FRANCE PAINTED to the LIFE*

By a Learned and Impartial Hand.

-- Quid non Gallia parturit ingens. LONDON.

Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet Street, betwixt the two
Temple Gates. 1656.

TO THE READER.
HIstories are like Jewels, not valued by their bulk, but their beauty and
luster: Real worth exceeds words; yet this History is furnished with both; it is
rare for the matter, method, truth and use.

It needs no Apology, its own furniture will sufficiently praise it,
especially amongst the Ingenuous and Learned; here is a solid and pleasant
relishment for any that desire foreign rarities.

The Penman managed his time with advantage: And it may be said, that a
Judicious Reader may see France in this Book as well as by travel. Nothing
worthy observation has escaped the Author; what has, was not worth his Pen.
Thou have (as it came to hand) without any adulteration, a true Copy of his
conceptions and labors without addition or diminution. Take hereof a serious
view, thereby thou shall inform thy judgment, please thy fancy, and be rendered
able to discourse of the several places and passages therein mentioned, equally
with those who have in person surveyed them.

FRANCE Painted to the Life. The First Book. The beginning of our Journey, the
nature of the Sea, a Farewell to England.
ON Thursday the 28th of June, at the time when England had received the chief
beauty of France, and the French had seen the chief beauties of England, we
went to Sea in a Bark of Dover; The Port we arrived at Diepe in Normandy, the
hour three in the afternoon: the wind fair and high* able, had it continued in
that point, to have given us a waftage as speedy as our longing. Two hours
before night it came about to the Westward, and the tide also not befriending
us, our passage became tedious and troublesome. The next day being dedicate to
the glory of God, in memory of St. Peter, we took the benifit of the ebb to
assist us against the wind. This brought us out of the sight of England, and
the flood ensuing compelled us to our anchor.

I had now leisure to see Gods wonders in the deep, wonders indeed to us, which
had never before seen them: but too much familiarity had made them none other
than the Sailors play-fellows. The waves striving by an inbred ambition which
should be the highest, which foremost: precedence and super-eminency was
equally desired, and each enjoyed it in succession. The wind more covetous in
appearance to play with the water than disturb it, did only rock the billow,
and seemed indeed to dandle the Ocean. You would at another time have thought,
that the Seas had only danced at the Winds whistle, or that the Wind straining
it self to a treble, and the Seas by a disdiapason supplying the base, had
tuned a Coranto to our Ship. For so orderly we rose and fell, according to the
time and note of the billow, that her violent agitation might be thought to be
nothing but a nimble Galliard filled with Capers. The nimbleness of the waves,
and correspondency of our Bark unto them, was not to all our company alike
pleasing: what in me moved only a reverend and awful pleasure, was to others
an occasion of sickness: their heads giddy, their joints enfeebled, their
stomachs loathing sustenance, and with great pangs avoiding what they had
taken* In their mouths nothing so frequent, as that of Horace, -- Illi robur
and aes triplex
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem.
Hard was his heart as brass, which first did venture
In a weak Ship on the rough Seas to enter.
Whether it be that the noisome smells which arise from the saltness and tartness
of that Region of waters, poisoneth the brain? or that the ungoverned and
unequal motion of the Ship stirs and unsettleth the stomach, or both? we may
conjecture with the Philosphers rather than determine. This I am sure of, that
the Cabbins and Deck were but as so many Hospitals or Pest-houses filled with
diseased persons: whilst I and the Mariners only made good the hatches: here
did I see the scaly Nation of that Kingdom solace themselves in the brim of the
waves, rejoicing in the light and warmness of the day, and yet spouting from
their mouths such quantity of waters, as if they had purposed to quench that
fire which gave it. They danced about our vessel, as if she had been a moving
May Pole; and that with such a delightful decorum, that you never saw a Measure
better troaden with less art: And now I know not what wave bigger than the
rest* tossed up our Ship so high, that I once more ken'd the coast of England;
an object which took such hold on my senses, that I forgot the harmless company
which sported below me, to bestow on my dearest Mother this (and for ought I
could assure my self, my last) Farewell.

England adieu: thy most unworthy Son
Leaves thee, and grieves to see what he has done;
What he has done in leaving thee, the best
Of Mothers, and more glorious than the rest,
Thy sister Nations. Had thou been unkind:
Yet might he trust thee safer than the Wind.
Had thou been weak: yet far more strength in thee,
Than in two inches of a sinking Tree.
Say thou were cruel? yet thy angry face
Has more love in it, then the Seas embrace.
Suppose thee poor! his zeal and love the less,
Thus to forsake his Mother in distress.
But thou art none of those: No want in thee,
Only a needless Curiosity,
Has made him leap thy Ditch. O let him have
Thy blessing in his Voyage, and he will crave
The Gods to thunder wrath on his neglect,
When he performs not thee all due respect:
That Nemesis on him her scourge would pluck,
When he forgets those breasts which gave him suck:
That Nature would dissolve and turn him earth,
If thou be not remembered in his Mirth.
May he be cast from Mankind, if he shame
To make profession of his Mothers name.
Rest then assured in this: though some times he,
Concealed perhaps his Faith, he will not thee.
CHAP. I.
Normandy in general, the Name and bounds of it, The condition of the ancient
Normans, and of the present. Ortelius Character of them examined. In what they
resemble the Inhabitants of Norfolk. The Commodities of it, and the Government.

THe next ebb brought us in sight of the seacoast of Normandy, a shore so
evenly composed and levelled, that it seems the work of Art not Nature, The
Rock all the way of an equal height, rising from the bottom to the top in a
perpendicular, and withal so smooth and polished, that if you dare believe it
the work of Nature, you must also think that Nature wrought it by the line, and
showed an art in it, above the imitation of an Artist; This wall is the
Northern bound of this Province; the South part of it being confined with
Le-Maine la Beausse and l' Isle du France. On the East it is divided from
Picardy by the River of Some, and on the West it is bounded with the Ocean, and
the little River Crenon which severeth it from a corner of Britain. It
extends in length from the beginning of the 9th degree of longitude to the
middle of the 23. viz. from the Cape of St. Savior West, to the Port town of
St. Valeria East. For breadth it lies partly in the 49th partly in the 50th
degree of latitude. So that reckoning 60. miles to a degree, we shall find it
to contain 270. English miles in length, and 60 English miles in breadth where
it is narrowest.

Amongst the Nations it was accounted a part of Gallia Celtica, the name
Neustria. This new title it got by receiving into it a new Nation. A people
that had so terribly spoiled the Maritine Coasts of England, France and Belgia,
that a furore Normannorum was inserted into the Letany. Originally they were of
Norway, their name imports it: Anno 800. or thereabouts they began first to
be accounted one of the plagues of Europe: 900. they seated themselves in
France by permission of Charles the Balde, and the valor of Rollo their
Captain. Before this they had made themselves Masters of Ireland, though they
long held it not, and Anno 1067. they added to the glory of their name by the
Conquest of England. You would think them a people not only born to the wars,
but to victory. But Vt frugum semina mutato solo degenerant, sic illa genuina
feritas eorum amaenitate mollita est. Florus spoke it of the Gauls removed
into Asia, it is appliable to the Norwegians transplanted into Gallia; yet fell
they not suddenly and at once into the want of courage, which now possesses
them. During the time they continued English, they attempt the Kingdom of
Naples and Antioch with a fortune answerable to their valor. Being once
oppressed by the French, and inslaved under that Monarchy, they grew presently
Crest fallen, and at once lost both their spirits and their liberty.

The present Norman then is but the corruption of the ancient: the heir of his
name, and perhaps his possessions; but neither of his strength nor his manhood:
Bondage and a fruitful soil has so emasculated them, that it is lost labor to
look for Normans in Normandy. There remains almost nothing in them of their
Progenitors but the remainders of two qualities, and those also degenerated, if
not bastards; a penurious pride, and an ungoverned doggedness: Neither of them
become their fortune or their habit, yet to those they are constant. Finally,
view him in his rags and dejected countenance, and you would swear it
impossible, that those snakes should be the descendents of those brave Heroes
which so often triumphed over both Religions, foyling the Saracens, and
vanquishing the Christians.

But perchance their courage is evaporated into wit, and then the change made
the better. Ortelius would seem to persuade us to this conceit of them, and
well might do it, if his words were Oracle. Le Gens (says he, speaking of this
Nation) sont de plus accorls, and subtills d' esprit de la Gaul. A Character
for which the French will little thank him, who (if he speak truth) must in
matter of descretion give precedence to their vassals. But as Imbat a French
Leader said of the Florentines in the fifth book of Guicciardine, Non supena
done consistesse lingeque tanto celebrare de Fior^ntini, so may I say of the
Normans: for my part I could never yet find, where that great wit of theirs
lay. Certain it is, that as the French in general are termed the King's asses:
so may these men peculiarly be called the Asses of the French, or the veriest
Asses of the rest. For what with the unproportionable rents which they pay to
their Lords on the one side, and the immeasurable taxes laid upon them by the
King on the other; they are kept in such a perpetuated course of drudgery, that
there is no place for wit or wisdom left amongst them. Liberty is the Mother
and Nurse of those two qualities; and therefore the Romans (not unhappily)
expressed both the condition of a Freeman and a discreet and modest personage
by this one word Ingenuous. Why the French King should lay a greater burden
upon the backs of this Nation, than their fellows, I cannot determine.
Perchance it is because they have been twice conquered by them (once from King
John, and again from Henry the sixth) and therefore undergo a double servitude.
It may be to abate their natural pride and stubbornness. Likely also it is,
that being a revolting people, and apt to an apostasy from their Allegiance,
they may by this means be kept impoverished, and by consequence disabled from
such practices. This a French Gentleman of good understanding told me, that it
was generally conceited in France, that the Normans would suddenly and
unanimously betray their Country to the English, were their King a Cath^like.

But there is a further cause yet of their beggarliness and poverty, which is,
the litigiousness and frequent going to law (as we call it:) Ortelius, however
he failed in the first part of the Character, in the conclusion of it has done
them justice. Mais en general (says he) its sont scavans an passible en
prosses and pluideries. They are pretty well versed in the querks of the Law,
and have wit more than enough to wrangle.

In this they agree exactly well with the Inhabitants of our Country of
Norfolk. Ex infima plebe non pauci reperiuntur (says Mr. Cambden) qui, si
nihil sit litium, lites tamen ex ipsis jaris apicibus serere callent. They are
pretty fellows to find out quirks in Law, and to it they will, whatsoever it
cost them. Mr. Cambden spoke not at random, or by the guess: for besides what
my self observed in them at my being once among them in a Colledge-progress; I
have heard, that there have been no less than 340. Nisi prius's tried there at
one Assizes. The reason of this likeness between the two Nations, I conjecture
to be, the resemblance of the site and the soil: both lie upon the Sea, with a
long and spacious coast, both enjoy a Country champain, little swelled with
hills, and for the most part, of a light and sandy mould. To proceed to more
particulars, if there be any difference between the two Provinces, it is only
this, that the Country of Normandy is much better, and the people of Norfolk
are somewhat the richer.

For indeed the Country of Normandy is enriched with a fat and liking soil,
such a one, quae demum votis respondet avari Agricolae, which may satisfy the
expectation of the Husbandman, were it never so exorbitant. In my life I never
saw Cornfieldsd more large and lovely extended in an equal level, almost as far
as eye-reach. The wheat (for I saw little Barley) of a fair length in the
stalk, and so heavy in the ear, that it even bended double, you would think the
grain had a desire to kiss the earth its Mother; or that it purposed by making
it self away into the ground, to save the Plowman his next years labor. Thick
it grows, and so perfectly void of weeds, that no garden can be imagined to
be kept cleaner by art, than these fields are by nature. Pasture ground it has
little, and less meadow: yet sufficient to nourish those few Cattle they have
in it. In all the way between Diepe and Pontois, I saw but two flocks of Sheep,
and then not above forty in a flock. Kine they have in some measure, but not
fat, nor large: without these, there were no living for them. The Noblest eat
the flesh, whiles the Farmer feeds on Butter and Cheese, and that but
sparingly. But the miserable states of the Norman paissant, we wiil defer
till another opportunity. Swine also they have in pretty number, and some
Pullen in their backsides, but of neither an excess. The principal Rivers of it
is Seine, of which more hereafter, and besides this I saw two rivulets, Robee
and Renel^e.

In matter of civil Government this Country is directed by the Court of
Parliament established at Roven: for matters Military it has an Officer like
the Lieutenants of our Shires in England, the Governor they call him. The
present Governor Mounsieur Duc de Longueville, to whom the charge of this
province was committed by the present King Lewis the thirteenth Anno 1629. The
Laws by which they are governed, are the Civil or Imperial, augmented by some
customs of the French, and others more particular, which are the Norman. One
of the principallest is in matters of inheritance: the French custom giving to
all the Sons an equality in their estate, which we in England call Gavel-kind.
The Norman dividing the estate into three parts, and thereof allotting two unto
the eldest brother, and a third to be divided among the others. A Law which the
French account not just, the younger brothers of England would think the
contrary. To conclude this general discourse of the Normans: I dare say it is
as happy a Country as most in Europe, were it subject to the same Kings, and
governed by the same Laws which it gave unto England.

CHAP. II.
Diepe^ the Town, strength and importance of it: The policy of Henry the fourth
not seconded by his Son: The custom of the English Kings in placing Governors
in their Forts: The breaden God there, and strength of their Religion: Our
passage from Diepe to Roven: The Norman Inns, Women and Manners: The
importunity of Servants in hosteries: The saucy familiarity of the attendants:
Ad pileum vocare, What it was amongst the Romans, and jus pilearum in the
Universities of England.

June the 30th at six of the clock in the morning we landed at Diepe, one of
the Haven Towns of Normandy, seated on an arm of the Sea, between two hills
which embrace it in the nature of a bag: this secureth the Haven from the
violence of the weather, and is a great strength to the Town against the
attempts of any forces, which should assault it by Sea, the Town lying within
these Mountains a quarter of a mile up the channel. The Town it self is not
uncomely, the streets large and well paved, the houses of an indifferent
height, and built upright without any juttings out of one part over the other.
The Fortifications (as they say, for we were not permitted to see them) are
very good and modern, without, stones, within, earth. On the top of the hill a
Castle finely seated, both to defend the Town, and on occasions to command it.
The Garrison consists of sixty men, in pay no more, but when need requires
the Captain has authority to arm the Inhabitants: The present Governor is the
Duke of Longueville, who also is the Governor of the Province, entrusted with
both those charges by Lewis the thirteenth, 1619. An action wherein he swarved
somewhat from the ensample of his Father, who never committed the military
command of a Country (which is the Office of a Governor) and the custody of a
Town of war or a Fortress unto one man. The Duke of Biron might have as great a
courtesy from that King, as the most deserving of his subjects: he had stuck
close to him in all his adversities, received many an honorable fear in his
service, and indeed was Fabius and Scipio, both the sword and buckler of the
French Empire. In a word, he might have said to this Henry, what Silius in
Tacitus did to Tiberius. Suum militem in obsequio mans^sse, cum alii ad
sedetiones prolaberentur, neque daraturum Tiberii imperium, si iis quoque
Legionibus cupido novandi fuisset; yet when he became petitioner to the King
for the Citadel of Bourg, seated on the confines of his Government of
Burgogne, the King denied it. The reason was, because Governors of Provinces
which commanded in chief ought not to have the command of places and fortresses
within their Government: there was also another reason, and more enforcing,
which was, that the petitioner was suspected to hold intelligence with the Duke
of Savoy whose Town it was. The same Henry though he loved the Duke Espernon
even to the envy of the Court, yet even to him also used he the same caution.
Therefore when he had made him Governor of Xanictoigne and Angoulmois, he put
also into his hands the Towns of Mets and Boullogne, places so remote from his
seat of Government, and so distant one from the other, that they did rather
distract his power than increase it.

The Kings of England have been well, and for a long time, versed in this
Maxim of State. Let Kent be one of our ensamples and Hampshire the other. In
Kent at this time the Lieutenant (or as the French would call him) the
Governor is the Earl of Montgomery; yet is Dover Castle in the hands of the
Duke of Buckingham, and yet Quinborough in the custody of Sir Edward Hobby. Of
which the one commands the Sea, and the other the Thames and the Medway. In
Hampshire the Lieutenant is the Earl of Southampton, but the Government of the
Town and Garrison of Portsmouth is entrusted to the Earl of Pembroke. Neither
is there any of the best Sconces or Block-houses on the shore side of the
Country which is commanded by the Lieutenant.

But King Lewis now reigning in France, minded not his Fathers actions, when at
the same time also he made his Confident M. Luines Governor of Picardy, and of
the Town and Citadel of Amiens. The time ensuing gave him an insight of that
state-breach; for when the Dukes of Espernon, Vendosme, Longueville, Magenne
and Nemours, the Count of Soisons and others sided with the Queen Mother
against the King; the Duke of Longueville strengthened this Dieppe, and had not
peace suddenly followed, would have made good, maugre the Kings forces. A town
it is of great importance, King Henry the fourth using it as his Asylum, or
City of Refuge, when that League was hottest against him. For had he been
further distressed, from hence might he have made an escape into England, and
at this door was the entrance made for the English forces, which gave him the
first step to his Throne. The Town has been pillaged and taken by our Richard
the first, in his wars against Philip Augustus, and in the declining of our
affairs in France, it was a month together besieged by the Duke of York, but
with that success which commonly attends a falling Empire.

The number of the Inhabitants is about 30000. whereof 9000. and upwards are of
the Religion, and have allowed them for the exercise of their Religion the
Church of Argues, a Village some two miles distant. The Remainder are Papists.
In this Town I met with the first Idolatry which ever I yet saw, more than in
my books. Quas antea audiebam hodi^, video Deos, as a barbarous German in
Velleius said to Tiberius. The Gods of Rome which before I only heard of I now
see, and might have worshipped, it was the Host, as they call it, or the
Sacrament reserved, carried by a couple of Priests under a Canopy; ushered by
two or three torches, and attended by a company of boys and old people which
had no other employment. Before it, went a bell continually tinckling, at the
sound whereof all such as are in their houses, being warned that then their God
goes by them, make some show of reverence; those which meet it in the street,
with bended knees and elevated heads doing it honor. The Protestants of this
bell make an use more religious, and use it as a warning or a watch-peal, to
avoid that street through which they hear it coming. This invention of the Bell
has somewhat of Turcisme, it being the custom there, at their Canonical hours,
when they hear the cryers bawling in the steeples; to fall prostrate on the
ground wheresoever they are, and to kiss it thrice, so doing their devotions to
Mahomet. The carrying it about the streets has no question in it a touch of
the Jew: this Ceremony being borrowed from that of the carrying about the Ark
upon the shoulders of the Priests. The other main part of it, which is the
adoration, is derived from the Heathen; there never being a people but they
which afforded divine honor to things inanimate. But the people indeed I
cannot blame for this idolatrous devotion, their consciences being persuaded,
that what they see pass by them is the very body of their Savior. For my part
could the like belief possess my understanding* I could meet it with a greater
reverence, then their charge can enjoin me. The Priests and Doctors of the
people are to be condemned only, who impose and enforce this sin upon their
bearers, and doubtless there is a reward which attends them for it. Of
standing it is so young, that I never met with it before the year 1215. Then
did Pope Innocent ordain in a Council holden at Rome, that there should be a
Pixe made to cover the Bread, and a Bell bought to be rung before it. The
adoration of it was enjoined by Pope Honorius Anno Dom. 1226. Both afterward
encreast by the new solemn Feast of Corpus Christi day by Pope Urban the
fourth, Anno 1264. and confirmed for ever with multitudes of pardons in the
Council of Vienna by Clement the third, Anno 1310. Such a punie is this great
God of the Romans Lactantius in his first book of Institutions against the
Gentiles taxes the wise men of those times of infinite ridiculousness, who
worshipped Jupiter as a God, Cum eundem tamen Saturno and Rhea genitum
confiterentur, since themselves so perfectly knew his original. As much I
marvail at the impudency of the Romish Clergy, who will needs impose a new God
upon their people, being so well acquainted with his cradle.

It is now time to go on in our journey to Roven. The Cart stays, and it is
fit we were in it; Horses we could get none for money, and for love we did not
expect them: we are now mounted in our Chariot, for so we must call it. An
English man thought it a plain Cart, and if it needs will have the honor of
being a Chariot, let it, sure I am it was never ordained for a triumph. At one
end were fastened three carcasses of Horses, and three bodies which had been
once Horses and now were worn to dead Images. Had the statue of a man been
placed on any one of them, it might have been hanged up at an Inn door to
represent Saint George on horseback: so liveless they were and so little
moving; yet at last they began to crawl, for go they could not. This converted
me from my former heresy, and made me apprehend life in them, but it was so
little, that it seemed only enough to carry them to the next pack af Hounds.
Thus accomodated we bad Farewell to Diepe, and proceeded with a pace so slow,
that we thought our journey to Roven would prove a most perfect Emblem of the
motion of the ninth Sphere, which was 49000. years in finishing. But this was
not our greatest misery: The rain fell on us through our Tilt, which for the
many holes in it we would have thought a net. The dirt brake plentifully in
upon us through the rails of our Chariot, and the unequal and unproportionable
pace of it startled almost every bone of us. I protest I marvel how a
Frenchman durst adventure in it. Thus endured we all the diseases of a
journey, and the danger of three several deaths, drowning, choking with the
mire, and breaking of the wheel, besides a fear of being famished before we
came to our Inn, which was six French miles from us. The mad Duke that in the
Play undertook to drive two Snails from Millaine to Musco, without staff,
whip, or goad; and in a bravery to match him, for an experiment would here have
had matter to have tired his patience.

On the left hand we saw Argues, once famous for a siege laid about it by our
Richard the first, but wasted speedily by the French. It is now (as before I
told you) the Parish Church of Diepe Protestants, their Preachers were Mr.
Courteau and Mr. Mondeme, who had each of them an yearly stipend, fifty pound
or thereabouts. A poor pay, if the faithful discharge of that duty were not a
reward unto it self above the value of gold and siver. To instance in none of
these beggarly Villages we past through: we came at last unto Tostes, the place
destinate to our Lodging, a Town like the worser sort of Market Towns in
England. There our Charioter brought us to the ruins of an house, an Alehouse
I would scarce have thought it, and yet in spite of my teeth it must be an Inn,
yea, and that an honorable one too, as Don Quixot's Host told him. Despair of
finding there either bedding or victuals, made me just like the fellow at the
Gallows, who when he might have been repreived, on condition he would marry a
Wench, which there sued for him, having veiwed well, cried to the Hangman to
drive on his Cart. The truth is, IN eschappay du tonnere etrencheu en l'es
lair, according to the French proverb; I fell out of the drying pan into the
hot fire. One of the house (a ragged fellow I am sure he was, and so most
likely to live there) brought us to a room somewhat of kindred to a
Charnel-house; as dark and as dampish: I confess it was paved with brick at the
bottom, and had toward the Orchard a pretty hole, which in former times had
been a window, but now the glass was all vanished. By the light that came in at
the hole, I first perceived that I was not in England. There stood in the
chamber three beds, if at the least it be lawful so to call them. The
foundation of them was of straw, so infinitely thronged together, that the
wooll-pack which our Judges fit on in the Parliament were melted butter to
them; upon this lay a medley of flocks and feathers together, sowed up in a
large bag (for I am confident it was not a Tick) but so ill ordered, that the
knobs stuck out on each side of it, like a crabtree-cudgel. He must needs have
flesh enough that lies upon one of them; otherwise the second night would wear
out his bones. The sheets which they brought for us were so course, that in my
consciente no Mariner would vouchsafe to use them for a sail: and the Coverlid
so bare, that if a man would undertake to reckon the threeds, he need not miss
one of the number. The Napery of the Table was suitable to the bedding, so foul
and durty, that I durst not conceive it had ever been washed above once, and
yet the poor cloth looked as briskly, as if it had been promised for the whole
year ensuing to escape many a scouring. The Napkins were fit companions for the
cloth; Vnum si noveris, omnes nosti. By my description of the Inn, you may
guess at the rest of France. Not altogether so wretched, yet is the alteration
almost insensible.

Let us now walk into the Kitchen, and observe their provision, and here we
found a most terrible execusion committed on the person of a Pullet. My
Hostess, cruel woman, had cut the throat of it, and without plucking off the
feathers, tare it into pieces with her hands, and afterward took away skin and
feathers together, just as we strip Rabbets in England. This done, it was clapped
into a pan, and fried into a supper. In other places where we could get meat
for the spit, it uses to be presently broached, and laid perpendicularly over
the fire: three turns at the most dispatcheth it, and brings it up to the
table, rather scorched than roasted; I say, where we could get it, for in these
rascally Inns you cannot have what you would, but what you may, and that also
not at the cheapest. At Pontoise we met with a Rabbet, and we thought we had
found a great purchase. Larded it was, as all meat is in that Country,
otherwise it is so lean, it would never endure the roasting. In the eating it
proved so tough, that I could not be persuaded that it was any more than three
removes from that Rabbet which was in the Ark. The price half a Crown English:
My Companions thought it over dear, to me it seemed very reasonable, for
certainly the grass that fed it was worth more than thrice the money: but I
return to Tostes.

And it is time, you might perchance else have lost the sight of mine Hostess
and her Daughters, you would have sworn at first blush they had been of a
blood, and it had been great pity, had it been otherwise. The salutation of
Horace, O matter pulchra, filia pulchrior, was never so seasonable as here. Not
to honor them with a further character let this suffice that their persons
kept so excellent decorum with the house and furniture, that one could not
possibly make use of Tullies, Quam dispari dominaris domino! But this is not
their luck only. The Women not of Normandy alone, but generally of all France
are forced to be contented with a little beauty; and she which with us is
reckoned among the vulgar; would amongst them be taken for a Princess. But of
the French Women more, when we have taken a view of the Dames of Paris, now
only somewhat of their habit and condition. Their habit in which they differ
from the rest of France, is the attire of their heads, which hangs down their
backs in fashion of a vail. In Roven and the greater Cities, it is made of
linen pure and decent, here and in the villages it cannot possibly be any
thing else than an old dish-clout turned out of service, or the corner of a
table-cloth reserved from washing. Their best condition is not always visible,
they show it only in the mornings, or when you are ready to depart, and that
is their begging. You shall have about you such a throng of these ill faces,
and every one whining out this ditty, Pour les servantes; that one might with
greater ease distribute a dole at a rich man's funeral, then give them a penny:
Had you a purpose to give them unasked, their importunity will prevent your
speediest bounty. After all this importunate begging, their ambition reaches
no higher than a Sol: He that gives more out-biddeth their expectation, and
shall be counted a spend-thrift.

But the principal ornaments of these times are the menservants, the raggedst
regiment that ever I yet looked upon. Such a thing as a Chamberlain was never
heard of among them, and good clothes are as little known there as he. By the
habit of his attendants a man would think himself in Jail, their clothes
either full of patches, or else open to the skin. Bid one of them wipe your
boots, he presently has recourse to the curtains; with those he will perhaps
rub over one side, and leave the other to be made clean by the Guest. It is
enough for him that he has written the copy. They wait always with their
hats on their heads, and so also do servants before their Masters:
Attending-bareheaded is as much out of fashion there as in Turkey. Of all
French fashions in my opinion the most unfitting and unseeming. Time and much
use reconciled me to all other things, which at the first were offensive, to
this irreverent custom I returned an enemy. Neither can I see how it can choose
but stomach the most patient, to see the worthiest sign of liberty usurped and
profaned by the basest of slaves. For seeing that the French paisants are such
infamous slaves unto their Lords and Princes; it cannot be, but that those
which are their servants must be one degree at the least below the lowest
condition.

Certainly among the Ancients this promiscuous covering of the head was never
heard of, it was with them the chief sign of freedom, as is well known to those
which are conversant with antiquity. The Lacones a people of Peloponnesus,
after they had obtained to be made free Denizens of Lacedaemon, in sign of
their now gotten liberty would never go into the battle, nisi pileati, but with
their hats on. Amongst the Africans, as it is written of Alexander, ab
Alexandro, the placing of an hat on the top of a spear, was used as a token to
incite the people to their liberty which had been oppressed by Tyrants: Per
pileum in bast a propositum ad libertatem proclamari. But among the Romans we
have more variety. The taking off the hat of Targuinius Priscus by an Eagle,
and the putting of it on again, occasioned the Augures to prophecy unto him
the Kingdom; which fell out accordingly. In their Sword-playes when one of
their Gladiators had with credit slain his adversary, they would sometimes
honor him with a Palm, sometimes with a Hat, of these the last was the
worthier; the Palm only honoring the Victor; this also enfranchising the
receiver; therefore conferred commonly on him which killed most men in the
Theaters: Hence the complaint of Tertuslian lib. de Spectaculis cap. 21. Qui
insigniore cuiquam homicide leonem poscit, idem gladiatori atroci Rudem petat
(Redis was another token of enfranchizement) and pileum proemium conferat. In
their common Forum or Guild Hall, when they purposed to manumit any of their
servants, their custom also was, after the Lictor or Sergeant had registered the
name of the party manumitted, to shave his head, and give him a cap, whence
according to Rosinus, ad pileum Vocare, is to set one at liberty.

Erasmus in his Chiliades makes the hat to be the sign of some eminent worth
iu him that wears it. Pileus (says he) insigne spectatae, virtutis. On this
he conjectureth, that the putting on of caps on the heads of such as are
created Doctors or Masters had its original. In the Universities of England
this custom is still in force, the putting on of the Cap being never performed
but on the solemn Comitia, and in the presence of all such as are either
auditors or spectators of that days exercise: When I was Regent, the whole
house of Congregation joined together in a petition to the Earl of Pembroke, to
restore unto us the jus pileorum, the license of putting on our caps at our
public meetings, which privilege time and the tyranny of our Vice-Chancellors
had taken from us. Amongst other motives we used the solemn form of creating a
Mr. in the Arts by putting on his cap, and that that sign of liberty might
distinguish us that were the Regents from those boys which we were to govern:
which request he graciously granted. But this French sauciness had drawn me out
of my way. An impudent familiarity, which I must confess did much offend me,
and to which I will still profess my self an open enemy. Though Jack speech
French, I cannot endure that Jack should be a Gentleman.

CHAP. III.
Roven a neat City: how seated and built. The strength of it. St. Kathe^ines
Mount. The Church of Nostre-dame, etc. The Indecorum of the Papists in the
several and unsuitable pictures of the Virgin. The little Chapel of the
Capuchins in Boulogne* The House of Parliament. The precedence of the President
and Governor. The Legend of St. Romain, and the privilege thence arising. The
Language and Religion of the Rhothomagenses.

IVly the first we set out for Roven; in ten hours our Cart dragged us thither,
the whole journey being in all six miles French; admirable speed. About three
of the clock in the afternoon we had a sight of the Town, daintily seated in a
valley on the River Seine: I know not any Town better situated ( Oxford
excepted) which indeed it much resembles, I mean not in bigness but in
situation. It stands on all sides environed with Mountains, the North
excepted, and has a large and pleasant walk of meadow by the river side, to
the South-Eastward, as Oxford has toward Iffley. It is seated on the
principal River of France, distant from the Metropolis of that Country fifty
miles English or thereabouts; as Oxford on the Thames and from London: watered
also it is with two small Rillets, Rosee and Renelle, as the other with
Charwell and Evenlode. The difference is, that Oxford is seated somewhat higher
on the swelling of an hill, and a little more removed from those mountains
which environ it, and that the Rivers which run through some part of Roven, do
only wash the precincts of the other. The buildings are in some places wood,
in some stone, in others both. The houses without juttings or overlets four
stories high, and in the front not very beautiful. The most promising house
which mine eyes met with was that of Mr. Boniface, who being of obscure
parents; and having raised himself a fortune in the wars against the League,
here built a receptacle for his age. It is fashioned after the manner of new
buildings in London, composed all of dainty white stone, square and polished.
On the partition betwixt the first story and the second it has these words
engraven, Vt and Virtute Martisopus; Tentanda via amore and armis. A Motto
suitable to his rising.

The other buildings of note are the Bridge (for I as yet omit the House of
Parliament and the Churches) and the Town wall by it. The Bridge whilst it was
all standing, was thought to have been the fairest and strongest piece of that
kind in all France, it consisted of twelve arches large and high, there now
remain but seven of them, the rest being broken down by the English, in the
falling of their affairs in France, the better to make good the Town against
the French. The River is here about the breadth of the Thames at Fullham.
Between the River and the Town wall is the Exchange or meeting place of the
Merchants, paved with broad and even pebble-stones; in breadth up to the
wallwards thirty yeards, in length a hundred. A fine walk in fair weather. All
along the bankside lay the Ships, which by reason of the broken bridge come up
hither, and on occasion higher; a good turn for Paris. The wall for the length
of an hundred yeards is as straight as one may lay a line; of a just height,
and composed of square and excellent stone so cunningly laid, that I never saw
the side of a Noble man's house built more handsomely. But it is not only the
beauty of the wall which Roven delights in, there must somewhat also be
expected of it for strength. To which purpose it might seem indifferently well,
were there some addition of earth within it. It is well helped on the outside
by the breadth and depth of the ditches, but more by St. Katharines Fort seated
on an hill at the East side of it. A Fort which, were it strengthened according
to the modern art of fortifying, would much assure the Town, and make it at
once both a slave and a Commander. The Marshal D'c Anere, when he was
Lieutenant here for the Queen Mother, began to fortify this Mountain,
Quilleboeuse and other places of importance; but upon his death they were all
razed. What were his projects in it, they know best which were acquainted with
his ambition. Certainly the jarrs which he had sown among the Princes, one with
the other, and between them and the King, show that they were not intended for
nothing.

There are in Roven thirty two Parish Churches, besides those which belong to
Abbeys and Religious Houses; of which the most beautiful is that of St. Audom
or Owen, once Archbishop of this City. The seat and Church of the Archbishop
is that of Nostre-dame, a building far more gorgeous in the outside than
within. It presents it self to you with a very gracious and majestical front,
decked with most curious imagery, and adorned with three stately Towers. The
first called La tour St. Romain; the second La tour de beaurre (because it was
built with that money which was raised by Cardinal D' Amboyse, for granting a
dispensation to eat butter in the Lent) and a third built over the Porch, or
great Door, wherein is the great Bell so much talked of: Within it is but plain
and ordinary, such as common Cathedral Churches usually are, so big, so
fashioned. Behind the high Altar at a pillar on the left hand is the remainder
of the Duke of Bedford's Tomb, which for ought I could discern was nothing but
an Epitaph, some three yeards high in the Pillar. I saw nothing in it, which
might move the envy of any Courtier to have it defaced, unless it were the
title of Regent du Rojaume de France, which is the least he merited.

Somewhat Eastward beyond this is our Ladies Chapel, a pretty neat piece, and
daintily set out. There stands on the top of the Screen the Image of the
Virgin her self between two Angels. They have attired her in a red Mantle laced
with two gold laces, a handsome ruff about her neck, a vail of fine lawn
hanging down her back, and (to show that she was the Queen of Heaven) a Crown
upon her head. In her left arm she holds her Son in his side coat, a black hat
and a golden hat-band. A jolly plump Lady she seems to be, of a flaxen hair,
a ruddy lip, and a cheerful complexion. 'Twere well the Painters would agree
about the limming of her; otherwise we are like to have as many Ladies as
Churches. At Nostre dame in Paris she is taught us to be brown, and seems
somewhat inclined to melancholy, I speak not of her different habit, for I envy
her not her changes of apparel. Only I could not but observe how those of St.
Sepulchers Church en la rue St. Denis, has placed her on the top of their
Screen in a Coape, as if she had taken on her the zeal of Abraham, and were
going to make a bloody sacrifice of her Son. They of Nostre-dame in Amiens have
erected her Statue all in gold, with her Son also of the same metal in her
arms, casting beams of gold round about her, as the Sun is painted in its full
glory. Strange Idolatries! On the contrary, in the parish Church of Tury in la
Beause she is to be seen in a plain petticoat of red, and her other garments
correspondent. In my mind this holds most proportion to her estate, and will
but serve to free their irreligion from an absurdity. If they will worship her
as a Nurse with her Child in her arms, or at her breast, let them array her in
such apparel as might beseem a Carpenters Wife, such as she might be supposed
to have worn before the world had taken notice that she was the Mother of her
Savior. If they must needs have her in her estate of glory, as at Amiens; or
of honor (being now publicly acknowledged to be the blessedness among Women)
as at Paris: let them disburden her of her Child. To clap them thus both
together, is a folly equally worthy of scorn and laughter. Certainly had she
but so much liberty as to make choice of her own clothes, I doubt not but she
would observe a greater decorum. And therefore I commend the Capouchins of
Boulogne, who in a little side Chapel consecrated unto her, have placed only
an handsome fair looking-glass upon her Altar, the best ornament of a Female
Closet. Why they placed it there I cannot say: only I conceive it was, that
she might there see how to dress her self.

This Church is said to have been built (I should rather think repaired) by
Raoul or Rollo the first Duke of Normandy: Since it has been much beautified
by the English, when they were Lords of this Province. It is the seat of an
Archbishop, a Dean and fifty Canons. The Archbishopric was instituted by the
authority of Constantine the Great, during the sitting of the Council of Arles;
Anidian who was there present being consecrated the first Archbishop. The
Bishops of Seas, Aurenches, Constances, Beaux, Lysieaux and Eureux, were
appointed for his Diocesans. The now Archbishop is said to be an able Scholar
and a sound Statesman: his name I enquired not. The Revenues of his Chair are
said to be ten thousand Crowns. More they would amount to, were the Country any
way fruitful of Vines: out of which the other Prelates of France draw no small
part of their Intrado.

The Parliament of this Country was established here by Lewis the twelfth, who
also built that fair Palace, wherein Justice is administered, Anno 1501. At that
time he divided Normandy into seven Cathes, Rapes, or Baliwicks, viz. Roven,
Caux, Constentin, Caen, Eureux, Gisors, and Alenzon, This Court has supreme
power to enquire into, and give sentence of all causes within the limits of
Normandy. It receives appeals from the inferior Courts of the Duchy unto it,
but admits none from it. Here is also Cour des Esleuz, a Court of the
general Commissioners for taxes: and la Chamber des aides, instituted by
Charles the seventh for the receiving of his subsidies, Gabels, Imposts, etc.
The house of Parliament is in form quadrangular, a very graceful and delectable
building. That of Paris is but a Chaos or a Babel to it. In the great Hall
(into which you ascend by some thirty steps or upwards) are the seats and desks
of the Procurators, every ones name being written in Capital letters over his
head. These Procurators are like our Attourneys, to prepare causes, and make
them ready for the Advocates. In this Hall do suitors use, either to attend, or
walk up and down and confer with their pleaders. Within this Hall is the great
Chamber, the Tribunal or Seat of Justice, both in Causes Criminal and Civil.

At domus interior regali splendida luxu
Instruitur.
As Virgil of Queen Dido's dining room.
A Chamber so gallantly and richly built, that I must confess it far supasseth
all the rooms that ever I saw in my life. The Palace of the Lou're has nothing
in it comparable. The seiling all inlaid with gold, and yet did the workmanship
exceed the matter. This Court consists of two Presidents, twenty Counselors
or Assistants, and as many Advocates as the Court will admit of, The prime
President is termed Mr. De Riz. by birth a Norman: upon the Bench and in all
the places of his Court he takes precedence of the Duke of Longueville. When
there is a Convention of the three estates summoned the Duke has the priority.

We said even now, that from the sentence of this Court there lay no appeal:
but this must be recanted, and it is no shame to do it. St. Austin has writ
his Retractions; so also has Bellarmine, Once in the year there is an appeal
admitted; but for one man only, and that on this occasion. There was a
poisonous Dragon not far from Roven, which had done much harm to the Country
and City. Many ways had been tried to destroy him, but none prospered. At last
Roman, afterward made a St. then Archbishop of the Town, accompanied with a
theif and a murderer, whose lives had been forfeited to a sentence, undertaketh
the enter prise. Upon sight of the Dragon the theif stole away, the murderer
goes in and sees that holy man vanquish the Serpent, armed only with a
Stoale (it is a neck habit sanctified by his holiness of Rome, and made much
after the fashion of a tippet) with this Stoale tied about the neck of the
Dragon does the murderer lead him prisoner to Roven. To make short work; the
Name of God is praised, the Bishop magnified, the murderer pardoned, and the
Dragon burned. This accident (if the story be not Apocrypha) is said to have
happened on Holy Thursday. Audom or Owen successor unto St. Roman, in memory of
this mavelous act, obtained of King Dagobert the first (he began his reign
Anno 632.) that from that time forwards the Chapter of the Cathedral Church
should on every Ascension day have the faculty of delivering any Malefactor
whom the Laws had condemned. This that King then granted, and all the following
Kings to this time have successively confirmed it. I omit the ceremonies and
solemnities wherewith this Prisoner is taken out of his Irons and restored to
liberty. It is not above nine years agone, since a Baron of Gascoyne took
occasion to kill his Wife; which done, he fled hither into Normandy; and having
first acquainted the Canons of Nostredame with his desire, put himself to the
sentence of the Court, and was adjudged to the Wheel. Ascension day
immediately coming on, the Canons challenged him, and the Judge, according to
the custom, caused him to be delivered. But the Normans pleaded, that the
benefit of that privilege belonged only to the Natives of that Country, and
they pleaded with such fury, that the Baron was again committed to prison, till
the Queen Mother had wooed the people, pro ea saltem vice, to admit of his
repreival.

I deferred to speak of the language of Normandy, till I came hither, because
here it is best spoken. It differs from the Parisian, and more elegant
French, almost as much as the English spoken in the North does from that of
London or Oxford. Some of the old Norman words it still retains, but not
many. It is much altered from what it was in the time of the Conqueror: few of
the words in which our Laws were written being known by them. One of our
company gave a Littletons tenures written in that language to a French Doctor
in the Laws, who protested that in three lines he could not understand three
words of it. The religion in this Town is indifferently poysed* as it is also
in most places of this Province. The Protestants are thought to be as great a
party as the other, but far weaker: the Duke of Longueville having disarmed
them in the beginning of the last troubles.

CHAP. IV.
Our journey between Roven and Pontoise; the holy man of St. Claire, and the
Pilgrims thither. My sore eyes. Mante, Pontoise, Normandy justly taken from K.
John. The end of this Book.

IVly the second we took our farewell of Roven; better accommodated than when
we came thither; yet not so well as I desired. We are now preferred, ab asinis
ad equos, from the Cart to the Wagon. The French call it a Coach, but that
matters not; so would they needs have the Cart to be Chariot* These Wagons are
ordinary instruments of travel in those Countries, much of kin to a Graves-end
Barge: you shall hardly find them without a knave or a Giglot. A man may be
sure to be merry in them, were he as certain of being wholesome. This in which
we traveled contained ten persons, as all of them commonly do: and amongst
these ten, one might have found English, Scots, French, Normans, Dutch, and
Italians; a jolly medley; had our religions been as different as our Nations, I
should have thought my self in Amsterdam, or Poland. If a man had desired to
have seen a brief or an Epitome of the world, he could no where have received
such satisfaction, as by looking on us. I have already reckoned up the several
nations, I will now lay open the several conditions. There were then to be
found among these passengers Men and Women, Lords and Serving-men, Scholars
and Clowns, Ladies and Chambermaids, Priests and Laymen, Gentlemen and
Artificers, people of all sexes, and almost of all ages* If all the learning in
the world were lost, it might be found in Plutarch, so said Budaeus. If all the
Nations in the world had been lost, they might have been found again in our
Wagon, so I: Seriously I think our Coach to have been no unfit representation
of the Ark, a whole world of men and languages might have grown out of it.

But all this while our Wagon joggeth on, but so leasuresy, that it gave me
leave to take a more patient view of the Country then we could in the Cart. And
here indeed I saw sufficient to affect the Country, yea to dote on it; had I
not come out of England. The fields such as already I have described: every
where beset with Apple Trees, and fruits of the like nature: you could scarce
see any thing which was barren in the whole Country. These Apples are both meat
and drink to the poor Pesant, for the Country is ill provided with vines (the
only want I could observe in it) and Beer is a good beverage at a Gentleman's
table. Sider then or Perry are the poor man's Clarret; and happy man is he,
which can once or twice in a week aspire so high above water. To proceed*
Through many a miserable Village ( Duburgs they call them) and one Town
somewhat bigger then the rest, called Ecquille, we came that night to St.
Claire, ten French miles from Roven. A poor Town, God wot, and had nothing in
it remarkable, but an accident. There dwelt a Monk grown into great opinion for
his sanctity; and one who had an especial hand on sore eyes: yet his ability
herein was not general, none being capable of cure from him, but pure Virgins.
I persuade my self France could not yield him many Patients: and yet from all
parts he was much sought unto. Hope of cure, and a charitable opinion which
they had of themselves, had brought unto him diverse distressed Damsels, which I
am confident had no interest in his miracle. In the same Inn (Alehouse I should
say) where we were to be harbored, there had put in a whole covey of these
Ladies Errant. Pilgrims they called themselves, and had come on foot two days
journey to clear their eyesight. They had white vails hanging down their
backs, which in part covered their faces, yet I perceived by a glimpse, that
some of them were past cure: though my charity durst allow them Maids* it was
afraid to suppose them Virgins: yet so far I dare assure them they should
recover their sight, that when they came home they should see their folly. At
that time, what with too much watching on shipboard, what with the tartness of
the water, and the violence of the wind working upon me almost forty hours
together whilst I lay on the hatches mine eyes had gotten a rheum and redness.
My Hostess (good woman) persuaded me to this holy and blessed Wight; but I
durst not venture; not that I had not as good a claim to my virginity as the
best there; but because I had learned what a grievous sentence was denounced on
Ahaziah King of Israel for seeking help of Beelzebub the God of Ekron: When I
hap to be ill, let mine amendment come in God's Name. Mallem semper profanus
esse, quam sic religiosus, as Minutius Felix of the Roman Sacrifices: let my
body still be troubled with a sore eye, then have such a recovery be a
perpetual eyesore to my conscience. Rather than go on pilgrimage to such a
Saint, let the Papists count me for an Heretic. Besides, how durst I imagine
in him an ability of curing my bodily eyes, who above seventy years had been
troubled with a blindness in the eyes of his soul. Thou Fool (said our Savior
almost in the like case) first cast out the beam of thine own eye, and then
shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye.

The next morning, August the third, I left my Pilgrims to try their fortunes,
and went on in our journey to Paris, which that day we were to visit. My eyes
not permitting me to read, and mine ears altogether strangers to the French
chat, drove my thoughts back to Roven; and there nothing so much possessed me,
as the small honor done to Bedford in his Monument. I had leisure enough to
provide him a longer Epitaph; and a short apology against the envy of that
Courtier which persuaded Charles the eighth to deface the ruins of his
Sepulcher, Thus: So did the Fox, the coward'st of the Heard*
Ki^k the dead Lion and profane his Beard.
So did the Greeks about their vanquished Host
Drag Hector's Relics, and torment his Ghost.
So did the Parthian slaves deride the head
Of the great Crassus, now betrayed and dead:
To whose victorious Sword, not long before,
They would have sacrificed their lives, or more.
So do the French assault dead Bedford's spright,
And trample on his ashes in despite.
But foolish Curio cease, and do not blame
So small an honor done unto his Name,
Why griev'st thou him a Sepulcher to have,
Who when he lived had made all France a Grave!
His Sword triump'd through all those Towns which lie
In the Isle, Main, Aniou, Guyen Normandy.
Thy Fathers felt it. Oh thou worst of men
(If Man thou art) do not endeavor then
This Conqueror from his last Hold to thrust;
Whom all brave minds shall honor in the dust.
But be not troubled Bedford! Thou shall stand
above the reach of malice: Though the hand
Of a French baseness may deface thy name*
And tear it from thy Marble: Yet shall Fame
Speak lowdly of thee and thy acts. Thy praise
A Pyramid unto it self shall raise.
Thy brave Achievements in the time to come
Shall be a Monument above a Tomb
Thy name shall be thy Epitaph: and he
Which once reads Bedford shall imagine thee
Beyond the power of Verses; and shall say,
None could express thy Worth's a fuller way,
Rest thou then quiet in the shades of Night,
Nor vex thy self with Curio's weaker spright:
Whilst France remains, and Histories are writ,
Bedford shall live, and France shall Chronicle it.


Having offered this unworthy, yet grateful sacrifice to the Manes of that
brave Hero, I had the more leisure to behold Mante, and the Vines about it,
being the first that ever I saw. They are planted like our Hop-gardens, and
grow up by the help of Poles, but not so high. They are kept with little cost:
and yield profit to an Husbandman sufficient to make him rich, had he neither
King nor Landlord. The Wine which is pressed out of them is harsh and not
pleasing; as much differing in sweetness from the Wines of Paris or Orleans, as
their language does in elegancy. The rest of the Norman Wines which are not
very frequent, as growing only on the frontiers toward France, are of the
same quality. As for the Town of Mante it seems to have been of good strength
before the use of great Ordinance; having a wall, a competent ditch, and at
every gate a Drawbridge. They are still sufficient to guard their pullen from
the Fox; and in the night time to secure their houses from foreign burglaries:
Once indeed they were able to make resistance to a King of France, but the
English were then within it: At last on honorable terms it yielded, and was
entered by Charles the seventh the second of August, Anno 1449. The Town is for
building and bigness somewhat above the better sort of Market Towns here in
England.

The last Town of Normandy toward Paris is Pontoise: a Town well fortified, as
being a borderer, and one of the strongest bulwarks against France. It has in
it two fair Abbeys of Maubuisson and St. Martin: six Churches parochial,
whereof that of Nostre-dame in the suburbs is most beautiful. The name it
derives from a bridge built over the River of Oyse, on which it is situated,
and by which on that side it is well defended: the bridge being strengthened
with a strong gate, and two draw-bridges. It is commodiously situate on the
rising of an hill; and is famous for the siege laid before it by Charles the
seventh, Anno 1442. but more fortunate unto him in the taking of it. For having
raised his arms upon the Duke of Yorkes coming to give him battle with 6000.
men only, the French Army consisting of double the number, he retired, or fled
rather, unto St. Deuis. But there hearing how scandalous his retreat was to the
Parisians, even ready to mutiny; and that the Duke of Orleance, and others of
the Princes, stirred with the ignominiousness of his flight, began to practice
against him; he speedily returns to pontoise and makes himself Master of it
by assault. Certainly to that fright he owed the getting of the Town, and all
Normandy; the French by that door making their entry into this Province; out of
which at last they thrust the English, Anno 1450. So desperate a thing is a
frighted Coward.

This Country had once before been in possession of the English: and that by a
firmer title than the Sword. William the Conqueror had conveyed it once over
the Seas into England, and it continued an appendix of that Crown from the year
1067. unto that of 1204. At that time John called Sans terre, third Son unto
King Henry the second, having usurped the States of England, and the English
possessions in France upon Arthur heir of Britain, and Son unto Geofrey his
elder brother; was warred on by Phillip Augustus King of France, who sided with
the said Arthur, In the end Arthur was taken, and not long after found dead in
the ditches of the Castle of Roven. Whether this violent death happened unto
him by the practices of his Uncle, as the French say, or that the young Prince
came to that unfortunate end in an attempt to escape, as the English report, is
not yet determined. For my part considering the other carriages and virulencies
of that King; I dare be of that opinion, that the death of Arthur was not
without his contrivement. Certainly he that rebelled against his Father, and
practiced the eternal imprisonment and ruin of his Brother, would not much
stick (this being so speedy a way to settle his affairs) at the murder of a
Nephew. Upon the first bruit of this murder, Constance Mother to the young
Prince, complained unto the King and Parliament of France; not the Court which
now is in force, consisting of men only of the long Robe: but the Court of
Pairrie, or twelve Peers, whereof himself was one as Duke of Normandy. I see
not how in justice Philip could do less than summon him: an Homager being
^lain, and an Homager accused. To this summons John refused to yield himself. A
counsel rather magnanimous than wise, and such as had more in it of an English
King than a French Subject. Edward the third a prince of a finer metal than
this John obeyed the like warrant and performed a personal homage to Philip of
Valoys: and it is not reckoned among his disparagements. He committed yet a
further error or solaecisme in State, not so much as sending any of his people
to supply his place, or plead his cause. Upon this none appearance the Peers
proceed to sentence. Il fur par Arrest la dire Cour (says Du' Chesne) condemn
pour attaint, et convainuc du crime de parricide, and de felonnie: Parricide
for the killing of his own Nephew, and felony for committing an act so
execrable on the person of a French vassal and in France. Jhon de Sienes adds
a third cause, which was contempt in disobeying the Kings commandment. Upon
this verdict the Court awarded; Que toutes les terres qu' il avoit par deca de
mourerient acquises and confisques a la corronne, etc. A proceeding so fair and
orderly, that I should sooner accuse King John of indiscretion, than the French
of injustice: when my estate or life is in danger, I wish it may have no more
sinister a trial. The English thus outed of Normandy by the weakness of John,
recovered it again by the puissance of Henry. But being held only by the
sword; it was after thirty years recovered again as I have told you. And now
being passed over the Oyse, I have at once freed the English and my self of
Normandy, here ending this Book, but not that days journey.

The Second Book, or FRANCE.
CHAP. I.
France in what sense so called; the bounds of it: All old Gallia not possessed
by the French. Countries follow the name of the most predominant Nation. The
condition of the present French not different from that of the old Gauls. That
the Heavens have a constant power upon the same Climate, though the Inhabitants
be changed. The quality of the French in private, at the Church, and at the
Table. Their Language, Complements, Discourse, etc.

IVly the third, which was the day we set out of St. Claire, having passed
through Pontoise, and crossed the River, we were entered into France: France as
it is understood in his limited sense, and as a part only of the whole. For
when Meroveus the Grandchild of Pharamond, first King of the Francones, had
taken an opportunity to pass the Rhene, having also during the wars between
the Romans and the Goths taken Paris; he resolved there to set up his rest:
and to make that the head City of his Empire. The Country round about it, which
was of no large extent, he commanded to be called Francia, or Terra Francorum,
after the name of his Francks whom he governed. In this bounded and restrained
sense, we now take it, being confined with Normandy on the North, Campaign on
the East, and on the West and South with the little Province of la Beausse. It
is also called, and that more properly, to distinguish it from the whole
continent, the Isle of France, and (...) the Isle; I know not any thing more
like it, then the Isle of Elie: the Eure on the West, the Velle on the East,
the Oyse on the Northward, and a vein riveret of the Seine toward the South,
are the Rivers which encircle it. But the principal environings are made by
the Seine, and the Marne, a river of Champagne, which within the main Island,
make diverse Ilets: the waters winding up and down, as desirous to recreate the
earth, with the pleasures of its lovely and delicious embraces.

This Isle, this portion of Gaul properly and limitedly styled France, was the
seat of the Franks, at their first coming hither; and has still continued so.
The rest of Gallia is in effect rather subdued by the French than inhabited;
their valor in time having taken in those Countries which they never planted.
So that if we look apprehensively into Gaul, we shall find the other Nations
of it, to have just cause to take up the complaint of the King of Portugal,
against Ferdinand of Castile, for assuming to himself the title of Catholic
King of Spain, eius tam non exigua part penes reges alios, as Mariana relates
it. Certain it is, that the least part of old Gallia, is in the hands of the
French; the Normans, Britons, Biscaines, or Gascoynes, the Goths (of Languedoc
and Provence) Burgundians, and the ancient Gauls of Poictou, retaining in it
such fair and ample Provinces. But it is the custom (shall I say) or fate of
lesser and weaker Nations, to loose their names unto the stronger; as Wives do
to their Husbands: and the smaller Rivers to the greater. Thus we see the
little Province of Poland to have mastered, and given name to the Pruteni,
Marovy, and other Nations of Sarmatia, Europaea: as that of Moseo has unto all
the Provinces of Asiatica. Thus has Sweden conquered and denominated almost
all the great Peninsula of Scandia, where it is but a little parcel: and thus
did the English Saxon, being the most prevailing of the rest, impose the name
of English on all the people of the Heptarchy.

Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo. And good reason the vanquished should
submit themselves as well unto the appellation, as the Laws of the Victor.

The French then are possessors of some part of old Gallia, and masters of the
rest; possessors not of their Cities only, but their conditions; a double
victory it seems they enjoyed over that people: and took from them at once,
both their Qualities and their Countries. Certainly whosoever will please to
peruse the Commentaries of Caesar de Bello Gallice, he will easily guess him an
Historian, and a Prophet. He will rather make himself believe that he has
Prophicied the character of the present French, then delivered one of the
ancient Gauls. And indeed it is a matter worthy both of wonder and
observation, that the old Gauls, being in a manner all worn out, should yet
have most of their condition surviving in those men which now inhabit that
Region, being of so many several Countries and originals. If we dive into
Natural causes, we have a speedy recourse unto the powerful influence of the
Heavens; for as those celestial bodies considered in the general, do work upon
all sublunary bodies in the general, by light, influence, and motion: so have
they a particular operation on particulars: an operation there is wrought by
them in a man, as born at such and such a minute; and again, as born under such
and such a climate: the one derived from the setting of the houses, and the
Lord of the Horoscope at the time of his nativity: the other from that
Constellation which governs as it were the Province of his birth; and is the
Genius or Deus tutelaris loci. Hinc illa ab antiquo vitia, (says an Author,
modern rather in time than judgment) et patriae sort dur antia, quae totas
in historiis gentes aut commendant aut notant. Two or three Authors by name of
parallel, will make it clear in the example, though it appear not obscure in the
search of causes. Primus Gallorum impe^us major quam virorum; Secundus minor
quam foeminarum, says Florus of the Gauls. What else is that which Mr.
Dallington says of the French, when he reports that they begin an action
like thunder, and end it in a smoke. Their attempts on Naples and Millaine, (to
omit their present enterprise on Genoa) are manifest proofs of it. Neither will
I now speak of the battle of Po^cctiers, when they were so forward in the
onset, and furious in the flight, ut sunt Gallorum subita ingenia, says
Caesar; and I think these people are well known to be as hair-brained, as the
other ever were. Juvenal calls Galliam foecundum Causidicorum, and amongst
the modern French, it is related that there are tried more Law cases in one
year, than have been in England since the Conquest. Of the ancient Germans,
the next neighbors and confederates of the Gauls. Tacitus has given us this
note, Diem noctemque continaure potando nulli probrum: and presently after, de
jungendis affinitatibus, de bello denique et pace inconviviis consuttant. Since
the times of Tacitus has Germany almost shifted all her old inhabitants, and
received new ^lonie^ of Lombards, Sueves, Goths, Sclavonians, Hunn's, Saxons,
Vandals, and diverse other Nations unknown to that writer; yet still is that
exhorbitancie of drinking in fashion: and to this day do the present Germans
consult of most of their affairs in their cups: if the English have borrowed
any thing of this humor, it is not to be thought the vice of the Country, but
the times. To go yet higher and further, the Philosopher Anacharsis (and he
lived six hundred and odd years before Christ) noted it in the Greeks, that at
the beginning of their feasts they used little goblets, and greater toward the
end, when they were almost drunken: (...): as Laertius reports it. Sr. George
Sandis in that excellent discourse of his own travells, reports the same
custom to continue still amongst them, notwithstanding the length of time, and
all those changes of State and People which have since happened. Their Empire
indeed they have lost, their Valor, and all other Graces which set them out in
the eye of the World; and no marvail, these were not National conditions, but
personal endowments. I conclude this digression with the words of Barklay,
Haeret itaque in omni gente vis quaedam inconcussa, quae hominibus pro
condition terrarum in quibus nasc^ contigerit, sua fata dimiserit.

The present French, then is nothing but an old Gaul, molded into a new name:
as rash he is, as head strong, and as hair-brained. A Nation whom you shall
win with a feather, and loose with a straw; upon the first sight of him, you
shall have him as familiar as your sleep, or the necessity of breathing, In one
hours conference, you may indear him to you, in the second unbutton him, the
third pumps him dry of all his secrets, and he gives them you as faithfully, as
if you were his Ghostly Father, and bound to conceal them sub sigillo
confessionis; when you have learned this, you may lay him aside, for he is no
longer serviceable. If you have any humor in holding him in a further
acquaintance (a favor which he confesses, and I believe him, he is unworthy
of,) himself will make the first separation: he has said over his lesson now
unto you, and now must find out some body else, to whom to repeat it. Fare him
well; he i^ a garment whom I would be loath to wear above two days together,
for in that time he will be thread bare. Familiare est hominis omnia sibi
remittere, says Velleius of all* it holds most properly in this people. He
is very kind hearted to himself, and thinks himself as free from wants, as he
is full: so much he has in him the nature of a Chynois; that he thinks all
men blind but himself. In this private self conceitedness he hates the
Spaniard, loves not the English, and contemns the German: himself is the
only Courtier and complete Gentleman; but it is his own glass which he sees
in. Out of this conceit of his own excellency, and partly out of a shallowness
of brain, he is very liable to exceptions; the least distaste that can be,
draws his sword, and a minutes pause sheatheth it to your hand: afterward if
you beat him into better manners, he shall take it kindly, and cry Serviteur.
In this one thing they are wonderfully like the Devil; meekness or submission
makes them insolent, a little resistance puts them to their heels, or makes
them your Spaniels. In a word (for I have held him too long) he is a waling
vanity in a new fashion.

I will give you now a taste of his Table, which you shall find in a measure
furnished, (I speak not of the Paisant) but not with so full a manner as with
us. Their Beef they cut out into such chops, that that which goes there for a
laudable dish, would be thought here a University Commons; new served from the
Hatch. A Loyne of Mutton serves amongst them for three rostings, besides the
hazard of making pottage with the rump. Fowl also they have in good plenty;
especially such as the King found in Scotland: to say truth, that which they
have, is sufficient for nature and a friend, were it not for the Mistress, or
the Kitchen wench. I have heard much fame of the french Cooks, but their skill
lies not in the neat handling of Beef or Mutton. They (have as generally have
all this Nation) good fancies, and are special fellows for the making of puff
pastes, and the ordering of banquets. Their trade is not to feed the belly, but
the pallat. It is now time you were set down, where the first thing you must
do, is to say your own Grace; private Graces are as ordinary there, as private
Masses, and from thence I think they learned them. That done, fall to where you
like best; they observe no method in their eating, and if you look for a
carver, you may rise fasting. When you are risen, if you can digest the
sluttishness of the Cookery, (which is most abominable at first sight) I dare
trust you in a Garrison; follow him to Church and there he will show himself
most irrereligious and irreverent: I speak not of all but the general. At a
Mass in Cordeliers Church in Paris, I saw two French Papists, even when the
most sacred Mystery of their faith was celebrating, break out into such a
blasphemous and athiestical laughter, that even an Ethnic would have hated it:
it was well they were known to be Catholics, otherwise some French hot head
or other, would have sent them laughing to Pluto.

The French Language is indeed very sweet and delectable, it is cleared of all
harshness, by the cutting and leaving out the consonants, which makerh it fall
off the tongue very volubly; yet in mine opinion, it is rather elegant than
copious; and therefore is much troubled for want of words to find out
Periphrases. It expresses very much of it self in the action: the head, body
and shoulders concur all in the pronouncing of it; and he that hops to
speak it with a good grace, must have something in him of the Mimick. It is
enriched with a full number of significant Proverbs, which is a great help to
the French humor in scoffing, and very full of Courtship, which makes all the
people complemental; the poorest Cobbler in the village has his Court cringes,
and his eau bemste de Cour, his Court holy water as perfectly as the Prince of
Conde.

In the Passadoes of their Courtship, they express themselves with much
variety of gesture, and indeed it does not misbecome them: were it as gracious
in the Gentlemen of other Nations as in them, it were worth your patience; but
the affectation of it is scurvy and ridiculous. Quocunque salutationis
artificio corpus inflestant, putes nihil is it a institutione mages convenice.
Vicinae autem gentes ridiculo errore deceptae, eiusdem Venustatis imitationem
ludieram faciunt et ingratam: as one happily observed at his being amongst
them. I have heard of a young Gallant Son to a great Lord of one of the three
British Kingdoms, that spent some years in France to learn fashions; at his
return he desired to see the King, and his Father procured him an enterveiwe;
when he came within the presence Chamber, he began to compose his head, and
carried it, as though he had been ridden with a Martingale; next he fell to
draw back his legs, and thrust out his shoulders, and that with such a
graceless apishness, that the King asked him, if he meant to shoulder him out
of his Chair, and so left him to act out his complement to the hangings. In
their Courtship they bestow even the highest titles upon those of the lowest
condition. This is the vice also of their common talk, the beggar begitteth
Monsieurs and Madames to his Sons and Daughters, as familiarly as the King:
were there no other reason to persuade me, that the Welsh or Brittaynes were
the defendants of the Gauls, this only were sufficient, that they would all
be Gentlemen.

His discourse runs commonly on two wheels, Treason and Ribaldry; I never
heard people talk less reverently of their Prince, nor more sawcily of his
actions; scarce a day passes away, without some seditious pamphlet printed and
published in the disgrace of the King, or of some of his Courtires. These are
every man's money, and he that buyeth them is not coye of the Contents, be they
never so scandalous: of all humors the most harsh and odious. Take him from
this (which you can hardly do till he has told all) and then he falls upon
his ribaldry; without these crutches, his discourse would never be able to keep
pace with his company. Thus shall you have them relate the stories of their own
uncleanness, with a face as confident, as if they had no accident to please
their hearers more commendible. Thus will they reckon up the several
profanations of pleasure, by which they have dismanned themselves; sometimes
not sparing to descend unto particulars. A valiant Captain never gloried more,
in the number of the Cities he had taken, then they do of the several women
they have prostituted.

Egregiam vero Laudem, et spolia ampla! Foolish and most perishing wretches, by
whom each several incontinency is twice committed, first in the act, and
secondly in the boast. By themselves they measure others; and think them
Naturals or Simplicians which are not so conditioned I protest I was fain
sometimes to put on a little impudency, that I might avoid the suspicion of a
gelding or a sheep-biter. It was St. Austins case as himself testifyeth in the
second Book of his Confessions: Fingebam me (says the good Father) fecisse
quod non feceram, ne caeteris viderer abiectior. But he afterward was sorry
for it, and so am I, and yet indeed there was no other way to keep in a good
opinion of that unmanly and ungoverned people.

CHAP. II.
The French Women, their persons, prating and conditions; the immodesty of the
French Ladies. Kissing not in use amongst them, and the sinister opinion
conceived of the free use of it in England: The innocence and harmlesness of it
amongst us: The impostures of French Pandors in London, with the scandal
thence arising: The peccancy of our old English Doctor. More of the French
Women: Their Marriages and lives after Wedlock: An Elegy to the English Ladies.

I Am now come to the French Women; and it were great pity they should not
immediately follow the discourse of the Men; so like they are one to the other,
that one would think them to be the same, and that all the difference lay in
the apparel: for person they are generally of an indifferent stature, their
bodies straight, and their wastes commonly small; but whether it be so by,
nature, or by much restraining of those parts, I cannot say. It is said that an
absolute Woman should have (amongst other qualities requisite) the parts of a
French Woman from the neck to the girdle; but I believe it holds not good;
their shoulders and backs being so broad, that they hold no proportion with
their middles: yet this may be the vice of their apparel. Their hands are in
my opinion the comelyest and best ordered parts of them, long, white, and
slender; were their faces answerable, even an English eye would apprehend them
lovely: but here I find a pretty contradictory, the hand, as it is the best
ornament of the whole structure, so does it most disgrace it: whether it be
that ill diet be the cause of it, or that hot blood wrought upon by a hot and
scalding air, must of necessity by such means vent itself, I am not certain:
this I am sure of that scarce the tithe of all the maids we saw, had their
hands, arms, and wrests free from scabs; which had overrunne them like a
Leprosy. Their hair is generally black, and indeed somewhat blacker, then a
gracious loveliness would admit. The Poets commend Leda for her black hair, and
not unworthily.

Leda fuit nigris conspicienda comis. As Ovid has it; yet was that blackness
but a darker brown, and not so fearful as this of the French women. Again the
blackness of the hair is there accounted an ornament; when the face about which
it hangs, is of so perfect a complexion and symmetrie, that it gives a
luster; then does the hair set forth the face, as a shadow does a picture, and
the face becomes the hair, as a field argent does a sable bearing: which kind
of armoury the Heralds call the most fairest, But in this the French Women are
most unlucky, Don Quixote did not so deservedly assume to himself the name of
the Knight of the ill favored face; as may they that of the Damosells of it.
It was therefore a happy speech of a young French gallant, that came in our
company out of England, and had it been spoken amongst the Ancients, it might
have been registered for an Apothegme: That the English of all the people in the
World were only Nati ad voluptates: you have, says he, the fairest Women, the
goodliest Horses, and the best breed of Dogs under Heaven: for my part (as
far as I could in so short a time observe) I dare in his first believe him.
Enland not only being (as it is styled) a Paradise for Women, by reason of
their privileges; but a Paradise also of Women, by reason of their unmatchable
perfections: Their dispositions hold good intelligence with their faces; you
cannot say of them as Sueton does of Galba, Ingenium Galbae male habitat: they
suit so well the one with the other, that in my life I never met with a better
decorum. But you must first here them speak, Loquere ut te videam, was the
method in old times, and it holds now. You cannot gather a better Character
of a French Woman than from her prating, which is tedious and infinite; that
you shall sooner want ear^s, than she tongue. The fastedious pratler which
Horace mentions in his ninth Satyr, was but a Puesne to her. The writers of
these times call the Sicilians gerrae Siculae, and not undeservedly; yet were
they but the Scholars of the French; and learned this faculty of them before
the Vespers. It is manners to give precedence to the Maistresse, and she will
have it, if words may carry it for two things, I would have had Aristotle
acquainted with these Chartings; first it would have saved him a labor in
taking such pains about finding out the prepetual motion: secondly it would
have freed him from an Heresy with which his doctrine is now inserted, and
that is, Quicquid movetur, ab alio movetur; their tongues I am certain move
themselves, and make their own occasions of discoursing: when they are a going
they are like a Watch, you need not wind them above once in twelve hours, for
so long the thread of their tongues will be in spinning. A Dame of Paris came in
a Coach with us from Roven, fourteen hours we were together, of which time (I Will
take my oath upon it) her tongue fretted away a eleven hours and fifty seven
minutes; such everlasting talkers are they all, that they will sooner want
breath than words, and they are never silent but in the grave, which may also
be doubted.

As they are endless in their talk, so are they also regardless of the comyany
they speak in; be he stranger or of their acquaintance it much matters not;
though indeed no man is to them a stranger, within an hour of the first sight
you shall have them familiar more than enough; and as merry with you, as if
they had known your bearing cloth. It may be they are chaste, and I persuade my
self many of them are; but you will hardly gather it out of there behavior. Te
tamen et cultus damnat, as Ausonius of an honest Woman, that carried her self
less modestly. They are abundantly full of laughter and toying, and are never
without variety of lascivious songs, which they spare not to sing in whose
company soever: you would think modesty were quite banished the Kingdom, or
rather that it had never been there. Neither is this the weakness of some few,
it is an Epidemicall disease: Maids and Wives are alike sick of it, though not
both so desperately. The Galliards of the Mayds being of the two a little more
tolerable; that of the Women coming hard upon the confines of shamelesness. As
for the Ladies of the Court (I can speak this but upon hearsay) they are as
much above them in their lightness, as they are in their place: and so much the
worse, in that they have made their lightness impudent: for whereas the
daughter of Pythagoras, being demanded what shamed her most to discourse of?
made answer, (...)* those parts which made her a Women: these French Dames will
speak of them even in the hearing of men, as freely, and almost as broadly as a
Midwife, or a Barbar Surgeon. Nay I have heard a Gentleman of good credence
relate, that being at a Tilting, he saw a Courtier going to remove a boy, who
very roguishly looked under a Ladies Clothes; but when her Ladyship perceived
his intention, she hindered him with this Complement, Laisse Monsieur Laisse
les yeux ne pas Larrons, the boys would steal nothing. A very merciful and
gentle Lady: if that of Justin be still true, Vera mulierum ornament a
pudicitiam esse non vestes: that modesty were the best apparel of a Woman; I
am afraid many of the female sex in France would be thinly clad, or else go
naked.

Being a people thus prone to a sudden familiarity, and so prodigal of their
tongues and company; you would scarce imagine them to be coy of their lips; yet
this is their humor. It seemed to me at first strange and uncivil, that a
woman should turn away from the proffer of a salutation. Afterward I liked the
custom very well, and I had good cause for it; for it saved me from many an
unsavory piece of mannerliness, This notwithstanding could not but amaze me,
that they who in their actions were so light and wanton, should yet think
themselves modest; and confine all lasciviousness unto a kiss. A woman that is
kissed, they account more than half whored, be her deportment never so
becoming; which makes them very sparing of receiving such kindnesses. But this
is but a dissembled unwillingness, and has somewhat in it of the Italian; As
they had rather murder a man in private, than openly speak ill of him: so it
may be thought, that these Damsels would hardly refuse a man's bed, though
education has taught them to fly from his lips. Night and the Curtains may
conceal the one, the other can obtain no pardon in the eye of such as may
happen to observe it.

Upon this ground your French Traveller, that perhaps may see his Hostess
kissed at Dover; and see a Gentleman salute a Lady in the streets of London,
relates at his coming home strange Chymera's of the English modesty: to
further this sinister opinion, he will not spare to tell his Comerades (for
this I have noted to you to be a part of his humor) what Merchants Wives he
enjoyed at London, and in what familiarity such a Lady entertained him at
Westminster. Terrible untruths, and yet my poor Gallant thinks he lies not.
I remember I met in Paris with an English Docter, and the Master of a College
there, who complained much of the lasciviousness of the English Women; and how
infamously every French Tailor that came from us reported of them, withal he
protested it did not much greive him; because he thought it a just judgment of
God upon our Nation, that all the married men should thus suffer. A strange
piece of Divinity to me, that never before heard such preaching. This was the
occasion of the doctrine. In the old English Mass Book, called Secundum usum
Sarum, the Woman at the time of marriage promises her future Husband to be
bonny and buxome at bed and at board till death us depart, etc. This being too
light for the gravity of the action then in hand; and in mine opinion somewhat
less reverent than a Church duty would require; the Reformers of that Book
thought good to alter, and thought fitter to put in, to love, cherish and obey.
That this was a sufficient assurance of Conjugal faith he would not grant,
because the promise of being buxome in bed was excluded. Besides, he accounted
the supposed dishonesty of the English Wives as a vengeance plucked down on the
heads of the people, for chopping and changing the words of the holy Sacrament
(for such they esteem the form of Matrimony.) Though his argument needed no
answer; yet his accusation might expect one. And an English Gentleman (though
not of the English faith) laid open the abuse, and seemed to speak it out of
knowledge. When the Monsieurs came over full pursed to London, the French
Pandars, which lay in wait for such booties, grow into their acquaintance, and
promise them the embraces of such a Dame of the City, or of such a Lady of the
Court; Women perhaps famed for admirable beauties. But as Ixion amongst the
Poets expected Juno* and enjoyed a Cloud: So those beguiled wretches, instead
of those eminent persons mentioned to them, take into their bosoms some of the
common prostitutes of the Town. Thus are they cozened in their desires: thus do
they lie in their reports: whilst, poor fools, they think themselves guilty of
neither imposture.

For the other accusation, which would seem to fasten a note of immodesty upon
our English Gentlewomens lips; I should be like enough to confess the crime,
were the English kisses like unto those of the French. As therefore Doctor Bale
Master of the Requests said unto Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, upon his
dislike of the promiscuous sitting of men and women within our Churches, Turpe
quidem id esse apud Hispanos, qui etiam in locis sacris cogitarent de explenda
libidine, a qua procul aberant Anglorum mentes: So do I answer to the bill of
the Complaint. An Oxford Doctor upon this Text, Betrayest thou the Son of man
with a Kiss? made mention of four sorts of kisses, viz. Osculum charitatis,
Osculum gratioris familiaritatis, Osculum calliditatis, and Osculum
carnalitatis: Of these I will bestow the last on the French; and the third on
the Spaniards, retaining the two first unto our selves: whereof the one is
enjoined by the precept, and the other warranted by the examples of holy
Scriptures: For my part I see nothing in the innocent and harmless salutations
of the English, which the Doctor calls Oscula gratioris familiaritatis, that
may move a French man's suspicion; much, I confess, which may stir his envy*
Perhaps a want of that happiness in himself makes him to dislike it in us: as
the Fox that had lost his tail persuaded all others to cut off theirs. But I
have already touched the reason, why that Nation is unworthy of such a favor;
their kisses being heat and sulphury; and indeed nothing but the Prologue of
their lust: whereas on the contrary, and I dare be confident in it, the chaste
and innocent kiss of the English Gentlewoman is more in Heaven, than many of
their best devotions. It were not amiss to explain in this place a verse of
Ovids, common in the mouths of many, but in the understanding of few. Oscula
qui sumpsit, and non and caetera sumpsit
Hoec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erat.
He that does only kiss, and does no more,
Deserves to loose the kisses given before.
Which must be understood according to the fashion of Rome and Italy (and since
of France and Spain) where they were given as pawns of a dishonest contract,
and not according to the customs of England, where they are only proffered in
the way of a gracious and innocent familiarity, and so accepted,

I return again to the French women, and though I may not kiss them (which he
that sees them will have good cause to thank God for) yet they are at liberty
to be courted: An office which they admit freely, and return as liberally: an
office to which they are so used, that they can hardly distinguish complement
from wooing, till the Priest expects them at the Church door: That day they
set themselves forth with all the variety of riches their credit can extend to:
A Scholar of the University never disfurnished so many of his Friends to
provide for a journey, as they do neighbors to adorn that wedding. At my being
at Pontoise I saw Mrs. Bride return from the Church; the day before she had
been somewhat of the condition of a Kitchen wench, but now so tricked up with
scarfes, rings and cross-garters, that you never saw a Whitson Lady better
rigged: I should much have applauded the fellows fortunes, if he could have
married the Clothes: but (God be merciful to him) he is chained to the Wench:
Much joy may they have together most peerless couple. Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen
Hymen O Hymenaee. The match was well knit up among them. I would have a French
man marry none but a French woman.

Being now made Mistress of an house, she can give her self a dispensation to
drink Wine. Before she had a fling at the bottle by stealth, and could make a
shift to play off her whole one in a corner; as St. Austin in the ninth book of
his Confessions reports of his Mother Monica: Now she has her draughts like
the second Edition of a book augmented and revised; and which is more,
published cum Privilegio. Her house she keeps as she does her self. It would
puzzle a strong judgment to resolve which of the two was the most nasty: yet
after ten of the clock you may come nigh her; for by that time she has not
only eaten, but it may be her hall has had a brushing. If you be not careful
of your time, you shall commonly find her speechless, her mouth being stopped
with some of the relics of last nights supper. To five meals a day she is
very constant, and for variety sake she will make some of them at the street
door. She is an exceeding good soul (as Sancho Pancha said of his Wife) and one
that will not pine her self, though her heirs smart for it. To her Husband she
is very servile, seldom sits with him at the table, readily executing all
his commands, and is indeed rather a married servant than a Wife, or a household
drudge under the title of a Mistress. Yet on the other side she has freedom
enough, and certainly much more than a moderate wisdom would permit her. It
is one of her iura conjugalia to admit of Courtship even in the sight of her
Husband, to walk arm in arm about the streets, or in the fields, with her
Privado, to proffer occasions of familiarity and acquaintance at the first
sight of one whose person she relisheth, and all this sans suspecion without
the least imputation. A liberty somewhat of the largest, and we may justly
fear, that having thus wholly in her own power the keys of the Cabinet, she
shows her Jewels to more than her husband. Such are the French women, and
such lives do they lead both Maids and Married.

Then happy England! Thy four Seas contain
The pride of Beauties; Such as may disdain
Rivals on earth; Such as at once may move,
By a strange power, the envy and the love
Of all their Sex besides. Admit a Dame
Of France or Spain pass in the breath of Fame
And her own thoughts for Fair: Yet let her view
The common'st Beauties of the English crew;
And in despair she will execrate the day
Which bare her black, and sigh her self away.
So pined the Phrygian Dames and hanged the head,
When into Troy Paris his Helen lead:
But boast not Paris; England now enjoyes
Helens enough to sack a World of Troys:
So do the vulgar Tapers of the Sky
Loose all their luster when the Moon is nigh.
Yet English Ladies (glorious Lights) as far
Exceed the Moon, as does the Moon a Star:
So do the common people of the Groves
Grow hush't, when Philomel recounts her Loves:
But when our Ladies sing, even she forbears
To use her tongue; and turns her tongue to ears:
Nay more; their beauties should proud Venus see,
She Would blush her self out of her Deity;
Drop into Vulcan's forge, her reign now done,
And yield to them her Empire and her Son.
Yet this were needless; I can hardly find
Any of these Land-stars, but straight my mind
Speaks her a Venus; and me thinks I spy
A little Cupid sporting in her eye:
Who thence his shaft more powerfully delivers
Than e're did the other Cupid from his quivers:
Such in a word they are: you would them guess
An harmony of all the Goddesses:
Or swear, that partial Nature at their birth
Had robbed the Heavens to glorify the earth.
Such though they are; yet mean these graces bi^^
Compared unto the virtues lodged within:
For needs the Jewels must be rich and precious,
The Cask that keeps them being so delicious.
CHAP. III.
France described: The Valley of Montmorancie and the Dukes of it. Mont-Martyr.
Burials in former times not permitted within the Walls. The prosecuting of this
discourse by manner of a Journal intermitted. The Town and Church of St. Denis.
The Legend of him and his head. Of Dagobert and the Leper. The relics to be
seen there: Martyrs how esteemed in St. Austin's time: The Sepulchers of the
French Kings and the Treasury there. The Kings House of Madrit. The Queen
Mothers House at Ruall, and fine devices in it* St. Germanenly another of the
Kings Houses: the curious painting in it. ( Gorrambery Window.) The Garden
belonging to it, and the excellency of the Waterworks. Boys, St. Vincent and
the Castle called Bisestre.

I Have now done with the French both Men and Women: a people much extolled by
many of the English Travelers for all those graces which may enoble and adorn
both Sexes: For my part, having observed them as well as I could, and traced
them in all their several humors, I set up my rest with this proposition, that
there is nothing to be envied in them but their Country; To that indeed I am
earnestly, and I think not unworthily affected: here being nothing wanting
which may be required to raise and reward ones liking. If Nature were ever
prodigal of her blessings, or scattered them with an over-plentiful hand, it
was in this Island into which we were entered as soon as we were passed over the
bridge of Pontoise. The first part of it, lasting for three leagues, was upon
the plain of a Mountain, but such a Mountain as will hardly yield to the best
Valley in Europe out of France. On both sides of us the Vines grew up in a just
length, and promised to the Husbandman a thriving vintage. The Wines they
yield are far better than those of Normandy or Gascoyne, and indeed the best in
the whole Continent, those of Orleans excepted; yet what we saw here was but as
a bit to prepare our stomachs, least we should surfeit in the Valley.

Here we beheld Nature in her richest vestments. The fields enterchangeably
planted with Wheat and Vines: That had L. Florus once beheld it, he would never
have given unto Campania the title of Cereris and Bacchi certamen. These fields
were dispersedly here and there beset with Cherry-trees: which considered with
the rest gave unto the eye an excellent object. For the Vines yet green, the
Wheat ready for the sith, and the Cherries now full ripened, and showing forth
their beauty through the vail of the leaves, made such a various and
delightsome mixture of colors, that no art could have expressed it self more
delectable. If you have ever seen an exquisite Mosaical work you may best judge
of the beauty of this Valley. Add to this that the River Seine being now past
Paris, either to embrace that flourishing soil, or out of a wanton desire to
play with it self, has divided it self into sundry lesser channels, besides
its several windings and turnings: So that one may very justly, and not
irreligiously conceive it to be an Idaea or representation of the Garden of
Eden; the River so happily separating it self to water the ground. This Valley
is a very large circuit. And as the Welch-men call Anglesea Mon Mam Gymry, that
is, the Mother of Wales: so may we call this the Mother of Paris: for so
abundantly does it furnish that great and populous City, that when the Dukes of
Bary and Burgundy besieged it with 100000. men, there being at that time three
or 400000. Citizens and Soldiers within the walls, neither the people within,
nor the enemy without, found any want of provision.

It is called the Valley of Montmorencie, from the Town and Castle of
Montmorencie seated in it. But this Town names not the Valley only; it gives
name also to the ancient family of the Dukes of Montmorencie, the ancientest
house of Christendom. He styled himself Lepremier Christien, and plus vicil
Baron du' France, and it is said, that his Ancestors received the faith of
Christ by the preaching of St. Denis the first Bishop of Paris. Their principal
houses are that of Chantilly and Ecqucan, both seated in the Isle: This last
being given to this present Dukes Father by King Henry the fourth, to whom it
was confiscated by the condemnation of one of his Treasurers. This house also
(and so I believe it) has been observed to have yielded to France more
Constables, Marshals, Admirals, and the like Officers of power and command than
any three other in the whole Kingdom, insomuch that I may say of it, what
Irenicus does of the Count Palatines, the names of the Countries only changed:
Non alia Galliae est familia cui plus debent nobilitus. The now Duke named
Henry, is at this present Admiral of France.

The most eminent place in all the Isle is Mont-Martyr, eminent I mean by
reason of its height; though it has also enough of antiquity to make it
remarkable. It is seated within a mile of Paris, high upon a Mountain, on which
many of the faithful, during the time that Gaul was heathenish, were made
Martyrs: Hence the name; though Paris was the place of apprehension and
sentence, yet was this Mountain commonly the Scaffold of execution: It being
the custom of the Ancients, neither to put to death, nor bury within the walls
of their Cities. Thus the Jews when they crucified our Savior, led him out of
the City of Jerusalem unto Mount Calvary: unto which St. Paul is thought to
allude, Hebr. 13. saying, Let us therefore go forth to him, etc. Thus also does
St. Luke (to omit other instances) report of St. Stephen, Acts 7. And they cast
him out of the City and stoned him. So in the State of Rome; the Vestal Virgin
having committed fornication was stifled in the Campus Sceleritatus; and other
Malefactors thrown down the Tarpeian rock; both situate without the Town. So
also had the Thessalians a place of execution from the praecipice of an hill,
which they called the (...) or Corvi: whence arose the Proverb (...), be
hanged. As they permitted not execution of Malefactors within their walls: so
neither would they suffer the best of their Citizens to be buried within them.
This was it which made Abraham to buy him a field wherein to bury his dead: and
thus we read in the seventh of Luke, that the Widow of Naims Son was carried
out to be buried. This custom also we find among the Athenians, Corinthians and
other of the Graecians; qui inagris suis (says Alexander ab Alexandro) aut in
fundo suburbano, ceuinavito aut patrio solo corpora humari consuevere. Amongst
the Romans it was once the fashion to burn the bodies of their dead within
their City. This continued till the bringing in of the Laws of Athens, commonly
called the Laws of the twelve Tables: one of which Laws runs in these words.
In urbe ne sepelito, neve drito. After this prohibition their dead corpse were
first burned in Campus Martius; and their Urnes covered in sundry places of the
field. The frequent Urnes or sepulchral stones dug up amongst us here in
England are sufficient testimonies of this assertion. Besides we may find in
Appian, that the chief reason why the rich men in Rome would not yield to the
Law called Lex Agrariae (for that Law divided the Roman possessions equally
among the people) was, because they thought it an irreligious thing, that the
Monuments of their forefathers should be sold to others. The first that is
registered to have been buried in the City was Trajane the Emperor. Afterward it
was granted as an honorary to such as had deserved well of the Republique. And
when the Christian Religion prevailed; and Churchyards, those dormitories of
the Saints were consecrated, the liberty of burying within the walls was to all
equally granted.

On this ground it not being lawful to put to death or bury within the Town of
Paris; this Mountain was destinate to these purposes: then was it only a
Mountain, now it is enlarged unto a Town. It has a poor wall, an Abbey of
Benedictine Monks, and a Chapel called La Chapelle des Martyrs: both founded
by Lewis the sixth, called The Gross. Amongst others which received here the
Crown of Martyrdom, none more famous than St. Denis (said to be Dionisius
Areopagita) the first Bishop of Paris: Rusticus his Arch-preist, and
Eleutherius his Deacon. The time when, under the reign of Domitian: the person
by whose command Hesubinus Governor of Paris; the crime; for not bowing before
the Altar of Mercury, and offering sacrifice unto him. Of St. Denis, being the
Patron or Tutelary St. of France, the Legend reports strange wonders, as
namely, when the Executioner had smitten off his head, he caught it between his
arms, and ran with it down the hill, as fast as his legs could bear him. Half a
mile from the place of his execution he sat down, rested, and so he did nine
times in all, even till he came to the place where his Church is now built.
There he fell down and died, being three milee English from Mount Martyr; and
there he was buried together with Rusticus and Eleutherius: who not being able
to go as fast as he did, were brought after by the people. O impudentiam
admirabilem and vere Romanam! and yet so far was the succeeding age possessed
with a belief of this miracle, that in the nine several places, where he is
said to have rested, so many handsome crosses of stones there are erected: all
of a making.

To the memory of this St. did Dagobert the first build a Temple, and the times
ensuing improved it to a Town. Afterward in honor of St. Denis, and because
it lay near Paris, some of the following Kings bestowed a wall upon it. A wall
it is of a large circuit, and very much unproportionable to the Town which
stands in it; for all the world like a Spaniards little face in his great
ruff: or like a small chop of Mutton in a large dish of Pottage (at the
three-penny ordinary.) Thus was the Town (as you see) built by means, but it
was not so with the Temple: unless that be worth a Miracle in the building and
in the consecrating of it, I will not give a straw for it. Thus then says the
story: Dagobert afterward King of France, during the life of Clotarre the
second his Father, had cruelly slain Sadrasagille his Governor. To avoid the
fury of his Father, much incensed with that unprincely action, he was compelled
to wander up and down France, hungry and thirsty: And as he went, and he went
(for this tale should be told in the same style that Wenches tell theirs by the
fires side) till he came to the Sepulcher of St. Denis; where he laid himself
down and slept: and then there appeared unto him a fine old man, with a staff
in his hand, and he told him, that his Father was dead; and that he should be
King: and he prayed him of all loves, that when he came to be King, he would
build a Church there, to the honor of St. Denis. He had an hard heart, that
could deny so sweet an old man so little a courtesy for so much good news: and
I trow he was more kind than so. And so when the Church was built, the Bishop
was sent for in all have to bless it. But it chanced the night before the day
wherein the Bishop was to bless it, there came to the Town an ugly Leper, and
the foulest that ever was seen. And this Leper would needs lie in the Church:
and when he was there, about twelve a clock in the night our Savior came to
the Church in garments as white as the driven snow. There came with him the
Apostles, the Angels, and the Martyrs, and the sweetest music that ever was
heard in the world. Then Christ blessed the Church; and said unto the Leper,
that he should tell the Bishop that the Church was already blessed: and for a
token of it, he gave the Leper his health: who presently became as fine a sweet
youth as one should see in a summers day. Auditam admisse risu^teneatis? you
may laugh if you please, but I will assure you this is the story: Neither is it
a jot the less authentical because of the style. Such ridiculous stuff did the
Monks and Friars of those times invent to please and blind the people. So prone
were our Ancestors to believe as Oracles whatever was delivered unto them by
these Impostors. Majoribus nostris tam facilis in mendaciis fides fuit, ut
temere credid^r^nt illa monstrosa mira^ula: and quicquid famae licet fingere,
illis erat libenter audire. Minutius Felix spoke it of his forefathers being
Heathens, we may affirm it of ours also being Christians.

But (to omit the additions of the Legend) true it is, that Dagobert was the
first Founder of the Church: which was afterward rebuilt and beautified by the
twenty fifth Abbot of it, called Sugger, in the reign of King Lewis the sixth.
A reverent and comely Fabric certainly it is: Dark, as the Churches of those
times commonly were, and none of the poorest. It maintains sixty two Monks
and an Abbot, whose single revenue is thought to be worth ten thousand Crowns
and upward. The present Abbot is Henry of Lorrain, Son to the Duke of Guise, a
young Gentleman of some fourteen years of age, or thereabouts: but of him more
hereafter. The Abbot of it, among many other privileges, has a full power
upon the lives, goods, and honors of his vassals; and has a voice in the
Parliament of Paris as full and binding as any of the Counselors there
sitting. As for the Church it self, it is in height eighty foot, an hundred in
breadth, and in length three hundred. The high Altar, under which the bodies of
Saint Denis and his two fellow Martyrs are said to be buried, is a very rich
and excellent work: the Crucifix standing over it being all of pure gold,
embos'd with diverse pearls and precious stones of great value. Before it
hangs a silver Lamp continually burning; and if you look about it, you shall
see the richest and the fairest glass for painting in all France, that of
Amiens only excepted; one thing I will further note in this Church, before I
come to the Tombs and Relics; which is, how Henry the fourth in this Church
said his first Mass after his last reconcilement to the Church of Rome: and
good reason I have to say his last: For having first been brought up in the
Romish faith; he was by his Mother made a Protestant. At the Massacre of Paris,
fear of death or imprisonment turned him Papist. Liberty made him again an
Hugonot. In this he continued till the year 1595. And then once more
re-embosom'd himself in the Roman Synagogue, which was the time we now speak
of. Quo teneam nodo mutantem protea vultum? the only Proteus in matters of
faith of our times, Doctor Perne, was a diamond to him.

It is now time I should show you the Relics: but you must first stay till
the Clerk has put on his Surplice. I have heard of a blind Priest, that could
never mumble over his Mass without his spectacles: this fellow and his Surplice
is just like him. I persuade my self, that the Surplice without the Clark could
marshal the Relics, as well as the Clark without the Surplice. As soon as he
was sadled for his journey, he put himself into his way, and followed it with a
pace so nimbly, that there was no keeping of him company. His tongue ran so
fast, that the quickest eye there was fain to give him over in plain ground:
the fellow that shows the Tombs at Westminster, being no more to be compared
to him for the volubility of his chops, than a Capouchin to a Jesuit: yet as
we learned afterward of him, when he was out of his road, they were thus
disposed. On the right hand of the Altar (not that high Altar above mentioned)
there are said to be kept one of the nails which fastened our Savior to the
Cross. Secondly, a piece of the Cross it self. Thirdly, some of the Virgin
Mary's Milk. Fourthly, the arm of St. Simeon set in a case of gold. And fifthly,
the Relics of St. Lewis reserved in a little Chapel, all of gold also, and
built after the fashion of Nostre-dame in Paris. On the left there was showed
us the head of St. Denis, and a part of his body: But I mistake my self, it was
not the head, but the Portraiture in gold; the head being said to be within it.
By this representation he seems to have had a very reverend and awful
countenance; though I persuade my self, that the rich Crown Miter which he
there wears (and certainly they are of an high value) never belonged to him
in his life. On each side of the head are two Angels supporting it, reported to
be the work of one Ely Le plus artiste orfeure de son temps: the cunningst
Goldsmiths of his time, who afterward was made Bishop of Noyon and Sainted.

Concerning Relics I shall have occasion to speak further, when I come to the
holy Chapel in Paris: somewhat now of the honor due unto the memory of
Martyrs. I am none of those that think the memories of those Heroes of the
Primitive times not to be honored in the dust. Neither would I assault their
shrines with an irreverent finger. On the other side, they shall never have my
prayers directed to them, nor my devotions: nor can I think it lawful to give
the remnants of them any bodily observance: though I do and will honor, yet I
dare not worship them. St. Austin has cut out the midway between the Papists
and the Zelots, in the eighth book of his most excellent work de Civitate Dei,
and his path it is best to follow: Honoramus sane memorias eorum, tanquam
Sanctorum hominum Dei, qui usque ad mortem suorum corporum pro veritate
certarunt. And a little after, he shows the end of these memorials: viz. Vt
ea celebritate Deo vero gratias de eorum victoriis agamus, and nos ad
imitationem talium coronarum eorum memoriae revocatione adhortemur. One Relic
there is, of which this use cannot possibly be made, and what do you think that
should be, but the Lanthorn which Judas used when he went to apprehend his
Master. A pretty one I confess, it is richly beset with studs of Crystal,
through which all the light comes, the main of it being of a substance not
transparent. Had it been showed me within the first Century of years after the
Passion, I might have perhaps been fooled into a belief, for I am confident it
can be no elder. Being as it is, I will acknowledge it to be a Lanthorn, though
it belonged not to Judas.

From the Relics of Martyrs, proceed we to those of Kings, and amongst those
there is nothing which will long detain an English man. He that has seen the
Tombs at Westminster, will think those to be but trifles: if he consider the
workmanship, or the riches and the magnificence. The chief of those mean ones
which are there, are those of Henry the second, and Katherine de Medices his
Wife, in a little Chapel of her own building, both in their full proportion,
and in their royal habiliments exceeding stately. Here is also a neat Tomb of
the same Henry built all of brass, and supported by four brass pillars. His
statue of the same metal placed on the top of it, and composed as if at his
prayers. The rest are more in tale than weight: but the chiefest beauties of
the Church are in the Treasury, which was not mine happiness to see. As I am
imformed, the most remarkable things in it are these. The Swords of Joan the
Virgin, Charles the great, Rowland his Cozen, and that of Henry the fourth when
he was crowned. His Boots, Crowns and Scepters, as those of his Son now
reigning. A Cross of three foot high made of pure gold: A Crown, Scepter and
golden Ball given by Pope Adrian to Carolus Magnus: A golden Crown of a larger
size be decked with adamants and other precious stones, given by Charles
Martell after his victory over the Saracens: A very fair Chalice all of gold,
in which St. Denis is said to have consecrated the Sacramental Wine. The others
of lesser note I purposely omit: for having not seen them, I am loath to go any
further upon trust. And so I leave St. Denis, a Church so richly furnished,
that had I seen all the rarities and glory of it, that only days content had
deserved our journey; Sed haec infaelici nimia,

Not to continue this discourse any further by way of journal, or gesta dierum;
some few days after we had wearied our selves with the sight of Paris, we went
to see some of their Majesty's houses in the Country; and here we passed by
Madrit, so called of the King of Spains house at Madrit* after the form of
which it is built. The Founder of it was Francis the first, who being taken
prisoner at the ba^tel of Pavi^, Anno 15^5. and thence carried into Spain, had
no less than a twelve-moneths leisure to draw that platform. A fine contrived
house it seemed to be; but our journey lay beyond it: One league beyond it lay
Ruall, a small Town belonging to the Abbey of St. Denis. In the corner of this
Town, the Queen Mother has a fine summer house, abundantly adorned with
retired walks, and a most curious variety of Waterworks: For besides the forms
of diverse glasses, pillars and geometrical figures, all framed by the water,
there were birds of sundry forts so artificially made, that they both deceived
the eye by their motion, and the ear by their melody: Somewhat higher, in the
midst of a most delicious garden, are two Fountains of admirable workmanship.
In the first the Portraitures of Cerberus, the Bore of Calidon, the Naemean
Lion, and in the navel of it Hercules killing Hydra. In the other only a
Crocodile full of wild and unruly tricks, and sending from his throat a music
not far different from Organs. Had your eyes been shut, you would have thought
your self in some Cathedral Church: this melody of the Crocodile, and that
other of the Birds, so exactly counterfeiting the harmony of a well ordered
Quire. And now we are come into the Grove, a place so full of retired walks, so
sweetly and delectably contrived, that they would even entice a man to
melancholy; because in them even melancholy would seem delightful. The trees so
interchangeably folded the one within the other, that they were at once a
shelter against wind and sun, yet not not so sullenly close, but that they
afforded the eye an excellent Lordship over the vines, and verdures of the
earth imprisoned within them. It seemed a Grove, an Orchard, and a Vineyard, so
variously interwoven and mixed together, as if it had been the purpose of the
Artist to make a man fall in love with confusion. In the middle of the
wilderness was seated the house, environed round about with a moat of running
water; the house pretty and therefore little, built rather for a banquet than a
feast. It was built and thus enriched with variety of pleasures by Mr. de Ponte
Tailor to King Henry the fourth, and was, no question, the best garment he ever
cut out in his life. Dying he gave it to Mr. Landerbone, once his servant, and
now his Son by adoption, of whom the Queen Mother, taking a liking to it,
bought it, giving in exchange an Office in the Treasury worth 400000 Crowns to
be sold.

Two leagues from Ruall is the Kings house of St. Germanenly, an house seated
on the top of an hill, just like Windsore. The Town of St. Germain lies all
round about it: the River Reine (of the same breadth as the Thames is at the
place mentioned) runs below it; and the house, by reason of the site,
having a large command of the Country round about it. The Town is poor, and
has nothing in it remarkable but the name, which it took from St. Germain
Bishop of Auxerre, who together with St. Lupus Bishop of Troyes sailed into
Britain to root out Pelagianisme. The Castle or Seat royal is divided into two
parts, the old and the new. The old, which is next unto the Town, is built of
brick and for form it is triangular. Founded it was at the first by Charles the
first, since strengthened and beautified by the English, when it was in their
possession. Francis the first added to it the upper story, and the battlements,
and in memoriam facti has left a Capital F. upon every of the chimneys. The
new house distant from the old about a furlong, and to Which you descend by a
handsome green Court. It was built by Henry the fourth. It consists of three
several parts all joined together, the two outermost quadrangular; that in the
middle almost round, and in the fashion of a Jewish Synagogue. Here we saw the
Volatory full of sundry foreign Birds, and in one of the lowest rooms great
store of outlandish Coins, but these were but accessories. The principal was
the majesty of the house, which is indeed worth the observation. The Palace of
the Lou're so much famed, is not to be named the same day with that. The rooms
are well ordered and well roofed: gorgeously set out with the curiosity of the
Painter. In some of the Chambers they showed us some poetical fictions,
expressed by the pencil in the windows, and on the wainscot, and seemed to
glory much in them. I confess they might plentifully have possessed my fancy,
had I not seen the Window in Gorrambury gallery, belonging to the right
Honorable Francis Viscount St. Albons, a Window, in which all the Fables of
Ovid's Metamorphosis are so naturally and lively resembled, that if ever Art
went beyond it self, it was in that admirable expression.

Let us now take a veiw of the Waterworks, and here we shall see in the first
Water-house (which is a stately large walk, vaulted over head) the effigies of
a Dragon just against the entrance. An unquiet Beast, that vomiteth on all that
come nigh it. At the end toward the right hand is the statue of a Nymph sitting
before a pair of Organs. Upon the loosing of one of the pipes the Nymphs
fingers began to manage the keys, and brought the instrument to yield such a
music, that if it were not that of an Organ, it was like it as could be, and
not be the same: Unto the division of her fingers her head kept a
proportionable time, jolting from one shoulder to the other: as I have seen an
old Fiddler at a Wake. In the same partition were the counterfeits of all sorts
of mils, which before very eagerly discharged their functions, but upon the
beginning of the harmony they suddenly stood still, as if they had ears to have
heard it. At the other end toward the left hand we saw a shop of Smiths,
another of Joyners, and backsides full of Sawyers and Masons, all idle: upon
the first command of the water they all fell to their occupations, and plied
them lustily: the Birds every where by their singing saving the Artificers the
labor of whistling. Besides upon the drawing of a wooden curtain, there
appeared unto us two Tritons riding on their Dolphins, and each of them with a
shell in his hand, which interchangeably and in turns served them instead of
Trumpets. A very happy decorum, and truly poetical. Caeruleum Tritona vocat,
conchaque sonanti
Inspirare jubet. --
Afterward follows Neptune himself sitting in his Chariot drawn with four
Tortises, and grasping his Tricuspis or threefold Scepter in his hand; the
water under them representing all the while a Sea somewhat troubled. Thirty six
steps from the front of the house we descended into this Water-house, and by
sixty more descended into a second of the same fashion, but not of an equal
length with the other. At the right hand of this, is the whole story of Perseus
and Andromeda, and the whole lively acted: the Whale being killed and the Lady
loosed from the rock very perfectly. But withal it was so cunningly managed,
and that with such mutual change of fortune on the parts of both the
Combatants, that one who had not known the Fable, would have been sore afraid,
that the Knight would have lost the victory, and the Lady her life. At the
other end there was showed unto us, Orpheus in silvis positus, silvaeque
sequentes. I say, there appeared unto us the resemblance of Orpheus playing on
a treble Violl; the trees moving with the force of the music, and the wild
Beasts dancing in two rings about him. An invention which could not but cost
King Henry a great sum of money; one string of the Fiddle being by mischance
broken, having cost King Lewis his Son 1500. Livers. Upon the opening of a
double leafed door, there were exhibited unto us diverse representations and
conceits: which certainly might have been more graceful, if they had not had so
much in them of a Pudpet-play. By some thirty steps more we descended into the
Garden; and by as many more into a Green, which opened into the water sides: In
which the goodliest Flower and most pleasing to mine eye, was the statue of an
Horse in brass, of that bigness, that I and one of my companions could stand on
the neck of him; but dismounting from this Horse we mounted our own, and so
took our leaves of Saint Germain.

Upon the other side of Paris and up the River, we saw another of the Kings
Houses called Saint Vincent, or Vincennes. It was beautified with a large Park
by Philip Augustus, An. 1185. who also walled the Park and replenished it with
Deer. In this House have died many famous personages, as Philip the fair, Lewis
Hutin, and Charles the fair, but none so much to be lamented as that of our
Henry the fifth, cut down in the flower of his age, and the midst of his
victories. A man most truly valiant, and the Alexander of his times. Not far
from thence is an old Castle, once strong, but time has made it now
unserviceable. The people call it Chasteau bisestre corruptly for Vincester,
which makes me believe it was built by the English when they were Masters of
this Isle.

CHAP. IV.
Paris, the names and antiquity of it. The situation and greatness; the chief
strength and fortifications about it. The streets and buildings. King James his
laudable care in beautifying London: King Henry the fourth his intent to
fortify the Town: Why not actuated. The Artifices and wealth of the Citizens:
The bravery of the Citizens described under the person of a Barber.

WE are now come to Paris, whether indeed I should have brought you the same
day we came from Pontoise. It has had in several ages two several names; the
one taken from the people, the other from the situation. The name taken from
the people is that of Paris: Julius Caesar in his Commentaries making mention
of the Nation of the Parisii: and at that time calling the City Vrbem
pacisiorum: Amianus Marcellinus calls it by the same name appellative: for as
yet the name of Paris was not appropriated to it. As for these Parisii, it is
well known that they were a people of Gallia Celtica: but why the people were
so called has been questioned, and that deservedly. Some derive them from a
Son of Paris the Son of Priam: but the humor of deriving all national
originations from Troy, has long since been hissed out of the School of
Antiquity: The Berosus of John Annins brings them from one Paris King of the
Celtae: and this authority is alike authentical: The bastards which this Annius
imposed upon the ancient Writers, are now taught to know their own Fathers.
Others deduce it from (...) a Greek word, importing boldness in speech, which
is approved by William Breton in the first book of his Philippiades.

Finibus egressi patriis per Gallica rura
Sedem quaerebant ponendis maembus aptum:
Et se Parisios dixerant, nomine Graeco:
Quod sonat expositum nostris audacia, verbis.
Leaving their native Soil, they sought through Gaul
A place to build a City and a Wall:
And called themselves Parisians: which in Greek
Does note a prompt audacity to speak.
It is spoken of the Gauls, who coming out of the more Southern parts here
planted themselves Neither is it improbable, that a Gallick Nation should
assume unto it self a Greek name; that language having taken good footing in
these parts long before and sans time; as himself testifies in his
Commentaries. How well this name agrees with the French nature, I have already
manifested, in the character of this people both Men and Women: But I will not
stand to this Etymology. The names of great Cities are obscure, as those of
their Founders: and the conjecturall derivations of them are oftentimes rather
plausible than probable, and sometimes neither. As for the antiquity of it, it
is said to have been built in the time of Amaziah King of Judah; but this also
is uncertain, the beginnings of ancient Cities being as dark and hidden as
their names. Certain it is, that it is no puisne in the world, it being a
strong and opulent Town in the days of Julius Caesar.

The other name of the City, which indeed is the ancient, and was taken from
the situation of it, is Lu^etia from Lutum, Dirt; as being seated in an
exceeding clammy and durty soil. To this also consents the above named
William of Breton in his said first book of his Philippiades, saying. --
Quoniam tunc temporis illam
Reddebat palus, and terrae pinguaedo lutosam
Aptam Parisii posuere Lutetia nomen.
And since the Fens and clammy soil did make
Their City dirty: for that reasons sake
The Town the name Lutetia did take.
As for the Etymology of Munster, who derived the name from Paris one of the
Kings of Celtae, it may (for ought that I know) deservedly keep company with
that of Berosus already recited. This name of Lutetia continued till the coming
of the Franks into these parts, who to endear the Nation of the Parisii, and
oblige them more faithfully to do them service, commanded it for ever after to
be called Paris. But the situation of the Town gave it not only the name, it
gave it also (as the custom of Godfathers is in England) a Christening gift,
which is the riches of it, and by consequence the preeminence. In how delicate
and flourishing a soil it is situate, I have already told you in my
description of the valley of Montmorencie wherein it stands. If you will
believe Comines in the first book of his History, he will tell you, that ( 'est
la cite que iamais ie veisse environn^e de meilleux pais and plantureux: of all
the Cities which ever he saw, it is environned with the best and fruitfullest
Country. The River of Seine is also no question a great help to the enriching
of it: though it be not navigable to the Town; yet it gives free passage unto
Boats of an indifferent bigg burden; into which the Ships are unladen, and so
their commodities carried up the water: A profitable intercourse between the
Sea and the City for the Merchants. Of these Boats there are an infinite
company, which ply up and down the water, and more indeed (as the said Cominces
is of opinion) than any man can believe, that has not seen them.

It is in circuit (as Boterus is of opinion) twelve miles; others judge it at
ten: for my part I dare not guess it to be above eight, and yet I am told by a
French man that it was in compass no less than fourteen Leagues within the
Walls: an untruth bigger than the Town. For figure it is circular; that being
(according to the Geometricians) of all figures the most capacious. And
questionless if it be true that Vrbs non in maenibus sed in civibus posita est,
Paris may challenge as great a circuit, as the most of Europe; it being little
inferior to the biggest for the multitude of her inhabitants. Join the compass
and the populousness together, and you shall hear the wisest of the French men
say, Que ce qu'est l' ame a la raisen, et la prunet a locit, cela mesme est
Paris a la France. Add to this the virdict of Charles the fifth, who being
demanded which he thought to be the biggest City of France, answered Roven: and
being then asked what he though of Paris, made answer, Un Pais, that it was a
whole Country; the Emperor did well to flatter Francis the first, who asked
him these questions, and in whose power he then was: otherwise he might have
given men good cause to suspect his judgment. The truth is that Paris is a
fair and goodly Town, yet withal it is no thing like the miracle that some make
it. Were the figure of London altered, and all the houses of it cast into a
ring, I dare able it a larger and more goodly Town than Paris, and that in the
comparison, it may give it at the least half a mile odds.

For matter of strength and resistance certain it is, that this City is
exceeding well seated, were it as well fortified. It lies in a plain flat and
level, and has no hills nigh unto it, from which it can any way be annoyed:
and for the casting and making of rolling Trenches, I think the soil is hardly
serviceable. If Art were no more wanting to the strengh of it than Nature, in
mine opinion it might be made almost impregnable. Henry the fourth, seeing the
present weakness of it, had once a purpose (as it is said) to have strenthened
it according to the modern Art of fortifications: but it went no further than
the purpose. He was a great builder, and had may projects of Masonry in his
head, which were little for his profit; and this would have proved less than
any: for besides the infinite sums of money, which would have been employed in
so immense a work; what had this been in effect, but to put a sword into a mad
man's hand. The often mutinies and seditions of this people has made it little
inferior to Laigh, or Gaunt, the two most revolting Towns in Europe. And
again, the Baracadoes against the person of King Henry the third, and the long
resistance it made to himself being weak, were sufficient to instruct him, what
might be expected from it by his Successors, when it should be strengthened and
enabled to rebellion.

The present strength of the Town then is not great, the walls being very weak
and ruinous; and those other few helps which it has being little available for
defense. The beautifullest part of the whole resistance is the Ditch, deep,
praecipitate, and broad; and to say no more of it, an excellent ward were there
any thing else correspondent to it. As for the Fort next to St. Antonies gate
called the Bastille, it is in my conceit too little to protect the Town, and
too low to command it. When Swords only and Pick-axes were in use, and
afterward in the infancy of Gunnes, it did some service in the Nature of of a
Fortress; now it only serves as a Prison, principally for those of the
greater sort, who will permit themselves to be taken. It is said to be built by
the English, when they were Lords of Paris: and the Vulgar are all of this
opinion. Others of the more learned sort, make it to be the work of one of the
Provosts of the City Du Chesne calls him Hugues Ambriott, in the time of
Charles the fifth, when as yet the English had nothing to do here. The word
Bastille in general is a Fortress; the article la prefixed before it makes it
a name, and appropriateth it to this building. There are also two little
turrets just against the Gallery of the Louure on both sides of the Seine,
intended for the defense of the River; though now they are little able to
answer that intention. They also are fathered on the English; but how true I
know not. Another place I marked, designed perhaps for a Rampart, but employed
only at this time by Wind-mills: it is a goodly mount of earth, high and
capacious, situate close unto the gate called St. Martin, the most defensible
part (if well manned) of all Paris. Thus is the strength of this Town (as you
see) but small, and if Henry the fourth, lay so long before it with his Army,
it was not because he could not take it, but because he would not: He was loath
(as Byron advised him,) to receive the bird naked, which he expected with all
his feathers: and this answer he gave to my Lord Willoughby, who undertook to
force an entry into it.

For the Streets they are made of a lawful and competent breadth, well pitched
under the foot with fair and large Pebble: This paving of it was the work of
Philip Augustus, Anno 1223. or therebouts: before which time it could not but
be miserably dirty, if not unpassable. As it now is, the least rain makes it
very slippery and troublesome, and as little a continuance of warm weather,
stinking and poisononus: But whether this noysomness proceed from the nature of
the ground, or the sluttishness of the people in their houses, or the neglect
of the Magistrates in not providing a sufficiency of Scavingers, or all, I am
not to determine. This I am confident of, that the nastiest Lane in London, is
Frankincense and Juniter to the sweetest Street in this City. The ancient
byword was (and there is good reason for it) Il destaint come la fange de
Paris. Had I the power of making Proverbs, I would only change Il destaint,
into Il puit, and make the byword ten times more Orthodoxe. I have spoken
somewhat of the Fortifications of this Town, but they are but triflles: the
only venom of the Streets is a strength unto it more powerful, than the
ditches or the Bullwark of St. Martin, Morison in his Itinerary relates how
the Citizens of Prague in Bohemia were reparing the walls of the Town for fear
of the Turks: but withal he adds, that if the stink of the Streets kept him
not thence, there was assurance to be looked for of the walls: I know not now
how true it is of that City; I am sure it may be justly verified upon this. It
was therefore not injudiciously said of an English Gentleman, that he thought
Paris was the strongest Town in Christendom: for he took strong in that sense,
as we do in England, when we say, such a man has a strong breath. These things
considered, it could not but be an infinite happiness granted by Nature to our
Henry the fifth, that he never stopped his nose at any stink, as our Chronicles
report of him; otherwise in my conscience he had never been able to have kept
his Court here. But that which most amazeth me is, that in such a perpetuated
constancy of stinks, there should yet be found, so large and admirable a
variety; a variety so specifical and distinct, that any Chymicall nose (I dare
lay my life on it) after two or three perambulations, would hunt out blindfold
each several street by the smell; as perfectly as another by his eye. A Town of
a strange composition: one can hardly live in it in the Summer without
poisoning, in the Winter without myring.

For the Buildings, they are I confess very handsomely and uniformly set out to
the street ward; not unseemly in themselves and very suitable one with another:
high and perpendicular, with windows reaching almost from the top to the
bottom. The houses of the new mould in London are just after their fashion,
wherein the care and design of our late Sovereign King James, is highly to be
magnified. Time and his good beginnings well seconded will make that City
nothing inferior for the beauty and excellency of her structures, to the
gallantest of Europe. Insomuch that he might truly have said of his London what
Augustus did of his Rome. (...): as Dyon has it, Vrbem quam lateritiam inveni
marmoreum relenquo. But as London now is, the houses of it in the inside are
both better contrived, and more richly furnished by far, than those of Paris:
the inward beauty and ornaments most commonly following the estate of the
builders or owners. Their houses are distinguished by Signs, as with us, and
under every sign there is printed in Capital Letters what sign it is: neither
is it more than needs. The old shift off, This is a Cock, and This is a Bull,
was never more requisite in the infancy of Painting, than in this City, for so
hideously, and so without resemblance to the thing signified, are most of these
Pencill Works, that I may without danger say of them as Psuedalus implautus
doeh of the Letter which was written from Phaenicium to his young Mr.
Callidorus: An absecro hercle habent quoque gallinae manus: nam has quidem
gallina scripsit. If a Hen would not scrape better Portraictures in a Dunghill,
than they have hanged up before their doors, I would send her to my Hostess of
Tostes, to be executed.

And indeed generally the Artificers of Paris are as slovenly in their Trades,
as in their houses; yet you may find nimble dancers, pretty Fiddlers for a toy,
and a Tailor that can trick you up after the best and newest fashion. Their
Cutlers make such abominable and fearful knives as would grieve a man's heart
to see them; and the Glovers are worse than they: you would imagine by their
Gloves, that the hand for which they were made were cut off by the wrest; yet
on the other side, they are very perfect at Tooth-picks, Beard-brushes, and
(which I hold the most commendable Art of them) the cutting of a Seal. Their
Mercers are but one degree removed from a Peddler; such as in England we call
Chapmen; that is, a Peddler with a shop: and for Goldsmiths there is little use
for them, Glasses there being most in request; both because neat and because
cheap: I persuade my self that the two several ranks of shops in Cheapside, can
show more Plate, and more variety of Mercery wars, good and rich, than three
parts of Paris. Merchants they have but not many; and those which they have not
very wealthy. The River ebbs not and flows, not nigher them than fifteen
miles or thereabouts; and the Boats which thence serve the City, be no bigger
than our Westren Barges. The principal means by which the people do subsist,
are the Court of the King, most time held amongst them, and the great resort of
Advodates and Clients, to the Chambers of Parliament: without these two
crutches the Town would get a vile halting, and perhaps be scarce able to
stand. What the estates of some of the wealthiest Citizens may amount to, I
cannot say: yet I dare conjecture it not to be superfluous. The Author of the
Book entitled Les estats du monde reckons it for a great mervail, that some
of our London Merchants should be worth 100000. Crowns: we account that estate
amongst us not to be so wonderful; and may hence safely conclude, that they
which made a Prodegy of so little, are not much worth themselves.

If you believe their apparel, you may perhaps be persuaded otherwise, that
questionless speaks no less than Millions; though like it is, that when they
are in their best clothes, they are in the middle of their estate. But
concernig the ridiculous bravery of the poor Parisian, take along with you this
story. Upon our first coming into Paris, there came to visit a German Lord,
whom we met a Shipboard, a couple of French Gallants, his acquaintance: the
one of them (for I did not much observe the other) had a suit of Turkey Grogram
dublet with Taffaty, cut with long slashes and carbonadoes after the French
fashion, and belayed with bugle lace; through the opening of his dublet
appeared his shirt, of the Purest Holland, and wrought with curious
needle work; the points of his wast and knees all edged with a silver edging,
his Garters Roses and Hatband suitable to his points; a Beaver hat, and a pare
of silk Stokings: his Cloak also of Turkey Grogram cut upon black Taffaty: This
Lord (for who would have dared to guess him other) applied himself to me, and
perceiving my ignorance in the French, accosted me in Latin, which he spoke
indifferently well. After some discourse he took notice of mine eyes which were
then sore, and Sea sick; and promised me, if I would call on him at his lodging
the next morning, to give me a water which suddenly would restore them to their
strength and vigor; I humbled thanked his Lordship, for such an ineffable and
immerited favor, in the best complement and greatest abaisance I could devise.
It was not for naught thought I, that our English extol so much, the humanity
of this people: Nay I began to accuse report of envy, as not having published
the one half of their graces and affabilities. Quantillum enim virtutum istarum
fama acceperam. And thus taking my leave of his Honor, I greedily expected the
next morning: the morning come, and the hour of visitting his Lordship almost
at hand, I sent a Servant to fetch a Barbar to comb me, and make me neat, as
not knowing what occasion I might have of seeing his Lady, or his Daughters:
upon the return of the messenger, presently followed His Altitude, and bidding
me sit down in the chair, he disburdened one of his pockets, (quis hoc credat
nisi sit proteste vetustas) of a case of instruments, and the other of a bundle
of linen. Thus accomodated he falls to work about me, to the earning of a
quart descu: in my life I had never more ado to hold in my laughter: and
certainly had not an anger or vexation at mine own folly, in casting away so
much humble rhetoric the night before upon him, somewhat troubled me, I should
either have laughed him out of his fine suit, or have broke my heart in the
restraint, Quid Domini facient, audent cum talia fures. If a Barber may thus be
taken in suspicion for a Lord: no doubt but a Mercer may be accused for a
Marquess.

CHAP. II.
Paris divided into four parts. The Faulx Bourgs in general. Of the Pest house.
The Faulx Bourg, and Abbey of St. Germain. The Queen Mothers house there: her
purpose never to reside in it. Of the Town and Government of Paris. The Provost
of Merchands, and his Authority. The Arms of the Town. The Grand Castellet.
The Arcenal. The place Royal, etc. The Vicounty of Paris, and the Provosts
seven Daughters.

THey which write of Lusitania, divide it into three parts; viz. Vlteriorum,
lying beyond Duerus North. Citerioram, lying from Tagus, south; and Interamnem,
situate betwixt both the Rivers. Paris is seated just as that Province, and
may in a manner admit the same division; for the River of Seine, does there
disperse it self, that it has divided the French Metropolis into three parts
also, viz. Citeriorem lying on this side the River which they call la Ville,
the Town; Vlteriorem, lying beyond the further branch of it, which they call
l' universite; and Interamnem situate between both the streams, in a little
Island which they call la Cete. To these add the Suburbs, or (as they call
them) the Faulx Bourgs: and you have in all four parts of Paris.

These Faulx bourgs are not incorporated into the Town, or joined together with
it, as the Suburbs of London are unto that City: they stand severed from it a
pretty distance, and appear what indeed they are, a distinct body from it. For
the most part the houses in them are old and ruinous; yet the Faulx bourg of
St. Jacques is in pretty good fashion, and the least unsightly of them all
except St. Germain: The Faulx bourg of St. Martin also has somewhat to commend
it, which is, that the great Pest house built by Henry the fourth, is within
the precincts of it. A House built quadrangular-wise, very large and capacious;
and seems to such as stand afar off it (for it is not safe venturing nigh
it or within it) to be more like the Palace of a King, then the Kings Palace
it self. But the principallest of all the Suburbs is that of St. Germain, a
place lately repared, full of diverse stately houses, and in bigness little
inferior to Oxford. It took name from the Abbey of St. Germain, seated in it,
built by Childebert the son of Clovis, Anno 542. in the honor of St. Vincint.
Afterward it got the name of St. Germain, a Bishop of Paris, whose body was
there buried, and at whose instigation it had formerly been founded. The number
of the Monks was enlarged to the number of 120. by Charles the bald, (he began
his reign Anno 841.) and so they continue till this day. The present Abbot is
Henry of Burbon, Bishop of Metz, base son unto Henry the fourth: He is by his
place Lord of all the goodly Suburbs, has the power of levying taxes upon his
Tennants, and to him accrue all the profits of the great fair holden here
every February.

The principal house in it, is that of the Queen Mother, not yet fully built;
the Gallery of it, which possesses all the right side of the square, is
perfectly finished, and said to be a most royal and majestical piece: the
further part also opposite to the gate is finished, so far forth as
concerning the outside and strength of it: the ornamentall part and trapping of
it, being not yet added: when it is absolutely consummate, if it hold
proportion with the two other sides both within and without, it will be a
Palace for the elegancy and politeness of the fabric, not fellowed in Europe.
A Palace answerable to the greatness of her mind that built it; yet it is by
diverse conjectured, that her purpose is never to reside there; for which cause
the building goes slowly forward: for when upon the death of her great
Privado, the Marquess d' Ancre (on whom she bestowed much of her grace and
favor) she was removed to Blois, those of the opposite faction in the Court,
get so strongly into the favor of the King, that not without great struggling
of those of her party, and the hazard of two Civil Wars, she obtained her
former neerness to his Majesty. She can see by this what to trust to, should
her absence leave the Kings mind any way prepared for new impressions. Likely
therefore it is, that she will rather choose to leave her fine house unhabited
(further than on occasions for a Banquet) then give the least opportunity to
stagger her greatness. This house is called Luxembourg Palace, as being built
in a place of an old house, belonging to the Dukes of that Province. The second
house of note in this Suburb, is that of the Prince of Conde, to whom it was
given by the Queen Mother, in the first year of her Regency.

The Town of Paris is that part of it which lies on this side of the
hithermost branch of the Seine toward Picardie: what was spoken before in the
general, has its reference to this particular, whether it concerns the
sweetness of the streets, the manner of the building, the furniture of the
Artificer, or the like. It contains in it thirteen Parish Churches, viz. 1.
St. Germainde l' Auxerre 2. St. Eustace. 3. les St. Innocents. 4. St. Sauveur.
5. St. Nicholas des Champs. 6. le Sepulcher. 7. St. Jacques de la boucherie. 8.
St. Josse. 9. St. Mercy. 10^ St. Jean, 11. St. Gervase et St. Protasse. 12. St.
Paul. 13. St. Jean de ronde. It has also in it seven Gates, sc. 1. St. Anthony
upon the side of the River near unto the Arcenal. 2. Port du Temple. 3. St.
Martin. 4. St. Denis. 5. Port Montmartre. 6. St. Honor. 7. Port neufue; so
called because it was built since the others, which joyneth hard by the
Tuilleries the Garden of the Louure.

The principal Governor of Paris, as also of the whole Isle of France, is the
Duke of Mont-bazon, who has held the office ever since the year, 1619. when it
was surrendered by Luines, but he little medleth with the City. The particular
Governors of it are the two Provosts, the one called le Provost de Paris, the
other le Provost des Merchands: The Provost of Paris, determines all causes
between Citizen and Citizen, whether they be crimical or civil: the office is
for term of life: the place of judgment the Grand Castellet. The present
Provost is called Mr. Sequse, and is by birth of the Nobility; as all which
are honored with this office must be: He has as his Assistants three
Leiutenants: the Leiutenant Criminal, which judges in matters of life and
death: the Leiutenant Civil, which desideth causes of debt or trespass between
party and party: and the Leiutenant perticulier, who supplyeth their several
places in their absence. There are also necessarily required to this Court, the
Procareur and the Advocate, or the Kings Solicitor and Attorney: twelve
Counselors, and of under Officers more than enough. This Office is said to
have been erected in the time of Lewis the Son of Charles the great. In matters
criminal there is an Appeal admitted from hence to the Attornelle. In matters
Civil, if the sum exceed the value of 250. Livers to the great Chamber, or le
grand Chamber in the Court of Parliament.

The Provost of the Merchands and his authority was first instituted by Philip
Augustus, who began his reign Anno 1290. His office is to conserve the
liberties and indulgences granted to the Merchants, and Artificers of the
City, to have an eye over the sales of Wine, Corn, Wood, Coal, etc. and to
impose Taxes on them: to keep the keys of the Gates, to give the watch word in
time of war: to grant Passports to such as are willing to leave the Town* and
the like. There are also four other Officers joined unto him; Eschevins they
call them, who also carry a great sway in the City. There are moreover
Assistants to them in their proceedings; yea the Kings Solicitor, (or
Procureur) and twenty four Counselors. To compare this Corporation with that
of London: the Provost is as the Mayor: the Eschevins as the Sheriffs: the
twenty four Counselors, as the Aldermen: and the Procureur as the Recorder. I
omit the under Officers whereof here there is no scarcity. The place of their
meeting is called l' hostelle de ville, or the Guild Hall. The present Provost,
Mr de Gri^ux; his habit as also that of the Eschevins and Counselors, half
red, half sky colored, the City Leveries with an Hood of the same.

This Provost is as much above the other in power, as men which are loved
commonly are above those which are feared. This Provost the people willingly,
yea sometimes factiously obey; as the Conservator of their Liberties: the other
they only dread as the Judges of their lives; and the Tyrants of their estates.
To show the power of this Provost both for and with the people against their
Princes, you may please to take notice of two instances, for the people,
against Philip devalois Anno 1349. when the said King desiring an impost of one
liver in five Crowns, upon all wares sold in Paris, (for his better managing
his wars against the English) could obtain it but for one year only; and
that not without especial Letters reservall, that it should no way incommodate
their privileges: which the people Anno 1357. when King John was prisoner in
England, and Charles the Daulphine, afterward the fifth of that name, labored
his ransom among the Parisiens, for then Steven Marcell attended by the vulgar
Citizens, not only brake open the Daulphin^s Chamber, but slew John de
Confluns, and Robert of Chermont, two Marshalls of France before his face. Nay
to add yet further insolences to this, he took his parti-colored hood off
his head, putting it on the Daulphins, and all that day wore the Daulphines hat
being a brown black, pour signal de sa Dictateur, as the token of his
Dictatorship. And which is more than all this, he sent the Daulphin cloth to
make him a Cloak and Hood of the Cities Liverie; and compelled him to avow the
Massacre of his Servants above named, as done by his command: Horrible
insolences! Quam miserum est eum haec impune pacere potuisse, as Tullie of
Marc. Antonius.

The Arms of the Town, as also of the Corporation of the Provost and Eschevins
are Gules, a Ship Argent, a Chief poudred with Flower de Luces Or. The seat or
place of their Assemblies is called (as we said*) Hostel de Ville or the
Guild Hall. It was built or rather finished by Francis the first, Anno 1533. and
since beautified and repaired by Francis Miron once Provost des Merchands, and
afterward privy Counselor to the King. It stands on one side of the Grieve,
which is the public place of the Execution, and is built quadrangular-wise,
all of free and polished stone, evenly and orderly laid-together. You ascend by
thirty or forty steps fair and large, before you come to the quadrate, and
thence by several stairs into the several rooms and chambers of it, which are
very neatly contrived and richly furnished. The grand Chastelet is said to have
been built by Julian the Apostata, at such time as he was Governor of Gaul. It
was afterward new built by Philip Augustus, and since repaired by Lewis the
twelfth. In which time of repaitation the Provost of Paris kept his Court in
the Palace of the Louure. To sight it is not very graceful, what it may be
within I know not. Certain it is, that it looks far more like a Prison (for
which use it also serves) than a Town Hall or seat of judgment.

In this part of Paris, called la Ville or the Town, is the Kings Arcenal or
Magazin of War. It carries not any great face of majesty on the outside;
neither indeed is it necessary: Such places are most beautiful without when
they are most terrible within. It was begun by Henry the second, finished by
Charles the ninth, and since augmented by Mr. Rhosme great Master of the
Artillery. It is said to contain an hundred field pieces and their Carriage;
and also armor sufficient for ten thousand Horses, and fifty thousand Foot. In
this part also of Paris is that excellent pile of building, called the Place
Royal, built partly at the charges, and partly at the encouragement of Henry
the fourth. It is built after the form of a Quadrangle, every side of the
square being in length seventy two fathoms; the materials brick of diverse
colors, which make it very pleasant, though less durable. It is cloystered
round just after the fashion of the Royal Exchange in London; the walks being
paved under foot. The houses of it are very fair and large, every one having
its garden and other outlets. In all they are thirty six, nine on a side, and
seemed to be sufficiently capable of a great retinue. The Ambassador for the
State of Venice lying in one of them. It is situate in that place, whereas
formerly the solemn tiltings were performed. A place famous and fatal for the
death of Henry the second, who was here slain with the splinter of a Lance, as
he was running with the Earl of Mountgomery, a Scottish man. A sad and heavy
accident.

To conclude this discourse of the Ville or Town of Paris, I must wander a
little out of it; because the power and command of the provost says that it
must be so: For his authority is not confined within the Town, he has seven
Daughters on which he may exercise it, Les sept filles de la Propaste de Paris,
as the French call them. These seven Daughters are seven Bayliwicks
comprehended within the Vicointe of Paris: Viz. 1. Poissy. 2. St. Germanenlay.
3. Tornon. 4. Teroiene Brie. 5. Corbeil. 6. Moutherrie: and the 7. Gennesseen
France. Over these his jurisdiction is extended, though not as Provost of
Paris. Here he commands and gives judgment as Leiutenant Civil to the Duke
of Mont-bazon, or the supreme Governor of Paris and the Isle of France for the
time being; yet this Leiutenancy being an Office perpetually annexed to the
Provostship, is the occasion that the Bayliwicks above named are called, Les
sept filles de la Provaste.

CHAP. VI.
The Universitie of Paris, and Founders of it. Of the Colleges in general:
Marriage when permitted to the Rectors of them: The small maintenance allowed
to Scholars in the Universities of France. The great College at Tholoza. Of
the College of the Sorbone in particular, That and the House of Parliament the
chief bulwarks of the French liberty. Of the policy nnd government of the
Universtty. The Rector and his precedence. The disordered life of the Scholars
there being. An Apology for Oxford and Cambridge. The privileges of the
Scholars: Theer Degrees, etc.

THis part of Paris which lies beyond the furthermost branch of the Seine is
called the University. It is little inferior to the Town for bigness, and less
superior to it in sweetness or opulency; whatsoever was said of the whole in
general, was intended to this part also as well as the others. All the learning
in it being not able to free it from those inconveniences wherewith it is
distressed: It contains in it only six parish Churches, the paucity whereof
is supplied by the multitude of religious houses which are in it. These six
Churches, are called by the names, St. Nicholas du' Chardomere. 2. St. Estienne
at this time in repairing. 3. St. Severin. 4. St. Bennoist. 5. St. Andre: and
the 6. St. Cosme. It has also eight Gates; 1. Port de Nesse, by the water
side, over against the Louure. 2. Port de Bucy. 3. St. Germain. 4. St.
Michell. 5. St. Jacques. 6. St. Marcell. 7. St. Victor: and the 8. Port de la
Tornelle. It was not accounted as a distinct member of Paris, or as the third
part of it, until the year 1304. at which time the Scholars having lived
formerly dispersed about the City, began to settle themselves together in this
place, and so to become a peculiar Corporation.

The University was founded by Charles the great, Anno 791. at the perswosion
of Al'uine an Oxford man, and the Scholar Venerable Bede, who brought with him
three of his condisciples to be the first Readers there. Their names were
Rabbanus Maurus, John Duns surnamed Scotus, Claudus, who was also called
Clement. To these four does the University of Paris owe its original and first
rudiments. Neither was this the first time that England had been the
Schoolmaster unto France: we lent them not only their first Doctors in
Divinity and Philosophy; but from us also did they receive the mysteries of
their Religion when they were Heathens. Disciplina in Britannia reperta (says
Julius Caesar Com. 6.) atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur: an
authority not to be questioned by any but by a Caesar. Learning thus new born
at Paris continued not long in any full vigor; for almost three hundred years
it was fallen into a deadly trance, and not here only, but almost through the
greatest part of Europe. Anno 1160* or thereabouts, Peter Lambard Bishop of
Paris, the first Author of Scholastical Divinity; and by his followers called
the Master of the Sentences, received it here in this, by the favor and
encouragement of Lewis the seventh. In his own house were the Lectures first
read: and after as the number of Students did increase, in sundry other parts
of the Town. Colleges they had none till the year 1304. the Scholars
sojourning in the houses of the Citizens, accordingly as they could bargain for
their entertainment.

But Anno 1304. Joan Queen of Navarre Wife to Philip the fair, built that
College, which then and ever since has been called the College of Navarre;
and it is at this day the fairest and largest of all the rest: Non ibi
consistunt exempla ubi caeperunt, sed intenuem accepta tramitem la^issima
evaganoi viam sibi faciunt, as Velleius: This good example ended not in twenty
it self: but invited diverse others of the French Kings and people to the
erecting of convenient places of study: so that in process of time Paris became
enriched with fifty two Colleges: so many it still has, though the odd forty
are little serviceable to Learning: For in twelve only of them is there any
public reading, either in Divinity or Philosophy. These twelve are the
Colleges of 1. Harcourte. 2. Caillve, or the petit Sorbonne. 3. Liseuer, or
Cerovium. 4. Boncorrte. 5. Montague. 6. Les March. 7. Navarre. 8. De le
Cardinal de Noyne. 9. Le Plessis. 10. De Beavis. 11. La Sorbonne. 12. De
Clermont, or the College of the Jesuits. There are also public readings in
the houses of the four Orders of Mendicant Friars: Viz. the Carmelites, the
Augustines, the Franciscans, or Cordeliers, and the Dominicans. The other
Colleges are destinate to other uses: That of Arras is converted to an house
of English Fugitives: and there is another of them hard by the gate of Jacques
employed for the reception of the Irish: in others of them there is Lodging
allotted out to Students, who for there instruction have resort to some of the
twelve Colleges above mentioned.

In each of these Colleges there is a Rector, most of whose places yield them
but small profit. The greatest commodity which accreweth to them is raised from
Chamber-rents: their Preferments being much of a nature with that of a
Principal of an Hall in Oxford: or that of a Treasurer in an Inn of Chancery
in London. At the first erection of their Colleges they were all prohibited
marriage, though I see little reason for it: There can hardly come any
inconvenience or damage by it unto the Scholars under their charge, by assuming
of leases into their own hands, for I think few of them have any to be so
embezelled: Anno 1520. or thereabouts, it was permitted to such of them as were
Doctors in Physic; that they might marry; the Cardinal of Toute-ville, Legate
in France giving to them that indulgence. Afterward in the year 1534. the
Doctors of the Laws petitioned the University for the like privilege, which in
fine was granted to them: and confirmed by the Court of Parliament. The Doctors
of Divinity are the only Academicals now barred from it, and that not as
Rectors but as Priests. These Colleges for their building are very inelegant
and generally little beholding to the curiosity of the Artificer. So confused
and so ill proportioned in respect of our Colleges in England; as Exeter in
Oxford was some twelve years since in comparison of the rest; or as the two
Temples in London now are in reference to Lincolns Inn. The Revenues of them
are suitable to the Fabrics, as mean and curtailed: I could not learn of any
College that has greater allowances than that of the Sorbonne, and how small
a trifle that is, we shall tell you presently. But this is not the poverty of
the University of Paris only, all France is troubled with the same want of
encouragements in learning: Neither are the Academies of Germany in any happier
estate; which occasioned Erasmus that great light of his times, having been
here in England, and seen Cambridge, to write thus to one of his Dutch
acquaintance: Vnum Collegium Cantabrigiense (confidenter dicam) superat vel
december nostra. It holds good in the neatness and graces of the buildings, in
which sense he spoke it, but it had been more undeniable had he intended it of
the Revenues. Yet I was given to understand, that at Tholoza there was amongst
twenty Colleges one of an especial quality, and so indeed it is if rightly
considered. There are said to be in it twenty Students places (or Fellowships
as we call them) The Students at their entrance are to lay down in deposito six
thousand F lorens or Livers, to stay there only six years; in the mean time to
enjoy the profits of the House, and at the 6, years end to have his 6000.
Livers paid unto him by Successor: Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius. A
pretty Market.

The College of Sorbonni (which indeed is the glory of this University) Was
built by one Robert de Sorbonne of the Chamber to Lewit the ninth, of whom he
was very well beloved. It consists merely of Doctors of Divinity: neither can
any of another profession, nor any of the same profession, not so graduated, be
admitted unto it. At this time their number is about seventy, their allowance a
pint of Wine (their pint being but a thought less than our quart) and a certain
quantity of bread daily. Meat they have none allowed them, unless they pay for
it; but they pay not so much: for five Sols (which amounts to six pence
English) a day they challenge a competency of flesh or fish to be served to
them at their Chambers. These Doctors have the sole power and authority in
conferring degrees in Divinity: The Rector and other Officers in the University
having nothing to do in it. To them alone belongs the examination of the
Students in that faculty: the approbation and bestowing of the honors: and to
their Lectures do all such assiduously repair as are that way minded. All of
them in their turns discharge this office of reading and that by six in a day,
three of them making good the Pulpit in the forenoon, and as many in the
afternoon. These Doctors also are accounted together with the Parliament of
Paris, the principal pillars of the French liberty; whereof indeed they are
exceeding jealous, as well in matters Ecclesiastical as Civil. When Gerson
Chancellor of Paris (he died Anno 1429.) had published a book in approbation of
the Council of Constance, where it was enacted, that the authority of the
Council was greater than that of the Pope; the Sorbonne Doctors declared that
also to be their doctrine. Afterward when Lewis the eleventh, to gratify Pope
Pius the second, purposed to abolish the force of the Pragmatick Sanction, the
Sorbonnists in the behalf of the Church Gallican and the University of Paris
magnis obsistebant animis (says Sleidan in his Commentary) and a papa
provacabant ad Concilium. The Council unto which they appealed was that of
Basil, where that Sanction was made: So that by this appeal they verified their
former Thesis, that the Council was above the Pope. And not long since, Anno,
viz. 1613. casually meeting with a Book written by Becanus entitled,
Controversia Anglicana de potestate Regis and Papae, they called an Assembly
and condemned it. For though the Main of it were against the power and
supremacy of the King of England, yet did it reflect also on the authority of
the Pope over the Christian Kings by the by; which occasioned the sentence. So
jealous are they of the least circumstances, in which the immunity of their
Nation may be endangered.

As for the government of the University, it has for its chief Director, a
Rector, with a Chancellor, four Procurators or Proctors, and as many others
whom they call his Intrantes to assist him; besides the Regents. Of these the
Regents are such Masters of the Arts, who are by the consent of the rest
selected to read the public Lectures of Logic and Philosophy. Their name they
derive a regendo, eo quod in artibus rexerint. These are divided into four
Nations: Viz. 1. The Norman. 2. The Picard. 3. The Germain. 4. The French.
Under the two first are comprehended the Students of those several Provinces;
under the third the Students of all Foreign Nations, which repair hither for
the attainment of knowledge. It was heretofore called Natio Anglica: but the
English being thought unworthy of the honor, because of their separation from
the Church of Rome, the name and credit of it was given to the Germains. That
of the French is again subdivided into two parts; that which is immediately
within the Diocese of Paris, and the rest of Gallia: these four Nations (for
notwithstanding the subdivision above mentioned, the French Nation is reckoned
but as one) choose yearly four Proctors or Procurators, so called, Quia negotia
nationis suae procurant. They choose also four other Officers, whom they call
les Intrants, in whose power there remains the delegated authority of their
several Nations. And here it is to be observed, that in the French Nation the
Procurator and Intrant is one year of the Diocese of Paris, and the following
year of the rest of France, the reason why that Nation is subdivided: These
four Intrants thus named have amongst them the election of their Rector, who is
their supreme Magistrate.

The present Rector is Mr. Tarrisnus of the College of Harcourte, a Master of
the Arts, for a Doctor is not capable of the office. The honor lasts only
three months; which time expired, the Intrants proceed to a new election;
though oftentimes it happens, that the same has the lease of his authority
renewed. Within the confines of the University he takes place next after the
Princes of the Blood: and at the public exercises of Learning before the
Cardinals; otherwise he gives them the precedence. But to Bishops and
Archbishops he will not grant it upon any occasion. It was not two months
before my being there, that there happened a shrewd controversy about it. The
King had then summoned an assembly of twenty five Bishops of the Provinces
adjoining, to consult about some Church affairs; and they had chosen the
College of Sorbonne to be their Senate House: When the first day of their
sitting came, a Doctor of the House being appointed to preach before them,
began his Oration with Reverendissime Rector and vos Amplissimi Praesulei. Here
the Archbishop of Roven, a man of an high spirit interrupted him, and
commanded him to invert his style. He obeyed, and presently the Rector rises
up with Impono tibi silentium, which is an Injunction within the compass of his
power. Upon this, the Preacher being tongue-tied, the controversy grew hot
between the Bishops and the Rector, both parties very eagerly pleading their
own priority. All the morning being almost spent in this altercation; a
Cardinal wiser than the rest, desired that their question for that time might
be laid aside, and that the Rector would be pleased to permit the Doctor to
deliver his Sermon, beginning it without any Praeludium at all. To which
request the Rector yielded; and so the contention at that time was ended.

But Salus Academiae non vertitur in istis. It were more for honor and profit
of the University, if the Rector would leave of to be so mindful of his place,
and look a little to his office; for certainly the eye and utmost diligence of
a Magistrate was never wanting more; and yet more necessary in this place.
Penelopes suitors never behaved themselves so insolently in the house of
Ulysses, as the Academicks here do in the houses and streets of Paris. Nos
numerus sumus and fruges consumere nati
Sponsi Penelopes, nebulones, Alcinoque, etc.
Was never the mouth of any of these; when you hear of their behavior you
would think you were in Turkey, and that these men were the Janissaries: For an
Angel given among them to drink, they will arrest whom you shall appoint them;
double the money, and they will break open his house, and ravish him into
Jail; I have not heard that they can be hired to a murder, though nothing be
more common amongst them than killing, except it be stealing. Witness those
many Carcasses which are found dead in a morning, whom a desire to secur
themselves, and make resistance to their pillages, has (only) made earth
again. Nay, which is most horrible, they have regulated their villainous
practices into a Commonwealth, and have their Captains and other Officers, who
command them in their night walks and dispose of their purchases. To be a
Gypsy, and a Scholar of Paris are almost Synonime's. One of their Captains had
in one week (for no longer would the gallows let him enjoy his honor) stolen no
fewer than eighty Cloaks: Nam fuit Autolei tam piceata manus? For these thefts
being apprehended, he was adjudged to the wheel; but because the Judges were
informed. that during the time of his reign he had kept the hands of himself
and his company unpolluted with blood, he had the favor to be hanged. In a
word, this ungoverned rabble (whom to call Scholars were to profane the title)
omit no outrages or turbulent misdemeanors which possibly can be, or were ever
known to be committed in a place, which consists merely of privilege and
nothing of statute.

I could heartily wish, that those, who are so ill conceited of their own two
Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, and accuse them of dissolutions in their
behavior, would either spend some time in the Schools beyond Seas, or enquire
what news abroad of those which have seen them; then would they doubtless see
their own errors and correct them; then would they admire the regularity and
civility of those places, which before they condemned of debauchedness: then
would they esteem those places as the seminaries of modesty and virtue, which
they now account as the nurseries only of an impudent rudeness. Such an
opinion I am sure, some of the Aristarchi of these days have lodged in their
breasts concerning the misgoverning of our Athens. Perhaps a Kinsman of theirs
has played the unthrift equally of his time and his money: Hence their malice
to it, and their invectives against it. Thus of old. -- Pallas exurere classem
Argivum atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto
Vnius ob noxam and furias Aiacis Oilei.
An injustice more unpardonable than the greatest sin of the Universities. But
I wrong a good cause with an unnecessary patronage, yet such is the peccant
humor of some, that they know not how to expiate the follies of some one, but
with the calumny and dispraise of all. An unmanly weakness, and yet many
possessed with it. I know it is impossible, that in a place of youth and
liberty, some should not give occasion of offense. The Ark, wherein there were
eight persons only, was not without one Canaan: And of the twelve which Christ
had chosen one was a Devil. It were then above a miracle, if amongst so full a
Cohort of young Soldiers none should forsake the Ensign of his General: He
notwithstanding that should give the imputation of cowardice to the whole Army,
cannot but be accounted malicious or peevish. But let all such as have evil
will at Sion live unregarded, and die unremembred for want of some Sciolar to
write their Epitaph. Certainly a man not wedded to envy and a spiteful vexation
of spirit, upon a due examination of our Lycaea, and a Comparison of them
abroad with those abroad, cannot but say, and that justly, Non habent Academiae
Anglicanae pares, nisi seipsas.

The principal cause of the rudeness and disorders in Paris had been chiefly
occasioned by the great privileges where with the Kings of France intended the
furtherance and security of Learning. Having thus let them get the bridle in
their own hands, no marvel if they grow sick with an uncontrouled
licentiousness. Of these privileges some are, that no Scholars goods can be
seized upon for the payments of his debts: that none of them should be liable
to any taxes or impositions: (a Royal immunity to such as are acquainted with
France;) that they might carry and recarry their utensiles without the least
molestation: that they should have the Provost of Paris to be the Keeper and
Defender of their Liberties, who is therefore styled, Le conservateur
despriviledges Royaux de le Vniversite de Paris, etc.

One greater privilege they have yet than all these; which is their soon
taking of degrees. Two years sees them both novices in the Arts, and Master of
them: so that enjoying by their degrees an absolute freedom, before the fol^ies
and violencies of youth are broken in them, they become so unruly and insolent
as I have told you^ These degrees are conferred on them by the Chancellor, who
seldom examineth further of them than hss Fees. Those paid, he presents them
to the Rector, and gives them their Letters Patents sealed with the
Universities seal, which is the main part of the Creation. He also sets the
Seal to the Authentical Letters (for so they term them) of such whom the
Sorbonists have passed for Doctors. The present Chancellor is named Petrus de
Piere Vive, Doctor of Divinity, and Chanoin of the Church of Nostre-dame (as
also are all they which enjoy that Office.) He is chosen by the Bishop of
Paris, and takes place of any under that dignity. But of this ill managed
University enough, if not too much.

CHAP. VII.
The City of Paris in the place of old Lutetia: The bridges which join it to
the Town, and University: King Henry's statua: Alexanders injurious policy. The
Church and Revenues of Nostre-Dame. The holy Water there, the original making
and virtue of it. The Lamp before the Altar. The heathenishness of both
customs. Paris best seen from the top of the Church: The great Bell there never
rung but in time of Thunder. The baptizing of Bells. The grand Hospital and
decency of it. The place Daulphin: the holy Chapel and Relics there. What
the Ancients thought of Relics. The Exchange. The little Chastelet. A
transition to thc Parliament.

THe Isle of Paris commonly called Isle de palais seated between the University
and the Town, is that part of the whole, which is called la Cite the City: The
Epitome and abstract of all France: It is the sweetest and best ordered part of
Paris; and certainly if Paris may be thought the eye of the Realm, this Island
may equally be judged the apple of the eye. It is by much the lesser part, and
by as much the richer, by as much the decenter, and affords more variety of
delightful objects than both the other. It contains an equal number of parish
Churches with the Town, and double the number with the University. For it has
in it thirteen Churches parochial: Viz. 1. La Magdalene. 2. St. Geniveue des
Ardents. 3. St. Christofer. 4. St. Pierre aux boeafs. 5. St. Marine. 6. St.
Landry. 7. St. Symphoryan. 8. St. Denis de la charity. 9. St. Bartellemie. 10.
St. Pierre des Assis. 11. St. Croix. 12. St. Marcial. 13. St. German le Vieux.
Seated it is in the middle of the Seine, and in that place where stood the old
Lutetia. Labienus cum quatuor legionibus (says Julius Caesar 7. Comment.)
Lutetiam proficiscitur, id est oppidum Parisioram positum in medio flumin^s
Sequanae, it is joined to the Main Land, and the other parts of this French
Metropolis by six bridges, two of wood and four of stone. The stone bridges
are, 1. Le petit pont, a bridge which certainly deserves the name. 2. Le pont
de Nostre-Dame, which is all covered with two goodly ranks of houses, and those
adorned with portly and antic imagery. 3. Le pont St. Michell, (so called,
because it leads toward the gate of St. Michell) has also on each side a
beautiful row of houses all of the same fashion so exactly, that but by their
several doors you could scarce think them to be several houses. They are all
new, as being built in the reign of this present King; whose Arms is engraven
over every door of them. The fourth and last bridge is that which stands at
the end of the Isle next the Louure, and covers the waters now united into
one stream. It was begun to be built by Katherine of Medices the Queen Mother,
Anno 1578. her Son King Henry the third laying the first stone of it. The
finishing of it was reserved to Henry the fourth, who as soon as he had settled
his affairs in this Town, presently sent the workmen about it. In the end of
it, where it joyneth to the Town, there is a Water house, which by artificial
engines forces up waters from a fresh spring rising from under the River, done
at the charges of the King also. In the midst of it is the Statua of the said
Henry the fourth all in brass, mounted upon his barbed Steed of the same
mertal. They are both of them very unproportionable to those bodies which they
represent, and would show them big enough were they placed upon the top of
Nostre-dame Church: What minded King Lewis to make his Father of so Gigantine a
stature I cannot tell. Alexander at his return from his Indian expedition
scattered armours, swords, and horse-bits far bigger than were serviceable, to
make future ages admire his greatness: Yet some have hence collected, that the
acts he performed are not so great as is reported, because he strived to make
them seem greater than they were. It may also chance to happen, that men in the
times to come, comparing the achievements of this King with his brazen
portraiture, may think that the Historians have as much belyed his valor, as
his Statuary has his person.

A ponte ad pontifices. From the bridge proceed we to the Church: the principal
Church of Paris being that of Nostre-dame. A Church very uncertain of its first
Founder; though some report him to be St. Savinian, of whom I can meet with no
more than his name. But whoever laid the first foundation it much matters not,
all the glory of the work being now cast on Philip Augustus, who pitying the
ruins of it, began to build it Anno 1196. It is a very fair and awful
building, adorned with a very beautiful front, and two towers of especial
height. It is in length 174. paces, and sixty in breadth, and is said to be as
many paces high, and that the two towers are seventy yards higher than the rest
of his Church. At your first entrance on the right hand, is the Effigies of St.
Christopher with our Savior on his shoulders: A man the Legend makes him, as
well as the Mason, of a Gigantine stature, though of the two the Masons
workmanship is the more admirable; his being cut out all of one Fair stone,
that of the Legendary being patched up of many fabulous and ridiculous shreeds.
It has in it four ranks of pillars 30 in a rank, and forty five little
Chapels, or Mass-closets, built between the outermost range of pillars and the
walls. This is the seat of the Archbishop of Paris, for such now he is. It was
a Bishopric only till the year 1622. when Pope Gregory the fifteenth at the
request of King Lewis raised it to a Metropolitanship. But beside the addition
of Honor, I think the present Incumbent has got nothing either in precedence
or profit. He had before a necessary voice in the the Courts of Parliament, and
took place immediately after the Presidents, he does no more now. Before he had
the priority of all the Bishops, and now he is but the last of all the
Archbishops. A preferment almost rather intellectual than real, and perhaps
his successors may account it a punishment. For besides that, the dignity is
too unweildy for the Revenue, which is but 600. livers, or 600 li English
yearly; like enough it is, that some may come into that See of Caesar's mind,
who being in a small Village of the Alps, thus delivered his ambition to his
followers, Mallem esse hic primus, quam Romae secundus. The present possessour
of this Chair is one Francis de Gondi, by birth a Florentine, one whom I have
heard much famed for a Statesman, but little for a Scholar. But had he nothing
in him, this one thing were sufficient to make him famous to posterity; that he
was the first Arlh-bishop, and the last Bishop of the City of Paris. There is
moreover in this Church a Dean, seven Dignities and fifty Canons. The Deans
place is valued at 4000* liuree, t^ ^he Dignities at 3006. and the Canons at
2000. no great Intrado's, and yet unproportionable to the Archbishopric.

At Diepe (as I have said) I observed the first Idolatry of the Papists; here I
noted their first Superstitions, which were the needless use of holy Water; and
the burning of Lamps before the Alter. The first is said to be the invention of
Pope Alexander, the seventh Bishop of Rome, in their account after Peter. I
dare not give so much credit unto Platina, as to believe it of this Antiquity,
much less unto Bellarmine, who deriveth it from the Apostles themselves: in
this Paradox he has enemies enough at home; his own Doctors being all for
Alexander: yet they also are not in the right. The principal foundation of
their opinion is an Epistle Decretory of the said Alexander, which in it self
carries its own confutation. The citations of Scriptures, on which this
Superstition is thought to be grounded, are all taken out of the Vulgar
Translation, Latin, attributed to St. Hierome; whereas neither was there in
the time of Alexander any public Translation of the Bible into Latin; neither
was St. Hierome born within 300. years after him. Holy Water then is not of
such a standing in the Church, as the Papists would persuade us; and as yet I
have not met with any, that can justly inform me at what time the Church
received it. Many corruptions they have among them, whereof neither they nor we
can tell the beginning.

It consists of two Ingredients. Salt and Water; each of them severally
consecrated, or rather exorcized; for so the words go, Exorcizo te creatura
salis: and afterward Exorcizo te creatura aquae etc. This done the Salt is
sprinkled into the Water in form of a Cross, the Priest in the mean time
saying Commixtio salis et aquae pariter fiat in nomine Patris, etc. Being made
it is put into a Cisterne standing at the entrance of their Churches: the
people at their coming in sometimes dipping their fingers into it, and making
with it the sign of the Cross in their foreheads, and sometimes being
sprinkled with it by one of the Priests, who in course bestow that blessing
upon them. Pope Alexander, who is said to be the Father of it, gave it the gift
of purifying and sanctifying all which it washed: Vt Cunesti illa aspersi
purificentur et sanctificentur, says his Decretall. The Roman Ritual published
and confirmed by Paulus the fifth, makes it very sovereign, ad abigendos
Daemones, et Spiritus imundos: Bellarmine maintains it a principal remedy ad
remissionem peccatorum Venialium: and says, that this was the perpetual
doctrine of the Church. August. Steuchus in his Commentary upon Numbers,
leaves out Venialia, and pronounces it to be necessary; Vt ad eius aspersum
debita nostra deleantur: So omnipotent is the Holy Water, that the blood of our
Savior Christ may be in a manner judged unnecessary. But it is not only used
in the Churches, the Rituale Romanum, (of which I spoke but now) allows any
of the faithful to carry it away with them, in their vessels, ad aspergendos
aegros, domos, agros, vineas et alia, et ad habendum eam in cubiculis suis. To
which purposes it cannot but think this Water very serviceable.

The second Superstition which this Church showed me, was the continual burning
of a Lamp, before the Alter: A Ceremony brought into the Churches (as it is
likely) by Pope Innocent the third, Anno 1215. at which time he ordained there
should a Pix be bought to cover the bread, and that it should therein be
reserved over the Altar. This honor one of late times has communicated also
unto the Virgin Mary; whose Image in the Church has a Lantern ex diametro
before it; and in that a Candle perpetually burning. The name of the Donor I
could not learn: only I met on the Screene close by the Ladies Image this
Inscription: Vne Ave Mariae et un Pater nostre pour luy qui ce la done: which
was intended on him that bestowed the Lantern. No question but Pope Innocent
when he ordained this V^stall Fire to be kept amongst the Christians thought he
had done God good service, in reviving this old Commandment given to Moses in
the twenty seventh of Exodus and the twentieth and twenty one verses. If so the
World cannot clear him of Judaisme, therefore the best way were to say, he
learned it of the Gentiles; for we read that the Athenians had Lychnum
inextineti luminis before the Statua of their Pallas: that the Persians also
had ign^m pervigilem in their Temples: and so also had the Medians and
Asirians: to omit the everlasting Fire of Vesta, and come near home, we meet
with it also here in Britain. In Britania quoque (says a good Philosopher)
Minervae numen colitur: in cuius Templo perpetui ignes etc. Afterward the
flattery of the Court applying divine honors unto their Kings, this custom of
having fire continually burning before them, began to grow in fashion among the
Romans: Herodian amongst other the ensigns of Imperial Majesty is sure not to
omit this: and therefore tells us, that notwithanding Commodus was fallen out
with his sister Lucilla, he permitted her her ancient seat in the Theater,
(...), and that fire should be carried before her. The present Romans succeed
the former as in their possessions so in their follies. For calling the
Sacrament their Lord God, and the Virgin their Lady; they thought they should
rob them of half their honor, should they not have their lamps and fires also
burning before them.

As are their Lamps, so is their Holy water, merely heathenish, Siquidem in
omnibus Sacris (as we read in the fourth book Genialium Dierum) Sacerdos cum
Diis immolat and rem divinan facit, corporis ablutione purgatur. The Author
gives a reason for it, and I would no Papist, no not Bellarmine himself to
give a better. Aquae enim aspersione labemtolli, and castimoniam praestare
putant. Neither did the Priest only use it himself, but he sprinkled the
people also with it. Spargere rore Levi, and ramo faelicis Olivae
Lustravitque viros. --
As Virgil in the Aeneads.
In which place two things are to be noted: First, ramus Olivae, now called
Aspersorium, or the sprinkling rod, wherewith the water is sprinkled on the
standers by: and secondly, the term Lustrare merely heathenish, whence the Holy
water of the Papists (no question) had the name of Aqua lustralis, by which
they call it. That the Laics also of the Gentiles were cleansed of sin by this
water, is evident by that of Homer, where he makes Orestes, having killed his
Mother and threupon grown mad, at once restored to his wits by washing in the
water. Perhaps Pilate might allude to this custom, when having condemned our
Savior, he washed his hands in the midst of the Congregation. Hereunto also
Ovid. O faciles nimium, qui tristia crimina caedis
Fluminae a tolli posse putatis aqua.
Too facil souls, which think such heinous matters
Can be abolished by the River-Waters.
Indeed in the word Fluminae a the Poet was somewhat out, the waters only of
the Sea serving for the expiation of any crime; the reason was, cum propter vim
igneam magnopere purgationibus consentaneae putaretur. And for this cause
questionless do the popish Priest use salt in the consecration of their holy
water, that it might as near as was possible resemble the waters of the Sea in
saltness, so willing are they in all circumstances to act the Heathens.

But I have kept you too long within the Church, it is now time to go up to the
top, and survey the outworks of it. It has (as we have already said) at the
front two Towers of admirable beauty, they are both of an equal height, and are
each of them 377. steps in the ascent. From thence we could clearly see the
whole circuit of Paris, and each several street of it, such as we have already
described, of an orbicular form, and neatly compacted. From hence we could see
the whole valley round about it, such as I have delineated already though not
in such lively colors as it meriteth. An object it is so delicious and
ravishing, that had the Devil taken King Henry the fourth and placed him on the
top of this Temple, as he did our Savior on that of Jerusalem, and said unto
him, all this will I give thee, this alone had been enough to have made him
fall down and worship him.

In One of those Towers there is a Ring of Bells, in the other two only, but
those for worth equal to all the rest. The bigger of the two is said to be
greater than that of Roven so much talked of, as being eight yards and a span
in compass, and two yards and an half in depth; the bowl also of the clapper
being one yard and a quarter round. Of a great weight it must needs be; and
therefore ( Multorum manibus grande levatur onus) there are no less than four
main ropes besides their several tail ropes to ring it. By reason of the
trouble it is never rung but in time of thunders, and these no mean ones
neither. Lesser Bells will serve the lesser tempests; this is only used in the
horrider claps, and such as threaten a dissolution of Nature. But how well, as
well this, as the smallest discharge that office, experience would tell us,
were we void of reason; yet so much do the people affiance themselves to this
conceit of the power of them, that they suppose it inherent to them
continually, after the Bishop has baptized them, which is done in this manner.
The Bell being so hanged, that it may be washed within and without, in comes
the Bishop in his Episcopal robes, attended by one of his Deacons, and sitting
by the Bell in his chair, says with a loud voice the 50, 53, 56, 66, 69, 85,
and 129. Psalms, or some of them; then does he exorcize severally the Salt and
the Water, and having conjured those ingredients into an holy water, he washes
with it the Bell, both on the inside and the outside; wiping it dry with a
linen cloth, he reads the 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, Psalms; he draws
a cross on it with his right thumb dipped in hallowed oil ( chrysome they call
it) and then prays over it. His prayer finished, he wipeth out the cross, and
having said over it the 48. Psalm, he draws on it with the same oil seven
other crosses, saying, Sanctificetur and consecretur Domine Campana ista, in
nomine, etc. After another prayer, the Bishop takes another Censer, and
putting into it Myrrh and Frankincense, sets it on fire, and puts it
under the Bell, that it may all receive sum of it; this done, the 76. Psalm
read, and some other prayers repeated, the Bell has received his whole and
entire Baptism, and these virtues following, viz. Vt per illius tactam procul
pellantur omnes insidiae mimici, fragor grandinum, procella turbinum, impetus
tempestatum, etc. for so one of the Prayers reckons them: prescribed in the
Roman Pontifical authorized by Clement 8th. A stranqe piece of Religion, that a
Bell should be baptized, and so much the stranger, in that those inanimate
bodies can be received into the Church by no other ministry than that of the
Bishop, the true Sacrament being permitted to every Hedge-Priest.

Not far from the West-gate of the Church of Nostre-dame is the Hosteldein,
or le grand Hospital de Paris, first founded by King Lewis, Anno 1258. It has
been since beautified and enlarged, Anno 1535. by Mr. Anthony Prat Chancellor
of France, who augmented the number of the hospitallers, and gave fair revenues
for the maintaining of Surgeons, Apothecaries, and religious men amongst them.
Since that time the Provost and Eschevins of Paris have been especial
Benefactors unto it. At your first entrance into it you come into their
Chapel, small but handsome and well furnished: After you pass into a large
gallery having four ranks of beds, two close to the walls, and two in the
middle. The beds are all suitable the one to the other; their vallance, curtains
and rugs being all yellow. At the further end of this a door opened into
another chamber dedicated only to sick women; and within them another room,
wherein women with child are lightened of their burden, and their children kept
till seven years of age at the charge of the Hospital. At the middle of the
first gallery on the left hand, were other four ranks of beds, little differing
from the rest, but that their furniture was blew, and in them there was no
place for any, but such as were some way wounded, and belonged properly to the
Surgeon. There are numbered in the whole Hospital no less than seven hundred
beds (besides those of attendants, Priests, Apothecaries, etc.) and in every
bed two persons. One would imagine, that in such a variety of wounds and
diseases, a walk into it, and a view of it might savor more of curiosity than
discretion. But indeed it is nothing less: for besides that, no person of an
infectious disease it admitted into it, which makes much for the safety of
such as view it, all things are kept there so cleanly and orderly, that it is
sweeter walking there, than in the best street of Paris, none excepted.

Next unto those succeeded la Saint Chapelle situate in the middle of the
Palais: a Chapel famous for its form, but more for its Relics. It was
founded by Lewis the ninth, vulgarly called St. Lewis, Anno 1248. and is
divided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower: the Lower serving for the
keeping of the Relics, and the Upper for celebrating of the Mass. It is a
comely spruce Edifice without, but far more curious within: the glass of it
for the excellency of painting, and the Organs for the richness and elaborate
workmanship of the Case, not giving way to any in Europe. I could not learn the
number of Chanoins which are maintained in it, though I heard they were places
of three hundred Crowns revenue. As for their Treasurer, le Threasurier, as
they call their Governor, he has granted him by especial privilege, the
license to wear all the Episcopal habits, except the Crosier-staffe, and to
bear himself as a Bishop within the liberties of his Chapel. In the top of the
upper Chapel (it is built almost in the form of a Synagogue) there hangs the
true proportion (as they say) of the Crown of Thorns: but of this more when we
have gone over the Relics. I was there diverse times to have seen them, but it
seems they were not visible to a Hugonots eyes; though me thinks they might
have considered, that my money was Catholic. They are kept, as I said, in the
lower Chapel, and are thus marshalled in a Table hanging in the upper. Know
then that you may believe that they can show you the Crown of Thorns, the
blood which ran from our Saviors breast, his swaddling Clouts, and a great part
of the Cross (they also of Nostre-dame have some of it,) the chain by which the
Jews bound him, no small piece of the stone of the Sepulcher, Sanctam taelam
tabulae insertam, which I know not how to English; some of the Virgins milk,
(for I would not have those of St. Denis think the Virgin gave milk to none
other but to them) the head of the Lance which peirced our Savior: the Purple
Robe: the Sponge, a piece of his Shroud: the Napkin wherewith he was girt when
he washed his Disciples feet: the Rod of Moses, the head of St. Blase, St.
Clement, and St. Simeon, and part of the head of John Baptist. Immediately
under this recital of these Relics (and venerable ones I durst say they were,
could I be persuaded there were no imposture in them) there are set down a
Prayer and an Antheme, both in the same Table as follows. ORATION. Quaesumus
Omnipotens Deus, ut qui sacra sanctissimae redemptionis nostrae insignia
temporaliter veneramur, per haec indesinenter munite aeternitatis gloriam
consequamur: dominum nostrum, etc.
De sacrosanctis Reliquiis Antiphonae
Christo plebs debita, tot Christi donis praedita
Jucunderis hodie: Tota sis devota:
Erumpens in Jubilum depone mentes nubilum
Tempus est Laetitiae. Cura sit summota.
Ecce Crux and Lancea, Ferrum, Corona spine^
Arma Regis gloriae tibi offerantur,
Omnes terrae populi laudent actorem seculi
Per quem tantis gratiae signis offererantur. Amen.
Pretty divinity if one had time to examine it. These Relics, as the Table
enformeth us, were given unto St. Lewis, Anno 1247. By Baldwin the second, the
last King of the Latins in Constantinople, to which place the Christians of
Palaestine had brought them, during the time that those parts were harrowed by
the Turks and Saracens. Certainly were they the same, which they are said to
be, I see no harm in it if we should honor them. The very reverence due to
antiquity and a silver head could not but extort some acknowledgement of
respect even from a heathen. It was therefore commendably done by Pope Leo,
having received a parcel of the Cross from the Bishop of Jerusalem, that he
entertained it with respect. Particulam Dominicae Crucis (says he in his 72.
Epislte) cum eulogiis dilectionis tuae Veneranter accepi. To adore and worship
that, or any other Relic whatsoever, with prayers and Anthems, as the Papists
you see do, never came within the minds of the Ancients, and therefore St.
Ambrose calls it Gentilis error, and vanitas impiorum. This was also St.
Hierom's religion, as himself testifies in his Epistle to Ruparius. Nos (faith
he) non dico martyrum reliquias, sed ne Solemn quidem and Lunam, non Angelos,
etc. colimus and adoramus. Thus were those two Fathers minded toward such
Relics, as were known to be no others than what they seemed: Before too many
Centuries of years had consumed the true ones, and the imposture of the Priests
had brought in the false. Had they lived in our times, and seen the supposed
Relics of the Saints not honored only, but adored and worshipped by the
blind and infatuated people, what would they have said, or rather what would
they not have said: Questionless, the least they could do, were to take up the
complaint of Vigilantius (the Papists reckon him for an Heretic) saying, Quid
necesse est tanto honor, non solum honorare sed etiam ador are, illud nescio
quid, quod in vasculo transferendo colis.

Presently without the Chapel is the Burse la Gallerie des Merchands, a rank
of shops in show, but not in substance, like to those in the Exchange at
London: It reaches from the Chapel unto the great Hall of Parliament, and is
the common through-fare between them. On the bottom of the stairs, and round
about the several houses consecrated to the execution of justice, are sundry
shops of the same nature, meanly furnished, if compared with ours, yet I
persuade my self the richest of this kind in Paris.

I should now go and take a view of the Parliament House, but I will step a
little out of the way to see the place Daulphin, and the little Chastelet. This
last serves now only as the Jail or common prison belonging to the Court of
the Provost of the Merchants, and it deserves no other employment. It is
seated at the end of the bridge called Petit pont, and was built by Hugh
Aubriot, once Provost of the Town, to repress the fury and insolences of the
Scholars, whose rudeness and misdemeanors can no way be better bridled. Omnes
eos qui nomen ipsum Academiae, vel serio, vel ioco nominassent* haereticos
pronunciavit (says Platina of Pope Paul the second) I will say it of this
wilderness; that whosoever will account it as an Academy is an Heretic to
Learning and Civility. The place Daulphin is a beautiful heap of building,
situate nigh unto the new bridge. It was built at the encouragement of Henry
the fourth, and entitled according to the title of his Son. The houses are all
of brick, high built, uniform, and indeed such as deserve, and would exact a
longer description, were not the Parliament now ready to sit, and my self
summoned to make my appearance.

CHAP. VIII.
The Parliament of France when began: Of whom it consisted: The Dignity and
esteem of it abroad, made sedentary at Paris, appropriated to the long Robe:
The Palais by whom built and converted to seats of Justice: The seven Chambers
of Parliament the great Chamber; the number and dignity of the Presidents. The
Duke of Biron afraid of them. The Kings seat in it. The sitting of the
Grandsigneur in the Divano. The authority of the Court in causes of all kinds,
and over the affairs of the King. This Court the main pillar of the liberty of
France. La Tournelle and the Judges of it. The five Chambers of Enquests
severally instituted, and by whom. In what causes it is decisive. The form of
admitting Advocates into the Court of Parliament. The Chancellor of France and
his authority. The two Courts of Requests and Masters of them. The vain envy of
the English Clergy against the Lawyers.

THe Court of Parliament was at the first instituted by Charles Marcell
Grandfather to Charlemaine, at such time as he was Mayor of the Palace unto the
lazy and retchless Kings of France. In the beginning of the French Empire their
King did justice to the people in person. Afterward banishing themselves from
all the affairs of State, that burden was cast upon the shoulders of their
Maires. An Office much of the nature with the Praefesti Praetorio in the Roman
Empire. When this Office was bestowed upon the said Charles Marcell, he, partly
weary of the trouble, partly intent about a business of a higher nature, which
was the estating of the Crown in his own Posterity, but principally to indear
himself to the Common people, ordained the Court of Parliament, Anno 720. It
consisted in the beginning of twelve Peers, the Prelates and Noblemen of the
best fashion, together with some of the principallest of the Kings Household.
Other Courts are called the Parliament with the addition of place, as of Paris,
at Roven, etc. This only (...), the Parliament. It handled as well causes of
State, as those of private persons. For hither did the Ambassadors of mighty
Princes repair to have their audience and dispatch; and hither were the
Articles (agreed upon in the National Synods of France) sent to be confirmed
and verified: Here did the Subjects tender in their homages and oaths of
fidelity to the King: And here were the Appeals heard of all such as had
complained against Comtes, at that time the Governors and Judges in their
several Counties. Being furnished thus with the prime and choicest Nobles of
the Land, it grew into great estimation abroad in the world, insomuch that the
Kings of Sicily, Cyprus, Scotland, Bohemia, Portugal and Navarre, have thought
it no disparagement unto them to sit in it. And which is more, when Frederick
the second had spent so much time in quarrels with Pope Innocent the fourth, he
submitted himself and the rightness of his cause to be examined by this Noble
Court of Parliament.

At the first institution of this Court it had no settled place of residence,
being sometimes kept at Tholoza, sometimes at Aix la Chapelle, sometimes in
other places, according as the Kings pleasure and the case of the people did
require. During the time of its peregrination it was called Ambulatorie,
following for the most part the Kings Court, as the lower Spears do the motin
of the Primum Mobile. But Philip le Belle (he began his reign An. 1280.) being
to take a journey into Flanders, and to stay there a long space of time, for
the settling of his affairs in that Country, took order that his Court of
Parliament should stay behind him at Paris, where ever since it has continued.
Now began it to be called Sedentary, or settled, and also peu a pen by little
and little to loose much of its luster: For the Chief Princes and Nobles of the
Kings retinue, not able to live out of the air of the Court, withdrew
themselves from the troubles of it, by which means it came at last to be
appropriated to those of the long Robe, as they term them, both Bishops and
Lawyers. In the year 1463. the Prelates also were removed by the Command of
Lewis the eleventh, an utter enemy to the great ones of his Kingdom, only the
Bishop of Paris and the Abbot of St. Denis being permitted their place in it.
Since which time the Professors of the Civil Law have had all the swaying in
it, and cedeunt arma togae, as Tully. The place in which this Sedentary Court
of Parliament is now kept is called the Pala^e, being built by Philip le Belle,
and intended to be his Mansion or dwelling house. He began it in the first year
of his reign, Viz. Anno 1286. and afterward assigned a part of it to his
Judges of the Parliament, it being not totally and absolutely quitted unto them
till the days of King Luwis the tenth. In this the French Subjects are
beholding to the English; by whose good example they got the ease of a
Sedentary Court: Our Law Courts also removing with the King, till the year
1224. when by a Statute in the Magna Charta, it was appointed to be fixed, and a
part of the Kings Palace in Westminster allotted for that purpose.

Within the Virge of this Palace are contained the seven Chambers the
Parliament. That called le grand Chamber: five Chambers of Inquisition, or des
Enquests, and one other called la Tournelle. There are moreover the Chambers,
des aides, des accounts, de l'ediect, des Monnoyes, and one called la Chamber
Royal: of all which we shall have occasion to speak in their proper places:
these not concerning the common Government of the People, but only the Kings
Revenues. Of these seven Chambers of Parliaments, le grand Chamber is most
famous: and at the building of this House by Philip le belle, was intended for
the Kings bed. It is no such beautiful place as the French make it; that at
Roven being far beyond it: although indeed it much excells the fairest room
of Justice in Westminster. So that it stands in a middle rank between them;
and almost in the same proportion as Virgil, between Homer and Ovid.

Quantum Virgilius magno concessit Homero,
Tantum ego Virgilio Naso Poeta m^o.
It consists of seven Presidents, Councellers, the Kings Attorney, and as
many Advocates, and Proctors, as the Court will please to give admission to.
The Advocates have no settled studies within the Palace, but at the Bar: but
the Procureurs or Atturneys have their several Pewes in a great Hall, which is
without this Grand Chamber in such manner as I have before described at Roven.
A large building it is fair and high roofed, not long since ruined by casualty
of fire, and not yet fully finished. The names of the Presidents are, 1. Mr.
Verdun, the first President, or by way of excellency le President, being the
sec^nd man of the long Robe in France. 2. Mr. Sequer lately dead, and likely to
have his Son succeed him as well in his Office, as his Lands. 3. Mr. Leiger. 4.
Mr.Dosammoi. 5. Mr. Sevin. 6. Mr. Baillure. and 7. Mr. Maisme. None of these,
neither Presidents nor Councellers can go out of Paris when the Laws are
open, without leave of the Court. It was ordained so by Lewis the twelfth. Anno
1499. and that with good judgment; Sentences being given with greater awe, and
business managed with greater Majesty when the Bench is full: and it seems
indeed that they carry with them a great terror. For the Duke of Biron, a man
of as uncontrolled a spirit, as any in France, being called to answer for
himself in this Court, protested that those scarlet Robes did more amaze him,
than all the red Cassocks of Spain.

At the left hand of this Grand Chamber, or golden Chamber as they call it, is
a Throne or Seat Royal, reserved for the King, when he shall please to come,
and see the administration of Justice amongst his people. At common times it is
naked and plain, but when the King is expected, it is clothed with blew purple
Velvet, semied with Flowers de lys. On each side of it are two forms, or
benches, where the Peers of both habits both Ecclesiastcal and Secular use to
fit, and accompany the King, but this is little to the ease or benefit of the
Subject; and as little available to try the integrity of the Judges: his
presence being always fore-known, and so they accordingly pr^pared. Far
better then is it in the Court of the Grand Signeur, where the Divano or
Counsel of the Turkish Affairs holden by the Bassa's is hard by his bed
Chamber which looks into it. The window which gives him this enterveiwe is
perpetually hidden with a curtain on that side of the partition which is
toward the Divano, so that the Bassa's and other Judges cannot at any time
tell, that the Emperor is not listening to their Sentences. An action in which
nothing is Turkish or Mohammedan.

The authority of this Court extends it self to all Causes, within the
Jurisdiction of it, not being merely Ecclesiastical. It is a Law unto it self,
following no Rule written in their Sentences; but judging according to equity
and conscience. In matters criminal of greater consequence, the process is here
immediately examined, without any preparation of it from the inferior Courts,
as at the araignment of the Duke of Biron; and diverse times also in matter
personal. But their power is most eminent in disposing the affairs of State
and of the Kingdom: for such prerogatives have the French Kings given
hereunto, that they can neither denounce War, nor conclude Peace, without the
consent (a formal one at the least) of this Chamber. An Alieniation of the
least of the Lands of the Crown, is not any whit valued, unless confirmed by
this Court; neither are his Edicts in force till they are here verified: nor
his Letters Pattents for the creating of a Peer, till they are here allowed
of. Most of these I confess, are little more than matters of form, the Kings
power and pleasure being become boundless: yet sufficient to show the body of
Authority which they once had, and the shadow of it which they still keep: yet
of late they have got into their disposing one privilege belonging formerly to
the Conventus Ordinum, or the Assembly of the three Estates; which is the
conferring of the Regency, or protection of their Kings during their minority.
That the Assembly of the three Estates formerly had this privilege is evident
by their stories. Thus we find them to have made Queen Blanch Regent of the
Realm during the nonage of her Son St. Lewiis, Anno 1227. that they declared
Phillip le Valois successor to the Crown, in case that the widow of Charles
de belle, was not delivered of a Son, Anno 1328. That they made Charles the
Daulphin Regent of France during the imprisonment of King John his Father, Anno
1357. As also Phillip of Burgony, during the Lunary Charles the sixth, Anno
1394 with diverse others. On the other side, we have a late example of the power
of the Parliament of Paris in this very case; for the same day that Henry the
fourth was slain by Raviliae, the Parliament met, and after a short
consultation, declared Mary de Medices, Mother to the King Regent in France,
for the Government of the State, (during the minority of her Son) with all
power and authority: such are the words of the Instrument, dated the 14. of
May, 1610.

It cannot be said but this Court deserves not only this, but any other
indulgence whereof any one member of the Commonwealth is capable. So watchful
are they over the health of the State, and so tenderly do they take the least
danger threatened to the liberties of that Kingdom, that they may not unjustly
be called Patres Patriae. In the year 1614. they seized upon a discourse
written by Suarez a Jesuit entitled Adversus Anglicanae sectae errores,
wherein the Popes temporal power over Kings and Princes is averred: which they
sentenced to be burnt in the Palace yard by the public Hangman. The year
before they inflicted the same punishment upon a vain and blasplemous discourse
penned by Gasper Niopins, a fellow of a most desperate brain, and a very
incendiary. Neither has Bellarmine himself that great Atlas of the Roman
Church escaped much better; for writing a Book concerning the temporal power of
his Holiness, it had the ill luck to come into Paris, where the Parliament
finding it to thwart the Liberty and Royalty of the King, and Country, gave it
over to the Hangman; and he to the Fire. Thus it is evident, that the titles
which the French writers gave it, as the true Temple of the French justice, the
Buttresse of Equity, the Guardian of the Rights of France, and the like, are
abundantly deserved of it.

The next Chamber in esteem is the Tournelle, which handles all matters
Criminal. It is so called from Tourner, which signifies to change or alter;
because the Judges of the other several Chambers give sentence in this,
according to their several turns. The reason of which Institution is said to
be, least a continual custom of condemning should make the Judges less
merciful, and more prodigal of blood. An order full of health and providence;
it was instituted by the above named Phillip le Belle, at the same time when he
made the Parliament sedentary at Paris; and besides its particular and original
employment, it receives Appeals from, and redresseth the errors of the
Provost of Paris. The other five Chambers are called des Enquests, or Camerae
Inquasitionum: the first and ancientest of them, was erected also by Phillip le
Belle, and afterward divided into two by Charles the seventh. Afterward of
Processes being greater than could be dispatched in these Courts, there was
added a third. Francis the first established the fourth, for the better raising
of a sum of money which then he wanted: every one of the new Counselors paying
right dearly for his place. The fifth and last was founded in the year 1568. In
each of these several Chambers, there be two Presidents, and twenty
Counselors, beside Advocates and Proctors, ad placitum. In the Tournelle which
is the aggregation of all the other Courts, there are supposed to be no fewer
than two hundred Officers of all sorts, which is no great number considering
the many Causes there handled. In the Tournelle, the Judges sit on matters of
life and death; in the Chambers of Enquests they examine only civil Affairs,
of estate, title, debts, and the like. The Pleaders in these Courts are called
Advocates; and must be at the least Licentiats in the study of the Law. At the
Parliaments of Tholoza and Bordeaux, they admit of none but Doctors: now the
form of admitting them is this. In an open and frequent Court, one of the
agedest of the Long Robe, presents the party which desires admission, to the
Kings Attorney General, saying with a loud voice, Paisse a Cour recevoir N. N.
Licencie (or Docteur) en droict civil, a l'office d' Advocate. This said; the
Kings Attorney bids him hold up his hand, and says to him in Latin, Tu
jurabis observare omnes Reges Consuetudines, he answers Iuro, and departs.
At the Chamber door of the Court, whereof he is now sworn an Advocate, he
pays two Crowns, which is forthwith put into the common Treasury, appointed
for the relief of the distressed-Widdows, of ruined Advocates and Proctors:
Hanc veniam petimusque damusque. It may be their own cases, and therefore it is
paid willingly. The highest preferment of which these Advocates are capable, is
that of Chauncellor: an Office of great power and profit. The present
Chauncellor is named Mr. d' Allegre, by birth of Chartres, he has no settled
Court wherein to exercise his authority; but has in all the Courts of France,
the supreme place whenever he will vouchsafe to visit them. He is also
President of the Council of Estate by his place, and on him depends the
making of good and sacred Laws, the administration of Justice, the reformation
of superfluous, and abrogation of unprofitable Edicts, etc. He has the keeping
of the Kings geeat Seal, and by virtue of that, either passes or puts back
such Letters Pattents, and Writs as are exhibited to him. He has under him
immediately for the better dispatch of his Affairs, four Masters of the
Requests, and their Courts. Their Office and manner of proceeding is the same,
which they also use in England: in the persons there is thus much difference,
that in Franee two of them must be perpetually of the Clergy. One of their
Courts is very ancient, and has in it two Presidents. which are two of the
Masters, and fourteen Counselors. The other is of a later erection; as being
founded Anno 1580. and in that the two other of the Masters, and eight
Councellers give sentence.

Thus have I taken a veiw of the several Chambers of the Parliament of Paris,
and of their particular Jurisdictions, as far as my information could conduct
me. One thing I noted further, and in my mind the fairest ornament of the
Palace, which is the neatness and decency of the Lawyers in their apparel;
for besides the fashion of their habit, which is I assure you exceeding
pleasant, and comely; themselves by their own care and love to handsomeness,
add great luster to their garments, and more to their persons. Richly dressed
they are and well may be so, as being the ablest and most powerful men under
the Princes and la Noblesse in all the Country. An happiness (as I conjecture)
rather of the calling than of the men. It has been the fate and destiny of the
Law, to strengthen and enable its professors beyond any other any Art or
Science: the Pleaders in all Commonwealths both for sway amongst the people,
and vague amongst the Military men, having always had the pre-eminence. Of
this rank were Pericles, Phochion, Alcibiades, and Demosthenes, amongst the
Athenians, Antonius, Mar. Cato, Caesar, and Tullie amongst the Romans: men
equally famous for Oratory and the Sword; yet this I can confidently say, that
the several States above mentioned, were more indebted unto Tullie and
Demosthenes, being both mere Gown men, than to the best of their Captains: the
one freeing Athens from the Armies of Macedon; the other delivering Rome from
the conspiracy of Catiline. O fortunatum natam me Consule Romam. It is not then
the fate of France only, nor of England, to see so much power in the hand of
the Lawyers; and the case being general, me thinks the envy should be the less;
and less it is indeed with them than with us. The English Clergy though
otherwise the most accomplished in the World, in this folly deserves no
Apology, being so strangely ill affected to the Pleaders of this Nation, that
I fear it may be said of some of them, Quod invidiam non ad causam sed
personam, et ad valantatem dirigant. A weakness not more unworthy of them, than
prejudicial to them, for fostering between both Gowns such an unnecessary
emulation, they do but exasperate that power, which they cannot control, and
betray themselves to much envy and discontentedness. A disease whose care is
more in my wishes, than in my hopes.

CHAP. IX.
The Kings Palace of the Louure, by whom built; the unsutableness of it. The
fine Gallery of the Queen Mother. The long Gallery of Henry the fourth; his
magnanimous intent to have built it into a Quadrangle. Henry the fourth a great
builder; his infinite project upon the Mediterranean, and the Ocean. Lasalle
des Antiques. The French not studious of Antiquities. Burbon House. The
Tuilleries, etc.

WE have discharged the King of one Palace, and must follow him to the other,
where we shall find his residence. It is seated in the west side of the Town or
Ville of Paris, hard by Port neufue, and also by the new Bridge. An House of
great fame, and which the Kings of France have long kept their Courts in. It
was first built by Phillip Augustus, anno 1214. and by him intended for a
Castle, it then serving to imprison the more potent of the Noblesse, and to lay
up the Kings Treasury; for that cause it was well moated and strengthened with
walls and draw Bridges, very serviceable in those times. It had the name of
Louure quasi L'oeuure, or the work: the Building by way of excellency. An
Etymology which draws nigher to the ear than the understanding, or the eye.
And yet the French writers would make it a miracle: Du Chesne calls it
superbe bastiment qui n' a son esgal en toute la Christiente: and you shall
hear it called in another place, Bastiment qui pass muiourd huy en excellenee
et en grandeur, tous les autres. Brave Eligies, if all were Gold that
glistered. It has given up now its charge of money, and great prisoners to the
Bastile; and at this time serves only to imprison the Court. In my life I
never saw any thing more abused by a good report, or that more belyeth the
rumors that go of it. The ordinary talk of vulgar travelers, and the bigg
words of the French had made me expect at the least some prodigy of
Architecture, some such Majestical house as the Sun Don Phoebus is said to
have dwelt in by Ovid.

Regia solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,
Clara micante auro, flammasque imitante pyropo:
Cuius ebur nitidum, etc.
Indeed I thought no fiction in Poetry had been able to have parralell'd it;
and made no doubt but it would have put me into such a passion* as to have
cried out with the young Gallant in the Comidie, when he saw his Sweet heart;
Hei mihi qualis erat? talis erat qualem nunquem ego vidi. But I was much
deceived in that hope, and could find nothing in it to admire, much less to
envy. The Fable of the Mountain which was with child, and brought forth a
Mouse, is questionless a Fable. This House, and the large fame it has in the
world is the Moral of it. Never was there an House more unsuitable to it self
in the particular examination of parts, nor more unsuitable to the Character and
esteem of it in the general survey of the whole.

You enter into it over two Draw-bridges; and thorough three Gates, ruinous
enough and abundantly unsightly. In the Quadrangle you meet with three several
fashions of buildings, of three several ages; and they so unhappily joined one
to the other, that one would half believe they were clapped together by an
Earthquake. The South and West parts of it are new, and indeed Prince like,
being the work of Francis the first, and his Son Henry: had it been all cast
into the same mould, I persuade my self, that it would be very gracious and
lovely. The other two are of ancient work and so contemptible, that they
disgrace the rest: and of these I suppose the one to be at the least a hundred
years older than his partner: such is it without. As for the inside it is far
more graceful, and would be pleasing at the entrance, were the Gaurd Chamber
reformed. Some Hugonot Architect which were not in love with the errors of
Antiquity, might make a pretty room of it: a Catholic Carpenter would never
get credit by it; for whereas the provident thrift of our fore fathers intended
it (for the House would else be too narrow for the Kings retinue) both for a
room of safety and of pleasure, both for Bellmen and Dancers; and for that
cause made up some six ranks of seats on each side. That sparingness in the
more curious eyes of this time is little King like. Country wenches might with
an indifferent stomach abuse a Galliard in it, or it might perhaps serve, with
a Stage at one end, to entertain the Parisiens at a Play; or with a partition
in the middle, it might be divided into pretty plausible Cockpits. But to be
employed in the nature it is now, either to solace the King and Lords in a
dance, or to give any foreign Ambassador his welcome in a Masque, is little
suitable with the majesty of a King of France. The Chambers of it are well
built, but ill furnished; the hangings of them being somewhat below a meanness:
and yet of these here is no small scarcity, for as it is said of the
Gymnosophists of India, that Vnadomus et mansioni sufficit et sepulturae: so
may we of this Prince. The same Chamber serves for to Iodge him, feed him, and
also to confer and discourse with his Nobility. But like enough it is that this
want may proceed from the several Courts of the King, the Monsieur, the Queen
Mother, and the Queen Regnant, being all kept within it.

Proceed we now to the two Galleries, whereof the first is that of the Queen
Mother, as being beautified and adorned exceedingly, by Catherine de Medices,
Mother to Henry the third, and Charles the ninth. It contains the Pictures of
all the Kings of France, and the most loved of their Queens since the time of
St. Lewis. They stand each King opposite to his Queen, she being that of his
Wives, which either brought him most estate, or his Successor. The tables are
all of a just length, very fair, and according to my little acquaintance with
the Painter, of a most excellent workmanship. And which adds more grace to
it, they are in a manner a perfect history of the State and Court of France in
their several times, For under each of the Kings pictures they have drawn the
potraitures of most of their Lords, whom valor and true courage in the field
ennobled beyond their births: Under each of the Queens, the lively shapes of
the most principal Ladies, whose beauty and virtue had honored the Court. A
dainty invention, and happily expressed. At the further end of it stand the
last King, and the present Queen Mother, who fill up the whole room. The
succeeding Princes, if they mean to live in their pictures, must either build
new places for them, or else make use of the Long Gallery built by Henry the
fourth, and which opens in to that of the Queen Mother. A Gallery it is of an
incredible length, as being above 500. yards long, and of a breadth and height
not unproportionable. A room built rather for oftentation than use, and such as
has more in it of the Majesty of is it Founder than the Grace: It is said to
have been erected purposely to join the Louure unto the house and garden of the
Tuilleries: an unlikely matter, that such a stupendous building should be
designed only for a cleanly conveyance into a Summer House. Others are of
opinion, that he had a resolution to have the House quadrangular, every side
being correspondent to this, which should have been the common Gallery to the
rest, which design had it taken effect, this Palace would at once have been the
wonder of the world, and the envy of it. For my part I dare be of the last
mind, as well because the second is in part begun, as also considering how
infinitely this King was affected to building. The place Daulphin, and the
place Royal, two of the finest piles of Paris, were erected partly by his
purse, but principally by his encouragement. The new Bridge in Paris was merely
his work; so was also the new Palace, and the most admirable Waterworks of St.
Germanenlay; this long Gallery and the Pesthouse owe themselves wholly unto
him, and the house of Fountain bleau, which is the fairest in France, is
beholding to him for most of its beauty. Add to this his fortifications
bestowed on the Bastile, and his purpose to have strengthened Paris according
to the modern art of Towns, and you will find the attribute of Parietaria or
Wall-floure, which Constantine scoffingly gave unto Trajane for his great
humor of building, to be due unto this King, but seriously and with reverence.

Besides the general love he had to building, h^ had also an ambition to go
beyond ensample, which also induces me further to believe his intent of making
that large and admirable quadrangle above spoken of, to have been serious and
real. For to omit others, certain it is, that he had a project of great spirit
and difficulty, which was to join the Mediterranean Sea and the Ocean together;
and to make the navigation from the one to the other through France, and not to
pass by the straight of Gibraltare. It came into counsel Anno 1604. and was
resolved to be done by this means. The River of Garond is navigable from the
Ocean almost to Tholoza; and the Mediterranean opens it self into the land by
a little River (whose name I know not) as high as Narbonne. Betwixt these two
places was there a navigable channel to have been dug, and it proceeded so
far toward being actuated, that a workman had undertaken it, and the price was
agreed upon. But there arising some discontents between the Kings of France and
Spain, about the building of the Fort Fuentis, in the Country of the Grisons;
the King not knowing what use he might have of treasure in that quarrel,
commanded the work not to go forward: However it is to be commended in the
attempt, which was indeed Kingly, and worthy his spirit, and praise him in his
heroic purpose and design:

Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis. But the principal beauty, if I
may judge of this so much admired Palace of the Louure, is a low plain room,
paved under foot with brick, and without any hangings or tapestry on the sides;
yet being the best set out and furnished, to my content, of any in France: It
is called La salle des Antiques, and has in it five of the ancientest and
venerablest pieces of all the Kingdom: For the Nation generally is regardless
of antiquity, both in the monuments and in the study of it; so that you shall
hardly find any ancient inscription, or any famous ruin snatched from the hand
of time, in the best of their Cities and Churches. In the Church only of
Amiens could I meet with any ancient Character; which also was but a Gothish
Dutch Letter, and expressed nothing but the name and virtue of a Bishop of the
Church, in whose time it was. So little also did I perceive them to be
inclining to be Antiquaries; that both neglects considered ( si Verbis
audaciadetur) I dare confidently aver, that one Cotton for the Treasury, and
one Seldom (now Mr. Camden is dead) for the study of Antiquities, are worth all
the French: As for these five pieces in La salle des Antiques, they are, I
confess, worthy our observation, and respect also, if they be such as our
trudgeman informed us. At the further end of it, the Statua of Diana, the same
(as it is said) which was worshipped in the renowned Temple of Ephesus, and of
which Demetrius the Silversmith and his fellow Artists cried out, (...), Great
is Diana of the Ephesians: Of a large and manly proportion she seems to be.
Quantum and quale latus, quam juvenile femur.
As Ovid of his Mistress.
She is all naked save her feet, which are buskined, and yet she has a scarf
or linen roll, which coming over her left shoulder, and meeting about her
middle, hung down with both ends of it a little lower. In the first place
toward the right hand, as we descended toward the door, was the Statua of one
of the Gods of Aethiopia, as black as any of his people, and one that had
nothing about him to express his particular being. Next unto him the Effigies
of Mercury, naked all except his feet, and with a pipe in his mouth, as when he
enchanted Argos. -- Nam que reperta Fistula nuper erat.
Says the Metamorphosis.
Next unto him the portraiture of Venus, quite naked and most immodestly
apparreld, in her hand her little Son Cupid, as well arrayed as his Mother,
sitting on a Dolphin. Last of all Apollo also in the same naked truth, but that
he had shoes on; He was portrayed as lately returned from a Combat, perhaps
that against the Serpent Python. Quem Deus arcitenens, and nunquam talibus armis
Ante, nisi in damis, caprisque fugacibus, usus
Mill gravem telis (exhausta pane pharetra)
Perdidit, effuso per vulnera nigra, veneno.
The Archer-God, who, e're that present tide,
Never us'e those arms, but against the Roes and Deer,
With thousand shafts the earth made to be died
With Serpents blood, (his quiver emptied clear.
That I was in the right conjecture I had these reasons to persuade me; the
Quiver on the Gods right shoulder almost emptied, his warlike belt hanging
about his neck, his garments loosly tumbling upon his left arm, and the slain
Monster being a water-serpent, as Pithon is fained to be by the Poets. All of
these were in the same side of the wall, the other being altogether destitute
of ornament, and are confidently said to be the statues of those Gods, in the
same forms that they were worshipped in, and taken from their several Temples.
They were bestowed on the King by his Holiness of Rome, and I cannot blame him
for it. It was worthy but little thanks to give unto him the Idols of the
Heathen, who for his Holiness satisfaction had given himself to the Idols of
the Romans. I believe, that upon the same terms the King of Enggland should
have all the Relics and ruins of Antiquity which can be found in Rome.

Without this room, the Salle des Antiques; and somewhat on the other side of
the Louure is the House of Burbon, and old decayed fabric, in which was
nothing observable but the Omen. For being built by Lewis of Burbon the third
Duke of that branch; he caused this Motto, ESPERANCE, to be engraven in Capital
Letters over the door, signifying his hopes, that from his loins should proceed
a King, which should join both the Houses and the Families, and it is
accordingly happened. For the Tuilleries I have nothing to say of them, but
that they were built by Catherine de Medices, in the year 1564, and that they
took name from the lime-kils and tile-pits there being before the foundation of
the house and the garden; the word Tuillerie importing as much in the French
language: I was not so happy as to see them, and will not be indebted to any
for the relation.

CHAP. X.
The person, age and marraige of King Lewis: Conjectural reasons of his being
issueless. Jaqueline Countess of Holland kept from issue by the house of
Burgundy: The Kings Sisters all married, and his alliances by them. His natural
Brethren and their preferment. His lawful Brother the title of Monsieur in
France: Monsieur as yet unmarried; not like to marry Mont-Peusiers Daughter:
That Lady a fit Wife for the Earl of Soisons: The difference between him and
the Prince of Conde for the Crown, in case the Line of Navarre fail: How the
Lords stand affected in the cause; Whether a Child may be born in the eleventh
month. King Henry the fourth a great Lover of fair Ladies: Monsieur Barrados
the Kings Favorite, his birth and offices. The omniregency of the Queen Mother
and the Cardinal of Richilieu; The Queen Mother a wise and prudent Woman.

THe King is the soul of the Court, without his presence it is but a Carcass, a
thing without life and honor. I dare not so far wrong the Louure, as to make
it but a common house, and rob it of the fruition of its Prince, and therefore
will treat of him here; though during my abode in France he lay all the while
in Fountain Bleau: For person he is of the middle stature, and rather well
proportioned than large. His face knows little yet of a beard, but that which
is, is black and swarthy; his complexion also much of the same heiw, carrying
in it a certain boysterousness, and that in a further measure than what a
graceful Majesty can admit of: So that one can hardly say of him without a
spice of Courtship, what Paterculus did of Tiberius, Quod visus praetulerit
principem, that his countenance proclaimed him a King. But questionless his
greatest defect is want of utterance, which is very unpleasing by reason of a
desperate and uncurable stammering, which defect is likely more and more to
grow upon him. At this time he is aged twenty four years, and as much as since
the 27 day of September last, which was his birth day, an age which he bears
not very plausibly; want of beard and the swarthiness of his complexion making
him seem elder. At the age of eleven years he was affianced to the Lady Anna
Infanta of Spain, by whom as yet he has no children. It is thought by many,
and covertly spoken by diverse in France, that the principal cause of the Queens
bartenness proceeds from Spain, that people being loath to fall under the
French obedience, which may very well happen, she being the elder Sister of the
King. For this cause, in the seventh article of marriage there is a clause,
that neither the said Infanta, nor the Children born by her (to the King) shall
be capable to inherit any of the estates of the King of Spain; and in the
eighth article she is bound to make an act of renunciation under her own
handwriting, as soon as she comes to be twelve years old, which was
accordingly performed. But this being not sufficient to secure their fears, it
is thought that she was some way or other disabled from conception, before ever
she came into the Kings embraces: A great crime I confess if true: yet I cannot
say with Tully in his defense of Ligarius: Novum crimen Caie Caesar, and hec
tempus mauditum. Jaqueline Countess of Holland was Cozen to Philip Duke of
Burgundy: Her being fruitful would have debarred him from those estates of
Holland, Zealand and West-Freezland; therefore though she had three Husbands
there was order taken she should never have Child: with her two first Husbands
the Duke would never suffer her to live: and when she had stolen a wedding
with Frane of Borselle one of her servants, the Dukes Physicians gave him such
a potion, that she might as well have married an Eunuch: upon this injury the
poor Lady died; and the Duke succeeded in those Countries; which by his
Grandchild Marie were conveyed over into the House of Austria, together with
the rest of his estate. I dare not say, that that Family has inherited his
practices with his lands; and yet I have heard, that the Infanta Isabella had
the like or worse measure afforded her, before she was bedded to the Archduke
Albertus. A diabolical trick, which the prostitutes of the heathen used in the
beginnings of the Gospel, and before, of whom Octavius complains, quod
originem futuri hominis extinguant, and paricidium faciunt, antequam pariunt.

Better luck than the King has his Sister beyond the mountains, I mean his
eldest Sister Madame Elizabeth, married to the King of Spain now living, as
being, or having been the Mother of two Children: His second Sister, Madame
Christian, is married to Amadeo Victor Principe Mayor, or heir apparent of the
Duke of Savoy, to whom as yet she has born no issue. The youngest, Henrietta
Mariae, is newly married to his most Excellent Majesty of England, to whom may
she prove of a most happy and fruitful womb. Et pulchra faciat te prole
parentem. Of these alliances the first were very profitable to both Princes,
could there be made a marriage between the Kingdoms as well as the Kings. But
it is well known, that the affections of each people are divided, more
unconquerable mountains, than their dominions: The French extremely hating the
proud humor and ambition of the Spaniard. We may therefore account each of
them in these marriages to have rather intended the perpetuity of their
particular houses, than the strength of their Empires; and that they more
desired a noble stock whereon to graft posterity, than power. The alliance with
Savoy is more advantageous, though less powerful than that of Spain. For if the
King of France can keep this Prince on his party, he need not fear the
greatness of the other, or any of his faction. The continual siding of this
House with that of Austria, having given many and great impediments to the
fortune of the French. It stands so fitly to countenance the affairs of
either King in Italy or Germany to which it shall incline, that it is just of
the same nature with the estate of Florence between Millain and Venice: of
which Guicciaraine says, that Mantennero le cose^d Italia bilan^iate On this
reason King Henry the fourth earnestly desired to match one of his Children
into this Country, and left this desire as a Legacy with his Council. But the
alliance of most use to the State of France, is that of England, as being the
nighest and most able of all his neighbors. An alliance which will make his
Estate invincible, and encompassed about as it were with a wall of brass.

As for the Kings bastard Brethren they are four in number, and born of three
several beds. The eldest is Mr. Alexander, made Knight of the Order of St.
John, or of Malta, in the life time of his Father. He is now Grand Prior of
France, and it is much labored and hoped by the French, that he shall be the
next Master of the Order; a place of great command and credit. The second and
most loved of his Father, whose lively image and character he is said to be, is
Mr Caesar, made Duke of Vendosme by his Father, and is at this time Governor of
Britain, a man of a brave spirit, and one who swayeth much in the affairs of
State. His Father took great care for his advancement before his death, and
therefore married him to the Daughter and Heir of the Duke of Mercuer, a man of
great possessions in Britain. It is thought that the inheritance of this
Lady,-both by her Fathers side, and also by her Mothers, who was of the Family
of Marsegues, being a stock of the old Ducal tree, is no less than 200000.
Crowns yearly. Both these were born unto the King by Madame Gabriele, for her
excellent beauty surnamed labelle, Duchess of Beauforte, a Lady whom the King
most entirely affected even to the last gasp, and one who never abused her
power with him; so that we may truly say of her what Velleius flatteringly said
of Livia the Wife of Augustus, Ejus potentiam nemo senset, nisi levatione
periculi, aut accessione dignitatis. The third of the Kings natural Brethren is
Mr. Henry, now Bishop of Metz in Lorraine, and Abbot of St. Germans in Paris.
As Abbot he is Lord of the goodly Fairbourg of St. Germans, and has the
profits of the great Fair there holden, which make a large revenue. His
Bishopric yeildeth him the profits of 20000. Crowns and upwards, which is the
remainder of 60000. the rest being pawned to the Duke of Lorraine, by the last
Bishop, who was of that family. The Mother of this Mr. Henry is the Marchioness
of Verneville, who before the death of the King fell out of his favor into the
prison, and was not restored to her liberty till the beginning of the Queen
Mothers Regency. The fourth and youngest is Mr. Antonie, born unto the King by
the Countess of Morret, who is Abbot of the Churches of Marseilles and Cave*
and has as yet not fully six thousand pound a year, when his Mother dies he
Will be richer.

The Kings lawful Brother is named John Baptist Gaston, born the 25th of April,
Anno 1608. A Prince of a brave and manlike aspect, likely to inherit as large a
part of his Fathers spirit, as the King does of his Crown. He is entitled Duke
of Aniou, as being the third Son of France, but his next elder Brother the Duke
of Orleance being dead in his childhood, he is vulgarly and properly called,
Monsieur. This title is different from that of Daulphin, in that that title is
only appropriated to the Heir apparent, being the Kings eldest Son living.
This limited to the Heir apparent, being the Kings eldest Brother surviving; if
there be neither Son nor Brother, then the next Heir apparent is styled only
Le primier Prince du sang, The first Prince of the blood. This title of
Monsieur answers to that of the Despote in the Greek Empire; and in imitation
of that it is thought to have been instituted. Others of the French Princes are
called Monsieurs also, but with some addition of place or honor; the Kings
eldest Brother only is called Monsieur sans queen, as the French use to say;
that is, simply Monsieur. This young Prince is as yet unmarried, but destinate
to the bed of the young Duchess of Mont-pensier, whose Father died in the time
of Henry the fourth. Had the Duke of Orleance lived, he had espoused her long
ere this; but it is generally believed, that this Prince is so affected. He
sees his elder Brother as yet childless, himself the next Heir to the Crown,
and it is likely he will look on a while, and expect the issue of his fortune.

Some that speak of the affairs of the Court, hold her to be a fit match for
the young Count of Soisons, a Prince of the blood, and a Gentleman of a fine
temper. The Lady her self is said not to be averse from the Match; neither will
the King not be inclinable unto him, as hoping therein to give him some
satisfaction, for not performing a Court promise, made unto him about marrying
him to the young Madame, now Queen of England. As for the Count it cannot but
be advantageous to him diverse ways; partly to join together the two Families
of Mont pensier and Soisons, both issuing from the house of Burbon; partly to
enrich himself by adding unto his inheritance so fair an estate; and partly by
gaining all the Friends and Allies of the Ladies kindred unto him; the better to
enable his opposition against the Prince of Conde. The difference between them
stands thus: Lewis the first Prince of Conde had by two Wives, amongst other
Children, two Sons; by his first Wife Henry Prince of Conde, by the second
Charles Count of Soisons. Henry Prince of Conde had to his first Wife Mary of
Cleve, Daughter to the Duke of Nevers, by whom he had no Children: to his
second Wife he took the Lady Katherine of Tremoville, Sister to the Duke of
Thovars, Anno 1586. two years after his marriage he died of an old grief took
from a poisoned cup, which was given him, Anno 1552. and partly from a blow
given him with a Lance at the battle of Contras, Anno 1587. In the eleventh
month after his decease, his young Princess was brought to bed of a young Son,
which is now Prince of Conde. Charles Count of Soisons in the reign of Henry
the fourth began to question the Princes legitimation; whereupon the King dealt
with the Parliament of Paris, to declare the place of the first Prince of the
blood to belong to the Prince of Conde: And for the clearer and more evident
proof of the title, twenty four physicians of good faith and skill made an open
protestation of oath in the Coutt, that it was not only possible but common
for Women to be delivered in the eleventh month. On this it was awarded to the
Prince.

This decree of Parliament notwithstanding, if ever the King and his Brother
should die childless, it is said, that the young Count of Soisons (his Father
died Anno 1614.) will not so give over his title: He is Steward of the Kings
House, as his Father also was before him, a place of good credit, and in which
he has demeaned himself very plausibly. In case it should come to a trial,
(...), which God forbid, he is like to make a great party* both within the
Realm and without it; without it by means of the House of Savoy, having married
his eldest Sister unto Don Thomazo, the second Son of that Dukedom now living:
A brave man at arms, and indeed the fairest fruit that ever grew on that tree,
next Heir of his Father after the death of Don Amadeo, yet childless: within
the Realm the Lords have already declared themselves, which happened on this
occasion. In the year 1620. the month of March, the King being to wash, the
Prince of Conde laid hold on the towel, chalenging that honor as first Prince
of the blood: and on the other side the Count of Soisons seized on it as
appertaining to his office of Steward, and Prince of the blood also. The King
to decide the controversy for the present, commanded it to be given to
Monsieur his Brother, yet did not this satisfy. For in the morning the Friends
of both Princes came to offer their service in the cause. To the Count came in
general all the opposites of the Prince of Conde, and of the Duke of Luines and
Guise; in particular the Duke of Maien, the Duke of Vendosme, the Dukes of
Longueville, Espernon, Nemours, the Grand Prior, the Dukes of Thovars, Retz and
Rohan, the Viscount of Aubetene, etc. who all withdrew themselves from the
Court, made themselves Masters of the best places in their Governments, and
were united presently into an open faction, of which the Queen Mother declared
her self head. As for the Commons, without whom the Nobility may well quarrel,
but not fight, they are more zealous in behalf of the Count, as being brought
up always a Papist, and born of a Catholic kindred, whereas the Prince, though
at this instant he be a Catholic, yet non fuit sic ab initio, he was born,
they say, and brought up an Hugonot, and perchance the alteration is but
dissembled.

Concerning the Prince of Conde, he has a sentence of Parliament on his side,
and a verdict of Physicians, both weak helps to a sovereignty, unless well
backed by the Sword. And for the verdict of the Physicians, thus the case is
stated by the Doctors of that faculty. Laurentius a Professor of M^nt-pellier
in Languedoc, in his excellent Treatise of Anatomy, makes three terms of a
Woman's delivery, Primus, intermedius, and ultimus: The first, the seventh and
eighth month after conception, in each of which the Child is vital and may
live if it be born. To this also consents the Dr. of their Chair Hippocrates,
saying, (...), that a Child born in the seventh month, if it be well looked
to, may live. We read also, how in Spain the Women are oftentimes lightened in
the end of the seventh month, and commonly in the end of the eighth: and
further, that Sempronius and Corbula, both Roman Consuls, were born in the
seventh month: Pliny in his natural History reports it as a truth, though
perhaps the Women that told him either misreckoned their time, or else
dissembled it to conceal their honesties. The middle time ( terminus
intermedius) is the ninth and tenth months, at which time Children do seldom
miscarry: In the former two months they had gathered life, in these later they
only consummate strength, so say the Physicians generally. Non enim in duobus
sequentibus mensibus (they speak it of the intermedii) additur aliquid ad
perfectionem partium, sed ad perfectionem roboris. The last time ( terminus
ultimus) in the common account of this Profession is the eleventh month, which
some of them hold neither unlikely nor rare. Massurius records of Papyrius, a
Roman Praetor, to have recovered his inheritance in open Court, though his
Mother confessed him to be born in the thirteenth month. And Avicen a Moor of
Corduba relates (as he is cited in Laurentius) that he had seen a Child born
after the fourteenth. But these are but the impostures of Women; and yet indeed
the modern Doctors are more charitable, and refer it to supernatural causes, Vt
extra ordinariam artis considerationem. On the other side Hippocrates gives it
out definitively, (...), that in ten months at the furthest (understand ten
months complete) the Child is born. And Vlpian the great Civilian of his
times, in the title of Digests de Testamentis is of opinion, that a Child born
after the tenth month (complete) is not to be admitted to the inheritance of
its pretended Father. As for the Common Law of England, as I remember, I have
read it in a book written of Wills and Testaments, it takes a middle course
between the charity of nature and the severity of Law, leaving it merely to the
conscience and circumstance of the Judge.

But all this must be conceived (taking it in the most favorable construction)
after the conception of the Mother, and by no means after the death of the
Father, and so can it no way (if I were first President) advantage the Prince
of Conde: His Father had been extremely sick no small time before his death for
the particular, and supposed since his poison taken, Anno 1552. to be little
prone to Women in the general. They therefore that would seem to know more than
the vulgar, reckon him as one of the by-blows of Henry the fourth, but this
under the Rose: yet by way of conjecture we may argue thus. First, from the
Kings care of his education, assigning him for his Tutor Nicholas de Februe,
whom he also designed for his Son King Lewis. Secondly, from his care to work
the Prince, then young, Mollis and aptus agi, to become a Catholic. Thirdly,
the age of the old Henry of Conde, and the privacy of this King with his Lady,
being then King of Navarre, in the prime of his strength, and in discontent
with the Lady Margaret of Valoys his first Wife. Add to this that Kings love
to fair Ladies in the general, and we may see this probability to be no
miracle: For besides the Duchess of Beaufort, the Marchioness of Verneville,
and the Countess of Morret already mentioned, he is believed to have been the
Father of Mr. Luines the great Favorite of King Lewis. And certain it is, that
the very year before his death, when he was even in the winter of his days, he
took such an amorous liking to the Prince of Conde,s Wife, a very beautiful
Lady, and Daughter to the Constable Duke of Montmorencie, that the Prince to
save his honor was compelled to fly, together with his Princess, into the
Archdukes Country, whence he returned not till long after the death of King
Henry. If Marie de Medices in her Husbands life time paid his debts for him
(which I cannot say) she only made good that of Quintilian, Et uxor mariti
exemplo incitata, aut imitari se putat, aut vindicate^ And yet perhaps a
consciousness of some injuries not only moved her to back the Count of
Soison's and his faction against the Prince and his, but also to resolve upon
him for the Husband of her Daughter.

From the Princes of the blood descend we to the Princes of the Court, and
therein the first place we meet with Mr. Barradas, the Kings present Favorite,
a young Gentleman of a fresh and lively hew, little bearded, and one whom the
people as yet cannot accuse for any oppression or misgovernment. Honors the
King has conferred none upon him, but only Pensions and Offices. He is the
Governor of the Kings Children of Honor, (Pages we call them in England) a
place of more trouble, than wealth or credit. He is also the Master of the
Horse, or le grand Escuire; the esteem of which place recompenceth the
emptiness of the other; for by virtue of this Office he carries the Kings
Sword sheathed before him at his entrance into Paris: the Cloth of Estate
carried over the King by the Provosts and Eschevins, is his Fee. No man can be
the Kings Spur maker, his Smith, or have any place in the Kings Stables but
from him, and the like. This place (to note so much by the way) was taken out
of the Constables Office ( Comes stabuli. is the true name) to whom it properly
belonged, in the time of Charles the seventh. Besides this he has a pension of
500000. Crowns yearly; and had an Office given him, which he sold for 100000.
Crowns in ready money. A good fortune for one who the other day was but the
Kings Page.

And to say truth, he is as yet but a little better, being only removed from
his Servant to his play-fellow: with the affairs of State he intermeddleth not;
if he should, he might expect the Queen Mother should say to him, what Apollo
in Ovid did to Cupid.

-- Tibi quia cum fortibus armis,
Mi puer: ista decent humeros gestamina nostros.
For indeed first during her Sons minority, and after since her redentigration
with him, she has made her self so absolute a Mistress of her mind, that he
has entrusted to her, the entire conduct of all his most weighty affairs: for
her Assistant in the managing of her greatest business, she has pieced her
self to the strongest side of the State, the Church, having principally (since
the death of the Marshall D' Anere Joneane) assumed to her Counsails the
Cardinal of Richileiu: a man of no great birth, were Nobility the greatest
Parentage: but otherwise to be ranked among the Noblest. Of a sound reach he
is, and of a close brain; one exceedingly well mixed of a Lay Understanding, and
a Church Habit; one that is completely skilled in the art of men, and a perfect
Master of his own mind and affections. Him the Queen uses as her Counselor,
to keep out frailty and the Kings name as her countenance to keep off envy. She
is of a Florentine wit, and has in her all the virtues of Katherine de Medices
her Ancestor in the Regencie: and some also of her vices, only her designs
tend not to the ruin of her Kingdom, and her Children. John de Seirres
tells us in his Inventaire of France, how the Queen Katherine suffered her
Son Henry the third, a devout and simple Prince, to spend his most dangerous
times even uncontrolled upon his Beads, whiles in the meantime, she usurped
the Government of the Realm. Like it is that Queen Mary has learned so much
of her kinswoman, as to permit this Son of hers also to spend his time, in his
Garden amongst his play fellows and his Birds, that she may the more securely
manage the State at her discretion. And to say nothing of her untrue or
misbecoming her virtue, she harh notably well discharged her ambition; the
Realm of France being never more quietly and evenly Governed, the^n first
during her Regencie; and now during the time of her favor with the King. For
during his minority, she carried her self so fairly between the Factions of the
Court, that she was of all sides honored: the time of Marquessd' Ancre only
excepted. And for the differences in Religion, her most earnest desire was not
to oppress the Protestants, insomuch that the war raised against them during
the Command of Mr. Luines, was presently after his death and her restoring to
grace ended. An heroical Lady, and worthy of the best report of posterity: the
frailty and weekness of her, as being a woman, not being to be accounted hers
but her Sexes.

CHAP. II.
The Religions struggling in France, like the two Twins in the womb of Rebecca:
The comparison between them two and those in general. A more peculiar Survey of
the Papists Church in France; In Policy, Privilege, and Revenue. The
Complaint of the Clergy to the King. The acknowledgement of the French Church
to the Pope, merely titular. The pragmatick Sanction: Maxima tua fatuitas, et
Conventui Tridentino, severally written to the Pope and the Trent Council. The
tedious quarrels about Investitures. Four things propounded by the Parliament
to the Jesuit's. The French Bishops not to meddle with Friars: Their lives and
Land. The ignorance of the French Priests. The Chanoins Latin in Orleans. The
French not hard to be converted if plausibly humoured, etc.

FRom the Court of the King of France, I cannot better provide for my self,
than to have recourse unto the Court of the King of Heaven, and though the Poet
meant not Exeat aula qui vult esse pius in that sense, yet will it be no
treason for me to apply it so. And even in this Court the Church, which should
be like the Coat of its Redeemer without seam, do I find rents and sactions;
and of the two, these in the Church more dangerous, than those in the Louure. I
know, the story of Rebecca, and the Children struggling in her, is generally
applied to the births and contentions of the Law and the Gospel. In particular
we may make use of it in the present estate of the Church, and Religions in
France* for certain it is, that there were diverse pangs in the womb of the
French Church before it was delivered: and first she was delivered of Esau, the
Popish faith being first after the struggling countenaaced by authority, and he
came out red all over like a hairy Garment, says the text, which very
oppositely expresses the bloody and rough condition of the French Papist at
the birth of the Reformation: before experience and long acquaintance had bred
a liking between them. And after came his Brother out, which laid hold on Esaus
heel, and his name was called Jacob: wherein is described the quality of the
Protestant party: which though confirmed by public Edict after the other, yet
has it diverse times endeavored, and will perchance one day effect the
tripping up of the others heels. And Esau (says Moses) was a cunning hunter;
a man of the field: but Jacob was a plain man dwelling in Tents. In which words
the comparison is most exact. A cunning Archer in the Scriptures, signifies a
man of Art and Power mingled: as when Nimrod in the 10th of Geneses is termed,
A mighty Hunter. Such is the Papist, a side of greater strength and subtilty, a
side of war, and of the field. On the other side the Protestants are a plain
race of men, simple in their actions, without craft and fraudulent behahaviour,
and dwelling in Tents, that is, having no certain abiding place, no one
Province which they can call theirs, but living dispersed and scatterred over
the Country; which in the phrase of Scripture, is dwelling in Tents. As for the
other words differencing the two Brethren, and the elder shall serve the
younger, they are rather to be accounted a Prophecy, than a Character: we must
therefore leave the Analogy it holds with the Rebecca of France, and her two
Sons, to the event and prayer.

For a more particular insight into the strength and subtilty of this Esau; we
must consider it in the three main particular strengths of it, Its policy,
privilege, revenue. For the first, so it is, that the Popish Church in France
is governed like those of the first and purer times, by Archbishops and
Bishops: Archibishops it comprehends twelve, and of Bishops an hundred and
four. Of these the Metropolitan is he of Rhemes, who uses to anoint the
Kings, which office and pre-eminence has been annexed to this seat, ever since
the time of St. Remegius Bishop hereof, who converted Clovis King of the Franks
unto the Gospel. The present Primate is Son to the Duke of Guise, by name Henry
de Lorrein, of the age of fourteen years or thereabouts, a burden too unweildy
for his shoulders, -- Et quae non viribus istis
Munera convenient, nec tam puerilibus annis.
For the better government therefore of a charge so weighty, they have
appointed him a Coadjutor to discharge that great function, till he come to age
to take Orders. His name is Gifford, an English fugitive, said to be a man
worthy of a great fortune, and able to bear it. The revenues of this
Archbishopric are somewhat of the meanest, not amouting yearly to above
10000. Crowns, whereof Doctor Gifford receives only two thousand, the
remainder going to the Cadet of Lorreine. This trick the French learnt of the
Protestants in Germany, where the Princes, after the reformation began by
Luther, took in the power and Lordships of the Bishops, which, together with
their functions, they divided into two parts. The Lands they bestowed upon some
of their younger Sons or Kinsmen, with the title of Administrator; the office
and power of it they conferred with some annual pension on one of their
Chaplains, whom they styled the Superintendent of the Bishopric. This
Archbishop, together with the rest of the Bishops, have under them their
several Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons and other Officers attending in
their Courts, in which their power is not so general, as with us in England.
Matters of Testament never trouble them, as belonging to the Court of
Parliament, who also have wrested into their own hands almost all the business
of importance, sure I am, all the causes of profit originally belonging to the
Church. The affairs merely Episcopal and Spiritual are left unto them, as
granting license for marriages, punishing whoredom by way of penance, and the
like: To go beyond this were Vltra crepidam, and they should be sure to have a
prohibition from the Parliament.

Of their Privileges, the chief of the Clergymen is, the little or no
dependency they have on the Pope, and the little profits they pay unto their
King. Of the Pope anon. To the King they pay only their dismes or tithes
according to the old rates, a small sum if compared unto the payments of their
neighbors, it being thought, that the King of Spain receives yearly one half
of the Living of the Churches. But this I mean of their Livings only, for
otherwise they pay the usual gabels and customs that are paid by the rest of
the Kings Leige-people. In the general assembly of the three Estates, the
Clergy has authority to elect a set number of Commissioners to undertake for
them and the Church, which Commissioners do make up the the first of the three
Estates, and do first exhibit their greivances and petitions to the King. In a
word, the French Church is the freest of any in Christendom, that have not yet
quitted their subjection to the Pope, as always protesting against the
Inquisition, not subjecting themselves to the Council of Trent, and paying very
little to his Holiness of that plentiful revenue wherewith God and good men
have blessed it.

The number of those which the Church-land maintains in France is tantum non
infinite, therefore the intrado and revenues of it must needs be uncountable.
There are numbered in it (as we said before) twelve Archbishopricks, an hundred
and four Bishoprics: To these add five hundred and forty Archpriorities, one
thousand four hundred and fifty Abbeys; twelve thousand three hundred and
twenty Priorities, the sixty seven Nunneries, seven hundred Covents of Friars,
two hundred fifty nine Commendams of the Order of Malta, and one hundred and
thirty thousand Parish Priests, yet this is not all. Their reckoning was made
in the year 1598. since which time the Jesuits have diverse Colleges founded
for them, and they are known to be none of the poorest. To maintain this large
wilderness of men, the Statists of France, who have proportioned the Country,
do allow unto the Clergy almost a fourth part of the whole. For supposing
France to contain two hundred millions of Arpens (a measure somewhat bigger
than one Acre) they have allotted to the Church for its temporal revenue forty
seven millions of them. In particular of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Parish Priests, they of Aulx, Alby, Clumai, and St. Estiennes in Paris, are
said to be the wealthiest. The Archbishop of Aux in Gascoyne is valued at
400000. livers, or 40000 li. English yearly. The Bishop of Alby in Languedoc is
prized at 100000. Florens, which is a fourth part of it, a great part of the
revenue arising out of Saffron. The Abbot of Clumac in the Duchy of Burgundy
is said to be worth 50000 Crowns yearly, the present Abbot being Henry of
Lorreine, Archbishop of Rhemes and Abbot of St. Denis. The Parish Priest of St.
Estiennes is judged to receive yearly no fewer than eight thousand Crowns, a
good intrado. As for the vulgar Clergy, they have little tithe, and less glebe;
most part of that Revenue being appropriated unto Abbeys and other religious
Houses. The greatest part of their means is the Baisemen, which is the Church
offerings of the people at Christnings, Marriages, Burials, Dirges, Indulgences
and the like, which is thought to amount to almost as much as the temporal
estate of the Church: An Income able to maintain them in good abundance, were
it not for the greatness of their number. For reckoning that there are (as we
have said) in France one hundred and thirty thousand Parish Priests, and that
there are only twenty seven thousand four hundred Parishes, it must of
necessity be, that every Prrish, one with another, has no fewer than four
Priests, too many to be rich.

But this were one of the least injuries offered to the French, thrift, and
would little hinder them from rising, if it were not, that the goodliest of
their preferments are before their faces given unto Boys and Children. An
affront, which not only despaireth them of the honors due unto their
callings, but dishearteneth them in their studies, and by consequence draws
them to debauched and slanderous courses. -- Quis emim virtutem exquireret
ipsam.
Praemia si tollas.
The Clergy therefore, Anno 1617. being assembled at the house of Austin Friars
in Paris, (as every two years they use to do) being to take their leaves of the
King, elected the Bishop of Air to be their Spokesman, and to certify his
Majesty of their greivances. In performing which business, the principal thing
of which he spoke was to this purpose. That whereas his Majesty was bound to
give them Fathers, he gave them Children; that the name of Abbot signifies a
Father, and the function of a Bishop was full of fatherly authority, yet Erance
notwithstanding was now filled with Bishops and Abbots which are yet in their
Nurses arms, or else under their Regents in Colleges. Nay more, that the abuse
goes before the being, Children being commonly designed to Bishoprics and
Abbacies before they were born. He also made another Complaint, that the
Sovereign Courts by their decrees had attempted upon the authority which was
committed to the Clergy, even in that which concerned merely Ecclesiastical
discipline and government of the Church. To these Complaints he gave them
indeed a very gracious hearing, but it never went further than a hearing, being
never followed by redress. The Court of Parliament knew too well the strength
of their own authority, and the King was loath to take from himself those
excellent advantages of binding to himself his Nobility, by the speedy
preferring of their Children: And so the Clergy departed with a great deal of
envy, and a little of satisfaction.

Like enough it were, that the Pope would in part redress this injury,
especially in the point of Jurisdiction, if he were able, but his wings are
shrewdly clipped in this Country, neither can he fly at all, but as far as
they please to suffer him. For his temporal power, they never could be induced
to acknowledge it, as we see in their stories, Anno 1610. the Divines of Paris,
in a Declaration of theirs tendered to the Queen Mother, affirm the supremacy
of the Pope to be an erroneus doctrine, and the ground of that hellish position
of deposing and killing of Kings. Anno 1517. when the Council of Luteram had
determined the Pope to be the Head of the Church in causes also temporal, the
Vuniversity of Paris testified against it, in an Apoligie of theirs dated the
twelfth of March the same year. Leo decimus (says the Apology) in quidam
coetu non tamen in spiritu Domini congregato, contra fidem Catholicam etc.
sacrum Basiliense Concilium damnavit; In which Council of Basil, the
supremacy of the Pope was condemned. Neither did the Kings of France forget to
maintain their own authority: And therefore whereas Pope Boniface the eighth,
had in a peremptory Letter Written to Phillip le Belle King of France styled
himself, Dominus totius Mundi tam in temporalibus quam in spiritualibus: the
King returned him an answer with an Epithet suitable to his arrogance: Sciat
maxima tua fatuitas nos intemporalibus alicui non subesse, etc. The like answer
though in modester terms, was sent to another of the Popes by St. Lewis; a man
of a most mild and sweet disposition, yet unwilling to forgo his Royalties.

His spiritual power is almost as little in substance, though more in show; for
whereas the Council of Trent has been an especial authorizer of the Popes
spiritual supremacy; the French Church never would receive it: by this means
the Bishops keep in their hands their own full authority, whereof an obedience
to the decrees of that Council would deprive them. It was truly said by St.
Gregory, and they well knew it: Lib. 7. Epist. 70. Si unus universalis est,
restat ut vos Episcopinon Sitis. Further the University of Paris in their
Declaration Anno 1610. above mentioned, plainly affirm that it is directly
opposite to the doctrine of the Church, which the University of Paris has
always maintained; that the Pope has power of a Monarch in the spiritual
Government of the Church. To look upon higher times, when the Council of
Constance had submitted the authority of the Pope, unto that of a Council.
John Gerson Theologus Parisiensis magni nominis, defended that deeree, and
entitleth them Perniciosos esse ad modum adulatores, qui tyranidem istam in
Ecclesia invexere, quasi nullis Regum teneatur vinculis; quasi neque parere
debeat Concilio Pontifex: nec ab eo judicare queat. The Kings themselves also
befreind their Clergy in this Cause, and therefore not only protested against
the Council of Trent, wherein the spiritual tyranny was generally consented to
by the Catholic faction, but Henry the second also would not acknowledge them
to be a Council, calling them in his Letters by no other name than Conventus
Tridentinus: An indignity which the, Fathers took very offensively.

Put the principal thing, in which it behooveth them not to acknowledge his
spiritual supremacy is the Collation of Benefices and Bishoprics, and the
Annates and first fruits thence arising. The first and greatest controversy
between the Pope and Princes of Christendom was about the bestowing the Livings
of the Church, and giving the investiture unto Bishops. The Popes had long
thirsted after that authority, as being a great means to advance their
followers, and establish their own greatness; for which cause, in diverse petty
Councels, the receiving of any Ecclesiastical preferment of a Layman was
decreed to be Simony. But this did little edify with such patrons as had good
Livings: As soon as ever Hi^el brand, in the Catalogue of the Popes called
Gregory the seventh, came to the throne of Rome, he set himself entirely to
effect the business as well in Germany now he was Pope, as he had done in
France whilst he was Legate. He commands therefore Henry the third Emperor:
Ne deinceps Episcopatus and Beneficia (they are Platina's own words) per
cupiditatem Simoniacam committat, aliter se usurum in ipsum censuris
Ecclesiasticis. To this injustice when the Emperor would not yield, he called
a solemn Council at the Lateran, where the Emperor was pronounced to be
Simoniacal, and afterward excommunicated: Neither would this Tyrant ever leave
persecuting of him till he had laid him in his grave. After this followed great
struggling between the Popes and the Emperors for this very matter; but in the
end the Popes got the victory. In England here, he that first bickered about it
was William Rufus, the controversy being, whether he or Pope Urban should
invest Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury. Anselme would receive his investiture
of none but the Pope; whereupon the King banished him the Realm, into which he
was not admitted till the reign of Henry the second. He to endear himself with
his Clergy relinquished his right to the Pope; but afterward repenting himself
of it, he revoked his grant. Neither did the English Kings wholly loose it,
till the reign of that unfortunate Prince King John, Edward the first again
recovered it, and his Successors kept it.

The Popes having with much violence and opposition wrested into their hands
this Privilege, of nominating Priests and investing Bishops, they spared not
to lay on what taxes they pleased; as on the Benefices, First fruits, Pensions,
Subsidies, Fifteenths, Tenths; and on the Bishoprics, for Palls, Mitres,
Crosiers, Rings, and I know not what bables. By these means the Churches were
so impoverished; that upon complaint made unto the Council of Basel, all these
cheating tricks, these aucupia and eapilandi rations, were abolished. This
Decree was called Pragmatica sanctio, and was confirmed in France by Charles
the seventh, Anno 1438. An act of singular improvement to the Church, and
Kingdom of France, which yearly before, as the Court of Parliament manifested
to Lewis the eleventh had drained the State of a million of Crowns. Since which
time the Kings of France have sometimes omitted the vigor of the Sanction, and
sometimes also exacted it, according as their affairs with the Pope stood: for
which cause it was called, fraenum pontificum: At the last King Francis the
first having conquered Millain, fell unto this composition with his Holiness,
namely, that upon the falling of any Abbacie or Bishopric the King should have
six months time to present a fit man unto him, whom the Pope legally might
invest: If the King neglected his time limited, the Pope might take the benefit
of the relapse, and institute whom he pleased. So is it also with the inferior
benifices between the Pope and the Patrons; insomuch that any or every
Lay-patron and Bishop together in England, has for ought I see (at the least
in this particular) as great a spiritual supremacy as the Pope in France,

Nay to proceed further, and to show how merely titular both his supremacies
are, as well the spiritual as the temporal, you may plainly see in the case of
the Jesuits, which was thus. In the year 1609. the Jesuits had obtained of King
Henry the fourth license to read again in their College of Paris: but when
their Letters Patents came to be verified in the Court of Parliament, the
Rector and University opposed them. On the seventeenth of December, Anno 1611.
both parties came to have an hearing; and the University got the day, unless
the Jesuits would subscribe unto these four points: Viz. First, that the
Council was above the Pope. Secondly, that the Pope had not temporal power over
Kings, and could not by Excommunication deprive them of their Realms and
Estates. Thirdly, that Clergy men having heard of any attempt or conspiracy
against the King, or his Realm, or any matter of treason in Confession, they
were bound to reveal it. And fourthly, that Clergy men were subject to the
Secular Prince, or Politic Magistrate. It appeared by our former discourse,
what title, or no power, they had left the Pope over the estates and
preferments of the French. By these propositions (to which the Jusuits in the
end subscribed, I know not with what mental reservation) it is more than
evident, that they have left him no command, neither over their consciences nor
their persons. So that all things considered, we may justly say of the Papal
power in France, what the Papists falsely say of Erasmus, namely, that it is
Nomen sine rebus.

In one thing only his authority here is entire, which is his immediate
protection of all the Orders of Friars, and also a superintendency or supreme
eye over the Monks, who acknowledge very small obedience, if any at all, to the
French Bishops. For though at the beginning every part and member of the
Diocese was directly under the care and command of the Bishop; yet it so
happened at the building of Monestaries in the Western Church, the Abbots being
men of good parts and sincere life, grew much into the envy of their Diocesan.
For which cause, as also to be more at their own command, they made suit to the
Pope, that they might be freed from that subjection: Vtque intutelam Dive Petri
admitterentur. A proposition very plausible to his Holiness ambition, which by
this means might the sooner be raised to his height, and therefore without
difficulty granted: This gap opened, first the several Orders of Friars, and
after them the Deans and Chapters purchased to themselves the like exemptions.
In this the Popes power was wonderfully strengthened, in having such able and
so many props to uphold his authority; it being a true Maxim in State, Quod
qui privilegia obtenent, ad eadem conservanda, teneantur authoritatem
concedentis tueri. This continued till the Council of Trent unquestioned, where
the Bishops much complained of their want of authority, and imputed all the
schisms and vices in the Church to this, that their hands were tied. Hereupon
the Popes Legates thought it fit to restore to their jurisdiction their Deans
and Chapters: At that of the Monks and Monestaries they were more sticking:
till at the last Sebastian Pighinus one of the Popes Officers found out for
them this satisfaction, that they should have an eye and inspection into the
lives of the Monks, not by any authority of their own, Sed tanquam a sede
Apostolica delegati. But as for the Orders of Friars, the Pope would not by any
means give way unto it. They are his Janissaries, and the strongest bulwarks of
his Empire, and are therefore called in a good Author, Egregia Romanae Curiae
instrumenta. So that with them the Diocesan has nothing to do; each several
religious House being as a Court of Peculiars, subject only to the great
Metropolitan of Rome.

This near dependence on his Holiness makes this generation a great deal more
regardless of their behavior than otherwise it would be, though since the
growth of the reformation, shame and fear has much reformed them. They have
still howsoever a spice of their former wantonness, and on occasions will
permit themselves a little good fellowship. And to say truth of them, I think
them to be the best Companions in France for a journey, but not for
acquaintance. They live very merrily, and keep a competent table, more I
suppose than can stand with their vow, and yet far short of that affluency
whereof many of our books accuse them. It was my chance to be in an house of
the Franciscans in Paris, where one of the Friars, upon the entreaty of our
Friend, had us into the Hall, it being then the time of their Refectory, a
favor not vulgar. There saw we the Brothers sitting all on a side, and every
one a pretty distance from the other; their several commons being a dish of
pottage, a chop of mutton, a dish of Cherries, and a large glass of water. This
provision, together with a liberal allowance of ease, and a little of study,
keeps them exceeding plump and in good liking, and makes them, having little
to take thought for, makes them (as I said before) passing good Company. As I
traveled to Orleans we had in coach with us three of these mortified sinners;
two of the Order of St. Austin, and one Franciscan, the merriest Crickets that
ever chirped. Nothing in them but mad tricks and complements, and for music
they would sing like Hawks; when we came to a vein of good Wine, they would
cheer up themselves and their neighbor with this comfortable doctrine, Vivamus
ut bibamus, et bibamus ut vivamus: and for Courtship, and toying with the
Wenches, you would easily believe it had been a trade, with which they had not
a little been acquainted. Of all men when I am married God keep my wife from
them, and till then my neighbors.

On the other side the common Priests of France are so dull and blockish, that
you shall hardly meet with a more contemptible people. The meanest of our
Curats in England for spirit and discourse are very Popes to them: for learning
they may safely say with Socrates, Hoc tantum scimus, quod nescimus: but you
must not look that they should say it in Latin. Tongues they have none but
those of their Mother and the Mass Book; of which last they can make no use*
unless the Book be open, and then also the Book is fain to read it self: for in
the last Romanum Missale, established by the authority of Pius the fifth, and
recognized by Clement the eighth, Anno 1600. every syllable is diversely marked,
whether it must be sounded long or short; just as the varifying examples are in
the end of the English Grammar. When I had lost my self in the streets of
Paris, and wanted French to enquire homeward, I used to apply my self to some
of this reverend habit: But O soeclum insipiens et infacitum; you might as
easily have wrought water out of the flint, as a word of Latin out of their
mouths. Nor is this the disease of the vulgar Mass mumbler only, it has
also infected the right worshipful of the Clergy:

In Orleans I had business with a Chanoin of the Church of St. Croiz, a fellow
that wore his surplice (it was made of Lawne and Lace) with as good a credit as
ever I saw any; and for the comeliness and capacity of his cap, he might have
been a Metropolitan: perceiving me to speak to him in a strange Tongue (for it
was Latin) he very learnedly asked me this question; Number potestis loqui
Gallica? which when I had denied, at last he brake out into another
Interrogatory: viz. Quandiu fuistis in Gallice. To conclude having read over my
Letter, with two or three deadly pangs, and six times rubbing of his temples,
he dismissed me with this cordial; and truly it was very comfortable to my
humor. Ego necotias vestras curabo. A strange beast and one of the greatest
prodigies of Ignorance, that ever I met with in man's apparel.

Such being the Romish Priests, it is no marvail if the French be no more
settled and resolute in their Religion. If the eye be blind, the body cannot
choose but be darkened: and certainly there is nothing that has prepared many of
this Realm more to embrace the reformation, than this blockishness of their own
Clergy: an excellent advantage to the Protestant Ministers, could they but well
humor it; and likely to be a fair enlargement to their party, if well
husbanded. Besides this the French Catholics are not over earnest in their
cause, and so do lie open to the assaults of any politic enemy; to deal with
them by main force of argument, and in the servent spirit of zeal (as the
Protestants too often do) is not the way: Men incapable of opposition (as this
people generally are) and furious, if once thwarted, must be tamed as Alexander
did his Horse Bucephalus. Those that came to back him with the tyranny of the
spur and a cudgel, he quickly threw down, and mischieved; Alexander came
otherwise prepared, for turning his Horse toward the Sun, that he might not see
the impatiency of his shadow, he spoke kindly to him, and gently clapping him
on the back, till he had left his flinging and wildness, he lightly leapeth
into the saddle, the Horse never making resistance. Plutarch in his life
relates the story, and this the Moral of it.

CHAP. XII.
The correspondency between the King and the Pope: This Pope: An Omen of the
Marriage of France with England; An English Catholick's conceit of it: His
Holiness Nuntio in Paris: A learned argument to prove the Popes universality. A
continuation of the Allegory of Jacob and Esau. The Protestants compelled to
leave their Forts and Towns: Their present estate and strength: The last War
against them justly undertaken: not fairly managed. Their insolence and
disobedience to the Kings command. Their purpose to have themselves a free
Estate. The War not a War of Religion. King James in justice could not assist
them more than he did: First forsaken by their own party. Their happiness
before the War. The Court of the Edict. A view of them in their Churches: The
commendation which the French Papists give to the Church of England: Their
Discipline and Ministry, etc.

WE have seen the strength and subtilty, as also somewhat of his poverties at
home, let us now see the alliance which this French Esau has abroad in the
world: in what credit and opinion he stands in the eye of B^e^i the Romish
Hittite, the daughter of whose abominations he has married: And here I find
him to hold good correspondency, as being the eldest son of the Church: and an
equal poize to balance the affairs of Italy against the potency of Spain. O^
this ground the present Pope has always showed himself very favorable to the
French side, well knowing into what perils a necessary and impolitick
dependence on the Spanish party only, would one day bring the state
Ecclesiastic. As in the general, so in many particulars also, has he
expressed much affection unto him: as first by taking into his hand the
Valtolin, till his Son of France might settle himself in some course to recover
it: secondly, his not stirring in the behalf of the Spaniard during the last
wars in Italy; and thirdly, his speedy and willing grant of the dispensation
of Madames marriage, of which his Papacy was so large an Omen, so fair a
Prognostic. Est Deus in nobis agitante calescimus illi. The Lar, or Angel
Guardian of his thoughts hastened him in it, in whose time there was so
plausible a presage, that it must be accomplished. For thus it stands:
Malachy now a Saint, then one of the first Apostles of the Irish, one much
reverenced in his memory to this day by that Nation, left behind him by way of
prophecy a certain number of Motto's in Latin, telling those, that there
should follow that certain number of Popes only, whose conditions successively
should be hereby expressed in those Motto's, according to that order he had,
placed them in. Messingham an Irish Priest, and Master of the College of Irish
fugitives in Paris, has collected together the lives of all the Irish Saints,
which book himself showed me. In that volume, and the life of that Saint, are
the several Motto's, and the several Popes, set down columewise one against the
other. I compared the lives of them with the Motto's, as far as my memory
would carry me, and found many of them very answerable: as I remember there are
thirty six Motto's yet to come, and when just as many Popes are joined to them,
they are of opinion (for so Malachy foretold) that either the world should end,
or the Popedom be ruined. Amongst others, the Motto of the present Pope is most
remarkable, and suitable to the chief action likely to happen in his time, being
this [ Lilium and Rosa] which they interpret, and in my mind not unhappily, to
be intended to the conjunction of the French Lilly and the English Rose. To
take from me any suspicion of imposture, he showed me an old book, printed
almost two hundred years ago, written by one Wion a Flemming, and comparing the
number of the Motto's with the Catalogue of the Popes, I found the name of
Urban (now Pope) directly to answer it: upon this ground an English Catholic,
whose acquaintance I gained in France, made a Copy of Verses in French, and
presented them to the English Ambassadors, the Earls of Carlisle and Holland:
because he is my Friend, and the conceit is not to be despised, I begged them
of him, and these are they. Lilia juncta Rosis.
Emblem de bon' presage de l' alliance de la France, avec l' Angleterre.
Ce grand dieu quid' un oecl voit tout ce que les a^s
Souos leurs voiles sacrez vont a nous yeax cathans.
Descouvre quelque fois ainsi qui bon luy semble
Et les moux avenir, et les biene tout ensemble.
Ainsc fit il iadis a ce luy, qui primier,
Dans l' Ireland porta de la foye le laurier,
Malachie son nom, qu' autymon de l' Eglise
On verra soir un jour il qui pour sa devise
Aura les Lys chenus ioints aux plus belles fleures
Qui docent le pin^temps de leurs doubles couleurs,
CHARLES est le fleuron de la roso pour pree
HENRITTE est le Lys, que la plus belle pree
De la France n^urit, pour estr^ quelque iour
Et la Reine des fl^ures, et des roses l' amor
Adorable banquet bien beu reux cour^nne
Que la bonte du ciel, en parrage nous done
Heu reux ma party, heu reux mill fois
Cela qui te fera reflorrier en les Roys.
With these verses I take my leave of his Holiness, wishing none of his
successors would presage worse luck unto England: I go now to see his Nuntio,
to whose house the same English Catholic brought me, but he was not at home,
his name is Ferdinando d' Espado; a man (as he informed me) able to discharge
the trust reposed in him by his Master, and one that very well affects the
English Nation He has the fairest Eglise, and keeps the largest retinue of
any ordinary Ambassador in the Realm, and makes good his Masters supremacy by
his own precedence. To honor him, against he was to take this charge, his
Holiness created him Bishop of Damiata in Egypt. A place, which I am certain
never any of them saw but in a Map; and for the profits he receives thence,
they will never be able to pay for his Crosier. But this is one of his Holiness
usual policies, to satisfy his followers with empty titles. So he made Bishop
whom he sent to govern for him in England Bishop of Chalcedon in Asia: and
Smith also, who is come over about the same business with the Queen, Bishop of
Archidala a City of Thrace. An old English Doctor used it as an especial
argument, to prove the Universality of power in the Pope, because he could
ordain Bishops over all Cities in Christendom. If he could as easily also give
them the revenue; this reason I confess would much sway me, till then I am
sorry, that men should still be boys and play with bubbles: By the same
authority he might do well, to make all his Courtiers Kings, and he were sure
to have a most Royal and beggarly Court of it.

To proceed a little further in the Allegory: so it is, that when Jacob saw
Esau to have incurred his Fathers and Mothers anger, for his heathenish
marriage; he set himself to bereave his elder brother of his blessing: prayers
and the sweet smell of his Venison, the sweet smelling of his sacrifices
obtained of his Lord and Father a blessing for him, for indeed the Lord has
given unto this his French Jacob, as it is in the Text: The dew of heaven and
the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and Wine Genesis 27. 5, 28. It
follows in the 41. ver. of the chapter: And Esau hated Jacob, because of the
blessing wherewith his Father had blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, the
days of mourning for my Father are at hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob:
The event of which his bloody resolution was, that Jacob was fain to relinquish
all that he had and fly unto his Uncle. This last story expresses very much of
the estate of the French Church. The Papists hated the Protestants to see them
thrive and increase so much amongst them; this hatred moved them to a war, by
which they hoped to root them out all together; and this war compelled the
Protestants to abandon their good Towns, and strong Holds, and all their
possessions, and to fly unto their friends wheresoever they could find them.
And indeed the present estate of the Protestants is not much better than that
of Jacob in Mesopotamia, nor much different; the blessing which they expect,
lies more in the seed than in the harvest, and well may they hope to be
restored to the love and bosom of their brethren, of which as yet they have no
assurance: For their strength it consists principally in their prayers to
God; and secondly, in their obedience to their King: Within these two
Fortresses, if they can keep themselves, they need fear none ill, because they
shall deserve none. The only outward strengths they have left them, are the
two Towns of Moutabon and Rochell; the one deemed invincible, the other
threatened a speedy destruction. The Duke of Espernon (at my being there) lay
round about it, and it was said, that the Town was in very bad terms; all the
neighboring Towns, to whose opposition they most trusted, having yielded at
the first sight of the Canon. Rochell its thought cannot be forced by assaults,
nor compelled by a famine; some Protestants are glad of it, and hope to see the
French Church restored to its former powerableness, by the resistance of that
Town merely: I rather think, that the perverse and stubborn condition of it
will at last drive the young King into a fury, and incite him to revenge their
contradiction on their innocent Friends, now disarmed and disabled. Then will
they see at last the issue of their own peremptory resolutions, and begin to
believe, that the Heathen Historian was of the two the better Christian, when
he gave us this note. Non turpe est ab eo vinci, quem vincere esset nefas,
neque illi, in honest etiam summitti, quem fortuna super omnes extulisset.

This weakness and misery which has now befallen the Protestants, was an
effect, I confess, of the ill will which the other party bare them; but that
they bare them ill will, was a fruit of their own grafting. In this
circumstance they were nothing like Jacob, who in the hatred, which his brother
Esau had to him, was merely passive. They being active also in the birth of it.
And indeed the lamentable and bloody war which fell upon them, they not only
endeavored not to avoid, but invited. During the reign of Henry the fourth,
who would not see it, and the troublesome minority of Lewis the thirteenth. who
could not molest them, they had made themselves masters of ninety nine Towns,
well fortified and enabled for a siege. A strength too great for any one
faction to keep the other under a King which desires to be himself and so rule his
people. In the opinion of their potency they call Assemblies, Parliaments, as
it were, when and as often as they pleased. There they consulted of the common
affairs of Religion, made new Laws of government, removed and exchanged their
general Officers, the Kings leave all this while never so much as formally
asked. Had they only been guilty of too much power, that crime alone had been
sufficient to have raised a war against them, it not standing with the safety
and honor of a King, not to be the absolute commander of his own subjects. But
in this their licentious calling of Assemblies, they abused their power into a
neglect, and in not dissolving them at his Majesty's commandment, they
increased their neglect into a disobedience. The Assembly which principally the
war and their ruin, was that of Rochell, called by the Protestants presently
upon the Kings journey into Bearne. This general meeting the King prohibited by
his especial Edicts: declaring all them to be guilty of treason, which
notwithstanding, they would not hearken to, but very undutifully went on in
their purposes: It was said by a Gentleman of that party, and one that had been
employed in many of their affairs, that the very zeal of some who had the
guiding of their consciences, had thrusted them into those desperate courses,
and I believe him.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Being assembled, they sent the King a
Remonstrance of their greivances, to which the Duke Lesdiguiers, in a letter to
them written, gives them a ^e y fair and plausible answer, wherein also he
entreats them to obey the Kings Edict, and break off the Assembly: Upon the
receipt of this Letter those of the Assembly published a Declaration, wherein
they verified the meeting to be lawful; and their purpose not to dismiss
themselves till their desires were granted. This affront done to the King, made
him gather together his forces; yet at the Duke of Lesdiguiers request, he
allowed them twenty four days respite before his Armies should march toward
them. He offered them also very fair and reasonable conditions, such almost as
their Deputies had solicited, but far better than those which they were glad
to accept, when all their Towns were taken from them. Profect^ meluctabilis
fatorum vis, cujus fortunam mutare constituit, ejus corrumpit consilia: It
holds very rightly in this people, who turned a deaf ear to all good advise,
and were resolved, it seems, not to hear the voice of the charmer, charmed he
never so sweetly. In their Assembly therefore they make Laws and Orders to
regulate their disobedience; as that no peace should be made without the
consent of the general Convocation, about paying of the Soldiers wages, for
the detaining of the Revenues of the King and the Clergy, and the like. They
also have divided France into seven circles or parts, assigning over every
circle several Generals and Lieutenants, and prescribed Orders how those
Generals should proceed in the war.

Thus we see the Kings Army levied upon no slight grounds. His regal authority
was neglected, his especial Edicts violated, his gracious proffers slighted,
his revenues forbidden him, and his Realm divided before his face, and allotted
unto Officers not of his own election. Had the prosecution of his action been
as fair as the cause was just and legal, the Protestants only had deserved the
infamy: But hinc illae lachrymae, the King so behaved himself in it, that he
suffered the sword to walk at random, as if his main design had been, not to
correct his people, but to ruin them. I will instance only in the tyrannical
slaughter which he permitted at the taking of Nigrepelisse a Town of Queren,
where indeed the Soldiers showed the very rigor of severity, which either a
barbarous Victor could inflict, or a vanquished people suffer. Nec ullum
saevitiae genus omisit ira and Victoria: as Tacitus of the angered Romans: For
they spared neither man, nor woman, nor child, all equally subject to the
cruelty of the Sword and the Conqueror: the streets paved with dead carcasses,
the channels running with the blood of Christians: no noise in the streets, but
of such as were welcoming death, or suing for life. The Churches, which the
Goths spared in the sack of Rome, were at this place made the Theaters of lust
and blood; neither privilege of Sanctuary, nor fear of God, in whose House
they were, qualifying their outrage. Thus in the Common places. At domus
interior gemitu miseroque tumultu
Miscetur: Penitusque eavae clangoribus aedes
Faeminiis ululant --
As Virgill in the ruin of Troy.
But the calamities which befell the men were merciful and sparing, if compared
with those which the women suffered: when the Soldiers had made them the
Subjects of their lust, they made them after the subjects of their fury; in
that only pitiful to that poor and distressed Sex, that they did not let them
survive their honors. Such of them, who out of fear and faintness had made but
little resistance, had the favor to be stabbed; but those, whose virtue and
courage maintained their bodies valiantly from the rape of those villains, had
the secrets of Nature ( Procul hinc este cast ae misericordes aures) filled
with Gunpowder, and so blown into ashes. Whether, O Ye Divine Powers, is
humanity fled, when it is not to be found in Christians? or where shall we find
the effects of a pitiful nature, when men are become so unnatural? It is said,
that the King was ignorant of this barbarousness, and offended at it: Offended,
I persuade my self, he could not but be, unless he had totally put off himself
and degenerated into a Tiger: but for his ignorance, I dare not conceive it to
be any other than that of Nero, an ignorance rather in his eye than in his
understanding. Subduxit oculos Nero (says Tacitus) jussitque scelera, non
spectavit.

Though the Protestants deserved affliction for their disobedience, yet this
was an execution above the nature of a punishment, a misery beyond the
condition of the crime. True it is, and I shall never acquit them of it, that
in the time of their prosperity they had done the King many affronts, and
committed many acts of disobedience and insolency, which justly occasioned the
war against them. For besides those already recited, they themselves first
brake those Edicts, the due execution whereof seemed to have been their only
petition. The King by his Edict of Pacification had licensed the free exercise
of both Religions, and thereupon permitted the Priests and Jesuits to preach
in the Towns of Caution, being then in the hands of the Protestants. On the
other side, the Protestants assembled at Loudan, straightly commanded all their
Governors, Mayors, and Sheriffs, not to suffer any Jesuits, or any of any
other Order, to preach in their Towns, although licensed by the Bishop of the
Diocese: When upon dislike of their proceedings in that Assembly, the King had
declared their meetings to be unlawful, and contrary to his peace, and this
Declaration was verified against them by the Parliament; they notwithstanding
would not separate themselves, but stood still upon terms of capitulation, and
the justifiableness of their action. Again, whereas it happened that the Lord
of Privas, Town full of those of the Religion, dyed in the year 1620. and left
his Daughter and Heir in the bed and marriage of the Viscount of Cheylane a
Catholic; this new Lord, according to law and right, in his own Town changed
the former Garrison, putting his own servants and dependants in their places.
Upon this the Protestants of the Town and Country about it, draw themselves in
Troops, surprise many of the Towns about it, and at the last compelled the
young Gentleman to fly from his inheritance; an action which jumping even with
the time of the Assembly at Rochell, made the King more doubtful of their
sincerity. I could add to these diverse others of their undutiful practices,
being the effects of too much felicity, and of a fortune which they could not
govern. Atqui animus meminisse horret, luctuque refuget.

These their insolences and unruly acts of disobedience made the King and his
Council suspect that their designs tended further than Religion; and that their
purpose might be to make themselves a free Estate, after the example of Geneva
and the Low Countrymen. The late power which they had taken of calling their
own Synods and Convocations, was a strong argument of their purpose: so also
was the intelligence which they held with those of their faith at the Synod at
Sap, called by the permission of Henry the fourth on the first of October,
Anno 1603. They not only gave audience to Ambassadors, and received Letters
from foreign Princes, but also importuned his Majesty to have a general liberty
of going into any other Countries, and assigning at their Counsel a matter of
especial importance. And therefore the King upon a foresight of the dangers,
wisely prohibited them to go to any Assemblies without a particular license,
upon pain to be declared Traitors. Since that time growing into greater
strength, whenever they had occasion of business with King Lewis, they would
never treat with him but by their Ambassadors, and upon especial Articles. An
ambition above the quality of those that profess themselves Sorbonets, and the
only way, as Du Seirres notes, to make an estate in the State: but the
answers made unto the King by those of Alerack and Montanbon are pregnant
proofs of their intent and meaning in this kind. The first, being summoned by
the King and his Army the 22. of July, Anno 1621. returned thus, that the King
should suffer them to enjoy their liberties, and leave their fortifications as
they were for them of their lives, and so they would declare themselves to be
his subjects. They of Montanbon made a fuller expression of the general design
Disobedience; which was, that they were resolved to live and die in the Union
of the Churches: had they said, for the Service of the King, it had been spoken
bravely, but now rebelliously.

This union and confederacy of theirs King Lewis used to call, the
Commonwealth of Rochell; for the overthrow of which he always protested that
he had only taken Arms: and if we compare circumstances, we shall find it to
be no other. In the second of April, before he had as yet advanced into the
Field, he published a Declaration in favor of all those of the Religion, which
would contain themselves within duty and obedience. And whereas some of Tours
at the beginning of the wars had tumultuously molested the Protestants at the
burial of one of their dead, five of them by the Kings especial commandment
were openly executed: When the war was hottest abroad, those of the Gospel at
Paris lived as securely as ever, and had their accustomed meetings at
Charentan. So had those also of other places. Moreover when tidings came to
Paris of the Duke of Mayens death slain before Montanbon, the Rascal French,
according to their hot headed dispositions, breathed out nothing but ruin to
the Hugonots; the Duke of Montbazon, Governor of the City, commanded their
houses and the streets to be safely guarded. After when this Rabble had burnt
down their Temple at Charentan, the Court of Parliament on the day following
ordained, that it should be built up again in a more beautiful manner, and that
at the Kings charge. Add to this, that since the ending of the wars, and the
reduction of almost all their Towns, we have not seen the least alteration of
Religion. Besides that, they have been permitted to hold a National Synod at
Clarenton for establishing the truth of their doctrine, against the errors of
Arminius Professor of Leiden in Holland.

All things thus considered in their true being, I cannot see for what cause
our late Sovereign should suffer so much envy as he did, for not giving them
assistance. I cannot but say, that my self has too often condemned his
remissness in that cause, which upon better consideration I cannot tell how he
should have dealt in. Had he been a meddler in it further than he was, he had
not so much preserved Religion as supported rebellion; besides the consequence
of the example. To have assisted the disobedient French, under the color of
the liberty of Conscience, had been only to have taught that King a way into
England upon the same pretense, and to have troad the path of his own hazard.
Further, he had not long before denied succor to his own children, when he
might have given upon a better ground, and for a fairer purpose; and could not
now in honor countenance the like action in another: For that other denial of
his helping hand, I much doubt how far posterity will acquit him, though
certainly he was a good Prince, and had been an happy instrument of the peace
of Christendom, had not the later part of his reign happened in a time so full
of troubles. So that betwixt the quietness of his nature, and the turbulencies
of his later days, he fell into that miserable exigent mentioned in the
Historian: Miserrimum est cum alicui aut natura sua excedenda est, aut minuenda
dignitas. Add to this, that the French had first been abandoned at home by
their own friends: of seven Generals, whom they had appointed for the seven
circles into which they divided all France, four of them never giving them
encouragement. The three which accepted of those inordinate Governments, were
the Duke of Rohan his Brother Mr. Sonbise, and the Marquess la Force: the four
others being the Duke of Tremoville, the Earl of Chastillon, the Duke of
Lesdiguier, and the Duke of Bovillon, who should have commanded in chief: So
that the French Protestants cannot say, that he was first wanting unto them,
but they to themselves. If we demand what should move the French Protestants to
this rebellious contradiction of his Majesty's commandments, we must answer,
that it was too much happiness: Causa hujus belli eadem, quae omnium nimid
faelicitas: as Florus of the Civil wars between Caesar and Pompey. Before the
year 1620. when they fell first into the Kings dis-favour, they were possessed
of almost an hundred good Towns well fortified for their safety, besides
beautiful houses and ample possessions in the Villages. They slept every man
under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree, neither fearing nor needing to fear
the least disturbance with those of the Catholic party; they were grown so
intimate and entire by reason of their inter-marriages, that a very few years
would have made them incorporated, if not into one faith, yet into one family:
For their better satisfaction in matters of Justice, it pleased King Henry the
fourth to erect a chamber in the Court of Parliament of Paris purposely for
them. It consisted of one President and sixteen Counselors; their office, to
take knowledge of all the Causes and Suits of them of the Reformed Religion, as
well within the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris, as also in Normandy
and Britain, till there should be a Chamber erected in either of them. There
were appointed also two Chambers in the Parliament of Bourdeaux and Grenoble,
and one at Chasters for the Parliament at Tholoza. These Chambers were called,
Les Chambres de l' Edict, because they were established by a special Edict at
the Town of Nantes in Britain, April the eighth; Anno 1598. In a word, they
lived so secure and happy, that one would have thought their felicities had
been immortal. O faciles dare summa Deos eademque tuer^
Difficiles!
And yet they are not brought so low, but that they may live happily, if they
can be content to live obediently, that which is taken from them being matter
of strength only, not privilege.

Let us now look upon them in their Churches; which we shall find as empty of
magnificence as ceremony: to talk amongst them of Common prayers, were to
fright them with a second coming of the Mass: and to mention Prayers at the
burial of the dead, were to persuade them of a Purgatory. Painted glass in a
Church window is accounted for the flag and ensign of Antichrist, and for
Organs, no question, but they are deemed the Devils Bap pipes: Show them a
Surplice, and they cry out, a rag of the Whore of Babylon, yet a Sheet upon a
Woman when she is in child^bed is a greater abomination than the other: A
strange people, that could never think the Mass Book sufficiently reformed,
till they had taken away Prayers, nor that their Churches could ever be
handsome until they were ragged. This foolish opposition of their first
Reformers has drawn the Protestants of these parts into a world of dislike and
envy, and been no small disadvantage to their side, whereas the Church of
England, though it dissent as much from the Papists in point of doctrine, is
yet not uncharitably thought on by the moderatest Catholics, by reason it
retained such an excellency of discipline. When the Liturgy of our Church was
translated into Latin by Doctor Mocket once Warden of All Souls College in
Oxford, it was with great approof and applause received here in France by those
whom they call Catholics Royal, as marvelling to see such order and regular
devotion in them, whom they were taught to condemn for heretical An allowance
which with some little help might have been raised higher, from the practice of
our Church, to some points of our judgment. And it is very worthy of our
observation, that which the Marquess of Rhosney spoke of Canterbury, when he
came as extraordinary Ambassador from King Henry the fourth to welcome King
James into England, for upon the view of our solemn Service and Ceremonies he
openly said unto his fellows, that if the reformed Churches in France had kept
the same orders amongst them which we have, he was assured, that there would
have been many thousands more of Protestants than now there are. But the
Marquess of Rhosney was not the last that said so: I have heard diverse French
Papists, who were here at the Queens coming over, and ventured so far upon an
excommunication, as to be present at our Church solemn Services, extolling
them, and us for their sakes, even almost unto Hyperboles: So graciously is our
temper entertained amongst them. As are their Churches, such is their
discipline, naked of all antiquity, and almost as modern as the men which
embraced it. The power and calling of Bishops they abrogated with the Mass;
upon no other cause, then that Geneva had done it. As if that excellent man,
Mr. Calvin, had been the Pythagoras of our age, and his (...), his Ipse dixit
had stood for Oracle. The Hierarchi of Bishops thus cast out, they have brought
in their places Lay Elders, a kind of Monsters never heard of in the Scriptures
or first times of the Gospel. These men leap from the stall to the Bench, and
partly sleeping, and partly stroaking their beard they enact Laws of government
for the Church: So that we may justly take up the complaint of the Satyrist:
saying, Surgunt nobis e Sterquitineo magistratus, nec dum tot is manibus
publica tractant negotia: yet to these very men, composed equally of ignorance
and a Trade, are the most weighty matters of the Church committed. In them is
the power of ordaining Priests, of conferring places of Charge, and even of the
severest censure of the Church, Excommunication. When any business which
concerns the good of the Congregation is befallen, they must be called to
counsel, and you shall find them there as soon as ever they can put off their
aprons. Having blotted out there a little classical nonsense, and passed their
consents, rather by nodding of their heads, than any other sensible
articulation, they hasten to their Shops, as Quinctius the Dictator, in Florus,
did to his Plow, Vt adopus relictum festinasse videatur. Such a platform though
it be, as needs no further confutation then to know it, yet had it been the
more tolerable, if the Contrivers of it had not endeavored to impose it on all
the reformation; by which means what troubles have been raised by the great
Zealots here in England, there is none so young but has heard some tragical
relations. God be magnified, and our late King praised, by whom this weed has
been snatched up out of the garden of this our Israel. As for their Ministry,
it is indeed very learned in their study, and exceeding painful in their
calling; by the first they confute the ignorant of the Romish Clergy: by the
second their laziness: And questionless it behooves them so to be; for living
in a Country full of opposition, they are forced to a necessity of
book-learning to maintain the Cause: and being continually (as it were) beset
with spies, did therefore frequent the Pulpits to hold up their credits: The
maintenance which is allotted them scarce amounts to a competency, though by
that name they please to call it. With receiving of tithes they never meddle,
and therefore in their Systematical Tractats of Divinity, they do hardly allow
of paying of them: Some of them hold, that they are Jewish and abrogated with
the Law: Others think them merely to be Jure Humano: and yet that they may be
lawfully accepted where they are tendered. It is well yet, that there are some
amongst the^ which will commend grapes though they cannot reach them: This
Competency may come to forty or fifty pound yearly or a little more. Beza that
great and famous Preacher of Geneva had but eighty pound a year, and about that
rate was Peter du Moulins pension, when he preached at Clarenton. These
stipends are partly paid by the King, and partly raised by way of Collection.
So the Ministers of those Churches are much of the nature of the English
Lecturers. As for the Tithes, they belong to the several Parish Priests in
whose precincts they are due: and those, I warrant you, according to the little
learning which they have, will hold them to be Jure Divino. The Sermons of the
French are very plain homespun, little in them of the Fathers, and less of
humane learning: it being concluded in the Synod of Sap, that only the
Scriptures should be used in their Pulpits; they consist much of exhortation
and use, and of nothing in a manner which concerns knowledge. A ready way to
raise up and edify the will and affections, but withal to starve the
understanding. For the education of them being Children they have private
Schools, when they are better grown, they may have free recourse unto any of
the French Academies, besides the new University of Saumus which is wholly
theirs, and is the chief place of their study.

CHAP. XIII.
The connection between the Church and Commonwealth in general. A transition to
the particulars of France: The Government there merely Regal. A mixed form of
Government most commendable. The Kings Patents for Offices, Monopolies above
the censure of the Parliament. The strange Office intended by Mr. Luines: The
Kings gifts and expenses. The Chamber of Accounts: France divided into three
sorts of people: The Conventus Ordinum nothing but a Title. The inequality
between the NoNobles and Commons in France. The Kings power how much respected
by the Princes: The powerableness of that rank: The form of Execution done on
them: The muititude and confusion of Nobility. King James defended. A Censure
of the French Heralds: The power and command of the French Nobles and their
Tennants, their baillages, giblets and other Regalia: Why they conspire with
the King to undo the Commons.

HAving thus spoken of the Church, I must now treat a little of the
Commonwealth. Religion is as the soul of a State, policy as the body; we can
hardly discourse of the one, without a relation to the other; if we do, We
commit a wilful murder in the destroying a Republic. The Commonwealth without
the Church is but a Carcass or thing inanimate: The Church without the
Commonwealth is as it were, anima separata. The joining of them together
makes of both one flourishing and permanent body: and therefore as they are in
nature, so in my relations, Connubio jungam stabili. Moreover such a secret
simpathy there is between them; such a necessary dependency of one upon the
other, that we may say of them what Tullie does of two Twinns in his book de
Fato Eorum morbus eodem tempore gravescit, and eodem levatur. They grow sick
and well at the same time, and commonly run out of their race at the same
instant. There is besides the general respects each to other, a more particular
bond betwixt them here in France, which is a likeness and resemblance in the
Church of France. We have found a Head and a Body. This Body again divided into
two parts, the Catholic and Protestant. The Head is in his own opinion and the
minds of many others, of a power unlimited; yet the Catholic party has
strongly curbed it: And of the two parts of the body, we see the Papists
flourishing and in triumph, whilst that of the Protestants is in misery and
affliction. Thus it is also in the Body Politic, the King in his own Conceit
boundless and omnipotent, is yet affronted by his Nobles: which Nobles enjoy
all freedom of riches and happiness; the poor Pesants in the mean time living
in drudgery and bondage.

For the government of the King is merely Regal, or to give it the right name,
Despotical: Though the Country be his Wife, and all the people are his
Children, yet does he neither govern as a Husband or a Father: He accounts of
them all as of his servants, and therefore commands them as a Master. In his
Edicts, which he over-frequently sends about, he never mentioned the good
will of his Subjects, nor the approbation of his Council, but concludes all of
them in this form, Cartel est nostre plaisir: sic volo, sic jubeo. A form of
government very prone to degenerate into Tyranny, if the Princes had not
oftentimes strength and will to make resistance. But this not the vice of the
entire and Sovereign Monarchy alone, which the Greeks call (...): the other two
good forms of regiment being subject also to the same frailty. Thus in the
reading of Histories have we observed an Aristocracie to have been frequently
corrupted into an Oligarchie: and Politeia (or Commonwealth properly so
called) into a Democracie. For as in the body natural the purest Complexions
are less lasting, and easily broken, and subject to alteration. So it is in the
body Civil: The pure and unmixt forms of government, though perfect and
absolute in their kinds, are of little continuance, and very subject to change
into its opposite. They therefore which have written of Republics do most
applaud and commend the mixed manner of Rule, which is equally compounded of the
Kingdom and Politeia, because in them Kings have all the power belonging to
their title, without prejudice to the property. In these there is reserved to
the King absolute Majesty, to the Nobles convenient authority, to the people an
incorrupted liberty, all in a just and equal proportion. Every one of these is
like the Empire of Rome, as it was moderated by Nerva. Qui res olim
dissociabiles miscuerat principatum and libertatem: wherein the sovereignty of
one endamaged not the freedom of all. A rare mixture of government. And such is
the Kingdom of England. A Kingdom of a perfect and happy composition, wherein
the King has his full prerogative, the Nobles all due respects, and the People
amongst other blessings perfect in this, that they are masters of their own
purses, and have a strong hand in the making of their own Laws.

On the other side, in the Regal government of France, the Subject frames his
life merely as the Kings variable Edicts shall please to enjoin him, is banished
of his money as the Kings taskmasters think fit, and suffers many other
oppressions, which in their proper place shall be specified. This Aristotle in
the third book of his Politics calls (...), or the command of a Master and
defines it to be (...). Such an Empire, by which a Prince may command, and do
whatsoever shall seem good in his own eyes, one of the Prerogatives Royal of
the French Kings. For though the Court of Parliament does seem to challenge a
perusal of his Edicts before they pass for Laws, yet is this but a mere
formality: It is the Cartell est nostre plaisir, which makes them current,
which it seems these Princes learned of the Roman Emperors, Justinian in the
book of Institutions makes five parts of the Civil Laws: Viz. (He means the
Law of the twelve Tables:) Plebiscita, Senatus consulta, Prudentum responsa,
and Principum placita: To this last he adds this general strength, Quod
principi placuerit legis habet valorem: The very foundation of the Kings
powerfulness. True it is yet, that the Courts of Parliament do use to demurre
sometimes upon his Patents and Decrees, and to petition him for a Reversal of
them: but his answer commonly is, Stat pro ratione Voluntas. He knows his own
power, and grants Letters Patents for new Offices and Monopolies abundantly.
If a moneyed man can make a friend in Court, he may have an Office found for
him, of six pence upon every Sword made in France: a liver upon the selling of
every head of Cattle: a brace of soles for every pair of boots, and the like.
It is the only study of some men, to find out such devices of enriching
themselves and undoing the people. The Patent for Mines granted to Sir Giles
Mompesson, was just one of the French Offices. As for Monopolies, they are here
so common, that the Subject takes no notice of it, not a scurvy petty book
being printed, but it has its privilege affixed, ad imprimendum solum. These
being granted by the King, are carried to the Parliament, by them formally
perused, and finally verified: after which they are in force and virtue against
all opposition.

It is said in France, that Mr. Luines had obtained a Patent of the King for a
quart d' Escu to be paid unto him for the Christning of every Child throughout
the Kingdom. A very unjust and unconscionable extortion: Had he lived to have
presented it to the Court, I much doubt of their denial, though the only cause
of bringing before them such Patents, is only intended, that they should
discuss the justice and convenience of them.

As the Parliament has a formality of power left in them of verifying the
Kings Edicts, his grants of Offices and Monopolies; so has the Chamber of
Accounts, a superficial survey of his gifts and expenses: For his expenses,
they are thought to be as great now as ever, by reason of the several retinues
of Himself, his Mother, his Queen, and the Monsieur. Neither are his gifts
lessened. The late wars which he managed against the Protestants cost him
dear, he being fain to bind unto him most of his Princes by money and Pensions.
As the expenses of the King are brought unto this Court to be examined, so are
also the gifts and pensions by him granted to be ratified. The titulary power
given to this Chamber, is to cut off all those of the Kings grants which have
no good ground and foundation; the Officers being solemnly, at the least
formally, sworn, not to suffer any thing to pass them to the detriment of the
Kingdom, whatsoever Letters of Command they have to the contrary: But with this
Oath they do oftentimes dispense. To this Court also belongs the
Enfranchisement or Naturalization of Aliens. Anciently certain Lords, Officers
of the Crown, and of the Privy Council, were appointed to look into the
Accounts: now it is made an ordinary and sovereign Court, consisting of two
Presidents, and diverse Auditors, and after, under Officers. The Chamber wherein
it is kept is called, La Chamber des Comptes, it is the beautifullest piece of
the whole Palace, the great Chamber it self not being worthy to be named in the
same day with it. It was built by Charles the eighth, Anno 1485. afterward
adorned and beautified by Lewis the twelfth, whose Statua is there standing in
his Royal Robes, and the Scepter in his hand; he is accompanied by the four
Cardinal-Virtues, expressed by way of Hieroglychick, very properly and cunning:
each of them have in them its particular Motto to declare its being. The Kings
Portraicture also as if he were the fifth Virtue, had its word underwritten,
and contained in a couple of verses, which (let all that love the Muses skip
them in the reading) are these: Quatuor has comites fowro, caelestia dona
Innocuae pacis, prospera sceptra gerens.


From the King descend we to the Subjects, ab equis, quod aiunt, ad asinos; and
the phrase is not much improper; the French Commonalty being called the Kings
Asses. These are divided into three ranks or Classes; the Clergy, the Nobless,
the Paisants, out of which certain Delegates or Committees, chosen upon an
occasion, and sent to the King, did anciently concur to the making of the
supreme Court for justice in France, it was called the Assembly of the three
Estates, or Conventus Ordinum, and was just like the Parliament of England, but
these meetings are now forgotten or out of use, neither indeed, as this time
goes, can they any way advantage the State. For whereas there are three
principal if not sole causes of these Conventions, which are, the disposing of
the Regency during the nonage or sickness of a King; the granting aids or
subsidies, and the redressing of grievances, there is now another course taken
in them. The Parliament of Paris, which speaks as it is prompted by power and
greatness, appoints the Regent: the Kings themselves with their Officers
determine of the taxes, and as concerning their grievances, the Kings ear is
open to private Petitions. Thus is that title of a Commonwealth, which went to
the making up of this Monarchy, escheated or rather devoured by the King: that
name alone containing in it both Clergy, Princes and People; so that some of
the French Counselors may say with Tully in his Oration for Marcellus unto
Caesar, Doleoque cum Respublica immortalis esse debeat, eam unius mortalis
anima consistere: yet I cannot but withal affirm, that the Princes and Nobles
of France do, for as much as concerns themselves, upon all advantages fly off
from the Kings obedience; but all this while the poor Paisant is ruined. Let
the poor Tennant starve, or eat the bread of carefulness, it matters not, so
they may have their pleasure, and be accounted firm Zealots of the Common
liberty, and certainly this is the issue of it; the Farmer lives the life of a
slave to maintain his Lord in pride and laziness, the Lord leads the life of
a King to oppress his Tennant by fines and exactions. An equality little
answerable to the old platforms of Republics. Aristotle, genius ille naturae,
as a learned man calls him, in his fourth book of Politics has an excellent
discourse concerning this disproportion. In that chapter his project is to have
a correspondency so far between Subjects under the King, or people of the same
City, that neither the one might be over rich, nor the other too miserably
poor. They, says he, which are too happy, strong, or rich, or greatly
favored, and the like, cannot nor will not obey, with which evil they are
infected from their infancy. The other, through want of these things, are too
abjectly minded and base, for that the one cannot but command, and the other
but serve, and this he calls, (...), a City inhabited only by slaves and
tyrants. That questionless is the most perfect and complete form of Government:
Vbi veneratur potentem humilis, non timet, antecedit, non contemnit humiliorem
potens, as Velleius. But this is an happiness whereof France is not capable,
their Lords being Kings, and their Commons Villains. And to say no less of them
than in truth they are, the Princes of this Country are little inferior in
matters of Royalty to any King abroad, and by consequence little respective in
matter of obedience to their own King at home. Upon the least discontent they
will draw themselves from the Court, or put themselves into Arms; and of all
other comforts are ever sure of this, that they shall never want partisans,
neither do they use to stand off from him fearfully and at distance, but
justify their revolt by public declaration, and think the King much indebted
to them, if upon fair terms, and an honorable reconcilement, they will please
to put themselves again into his obedience. Henry the fourth was a Prince of as
undanted and uncontrollable a spirit, as ever any of his Predecessors, and one
that loved to be obeyed, yet was he also very frequently baffled by these
Roytelets, and at the last died in an affront.

The Prince of Conde perceiving the Kings affection to his new Lady, began to
grow jealous of him, for which reason he retired unto Bruxels. The King
offended at this retreat sent after him, and commanded him home: The Prince
returned answer, that he was the Kings most humble Subject and Servant, but
into France he would not come, unless he might have a Town for his assurance,
withal he protected in public writing a Nullity of any thing that should be
done to his prejudice in his absence. A stomackful resolution, and somewhat
misbecoming a Subject: yet in this opposition he persisted, his humor of
disobedience out-living the King whom he had thus affronted. But these tricks
are ordinary here, otherwise a man might have construed this action by the term
of rebellion. The chief means whereby these Princes become so headstrong, is
an immunity given them by their Kings, and a liberty which they have taken to
themselves: By their Kings they have been absolutely exempted from all
tributes, tolles, taxes, customs, impositions and subsidies; by them they have
been always estated in whole entire Provinces, with a power of Hante and many
justice (as the Lawyers term it) passed over unto them: the Kings having scarce
an homage or acknowledgement of them. To this they have added much to their
strength and security, by the insconcing and fortifying their houses, which both
often moves and afterward enableth the^ to contemn his Majesty. An example we
have of this in the Castle of Rochforte, belonging to the Duke of Tremoville,
which in the long Civil Wars, endured a shelf of five thousand shot and yet was
not taken. A very impolitick course (in my conceit) in the French, to bestow
honors and immunities upon those, Qui (as the Historian says) ea suo arbitrio
aut reposcituri, aut retenturem videantur, quique modum habent in sua
voluntate: For upon a knowledge of this strength in themselves, the Princes
have been always prone to civil Wars, as having sufficient means for safety
and resistance. On this ground all they write the Kings authority, and disobey
his justice. Insomuch that the greatest sort of Nobles in this Kingdom can
seldom be arraigned or executed in person, and therefore the Laws condemn them
in their images, and hang them in their pictures. A pretty device to work
justice. If by chance or some handsome slight any of them be apprehended, they
are put under a sure guard, and not doomed to death without great fear of
tumult and unquietness. Neither is it Vnus and alter, only some two or three
that thus stand upon their distance with the King, but even all the Nobility of
the Realm- A rout so disordered, unconfined and numberless, that even Fabius
himself would be out of breath in making the reckoning. I speak not here of
those that are styled La Noblesse, but of Titulados, men only of titular
Nobility, of the degree of Baron and above: of these there is in this Country a
number almost innumerable, quot Coelum stellas, take quantity for quantity, and
I dare be of the opinion, that Heaven has not more Stars than France Nobles;
you shall meet with them so thick in the Kings Court especially, that you would
think it almost impossible the Country should bear any other fruit. This I
think I may safely affirm and without Hyperbole, that they have there as many
Princes as we in England have Dukes, as many Dukes as we Earls, as many Earls
as we Barons, as many Barons as we Knights. A jolly company, and such as know
their own strength too. I cannot but as much marvel, that those Kings should be
so prodigal in conferring honors, considering this, that every Nobleman he
creates is so great a weakening to his power. On the other side, I cannot but
as much wonder at some of our Nation, who have murmured against our late
Sovereign, and accused him of an unpardonable unthriftiness, in bestowing the
dignities of his Realm with so full and liberal an hand. Certainly could there
any danger have risen by it unto the State, I could have been as impatient of
it as another. But with us titles and ennobling in this kind, are only either
the Kings favor, or the parties merit, and makes, whomsoever he be that
receives them, rather reverenced than powerful. Raro eorum honoribus invidetur
quorum vis non timetur, was a good Aphorism in the days of Paterculus, and
may, for ought I know, be as good still: Why should I envy any man that honor,
which takes not from my safety, or repine at my Sovereign for raising any of
his Servants into an higher degree of eminency, when that favor cannot make
them exorbitant. Besides it concerns the improvement of the Exchequer at the
occasions of Subsidies: and the glory of the Kingdom, when the Prince is not
attended by men merely of the Vulgar. Add to this the few Noble men of any
title, which he found at his happy coming in amongst us, and the additions of
power which his coming brought unto us, and we shall find it proportionable,
that he should enlarge our Nobility with our Country. Neither yet have we
indeed a number to be talked of, comparing us with our neighbor Nations. We
may see all of the three first rank in the books of Miles, Brook, and Vincent,
and we are promised also a Catalogue of the creations and successions of all
our Barons; then we should see that as yet we have not surfeited. Were this
care taken by the Heralds in France, perhaps the Nobility there would not seem
so numberless, sure I am, not so confused: but this is the main vice of that
Profession: of six Heralds which they have amongst them, Viz Mountjoy,
Normandy, Guyenns, Valoys, Britain, and Burgoyne, not one of them is reported
to be a Genealogist: Neither were their Predecessors better affected to this
study. Peradine the only man that ever was amongst them, has drawn down the
Genealogies of twenty four of the chief Families, all eminent and of the blood;
in which he has excellently well discharged himself: but what a small pittance
is that, compared to the present multitude.

The Nobles being so populous, it cannot be but the Nobless (as they call them)
that is, the Gentry, must needs be thick set, and only not innumerable. Of
these Nobless there be some that hold their estates immediately of the Crown,
and they have the like immunity with the Princes. Some hold their feifes (or
seuda) of some other of the Lords, and he has only Basse justice permitted to
him, as to mulct and amerce his Tennants, to imprison them, or to give them any
other correction under death. All of them have power to raise and enhaunce up
their rents, to tax his Subjects on occasion, and to prohibit them such
pleasures, as they think fit to be reserved for themselves. In Grettanl in
Picardie I saw a post fastened in the ground, like a race-post with us, and
thereon an inscription, I made presently to it, as hoping to have heard news of
so^e memorable battle there fought, but when I came at it, I found it to be
nothing but a declaration of the Prince of Condes pleasure, that no man should
hunt in those quarters. Afterward I observed them to be very frequent. But not
to wander through all particulars, I will in some few of them only give
instance of their power here.

The first is Droict de Balliage, power to keep Assizes, or to have under them
a Baillie, and an Imperial seat of justice, for the definition of such causes
as fall under the compass of ordinary jurisdiction. In this Court there is
notice taken of treason, robberies, murders, protections, pardons, fairs,
markets, and other matters of privilege.

Next they have a Court of ordinary jurisdiction, and therein a Judge whom they
call Le Guarde de Justice, for the decision of smaller business, as debts,
trespass, breach of the Kings peace, and the like. In this the purse is only
emptied; the other extends to the taking away of the life; for which every
one that has Hante Justice annexed to his feife, has also his particular
Gibbet. Nay, which is wonderful methodical, by the Criticisme of the Gibbet you
may judge at the quality of him that owneth it, for the Gibbet of one of the
Noblesse has but two pillars, that of the Chastellan three, the Barons four,
the Earls six, the Dukes eight, and yet this difference is rather precise than
general.

The last of their jura Regalia, which I will here speak of, is the Command
they have upon the people to follow them unto the wars, a Command not so
advantageous to the Lord, as dangerous to the Kingdom.

Thus live the French Princes, thus the Noblesse, thus those Sheep which God
and the Laws has brought under them, they do not shear, but fleece them, and
(which is worse than this) having themselves taken away the wool, they give up
the naked carcass to the King. Tonderi oves meas volo, non deglubi; was
accounted one of the golden sayings of Tiberius, but it is not current here in
France: Here the Lord and the King, though otherwise at odds amongst
themselves, be sure to agree in this, the undoing and oppressing of the
Paisant. Ephraim against Manasseh, and Masnasseh against Ephraim, but both
against Juda, says the Scripture. The reason why they thus desire the poverty
of the Commons, is, as they pretend, the safety of the State, and their own
particulars. Were the people once warmed with the feeling of ease, and their
own riches, they would be presently hearkening after the Wars. And if no
employment were offered abroad, they would make some at home. Histories and
experience has taught us enough of this humor in this kind: it being
impossible for this hotheaded and hare-brain'd people not to be doing. Si
extraneus deest domi hostem quaerunt: as Justin has observed of the ancient
Spaniards. A pretty quality, and for which they have often smarted.

CHAP. XIV.
The base and low estate of the French Paisant. The misery of them under their
Lords. The bed of Procrustes. The suppressing of the Subject prejudicial to a
State. The Wisdom of King Henry the seventh. The French forces all in the
Cavillery. The cruel Impositions laid upon the people by the King. No Demain in
France. Why the trial by twelve men can be used only in England. The gabel of
Salt. The Popes license for wenching. The gabel by whom refused, and why the
Gascoines impatient of taxes. The Taille and Taylon. The Pancarte or aids, the
vain resistance of those of Paris. The Court of aids. The manner of gathering
the Kings moneys. The Kings Revenue. The corruption of the French Publicans.
King Lewis why called the Just. The moneys current in France. The gold of Spain
more Catholic than the King. The happiness of English Subjects.

BY that which has been spoken already of the Nobless, we may partly guess at
the low estate of the Paisant or Country man: of whom we will not now speak, as
Subjects to their Lords, and how far they are under their commandment, but
how miserable and wretched they are in their apparel and their houses: For
their apparel, it is well if they can allow themselves Canvas, or an outside of
that nature: As for Cloth, it is above their purse, equally, and their
ambition: if they can aspire unto Fustian, they are as happy as their wishes:
and he that is so arrayed, will not spare to aim at the best place in the
Parish, even unto that of Churchwarden: When they go to Plow or to the Church
they have shoes and stockings; at other times they make bold with Nature and
wear their skins. Hats they will not want though their bellies pinch for it:
and that you may be sure they have them, they will always keep them on their
heads. The most impudent custom of a beggarly fortune that ever I met with, and
which already has had my blessing. As for the Women, they know in what degree
Nature has created them, and therefore dare not be so fine as their Husbands:
some of them never had above one pair of stockings in all their lives, which
they wear every day, for indeed they are very durable: the goodness of their
faces tells us that they have no need of a band, therefore they use none. And as
concerning petticoats, so it is, that all have such a garment, but most of them
so short, that you would imagine them to be cut off at the placket: When the
parents have sufficiently worn these vestures, and that commonly is till the
rottenness of them will save the labor of undressing; they are a new cut out
and fittted to the Children. Search into their houses, and you shall find them
very wretched, and destitute, as well of furniture as provision. No butter
salted up against Winter, no poudering tub, no pullein in the rick barten, no
flesh in the pot, or at the spit, and which is worse, no money to buy them. The
description of the poor aged couple, Philemon and Baucis, in the eigth book of
the Metamorphosis, is a perfect character of the French Paisant in his
housekeeping, though I cannot affirm, that if Jupiter and Mercury did come
amongst them, they should have so hearty an entertainment; for thus Ovid
marshelleth the dishes.

Ponitur hic bicolor sincerae bacca Minervae
Intubaque and radix, and lactis Massa coacti
Ovaque non acri leviter versata favella,
Prunaque and in patulis redolentia mala canistris
Hic nux, hic mixta est rugosis carica palmis
Et de purpurers collectae vitibus uvae.
Omnia fictilibus nitede.
They on the Table set Minerva's fruit;
The double coulour'd Olive: Endive root,
Raddish and Cheese, and to the board there came
A dish of Eggs never roasted by the flame:
Next they had Nuts, course Dates and lenten Figs,
And Apples from a basket made with twigs.
And Plums and Grapes cut newly from the tree,
All served in earthen dishes huswifelie.
But you must not look for this ohear often: At Wakes or feast days, you may
perchance be so happy as to see this plenty: but at other times, onus omne
patilla, the best provision they can show you, is a piece of Bacon where with
to fatten their pottage, and now and then the inwards of Beasts killed for the
Gentleman. But of their miseries, this me thinks is the greatest, that sowing
so many acres of excellent Wheat in a year, and gathering in such a plentiful
vintage as they do, they should not yet be so fortunate as to eat white bread,
or drink Wine: for such infinite rents do they pay to their Lords, and such
innumerable taxes to the King, that the profits arising out of these
commodities are only sufficient to pay their duties, and keep them from the
extremities of cold and famine. The bread which they eat is of the coursest
flower, and so black that it cannot admit the name of brown, and as for their
drink, they have recourse unto the next fountain: A people of any the most
unfortunate, not permitted to enjoy the fruit of their labors: and such as
above all others are subject to that Sarcasme in the Gospel, This man planted a
Vineyard, and does not drink of the fruit thereof.

Neo prosunt Domino, quae prosunt omnibus arts. Yet were their cases not
altogether so deplorable, if there were but hopes left to them of a better; if
they could but compass this certainty, that a painful drudging and thrifty
saving would one day bring them out of this hell of bondage. In this
questionless they are entirely miserable; in that they are sensible of their
present fortunes, and dare not labor nor expect an alteration. If industry and
a sparing hand has raised any of these afflicted people so high, that he is
but four or five shillings richer than his neighbor, his Lord immediately
enhanceth his rent, and enformeth the Kings taskmasters of his riches; by
which means he is within two or three years brought into equal poverty with
the rest. A strange course and much different from that of England; where the
Gentry take a delight in having their Tennants thrive under them, and account
it no crime in any that hold of them to be wealthy. On the other side, those of
France can abide no body to gain or grow rich upon their Farms, and therefore
thus upon occasions rack their poor Tennants. In which they are like the Tyrant
Procrustes, who laying hands upon all he met, cast them upon his bed: if they
were shorter than it, he racked their joints till he had made them even to it;
if they were longer, he cut as much of their bodies from them as did hang over;
so keeping all that fell into his power in an equality of stature. I need not
make further application of the story but this, that the French Lords are like
that Tyrant.

How much this course does depress the military power of the Kingdom, is
apparent by the true principles of war, and the examples of other Countries.
For it has been held the general opinion of the best judgments in matters of
war, that the main buttress and pillar of an Army is the foot, or (as the
Martialists term it) the infantry. Now to make a good infantry, it requires
that men be brought up not in a slavish or needy fashion of life, but in some
free and liberal manner. Therefore it is well observed by the Viscount St.
Albons in his history of Henry the seventh, that if a State run most to Nobles
and Gentry, and that the Husbandmen be but as their mere drudges, or else
simple Cottagers, that that State may have a good Cavilleria, but never good
stable bands of Foot: like to Coppines wood, in which, if you let them grow too
thick in the standerds, they will run to bushes or briers, and have little
clean under wood. Neither is it thus in Franne only, but in Italy also, and
some other parts abroad; insomuch that they are enforced to employ mercenary
Soldiers for their battalions of Foot; whereby it comes to pass in those
Countries, that they have much people but few men.

On this consideration King Henry the seventh, one of the wisest of our
Princes, took a course so cunning and wholesome for the increase of the
military power of this Realm, that though it be much less in territories, yet
it should have infinitely more Soldiers of its native forces than its
neighbor Nations. For in the fourth year of his reign there passed an Act of
Parliament pretensively against the depopulation of Villages and decay of
tillage, but purposely to make his Subjects for the wars. The Act was, that
all houses of Husbandry which had been used with twenty acres of ground and
upwards should be maintained and kept up so, together with a competent
proportion of Land to be used and occupied with them, etc. By this means the
houses being kept up, did of necessity enfarce a dweller, and that dweller,
because of the proportion of Land, not to be a beggar, but a man of some
substance, able to keep hinds and servants, and to set the Plow going. An Order
which did wonderfully concern the might and manhood of the Kingdom, these
Farmers being sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and by
consequence to prepare them for service, and encourage them to high honors:
for, Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --
As the Poet has it.
But this Ordinance is not thought of such use in France; where all the hopes
of their Armies consist in the Cavallery or the Horse; which perhaps is the
cause why our Ancestors have won so many battles upon them: As for the French
Foot, they are quite out of all reputation, and are accounted to be the basest
and unworthiest company in the world.

Besides, should the French people be enfranchized as it were from the tyranny
of their Lords, and estated in free hold, and other tenures after the manner of
England, it would much trouble the Council of France to find out a new way of
raising the Kings Revenues, which are now merely sucked out of the blood and
sweat of the Subject. Anciently the Kings of France had rich and plentiful
demeasnes, such as was sufficient to maintain their Majesty and greatness,
without being burdensome unto the Country. Pride in matters of sumptuousness
and the tedious Civil wars which have lasted in this Country almost ever since
the death of Henry the second, have been the occasion, that most of the Crown
Lands have been sold and morgaged: insomuch that the people are now become the
Demain, and the Subject only is the revenue of the Crown; by the sweat of
their brows is the Court fed and the Soldier paid, and by their labors are
the Princes maintained in idleness. What impositions soever it pleases the
King to put upon them, it is almost a point of treason, not only to deny, but
to question: Apud illos vere regnatur, nefasque quantum regi liceat dubitare;
as one of them: The Kings hand lies hard upon them, and has almost thrust
them into an Egyptian bondage: the poor Paisant being constrained to make up
daily his full tale of brick, and yet have no straw allowed him. Upon the sight
of these miseries and poverties of this people, Sir John Fortescue Chancellor
of England, in his book entitled, De laudibus Regum Angliae, concludes them
to be unfit men for Jurers or Judges, should the custom of the Country admit of
such a trial: for having proved there unto the Prince (he was Son unto Henry
the sixth) that the manner of trial, according to the Common Law, by twelve
Jurats, was more commendable than the practice of the Civil or Imperial Laws,
by the deposition only of two Witnesses, or the forced confession of the
person arraigned: the Prince seemed to marvel, Cur ea lex Angliae quae tam
frugi and optabilis est, non sit toti mundo communis: to this he makes answer,
by showing the free condition of the English Subjects, who alone are used at
these Inditements; men of a fair and large estate, such as dwell nigh the place
of the deed committed: men that are of ingenuous education, such as scorn to be
suborned or corrupted, and afraid of infamy. Then he shows how in other
places all things are contrary: the Husbandman an absolute beggar, easy to be
bribed by reason of his poverty: The Gentlemen living far asunder, and so
taking no notice of the fact. The Paisant also neither fearing infamy nor loss
of goods if he be found faulty, because he has them not. In the end he
concludes thus: Nec mireris igitur princeps, si lex quae Anglia veritas
inquiritur, ab ea non pervagetur in alias nationes: Ipsae namque, ut Anglia,
nequeunt facere sufficientes, consimilesque juratas. The last part of the
Latin savoureth somewhat of the Lawyer; the word Jurata being there put to
signify a Jury.

To go over all those impositions, which this miserable people are afflicted
withal, were almost as wretched as the payment of them. I will therefore speak
only of the principal: and here I meet in the first place with the gabel or
imposition on Salt. This gabelle de Sell, this Impost on Salt was first begun by
Philip the Long, who took for it a Double, which is half a Sol, upon the pound.
After whom Philip de Valoys, Anno 1328. doubled it. Charles the seventh raised
it unto three Doubles, and Lewis the eleventh unto six; since that time it has
been altered from so much upon the pound to a certain rate on the Maid, which
contains some thirty bushels English, the rates rising and falling at the
Kings pleasure. This one Commodity were very advantageous to the Exchequer,
were it all in the Kings hands; but at this time a great part of it is
morgaged. It is thought to be worth unto the King three millions of Crowns
yearly, that only of Paris and the Provosts seven Daughters being farmed at
1700000. Crowns the year. The late Kings since Anno 1581. being entangled in
wars, have been constrained to let it to others; insomuch that about Anno
1599. the King lost above 800000. Crowns yearly: and no longer then Anno 1621.
the King taking up 600000. pounds of the Provost of the Merchants and the
Eschevins, gave unto them a Rent charge of 40000. pound yearly, to be issuing
out of the customs of Salt till their money were repaid them. This gabel is
indeed a Monopoly, and that one of the unjustest and unmeasurablest in the
world: for no man in the Kingdom (those Countries hereafter mentioned excepted)
can eat any Salt, but he must buy it of the King, and at his price, which is
most unconscionable; that being sold at Paris and elsewhere for five livers,
which in the exempted places is sold for one. Therefore that the Kings profits
might not be diminished, there is diligent watch and ward, that no foreign Salt
be brought into the Land, upon pain of forfeiture and imprisonment. A search
that is made so strictly, that we had much ado at Diepe to be pardoned the
searching of our Trunks and Port-mantues; and that not but upon our solemn
protestations, that we had none of that Commodity. This Salt is of a brown
color, being only such as we in England call Bay Salt, and is imposed on the
Subjects by the Kings Officers with great rigor. For though they have some of
their last provision in the house, or perchance would be content (through
poverty) to eat their meat without it; yet will these cruel villains enforce
them to take such a quantity of them; howsoever they will have of them so much
money. But this tyranny is not general; the Normans and Picards enduring most
of it, and the other Paisants the rest. Much like unto this was the license
which the Popes and Bishops of old granted in matter of keeping Concubines: for
when such as had the charge of gathering the Popes rents happened upon a Priest
which had no Concubine, and for that cause made denial of the tribute, the
Collectors would return them this answer, that notwithstanding this they should
pay down the money, because they might have had the keeping of a Wench if they
would.

This gabel as it sits hard upon some, so are there some also, who are never
troubled with it: of this sort are the Princes in the general release, and many
of the Nobless in particular: insomuch that it was proved unto King Lewis, Anno
1614. that for every Gentleman which took of his Majesty's Salt, there were two
thousand of the Commons. There are also some entire Provinces which refuse to
eat of this Salt, as Britain, Gascoine, Poictou, Queren, Naintogne, and the
County of Boulonnois. Of these the County of Boulonnois pretends a peculiar
exemption, as belonging immediately to the patrimony of our Lady (Nostre-Dame)
of which we shall learn more when we are in Bovillon. The Britains came united
to the Crown by a fair marriage, and had strength enough to make their own
Capitulations, when they first entered into the French subjection; besides,
here are yet diverse of the Ducal Family living in the Country, who would much
trouble the quiet of the Kingdom, should the people be oppressed with this
bondage, and they take the protection of them. Poictou and Queren have
compounded for it with the former Kings, and pay a certain rent yearly; which
is called the Equivalent. Xaintogne is under the command of Rochell, of whom it
receives sufficient at a better rate. And as for the Gascoynes the King dares
not impose it upon them for fear of rebellion. They are a stubborn and churlish
people, very impatient of a rigorous yoke; and such as inherit a full measure
of the Beiseains liberty and spirit, from whom they are descended. Le Droit de
fonage, the privilege of levying of a certain piece of money upon every
Chimney in an house that smoaked, was in times not long since one of the Jura
Regalia of the French Lords, and the people paid it without grumbling: yet when
Edward the black Prince returned from his unhappy journey into Spain, and for
the paying of his Soldiers to who^ he was indebted, laid this fonage upon the
people, being then English, they all presently revolted to the French, and
brought great prejudice to our affairs in those quarters.

Next unto the Gabel of Salt we may place the Taille and the Taillon; which are
much of a nature with the Subsidies in England, being granted by the people,
and the sum of that certain shall please to impose them. Anciently the Tailles
were only levied by way of extraordinary subsidy, and that upon four
occasions, which were, the Knighting of the Kings Son, the Marriage of his
Daughters, a Voyage of the Kings beyond Sea, and his Ransom in case he were
taken Prisoner. Les Tailles ne sont point deves de devoyer ordicmer (says
Rayneau) ains ont este accorded, durant la necessite des Affairs Semblement.
Afterward they were continually levied in times of war, and at length Charles
the first made them ordinary, neither is it extended equally, all of it would
amount to a very fair revenue. For supposing this, that the Kingdom of France
contained two hundred millions of acres (as it does) and that from every one
there were raised to the King two Sols yearly; which is little in respect of
the taxes imposed on them; that income alone, besides that which levied on
goods personal, would amount to two millions of pounds in a year. But this
payment also lies all on the Paisant. The greater Towns, the Officers of the
Kings House, the Officers of Wars, the Presidents, Counselors and Officers of
the Court of Parliament; the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Scholars of the
University being freed from it. That which they call the Taillon, was intended
for the ease of the Country, though now it prove one of the greatest burdens
unto it. In former times, the Kings Soldiers lay all upon the charge of the
Villages, the poor people being fain to find them diet, lodging and all
necessaries for themselves, their horses and their harlots, which they brought
with them. If they were not well pleased with their entertainment, they used
commonly to beat their Host, abuse his family, and rob him of that small
provision which he had laid up for his Children, and all this Cum privilegio.
Thus did they move from one Village to another, and at the last returned unto
them from whence they came, Ita ut non sit ibi villula una expers calamitatis
istius, quae non semel aut bis in anno hac nefanda pressura depiletur, as Sir
John F^rtescue observed in his time. To redress this mischief, King Henry the
second, Anno 1549. raised his Imposition called the Taillon, issuing out of the
lands and goods of the poor Country man; whereby he was at the first somewhat
eased: but now all is again out of order, the miserable Paisant being oppressed
by the Soldier as much as ever, and yet he still pays both taxes* the Taille
and the Taillon.

The Pancarte comprehends in it diverse particular imposts, but especially the
Sol upon the Liver, that is, the twentieth penny of all things bought or sold
(corn, sallets, and the like only excepted.) Upon wine, besides the Sol upon
the Liver, he has his several customs at the entrance of it into any of his
Cities, passages by Land, Sea, or River. To these Charles the ninth, Anno 1561.
added a tax of five Sols upon every Maid, which is the third part of a Tun, and
yet when all this is done, the poor Vintner pays unto the King the eighth
penny he takes for that wine which he sells.

In this Pancart is also contained the bant passage, which are the tols paid
unto the King, for passage of men and cattle over his bridges and his City
gates, as also for all such Commodities which they bring with them. A good and
round sum considering the largeness of the Kingdom, the thoroughfare of Lions
being farmed yearly of the King for 100000. Crowns. Hereunto belong also the
Aides, which are a tax also of the Sol on the Liver, upon all sorts of fruits,
provision, wares and Merchandise, granted first unto Charles Duke of Normandy,
when John his Father was prisoner in England; and since made perpetual. For
such is the lamentable fate of that Country, that their kindnesses are made
duties; and those moneys which they once grant out of love, are always after
exacted of them, and paid out of necessity. The bedrolle of all these
impositions and taxes is called the Paneart, because it was hanged up in a
frame, like as the Officers Fees are in our Bishops Diocesan Courts; the word
Pan signifying a frame or pane of wainscot. These impositions time and custom
has now made tolerable, though at first day they seemed very burdensome, and
moved many Cities to murmuring, some to rebellion. Amongst others the City of
Paris, proud of her ancient liberties and immunities, refused to admit of it.
This indignity so incensed Charles the sixth their King, then young and in hot
blood, that he seized into his hands all their privileges, took from their
Provost des Merchants and the Eschevins, as also the key of their gates, and
the chains of their streets, and making through the whole Town such a face of
mourning, that one might justly have said: Haec facies Troiae cum caperetur
erat. This happened in the year 1383. and was for five years together
continued; which time being expired, and other Cities warned by that example,
the imposition was established, and the privileges restored. For the better
regulating of the profits arising from these imposts, the French King erected a
Court, Le Cour des Aides. It consisted at the first of the general of the
Aides, and of any four of the Lords of the Council, whom they would call to
their assistance. Afterward Charles the fifth, Anno 1380. or thereabouts,
settled it in Paris and caused it to be numbered as one of the Sovereign Courts,
Lewis the eleventh dissolved it, and committed the managing of his Aids to his
Household servants, as loath to have any public Officers take notice how he
fleeced his people, Anno 1464. it was restored again. And finally Henry the
second, Anno 1551. added to it a second Chamber, composed of two Presidens and
eight Counselors. One of which Presidents, Mr. Cavilayer, is said to be the
best moneyed man of all France. There are also others of these Courts in the
Country: as one at Roven, one at Montferrant in Averyne, one at Bourdeaux, and
another at Montpellier established by Charles the first, Anno 1537. For the
levying and gathering up of rhese taxes, you must know, that the whole Country
of France is divided into twenty three generalities and Counties as it were,
and these again into diverse Eslections, which are much like unto our Hundreds.
In every of the Generalities there are ten or twelve Treasurers, nine Receivers
for the Generality, and as many Controulers, besides all under Officers, which
are thought to amount in all to thirty thousand men. When the King levieth his
taxes, he sends his Letters Patents to the principal Officers of every
Generality, whom they call Les genereaux des Aides, and they dispatch their
warrant to the Ezlenzor Commissioners. These taxing every one of the Parishes
and Villages within their several divisions at a certain rate, send their
Receivers to collect it, who account for it to their Controulers, by them it
ascends Ezleie; from him to the Receiver general of that Generality, next to
the Controuler, then to the Treasurer, afterward to the General des Aides; and
so Per varios cesus, per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium --
By all these hands it is at last conveyed into the Kings purse: in which
several passage, necesse est ut aliquid haereat, it cannot be, but it must
needs have many a shrewd snatch: Insomuch that I was told by a Gentleman of
good credence in France, that there could not be gathered by the several
exactions above specified, an^ other devices of prowling (which I have omitted)
less than eighty five millions a year, whereof the King receives fifteen
only. A report not altogether to be sle^ghted: considering that a President of
the Court of Accounts made it evident to the Assembly at Blois in the time of
King Henry the fourth, that by the time that every one of the Officers had had
his share of it, there came not to the Kings Coffers one teston (which is one
shilling four pence) of a Crown: So that by reckoning five testons to a Crown
or Escue, as it is but two pence over, these Officers must collect five times
the money which they pay to the King; which amouteth to seventy five millions,
and is not much short of that proportion which before I spoke of. The Kings
revenues then, notwithstanding this infinite oppression of his people,
amounts to fifteen millions; some would have it eighteen, which is also a
good improvement in respect of what they were in times before. Lewis the
eleventh as good a Husband of his Crown, as ever any was in France, gathering
but one and an half only, but as you count the flow, so also if you reckon the
ebb of his treasures, you will find much wanting of a full sea in his Coffers,
it being generally known, that the Fees of Officers, Pensions, Garrisons and
the men of Arms draw from him yearly, no fewer than six of his fifteen
millions. True it is, that his Treasure has many good helps by way of Escheat,
and that most frequently when he comes to take an account of his Treasurers
and other Officers. An action so abominable, full of base and unmannly
villainies in their several charges, that the Publicans of old Rome were milk
and white broth to them: For so miserably do they abuse the poor Paisant, that
if he has in all the world but eight Sols, it shall go hard but he will extort
from him five of them. Non missura cutim nisi plena cruoris hirudo. He is just
of the nature of the Horsleach, when he has once gotten hold of you, he will
never let you go till he be filled, and which is most strange, he thinks it a
greater clemency, that he has left the poor man some of his money, than the
cruelty was in wresting from him the rest. Nay they will brag of it, when they
have taken but five of the eight Sols, that they have given him three, and
expect thanks for it. A kindness of a very theevish nature, it being the
condition of Robbers, as Tully has observed, Vt commemorent iis se dedisse
vitam, quibus non ademerint. Were the people but so happy as to have a certain
rate set upon their miseries, it could not but be a great ease to them, and
would well defend them from the tyranny of these thieves: but, which is not the
least part of their wretchedness, their taxings and assemblings are left
arbitrary, and are exacted according as these Publicans will give out of the
Kings necessities. So that the Country man has no other remedy, than to give
Cerberus a crust, as the saying, is, and to kiss his rod and hug his
punishment. By this means the Quaestors thrive abundantly, it being commonly
said of them, Fari bouvier au jourd huy Cheualier, to day a Swineheard, to
morrow a Gentleman; and certainly they grow into great riches. Mr. Beaumarchais
one of the Treasurers (Mr. de Vi^^ry, who slew the Marquess de Ancri, married
his only Daughter) having raked unto himself, by the v^l^ainous abuse of his
place, no less than twenty two millions of Livers, as it is commonly reported:
but he is not like to carry it to his grave, the King having seized upon a good
part of it, and himself being condemned to the Gallows by the grand Chamber of
Parliament, though as yet he cannot be apprehended and advanced to the ladder,
And this has been the end of many of them since the reign of this present King
(whom it may be for this cause they call Lewis the Just:) This fashion of
affixing Epithites to the names of their Kings, was in great use heretofore
with this Nation. Carolus the Son of Pipin was by them surnamed Le magne: Lewis
his Son Le Debonaire; and so of the rest: since the time of Charles the sixth,
who was by them surnamed the Beloved, it was discontinued and new revived again
in the persons of King Henry the fourth and his Son King Lewis: (but this by
the way.) It may be also he is called the Just by way of negation; because he
has yet committed no notable act of injustice (for I wink at his cruel and
unjust slaughter at Nigrepelisse.) It may be also to keep him continually in
mind of his duty, that he may make himself worthy of that attribute: Vere
Imperator sui nominis, as one said of Severus.

Let us add one more misery to the State and Commonalty of France, and that is
the base and corrupt money in it: for besides the Sol which is made of Tin,
they have the Double made of Brass, where of six make a Sol, and the Deneir,
whereof two make a Double: a Coin so vile and base of value, that one hundred
and twenty of them go to our English Shilling: These are the common Coins of
the Country. Silver and Gold not being to be seen but upon holy days. As for
their Silver it is most of it of their new coining, but all exceedingly clipped
and shorn, their Gold being most of it Spanish. In my little being in the
Country, though I casually saw much Gold, I could only see two pieces of
French stamp, the rest coming all from Spain, as Pistolets, Demi pistolets, and
double Pistolets. Neither is France only furnished thus with Chastilian Coin;
it is happiness also of other Countries, as Italy, Barbary, Brabant, and
elsewhere, and indeed it is kindly done of him, that being the sole Monopolist
of the Mines, he will yet let other Nations have a share in the metal. Were
the King as Catholic as his money, I think I should be in some fear of him;
till then we may lawfully take that ambitious title from the King, and bestow
it on his pictures: the sovereignty of the Spanish gold is more universally
embraced, and more seriously acknowledged in most parts of Christendom, than
that of him which stamped it. To this he, which entituleth himself Catholic, is
but a prisoner, and never saw half those Provinces, in which this more powerful
Monarch has been heartily welcomed: And yet if he will needs be King let him
grow somewhat more jealous of his Queen, and confess that his Gold does royally
deserve his embraces, whom before this extent of its dominion, the ancient
Poets styled, Regina Pecunia.

True it is, that by the frame and shape of this Empress you would little think
her to be lovely, and less worthy your entertainment, the stones which little
boys break into quoyts, are a great deal better proportioned. If a Geometrician
were to take the angles of it, I think it would quite put him besides his
Euclide: Neither can I tell to what thing in the world fitter to resemble it,
then a French Cheese, for it is neither long, nor square, nor round, nor thin,
nor thick, nor any one of these, but yet all, and yet none of them. No question
it was the Kings desire, by this unsightly dressing of his Lady, to make men
out of love with her, that so he might keep her to himself; but in this his
hopes have cozened him: for as in other Cuckoldings, so in this, some men will
be bold to keep his Wife from him, be it only in spite.

These circumstances thus laid together and considered, we may the clearer and
the better see our own felicities, which to exprese generally and in a word, is
to say only this, that the English subject is in no circumstance a Frenchman:
here have we our money made of the best and purest matal, that only excepted
which a charitable consideration has coined into farthings: here have we our
King royally, and to the envy of the world, magnificently provided for, without
the sweat and blood of the people: no pillages nor impositions upon any private
wares; no Gabels upon our Commodities: Nullum in tam ingenti regno vestigal:
non in urbibus pontium vae discriminibus publicanorum stationes; as one truly
has observed of us. The moneys which the King wants to supply his
necessities are here freely given him, he does not compel our bounties, but
accept them. The Laws by which we are governed, we impart, are makers of: each
Peasant of the Country has a free voice in the enacting of them, if not in
his person, yet in his Proxy: we are not here subject to the lusts and tyranny
of our Lords; and may therefore say safely, what the Jews spoke factiously,
that We have no King but Caesar: the greatest Prince here is subject with us to
the same law; and we stand before the Tribunal of the Judge: we acknowledge no
difference: here do we inhabit our own houses, plow our own lands, enjoy the
fruits of our labor* comfort our selves with the Wives of our youth; and see
our selves grow up in those Children which shall inherit after us the same
felicities. But I forget my self; to endeavor the numbering of Gods blessings,
may perhaps be as great a punishment as David's numbering the people. I conclude
with the Poet.

O fortunati nimium bona si sua norint Agricolae nostri. THE THIRD BOOK: OR, LA
BEAVSSE.
CHAP. I.
Our Journey toward Orleans, the Town, Castle, and Battle of Montliherrie.
Many things imputed to the English, which they never did. Lewis the 11th.
brought not the French Kings out of Wardship. The Town of Chastres and
mourning Church there* The Country of La Beausse, an old People of it,
Estampes. The dancing there. The new art of begging in the Innes of this
Country. Angervile, Toury. The sauciness of French Fiddlers. Three kinds of
Music amongst the Ancients. The French Music.

HAving abundantly stifled our spirits in the stink of Paris, on Tuesday being
the 12. of June, we took our leave of it, and prepared our selves to entertain
the sweet air and wind of Orleans. The day fair, and not so much as disposed
to a cloud, save that they began to gather about noon, in the nature of a
Curtain, to defend us from the injury of the Sun; the wind rather sufficient
to fan the air, then to disturb it, by qualifying the heat of that celestial
fire, brought the day to an excellent mediocrity of temper. You would have
thought it a day merely framed for that great Princess Nature to take her
pleasure in, and that the Birds which cheerfully gave us their voices from the
neighboring bushes, had been the loud music of her Court; in a word, it was a
d^y solely consecrated to a pleasant journey, and he that did not put it to
that use misspent it. Having therefore put our selves into our Wagon, we took
a short farewell of Paris, exceeding joyful that we yet lived to see the
beauty of the fields again, and enjoy the happiness of a free Heaven. The
Country, such as that part of the Isle of France toward Normandy, only that
the Corn fields were larger and more even: On the left hand of us we had a
side-glance of the Royal house of Boys, and Vincennes, and the Castle of
Bifectre, and about some two miles beyond them, we had a sight also of a new
house lately built by Mr. Sillerie Chancellor of the Kingdom, a pretty house
it promised to be, having two base Courts on the hither side of it, and beyond
it a Park, an ornament, whereof many great mansions in France are altogether
ignorant.

Four leagues from Paris is the town of Montl'herrie; now old and ruinous, and
has nothing in it to commend it, but the carcass of a Castle; without it, it
has to brag of a large and spacious plain, on which was fought that memorable
battle between Lewis the 11. and Charles le Hardy Duke of Burgoyne. A
battle memorable only for the running away of each Army, the Field being in
a manner emptyed of all the forces, and yet neither of the Princes victorious.
Hic spe celer, ille salute. Some ran out of fear to dye, and some out of hope
to live, that it was hard to say which of the Soldiers made most use of their
heels in the combat. This notwithstanding, the King esteemed himself the
Conqueror, not that he overcame, but because not vanquished. He was a Prince of
no heart to make a warrior, and therefore Resistance was to him almost as much
hugged as Victory. It was Anthonies case in his War against the Parthians, a
Captain whose Lance King Lewis was not worthy to bear after him: Crassus
before him had been taken by that people, but Anthonius made a retreat though
with loss. Hanc itaque fugam suam, quia victus non exierat, victoriam vocabat,
as Paterculus one that loved him not says of him: yet was King Lewis so puffed
up with this conceit of victory, that he ever after sl^ighted his enemies, and
at last ruined them, and their cause with them. The War which they undertook
against him, they entitled, the War of the Weal public, because the
occasion of their taking Arms was for the liberty of the Country and the
People, both whom the King had beyond measure oppressed. True it is, they had
also their particular purposes, but this was the main, and failing in the
expected event of it, all that they did was to confirm the bondage of the
Realm by their own overthrow. These Princes once disbanded, and severally
broken, none durst ever afterward enter into the action: for which reason King
Lewis used to say that he had brought the Kings of France Horse Pupillage out of
their Wardship: a speech of more Brag than Truth. The people I confess he
brought into such terms of slavery, that they not long merited the name of
Subjects: but yet for this great boast, the Nobles of France are the Kings
Guardians. I have already shown you much of their potencie, by that you may
see, that the French Kings have not yet sued their Outre le maine, as our
Lawyers call it. Had he also in some measure broken the powerableness of the
Princes, he had then been perfectly his word's Master; and till that be done, I
shall think his Successors to be in their Pupillage. That King is but half
himself, which has the absolute command only of half his people.

The Battle by this town, the common people impute to the English; and so do
many others, which they had no hand in: for hearing their Grandames talk of
their Wars with our Nation, and of the many Fields which we gained of them,
they no sooner hear talk of a pitched Field, but presently (as the nature of
men in a fright is) they attribute it to the English. Good simple souls, Qui
nos non solum laudibus nostris ornare velint, sed alienis onerare: as Tullie in
his Philippicks. An humor just like unto that of little children, who being
once afrighted with the Tales of Robin Good Fellow, do never after hear any
noise in the night, but they straight imagine, that it is he which makes it,
or like the women of the villages near Oxford; who having heard the tragical
story of a Duck or a Hen killed and carried to the University, no sooner miss
one of their chickins, but instantly they cry out upon the Scholars. On the
same false ground also, hearing that the English whilst they had possessions in
this Country were great builders, they bestow on them without any more ado,
the foundation and perfecting of most of the Churches and Castles in the
Countr^y. Thus are our Ancestors said to have built the Churches of Roven,
Amiens, Bayon, etc. as also the Castles of Boys, S. Vincennes, the Bastile, the
two little Forts on the River side by the Louvre at S. Germans* and amongst
many others this of Montl'herrie, where we now are, and all alike. As for this
Castle, it was bu^lt during the reign of King Robert, Anno 1015. by one of his
servants named Thebald, long before the English had any poss^ssions in this
Continent. It was razed by Lewis the Gross, as being a harbourer of Rebels in
former times, and by that means as a strong bridle in the mouth of Paris;
nothing now standing of it save an high Tower, which is seen a great distance
round about, and serves for a Landmark.

Two leagu^s from Montl'herrie is the twon of Chastres, seated in the farthest
angle of France, where it confineth to la Beauss, a town of an ordinary size,
somewhat bigger than for a market, and less than would beseem a city. A wall
it has and a ditch, but neither serviceable further than to resist the enemy
at one gate, while the people run away by the other. Nothing else remarkable in
it, but the habit of the Church which was mourning for such is the fashion of
France, that when any of the Noblesse are buried, the Church which entombeth
them is painted black within and without for the breadth of a yard, or
thereabouts, and their coats of Arms drawn on it. To go to the charges of
hanging it round with cloth is not for their profits. Besides, this countefeit
sorrow fears thieves, and dares out-brave a tempest. He for whom the Church
of Chastres was thus apparelled, had been Lord of the Town, by name as I
remember Mr. St. Bennoist, his Arms were argent, three Crescents on a Mullet
of the same, but whether this Mullet were part of the Coat, or a mark only of
difference I could not learn. Thelike Funeral churches I saw also at Tostes in
Normandy, and in a Village of Picardie, whose name I mind not; nec operae
pretium. And now we are passed the confines of France, a poor River, which for
the narrowness of it, you would think a ditch parting it from the Province of
La Beausse.

La Beausse has on the North, Normandy, on the East, the Isle of France, on
the South, the River of Loyer, and on the West, the Countries of Tourein and le
Main; it lies in 22 and 23 degree of Longitude, and the 48 and 49 of Latitude,
taking wholly up the breadth of the two former, and but part only of each of
the latter. If you measure it for the best advantage of length, you will find
it to extend from la Forte Bernard in the North west corner of it, to Gyan in
the South east, which according to the proportion of degrees, amounts to 60
miles English, and somewhat better; for breadth it is much after the same
reckoning. The ancient inhabitants of this Province, and the reason of the name
I could not learn amongst the people; neither can I find any certainty of it in
my books, with whom I have consulted. If I may be bold to go by conjecture, I
should think this country to have been the seat of Bellocassi, a people of
Gaul Celtick, mentioned by Caesar in his Commentaries. Certain it is that in
this Tract they were seated, and in likelihood in this Province; the names
ancient and modern being not much different in sense, though in sound. For the
Franks called that which in Latin is pulcher or bellus, by the name of Bell in
the Masculine Gender; Beu the Pronoune it, and Beau as it were the Faeminine.
At this time Beau is Masculine, and Belle Faeminine: so that the name of
Bellocassi is but varied into that of Beausse: Besides that Province which the
Roman writers style Bellovaci, the French now call Beauvais, where Belle is
also turned into Beau. Add to this, that the Latin writers do term this
country, Bello Bessia, where the ancient Bello is still preserved; and my
conjecture may be pardoned, if not approved. As for those which have removed
this people into Normandy, and found them in the city of Baieux, I appeal to
any understanding man, whether their peremptory sentence, or my submisse
opinion be the more allowable.

-- Haec si tibi vera videtur,
Deed manus: aut si falsa est, accingere contra.
The same night we came to Estampes, a town situate in a very plentiful and
fruitful Soil, and watered with a River of the same name, stored with the
best Crevices; it seems to have been a town of principal importance, there
b^ing five walls and gates in a length, one before another. So that it
appears to be rather a continuation of many towns together than simply one.
The Streets are of a large breadth, the Buildings for substance are stone, and
for fashion as the rest of France. It contains in it five Churches, whereof
the principal is a College of Chanons, as that of Nostredame, built by King
Robert, who is said also to have founded the Castle, which now can scarcely be
visited in its ruins; without the town they have a fine green Meadow daintily
seated within the circlings of the Water, into which they use to follow their
recreations. At my being there, the sport was dancing, an exercise much used by
the French, who do naturally affect it. And it seems this natural inclination
is so strong and deep rooted, that neither age, nor the absence of a smiling
fortune can prevail against it. For on this Dancing-green there assembleth not
only Youth and Gentry, but also Age and Beggary, old wives which could not set
foot to ground without a Crutch in the streets, had here taught their feet to
amble, you would have thought by the cleanly conveyance and carriage of their
bodies, that they had been troubled with the Sciatica, and yet so eager in the
sport, as if their dancing-dayes should never be done. Some there were so
ragged, that a swift Galliard would almost have shaked them into nakedness,
and they also most violent to have their carcasses directed in a measure. To
have attempted the staying of them at home, or the persuading of them to work
when they heard the Fiddle, had been a task too unweildy for Hercules. In this
m^xture of age and condition did we observe them at their pastime; the rags
being so interwoven with the silks, and wrinkled brows so interchangably
mingled with fresh beauties, that you would have thought it to have been a
mummery of fortunes; as for those of both sexes which were altogether past
action, they had caused themselves to be carried thither in their chaires, and
trod the measures with their eyes.

The Inn which we lay in was just like those of Normandy, or at the least so
like, as was fit for Sisters, for such Guests take them. -- Facies non omnibus
una
Nec diversa tamen, qualem de cet esse sororum.
All the difference in them lay in the morning, and amongst the maidservants,
for there we were not troubled with such an importunate begging, as in that
other country. These here had learned a more neat and compendious art of
getting money, and petitioned not our ears, but our noses, by the Rhetoric of
a Poesy; they prevailed upon the purse, by giving each of us a bundle of dead
flowers tacked together, seemed rather to buy our bounties than to beg them. A
sweeter and more generous kind of craving, than the other of Normandy, and
such as may seem to imply in it some happy contradiction; for what else is it,
that a maid should proffer her self to be deflowred without prejudice to her
modesty, and raise to her future husband an honest stock by the usury of a
kindness. Refreshed with these favors, we took our leave of Estampes and the
dancing Miscelanie, jogging on through many a beautiful field of corn, till
we came unto Angerville, which is six leagues distant: a Town of which I could
not observe or hear any thing memorable, but that it was taken by Montacute,
Earl of Salisbury, as he went this way to the siege of Orleans, and indeed
the taking of it was no great miracle, the walls being so thin that an arrow
could almost as soon make a breach in them as a canon. The same fortune befell
also unto Toury, a place not much beyond it in strength or bigness, only that
it had more confidence (as Savage an English Gentleman once said) in the walls
of bones, which were within it, than in the walls of stones which were without
it.

This Town stands in the middle way betwixt Estampes and Orleans, and
therefore a fit stage to act a dinner on, and to it we went: by that time we
had cleared our selves of our pottage, there entered upon us three uncouth
fellows with hats on their heads, like covered dishes; as soon as ever I saw
them, I cast one eye upon my cloak, and the other on my sword, as not knowing
what use I might have of my steel to maintain my cloth. There was great talk
at that time of Mr. Sonbise's being in arms, and I much feared that these
might be some straglers of his army; and this I suspected by their
countenances, which were very thievish and full of insolence. But when I had
made a survey of their apparel, I quickly altered that opinion, and accounted
them as the excrement of the next prison, deceived alike in both my jealousies,
for these pretty parcels of man's flesh were neither better nor worse, but even
arrant fiddlers, and such which in England we should not hold worthy of the
whipping post. Our leave not asked, and no reverence on their parts performed,
they abused our ears with a harsh lesson; and as if that had not been
punishment enough unto us, they must needs add unto it one of their songs; by
that little French which I had gathered, and the simpering of a Fille de joy of
Paris who came along with us, I perceived it was bawdy, and to say truth, more
than patiently could be endured by any but a Frenchman, but quid facerem, what
should I do but endure the misery, for I had not lagu^ge enough to call them
rogues handsomely, and the villains were inferior to a beating, and indeed
not worthy of mine or any honest man's anger. Praeda canum lepus est, vastos non
implet hiatus
Nec gaudet tenui sanguine tanta s^is*
They were a knot of Rascals so infinitely below the severity of a Statute,
that they would have discredited the State, and to have hanged them had been to
hazard the reputation of the Gallows. In a year you would hardly find out
some vengeance for them, which they would not injure in the suffering; unless
it be not to hearken to their ribaldry, which is one of their greatest
torments. To proceed, after their song ended, one of the company (the Master of
them it should seem) draws a dish out of his pocket, and lays it before us,
into which we were to cast our benevolence. Custom has allowed them a Sol,
for each man at the table, they expect no more, and will take no less; no
large sum, and yet I assure you, richly worth the music, which was merely
French, that is, lascivious in the composure: and French also, that is,
unskilfully handled in the playing.

Amongst the Ancients I have met with three kinds of Music, viz. First, that
which the Greeks call (...), which consisted altogether of long notes or
Spondees, which was the gravest and saddest of all the rest, called by
Aristotle, in the last Chapter of his Politics, (...), or moral, because it
settled the affections: Boethius whom we account the classical Author in this
faculty, called it Lydian, because in much use with those of that Nation at
this day: We may call it Italian, as being generally a peculiar music to that
people. This is the Music which Elisha called for, to invite unto him the
spirit of Prophecy, 1 Kings 3.15. and this is it which is yet sung in our
Churches. A practice which we derive from the Ancients (however some of late
have opposed it) and which is much commended by Saint Augustine, this being the
use of it, Vt per oblectamenta aurium infirmior animus in pietatis affectum
assurgat. The second kind the Artists call (...), which consists of a
mixture of long and short notes, or of the Dactylus. The Philosopher terms it
(...). being it had been in much esteem amongst the Doors, a Greek Nation: we
may now call it English, as being that Music with which our Nation is
particularly affected. This is that Music, which cheereth the spirits, and is
so sovereign an Antidote to a mind afflicted, and which, as the Poet has it,
does Saxa movere sono. The third sort is, that which the Greeks call (...),
consisting altogether of short notes, or Tribracches. Aristotle calls it,
(...), ravishing, because it unhinged the affections, and stirred them to
lasciviousness. Boethius terms this Phrygian, as being the strain of that
wanton and luxuriant people. In these times we may call it French, as most
delighted in by the stirring spirits, and lightness of this Nation, a note of
Music forbidden unto youth by Aristotle and Plato, and not countenanced by any
of them, but on the common theaters, to satisfy the rude manners and desires
of the vulgar, (...), and to give them also content in their recreations, yet
is this Music altogether in use in this Country; no lesson amongst their
professed Musicians that I could hear which had any gravity, or solid Art showed
in the Composition. They are pretty fellows, I confess, for the setting out
of a Mask or a Coranto, but beyond this nothing, which makes the Music in
their Churches so base and unpleasing, so that the glory of perfect Music at
this time, lies between the English and Italian; that of France being as
trivial as their behavior, of which indeed it is a concomitant. Mutata Musica
mutantur mores, says Tullie, and therefore he gives us this lesson, Curandum
itaque est, ut musica quam gravissima and sedatissima retineatur. A good item
for the French.

CHAP. II.
The Country and Site of Orleans, like that of Worcester. The Wine of Orleans.
Praesidiall Towns in France, what they are. The sale of offices in France. The
fine walk and pastime of the Palle Malle. The Church of St. Croix founded by
Superstition of a Miracle, defaced by the Hugonets. Some things hated only for
their name. The Bishop of Orleans and his privilege. The Chapel and Pilgrim
of St. Jacques. The form of Mass in St. Croix. Censing a heathenish Custom.
The great Siege of Orleans, raised by Joane the Virgin. The valor of that
Woman, that she was no Witch. An Eulogie on her.

WE are now come into the country of Orleans, which though within the limits
of La Beausse, will yet be accounted an entire County of it self, it is a
dainty and pleasant Region, very even and large in the fields of it, insomuch
that we could not see a hill or swelling of the ground within eye-reach. It
consisted of an indifferent measure of Corn, but most plentiful of Vines, and
has of all other Fruits a very liberal portion. Neither is it meanly
beholding to the Loyre for the benefits is receives by that River, on which
the City of Orleans it self is sweetly seated. Of all places in England,
Worcestershire in my opinion comes most nigh it, as well in respect of the
Country, as the situation of the Town: for certainly that Country may be
called the Epitome of England, as that of France. To the richest of the
Cornfieldsd of Orleans we may compare the Vale of Evesham. Neither will it
yield for choice and variety of Fruits, the Vine only excepted. The Hedges in
that Country are prodigal and lavish of those trees, which would become the
fairest Orchards of the West, and in a manner recompenceth the want of Wine by
its plenty of Perry and Syder. In a word, what a good Writer has said of one,
we may say of both, Coelum and sol^m ita propitium habent, ut salubritate and
ubertate vicinis non concedunt. But the resemblance between the towns is more
happy; both seated on the second River of note in their several Countries; and
which are not much unlike in their several courses. Severn washing the walls
of Gloucoster, and passing nigh unto Bristoll, seated on a little Rivulet, and
its Homager divides the ancient Britains from the rest of the English. The
Loyre gliding to the city Tours, and passing nigh unto Angiers, seated also
within the land on a little River, and one of its Tributaries, separateth the
modern Britains from the rest of the French. Posita est in loco modice
acclivi, ad flumen, quod turrigero ponti conjungitur, and muro satis firmo
munita, says Mr. Cambden of Worcester. Orleans is seated on the like
declivitie of an hill, has its bridge well fortified with Turrets, and its
walls of an equal ability of resistance; Sed decus est ab incolis qui sunt
numerosi and humani, ab aedificiorum nitore, a templorum numero and maxim a
Sede Episcopali, says he of ours in genrall; we may see it fitly applied to
this in each particular. The people of this town are not of the fewest, no town
in France (the proportion of it considered) being more populous: for standing
in so delicate an Air, and on so commodious a River, it inviteth the Gentry or
Noblesse of the country about it to inhabit there, and they accept it.
Concerning their behavior and humanity, certainly they much exceed the
Parisians, I was about to say all the Frenchmen, and indeed I not grudge them
this Eulogie, which Caesar gives unto those of Kent, and verify that they are
omnium incolarum long humanissimi, my self here observing more courtesy and
affability in one day, than I could meet withal in Paris, during all my abode
there. The buildings of it are very suitable to themselves, and the rest of
France; the streets large and well kept, not yiedling the least offense to the
most curious nostrill: Parish Churches it has in it 26. of different and
unequal being, as it uses to be in other places; besides these, it
contains the Episcopal Church of S. Croix, and diverse other houses of
religious persons, amongst which is St. Jacques; of both which I shall speak in
their due order. Thus much for the resemblance of the Towns, the difference
betwixt them is this, that Orleans is the bigger, and Worcester the richer.
Orleans consists much of the Noblesse, and of Sojourners; Worcester of
Citizens and Home-dwellers; and for the manner of life in them, so it is that
Worcester has the handsomer woman in it, Orleans the finer, and in my opinion
the loveliest in all France. Worcester thriveth the most on Clothing, Orleans
on their Vine-presses.

And questionless the Wine of Orleans is the greatest riches, not of the Town
only, but of the Country also about it. For this cause A^dre dis Chesne
calls it, the prime Cellar of Paris, Est une pars (says he) si henreuse and
si secunde sur tout in vins quon la pent dice l'unde primiers celiers de Paris.
Those Vines wherein he makes it to be so happy, deserve no less a
commendation than he has given them, as yiedling the best Wines in all the
Kingdom, such as it much moved me to mingle with Water, they being so
delicious to the Palate, and the Epicurisme of the taste. I have heard of a
Dutch Gentleman, who being in Italy was brought acquainted with a kind of Wine
which they there call Lachrymae Christi; no sooner had he tasted it, but he
fell into a deep melancholy; and after some seven sighs, besides the addition
of two gro^nes, he brake out into this patheticall Ejaculation: Dii boni, quare
non Christus lachrymatus esset in nostris regionibus? This Dutchman and I were
for a time both of one mind, insomuch that I could almost have picked a
quarrel with Nature, for giving us none of this Liquor in England At last we
grew friends, again, when I had perceived how offensive it was to the brain (if
not well qualified) for which cause it is said, that K. Lewis has banished it
his Cellar, no doubt to the great grief of his drinking Courtiers, who may
therefore say with Martial, Quid tantum fecere boni tibi pessima vina?
Aut quid fecerunt optima vina mali?


This town called Genabum by Caesar, was reedified by Aurelian the Emperor,
Anno 276. and called by his name Aurelianum, which it still retains amongst
the Latins. It has been famous heretofore for four Councels here celebrated;
and for being the seat royal of the Kings of Orleans: though as now I could
not hear any thing of the ruins of the Palace. The same of it at this time
consists in the University and its seat of Justice: This town being one of
them which they call Sieges Presidiaux. Now these Seiges Presidiaux, Seats or
Courts of Justice, were established in diverse cities of the Realm for the ease
of the people, Anno 1551. or thereabouts. In them all civil causes not
exceeding 250 Liu'res in Money, or 10. Liu'res in Rents, are heard and
determined soveraignly and without appeal. If the sum exceed those
proportions the appeal holds good, and shall be examined in that Court of
Parliament, under whose jurisdiction it is. Their Court here consists of a
Baille, whose name is Mr. Digion, of twelve Counselors, two Lieutenants, one
civil, the other criminal, and a public Notarie. When Mr. Le Compte de St.
Paul, who is the Governor or Lieutenant General of the Province comes into
their Court, he gives precedence to the Baille, in other places he receives
it. This institution of these Presidiall Courts, was at first a very profitable
ordinance, and much eased the people, but now it is grown burdensome. The
reason is, that the offices are mere sa^^able, and purchased by them with a
great deal of money, which afterward they wrest again out of the purses of
the Pa^sant. The sale of Offices drawing necessarily after it, the sale of
Justice, a mischief which is spread so far, that there is not the worst under
Officer in all the Realm Who may not say with the Captain in the 22. of the
Acts and the 28. verse, (...). With a great sum of money obtained I this
freedom. Twenty years purchase is said to be no extraordinary rate; and I
have read, that only by the sale of Offices one of the Kings had raised in
twenty years 139 millions, which amounts to the proportion of 7 millions
yearly, or thereabouts, of all ways to thrift and treasure the most unkindly.
In the year 1614. the King motioned the abolishing of the sales of this
Market, but it was upon a condition more prejudicial to the people than the
mischief. For he desired in lieu of it to have a greater imposition laid upon
Salt, and upon the Aides, which those that were Commissioners for the
C^mmonalty would not admit of, because then a common misery had been brought
out of the State, to make their particular miseries the greater, and so the
corruption remains unaltered.

This Town as it is sweetly seated, in respect of the air, so is it finely
convenienced with the walks, of which the chief are, that next unto Paris gate,
having the wall on the one hand, and a rank of Palm trees on the other; the
second, that near unto the bridge, having the Water pleasingly running on both
sides: and a third which is indeed the principal, on the East Side of the
City, it is called the Palle Malle, of an exercise of that name much used in
this Kingdom, a very Gentleman-like sport, not over violent, and such as
affords good opportunity of discourse, as they walk from one mark to the
other. Into this walk, which is of a wonderful length and beauty* you shall
have a clear evening empty all the town, the aged people borrowing legs to
carry them, and the younger arms to guide them. If any young Dame or Monsieur
walk thither single, they will quickly find some or other to link with them,
though perhaps such with whom they have no familiarity. Thus do they measure
and re-measure the length of the Palle Malle, not minding the shutting in of
the day, till darkness has taken away the sense of blushing; at all hours of
the night, be it warm and dry, you shall be sure to find them thus coupled;
and if at the years end there be found more children in the town than
fathers, this walk and the night are shrewdly suspected to be accessories; a
greater incnovenience in mine opinion, than an English Kiss.

There is yet a fourth walk in this town, called L'estappe, a walk principally
frequented by Merchants, who here meet to confer of their occasions. It lies
before the house of Mr. Le Comte de St. Paul, the Governor, and reaches up to
the Cloister of St. Croix: of the buildings of which Church I could never yet
hear or read of any thing, but that which is merely fabulous: for the Citizens
report, that long since, time out of mind, there appeared a Vision to a holy
Monk, which lived thereabouts, and bad him dig deep in such a place, where he
should find a piece of the Holy Cross, charging him to preserve that blessed
relic in great honor, and to cause a Church to be built in that place where
it had been buried. Upon this warning the Church was founded, but at whose
charges they could not inform me: so that all which I could learn concerning
the foundation of this Church, is, that it was erected by Superstition and a
Lie. The Superstition is apparent in the worshipping of such rotten sticks, as
they imagine to be the remnants of the Cross: their calling of it holy, and
dedicating of this Church unto it. Nay they have consecrated unto it two
Holy Days, one in May, and the other in September, and are bound to salute it
as often as they see it in the streets, or high ways, with these words, Ave
salus totius Seculi, arbor salutifera. Horrible blasphemy, and never heard of
but under Antichrist, Cruces subeundas esse non adorandas, being the lesson of
the Ancients. As for the Miracle I account it as others of the same stamp,
equally false and ridiculous. This Church in the year 1562. was defaced and
ruined by the Hugonots, who had entered the town under the conduct of the Prince
of Conde. An action little savouring of Humanity, and less of Religion; the
very Heathens themselves never demolishing any of the Churches of those towns
which they had taken: but in this action the Hugonots consulted only with
rashness and zealous fury, thinking no title so glorious as to be called the
Scourge of Papists, and the overthrowers of Popish Churches.

Quid facerent hosts capta crudelius urbe? The most barbarous en^mies in the
world could not more have exercised their malice on the vanqu^shed. And this I
pe^swade my self had been the fate of most of our Churches, if that Fict^on
had got the upper hand of us; but this Church notwithstanding is likely now to
survive their madness, being Henry the fourth beg^n the repairing of it, and
his Son Lewis has si^ce continued it, so that the Quire is not quite finished,
and the workmen are in hand with the rest. What should move the Hugonots to
this execution I cannot say, except it were a hate which they bear unto the
name, and perhaps not that unlikely. We read how the Romans having expelled the
Kings banished also Collatinus their Consul, a man in whom they could find no
fault, but this, that his surname was Tarquinius. Tantum ob nomen and genus
regium, says Florus: Afterward quam invisum fuerit Regis nomen, is very
frequent in the stories of those times. Among those which had been of the
Conspiracy against Julius Caesar, there was one named Cinna, a name so odious
among the people, that meeting by chance with one of Caesar's friends, and
hearing that his name was Cinna, they presently murdered him in the place. For
which cause one Cassius, which was also the name of one of the Conspirators,
published a writing of his name and ped^gree, showing therein that he neither
was the Traitor, nor any kin to him. The reason of his action Dion gives us,
(...). Ne si nominis causa occideretur. With a like heat it may be were the
French Protestants possessed against the name of the Cross. For they not only
ruined that Temple, but beat down also all those little Crosses betwixt Mount
Mactre and St. Denis, though now King Lewis has caused them to be re-edified.
And what troubles the French party here in England have raised because of that
harmless ceremony of the Cross, Notius est quam ut stylo egeat, and therefore
I omit it.

This Church is the Seat of a Bishop, who acknowledges the Archbishopric of
Seines for his Metropolitan. The present Bishop is named Franciscus de
Anbespins, said to be a worthy Scholar, and a sound Politician; though he were
never graduated farther than the Arts: of his revenue I could learn nothing,
but of his privileges this, namely, that at the entrance of every new Bishop
into this Church, he has the liberty of setting free of any of the Prisoners
of the Jail, though their crime be never so mortal. For the original of this
indulgence we are beholding to St. A^gnan, once Bishop here, and who defended
the city against Atella the Huanne: At his first entrance into the town (says
the Story) after he was invested Bishop, he besought Agrippinus the Governor
that for his sake he would let loose all his Prisoners; Vt omnes quos pro
variis criminibus poenalis car^er detinebat inclusos, sibi in introitus gratiam
redderet resolutos: When the Governor had heard this request, he denied it,
and presently a stone falls on his head, no man knew from whence. Wounded and
terrified with this, the Governor grants hi^ desire, recovereth his health,
and ever since the custom has continued. For the truth of this story I intend
to be no Champion, for I hold it ridiculous, and savouring too much of the
Legend; but this I am certain of, that every new Bishop makes a solemn and
majestic entry into the City, and at his entry releaseth a Prisoner.

Let us follow the Bishop into his Church, and we shall find him entertained
with an high Mass, the ceremonies whereof are very pretty and absurd; To go
over them all would require a volume, I will therefore mention those only,
wherein they diff^r from other Masses and they are two, the one Fantastical,
the other Heathenish; for as soon as the Priest at the Altar has read a
certain lesson, but what, his voice was not audible enough to tell me, out
marches the Dean, or in his absence the senior Chanoin out of the Church;
before him two or three Torches, and a long Cross silvered over; after him all
those of the Church, and lastly, the Lay People both men and women, so that
there is none left to keep possession, but the Priest at the Altar, and such
strangers as come thither for curiosity; they went out at one door, and just
circuited the Quire, and the body of the Church, afterward they return to
their places, and the Priest proceeds; I have seen many a dumb show in a Play
just like it. This only is the difference, that here we had no interpreter nor
Chorus afforded us to show us the mystery of this silent je^iculation. The
other addition which I observed here at the Mass (though I have since been
told, that it is ordinrary at High Masses in Cathedral Churches) was the
censing of the people, which was performed in this manner: Whiles the Priest
was busy at the Altar, there entered into the Quire at a side door, two Boys
in their Surplices bearing wax Tapers in their hands, and immediately after
them the foresaid fellow with the Cross. In the rare there came two of the
Priests in their Copes, and other stately vestments, between both a young lad
with the Incense pot, made full of holes to let out the fume, which he swinged
on all sides of him, with a chain to which it was fastened: Having thus marched
through the Church, and censed the people, he ascended unto the Altar, and
there censed the Cross, the Relics, the Bread and Wine, the Chalice, the
Images* and I know not what not. A custom very much used amongst the Heathen:
Omnibus vicis factae sunt statuae, and ad eas thus and cerei, says Tully: and
Jane tibi primum thura merumque fero, says Ovid in his book de Fastis; so have
we in Martial, Te primum pia thura rogent, and the like in diverse other
writers of the Ancients. At what time it crept into the Churches of the
Christians, I cannot tell. Sure I am, it was not used in the Primitive times,
nor in the third Century after our Savior, save only in their Burialls, Sciant
sabae (says Tertullian, (who at that time lived) plures and chariores merces
suas Christianis, saepeliendis profligari, qua^ Diis fumigantibus. Arnobius
also in his first book, adversus gentes, disclaimeth the use of it, and yet
their Council of Trent in the 22 Session defines it to be as boldly an
Apostolical institution and tradition, as if the Apostles themselves had told
them so; I know they had rather seem to derive it from the 10. chapter of
Exodus, and the 1. verse, and so Bishop Durand is of opinion in his Rationale
Divinorum, but this will not help them. Aaron there is commanded to burn
Incense only on the Altar, and not to cense Men and Images, Crosses and
relics, as the Papists do; so that will they, ^ill they, they must be
counted followers of the Heathen, though I envy them not the honor of being
Jews. From the History and Revenue of the Church proceed we to that of the
Town, where nothing occurreth more memorable, than the great si^ge laid before
it by the English. A siege of great importance to both parties, France having
been totally won unto King Henry, if this Town had yielded, and once so nigh it
was to submit it self, that the people proffered to yield themselves to Philip
Duke of Burgundy, then a great confederate of our Nation, who had not been
present in the Camp, but this the English General would not consent unto; and
it was the resolution of Antigonus a long time before us, Negavit Antigonus
(says Justine) se in ejus belli praedam socios admittere, in cujus periculum
solus descenderat. On this determinate sentence of the General, (he was
Montacute Earl of Salisbury) the Town purposed to hold out a little longer, and
was at last relieved by Joane de Arca maid of vancoleure in Loraine whom they
called la Puelle; how by that excellent Soldier the General war slain, and
the siege raised, I need not relate, it is extant in all our Chronicles. This
only now, that ever since that time, the people of Orleans keep a solemn
procession on every eighth day of May, on which day, An. 1427. their City was
delivered from its enemies.

But the achievements of this brave Virago, stayed not here, she thinks it
not enough to d^pulse her enemies, unless she also vanquish them; armed
therefore cap a pea; she went to seek an occasion of battle* and was always
foremost, and in the head or her Troops.

Duxit Amazonidum lunatis agmina bellis,
Penthesilea furens, mediisque in millibus arde^.
For her first service she takes Jargean, discomfiteth the English which were
in it, and makes the Earl of Suffolk Prisoner: soon after followed the
battle of Patay, in which the English were driven out of the field, and the
great Talbot taken. This done, she accompanies Charles the 1. whose
Angell-Guardian she was thought, all Champayne unto Rhemes, where she solemnly
saw him Crowned, all the Towns of those Countries yielding upon the approach
of her, and the Kings Army. Finally, after many acts performed above the nature
of her sex, which I will not stand here to particulate: she was taken prisoner
at the siege of Campaigne delivered over unto the Earl of Bedford by him sent
unto Roven and there burnt for a Witch on the sixth of July Anno 1431. There
was also another crime objected against her, as namely that she had abused the
nature of her sex, marching up and down in the habit of a man; and nihil
muliebre p^aeter corpus gerens, of all accusations the most impotent, for in
what other habit could she dress her self, undertaking the actions of a
General: and besides, to have worn her woman's weeds in time of battle, had
been to have betrayed her safety, and to have made her self the mark of every
Arrow. It was therefore requisite, that she should array her self in complete
harness, and in that habit of complete armor have those of Orleans, erected
those statua's all in brass, upon the middle of their bridge.

As for that other imputation of being a Witch, saving the credit of those that
condemned her, and theirs also, who in their writings have so reported her, I
dare be of the contrary opinion, for dividing her actions into two parts, those
that precede her coming unto Orleans, and those that followed it, I find much
in it of valor, somewhat perhaps of cunning, but nothing that is divelish; her
relieving of Orleans, and courage shown at the battle of Patay and Gargean,
with the conducting of the King unto Rhemes, are no such prodigies, that they
need to be ascribed unto Witchcraft: She was not the first woman whom the world
knew famed in arms, there being no Nation almost of the Earth, who have not
had a Champion of this sex to defend their liberties: to omit the whole Nation
of the Amazon's, to the Jews in the time of their afflictions, the Lord raised
up a Salvation by means of two women, Deborah and Judith: And God is not the
God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. Amongst the Sirvans, Zenobia,
Queen of Palmira is very famous: the Romans (whom she often foiled) never
mentioning her without honor. The like commendable testimony they give of
Velleda, a Queen amongst the Germans, and a woman which much hindered their
affairs in that Country: thus had the Goths their Amalasunta, the Assyrians
their Semiramis the Scythians their Tomyres; the Romans their Flavia, and brave
Captains, and such as posterity has admired without envy. To come home unto
our selves, the writers of the Romans mention the revolt of Britains and the
slaughter of 70000 Confederates to the Romans, under the conduct of Vocudia:
and she in the beginning of her encouragements to the action tells the people
thus, Solitum quidem Britannis foeminarum ductu bellare. Of all these Heroical
Ladies, I read no accusation of witchcraft; innative courage, and a sense of
injury, being the arms they fought withal. Neither can I see why the Romans
should exceed us in modesty, or that we need envy unto the French this one
female Warrior: when it is a fortune which has befallen most nations. As for
her achievements, they are not so much beyond a common being, but that they
may be imputed to natural means. For had she been a Witch, it is likely she
would have prevented the disgrace which her valor suffered in the ditches of
Paris; though she could not avoid those of Champeigne who took her prisoner.
The Devil at such an exigent only being accustomed to forsake those which he
has entangled; so that she enjoyed not such a perpetuity of faelicity, as to
entitle her to the Devils assistance, she being sometimes conqueror,
sometimes overthrown, and at last imprisoned. Communia fortune ludibria, the
ordinary sports of Fortune; her actions before her March to Orleans having
somewhat in them of cunning and perhaps of imposture, as the Vision which she
reported to have incited her to these attempts; her finding out of the King
disguised in the habit of a Countryman, and her appointing to her self an
old sword, hanging in Saint Katharines Church in Tours. The French were at this
time merely cr^^t-fallen, not to be raised but by a miracle. This therefore is
invented, and so that which of all the rest must prove her a sorceresse, will
only prove her an impostor. Gerrard seigneur de Haillan, one of the best
writers of France is of opinion, that all that plot of her coming to the King,
was contrived by three Lords of the Court to hearten the people, as if God now
miraculously intended the restoration of the Kingdom. Add to this, that she
never commanded in any battle, without the assistance of the best Captains
of the French Nation, and amongst whom was the Bastard of Orleans, who is
thought to have put this device into her head. The Lord Bellay in his discourse
of Art Military, proceeds further, and makes her a man, only thus habited:
Pour fair revenir le courage aux Francois, which had it been so, would have
been discovered at the time of her burning. Other of the later French Writers
(for those of the former age savor too much of the Legend) make her to be a
lusty less of Lorreine, trained up by the Bastard of Orleans and the Seigneur
of Brandicourt, only for this service and that she might carry with her the
reputation of a Prophetess, and an Ambassadresse from Heaven, Admit this, and
farewell Witchcraft. As for the sentence of her Condemnation, and the
confirmation of it by the Divines and University of Paris, it is with me of no
moment, being composed only to humor the Victor. If this could sway me, I had
more reason to incline to the other party; for when Charles had settled his
estate, the same man who had condemned her of Sorcery, absolved her; and there
was also added in defense of her innocence, a Decree from the Court of Rome.
Joane then with me shall inherit the title of La puelle d' Orleans, with me she
shall be ranked amongst the famous Captains of her time, and be placed in the
same throne, equal with the valiant'st of all her Sex in times before her. Let
those whom partiality has wrested aside from the path of truth, proclaim her
for a Sorceress: for my part I will not flatter the best Fortunes of my
Country to the prejudice of a truth; neither will I ever be induced to think
of this female Warrior otherwise than as of a noble Captain.

-- Audetque viris concurrere Virgo.
Penthesilea did it, why not she
Without the stain of Spells and Sorcery?
Why should those Arts in her be counted sin,
Which in the other have commended been?
Nor is it fit that France should be denied
This Female Soldier; since all Realms beside
Have had the honor of one, and relate
How much that Sex has even forced the state
Of their decaying strength: let Scytha spare
To speak of Tomyris; the Assyrians care
Shall be no more to have their deeds recited
Of Ninus's wife, nor are the Dutch delighted
To have the name of their Velleda extolled, the name
Of this French Warrior has eclipsed their fame,
And silenced their achievements; let the praise
That Is due to Virtue wait upon her, raise
An Obelisk unto her, you of Gaul,
And let her Acts live in the mouths of all:
Speak boldly of her, and of her alone,
That never Lady was as good as Joane.
She died a Virgin, 'twas because the earth
Held not a man, whose Virtues, or whose Birth
Might merit such a Blessing; but above
The Gods provided her a fitting Love,
And gave her to St. Denis; she with him
Protects the Lillies and their Diadem.
You then about whose Armies she does watch,
Give her the honor due unto her Match.
And when in Field your Standard you advance,
Cry 'loud, St. Denis and St. Joan for France.
CHAP. III.
The study of the Civil Law received in Europe. The dead time of Learning. The
School of Law in Orleans. The Oeconomie of them. The Chancelour of Oxford
anciently appointed by the Diocaesan there. Method here, and Prodigality in
bestowing Degrees. Orleans a great Conflux of Strangers. The Language there.
The Corporation of Germans there. Their House and Privilege. Dutch Latin.
The difference between an Academy and an University.

I Have now done with the Town and City of Orleans, and am come to the
University or Schools of Law which are in it, this being one of the first
places in which the Study of the Civil Law was received in Europe; for
immediately after the death of Justinian, who out of no less than two thousand
volumes of Law-Writers, had collected that body of the Imperial Laws, which we
now call the Digest, or the Pandects, the study of them grew neglected in these
Western parts: nor did any for a long time profess or read them. The reason
was because Italy, France, Spain, England and Germany, having received new
Lords over them, as the Franks, Lombards, Saxons, Sarcens, and others, were
feign to submit themselves to their Laws. It happened afterward that
Lotharius Saxo the Emperor, who began his Reign Anno 1126, being 560 years
after the death of Justinian, having taken the City of Melphy in Naples, found
there an old Copy of the Pandects. This he gave to the Pisans his Confederates,
as a most reverend relic of Learning and Antiquity, whence it is called
Litera pisana. Moreover he founded the University of Bologne, or Bononia
ordaining the Civil Law, to be professed therein, Wernir being the first
Professor; upon whose advice the said Emperor ordained, that Bononia should be
Legum and Juris Schola una and sola, and here was the first time and place of
that study in the Western Empire. But it was not the fate only of the Civil
Laws to be thus neglected, all other parts of Learning, both Arts and
Languages were in the same desperate Estates. The Poets exclamation, O coelum
insipiens and infacetum, never being so appliable as in those times, for it is
with the knowledge of good Letters as it is in the effects of Nature; they have
their times of growth alike, of perfection and of death like the Sea, it has
its ebbs as well as its floods; and like the Earth, it has its Winter, wherein
the seeds of it are deaded, and bound up, as well as a Spring wherein it
re-flourisheth. Thus the learning of the Greeks* lay forgotten, and lost in
Europe, for 700 years, even unto Emanuel Chrysolarus taught it at Venice,
being driven out of his own Country by the Turks. Thus the Philosophy of
Aristotle lay hidden in the moath of dust and Libraries; Et nominabatur potius
quam legebatur, as Ludovicus Vives observes in his notes. S. Austin, until
the time of Alexander Aphrodiseus. Thus also lay the elegancies of the Roman
tongue obscure, till that Erasmus Moor and Reuclyn in the several kingdoms of
Germany, England and France endeavored the restoration of it.

But to return to the Civil Law, after the foundation of the University of
Bologne, it pleased Philip le Belle King of France, to found another here at
Orleans for the same purpose, Anno 1^12. which was the first school of that
profession, on this side the mountains; this is evident by the Bull of Clement
the fifth, dated at Lions in the year 1367. where he gives this title;
Fructiferum Vniversitatis Aurelianum sis inter caetera Citramontana studia
prius, solennius, antiquius, tam Civilis, quam Canonicae facultatis studium. At
the first there were instituted eight Professors, now they are reduced unto
four only, the reason of this decrease being the increase of Universities: the
place in which they read their Lectures is called, Les grands Escoles, and that
part of the City, La University, neither of which attributes it can any way
merit: Colleges they have none, either to lodge the Students, or to entertain
the Professors; the former sojourning in diverse places of the Town, these last
in their several houses. As for their places of reading, which they call Les
grands Escoles, it is only an old Barn converted into a School, by the
addition of five ranks of Forms, and a Pew in the middle; you never saw any
thing so mock its own name: Lucus not being of more people called so, a non
lucendo, then this ruinous house is, the great School, because it is little.
The present Professors are Mr. Fowrner, the Rector at my being there, Mr.
Tullerie and Mr. Grand: the fourth of them named Mr. Angram, was newly dead,
and his place, like a dead pay among Soldiers, not supplied: In which estate
was the function also of Mr. Podes, whose office it was to read the book of
Institutions, unto such as come newly to the town. They read each of them an
hour in their turns every morning in the week, unless Holy Days and
Thursdayes, their hearers taking their Lectures of them in their tables. Their
principal office is that of the Rector, which every three months descends
down unto the next, so that once in a year, every one of those Professors has
his turn of being Rector. The next in dignity unto him is the Chancellor,
whose office is during life, and in whose names all degrees are given, and of
the Letters Authentical (as they term them) granted. The present Chancellor
is named Mr. Bouchier, Doctor of Divinity, and of both the Laws; and Prebend
also of the Church of S. Croix; his place is in the gift of the Bishop of
Orleans, and so are the Chancellors places in all France, at the bestowing of
the Diocesan: anciently it was thus also with us of Oxford; the Bishop of
Lincoln nominating unto us our Chancellors, till the year, 1370. William of
Renmington being the first Chancellor elected by the University.

In the bestowing of their degrees here, they are very liberal, and deny no
man that is able to pay his fees: Legem ponere, is with them more powerful
than Legem dicere, and he that has but his gold ready, shall have a sooner
dispatch, than the best Scholar upon the ticket. Ipse licet venias Musis
comitatus Homere,
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.
It is the Money that disputes best with them.

Money makes the man, says the Greek and English proverb. That of one of the
Popes (I remember not suddenly his name) who openly protested, that he would
give the orders of Priesthood to an Ass, should the King of England commend an
Ass unto him, may be most appositely spoken of them. The exercise which is to
be performed before the degree taken, is very little, and as trivially
performed. When you have chosen the Law, which you mean to defend, they will
conduct you into an old ruinous chamber, they call it their Library; for my
part I should have thought it to have been the Warehouse of some second hand
Bookseller: those few books which were there, were as old as Printing, and
could hardly make amongst them one cover to resist the violence of a Rat. They
stood not up endlong, but lay one upon the other, and were joined together with
Cobwebs instead of strings; he that would ever guess them to have been looked
into since the long reign of Ignorance, might justly have condemned his own
charity. For my part I was prone to believe, that the three last centuries of
years had never seen the inside of them or that the poor p^per had been
troubled with the disease called Noli me tangere. In this unlucky room do they
hold their disputations, unless they be solemn and full of expectation: and
after two or three arguments urged, commend the sufficiency of the Respondent,
and pronounce him worthy of his degrees. That done, they cause his Authentical
Letters to be sealed, and in them they tell the Reader, with what diligence and
pains they sifted the Candidate: that it is necessary to the Commonwealth of
Learning, that Industry should be honored, and that on that ground they have
thought it fitting. Post angustias solamen, post vigilias requietem, post
dolores gaudia, for so (as I remember) goes the form, to recompense the
labors of N. N. with the degree of Doctor or Licentiate, with a great deal
more of the like formal foolery; Et ad hunc modum fiunt Doctores.

From the Study of the Law, proceed we unto that of the Language, which is said
to be better spoken here, then in any part of France, and certainly the people
hereof spoke it more distinctly then the rest, I cannot say more elegantly; yet
partly for this reason, partly because of the study of the Law, and partly
because of the sweetness of the air; the Town is never without abundance of
strangers of all Nations, which are in correspondency with the French: but in
the greatest measure it is replenished with those of Germany, who have here a
Corporation, and indeed do make among themselves a better University then the
University. This Corporation consists of a Procurator, a Questor, an
Assessor, two Bibliothecaries, and twelve Counselors; they have all of them
their distinct jurisdictions, and are solemnly elected by the rest of the
company every third month. The Consulship of Rome, was never so welcome unto
Cicero, as the office of Procurator is to a Dutch Gentleman: he for the time of
his command, ordering the affairs of all his Nation, and to say truth, being
much respected by those of the Town; it is his office to admit of the young
comers, to receive the moneys due at their admission, and to receive an
account of the dispending of it, of the Questor, and the expiring of his
charge. The office of an Assessor, is like that of a Clerk of the Council, and
the Secretary mixed: fot he registreth the Acts of their Counsels, writes
Letters in the name of the House, to each of the French Kings, at their new
coming to the Crown, and if any Prince, or extraordinary Ambassador comes to
the town, he entertaineth him with a Speech. The Bibliothecaries look to the
Library, in which they are bound to remain three hours a day in their several
tu^nes; a pretty room it is, very plentifully furnished with choice books, and
that at small charge, for that it is here the custom, that every one of the
Nation at his departure, must leave with them one of what kind or price it
best pleases him: besides, each of the Officers at the resigning of his
charge, gives unto the new Questor, a piece of gold about the value of a
Pistolet, to be expended according as the necessities of their state require,
which most an end is bestowed upon the increase of their Library.

Next unto this Cite des Littres (as one of the French writers calls Paris)
is their Counsell-house, an handsome squire Chamber, and well furnished: In
this they hold their consultations, and in this preserve their Records and
Privileges, the keeping of the one, and summoning the other, being merely in
the hands of the Procurator. About the Table they have five Chaires, for the
five principal Officers, those of the Council sitting round the Chamber on
Stools: the arms of the Empire being placed directly over every of the Seats:
If it happen that any of them dye there, they all accompany him to his Grave,
in a manner mixed so orderly of Grief and State, that you would think the
obsequies of some great Potentate were solemnizing; and to say truth of them,
they are a hearty and loving Nation, not to one another only, but to
strangers, and especially to us of England. Only I could wish that in their
Speech and Complement they would not use the Latin tongue, or else speak it
more congruously: You shall hardly find a man amongst them, which can make a
shift to express himself in that language, nor one amongst an hundred that
can do it Latinely. Galleriam, Compaginem, Gardinum and the like, are as
usual in their common discourse, as to drink at three of the clock, and as
familiar as their sleep. Had they bent their study that way, I persuade my self
they would have been excellent good at the Common Laws, their tongues so
naturally falling on these words which are necessary to a Declaration: but
amongst the rest, I took especial notice of one Mr. Gebour, a man of that
various mixture of words, that you would have thought his tongue to have been a
very Amsterdam of Languages, Cras mane (...) non irous ad magnam Galleriam, was
one of his remarkable speeches when we were at Paris: but here at Orleans, we
had them of him thick and threefold. If ever he should chance to dye in a
strange place, where his Country could not be known but by his tongue, it
could not possibly be, but that more Nations would strive for him, than ever
did for Homer. I had before read of the confusion of Babel, in him I came
acquainted with it: yet this use might be made of him, and his hotch-potch of
Languages, that a good Chymicall Physician would make an excellent medicine of
it against the stone. In a word, to go no more upon the particulars, I never
knew a people that spoke more words and less Latin.

Of these ingredients is the University of Orleans compounded, if at least it
be lawful to call it an University, as I think it be not; the name of
Academie would beseem it better, and God grant (as Zancho Panca said of his
wife) it be able to discharge that calling. I know that these names are
indifferently used, but not properly; for an Academie (the name is derived from
a place near Athens, called Academia, where Plato first taught Philosophy) in
its strict and proper sense is such a study, wherein one or two Arts are
professed, as Law at Orleans and Bononia, and Physic at Montpelleir and Padua.
An University is so called, quod Vniversae ibi traduntur disciplinae, as the
name imports, where Learning is professed in the Generality, and in the whole
(...) of it. The first the Germans call Schola illustris; the latter, Generale
studium: very opposite titles, and in which there is little of a German.

CHAP. IV.
Orleans not an University, till the coming of the Jesuits. Their College
there, by whom built. The Jesuits not Singers. Their laudable and exact Method
of teaching. Their Policy in it. Received not without great difficulty into
Paris. Their houses in that University. Their strictness unto the Rules of
their order. Much maliced by the other Priests and Friars. Why not sent into
England with the Queen. And of what order they were that came with her. Our
return to Paris.

THe difference between an University and an Academy standing thus; those which
lived in our Fathers days, could hardly have called Orleans an University: a
Shoole of Law being the name most fit for it. At this time, since the coming of
the Jesuits, that appellation may not misbecome it; they having brought with
them those parts of Learning, which before were wanting in it* but that has
not been of any long standing, their College being yet not fully finished: By
an Inscription over the gate, it seems to be the work of Mr. Cagliery, one of
the Advocates in the Parliament of Paris, a man of large practice, and by the
consequence, of great^ possessions, and who having no child but this College,
is said to intend the fastening of his estate upon it. In this house do those
of this order apply themsevles to the study of good Letters; in the pursuit
whereof, as the rest of this Fraternity are, they are good proficients, and
much exceed all other sorts of Friars, as having better teachers, and more
leisure to learn. That time which the other spend at their High Masses, and at
their Canonical hours, these men bestow upon their books, they being exempted
from those duties by their order. Upon this ground they trouble not their heads
with the Crotchets of Music, nor spend their mouths upon the chanting out of
their Services: they have other matters to employ their brains upon, such as
are the ruin of Kingdoms and desolation of Countries. It was the saying of
Themistocles, being requested to play a Lesson on the Lute, That he could not
fiddle, but he could tell how to make a little Town a great City. The like may
we say of the Jesuits, they are no great singers, but are well skilled in
making little cities great, and great ones little: and certain it is, that
they are so far from any ability or desire this way, that upon any of their
solemn Festivals, when their Statutes require Music, they are feign to hire
the Singing men of the next Cathedral, as here upon the feast of their Patron
St. Ignatius, being the 22. of July; they were compelled to make use of the
voices of the church of S. Croix.

To this advantage of leisure is added the exact method of their teaching,
which is indeed so excellent, that the Protestants themselves in some places
send their sons to their Schools, upon desire to have them prove exquisite in
those arts they teach. To them resort the Children of the rich as well as of
the poor, and that in such abundance, that wheresoever they settle; other
houses become in a manner desolate, or frequented only by those of the more
heavy and phlegmatic constitutions. Into their Schools when they have
received them, they place them in that form or Class, into which they are
best fitted to enter. Of these Classes the lowest is for Grammar; the second
for the composition or making of Themes, as we call it; the third for Poetry,
the fourth for Oratory, the fifth for Greek Grammar and Compositions; the
sixth for Poesy and Rhetoric of that Language; the seventh for Logic; and
the eighth and last for Philosophy. In each of these Schools there is a
several Reader, or Institutor, who only intends that art, and the
perfection of it, which for that year he teaches. That year ended, he
removes both himself and Scholars with him into the Classes or School next
beyond him, till he has brought them through the whole study of humanity. In
the last Form, which is that of Philosophy, he continues two years, which
once expired, his Scholars are made perfect in the Universality of Learning,
and themselves are manumitted from their Tutors, and permitted their private
Studies. Nor do they only teach their Scholars an exictnesse in those
several parts of Learning which they handle: but they also endeavor to breed
in them an obstinacy of mind, and a sturdy eagerness of spirit, to make them
thereby hot prosecutors of their own opinions, and impatient of any contrary
consideration: This it is which makes all those of their education to affect
Victory in all their controversies of Wit and Knowledge, with such a violence,
that even in their very Grammatical disputations, you shall find little boys
maintain arguments with such a fierce impatience, that you would think it above
the nature of years; and all this they perform freely, and for nothing: the
poor Paisants son being by them equally instructed with that of the
Noblesse. By this means they get into their Society great honor and great
strength: Honor in furnishing their Schools with so many persons of excellent
quality, or nobility, of whom afterward they make their best advantages for
their strength also: As for those of the poorer sort, they have also their ends
upon them; for by this free and liberal education of their children, the
common people do infinitely affect them; besides that, out of that rank of
their Scholars, they assume such into their Fraternity, whom they find to be
of a rare wit, an excellent spirit, or any other way fitted for their
profession.

Thus do they make their own purpose out of all conditions, and refuse no fish
which either they can draw into their nets, or which will offer it self unto
them. Si locuples quis est, avari sunt; si pauper ambitiosi: quos non oriens
non occidens satiaverit, soli omnium opes atque in piam opur affectu
concupiscunt. Galgacus a British Captain spoke it of the Soldiers of the
Roman Empire, we may as justly verify it of these Soldiers of the Roman
Church: they being the men whom neither the East nor West Indies can satisfy,
and who with a like fervency desire the education of the needy and the wealthy.
Moreover, by this method of teaching they do not only strengthen themselves in
the affections of men abroad, but also fortify themselves within their own
walls at home; for by this means there is not one of their society who has
perfectly concocted in his head the whole (...) of knowledge, but has gained
unto himself the true art of speaking, and readiness of expressing what he
knows, without the least demur or hesitancie; the greatest happiness of a
Scholar. To conclude then, and say no more of them and their abilities (for
virtus and in host probatur) it is thought by men of wisdom and judgment,
that the planting of a College of Jesuits in any place, is the only sure way
to re-establish that Religion which they profess, and in time to eat out the
contrary.

This notwithstanding they were at the first institution of them rightly
opposed, and no where more v^olently than in the University of Paris. An
University that stands much upon its liberties and privileges, to which this
order was imagined to be an hindrance, it being lawful for them to take any
degree in their own houses without reference to any public exercise or
examination. In the year 1554. at which time they first began to set foot in
France, the College of the Sorbonists made a long Decree against them: in the
end whereof are these words, and they are worth the reading, Videtur haec
societas in negotio fidei periculosa, pacis and Ecclesiae perturbativa,
Monasticae religionis eversiva, and magis ad destructionem quam ad
aedificationem. A censure too full of vinegar and bitterness: Afterward in
the year 1564. they preferred a Petition to the University, that the College
which the Bishop of Clermont had built for them, might be incorporated into the
University, and every the immunities of it: Upon the Universities denial of
their desire, there arose a suit between them and the University in the High
court of Parliament, Peter Versories pleading for the Jesuits, and Steven
Pasquier for the other party: in the end they were admitted, though upon terms
of wonderful strictness. Anno 1594. John Chastell of Novice of this order,
having wounded King Henry the fourth in the mouth, occasioned the banishment of
this Society out of all France. Into which they were not again received till
the year 1604. and then also upon limitations more strict than ever. Into
Paris they were not readmitted until Anno 1606. neither had they the liberty
of reading Lectures, and instructing the Youth, confirmed unto them until Anno
1621. which also was compassed not without great trouble and vexation.

Per varios casus and tot discrimina rerum,
as Aeneas and his companions came into Latium.
In this University they have at this instant three Houses, one of Novices, a
second of Institutors, which they call the College, and a third of professed
Jesuits, which they style their Monastery, or the professed House of St. Lewis.
In their house of Novices they train up all those whom they have called out of
their Schools, to be of their order, and therein imitate them in the art of
Jesuitisme, and their mysteries of iniquity. There they teach them not
Grammatical construction, or composition, but instruct them in the paths of
Virtue, Courage, and Obedience, according to such examples as their Authors
afford them. But he that made the Funeral Oration for Henry the fourth, Anno
1610. reported otherwise: Latini Sermonis obtentu (says he) impurissime
Gallicae juventutis mores ingenuos foedant: Bonarum artium praetextu, pessimas
edocent arts; Dum ingenia excolunt, animas perdunt, etc. In their College they
have the same method of teaching, which the others of their company use in
Orleans. A College first given unto them by Mr. William Prat, Bishop of
Clermont, whose House it was, but much beautified by themselves after his
decease; for with the money which he gave unto them by his Will, which
amounts (as it was thought) to 60000. Crowns; they added to it the Court
called de Langres, in S. James's street; An. 1582. Their Monastery, or house of
prayer or profession, is that unto which they retire themselves, after they
have discharged their duties in the College, by reading and studying publicly
in their several Classes; when they are here, their study both for time and
quality, is ad placitum, though generally their only study in it, is Policy,
and the advancing of their cause. And indeed out of this Trojan Horse it is
that those firebrands and incendiaries, are let out to disturb, and set in
combustion the affairs of Christendom. Out of this Forge come all those
Stratagems, and tricks of Machiavillianisme which tend to the ruin of the
Protestants and the desolation of their Countries. I speak not this of their
house of Profession here in Paris, either only or principally; wheresoever
they settle, they have a House of this nature, out of which they issue to
overthrow the Gospel. Being once sent by their superiors, a necessity is laid
upon them of obedience, be the employment never so dangerous; and certainly
this nation does most strictly obey the rules of their order of any whosoever,
not excepting the Capuchins, nor the Carthusians. This I am witness unto, that
whereas the Divinity Lecture is to end at the tolling of a Bell, one of the
Society in the College of Clermont, reading about the fall of the Angels,
ended his Lecture with these words, Denique in quibuscunque; for then was the
warning given, and he durst not so far trespass upon his rule, as to speak
out his sentence.

But it is not the fate of these Jesuits to have great persons only, and
Universities to oppose their fortunes, they have also the most accomplished
malice, that either the Secular Priests, or their friends amongst whom they
live, can fasten upon them. Some envy them for the greatness of their
possessions, some because of the excellency of their Learning; some hate them
for their power; some for the shrewdness of their brains; all together making
good that saying of Paterculus, that Semper eminentis fortunae comes est
invidia. True indeed it is, that the Jesuits have in a manner deserved all
this clamor and stomach by their own insolences, for they have not only
drawn into their own hands all the principal affairs of Court and State,
but upon occasions cast all the storm and contempt they can, upon those of the
other Orders. The Janissaries of the Turk never more neglectfully speak of the
Asapi, than these do of the rest of the Clergy. A great crime in those men
who desire to be accounted such excellent Masters of their own affections.
Neither is the affection borne to them abroad, greater then that at home;
amongst those, I mean, of the opposite party, who being so often troubled and
frumped by them, have little cause to afford them a liking, and much less a
welcome. Upon this reason they were not sent into England with the Queen,
although at the first they were destinate to that purpose. It was well known
how odious that name was among us, and so little countenance the Court or
Country would have afforded them. They therefore that had the governance of
that business, sent hither in their places the Oratorians or Fratres
Congregationis. Oratorii were a race of men never as yet offensive to the
English, further than the general defense of the Romish cause, and so less
subject to envy and exception. They were first entitled by Philip Nerius, not
long after the Jesuits, and advanced and dignified by Pope Sixtus the fifth,
principally for this end, that by their incessant Sermons to the People of the
lives of Saints, and other Ecclesiastical antiquity, they might get a new
reputation, and so divert a little the torrent of the peoples affections from
the Jesuits. Baronius, that great and excellent Historian; and Bozius that
deadly enemy to the sovereignty of Princes, were of the first foundation of
this new order.

I have now done with Orleans and the Jesuits, and must prepare for my return
to Paris, which journey I began the 13. of July, and ended the day following.
We went back the same way that we came, though we were not so fortunate as to
enjoy the same company we came in formerly: Instead of the good and acceptable
society of one of the French Noblesse, some Gentlemen of Germany, and two
Friars of the Order of S. Austin, we had the perpetual vexation of four
Tradesmen of Paris, two Fulles de Joy, and an old Woman. The Artizans so
slovenly attired, and greazy in their apparel, that a most modest apprehension
could have conceived no better of them, than that they had been newly raked out
of the Scullery: one of them by an inkhorne that hung by his side, wou^d have
made us believe that he had been ^ Notary* bu^ by the thread of his discourse,
we found out that h^ was a Sumner; so full of Ribaldry was it, and so rankly
did it savor of the French Bawdy court The rest of them talked according to
their skill concerning the price of Commodities; and wh^ was the most likely
man of all the City to be made one of the next years Eschevins: Of the two
Wenches, one so extremely impudent, that even an immodest ^are would have
abhorred her language, and of such a shameless deportment, that her very
behavior would have frighted Lust out of the most incontinent man living.
Since I first knew mankind and the world, I never observed so much impudency
in the general, as I did then in her particular, and I hope shall never be so
miserable as to suffer two days more the torment of her, and of her
conversation. In a word, she was a wench borne to shame all the Friars with
whom she had traffiqued; for she would not be Casta, and could not be Cauta;
and so I leave her. A creature extremely bold, because extremely faulty, and
yet having no good property to redeem both these and other unlovely qualities;
but as Sir Philip Sidney says of the strumpet Baccha, in the Arcadia a little
counterfeit Beauty disgraced with wandering eyes, and unweighed speeches. The
other of the young females (for as yet I am doubfull whether I may call any of
them women) is of the same profession also, but not half so rampant as her
companion; Haec habitu casto cum non sit casta videtur. as Aus^nius gives it
of one of the two wanton Sisters: by her carriage a charitable stranger would
have thought her honest; and to that favorable opinion had my self been
inclinable, if a French Monsieur had not given me her Character at Orleans:
besides, there was an odd twinkling of her eye, which spoiled the
composedness of her countenance, otherwise she might have passed for current,
so that I may safely say of her, in respect of her fellow-harlot, what Tacitus
does of Pompey in reference to Caesar, viz. Secretior Pompeius Caesare, non
melior; they were both equally guilty of the same sin, though this last had the
more cunning to dissemble it, and avoid the infamy and censure due unto it. And
so I am come to the old Woman, which was the last of our goodly companions; A
woman so old, that I am not at this day fully resolved whether she were ever
young or no; 'twas well I had read the Scriptures, otherwise I might have been
prone to have thought her one of the first pieces of the Creation, and that by
some mischance she had escaped the Flood: her face was for all the world like
unto that of Sybilla Erythraea in some old print, or that of one of Solomon's
two Harlots in the painted cloth; you would not but have imagined her one of
the Relikes of the first age after the building of Babel, for her very
complexion was a confusion more dreadful than that of Languages; as yet I am
uncertain whether the Poem of our Arch-Poet Spencer, entitled was not
purposely intended on her: sure I am it is very appliable in the Title; but I
might have saved all this labor: Ovid in his description of Fames, has most
exactly given us her Portraiture, and out of him and the eighth book of the
Metamorphosis, you may take this view of her; Nullus erat crinis, cava lumina,
pallor in ore,
Labra incana situ, scabri rubigine dentes,
Dura cutis, per qua^ spectari viscera possent,
Ventris erat pro ventre locus, pe^dere putares
Pectus, and a spinae tantummodo crate teneri.
Unhair'd, pale-faced, her eyes sunk in her head,
Lips hoary-white, and teeth most rusty red.
Through her course skin her guts you might epsy
In what estate and posture they did lie.
Belly she had none, only there was seen
The place where her belly should have been:
And with her Hips her body did agree,
As if 'twere fastened by Geometry.
But of this our Companion, as also of the rest of the Coach full, Sunday-night
and our arrival at Paris, has at the last delivered us. Ablessing, for which ^
can never be sufficiently thankful: and thus, -- Dedit Deus his quoque finem.

The Fourth Book: Or PICARDY.
CHAP. I
Our return toward England, more of the Hugonots hate unto Crosses. The Towns
of Luzarch and St. Lowp: The Country of Picardy and People: The Picts of
Britain not of this Country: Mr. Lesdiguier Governor of Picardy: The Office
of Constable what it is in France; By whom the place supplied in England. The
Marble Table in France, and Causes there handled. Clermont and the Castle
there: The Wars raised by the Princes against D' Ancre: What his Designs might
tend to, etc.

IVly the twenty seventh having dispatched that business which brought us into
France, and surveyed as much of the Country as that opportunity would permit
us: we began our journey toward England in a Coach of Amiens; better
accompanied we were, than when we came from Orleans; for here we had Gentlemen
of the choicest fashion, very ingenuous, and in mine opinion finer conditioned
than any I had met withal, in all my acquaintance with that Nation, and which
appeared to me somewhat mavelous, we had no vexation with us in the shape of
a French-woman, to torment our ears with her discourse, or punish our eyes with
her complexion. Thus associated we began to wag on toward St. Lowp, where that
night we were to be lodged. The Country such as already I have described it in
the Isle of France; save that beyond St Denis it began to be somewhat more
hilly: by the way I observed those little cressets erected in the memory of St.
Denis (as being vainly supposed to be his resting places, when he ran from
Mountmartyr with his head in his hand) which the zealous madness of the
Hugonots had thrown down, and were now reedifyed by King Lewis: It could not
but call to mind the hate of that Nation unto that harmless monument of Christ's
suffering, the Cross; which is grown, it seems, so exorbitant, that the
Papists make use of it to discover an Hugonot.

I remember that as we passed by water from Amiens to Abbeville, we met in the
boat with a berry of French Gentlewomen. To one of them, with that little
French which I had, I applied my self; and she perceiving me to be English,
questioned my Religion: I answered (as I safely might) that I was a Catholic:
and she for her better satisfaction proffered me the little cross which was on
the to^ of her beads to kiss: I kissed it, and rathe^ should I desire to kiss
it than many of their lip: thereupon the rest of the company gave ^ome this
verdict, that I was un urai Christien et (...) point un Hugonet. But to proceed
to our jour^ey.

The same day we parted from Paris we passed through the Town of Luzarch, and
came to that of St. Lowp. The first famous only in its owner, which is the
Count of Soisons: the second in an Abbey there situate, built in memory of St.
Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Campaign. These Towns passed, we entered into Picardy.

Picardy is divided into the higher, which contains the territories of Calais
and Burlogne, with the Town of Monstrevelle and the lower; wherein are the
goodly Cities of Amiens, Abeville, and many other places of principal note. The
higher, which is the lesser, and more Northern part, is bounded North and West
with the English Ocean, and on the East with Flanders and Artoys. The later,
which is the larger, the richer and the more Southern, has on the East the
little County of Veromandoys, on the West Normandy, and on the South the County
of Campaigne. In length it comprehends all the fifty one degree of Latitude,
and three parts of the fiftieth, extending from Cales in the North to Clermont
in the South. In breadth it is of a great inequality: For the higher Picardy is
like Linea amongst the Logicians, which they define to be Longitudo sine
Latitudine, it being indeed nothing in a manner but a mere border. The lower is
of a larger breadth, and contains in it the wole twenty fourth degree of
Longitude, and a fourth part of the twenty three. So that by the proportion of
degrees this province is an hundred and five miles long, and seventy five broad.

Concerning the name of Picardy, it is a difficulty beyond my reading and my
conjecture. All that I can do is, to overthrow the less probable opinions of
other Writers; and make my self subject to the scoff which Lactantius
bestows on Aristotle. Recte hic sustulit aliorum disciplinas, sed non recte
fundavit suam. Some then derive it from Pignan, one sorsooth of Alexander the
greats Captains, who they fain to have built Amiens and Pigmingin; an absurdity
not to be honored with a confutation. Some from the Town of Pigmingin it self,
of which mind is Mercator; but that Town never was of such note as to name a
Province. Others derive it from Picardus, a fanatical heretic of these parts,
about the year 1300. and after; but the appellation is far older than the
man. Others fetch it from the Picts of Brittanie, whom they would have to fly
hither, after the discomfiture of their Empire and Nation by the Scots. A
transmigration of which all Histories are silent: this being the verdict of the
best Antiquary ever nursed up in Britain. Picti itaque praelio funestissimo
debellati, aut penitus fuerunt extincti, aut paulatim in Scotorum nomen and
nationem concesserint. Lastly, some others derive the name from Pigs, which
signifies a Lance or Pike: the inventors of which warlike Weapon the fathers
of this device would fain make them. In like manner some of Germany have
labored to prove, that the Saxons had that name given them, from the short
Swords which they used to wear, called in their language Seaxen: but neither
truly: For my part, I have consulted Ptolomie for all the Nations, and the
Itinerarium of Antonius for all the Towns in this Tract, but can find none, of
which I may fasten any probable Etymology. All therefore that I can say, is
that which Mr. Robert Bishop of Auranches in Normandy has said before me, and
that only in the general: Quos itaque aetas nostra Picardos appellat, Vere
Belgae dicendi sunt, qui post modum in Picardorum nomen transmigrarunt.

This Country is very plentiful of corn and other grain, with which it
abundantly furnishes Paris; and has in it more store of pasture and meadow
ground, than I else saw in any part of France: In Vines only it is defective,
and that (as it is thought) more by the want of industry in the people, than
any inability ih the soil; for indeed they are a people that will not labor
more than they needs must; standing much upon their state and distance, in the
carriage of their bodies savouring a little of the Spaniard; when Picardiser,
to play the Picard is usually said of those who are lofty in their looks; or
gluttonous at their tables: this last being also one of their simptomes of a
Picard.

The Governor of this Province is the Duke les Deguiers; into which Office he
succeeded Mr. Luynes, as he also did in that of the Constable; two preferments
which he purchased at a deer rate, having sold or abandoned that Religion to
compass them, which he had professed for more than sixty years together. An
Apostasy most unworthy of the man, who having for so many years supported the
cause of Religion, has now forsaken it, and thereby made himself guilty of the
cowardice of M. Antonius, qui cumin desertores saeviri debuer at desertor sui
exercitus factus est. But I fear an heavier sentence waits upon him; the
Crown of immortality not being promised to all those which run, but to those
only which hold out to the end: For the present indeed he has augmented his
honors. By this Office, which is the principal of all France, he has place
and command before and over all the Peers and Princes of the blood, and at the
coronation of the French Kings ministers the Oath. When the King enters a
City in state, or upon the rendition of that, he goes before with the Sword
naked; and when the King sits in an Assembly of the three Estates, he is
placed at the Kings right hand: he has command over all his Majesty's Forces,
and he that kills him is guilty of high treason: he sits also as chief
Judge at the Table of Marble, upon all suits, actions, persons and complaints
whatsoever concerning the wars.

This Table de Marble was wont to be continually in the great Hall of the
Palace of Paris; from whence at the burning of that Hall it was removed to the
Louure. At this Table does the Admiral of France hold his Sessions, to judge of
traffiick, prizes, Letters of Marts, piracies and business of the like nature.
At this Table judges all Le grand Maistre des eaures et Forests, we may call
him the Justice in Eire all his Majesty's Forests and Waters. The actions
there handled are thefts and abuses committed in the Kings Forests, Rivers,
Parks, Fish Ponds and the like. In the absence of the Grand Maistre, the power
of sentence rests in the Les grands Maistres enquesteures, et generaux
reformateurs, who have under their command no fewer than 300. subordinate
Officers. Here also sit the Marshals of France, who are ten in number,
sometimes in their own power, sometimes as Assistants to the Constable, under
whose direction they are: with us in England the authority of the Marshalship
is more entire, as that which besides its own jurisdiction, has now
incorporated in it self most of the matters anciently belonging to the
Constables: which Office ended in the death of Edward Lord Duke of Buckingham,
the last hereditary and proprietary Constable of England. This Office of
Constable, to note unto you so much by the way, was first instituted by Lewis
the Gross, who began his reign Anno 1110. and conferred on Mr. Les Deguiers on
the 24th of July Anno 1622. in the Cathedral Church of Grenoble, where he first
heard Mass, and where he was installed Knight of both Orders. And so I leave
the Constable, to take a veiw of his Province: A man at this time beloved of
neither parties; hated by the Protestants as an Apostata, and suspected by the
Papists not to be entire.

To proceed: July the twenty eighth we came unto Clermont, the first Town of
any note that we met with in Picardy. A pretty nea Town, and finely seated on
the rising of an hill: For the defense of it, it has on the upper side of it
an indifferent large Castle, and such as were the scituations of it, somewhat
helped by the strengths of Art, might be brought to good service. Toward the
Town it is of an easy access, to the fieldward more difficult, as being built
on the pendicular fall of a Rock. In the year 1615. it was made good by Mr.
Haroncourt with the Regiment of eight Companies, who kept it in the name of the
Prince of Conde, and the rest of that Confederacy; but it held not long: For at
the Marshal d' Ancres coming before it with his Army and artillery, it was
presently yielded. This war, which was the second Civil war that had happened
in the reign of King Lewis, was undertaken by the Princes chiefly to thwart the
designs of the Queen Mother, and to crush the powerableness of her grand
favorite the Marshall. The pretense (as in such cases commonly is) was the
good of the Commonwealth: the occasion, the cross Marriages then consummated by
the Marshal between the Kings of France and Spain: For by those marriages they
seemed to fear the augmentation of the Spaniards greatness; the alienation of
the affections of their ancient Allies, and by consequence the ruin of the
French Empire. But it was not the fate of D' Ancre to perish; two years more of
Command and insolences his destinies allowed, and then he tumbled: This
opportunity of his death ending the third Civil war, each of which his faulty
greatness had occasioned.

What the ambition of his designs did tend to, I dare not absolutely determine,
though like enough it is, that they aimed further than at a private or personal
potency: for having under the favor and countenance of the Queen Mother, made
himself Master of the Kings ear, and of his counsels, he made a shift to get
into his own hands an authority almost as unlimitted, as that of the old Mayre
of the Palace; for he had suppressed the liberty of the general Estates, and of
the Sovereign Court, removed all the Officers and Counselors of the last King:
ravished one of the Presidents of the great Chamber, by name Mr. Le Jay, out of
the Parliament into the Prison; and planted Garrisons of his own in most of the
good Towns of Normandy, of which Province he was Governor: Add to this, that
he had caused the Prince of Conde, being acknowledged the first Prince of the
blood, to be imprisoned in the Bastile: and had searched into the continuance
of the lives of the King and his Brother by the help of sorcery and witchcraft:
Besides he was suspected to have had secret intelligence with some foreign
Princes, ill-willers to the State, and had disgraced some, and neglected others
of the Kings Confederates: And certainly those actions seem to import some
project beyond a private and obedient greatness; though I can hardly believe,
that he durst be ambitious of the Crown; for being a fellow of a low birth, his
heart could not but be too narrow for such an hope, and having no party amongst
the Nobility, and being less gracious among the people, he was altogether
destitute of means to compass it. I therefore am of opinion, that the Spanish
gold had corrupted him to some project concerning the enlargement of that
Empire upon the French dominions, which the cross Marriages (whereof he was the
contriver) and which seemed so full of danger to all the best Patriots of
France, may seem to demonstrate. And again, at that time, when he had put the
Realm into this third combustion, the King of Spain had an Army on foot against
the Duke of Savoy, and another in the Countries of Cleive and Juliers; which
had not the timely fall of this Monsieur, and the peace ensuing prevented it,
might both perhaps have met together in the midst of France: but this is only
conjectural.

CHAP. II.
The fair City of Amiens, and greatness of it. The English feasted within it,
and the error of that action: The Town how built, seated and fortified: The
Citadel of it thought to be impregnable, not permitted to be veiwed. The
overmuch openness of the English in discovering their strengths: The watch and
form of government in the Town. Amiens a Visedamate, and to whom it pertains.
What that honor is in France, and how many there enjoy it, etc.

THat night we went from Clermont to a Town called B^etaul, where we were
harbored, being from Clermont six French Leagues, and from Paris twenty. Our
entertainment there such as in other places, as sluttish and as inconvenient.
The next day, being the twenty ninth, about ten of the clock we had a sight of
the goodly and fair City of Amiens. A City of some English miles circuit within
the walls, which is all the greatness of it, for without the walls it has houses
few or none. A City very capacious, and for that cause has been many times
honored with the persons and trains of many great Princes: Besides that, once
it entertained almost a whole Army of the English. For King Lewis the eleventh
having made an advantageous peace with our Edward, and perceiving how
ungrateful it was amongst the military men, he intended also to give them some
manner of satisfaction: he sent therefore unto them three hundred Carts laden
with the best Wines, and seeing how acceptable a present that had proved, he
intended also to feast them in Amiens; within half a league of which their Camp
was lodged. This entertainment lasted four days, each street having in it two
long tables, and each table being furnished with very plentiful provision
Neither were they denied entrance into any of the Taverns or
Victualling-houses, or therein stinted either in meats or drinks, whatsoever
was called for, was defraied by King Lewis. An action wherein, if my opinion
might carry it, there was little of the Politician; for there were permitted to
enter into the Town so many of the Englishmen at once, that had they been but
so minded, they might easily have made themselves as well Masters of the place,
as of the Kings person: nine thousand are reckoned by Comminees to have been
within together, and most of them armed; so that they might very easily have
surprised the Gates and let in the rest of the Army. Those of the French Kings
Council feared it much, and therefore informed both Princes, the one of his
Town, the other of his honor. But this jealousy was but a French distrust,
and might well have been spared: the English being of that Generals mind, that
scorned to steal a Victory, and of that generous disposition, that they would
not betray their credits. Nunquam illis adeo ulla opportuna visa est victoriae
occasio, quam damno pensa^ent fidei; as the Historian of Tiberius. If then this
City escaped a sack or a surprisal, it cannot be imputed to the wisdom of the
French, but to the modesty and fair dealing of the English: but this was not
the only Solaecisme in point of State committed by that great Politic of his
time King Lewis, there never being a man so famed for brain, that more grossly
overreached himself, than that Prince, though perhaps more frequently.

The buildings of this Town are of diverse materials, some built of stone,
others of wood, and some again of both: the streets very sweet and clean, and
the air not giving place to any for a lively pureness: Of their buildings the
principal are their Churches, whereof there are twelve only in number.
Churches, I mean, parochial, besides those belonging unto Religious Houses.
Next unto them, the work of most especial note, is a great large Hospital, in
method and disposing of the beds much like unto the Hostel Dieu in Paris, but
in number much inferior: Et me tamen capuerant: and yet the decency of them did
much delight me. The sweetness and neatness of the Town proceeds partly (as I
say) from the air, and partly from the conveniencie of the River of Some, on
which it is seated: for the River running in one entire bank at the further end
of the Town, is there divided into six Channels, which almost at an equal
distance run through the several parts of it. These Channels thus divided
receive into them all the ordure and filth wherewith the Town were otherwise
likely to be pestered, and affords the people a plentiful measure of water,
wherewith to purge the lanes and by-corners of it, as often as them lists.
But this is not all the benefit of these Channels; they bestow upon the City
matter also of commodity, which is the infinite number of Griest-Mils that are
built upon them. At the other end of the Town the Channels are again united
into one stream, both those places, as well at the division as the union, of
the Channels being exceedingly fortified with chains and piles, and also with
bulwarks and outworks.

Neither is the Town well fortified and strengthened at those passages only in
the upper parts of it, having enough of strength to enable them to a long
resistance. The Ditch round about it, save where it meets with the Citadel,
is exceeding deep and steepy, the walls of a good height, broad and composed of
earth and stone equally: the one making up the outside of them, and the other
the inside. The Gates are very large and strong, as well in the sinewie
composition of themselves, as in addition of the Drawbridge. Subburbs this
City has none, because a Town of War, nor any liberal circuit of territoty,
because a Frontier: yet the people are indifferent wealthy, and have amongst
them good trading, besides the benefit of the Garrison and the Cathedral. The
Garrison consists of two hundred and fity men (five hundred in all they
should be) who are continually in pay to guard the Citadel: their pay eight
Sols daily. The Governor of them is the Duke of Chawne, who is also the
Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of the whole Province under the Constable. Their
Captain Mr Le Noyr, said to be a man of good experience, and worthy his place.
This Citadel was built by Henry the fourth as soon as he had recovered the
Town from the Spaniards, Anno 1591. It is seated on the lower part of the City,
though somewhat on the advantage of an hill; and seems in my opinion better
situate to command the Town, than to defend it, or rather to recover the Town,
being taken, than to save it from taking. They who have seen it, and know the
arts of Fortification, report it to be impregnable. -- Quod nec Jovis ira, nec
ignes
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
Nor am I able to contradict it: for besides that it is a skill beyond my
profession, we were not permitted to come within it, to take a survey of it at
a distance: As soon as we approached nigh unto it, one of the Garrison offered
us the musket, a sufficient warning not to be too venterous. So that all I
could observe was this, that they had within themselves good plenty of earth to
make their gabions and repair their breaches. With the same jealousy also, are
the rest of the Forts and Towns of importance guarded in this and other
Countries: no people that ever I heard of being so open in showing their places
of strength and safety unto strangers as the English: For a dozen of Ale a
Forreiner may pace over the Curtain of Portsmouth, and measure every sconce and
bulwark of it: for a shilling more he shall see their provision of powder and
other munition, and when that is done, if he will, he shall walk the round too.
A French crown fathometh the walls of Dover Castle; and for a pint of Wine one
may see the nakedness of the block-houses at Gravesend. A negligence which may
one day cost us dearly, though now we think it not. For what else do we in it,
but commit that prodigal folly, for which Plutarch condemns Pericles? Viz.
(...) etc. that is, to break open all the pales and enclosures of our Land, to
the end that every man might come in freely, and take away our fruits at his
pleasure. Jealousy, though a vice in a man toward his Wife, is yet one of the
safest Virtues in a Governor toward his Fortress, and therefore I could wish,
that an English man would borrow a little of this Italian humor. Besides these
Soldiers which are continually in garrison for the defense of the Citadel,
there are also three hundred which keep watch every night for the defense of
the City. These watchmen receive no pay from the King, but discharge that duty
amongst themselves, and in turns, every house finding one for that service
twelve nights in the year: The Weapons which they use are Pikes only and
Muskets, there being not one piece of Ordinance all about the Town, or on the
walls of it. The Governor of this Town, as it has reference to the King, is a
Bailly, who has belonging unto him all the authority which belongs to a
Siege Presidial. Under him he has a Lieutenant General and particular; seven
Counselors, a public Notary, and other inferior Officers and Magistrates. As
it is a Corporation the Chief Governor of it is a Mayor, and next to him the
Eschevins or Sheriffs, as Protectors of the Inhabitants and their Liberties,
besides those of the Common Council.

Another Circumstance there is which ennobleth this Town of Amiens, which is,
that it is a Visedamate, or that it gives honor to one of the Nobility, who
is called the Visedame of Amiens. This title at this time belongs to the Duke
of Chauny, Governor of the Citadel, together with the Lordship of Pigingin;
both which he obtained by marrying the Daughter and Heir of the last Visedame
of Amiens, and Lord of Pigingin, Anno 1619. A marriage which much advanced his
fortunes, and which was compassed for him by the Constable Luynes his brother,
who also obtained for him of the King the title of Duke: His highest attribute
before, being that of Mr. de Cadinet, by which name he was known here in
England, at such time as he was sent extraordinary Ambassador to King James.
This honor of Visedame is, for ought that ever I could see, used only in
France. True it is, that in some English Charters we meet with Vice-Dominus, as
in the Charter of King Edred to the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolnshire, dated
in the year 948. there is subscribed, Ego Bingulph Vice-dominus, etc. but with
us, and at those times, this title was only used to denotate a subordination
to some superior Lord, and not as an honorary attribute, in which sense it is
now used in France: besides that, with us it is frequently, though falsely, used
for Vicecomes: between which two Offices of Vicount and Vidame there are found
no small resemblances: For as they which did agere Vicem Comitis, were called
Vicecomites or Vicomits, so were they also called Vidames, or Vice-Domini, qui
Domini Episcopi vicem gerebant in temporalibus. And as Vicountes from Offices
of the Earls became honorary; so did the Vidames disclaim the relation to the
Bishop, and became Seigneural or honorary also.

The Vidames then, according to the first institution, were the substitutes of
the greater Bishops in matters of secular administration, for which cause,
though they have altered their tenure, they take all of them their denomination
from the chief Town of some Bishopric; neither is there any of them, who
holds not of some Bishopric or other: Concerning the number of them that are
thus dignified I cannot determine. Mr. Glover, otherwise called Sommerset
Herald, in his discourse of Nobility, published by Mr. Miles of Canterbury,
puts it down for absolute, that here are four only, Viz. of Amiens, of
Chartres, of Chalons, and of Gerbery in Bauvice: but in this he has deceived
both himself and his Readers; there being besides these diverse others, as of
Rhemes, Man's, and the like: but the particular and exact number of them,
together with the place denominating, I leave to the French Heralds, unto whose
profession it belongs.

CHAP. III.
The Church of Nostre-Dame in Amiens. The Principal Churches in most Cities
called by her name: More honor performed to her, than to her Savior: The
surpassing beauty of this Church on the outside: The front of it. King Henry
the seventh's Chapel at Westminster: The curiousness of this Church within: By
what means it became to be so: The three sumptuous Massing-Closets in it: The
excellency of Perspective works. Indulgencies by whom first founded: The estate
of the Bishopric.

THere is yet one thing which adds more luster to the City of Amiens, than
either the Visdamate, or the Citadel, which is the Church of Nostre Dame: a
name by which most of the principal Churches are known in France: there have we
the Nostre Dame in Roven, a second in Paris, a third in this City, a fourth in
Boulogne, all Cathedral; so also a Nostre Dame in Abbeville, and another in
Estampes, the principal Churches in those Towns also; Had I seen more of their
Towns, I had met with more of her Temples; for so of many ^ have heard, that if
there be more than two Churches in a Town, one shall be sure to be dedicated to
her, and that one of the fairest. Of any Temples consecrated to the Name and
memory of our Savior. Ne gry quidem, there was not so much as a word stirring;
neither could I marvel at it, considering the honors done to her, and those to
her Son; betwixt which there is so great a disproportion, that you would have
imagined that Mary, and not Jesus, had been our Savior; for one Pater Noster
the people are enjoined ten Ave Mary's: and to recompense one pilgrimage to
Christ's Sepulcher at Jerusalem, you shall hear of two hundred undertaken to
our Lady of Loretto: And whereas in their Calendar they have dedicated only
four Festivals to our Savior, which are those of his birth, circumcision,
resurrection, and ascension, all which the English Church also observes; for
the Virgins sake they have more than doubled the number. Thus do they solemnize
the feast of her Purification and Annunciation, at the times which we also do:
of her Visitation of Elizabeth in July; of her Dedication and Assumption in
August, of her Nativity in September, of her Presentation in November, and of
her Conception in the womb of her Mother in December. To her have they
appropriated set forms of prayers prescribed in the two books, called one
Officium, and the other Rosarium beatae Mariae Virginis: whereas her Son must
be contented with those Orisons which are in the Common Mass Book: her Shrines
and Images are more glorious and magnificent, then those of her Son, and in her
Chapel are more Vows paid, than before the Crucifix. But I cannot blame the
Vulgar, when the great Masters of their souls are thus also besotted. The
Officium before mentioned, published by the Command of Pius the fifth, says
thus of her. Gaude Maria Virgo, tu sola omnes haereses intermist^ in universo
mundo. Catherinus in the Council of Trent, calls Fidelissimam Dei sociam: and
he was modest, if compared with others. In one of their Councils Christ's name
is quite forgotten, and the name of our Lady put in the place of it, for thus
it begins: Authoritate Dei Patris, and beatae Virginis, and omnium
Sanctorum, etc. but most horrible is that of one of their Writers (I am loath
to say it was Bernard) Beata Virgo monstra te esse Matrem, jube filium: which
Harding in his confutation of the Apology, endeavoring to make good, would
needs have it to be only an excess of mind, or a spiritual sport and
dalliance: but from all such sports and dalliances, good Lord deliver us.

Leaving our Lady, let us go see her Church, which questionless is one of the
most glorious piles of building under the Heavens; what Velleius says of
Augustus, that he was homo qui omnibus omnium gentium viris inducturus erat
caliginem, or what Suetonius spoke of Titus, when he called him Delias humani
generis, both these attributes and more too, may I most fitly fasten on this
magnificent structure. The whole body of it is of most curious and polished
stones, every where born up by buttresses of excellent composure, that they
seem to add more of beauty to it than of strength: the Quire of it is, as in
great Churches commonly it is, of a fairer fabric than the body, thick set
with dainty pillars, and most of them reaching unto the top of it, in the
fashion of an Arch. I am not well able to judge, whether the Quire of the
Chapel of King Henry the seventh at Westminster be the more exquisite piece of
Architecture, though I am not ignorant, that Leland calls that of our King,
Miraculum Orbis. I persuade my self, that a most discerning eye could find out
but little difference between them, and that difference more subtle than sound:
For if such perfections may receive the word of more, it might be said, that
there were more majesty in this of Amiens, and more loveliness in that of
Westminster; yet so, that the ones majesty did exceed in loveliness, and the
others loveliness excelled in majesty.

Tam been convenient and in una sede morantur
Majestas and Amor --
But now we are come unto the divinity of workmanship, the Front; which
presents it self unto us with two Towers, and three Gates, that in the middle
being the principal: the Fronts of Wels or Peterborough, which we so much fam^
in England, deserve not to be named in the same Myriad of years with this of
Amiens: For here have you almost all the sacred Stories engraven so lively,
that you would no longer think this story of Pigmalions image to be a fable;
and indeed at the first sight you would confidently believe, that the Histories
there represented were not carved but acted: To say no more of it (for all my
abilities will but disgrace it) in the description: that of Zeuxis may most
fitly be inscribed upon it: Invisur^m facilius aliquem, quam imitaturum: so
infinitely is it above the ambition of imitation.

The outside of the Church being so admirable you would have thought that Art
and treasure had left nothing of themselves to bestow within it, yet herein
would such thoughts deceive you: Nostre Dame in Paris and Roven lay most
without; yet here it serves but as a mask to hide and conceal those more
admirable graces which are within. As soon as you are entered, you will suppose
that the materials of it are all of gold, such a luster does it cast upon the
eyes of all those that look upon it: the glory of Solomon's Temple, next unto
the description of it in the Scriptures, is best read in this Church; of which
it seems to have been the pattern. Jupiters house in Heaven, described by the
Poets, was never half so gorgeous as this on the earth, that therefore which
Ovid poetically spoke concerning that imagery Palace of the false God, we most
truly verify of this real Mansion of the true God. Hic locus est, quem si
verbis audacia detur
Haud timeam Magni dixisse Palatia Regis.
To instance in particulars, the partition between the Quire and the body is so
overlaid with gold, that the acutest sight could apprehend no other substance
of it, and yet had the art of the workman so fully expressed its power on it;
that the cost was much inferior to the workmanship; so curiously was it
adorned with excellent imagery, and what else the hand of man could fashion
into portraiture. On the top of it was the Statua of our Lady, in the just
height and proportion of a woman, all either of gold or gilded, her Child in
her arms of the same making.

She was there expressed, as standing in a round circle, unto every part of which
she darted ou^ rays and beams of gold, just as the Sun does seem to do, when
the Painter has drawn him in his full luster. The glass of the Church
generally, and particularly that about the Quire, the Virgins Chapel is the
most full of life and beauty of any that I ever set eye upon: As much as that
of St. Denis exceeds ours at Canterbury, so much does this St. Denis. But the
largest measure of perfection in it is that of the pillars; which though full
of majesty in their height and compass, have yet an ornament added to them more
majestical than that majesty, for upon each of them (there are four ranks of
them in all) are fastened four tables, which take up their whole circuit, every
table being in length two yards or thereabouts: In every of these are the
pictures of sundry men and women of the better quality, so exactly limmed, that
neither a curious eye could desire, or a cunning hand discharge it better.
These tables are the monuments and tombs of the Burgers of the City, or of the
Nobles of the Country nigh unto it, who in them have caused their pictures to
be drawn, with as great art and state as cost could procure them, and in a
subscription of golden letters have eternized their names, and that art to all
succeeding posterity. So that we may justly say of the sumptuousness of this
Church, what the Historian does of the Temple at Delphos. Multa igitur ibi, and
opul^nta regum populorumque visuntus munera, quaeque magnificen^ia sui
reddentium vota gratans voluntatem magnifestant. Neither have these sepulchral
ornaments been of any great standing; the ancientest of them that I could
observe, having been erected since the year 1570. Add to these the curious
works which the Engraver has cut in the main walls, and then perhaps you will
fall into the same ecstasy that I did, and pick a quarrel with Nature and the
Heavens, that they had not made you all into an eye.

In this Church, as in others also of this party, besides the high Altar in the
midst of the Quire, there are diverse others in the private Clossets, which are
destinate to the mumbling of their low Masses: of these here are in number
twenty four, all of them seated within the two outermost ranks of pillars and
the walls pretty neat pla^es, and it is pity they should be abused to such
Idolatries. Of three of them I took especial notice, they being indeed the
chiefest of the rest, either for furniture or for use. The first of them is
that of the Virgin, which was divided from the West of the Church by a sphere
made of wood, which reached unto the top of the partition. On the outside, the
Planets, Stars and Constellations were most artificially set down in their
proper Orbs, with the time of absolving their several courses: On the inside
those places were filled up with a pack of verses in commendation of our Lady.
The Alter there was for matter and making the most glorious that ever I yet
looked upon: that on the other side in the Quire, and over which is the image
of our Savior, being more despicable than were fit for the credit of a
Village. Over this Altar was the Virgins Statua, all gift, and of a full and
womanly proportion: two Angels of the same materials attending on her: Finally,
this Chapel, considering the richness and glory of it, may be styled the
Epitome of the Church: that attribute of immensae opulentiae templum, being no
more deservedly appliable to Solomon's Temple, which Tacitus spoke it, than to
this.

The second of them stood, as I remember, at the further end of the Church
behind the Quire, not directed, for ought I could perceive, to any particular
Saint: yet not to be passed over without a due remembrance: It was separated
from the rest of the Church by two ranks of brass pillars, one rank above the
other. The pillars are curiously cast, and such as would not shame the workman.
In the massing Closset over the Altar there was hanged a tablet, which by the
many lines and shadows drawn in it, seemed to represent some piece of building.
Moving my hand toward my eye, in the nature and kind of a perspective-glass, I
perceived to be the representation of that Church wherein I stood to see it,
and it was done with that cunning, that it would almost have persuaded a man
out of himself, and made him believe, that he had been in the Churchyard; so
perfectly did it show the majesty of the Front, the beauty of the Isles, the
number of the pillars, and the glory of the Quire; a kind of work in my opinion
of all others the most excellent, and such as would infinitely delight an
Optic: Had not such pieces been vulgar to me, it had more affected me: But in
the gallery of Mr. Crane of Cambridge, once belonging to that humerous
Physician Mr. Butler, and in that of Sir Noel Caron late Leiger for the States
at Lambeth, I had seen diverse of them, whereof some perfecter.

The third of these Massing Clossets was that of St. Peter, not so gorgeous as
the rest unto the eyes of them that saw it, but more useful to the souls of
those who had a mind to take the benefit of it, for therein hung an Indulgence
granted by Pope Gregory the fifteenth unto that Church, dated the twenty
seventh of July, Anno Dom. 1612. and of his Popedom the twentieth. The contents
of it were, an absolute exemption from the pains and place of Purgatory, to
those, who upon the Feast of All-Soules (Festum commemorationis Sanctorum the
Brief calls it) and the Octaves of it, would come to pay their devotions and
moneys in that Temple. Had the extent of it been general, it would quickly have
emptied the Popes treasury, and in time to have put an end to Purgatory. His
Holiness therefore did wisely restrain it in his Bull to the natives of that
Diocese. The author and first founder of those Indulgences (if it be lawful to
note so much by the way) was Pope Urban the second, who began his Popedom, Anno
1088. who conferred them on all such who would go into the wars for the
recovering of Jerusalem: Next they began to be conferred on those who would
side with the Pope in his unlawful wars against the Emperors. And lastly,
about the time of Clem^nt the fifth (he began his reign, Anno 1306.) they began
to grow merchantable, for to him that gainful invention of the Church treasury,
consisting of the merits of our Savior and the Saints, is imputed: but I
return again to the Church of Amiens.

This glorious Church is the seat of a Bishop, who acknowledges for his
Metropolitan the Archbishop of Rhemes, Primate of all France: the first Bishop
of it was one Firnamus a native of Pampelune in the Kingdom of Navarre, who
suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Dioclesian: to him succeeded another
Firminus, to whom the first foundation of this Church is attributed: the
present Diocesan is named Franciscus Faber, his intrado about six thousand
Crowns a year: Chanoins there are in the Church to the number of forty, of
whose revenue I could not learn any thing. Neither could I be so happy as to
see the Head of St. John Baptist, which is said to be here entire: though it
cannot be denied, that a piece of it is in the holy Chapel of Paris; besides
those fractions of it which are in other places.

CHAP. IV.
Our journey down the Some, and Company. The Town and Castle of Pigingi for
what famous: Comminees censure of the English on matter of Propheoies. A
Farewell to the Church of Amiens: The Town and Castle of Pont d' Army
Abbeville, how seated, and the Garrison there: No Governor in it but the
Mayor. The French Posthorses, how base and tired: Mp preferment to the
Trunk-horse: the House of Philip de Commi^ees: The Town and strength of
Monstreville: The importance of these three Towns to the French border, etc.

IVly the thirtieth we took boat to go down to Abbevi^e by the River of Some, a
River o^f no g^e^t breadth, but deep and full: the boat that carried us, was
much of the making of those Lighters that live upon the Thames, but that it was
more weildy and fit for speed; there were in it of ^^ shall to the number of
thirty persons or thereabouts; people of all conditions, and such with whom a
man of any humor might have found a companion, under the tilt we espied a
bearie of Lasses, mixed with some young Gentlemen. To them we applied our
selves, and they taking a delight to hear our broken French, made much of our
company, for in that little time of our abode, there we had learned only so
much of the French, as a little Child after a years practice has of his
Mothers tongue: Linguis dimidiata ad huc verba tentantibus and loquela ipso
affectantis linguae fragmine dulciori. The Gentlewomen, next those of Orleans,
were the handsomest that I had seen in France; very pleasant and affable: one
of them being she that put my Religion to the touchstone of kissing the cross
of her beads: Thus associated we passed merrily down the stream, though slowly;
the delight which our language gave the company, and the content which their
liberal humanity afforded to us, beguiling the tediousness of the way.

The first thing which we met with observable, was the Town and Castle of
Pignigni: The Town poor and beggarly; and so unlikely to have named the
Province, as Mercator would have it: besides the disproportion, and
dissimilitude of their names. The Castle situate on the top of the Hill, is
now a place of more pleasure, than strength, as having command over an open and
good Country, which lies below it; it belongs as we have said, to the
Vidimate of Amiens, and so does the Town also. This Town is famous among the
French, for a tradition and a truth. The tradition is of a famous defeat given
to the English* near unto it; but in whose reign, and under whose conduct,
they could not tell us; being thus routed they fled to this Town, into which
their enemies followed with them, intending to put them all to the sword: but
at last their fury being allayed, they proposed that mercy unto them, which
those of Gilead did unto those of Ephraim in the Scriptures: life and liberty
being promised to all them that could pronounce this word Pignigni: it seems
it was not a word in those days possible for an English mouth, for the English
saying all of them Peguenie, instead of Pignigni, were all of them put to the
sword: thus far the tradition. The truth of story by which this Town is
famous in the writers of both Nations, is an enterviewe there given between our
Edward the fourth, and their Lewis the eleventh, upon the concluding of their
nine years truce; a circumstance of no great moment in it self, had not Phillip
de Comminees made it such by one of his own observations. Upon this meeting the
Chancellor of England, being Bishop of Ely, made an oration to both Kings;
beginning with a prophecy, which said that in this place of Pignigni, an
honorable peace should be concluded between both the Kingdoms. On this
ground, which himself also is the only man that related, he has built two
observations: the one (I have not the original by me) that the English men are
never unfurnished with Prophesies: the other that they ground every thing which
they speak upon Prophesies: How far those times were guilty of that humor I
cannot say; though sure I am, we are not the only men that were so affected:
Paulus Jovius in some place of his Histories (I remember not the particular)
has vindicated that quarrel for us, and fastened the same imitation upon the
French. So true is that of the Fragaedian, Quod quisque fecit, patitur;
authorem scelus Reperit: And now being past Pignigni, I have lost the sight of
the Church of Amiens.

The fairest fabric, and most rich to see,
That ere was guilty of mortality,
No present structure like it: nor can Fame
In all its bead rolls boast an equal name:
Let then the barbarous Egyptians cease
So to extol their huge Pyramides,
Let them grow silent of their Pharus, and
Conceal the other triumphs of their Land.
And let the Charians henceforth leave to raise
Their Mausolaea with such endless praise:
This Church alone does them as much excel
As they the lowest Cottages; where dwell
The least of men; as they those urnes: which keep
The smallest ashes which are laid to sleep.
Nor be thou vexed, thou glorious Queen of night;
Nor let a cloud of darkness mask thy light:
That renowned Temple, which the Greeks did call,
The Worlds seventh wonder; and the fairest of all
That Pile; so famous that the World did see
Two only great and high; thy Fame and Thee;
Is neither burnt nor perished: Ephesus
Survives the follies of Herostratus,
Only thy name in Europe to advance,
It was transported to the Realm of France:
And here it stands, not robbed of any grace
Which there it had; not altered save in place,
Cast thy Beams on it: and it will soon be proud,
Thy Temple was not ruined, but removed:
Nor are thy Rights so changed, but thou wilt aver
Ibis Christian is thy old Idolater.
But oh great God, how long shall thy Decree
permit this Temple to Idolatry:
How long shall they profane this Church and make
Those sacred Walls and Pavements to partake
Of their loud sins: and here that doctrine teach
Against which the very stones do seem to preach;
Reduce them Lord unto thee: make them see
How ill this building and their Rites agree;
Or make them know, though they be still the same,
This House was purposed only to thy Name.
The next place of note which the water conveyed us to, was the Town and Castle
of Pont d' Army, a place now scarce vissible in the auines: and belonging to
one Mr. Queran: it took name, (as they said) from a Bridge here built for the
transpo^tation of an Army; but this I cannot justify: Three Leagues down the
River is the Town of Abbeville; a Town conveniently seated on the Some, which
runs through it. It is of greater circuit within the walls, than the City
of Amiens, and has four parish Churches more in it, but is not so beautiful
nor so populous: for the houses here are of an older stamp: and there is within
the Town no scarcity of wast ground: I went round about the walls, and observed
the thinness of the houses, and the largeness of the fields; which are of that
capacity and extent, that for ought I could apprehend; the Town needs never to
be compelled by famine, if those fields were husbanded to the best advantages:
the walls are of earth within and stone without: of an unequal breadth and in
some places rui^ous: A Castle it once had, of which there is now scarce any
thing remaining; instead of which and in places more convenient, they have
built out three bastions very large and capacious; and such which well manned,
needs not yield up on a summons. There are also a couple of Mounts raised nigh
unto the Wall at that place, where the Country is most plain; upon which good
Ordinance would have good command, but at this time there were none upon it:
without the wal^s it is diversely strengthened, having in some places a deep
ditch without water; in some a shallower ditch, but well filled with the
benefit of the benefit of the River: the others only a marish, and fennie
level, more dangerous to the enemy and service to the Town, than either of
the rest; and therefore never guarded by the Soldiers of the Garrison: but the
chief strength of it is five Companies of Swisses, 100. men in a Company,
proper tall fel^owes in appearance, and such as one would imagine fit for the
service: It was my chance to see them begin their watch; to which employment
they advanced with so good order and such show or stomach, as if they had not
gone to guard a sown, but possess one. Their watch was at Port de Boys, and
Port St. Valery: the first thing ^ear unto Hesden a frontier Town of Artoys:
the other five Leagues only from the Sea and Haven of St. Valery: from these
places most danger was feared, and therefore there kept most of their
Soldiers, and all their Ordinance. The Captain is named Mr. Aille a Grison by
birth, and reported for a good Soldier: besides him they have no Military
Commander: the Mayor of the Town, contrary to the common nature of Towns of
war, being there in highest authority: A privilege granted unto the Mayors
hereof not long since, as a reward due to one of their Integrities, who
understanding that the Governor of the Town held intelligence with the Arch
Duke; apprehended him, and sent him to the Court where he receceived his
punishment. This Abbeville (and so I leave it, and in it the berry of French
Lasses) is so called quasi Abbatis Villa, as formerly belonging to some Abbot.

July the last we took post-horse for Boulogne, if at least we may call those
Posthorses which we rode on: As lean they were as Envis is in the Poet: Macies
in corporatota, being most true of them. Neither were they only lean enough to
have their ribs numbered, but the very spur-gals had made such casements through
their skins, that it had been no greater difficulty to have surveyed their
entrails. A strange kind of Cattle in mine opinion, and such as had neither
flesh on their bones, nor skin on their flesh, nor hair on their skin. Sure I
am, they were not so lusty as the Horses of the Sun in Ovid: neither could we
say of them, flammiferis implent hinnitibus aur as: All the neighng we could
hear from the proudest of them, was only an old dry cough, which I Will assure
you did much comfort me, for by that noise I first learned there was life in
them. Upon such Anatomies of Horses, or to speak more properly, upon such
several heaps of bones were I and my company mounted, and when we expected,
however they seemed outwardly, to see somewhat of the post in them, my beast
began to move after an Aldermans pace, or like Envy in Ovid: Surgit humi
pigre, passuque incedet inerti. Out of this gravity no persuasion could work
them; the dull jades being grown insensible of the spur; and to hearten them
with wands would in short time have distressed the Country. Now was the Cart of
Diepe thought a speedy conveyance, and those that had the happiness of a Wagon
were esteemed too blessed, yea, though it came with the hazard of the old woman
and the wenches. If good nature, or a sight of their journeys ever did chance
to put any of them into a pace like a gallop, we were sure to have them tire in
the middle way, and so the remainder of the Stage was to be measured with our
own feet: being weary of this trade, I made bold to dismount the Postilion, and
ascended the Trunk Horse, where I sat in such magnificent posture, that the
best Carrier in Paris might have envied my felicity: behind me I had a good
large Trunk, and a Portmantue, before me a bundle of Cloaks, and a parcel of
Books. Sure I was, that if my stirrups could poize me equally on both sides,
that I could not likely fall backwards nor forwards. Thus preferred I
encouraged my Companions, who cast many an envious eye upon my prosperity: and
certainly there was not any of them, who might not more justly have said of me,
Tu as un meilleur temps que le pape, then poor Lauarillo's Master d^d, when he
allowed him an Onion for four days. This circumstance I confess might have
well been omitted, had I not great example for it. Philip de Comminees in the
midst of his grave and serious relation of the battle of Mont l' hierrie, has
a note much about this nature, which gave me encouragement, which is, that
himself had an old Horse half tired (and this was just my case) who by chance
thrust his head into a pail of Wine, and drunk it off, which made him lustier
and friskier that day than ever before, but in that his Horse had better luck
than I had.

On the right hand of us, and almost in the middle way betwixt Abbeville and
Boulogne, we left the Town of Monstreville, which we had not leisure to see. It
seemed daintily seated for command and resistance; as being built upon the top
and declivity of an hill, it is well strengthened with Bastions and ramparts on
the outside and has within a Garrison of five Companies of Soldiers: their
Governor (as I learned of one of the Paisants) being called Lenroy: And indeed
it concerns the King of France to l^ck well to his Town of Monstreville, as
being a border Town within two miles of Artoys; and especially co^si^ering,
that the taking of it would ^ut off all intercourse between the Countries of
Boulogne and Calais with the rest of France. Of the like importance also are
the Towns of Abbeville and Amiens; and that the French Kings are not ignorant
of: Insomuch that those two only, together with that of St. Quintin, being put
into the hands of Philip Duke of Burgundy, to draw him from the party of the
English, were redeemed again by Lewis the eleventh for 450000. Crowns, an
infinite sum of money, according to the standard of those times, and yet it
seems the King of France had no bad bargain of it; for upon an hope only of
regaining those Towns, Charles Earl of Charoloys, Son to Duke Philip, undertook
that war against King Lewis, by which at the last he lost his life, and
hazarded his estate.

CHAP. V.
The Country of Boulonnois, and Town of Boulogne, by whom enfranchised: The
present of salt butter. Boulogne divided into two Towns. Procession in the low
Town to divert the Plague. The forms of it. Processions of the Letany, by whom
brought into the Church. The high Town garrisoned: The old man of Boulogne: The
neglect of the English in leaving open the Havens. The fraternity de la
charity, and inconvenience of it. The costly journey of Henry the eigth to
Boulogne. Sir Wa^ter Raleighs censure of that Prince condemned: the
discourtesie of Charles the fifth toward our Edward the sixth. The defense of
the House of Burgundy how chnrgeable to the Kings of England: Boulogne
re-yeilded.

WE are now come to the Country of Boulonnois, which though a part of Picardy,
disdaineth yet to be so counted; but will be reckoned a County of it self: It
comprehends in it the Towns of Boulogne, Escapes and Neus-Chastel,
beside-divers Villages, and consists much of hills and valleys, much after the
nature of England; the soil being indifferent fruitful of corn, and yiedling
more glass than any other part of France (which we saw) for the quantity.
Neither is it only a County of it self but it is in a manner also a free
County; it being holden immediately of the Virgin Mary; who is, no question, a
very gracious Land Lady: For when King Lewis the eleventh, after the decease of
Charles of Burgundy, had taken in Boulogne* Anno 1477. As new Lord of the Town
(thus John de Sierries relates it) he did homage without sword or spurs,
bareheaded, and on his knee before the Virgin Mary, offering unto her image an
heart of Massy gold, weighing two thousand Crowns; he added also this, that he
and his successors after him being Kings should hold the County of Boulogne of
the same Virgin, and do homage unto her image in the great Church of the higher
Town dedicated to her name, giving (...) every change of a Vassal an heart of
pure gold of the same weight. Since that time the Boulonnois being the Tennants
of our Lady, have enjoyed a perpetual exemption from many of those tributes and
taxes under which the rest of France are miserably afflicted. Amongst others
they have been always freed from the gabel of Salt, by reason whereof, and by
the goodness of their pastures, they have there the best Butter in all the
Kingdom, I say, partly by reason of their Salt, because having it at a low rate
they do liberally season all their Butter with it; whereas they which do buy
their Salt at the Kings price cannot afford it any of that dear commodity: Upon
this ground, it is the custom of these of Boulonnois to send unto their Friends
of France and Paris a barrel of Butter seasoned according to their fashion; a
present no less ordinary and acceptable, than Turkeys, Capons, and the like are
from our Country Gentlemen to those of London.

As for the Town of Boulogne it is divided into two parts, la haute Ville, and
la Bass Ville, or the High Town, and the Low Town, distant one from the other
about an hundred paces and upwards. The high Town is seated upon the top of an
hill; the low Town upon the the declivity of it and toward the Haven: Or else
we may divide it into two other parts, Viz. the Town and the City; the Town
that toward the water, and the City; that which lies above it. It was made a
City in the reign of Henry the second, Anno 1553. at which time the City of
Terorenne was totally ruined by the Imperials, and the Bishop was removed
^^ther: The Church of Nostre Dame being made the Cathedral: there came along
hither upon the remove of the Bishop 20. Chanoins, which number is here still
retained; their revenues being about a 1000. Livers yearly: as for the present
Bishop, his name is Pierre de Arm, his intrado twenty thousand Livers: His
Metropolitan he of Rhemes: The Town or (as they call it) the low Town is bigger
than the City, and better built, the streets larger, and the people richer,
most of the Merchants living in it, because it lies above the Haven: but that
which made this low town most pleasing, was a solemn procession that passed
through the streets of it, intended to pacify Gods anger, and divert the
plague, which at that time was in the City.

In the first front there was carried the Cross, and after that the holy and
sanctified Banner; next unto it followed all the Priests of the Town
bareheaded, and in their Surplices, singing as they went the services destinate
to that occasion: after them followed the Men, and after them the Women of the
Town by two and two, it being so ordered by the Roman Ritual. Vt Laicia
Cl^ricis, faeminae a viris separatae prosequantur. On the other side of the
street went the Brethren dela Charity, every one of them holding in his hand a
little triangular Banner, or a Pennon: after them the Boys and Wenches: in this
method did the solemnity measure every lane and angle of the Town, the Priests
singing, and all the people answering them in the same note. At the Church they
began it in prayer, and having visited all the Town, they returned again
thither to end it with the same devotion. An action vety grave and solemn, and
such as I could very well allow of, were it not only for one prayer, which is
always said at the time of this performance, and addition of the Banners: The
prayer is this; Exaudi nos Deus salutaris noster, and intercedente beata and
gloriosa Dei genetrice Maria semper Virgin, and Sebastiano beato Martyr tuo
(this Sebastian is their Aesculapius, or Tutelary Saint against the sickness)
and omnibus Sanctis populum tuum ab iracundiae tuae terroribus libera, and
misericordiae tuae fac largitate securum. Amen. This only excepted, there is
nothing in the whole Liturgy of it, which can be offensive to any conscience
not idle scrupulous.

These Processions were first instituted by Pope Stephanus the second, who
began his Popedom Anno 752. the intent of them is, as Platina reports, Ad
placandam Dei iram. The first place that they ever went to in Procession, was
the Church of our Lady in the Shambles, or ad Sanctam Dei genitricem ad
praesepe, as the Historia calls them. As for the Letany, which is a principal
part of it, it was first compiled by Mamercus Bishop of Vienna in Daulphine, in
the time of Pope Leo the first, which was 308. years after the time of
Stephanus. The motive of it was the often danger to which France was subject by
reason of the frequency of Earthquakes: Since those beginnings, which were fair
and commendable, the Romish Church has added much to them of magnificence, and
somewhat of impiety and profaneness. As for the Brethren de la Charity, I
could not learn any thing of their original, but much of their office: for they
are bound to visit all such as are infected with the Plague, to minister unto
them all things necessary, and if they die, to shroud them and carry them to
their graves. These duties they perform very willingly, being possessed with
this fancy, that they are privileged from contagion by virtue of their Order;
and to say the truth, they are most of them old, and so less subject to it; and
indeed such sapless, thin, and unbodied fellows, that one would think almost no
disease could catch them: yet has their prerogative not always held to them:
Of thirty three of them in Callice three only surviving the disease about four
years since: But were the danger to which themselves are liable all the
inconvenience of it, I should not much disallow it. There is a greater mischief
waiting upon it, and that is the infecting of others; they immediately after
their return from the Pesthouse mixing themselves with any of their
neighbors: A most speedy means to spread the pestilence, where it is once
begun, though neither they nor the people will be persuaded unto it.

The City or the high Town stands, as we have said, on the top of the hill,
environed with deep ditches, a strong wall, and closed with a treble gate* and
two draw-bridges: a little small Town it is, not much above a slights shoot
thwart where it is widest; and has in it but one Church besides that of Nostre
Dame, which is the Cathedral: the streets not many, and those narrow, unless it
be in the market place; where the Corpus du Guard is ^ept. What the outworks
are, or whether it has any or no I cannot say; Even in this time of League and
peace, their jealousy will not permit an English man to walk their wall,
either within the Town or without. A Castle they said, that it has; bur such a
one as seems more for a dwelling than a fort. The Garrison of this Town
consists of five Companies, sixty in a Company, which amount in all to 300.
their Governor being Mr. de Anmont son to the Marshal de Anmont, who so
faithfully adhered to Henry the fourth in the beginning of his troubles: the
cause why this Town being so small is so strongly Garrisoned is the safe
keeping of the Haven which is under it; and the command of the passage from the
Haven up into the Country: The first of these services it can hardly perform
without much injury to the low Town which stands between them; but for the
ready discharge of the last it is daintily seated, for though to spare the low
Town, they should permit an enemy to land; yet as soon as he is in his march
up into the higher Country, their Ordinance will tear him to pieces: But for
the immediate security of the Haven, their Ancestors did use to fortify the
old Town standing on the top of the hill, called La Tower de Order; it is said
to have been built by Julius Caesar, at the time of his second expedition into
Britain: this Haven being then Portus Gessorianus. This Tower which, we now
see, seems to be but the remainder of a greater work; and by the height and
situation of it, one would guess it to have been the Key or watch Tower unto
the rest; it is built of rude and vulgar stone, but strongly cemented together;
the figure of it is six square, every square of it being nine paces in length:
A compass to little for a Fortress; and therefore it is long since it was put
to that use: it now serving only as a Sea mark by day and a Pharos by night.
Vbi accensae noctu faces navigantium cursum dirigunt. The English men call it
the Old man of Boulogue: and not improperly; for it has all the signs of age
upon it. The Sea has by undermining it, taken from it all the earth, about two
squares of the bottom of it, the stones begin to drop out from the top; and
upon the rising of the wind, you would think it were troubled with the Palsy:
in a word two hard winters, seconded with a violent tempest, makes it rubbish:
what therefore is wanting of present strength to the Haven in this ruin of a
Tower, the wisdom of this age has made good in a Garrison. And here me thinks
I might justly ac^use the impolitick thrift of our former Kings of England, in
not laying out some money upon the strength and safety of our Haven Towns; not
one of them ( Portsmouth only excepted) being Garrisoned: true it is, that
Henry the eighth did e^ect Block-Houses in many of them* but what b^bles they
are, and how unable to resist a Flees royally appointed is known to every one*
I know indeed we were sufficiently Garrisoned by out Name; could it either keep
a watch on all particular places, or had it no^ sometimes occasion to be
absent; I hope our Kings are not of Darius mind in the story, qu^ gloriosius
ra^us est hostem (...), quam non admittere: neither will I take (...) to give
counsel; only I could wish that we were not inferior to our neighbors in
the greatness of our care; since we are equal to the best of them in the
goodness of our Country.

This Town of Boulogne and the Country about it was taken by Henry the eighth
of England, Anno 1545. himself being in person at the siege; a very costly and
chargeable victory. The whole list of his Forces did amount to 44000. foot, and
3000. horse: Field Pieces he drew after him above a hundred, besides those of
smaller making, and for the conveyance of their Ordinance, baggage, and other
provision, there were transported into the Continent above 25000. Horses. True
it is that his designs had a further aim, had not Charles the Emperor, with
whom he was to join, left the field, and made peace without him, So that
judging only by the success of the expedition, we cannot but say that the
winning of Boulonnois was a dear purchase; and indeed in this one particular
Sr. Walter Raleigh in the preface to his most excellent History says not amiss
of him, namely, that in his vain and fruitless expeditions abroad, he consumed
more treasure, than all the rest of our victorious Kings before him did in
their several Conquests: The other part of his censure of that Prince, I know
not well what to think of, as merely composed of gall and bitterness: Only I
cannot but much marvail that a man of his wisdom, being raised from almost
nothing by the Daughter, could be so severely invective against the Father:
certainly a most charitable judge cannot but condemn him of want of true
affection and duty to his Queen: seeing that it is (as his late Majesty has
excellently noted in his ASILIKON DOPON) a thing monstrous to see a man love
the Child and hate the Parents: And therefore he may earnestly enjoin his Son
Henry, to repress the insolency of such as under pretense to tax a vice in the
person* seek craftily to stain the Race.

Presently after this taking Boulogne, the French again endeavored the
regaining of it, even during the life of the Conqueror; but he was strong
enough to keep his gettings: After his death the English being engaged in a
war against the Scots, and Kit having raised a rebellion in Norfolk they began
again the reconquest of it, and that more violently than ever. Upon news of
their preparations, an Embassage was dispatched to Charles the fifth to desire
succors of him; and to lay before him the infancy and several necessity of the
young King, who was then about the age of ten years. This desire when the
Emperor had refused to hearken to, they besought him, that he would at the
least be pleased to take into his hands and keeping the Town of Boulogne, and
that for no longer time, than until King Edward could make an end of the
troubles of his Subjects at home. An easy request; yet did he not only deny
to satisfy the King in this, except he would restore the Catholic Religion,
but he also expressly commanded, that neither any of his men or munition should
go to the assistance of the English. An ingratitude for which I cannot find a
fitting Epithet, considering what fast friends the Kings of England have
always been to the united Houses of Burgundy and Austria; what moneys they
have helped them with, and what sundry wars they have made for them, both in
Belgium to maintain their authority, and in France to augment their potency:
from the marriage of Maximilian of the Family of Austria with the Lady Mary of
Burgundy, which happened in they ear 1478. unto the death of Henry the eighth,
which fell in the year 1548. are just seventy years, in which time only it is
thought by men of knowledge and experience, that it cost the Kings of England
at the least six millions of pounds in the mere quarrels and defense of the
Princes of those Houses. An expense which might seem to have earned a greater
requital than that now demanded. Upon this denial of the unkindful Emperor, a
Treaty followed between England and France: The effect of it was, that Boulogne
and all the Country of it should be restored to the French, by paying to the
English at two days of payment 800000. Crowns. Other Articles there were, but
this the principal: and so the fortune of young Edward was like that of Julius
Caesar toward his end: Dum clementiam, quam praestiterant, expectant, incauti
ab ingratis occupati sunt.

The CONCLUSION. A General censure of France, and the French. A gratulation to
England. The end of our journey.
ON wednesday the third of August, having stayed in Boulogne three days for
wind and company, and not daring to venture on Calice, by reason of the
sickness there raging, we took ship for England: the day fair, and the wind
fitly serving us, we were quickly got out of the harbor into the main. And so
I take my leave of France, a Country which I know not whether it be more happy
in it self, or more unhappy in its Inhabitants. This I am almost confident of,
that the worst of its commodities are the people; who by no virtue of theirs,
which my understanding is yet guilty of, deserve to grow there: France then
being in their possession, is like a delicate choice dish of meat disgraced in
the cooking: Or to give you my verdict of them both, both Men and Country;
modestly, and in a word, I think you never saw a fair Lady worse marred, and
indeed to speak the truth --,

But soft; What white is that which I epsy,
Which with its luster does eclipse mine eye?
That which does Neptunes fury so disdain,
And beats the billow back into the main?
It is some dreadful Scylla fast'ned there,
To shake the Sayler into prayer and fear:
Or its some I stand floating on the Wave,
Of which in Writers we the stories have:
It Is England; hah! it is so: clap, clap your hands,
That the full noise may strike the nighb'ring lands
Into a Palsy: Does not that loved name
Move you to ecstasy? Oh were the same
As dear to you as me; that very word
Would make you dance and caper over board.
Dull Shipemen, how they move not, how their hoof
Grows to the planks: yet stay, here is sport enough:
For see the Sea Nimphs foot it, and the fish
Leap their high measures, equal to my wish
Triton does sound his shell; and to delight me,
Old Nereus hobbleth with his Amphitrite.
Excellent triumphs! but (cursed Fates) the Main
Quickly divides, and takes them in again:
And left me dying; till I came to land
And kissed my dearest Mother in her sand.
Hail happy England! hail thou sweetest I Will,
Within whose bounds no Pagan rites defile
The purer Faith; Christ is by Saints not mated;
And he alone is worshipped that created.
In thee the laboring man enjoys his wealth;
Not subject to the Lords rape; or the stealth
Of hungry Publicans: In thee thy King
Fears not the power of any underling,
Or petty Prince; but by his awful word
Commands not more the Beggar than the Lord.
In thee those heavenly beauties lie, would make
Most of the Gods turn Mortals for their sake:
Such as out-go report, and make Fame see,
They stand above her bigg'st Hyperbole:
And yet to strangers will not grude the bliss
Of salutation and an harmless kiss.
Hail then sweet England! May I breath my last
In thy loved arms: and when my days are past,
And to the silence of the grave I must,
All I desire is, Thou would keep my Dust.
And now I am safely come into my Country, where, according to the custom of
the Ancients, I offer up my thanksgiving to the God of the Waters, and testify
before his Altars the grateful acknowledgement of a safe voyage, and a
prosperous return: Blessings which I never merited.

-- Me tabula sacer
Votiva paries indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta inariis Deo.
FINIS.
March 11. 1655. This Book is Entered J. BUROUGHS

Printed or sold by William Leake, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet
between the two Temple Gates:

These Books following.
YOrk's Heraldry, Folio A Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 40. Orlando
Furioso, Folio Callis learned Readings on the S^at. 21. Hen. 8. Chap. 5 of
Sewers Perkins on the Law of Engl. Wikinsons Office of Sheriffs Persons Law.
Mirror of Justice Topics in the Laws of Engl. Sken de significatione Verborum
Delamon's use of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilby's 2d. set of Music, 3, 4, 5,
and 6 parts Corderius in English Doctor Fulk's Meteors, with Observations
Malthus Fireworks Nyes Gunnery and Fireworks Cator Major with Annotations, by
Will. Austin Esquier Mel Helliconium by Alexander Rosse Nosce teipsum by Sr.
John Davis Animadversions on Lillies Grammar The History of Vienna and Paris.
Lazarillo de Tormes Hero and Leander by G. Chapman and Christoph. Marlow.
Posing of the Accidence Guilliam's Heraldry Herberts Travels Man become guilty,
by John Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth Excersitatio
Scolastica The Idiot in 4. books; the first and second of Wisdom; the third of
the Mind; the fourth of Statick Experiments of the Balance. The life and Reign
of Henry the eighth, written by the Lord Herbert. Aulalucis, or the house of
light The Fort Royal of Holy Scriptures, by I. H. the third Edition. A Tragedy
of Christ's Passion, written by the most learned Hugo Grotius, and Englished by
George Sands. Mathematical Recreations, with the general Horological Ring and
the double Horizontal Dial, by William Oughtred The Garden of Eden, or an
Acurate description of all Flowers and Fruits now growing in England, with
particular rules how to advance their Nature and Growth as well in Seeds and
Herbs, as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants, by that learned and great
Observer Sir Hugh Plat, Knight, the fourth Edition Solitary devotions with man
in glory, by the most Reverend and holy Father Ansolem, Archbishop of
Canterbury.
PLAYS.
Henry the Fourth. Philaster The Wedding. The Hollander. Maids Tragidy. King
and no King. The grateful Servant. The strange discovery The Merchant of
Venice.

