A pleasant DISCOURSE Between CONSCIENCE and Plain-dealing.

Discovering their Travels, and hard Fortunes since these Times began; and what
hard shifts they have bin put too, for want of Entertainment.

With their Resolution once more: to try their Fortunes; and to discover in
their Travels, all that are enemies to Conscience and Plain-dealing: and to
give notice to all honest Men, in all Cities, and Towns, to beware of their
Hipocriticall double dealing, in their Tradings.

Then listen all People now, for we are fully bent
To tell knavs their own, and give honest men content
Written by C H. A well-wisher to Conscience and Plain-dealing; and to all
those that will entertain them.

But for him that wishes ill to them, or me.

Pray pass a long, A. K. I. C. V. B.

London Printed for Richard Burt^n

A pleasant DISCOURSE Between CONSCIENCE and Plain-dealing.
Plain-dealing. O Mr. Conscience well-met, whether are you walking so fast; I
wonder to see you here in ye City, I think you have few friends here to
entertain you, as well as I.


Conscience. Honest Plain-dealing I am glad to see thee in health, and as I may
say I am glad to see thy heels at liberty, for it is a wonder some Knave or other
claps thee not in Prison, for telling him of his double dealing.


Plain. In truth Conscience, I Will tell thee what I am fain to do (as many
honest. Men do now a days yt are my Freindes) e'ne say nothing, but give them a
touch now and then, and bid them remember thee; there is some will say nothing,
and perhaps will harken to me; and some again (and the most part too) will
tell me that they do not care if thee and I were both hanged; for they can
live without us.


Con. Well, Mr. Plain-dealing, for I will give you that Title too now? for they
are all Masters, and Mistresses here in the City. For being the other day with
an honest poor man that loves me? for now a days most of all my acquaintance
are none of the richest? Drinking a cup of Beer; in comes on for a penny worth
of Ale, I seeing her to be a poor Woman profferd her a cup of Beer, and called
her Gammer, she gave me such a ugly look, and told me she was as able to give
me a cup a Beer, as I was to give her: so going out of doors, I heard the
Woman of the House call her Mistress: and told her, that made 16. d. so I asked
the Woman, whether she was a Gentlewoman that was brought to Poverty by these
times; (as many there be now, the more is the pity) no, she told me she was a
Dunghill raker, and her Father had bin a Small-cole Crier from his Childhood,
and her Husband was a Map-maker; and truly I think if her Husband should want
stock, I think all the Clothes of he Back would scarce a yielded him 6. d. to
make Maps off: and so ever since, I have learned to call every on in the City
Master and Mistress; and I think you deserve the Title Mr. Plain-dealing as
well as another.


Plain. Well Mr. Conscience let it be so, we must Sir every Jack now, and so
must you, for there is Sir John, Sir honest-man, and Sir knave too: but com
honest Friend let us not talk here in ye street, for I am going to a Friend of
ours; I know will bid us both welcome, for he loves all that loves us, it is but
in Cloth-fayre,


Con. Sir, I will be ready to go with you, I know who you mean, he and I am very
well acquainted.


Plain. So, here is the house, come lets go in for he will be as glad to
entertain us, as we are to see him.

With your leave old Aquaintance, I have made bold to bring a Friend of mine
along with me, I hope he is well come as well as I.


Author. Why Ge^tlemen, you are both my old aquaintance, and one as welcome as
the other to me, and ever was, and I desire to entertain you both as long as
I Live, and I desire to entertain all such as entertain you, according to my
poor Ability; and I hope all honest men will do the like: if I had never met
with Knaves, (as it is too well known I have) my love to you should be more
bountifully shown.

Take in love kind Friends,
what so ere you find here?
You ar truly welcome unto me,
and that is your best Cheer.
For he that does Conscience and
Plain-dealing entertain,
Though poor, yet nere shall want,
while with him they remain.
And so here is to you both,
pray let us hear anon,
What in your Travells,
you have undergon.

Plain. For my part I have Traveled most parts of this Land, in Country, Town,
and City; I never wanted I must confess, for still found some that would
entertain me, and they would send me from one to another in my Travells: but
I went still as a Man turned out of sevice, and went to seek one. So coming one
Friday into Smithfield to ye sign of ye Black-boy, and there 3 or 4
Country-like Men drinking, ask't what Countryman I was; I told them a West
Countrie-man; they ask't me with I came to London for, I told them to seek a
service if I could meet with an honest Master; they ak't me with I could do, I
told them any thing to get a living in ye way of truth and honesty; and they
were all willing to entertain me: one of them asked my name; I told them it
was Plain-dealing; they laughed at me, and asked me if I were so simple to come
out of ye Country, to seek a service in London, and especially in Smithfield
amongst Horse-scoursers; they told me that my Friend Conscience was gone out of
London, long since, Just as the wars begun, and I had best go after, for I
should find but small entertainment hear, and for their parts they were not
able to keep me; they told me, being ye Wars was begun, I had best go and be a
Soldier; for there was want of me amongst them on both sides, as they heard;
so I went down to Westminster amongst the Lawyers, and others that were there,
and about the City in other places among the Shop keepers, the Bakers, the
Brewers, ye Cooks the Butchers, ye Brokers, and the Tailors: some entertained
me for a whil, and when I told them that conscience would not give me leave to
do such things as they would have me do, they told me that they must not be
ruled by conscience, nor by me neither, for they must do as their Neighbors
did, or else they were not able to live, so well as they did: so I could not
stay long in a place? so I was resolved to seek out my Friend Conscienc, and
now we have met here at my Friends House, pray Mr. Conscience tell me how you
parted out of ye City.


Con. Well I will Sir, I did live here in the City a little before these Wars
began pretty well? and had many Friends that did entertain me, but then Pride,
and Covetousness, and Envy got in, and never left til they had banished me
clean out; and then the difference begun between the King and Parliament, and
here was like to be Wars, and I seeing that, resolved to go into the Country,
to see what Friends I could find there, that I might live quiet if I could, for
that was my desire, and there I found some Friends now and then, but they could
not do as they would, nor dare not keep me long, for either one Army or other
was with them still; and there was some Knaves on both sides that could not
endure me, and would make the poor People for to deny me, and say anything to
save their Goods: They would Pray very heartily for them before their faces,
and wish that they were Hanged, or that the Devil had them, behind their
Backs: Look what Side soever came, they must be for them and say as they say;
when it was sore against me, but some Soldiers would be to hand for them and
tell them they were on on side, when they were on another? when it may be they
had persuaded the People out of there Religion; then when they had known all
there minds tell them they were of the other side; it may be rail on that
side, and call them Rogues to their faces, but then the great Crock and little
Crock, and all must go, I and carry away the man of the house too, and I along
with them; so then if the poor man would not turn me off, and deny me his
purse-strings must pay sou^dly fort; for some of the Soldiers could not endure
me; then none of the poor people durst entertain me any longer: then I was
fain to go into the Armies, and to speak the truth, I found Gentlemen on both
sides that did love me, and would entertain me; and I prevaild much with a
great many of them, so that wheresoever my Masters marched, the Countries fair'd
the better, and they fair'd never the worse; for to be sure what soever mishap
befell them, I would never leave them; if my Masters on either side were taken
Prisoners, I would stir up on or other of that side that were their enemies to
help them, and to be sure either released or relieved, so I continved in the
wars, til some of my Masters had spent and lost all their estates, and some left
off when they saw things did not go as they thought it would do, so I left off
too: and when I saw there was no hopes of peace, but still there was like to be
Rising, and Mutring, and murmuring still; so I took my leave of those masters I
had that was resolvd to stay in the Army, and prayed them to remember me in all
there martches and they promised me they would, and I told them I should be
very glad to hear the welfare of all them that loved me so taking my leave I
came to London,

But jle go and visit some Friends in the Country sometimes, and to see
fashions, and to discover the knaveryes of those that does not love thee nor
me, (Brother Plain-dealing.) And jle discover them all, for jle favor none let
them take it how they will: for Conscienc must speak the truth, but pray how
was your progress in the Country the time of the War.


Plain. Why in truth Brother Conscience, even such another Progress as you
had, indeed they that did love me, sufferd most; for them that would swear,
and domineere, and be on both-sides, and speak against their Neighbors, and
tell the Soldiers, such was Roundheads, and such was Cavaliers, and all to
save themselves; such perhaps escaped well enough: but since the times has been
quiet, I have seen abundance of such Rogues, that can scarce get a bit of
Bread, to put in their heads, for no honest body can abide them, nor will set
them aworke, and for my part jle nere pity them, and they were hanged I should
nere grive for them; for many an honest man that loved thee and me, has bin
undone by them: I and there was many Soldiers that were as bad: some would run
from the King to the Parliament, and then they would tell that such and such
were Caveliers;, and that such a Man had sent the King Money, and that another
had sent a Horse, yt another had sent Vittalls? when alack, it was taken from
them by force; which made the poor men be Plundered by both Armies; for what
the one left the other took: and some again would run from the Parliament, to
the King, and tell that such and such was Roundheads, and so cause them to be
plundered, I think either side might have spared such as those to the Hangman,
and the Armies nere the more weakened, for when the Armies were a Fighting to be
sure they would be a Plundering, and never go in danger, for fear of taking:
for they knew whereto they must, ean put on their Hempen band and up be trust:
but well leave off this discourse for there are some hear that would feign
hear our opinion of the times and prithy Brother Conscience what do thou
think of them, do think we shall have peace now.


Con. Why Brother Plain-dealing I must say as many now will say, if you ask me
I cannot tell, but jle tell thee my opinion, so long as thee and I are so
little regarded as we are, there will be on hart-burning or another, what say
thou Brother.


Plain- And truly Brother Conscience be plain and brief, God cannot be
pleased with us so long as these Sins Reigns thus in the Land; Pride raigns
instead of Humility; Covetousness, instead of Charity, Drunkenness, instead
of Sobriety; Wrath and Envy, instead of Love, and Unity: instead of Peace,
Discention, Backbiters, and Slanderers; and instead of Plain-dealing Cusening
and Cheating: these are the sins that hinders our Peace, for the Lord says
there shall be no Peace to the wicked.


Con. You speak truth Brother, the Country complains, and City too of the
Excise, and Taxes, and Rates, and the deadness of Trading; and they do not
consider it is their sins that has caused these burdens, to be laid upon the
Land,


Plain. Indeed Brother Conscience, I must confess, in my travells, I have
heard great complaint in the Inns and Alehouses, of the Excise: for my part
jle be plain with them, that if it were taken off no body would be the better
for it, unless it were them; unless there were some strickt course taken in
ordering what Beer they should Brew, and how they should sell it, for there is
no body pays the Excise but Tradesmen, Good-fellows, and Travellors; let Malt
be cheap or dear, ye Ale is all at on price, and all on goodness; a Iug or a
Flaggon for 2. d. Indeed they cannot live unless they get 9. d. in the
shilling, and so I think they do many times in their misreckonings, their
Frothing of Iugs, and their half bottomed Flaggons: with your eight penny, and
ten penny ordinaries to your Passengers and Travelers when they scarce eat a
pennyworth of victuals, and your Waggoners and Carriers pays a great or 6 d
or nothing perhaps, and eats a shillings worth of victuals: you had need be
eased of your Excise; you are not fatt enough already; Silke-gownes and
Peticotes and Bever-hats is not good enough for you; your Children, in
Silver-lace, when it may be your Parents could scarce bring you up without the
Alms of the Parish; some of you knows it, and I know it too: for I am
Plain-dealing and must tell you of it, if good-fellows would be ruled by me,
you should use a better Conscience to get your Money, and not maintain you in
Silks, when many an honest Farmer, and Trades-mans Wife; is glad to get good
Cloth on their backs: it is true I could wish the poor Farmers were eased of
their Taxes and Rates, for the Lord make us thankful all things are so
plentiful that he m^st be a good Husband whether he will or no; or else he
were not able to undergo them: but for your proud unconscionable Hostises I
pity them not much, if I should see some course taken with them, for ye
exacting on Travelers, as I should of a Baker, when he is to go to the Pillory
for making of light Bread, I hope ere long there will be a course taken for
both, and when they see it, they must make use of me more then they did.


Con. Now you talk of Bakers Brother, I Will speak my Conscience I thin^e they
are as unconscionable in many places as the Ale-Wives: and I could name some
Chief places of my Travels where I think they should have been better looked
after, there is Noridge an anchient City I think there penny Bread was full
as big as halfe-penny Bread in other places, I told my Landelord at
Abrahams-hall that I would have them in Print, there is Bristow and Salisbury
too, and many other places that I could name, Conscience must needs tell their
Maiestrates that they are in the blame.


Plain. Well Brother Consc^ence, i will tell thee what we will do; we will go travel
once more? thou shall go Northward and I Will go West-warde, and so we will
Cercuit till we meet at London again, we will visit every great Fair, for there
we shall find out abou^dance of Knavery, for ye Proverb goes there is Knavery in
all Trads: and I hope we shall find some honest Men of all Trads which will
entertain us. I intend to see Bristoll Fair (God willing) for there comes
Trads-men from all Parts; and abundance of Londoners, and yt Country people
are very fearful of them.

And for any thing as I see, there is as much double dealing used in ye
Country by your Trads-men there, as there is by your Londoners? and you are
too hard for them sometimes? when your Sop-keepers in ye Country gives such a
Crack, which makes such a Sound in the Londoners ears, that they are the worse
fort a great while afterward.


Con. Honest Plain-dealing I am willing to take thy Advice and see the Country
once more? and now every thing is so Plentiful we will see what entertainment
thee and I shall have: I Will stay Bartholomew-Fayre at London, and then to
Sturbridge, and so to Yorkshire^ for there I had used to be much regarded
amongst Them.

Good Ale is the dearest Penny worth there? for Vitalls will cost you little or
nothing, if you be a good fellow.

But honest Brother, prithee let me give thee some Instructions in your Travel:
and I would desire some of yours, for where I am, i will put them in mind of you:
and where you are, bid them remember me.


Plain. Well I will, and now tell me what I shall do, for Plaindealing must be
ruld by Conscience and Conscience by Plaindealing? for he that uses one, must
use the other.


Con. First bid the Shopkeepers and Sails-men, provide them light Shops, and
not dark Romes? whereby to deceive their Customers, to make them take old
Cloth instead of new, and course Cloth instead of fine. And bid the
Whole-saile Men sell good Peny-worths to their Customers, and when they trust
them not take to much Gains: For here they get naught but Ink and Paper for
their pains: and pray bid all Tradesmen their, have a care of Lying, for it
may be they dare not Swear, for fear they are made pay for it? and bid their
Customers not believe them when they say they loose by their commodities, or get
nothing by them, for such as those will cheat them most? and pray invite all
the Horse-scorcers in the Fair that makes much of thee and me, and bid them to
dinner but to be sure do not provide too much vittals, for fear your company
be so small, you must be glad to eat it your self, pray invite them to the
Sign of the Logger-head, for that is near the Fair: and pray bid the
Hop-merchants keep there Flemish Hopps, and sell there English if they have
any; bid them have a care they do not sell Flemmish instead of English, for if
they Love me, they will not: and bid the Bakers remember me, and tell them you
are a Friend of mine, and must take notice of such as Loves not Conscience and
Plain-dealing; bid them all remember thee and I? and tell them that the Fair
would be a great deal the better, (and all Fayres, and Markets else) if they
would make use of thee and I, to help them in their Buying and Selling? and
not use false Waights and Measures, and deceitfullnesse in their Trading: for
light gains, and quick sail, will make a heavy Pursse.


Plain. Well Brother Consc^ence, I intend to follow thy directions, and prithy
where thou go bid them remember me: and let not Shopkeepers and Trads Men
use double dealing so much as they do? nor keep but one sort of Waights, and
Measures, to buy and sell by: and let them turn out Hypocracy out of their
Shops, for a great many have kept him to be the Foreman of the Shop instead of
me? and so have deceived the People: but I hope we shall discover them all:
for the People begin to find them out already, for indeed, and forsooth, and in
truth? they have cheated many an honest Man: not an Oath, but as many Lies as
you please: I advise all to have a care of them, and nor deal with any, if you
know them to be such: for he that will Swear, will Ly, and he that will Ly
would Swear too, if it were not in hopes to Coussen you the more.

Pray remember me to all the honest Inns, and Alehouses that you go too in
your Travells, and tell them they will be near the poorer for entertaining you.
For indeed in the North parts, and especially in Yorkshire they use some
Conscience there, therefore you need not fear entertainment. Remember me to al
our Friends at Shefield, and bid the Cutlers there not glaze their knives so
much as they do, nor Bromygum neither, for they leave so little Steel on, yt
when they are used a while the heat of the meat melts all the steel away: there
is a place called Cuckolds-haven near Shefield, where I hard, the Host of the
House formerly dealt so much with that Ware, and had so much credit of his
dealers in Sheffield; and got so much credit by his Ware, by Sea and Land, yt
he has built him this plac called Cuc^olds-haven? which by report cost his
dealers three hundrd pound ye building: where they got so much by him I know
not? but good brother Conscience come not there, for he will turn you out of
doors, for by report he never knew you in his life, and he cares not for
strangers, its ye trick of a knav you will say: it is pity knavs should flourish so
in Town and City.

Pray Brother Conscience bid ye Cloathyers to br^ng as much Cloth as they can
this Summer, while the weather is dry? but let them give good measure when they
sell it? and persuade ye people yt buys it: to take enough for fear they
should find none to match it when it is shrunk: and pray advise all Coun rey-men
and wmoen yt comes to Markets and Fayres, to have a care how that they part
from their Money, and let them not part from it to them that will take it at a
venture, and never tell it, for then they will have nothing for it; but trouble
to find it again: and pray let all country men and others where they are
merry, and in drink: have a care of Gaming, for fear they meet with a dish of
Rooks that will be so saucy they,l not be able to digest them in a good while
after, and I would advise Young men to have a care of their pockets, and Maids
have a care of their plackets, for when yt drink is in ye wit is out, for both
may have sour sance to their sweet meat, if they have not a care.

And in the next place I advise all, let them be rich or poor, old or young,
to hate swearing, and lying, cusening and cheating, quarling and fighting, do
as they would be don by? keep a good conscience, and love plaindealing. Let a
man be honest, Just and fair, then where he goes he need not care; So once
more we are resolvd to see, where conscience and plaindealing best entertained
shall-be. And when we have gone our circut round we will tell you where conscience
and plaindealing may be found: so fare well tell we do meet again: for
conscience and plaindealing, among some does still remain. The


The Authors advice.
WEll honest Men and Women, either in Country or City? let me like a friend,
advise you to take notice of what you have hard here in this Book; and be not
angry if Conscienc and Plain-dealing has told you of some of your faults, if
you are wise you will seek to amend them, and not like a Gaul'd-horse kick and
wince when you are rubd? and though it be a Proverb amongst a many, that
Conscience is hanged, and he that loves Plain-dealing will ^ie a Beggar? yet tell
those Knaves where you do them see: that Conscience is not hanged, though lost
with them he be: and though Plain-dealing dies a beggar as some say? he gains
at last, though here he lose the day.

Some grows Rich, and some grows poor,
Some gets Houses, some turned out of door,
Some gets by Swearing, Cheating, and Lying.
And some gets estates without any buying;
But he that loves Conscience and Plain-dealing to
To live in these rimes he? I have much to do,
So far you well, my Name begins with C.
A Friend to Conscience and plain-dealing where so ere they be,
FINIS.

