A BRIEF RELATION OF THE DEATH AND SVFFERINGS OF THE MOST REVEREND AND
RENOWNED PRELATE THE L. ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY: With, A more perfect Copy of
his Speech, and other passages on the Scaffold, than has been hitherto
imprinted.

JEREM. 26. 14, 15. 14. As for me, behold I am in your hands, do with me as
seems good and meet unto you:

15. But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely
bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the
Inhabitants thereof, etc.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year 1644.

A BRIEF RELATION OF THE DEATH AND sufferings of the most Reverend and
Renowned Prelate, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.
IT is a preposterous kind of writing to begin the story of a great man's
life, at the hour of his death; a most strange way of setting forth a solemn
Tragedy, to keep the principal Actor in the tyring-house, till the Play be
done, and then to bring him on the Stage only to speak the Epilogue, and
receive the Plaudites. Yet this must be the scope and method of these
following papers. To write the whole life of the most Reverend and Renowned
Prelate the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, would require more time then
public expectation can endure to hear of. Those that can judge (as all wise
men may) of the brightness and glories of the Sun in his highest altitude by
the clearenesse of his going down; Justin. hist. l. 11.
or that can Ortum Solis in occasu quaerere: discern the rising of the Sun
(as once Straton did) by the reflection of his beams in a Western cloud: may
by the glorious manner of his death and sufferings, presented in these short
Remembrances, conjecture at the splendor of those rare endowments both of
Grace and Nature, wherewith his former life was adorned and beautifyed. The
ordinary and unsatisfied Reader, may for his farther satisfaction repair to
Master Prynn's Breviate of his life and actions, though published of purpose to
defame him, and render him more odious to the common people. Concerning which,
the Reader may observe in breife, that all which Mr. Prynn's industrious malice
has accused him of in those Collections, is, that he was a man of such
eminent virtues, such an exemplary piety toward God, such an unwearied
fidelity to his gracious Sovereign, of such a public soul toward Church
and State; so fixed a constancy in Freindship, and one so little biassed by his
private interesses; that this Age affords not many Equals. And it would
trouble Plutarch, (if he were alive,) to find out a fit Parallel with whom to
match him. All therefore I shall do at the present time, (and it is the last
public Office I shall do him) is, to lay down the story of his death and
sufferings, together with a view of those plots and practices which were set on
foot, to pluck a few years from a weak old man, and bring him to an
unnatural calamitous end. For though that maxim in Philosophy is most true
and certain; that corruption est in instanti, that death comes to us in a
moment, or in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15 52.
as the Scriptures phrase is; yet are there many previous dispositions which
make way unto it; all which are comprehended in the name of death. And in that
latitude of expression do we take the word, in laying down the story of his
death before you; which being writ out of an honest zeal to truth, and a
sincere affection to his name and memory, shall either be approved of, or at
least excused.

Donatists, Opt. de Schis. Donatist. l. 1.
(the Predecessors and Progenitors of the modern Puritan) occidere quemcunque
qui contraeos fecerit; to kill and make away whoever durst oppose their doings,
or was conceived to be an hinderance to their growing faction. And by this Card
their followers in these Kingdoms have been steered of late, imprisoning and
destroying all who have stood against them. It is long since they entertained
such desperate purposes against the life and person of the Lord Archbishop,
threatening his death in scattered Libels, telling him that his life was sought
for, that neither God nor man could endure so vile a Counselor to live any
longer. This was about the end of March 1629. and was the Prologue to those
libels, full of threats and scandals, which year by year exasperated and
inflamed the people, till they had made them ripe for mischeife, and readily
prepared to execute whatever their grand Directours should suggest unto them.
Saint Paul did never fight more frequent and more terrible combats with the
beasts of Ephesus, for the promotion of the Gospel, then he with these
untractable and fiery spirits, who most seditiously opposed his religious
purposes of settling unity and uniformity in this Church of England. And in this
state things stood till the year, 1640. in which not only many factious and
seditious people in and about the City of London, made an assault by night on
his house at Lambeth, with an intent to murder him, had they found him there:
but the whole faction of the Scots declared in a Remonstrance to the English
Nation, that one of the chief causes which induced them to invade this Realm,
was to remove him from his Majesty, and bring him to the punishment which he
had deserved. The manner of their coming hither, and the great entertainment
given them by the faction here, showed plainly that they were not like to be
sent away without their Errand: and makes it evident that his ruin was
resolved on in their secret Counsels, before the Parliament was called, or
that they had declared so much by their will revealed.

The Parliament had not long continued, but he is named Incendiary by the
Scottish Commissioners; and thereupon accused of Treason by the House of
Commons. And although no particular Charge was brought against him, December. 18.
1640.
but only a bare promise to prepare it in convenient time; yet was he
presently committed to the custody of the Gentleman Usher, and by him kept in
duresse till the end of February, (being full ten weeks;) about which time
his charge was brought unto the Lords, but in generals only, and longer time
required for particular instances. And yet upon this Lydford law, by which they
used to hang men first, and endite them afterward,) was he committed to the
Tower, being followed almost all the way by the Rascal multitude, who
barbarously pursued him with reproach and clamours to the very gates; March. 1.
1640
and there detained, contrary to all law and justice, almost four years
longer. This was the first great breach which was made by Parliament in the
liberties of the English Subject; (save that their like proceedings with the
Earl of Strafford, was a preparative unto it;) and was indeed the very gappe,
at which the slavery and oppression, under which this miserable Nation does now
pine and languish, did break in upon them. What right could meaner persons
look for, when as so great a Peer was doomed to so long imprisonment, without
being called unto his Answer! What else has filled so many Prisons in most
parts of the Kingdom, with the best and wealthiest of the Subjects; but the
most dangerous effects and consequences of this woeful President! Which as it
was the leading case unto all our pressures; so might those pressures have
been remedied, had the Subject made his Case their own; and labored to
prevent it in convenient time. But such a miserable infatuation had befallen
them generally, Matthew. 13.14.
that seeing they did see, but would not perceive.

Lords, who did not pierce into the depth of the design, gave out that they
intended only to remove him from his Majesty's ear, and to deprive him of his
Archbishopric, (which resolution notwithstanding being taken up before any
charge was brought against him, was as unjust though not so cruel, as the
others:) yet they showed only by this Overture, that they did reckon without
their hosts, and might be of the Court perchance, but not of the Counsel. The
leading and predominant party thought of nothing less, then that he should
escape with life, or go off with liberty. Only perhaps they might conceive
some wicked hopes, that either the tediousness of his restraint, or the
indignities and affronts which day by day were offered to him, would have broke
his heart, not formerly accustomed to the like oppressions. M^^t. 27.24
And then like Pilate in the Gospel they had called for water, and washed their
hands before the multitude, and said, that they were innocent of the blood of
that righteous person: thinking that by such wretched figge-leaves, they could
not only hide their wickedness, and deceive poor men; but that God also might
be mocked, and his All-seeing eye deluded, to which all hearts lie open, all
desires are known, and from which no secrets can be hidden. To this end not
content to immure him up within the walls of the Tower, October 26 and November.
16. 1642.
they rob him of his meniall servants, restrain him to two only of his
number, and those not to have conference with any others, but in the presence
of his Warder: and in conclusion make him a close Prisoner, not suffering him
to go out of his lodging to refresh himself, but in the company of his
keeper. May 9. 1643.
And all this while they vex his soul continually with scandalous and infamous
Papers, and set up factious and seditious Preachers to inveigh against him in
the Pulpit to his very face; so to expose him to the scorn both of boys and
women, As May 15. 1642.
who many times stood up and turned toward him, to observe his countenance, to
see if any alteration did appear therein. And to the same ungodly end, did they
divest him of his Archiepiscopall and Episcopal jurisdiction, conferring it on
his inferior and subordinate Officers; sequester his rents under pretense of
maintenance for the Kings younger Children (as if His Majesty's Revenues which
they had invaded, Oct 23. 16. 1.
were not sufficient for that purpose,) convert his House at Lambeth into a
Prison, and confiscate all his coals and fuel to the use of their Jailer;
Nov. 8. 1642.
deprive him of his right of Patronage, Jan. 5. 1642.
and take into their own hands the disposing of all his Benefices; May 16.
1643.
seize upon all his goods and books which they found at Lambeth; May 9. 1643.
and in conclusion rifle him of his notes and papers, May 31. 1643.
not only such as were of ordinary use and observation, but such as did
concern him in the way of his just defense. In which they did not any thing
from the first to the last, but in a proud defiance to the laws of the land,
which they most impudently violated in all these particulars: and more then so,
they had proceeded step by step, to this height of tyranny a whole year
almost before they had digested their general charge into particular
Accusations; or ever called him to his Answer in due form of law.

Adamant. For a^ his (...) commitment he besought his God, (as Master Pryn
observes out of his Manual of devotions) to give him full patience,
proportionable comfort, and contentment with whatsoever he should send; and he
was heard in that he prayed for. For notwithstanding that he had fed so long on
the bread of carfulness, and drank the water of affliction: Dan. 1.13.
yet, as the Scripture tells us of the four Hebrew children, his countenance
appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, then any of those who eat their portion of
the Kings meat, or drank of his wine. And he was wont to say to his private
friends, that, he thanked God, he never found more sweet contentment in his
greatest liberty, then in the time of that restraint. And certainly it was no
wonder that it should be so, he being conscious to himself of no other crimes,
which drew that fatal storm upon him, then a religious zeal to the honor of
God, the happiness of the King, and the preservation of the Church in her
peace and patrimony, as he professes at his death before all the people. So
that despairing of success in the way intended his enemies sell upon another,
but more desperate course, which was to ship him for New England, and make him
subject to the insolences of Wellt and Peter's, two notorious Schismatics. But
this being put to the question in the house of Commons, April 25. 1643.
was rejected by the major part: not out of pity to his age, or consideration
of his quality, nor in respect unto the laws so often violated; but to
preserve him yet a while, as a stale or property, wherewith to cheat the
Citizens of some further sums, and to invite the Scots to a new invasion,
when their occasion so required. For it was little doubted by discerning men,
but that the Scots, who made their first invasion on a probable hope of
sequestring the Lord Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford from His Majesty's
Counsels; and sped it so well in their design, that they were recompensed
already with the death of the one, would easily be tempted to a second journey,
upon assurance to be glutted with the blood of the other.

And this appears more plain and evident, in that about Scots, which was in
the midst of January 1643. they did again revive the business, which had
long layen dormant; causing the Articles, which they had framed in maintenance
of their former Accusation, to be put in print about that time, as is apparent
by the Test of John Brown their Clerk, dated the 17 of that month. And as
the Scots advanced or slackned in their marches Southward, so did they either
quicken or retard the work: till hearing of the great successes which they had
in Yorkshire, they gave command to Master Prynne (a man most mischievously
industrious to disturb the public) to prosecute the charge against him, In
his Epistle to the Breviate.
and bring him to his long expected trial; as he reports it of himself, who,
having rifled him of his Papers, and thereby robbed him of those helps, which
he had purposely reserved for his just defense; and having personal quarrels
of his own to revenge upon him, was thought to be the fittest bloud-hound in
the whole kennell, to pursue the sent. And now there was no talk but of quick
dispatch. When hatred does accuse, and malice prosecute, and prejudice and
prepossession sit upon the Bench, God help the innocent. There Is nothing but a
miracle can preserve him then. And so it proved in the event. They called him
often to the Bar, both before and after, caused a strict inquisition to be
made into all his actions: they winnowed him like wheat, and sifted him to the
very bran, Luke 22.31.
(which was you know the Devils office;) they had against him all advantages of
power and malice, and witnesses at hand upon all occasions: but still they
found his answers and his resolutions of so good a temper, his innocence and
integrity of so bright a die, that as they knew not how to dismiss him with
credit, so neither could they find a way to condemn him with justice. And
though their Consciences could tell them, that he had done nothing which
deserved either death or bonds; yet either to reward or oblige the Scots, who
would dot think themselves secure whilst his head was on, they were resolved
to bring him to a speedy end. Only they did desire, if possible, to lay the
Odium of the murder upon the common people. And therefore Sergeant Wild in a
speech against him, having aggrivated his supposed offenses to the highest
pitch, concluded thus, that he was guilty of so many and notorious treasons,
so evidently destructive to the commonwealth, that he marvelled the people did
not tear him in pieces as he passed between his barge, and the Parliament
Houses. Which barbarous and bloody project when it would not take, and that
though many of the Rabble did desire his death, yet none would be the
executioner; they then employed some of their most malicious and most active
instruments, to go from door to door, and from man to man, to get hands
against him; and so petition those to hasten to his condemnation, which must
forsooth be forced to their own desires: (whereof, and of the Magistrates
standing still, and suffering them to proceed without any check, he gave them a
momento in his dying speech.) This being obtained, the business was pursued
with such heat and violence, that by the beginning of November it was made
ready for a sentence; which some conceived would have been given in the Kings
Bench, and that their proofs (such as they were) being fully ripened, he
should have been put over to a Middlesex Jury. But they were only some poor
Ignorants which conceived so of it. The leading members of the Plot thought of
no such matter; and, to say truth, it did concern them highly not to go that
way. For though there was no question to be made at all, but that they could
have packed a Jury to have found the Bill; but by a clause in the Attaindure of
the Earl of Strafford they had bound the Judges, not to declare those facts
for treason in the time to come, for which they had condemned and executed that
Heroicke Peer. And therefore it was done with great care and caution to
proceed by Ordinance, and vote him guilty first in the House of Commons; in
which being parties, witnesses, and Judges too, they were assured to pass it
as they would themselves; which was done accordingly, about the 20 of November.

But yet the business was not done, for the Lords stuck at it. Some of which
having not extinguished all the sparks of honor, did by the light thereof
discover the injustice of so foul a practice; together with the danger might
befall themselves, if once disfavoured by the Grandees of that potent faction.
A thing so stomacked by the Commons, that alter some evaporations of their
heat and passion, which broke out into open threats, they presently drew and
sent up an Ordinance to the Lords, tending to dispossess them of all power and
command in their Armies. But fearing this device was too week to hold, they
fall upon another and a likelier project, which was to bring the Lords to sit
in the Commons House; where they were sure they should be inconsiderable both
for power and number. And to effect the same with more speed and certainty,
they had recourse to their old Arts, drew down Sir David Watkins with his
general muster of subscriptions, and put a peition in his hands, to be tendered
by him to the Houses, that is, themselves: wherein it was required amongst
other things, that they would vigorously proceed unto the punishment of all
Delinquents; and that for the more quick dispatch of the public businesses of
the State, the Lords would please to vote and sit together with the Commons. On
such uncertain terms, such a ticklish Tenure do they now hold their place and
power in Parliament; who so efficiously complied with the House of Commons, in
depriving the Bishops of their Votes, and the Churches birthright. And this
was it which helped them in that time of need. For by this (though stale and
common) Stratagem did they prevail so far upon some weak spirits, that the
Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrook, the Lords, North, Gray
of Wark, and Brews, (a Scothman, but an English Baron, and generally called the
Earl of Elgin) resolved to yield unto the current of so strong a stream: and
thought they made a gaining voyage, if by delivering the Lord Archbishop to
the peoples fury, they might preserve themselves in the peoples favor. And we
know well, both who it was and what end he came to, who, though he knew that
the accused party was delivered him out of envy only, and that he found no
evil he was guilty of; Mat. ^7. v. 18.22, 23, 24.36.
yet being wearied with the clamours and the Crucifiges of the common people,
and fearing that some tumult would be made about it, delivered him unto his
enemies to be put to death. And for those other Lords who withdrew themselves,
and neither durst condemn nor protect the innocent; (though far the major
part, as it is reported) it is not easy to determine, whether their conscience
were more tender, their Collusion grosser, or their courage weaker. Act. 23. v.
13.20.23, etc.
All I shall say is only this, that Claudias Lysias in the Acts, had been as
guilty of Saint Paul's death, as any of the forty who had vowed to kill him; if
upon notice of the Plot which was laid to murder him, he had brought him down
unto the people, or not conveied him with a strong guard to the Court of Felix.
The journies end must needs be foul, which such lewd and crooked ways do
conduct unto. And it is worth your observation that the same day, the fourth of
January, in which they passed this bloody Ordinance, (as if therein they would
cry quittance with His Sacred Majesty, who on the same accused the six guilt
Members) they passed another for establishing their new Directory; which in
effect is nothing but a total abolition of the Common-prayer-booke: and
thereby showed unto the world, how little hopes they had of settling their new
form of worship if the foundation of it were not laid in blood.

The Bill being thus dispatched in the House of Lords, (if Lords, which are so
over-loaded by the Common people) there wanted yet the Kings Assent to give
life to it: which they so far contemned, (they had more reason to despare of
it) that they never sought it. They had screwed up their Ordinances to so high
a pitch, that never Act of Parliament was of more authority: and having found
the subjects so obedient as to yield unto them in matters which concerned them
in their goods and liberties; it was but one step more to make trial of them,
whether they would submit their lives to the self same tyranny: And this they
made the first experiment in this kind, both of their own power, and the
peoples patience; he being the first man, as himself noted in his speech,
(which words are purposely omitted in Hindes Copy of it;) that was ever put to
death by Ordinance in Parliament* but whether he shall be the last, further
time will show. Certain it is, that by this Ordinance they have now made
themselves the absolute masters of the Subjects life, which they can call for
at their pleasure, as no doubt they will; and left him nothing but his fetters,
he can call his own. Just as it was observed by our Gracious Sovereign, upon
occasion of the Ordinance for the 20th part, Declaration about the twentieth
part.
that the same power which robbed the Subject of the twentieth part of their
Estates, had by that only made a claim and entitled it self to the other
nineteen, whenever it should be thought expedient to hasten on the general
ruin. In which His Majesty has proved but too true a Prophet. And though
perhaps some of the people were well pleased with this bloody Ordinance, and
ran with joy to see it put in execution; yet all wise men do look upon it as
the last groan or gasp of our dying liberty. And let both them and those who
passed it, be assured of this* that they who do so gadly sell the blood of
their fellow Subjects, seldom want Chapmen for their own in an open Market.

United Provinces, to bring about their ends in the death of Barnevelt,
subverted all those fundamental Laws of the Belgic liberty; for maintenance
whereof they took up Arms against Philip the 2 so would I know which of those
Fundamental Laws of the English Government have not been violated by these
men in their whole proceedings; for preservation of which Laws (or rather
under color of such preservation) they have bewitched the people unto this
Rebellion: It is a Fundamental Law of the English Government, and the first
Article in the Magna Charta, that the Church of England shall be free, Magna
Chapter c. 1.
and shall have her whole Rights and Privileges inviolable: yet to make way
unto the condemnation of this innocent man, and other the like wicked and
ungodly ends, the Bishops must be Voted out of their place in Parliament, which
most of them have held far longer in their Predecessors, then any of our
noble Families in their Progenitors. And if the Lords refuse to give way unto
it (as at first they did) the people must come down to the House in
multitudes, and cry, No Bishops, no Bishops, at the Parliament doors, till by
the terror of their tumults they extort it from them. Magn. Chart. c. 29.28
Edw. 3. And the Petition of Right.
It is a Fundamental Law of the English liberty, that no Free man shall be
taken or imprisoned without cause shown, or be detained without being brought
unto his Answer in due form of Law: yet here we see a Freeman imprisoned
ten whole weeks together, brfore any Charge was brought against him; and
kept in prison three years more, before his general Accusation was by them
reduced into particulars; and for a year almost detained close prisoner,
without being brought unto his answer, as the Law requirer. It is a
Fundamental Law of the English Government, Magn. Chart. c. 29.28 Edw. 3.
that no man be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, but by the known Laws
of the Land: yet here we see a man disseised of his Rents and Lands, spoiled
of his Goods, deprived of his jurisdiction, divested of his Right and
Patronage; and all this done, when he was so far from being convicted by the
Laws of the Land, that no particular charge was so much as thought of. It is a
Fundamental Law of the English Liberty, Ibid.
that no man shall be condemned, or put to death, but by lawful judgment of
his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, i. e. in the ordinary way of a legal
trial: and sure an Ordinance of both Houses, without the Royal Assent, is no
part of the Law of England, nor held an ordinary way of trial for the English
subject, or ever reckoned to be such in the former times. And finally, it is a
Fundamental Law in the English Government, 25 Edw. 3.
that if any other case (then those recited in the Statute of King Edward 3.)
which is supposed to be Treason, do happen before any of His Majesty's
Justices, the Justices shall tarry without giving judgment, till the cause be
shown and declared before the King, and His Parliament, whether it ought to be
judged Treason or not: yet here we have a new found Treason, never known
before, nor declared such by any of His Majesty's Justices, nor ever brought to
be considered of by the King and His Parliament, but only voted to be such by
some of those few Members which remain at Westminster, who were resolved to
have it so for their private ends. Put all which has been said together, and
then tell me truly, if there be any difference (for I see not any) between the
ancient Roman slaves, and the once Freeborn Subject of the English Nation,
whose life and liberty, whose goods and fortunes depend on the mere pleasure
of their mighty Masters.

But to return unto our Story, the passing of the Ordinance being made known
unto him, he neither entertained the news with a Stoicall Apathie, nor wailed
his Fate with weak and womanish lamentations, (to which extremes most men are
carried in this case) but heard it with so even and so smooth a temper, as
showed he neither was afraid to live, nor ashamed to die. The time between the
Sentence and the Execution, he spent in prayers and applications to the Lord
his God; having obtained, though not without some difficulty, a Chaplain of
his own, to attend upon him, and to assist him in the work of his
preparation: though little preparation needed to receive that blow, which could
not but be welcome, because long expected. For so well was he studied in the
art of dying (especially in the last and strictest part of his imprisonment)
that by continual fasting, watching, prayers, and such like acts of Christian
humiliation, his flesh was rarefied into spirit, and the whole man so fitted
for eternal glories, that he was more then half in heaven, before death
brought his bloody (but triumphant) chariot to convey him thither. He that had
so long been a Confessor, could not but think it a release of miseriea to be
made a Martyr. And as is recorded of Alexander the Great, Plutarch in Alexandr^.
that the night before his best and greatest battle with Darius the Persian,
he fell into so sound a sleep, that his Princes hardly could awake him when
the morning came: so is it certified of this great Prelate* that on the evening
before his Passover, the night before the dismal combat betwixt him and death,
after he had refreshed his spirits with a moderate supper, he betook himself
unto his rest, and slept very soundly, till the time came in which his servants
were appointed to attend his rising. A most assured sign of a soul prepared.
Fridy Jan. 10. 1644.
The fatal morning being come, he first applied himself to his private
prayers, and so continued, till Pennington, and other of their public
Officers came to conduct him to the Scaffold: which he ascended with so brave a
courage, such a cheerful countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a
triumph, then to made a sacrifice, and came not there to die, but to be
translated. And to say truth, it was no Scaffold, but a Throne; a Throne
whereon he shortly was to receive a Crown, even the most glorious Crown of
Martyrdom. And though some rude, uncivil people reviled him as he passed
along, with opprobrious language, as loath to let him go to the Grave in peace,
it never discomposed his thoughts, nor disturbed his patience. For he had
profited so well in the School of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.23.
that when he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened
not, but committed his cause to him that judges righteously. And as he did not
fear the frowns, so neither did he covet the applause of the vulgar herd, and
therefore rather chose to read what he had to speak unto the people, then to
affect the ostentation either of memory or wit in that dreadful Agony: whether
with greater magnanimity or prudence, I can hardly say. As for the matter of
his Speech, besides what did concern himself and his own purgation, his
great care was to clear His Majesty, and the Church of England from any
inclination unto Popery; with a persuasion of the which, the Authors of our
present miseries had abused the people, and made them take up Arms against
their Sovereign. A faithful servant to the last. By means whereof, Judge.
21.30.
as it is said of Sampson in the book of Judges, that the men which he slew at
his death were more then they which he slew in his life: so may it be affirmed
of this famous Prelate, that he gave a greater blow unto the enemies of God and
the King at the hour of his death, than he had given them in his whole life
before; of which I doubt not but the King and the Church will find speedy
fruits. But this you will more clearly see by the Speech it self. (...)
follows here according to the best and most (...) Copies.

Scaffold on the Tower Hill January 10. 1644.
Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to Preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with Patience that race which is set before
us, Looking unto JESUS the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God,

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to JESUS the Author and
finisher of my Faith, He best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame; but the shame must be despised, or
no coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for Him; I am going apace (as you see)
toward the Red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brinke of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of promise, for that
was the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, He
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with
sour Herbs, I shall obey, and labor to digest the sower Herbs, as well as
the Lamb. Ezod. 12.8.
And I shall remember it is the Lord's Passover; I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hand which gathers them; but look up only to
Him who instituted that, and governes these; For men can have no more power
over me then what is given them from above. Joh. 19.11
I am not in love with this passage, through the Red Sea, for I have the
weakness and infirmities of flesh and blood plentifully in me; And I have
prayed with my Savior, ut transiret Calixiste, that this Cup of Red wine might
pass from me: Luke 22, 4^.
But if not, God's will (not mine) be done and I shall most willingly drink of
this Cup as deep as He pleases, and enter into this Sea, yea and pass through
it, in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good people) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and did in a manner drive them into that Sea) were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them; I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the three Children from
the Furnace; Dan. 3.
and ( I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now, as theirs
was then; They would not worship the Image the King had set up, nor will I the
Imaginations which the People are setting up; nor will I forsake the Temple and
the truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calfe, in Dan and in
Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled, (God of
his mercy open their Eyes that they may see the right way) for at this day the
Blind lead the Blind, Luke 6.36.
and if they go on, both will certainly into the ditch. For my self, I am
(and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous Sinner many ways, by
thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but that God has mercy in store
for me (a poor Penitent) as well as for other sinners, I have now upon this
sad occasion, ransacked every corner of my Heart, and yet ( I thank God) I
have not found (among the many) any one sin which deserves death by any
known Law of this Kingdom; And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my Judges;
for if they proceed upon proof (by valuable witnesses) I or any other
innocent, may be justly condemned; And I thank God) though the weight of the
sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my life.
And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever dyed
by an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way,
though not by this means; For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his head by
the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows; Before
these, Saint Jon Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd woman; and Saint
Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his head to a persecuting Sword.
Many Examples (great and good) and they teach me patience; for I hope my Cause
in Heaven will look of another dye, then the color that is put upon it here.
And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in
their several generations, but also that my Charge (as foul as it is made)
looks like that of the Jews against Saint Paul (Acts. 25.3.) For he was
accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion; And like that of Saint
Stephen (Acts 6.14.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law
and Religion, the holy place and the Temple (verse. 13.) But you will say, do
I then compare my self with the integrity of Saint Paul, and Saint Stephen?
No, far be that from me; I only raise a comfort to my self, that these great
Saints and Servants of God were laid at in their times, as I am now. And it is
memorable, that Saint Paul who helped on this Accusation against Saint Stephen:
did after fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here is a great Clamor
that I would have brought in Popery; I shall Answer that more fully by and by;
In the mean time you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, Joh.
11.48.
If we let him alone, all men will believe in him, Et venient Romani, and the
Romans will come, and take away both our place and the Nation. Here was a
causeless Cry against Christ that the Romans will come; And see how just the
judgment of God was? they crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans should
come, and his death was it which brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing
them with that which they most feared: and I pray God this Clamor of Venient
Romani (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring them in; for the
Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now
upon the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us, In the mean time, by Honor
and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am
I passing through this world, 2 Cor. 6.8. -- Some particulars also I think it
not amiss to speak of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of, the King our gracious Sovereign;
He has bin much traduced also for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience
(of which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be as free
from this Charge, as any man living; and I hold Him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; And
that he will venture His Life as far, and as freely for it; and I think I
do, or should know, both His affection to Religion, and his grounds for it, as
fully as any man in England.

The second particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless.) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then
go to the Great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament) and clamor for
Justice, as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which
are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their
appointment. A way, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his
blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Citie's also: And this has
been lately practiced against my self; [the Magistrates standing still,
Reader the words included [] are left out in the speech published by Hind.
Acts 6.12.
and suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check;]
God forgive the setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well
meaning People are caught by it. In Saint Stephen's case, when nothing else
would serve, they stirred up the People against him; and Herod went the same
way, when he had killed Saint James, yet he would not venture upon Saint Peter,
till he found how the other pleased the People. But take heed of having your
hands full of blood, for there is a time (best known to himself) when God
(above other sins) makes Inquisition for blood, Isa. 1.15.
and when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmest tells us, That God
remembers (but that is not all) He remembers and forgits not the Complaint of
the Poor, Psalm. 9.12.
that is, whose blood it shed by oppression, verse. 9. take heed of this, It Is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 12.
but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood; And (with my
Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophesy
that is expressed, Se the words at large in the tittle of this Relation.
Jer. 26.15.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether,
or how it shall get out; and (which is worse then a storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of it is own body,
and at every cleft profaneness and Irreligion is entering in, while as Prosper
speaks (in his second Book De vitae contemptu, cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness are cloaked over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of
Imaginary Religion; for we have lost the Substance and dwell to much in
Opinion, and that Church which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruin, is
fallen into danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self; I was
borne and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law;
in that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye; This
is no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion; and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion, established in England, and in that I come now to dye. What Clamours
and Slanders I have endured for laboring to keep a Uniformity in the
external service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this
Church, all men know, and I have abundautly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a Crime which my soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An
endeavouor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavur to overthrow
the (...) Protestant Religion Established by Law. Besides my answers to the
several Charges, I protested my Innocence in both Houses. It was said
Prisoners protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no witness
of my heart and the intentions thereof, threfore I must come to my Protestation
not at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour and instant of my death; in
which I hope all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to think I
would dye and dissemble, being iustantly to give God an account for the truth
of it: I do therefore here in the presence of God, and his holy Angels, take
it upon my death, That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or
Religion; and I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my
Innocence, in these, and from all Treasons what soever. I have been accused
likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand them and the benifit that
comes by them too well to be so; But I did mislike the misgovernments of some
Parliaments many ways, and I had good reason for it; For Corruption optimi est
pessima, there is no corruption in the world so bad, as that which is of the
best thing in it self; for the better the thing is in nature, the worse it is
corrupted. And that being the highest Court, over which no other have
Jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject is left
without all remedy. But I have done, I forgive all the World, all and every of
those bitter Enemies which have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven
of God first, and then of every man, whether I have offended him or not, if he
do but conceive that I have, Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg
forgiveness of him. And so I heartily desire you to join in Prayer with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, The Arch Bishops prayer upon the Scaffold.
look down upon me in mercy, in the Riches and fulness of all thy mercies
look upon me; but not till thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ,
not till thou have bathed me in the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my
self in the wounds of Christ: that so the punishment due unto my sins may
pass over me. And since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly
beseech thee give me now in this great instant, full Patience, proportionable
Comfort, and a heart ready to dye for thy Honor, the King's happiness, and
this Churches preservation. And my zeal to these (far from Arrogance be it
spoken,) is all the sin (humane frailty excepted and all incidents thereto.)
which is yet known to me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer; I
say in this particular of Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great:
Lord pardon them all, and those especially (what ever they are) which have
drawn down this present judgment upon me: and when thou have given me
strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and carry
me through death that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall
appear to me, Amen. And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood, in
this more then miserable Kingdom, (I shall desire that I may pray for the
people too, as well as for my self) O Lord, I beseech the; give grace of
Repentance to all Bloodthirsty people; but if they will not repent, O Lord
confound all their devices, Defeat and Frustrate all their Designs and
Endeavors upon them, which are or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy great
Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and
His Posterity after Him in their just Rights and Privileges, the Honor and
Conservation of Parliaments in their just power, the Preservation of this Poor
Church in her Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this
distracted and distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native
Liberties. And when thou have done all this in mere mercy for them. O Lord,
fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with Religious dutiful obedience to
thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus Amen, and
receive my Soul into thy Bosom Amen. Our Father which art, etc.

The Speech and Prayers being ended, he gave the Paper Stern, desiring him to
show it to his other Chaplains, that they might know how he departed out of
this world, and so prayed God to show his mercies and blessings on them. And
noting how one Hind had employed himself in taking a Copy of his Speech as it
came from his mouth; he desired him not to do him wrong in publishing a false
or imperfect Copy. Which as Hind promised him to be careful of, calling for
punishment from above if he should do otherwise; so has he reasonably well
performed his promise: the Alterations or Additions which occur therein,
being perhaps the work of those who perused his Papers, and were to Authorize
them to the public view, to fit it more unto the palate of the City faction,
and make it more consistent with the credit of those guilty men, who had voted
to his condemnation. This done, he next applied himself to the fatal Block,
as to the Haven of his rest. But finding the way full of people, who had placed
themselves upon the Theater to behold the Tragedy, he desired he might have
room to dye, beseeching them to let him have an end of his miseries, which he
had endured very long. All which he did with so serene and calm a mind, as
if he had been rather taking order for another man's funeral, then making way
unto his own. Being come near the Block, he put off his doublet, and used
some words to this effect. Gods will be done, I am willing to go out of this
world, no man can be more willing to send me out of it. And seeing through the
chinkes of the boards that some people were got under the Scaffold, about the
very place where the Block was seated, he called on the Officers for some dust
to stop them, or to remove the people thence, saying it was no part of his
desires, that his blood should fall upon the heads of the People. Never did man
put off mortality with a brave courage, nor look upon his bloody and malicious
enemies with more Christian charity. And thus far he was gone in his way
toward Paradise with such a Primitive magnanimity, as equalled, if not
exceeded the example of ancient martyrs, When he was somewhat interrupted in his
quiet passage by one Sir John Clotworthy, a firebrand brought from Ireland by
the Earl of Warwick to increase the Combustions in this Kingdom. Who finding
that the mockings and revilings of malicious people had no power to move him,
or sharpen him into any discontent or show of passion; would needs put in, and
try what he could do with his sponge and vinegar, and stepping to him near the
block, asked him, ( with such a purpose as the Scribes and Pharisees used to
propose questions to our Lord and Savior) not to learn by him but to tempt
him, or to expose him to some disadvantage with the standers by, what was the
comfortablest saying which a dying man could have in his mouth. To which he
meekely made this answer, Cupio dissolvi and esse cum Christo; i. e. I desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Being asked again what was the
fittest speech a man could use, to express his confidence and assurance; he
answered with the same spirit of meekness, that such assurance was to be found
within, and that no words were able to express it rightly. Which when it would
not satisfy the troublesome and impertinent man (who aimed at something else
then such satisfaction) unless he gave some word, or place of Scripture,
whereupon such assurance might be truly founded; he used some words to this
effect, that it was the Word of God concerning CHRIST, and his dying for us.
And so without expecting any further questions (for he perceived by the manner
of Sir John's proceedings, that there would be no end of his interruptions, if
he hearkened any longer to him) he turned toward his Executioner (the gentler
and discreeter man of the two) and gave him money, saying, without the least
distemper or change of countenance, here, honest friend, God forgive thee, and
do thy office upon me with mercy, and having given a sign when the blow
should come, he kneeled down upon his knees, and prayed as follows.

The Lord Archbishops Prayer, as he kneeled by the Block.
Lord, I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass umbra mortis, a mere
shadow of death, a little darkness upon nature; but thou by thy merits and
passion have broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord receive my Soul, and
have mercy upon me, and bless this Kingdom with Peace and Plenty, and with
brotherly love and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian
blood amongst them, for JESUS CHRIST'S sake, if it be thy will. Then laying
his head upon the Block, and praying silently to himself, he said aloud, Lord
receive my Soul, which was the signal given to the Executioner, who very
dexterously did his office, and took it off at a blow: his soul ascending on
the wings of Angels into Abraham's bosom, and leaving his Body on the Scaffold,
to the care of men. A spectacle so unpleasing unto most of those who had
desired his death with much heat and passion, that many who came with greedy
eyes to see him suffer, went back with weeping eyes when they saw him dead;
their consciences perhaps bearing witness to them, as you know whose did, that
they had sinned in being guilty of such innocent blood. Of those, whom only
curiosity, and desire of novelty brought thither to behold that unusual sight,
many had not the patience to attend the issue, but went away as soon as the
speech was ended; others returned much altered in the opinion which before they
had of him, and bettered in their resolutions toward the King and the Church,
whose honor and religious purposes they saw so clearly vindicated by this
glorious Martyr. And for the rest (the most considerable, though perhaps the
smallest part of that great assembly) as they came thither with no other
intention, then to assist him with their prayers, to imbalme his body with
their tears, and to lay up his dying speeches in their hearts and memories: so
when they had performed those offices of Christian duty, they comforted
themselves with this, that as his life was honorable, so his death was
glorious, the pains whereof were short and momentany to himself, the benefit
like to be perpetual, unto them and others, who were resolved to live and dye
in the Communion of the Church of England.

Block, use to look pale, and wan, and ghastly, and are even dead before the
blow, he on the contrary seemed more fresh and cheerful, then he had done any
part of the day before: a clear and gallant spirit being like the Sun, which
shows greatest always at the setting. And as the Scripture tells us of Saint
Stephen the Proto Martyr, that whilst he spoke his last Oration before the
chief Priests and Elders of the Jews, Acts 6.15
they of the Counsel looking steadfastly upon him, saw his face as it had been
the face of an Angel: so was it generally observed, not without astonishment,
that all the while our Martyr prayed upon the Block, the Sun which had not
shown it self all the day till then, did shine directly on his face, which
made him look most comfortably (that I say not gloriously) but presently as
soon as the Blow was given, withdrew behind a cloud again, and appeared no
more, as we are credibly advertised by good hands from London, though it be
otherwise reported in their weekly Pamphlets. And if the bodies of us men be
capable of any happiness in the grave, he had as great a share therein, as he
could desire, or any of his friends expect: his body being accompanied to the
earth with great multitudes of people, whom love, or curiosity, or remorse of
conscience had drawn together, purposely to perform that office, and decently
interred in the Church of All hallowes Barking (a Church of his own Patronage
and Jurisdiction) according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England. In which it may be noted, as a thing remarkable, that being whilst he
lived the greatest Champion of the Common-Prayer-Booke, here by Law
established, he had the honor being dead, to be buried in the form therein
prescribed, after it had been long disused, and reprobated in most Churches of
London. Nor need posterity take care to provide his Monument. He built one for
himself whilst he was alive: it being well observed by Sir Edw. Dering (one of
his most malicious enemies, and he who threw the first stone at him, in the
beginning of this Parliament) that Saint Paul's Church will be his perpetual
Monument, In his Book of Speeches.
and his own Book (against the Jesuit) his lasting Epitaph.

Thus dyed this most Reverend, Renowned, and Religiour Psalmist gives him, and
it is the greatest comfort can befall those men, which have been tortured on
the Rack of malicious tongues: viz. The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, and shall not be afraid of any evil report. Ps. 112. v. 6.7.

Horat. Carm. l. 4. Ode. 8. Dignum Laud virum Musa vetat mori.
ANd yet not leave thee thus, I feign would try
A line or two in way of Elegy;
And wail so sad a loss, if to express
The greatness of it would not make it less:
If to lament thee might not vex thee more,
Then all the scorns thou have endured before;
And make thee think we envied thee thy start,
Or doubted that thou were not what thou art.
Yet, with thy leave, I needs must drop a verse,
Write it with Tears, and fit it for thy hearse;
And at this distance from thy grave, which lacks
The pompes of sorrow, hang my heart with blacks.
Religious Prelate, what a calm have thou
In The midst of all those turbulent storms, which now
Shipwreck this Island? At how cheap a rate
Have thou procured this change of thy Estate?
The Mitre for a Crown, a few poor days
For endless bliss, vile earth for heavenly joys!
Such glories have thou found, such alteration,
In this thy highest, as thy last Translation.
How were thine Enemies deceived, when they
Advanced thee thus, and chalked thee out the way;
A way so welcome to thee! No Divine
But knows the Red Sea leads to Palestine;
And that since JESUS sanctified the Cross,
Death's the best purchase, life the greatest loss.
Nor be thou grieved, bless't Soul, that men do still
Pursue thee with black slanders, and do kill
Thy shadow now, and trample on thy Ghost,
(As Hectors Carcass by the Grecian host;)
Or that thou want inscriptions, and a stone
T'ingrave thy name, and write thy Titles on.
Thou art above those trifles, and shall stand
As much above men's malice. Though the hand
Of base detraction practice to defame
Thy spotless virtues, yet impartial fame
Shall do thee all just honors, and set forth
To all succeeding times thy matchless worth.
No Annals shall be writ but what relate
Thy happy influence both on Church and State;
Thy zeal to public order, thy great parts
For all affairs of weight, thy love to Arts:
And to our shame and his great glory, tell
For whose dear sake, by whose vile hands he fell
(A death so full of merits, of such price,
To God and man so sweet a sacrifice;
As by good Church-law may his name prefer
To a fixed Rubric in the Calender.
And let this silence the pure Sect's complaint,
If they make Martyrs, we may make a Saint.)
Or should men envy thee this right, thy praise
An Obelisque unto it self can raise.
Thy brave attempt on Paul's in times to come
Shall be a Monument beyond a Tomb.
Thy Book shall be thy Statua, where we find
The image of thy nobler part, thy mind.
Thy name shall be thine Epitaph; and he
Which hear's or read's of that, shall publish thee
Above the reach of Titles, and shall say
None could express thy worthes a braver way.
And thus though murdered, thou shall never dye,
But live renowned to all Posterity.
Rest thou then happy in sweets of bliss,
The Elyzian fields, the Christians Paradise*
Exempt from worldly cares, secure from fears,
And let us have thy Prayers, as thou our Tears.
Ad Regem CAROLUM.
Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit,
Nulli ^^ebilior, quam tibi, CAROLE.
Horat. Carm. l. 1. Ode. 24. FINIS.

