CLOSET-PRAYER A Christian Duty: OR, A TREATISE UPON MAT. VI. VI.

Tending to prove that the Worship of God in Secret, is the indispensible duty
of all Christians; both by sundry Examples and Arguments.

TOGETHER, With a severe rebuke of Christians for their neglect of, or
negligence in, the duty of Closet-Prayer: And many Directions for the managing
thereof, Exhortations to it, Objections answered, Cases of Conscience cleared.

By O. HETWOOD, Minister of the Gospel.

Jer. 13.17. But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places
for your pride, and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because
the Lords Flock is carried away captive.

^^ndon, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and ^ce Crowns, at the lower
end of Cheapside, 1671.

There is of this Author two other Books Printed.
1. Heart-Treasure, from Mat. 12.35. 2. The sure Mercies of David, Explained
and Applied, in several Sermons, from Isa. 55.3.
The Epistle to the Reader: Especially to the strict and serious Professor of
Christianity.
Christian Friend,
THE power of Godliness is much spoken of, but (I am afraid) very rarely to be
found amongst [even] famous professors: Most content themselves with external
visible duties, which Formalists may carry on with as much seeming zeal and
applause as sincere worshippers: A formal spirit is the disease of the present
day: The beams of Gospel Light, in the late noon-tyde-dispensations, have so
far extracted an assent to fundamental truths, and the necessity of some
practical duties, that it is a shame in some places not to have a form of
Godliness: Many will be found Orthodox in their judgments, and externally
conformable in their practices; yet without a principle of Grace in their
hearts, or the life of Religion in their lives, in the day of accounts; witness
the foolish Virgins. Thousands do finally miscarry besides the grossly profane:
Some go to hell with a candle in their hands, Christ's Colors in their hats,
his Word in their mouths, and in the habit of Religion: Every one is not a
Saint, that looks like one; a painted picture makes a fair show, but wants
life: A Formalist will be comely indeed, if animated with the truth of grace:
But the leaven of hypocrise spoils many good duties: This was that leaven of
the Pharisees that sowred their prayers, and rendered them distastful to God:
They made Religious duties a stage to act vain glory upon, their Prayers had a
thick shell and little kernel. Our Savior would not have the Saints like them,
Christ's Disciples must do some singular thing, more than others; Their
righteousness must go beyond that of the Scribes and Pharisees: Sincerity is
that spirit and life that is to run through Religion: else it is a Body without
a Soul, or Clothes without the Man: This is the chief drift of our Saviors
teaching, and main design of Gospel-commands, to render Professors sincere and
spiritual, approving their hearts to God in Evangelical performances. I have
many times bewailed the condition of those who are very busy in Externals of
Religion abroad, and are grossly negligent of the main Essentials at home. They
are like those who are propping up some remote members of their body, while
their Vitals are wasting in a languishing Consumption: These are like a Man in
a Fever, his face and hands burn, but his heart shakes and quivers for cold:
These I may call Pepper-professors, hot in the mouth, but cold at the stomach:
There are thousands in the World will run many miles to hear a Sermon, will
countenance the best Preachers, will read the Scriptures and good Books, will
pray in their families, yea keep days of Fasting and Prayer with others, that
yet will not set about heart-work and flesh-displeasing duties, of mortifying
beloved lusts, loving, forgiving and praying for enemies, -- yea that will not
set themselves solemnly to the duties of Meditation, Self-examination, and
secret Prayer: The Vessel will not stir except the wind of applause blow the
sails; these are like the Nightingale in the wood, of which it is recorded,
that she sings most sweetly when she thinks any is near her. An Hypocrite can
pray best, when taken notice of by men, you shall seldom see him at work with
his heart in a Closet: he is of the mind of those carnal persons of Christ's
natural kindred, Joh. 7.4. who said to Christ, If thou do these things show thy
self to the World, for, says the Text, ver. 5. Neither did his brethren
believe in him: q. d. Such as carry on duties, or counsel others to such
undertakings as may expose them to public view for ostentation, declare
plainly they want true grace, which makes persons Jews inwardly, Whose
circumcision is of the heart, in the Spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of
God: Romans 2.29. The main trade of a Christian, is his Home-trade, as one says,
Jurnal Christian Armor, Chap. 12. Sect. 3. p. 304.
which is spent in secret betwixt God and his own soul: here he drives an
unknown Trade, he is at Heaven and home again, richly laden in his thoughts
with heavenly meditations before the World knows where he has been.

The consideration of these things has engaged me to spend some thoughts,
concerning this great and much neglected Duty of Closet Prayer; which when I
had delivered, and several had got Copies thereof, it was judged fit for the
Press, some hopes conceived of its further usefulness: I perused it again, and
methodized it into this form, and communicated my thoughts to some concerning
the publication of it. A friend gave me notice there was a Book extant upon the
same Subject, which I enquired after, and found one of Mr. Brooks on the same
Text: That Book I looked over, and was ready to think it would save me a
labor; but, upon second thoughts, I considered that this might fall into some
hands that that would not; that several men writing on the same Subject may be
useful, is ordinary; that our Method and most of our Matter is different; for I
had finished mine before I saw the other, except two or three leaves in the
close: Besides that, the other is larger, this a small Piece, and more
portable, as a pocketbook, or Vade mecum: let it be then a short Appendix to
that excellent Piece.

I am heartily glad, any of Gods servants have set themselves to promote this
part of practical piety; it is an excellent design, and I am well assu^, if
Christians were more in their Closets with God, their own souls would thrive
better, and things would succeed better abroad; Mr. Rogers being silenced from
public work; desired his Hearers to spend that time they were want to come to
his Lecture in, in serious Prayer and Meditation in their Closets, and he was
confident Satan would be a loser, and their souls gainers by that providence:
And this I can affirm, that if persons would spend part of that time in secret
Prayer they take to run abroad to Sermons in, they would be better proficients:
Not but that hearing the word is necessary and so is this; nor must the one
justle out the other: yea, these secret duties help us to profit by public
Ordinances. If dung be poured down on heaps in the field, it does no good; it
must be spread abroad, before it make fruitful ground. The plaster heals not,
except it be applied; so the Word must be spread on our hearts by serious and
secret Meditation and Application, or else it will never make our souls
healthful and fruitful; and then we must pray over it, for the showers of
divine grace to wash it and work it into our hearts: Many Sermons are lost for
want of souls taking them home to their Closets, and turning them to Prayer: I
fear all will be little enough that Ministers can preach or write upon this
theme, I doubt still, this work will be either totally neglected or negligently
performed: its an hard work; the spirit must travel in it; and (says good Mr.
Bains) the Saints can endure better to hear an hour, than to pray a quarter:
yea our trifling hearts will make any excuse to shift from this duty, or
shuffle it off; nay, though it be in exchange for another, a sign the work is
of God, and tending much to the souls good, or else Satan and our corrupt
hearts would never so much hinder or oppose it.

P^or Soul, it may be thou look abroad, and see much wickedness committed,
holiness persecuted, thy God dishonored, many things out of order thou want
a capacity to bring a remedy: I must therefore say to thee as it is reported,
Albertus Crantzius said to ^her, when he began to oppose the Pope [Frater vade
in cellam, and die, Miserere mei Deus] Brother, go into thy cell, and say God
be merciful unto me; so say I. Alas thy interest and influence reaches but a
little way to mend a wicked world, (though thou must seek to perform as far as
thy place and calling extends;) but go thy way to thy God in thy Closet, bewail
thy sins, and the sins of others plead with God for thine own soul: Busy thy
self about thyself, set all straight at home, take heed of that which the poor
Church complains of, Cant. 1.6. They made me the keeper of the vinyards, but
mine own vinyard have I not kept. Oh leave other things undone, rather than
this great matter, that concerns the affairs of thine own soul.

Mr. Fox tells us of one Peter Moyce, a German Martyr, being called before the
Synod at Dornick, Acts mon. 2. vol. lib. 8. fol. 1^2.
they began to examine him in certain Articles of Religion to whom as he was
about to answer boldly and expressly to every point, they interrupting him, bad
him say in two words, Yea or Nay. Then said he, If you will not suffer me to
answer for my self in things of such importance send me to my Prison again
among my Toads and Frogs, which will not interrupt me while I talk with my Lord
my God. Oh Christian, the time may come, or is already, when men may stop thy
mouth, and will not suffer thee to witness a good confession, withdraw thy self
from men, and retire unto thy God, who will make thee freely welcome, to pour
out thy soul to him in secret. He Will neither stop thy mouth nor stop his car; he
bids thee Open thy mouth wide, Psalm. 81.10. And he tells thee, His ear is open
to thy cry, Psalm. 34.15. That cast not ask such great things as he can and will
give. Only see thou be a Child of God. Naturalists tell of a precious Stone
of an excellent virtue yet loses all its efficacy when it is put into a dead
man's mouth: so Prayer in the lips of a Saint or a righteous man, avails much,
but the Prayer of the wicked is not only ineffectual, but abominable to God:
See to your states, and then see that you pray aright, for manner, matter, end,
many ask and receive not, because they ask amiss: Above all, Soul, in thy
secret addresses to God, take heed of a trifling spirit; thou wilt find most ado
with thy self herein: our wanton spirits are loath to be pent up in the narrow
room of a spiritual performance; we love to take our liberty in ranging abroad
to a thousand objects: but Christian, as thou love thy peace, thy Soul, thy
God, look to thy spirit in secret Prayer: Do not trifle away thy time upon thy
knees, let not thy words freeze as they come from thee, let no discouragements
beat thee off: the Woman of Canaan, as one says, takes the Bullets that Christ
shot at her, and with an humble boldness of faith, sends them back again in
Prayer; which indeed reached his heart, and prevailed with God for mercy.

But, I shall enlarge no more at present, but refer thee to this small
Treatise, wherewith I have (according to my poor talent) laid before thee this
great duty: What effect it shall have I know not, my God knows, in whose hands
the blessing of our endeavors lies; Get alone and pray over this Book, and for
the unworthy sinful Author, as he desires to do for thee into whose hand this
may come: let our Prayers daily meet at the throne of Grace, till our souls
meet before the throne of God; if thou receivest any good by this or any other
work this poor worm has handed to thee, ascribe nothing to the instrument, but
all to the agent, and efficient: our good God, from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, disdains not the work for the plainness of the style; it was
purposely put in this dress for the vulgars benefit; and if it or my self be
exposed to censure for that, it is welcome. I write not to please learned
Scholars, but to profit plain Christians; whose spiritual good I prefer above
any credit to my self. I am sure, there is none due: there being few of my
brethren but they transcend me in parts and learning, But by the grace of God I
am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. Nor is that grace altogether in vain: for as it
has helped me in labors so he has in some measure blessed my labors, though
I be nothing, the least of Saints, not meet to be called a Minister. Did those
that read my labors know me, they would be ready to despise my undertakings:
this I speak, because my former book has found such good acceptance, and this
is so much desired. And that no man think of me, above what he knows to be in
me: my heart has been near fainting through discouragements from my great
weakness, had I not been supported many a time with that word, in 2 Cor. 4.7.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the Power
may be of God, and not of Man. Whence I gather, that God can make use of weak,
unlearned, sinful instruments to do great works; and he can use persons of mean
abilities, to accomplish his glorious ends, in converting souls, as well as the
profoundest Clerks, or wisest men on earth: yea sometimes be lays aside
these, and rather uses the former, that all the glory might be his, And that
no flesh might glory in his presence: 1 Cor. 1.29. But such as I am or have, is
all devoted to the honor of our Redeemer, and welfare of Souls.

October. 31. 1668. Whiles I am Oliver Heywood.

Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden-Bible, at the lower end of
Cheapside.
AN Exposition of Temptation, on Mat. 4. ver. 1. to the end of the eleventh: by
Dr. Tho. Tailor fol. Daille, on the Epistle to the Colossians, containing 49.
Sermons, fol.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psa. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, fol.

The view of the holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton, fol. These six Treatises
next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein
Christians are directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, in the conditions of Prosperity and
Adversity. 3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein
the Christian is directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings
with all Men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company,
in bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone; on a weekday from
morning to night; in visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also the means how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of Salvation opened,
by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: And the True
Christian characterized. 6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of
Faith: Or, One cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it well: All these
by George Swinnock, M. A. Large Octavo's.


An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon. By Will. Greenhil, 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
by Peter Bulkely, 4to.

God's holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer. By Edward Elton, B.
D. 4to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialling Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical. By Sylvanus Morgan 4to.

The Rebuilding of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations. By
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation: or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties, and the necessity of it. By R. Steedman, M. A.

A defense against the fear of Death. By Zuch. Croston.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By Will. Geering.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mrs. Moor's Evidences for Heaven. By Edm. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast. By Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation. By Mr. Mead.

1. A Divine Cordial. 2. A word of comfort for the Church of God. 3. A Plea for
Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle. 4. The Godly Man's Picture, drawn with a
Scripture-pensil. 5. The Doctrine of Repentance. 6. Heaven taken by Storm. 7.
The Holy Eucharist: or, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, briefly opened.
These seven by Mr. Tho. Watson.
The true bounds of Christian Freedom: or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted; out of John 8. ver. 36.

Comfortable Crumbs of Refreshment, by Prayers, Meditation, Consolation, and
Ejaculations; with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

Aurifodina Linguae Gallicae, or the Golden Mine of the French Language,
opened. By Ed. Costlin, Gent.

Sins Sinfulness. By Ralph Venning.

Sober Singularity. By R. Steedman.

The Parable of the great Supper. By John Crump, late of Maidstone.

The Christians daily Monitor. By Joseph Church.

A Memento to young men and old. By J. Maynard.

A Little Book for Little Children. By Tho. White.

The History of Moderation, or the Life, Death, Resurrection of Moderation.

The Conversion of a Sinner, explained and applied, from Ezekiel. 33.11.

Worthy Walking. By Not. Vincent.

Method of Meditation. By Tho. White.

Antidote against Quakerism.

The Contents of the Book.
Sect. 1. THe context cleared 1 Sect. 2. The words explaind 4 Sect. 3.
Doctrines raised 7 Sect. 4. Instances for Closet-Prayer 1 Abraham 12 2 Isaac
ibid. 3 Jacob 13 4 Moses 14 5 David ibid.
Sect. 5. More Instances of 6 Elijah 15 7 Jeremiah 16 8 Daniel 17 9 Peter ibid.
10 Jesus Christ 18

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. Reason 1. Convenience of Privacy 20 For 1 Expostulation 21 2 Act
distraction ibid.
Sect. 2. Reas. 2. Relation betwixt God and Soul 24 1 The hearts free opening
to a Father ibid. 2 God communicates himself to it ibid.
Sect. 3. Reas. 3. God sees in secret, i. e. 1 He takes notice whether thou
Pray 27 2 He has seen thy secret sins 28 3 Thou losest not thy labor 29 4
Thou ownest Gods omnipresence 30
Sect. 4. Reas. 4. God rewards openly, for ways 31 1 Returning visible Answers
32 2 Discriminating providence 33
Sect. 5. 3. Increase of Graces 35 Sect. 6. 4. Solemn owning at the great Day
36
CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. Use 1. Of information concerning places of Prayer 42 Sect. 2. The
nature of Prayer 1 It is an immediate Worship 45 2 Cannot be interrupted ib
Sect. 3. 3. The power of Prayer 48 Sect. 4. 4. The property of a Christian 50
CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. Use of Reprehension, 1 Of Wicked 53 Sect. 2. 2 Of Godly, for
neglecting this; herein 56 1 They are unlike Jesus Christ ibid. 2 Unlike the
Saints of God 57 3 Unlike themselves formerly 58
Sect. 3. 4 They lose much spiritual good 59 5 Expose themselves to temptation
60 6 They express little love to God 61 7 Gross ingratitude to him ibid.
Sect. 4. 8 They contradict the Spirits motions 63 9 May be deprived of Helps
64 10 What if Christ surprise them in neglect. 65

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. 3. Use of Instruction about Closet-Prayer: wherein are, 1.
preparatives to it 1 Look to your state 68 2 Lay aside other business 69
Sect. 2. 3 Set your selves in Gods sight 70 4 Muster up your thoughts wants 71
Sect. 3. 2 Essentials required in secret Prayer 1 Engage the heart in it 74 2
Beg the Spirits assistance 77
Sect. 4. 3 Pray according to Gods will 78 4. In the name of Jesus Christ 80

CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1. 3 Circumstances about Closet-Prayer Referring to Place 8 Referring to
Posture 84 Referring to Season 85 Referring to Voice 86
Sect. 2. 4 Duties consequent to it 87 1 Observe Gods appearance ibid. 2. Walk
suitably 88
Sect. 3. 3 Wait for Returns 90 4 Communicate Experiments 91

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1. Concerning matter or words of prayer 94 1 Lords-Prayer is paraphrased
95
Sect. 2. 2 Wherein an example propounded from Jacob, Exodus 32.10. in ten
particulars. 98
CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1. 4 Use of Exhortation to Closet-prayer pressed by ten Expostulatory
Arguments 103 Sect. 2. Objections answered, as, 1 I perform Family-duty, Answ.
110 2. I am a poor Laboring man, Ans. ibid. 3. I am a Servant, and cannot,
Ans. 111 4 I want a convenient place, Ans. 112 5 I know some Christians against
it, Ans. 113
Sect. 3. 6 I find not my heart prepared, Ans. 114 7 I meet with temptations,
Ans. 115 8 I get no good by it, Ans. 116 9 I want gifts for it, Ans. 117 10
It Is too much ado, labor. Ans. 118
Sect. 4. Cases of conscience answered 1 What difference betwixt Saint and
hypocrite 120 2 Whether may a man engage by vow 121 3 How may we know communion
with God 122 4 What must I do if I find no good ibid. The Whole, concluded with
Exhortation. 124

MATTHEW. 6.6. But thou, when thou prayest enter into thy Closet: and when thou
have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.


CHAP. I.
SECT. I. The Context cleared.
IN this excellent Sermon of our precious Savior in the Mount, we have both
the Gospel clearly Propounded, and the Law solidly expounded: The corrupt and
carnal Pharisees had degraded God's holy Law from its spiritual extent and
regiment by their low and literal glosses, but our Savior restores it to its
dignity and authority over hearts and consciences.

In this Chapter, the best Preacher that ever opened his mouth, does admirably
explain the Adjuncts, Offices, and Exercises of true Piety: which are
principally three, Alms, Prayer and Fasting; to ver. 19.

Particularly, concerning the Duty of Prayer, there were two material
destructive Faults which the Scribes and Pharisees were guilty of; in that
sweet and solemn Ordinance: Those were, 1. Hypocrisy, 2. Battologie, or
vain-babling. Jesus Christ rebukes and rectifies both.

1. They were wont to perform their private devotions, in public places,
merely for vainglory, to be seen of men, as in the Synagogues, or in the
Streets: ver. 5. Now for the Disciples practice in this case, he commands them
to withdraw themselves out of the view of men, into some solitary place, and
there perform that Duty, where they are least exposed to the danger of
ostentation: ver. 6.

2. Another fault that our Redeemer rebukes in the Duty of Prayer is, vain
Repetitions. And though he only mention it here as the Heathens fault, ver. 7.
yet certainly the Scribes and Pharisees might also be guilty of it, for they
are censured for their long Prayers, Mat. 23.14. Yet upon different accounts.
Here the Heathens use vain repetitions that they may move God: There the
Scribes and Pharisees make long Prayers that they may deceive men, and devour
Widows houses. This Text says, They think they shall be heard for their much
speaking; just as Baal's Priests. 1 King. 18.26. They called on the name of
Baal from morning even till noon, saying, O Baal hear us; they leapt upon the
Altar, and cried aloud, and cut themselves, with knives and lancers, till the
blood gushed out upon them. No doubt this was done to move their cruel god (or
rather stupid block) to some pity and compassion: Just as the frantic Papists
do at this day in their self-tormenting penances: But our God who is the
searcher of hearts, delights more in ardent affections, than in either
extension of the voice, or multiplication of words, or excruciating afflictions
of the outward man: Therefore our Savior tells us, that when we pray, we come
not to inform God of any thing he is ignorant of, ver. 8. Your Father knows
what things ye have need of before ye ask him: But we pray that our own hearts
may be affected, and that we may have the condition of acceptance: And for the
rectifying of this abuse of vain babbling in Prayer, Christ propounds and
presents to us an exact draught and compendious platform of Prayer, in that
which is commonly called, The Lords Prayer: not as though men should say only
those words and no more; for then the Apostles had failed in praying in other
terms, but that this might be a directory for Prayer. So that every thing we
ask, Ut aliter orare quam docuit, non Ignorantia sola est, sed and Culpa: Cyp.
sermon. ad orat. Domin. page 408.
should be reducible to some of those heads mentioned in this perfect platform:
So that, as Cyprian says, To pray otherwise than he has taught (either as to
the manner, or substance of the matter) it is not only ignorance but an offense:
and indeed we cannot expect to be heard except we ask, as well according to
Christ's mind as in his name. But this is not the subject I have chosen to
insist upon. That which falls under our present cognizance from this Text, is,
The modification of Prayer, with respect to the circumstance of privacy,
solitariness, or retirement.

The Text holds forth the warrant for, and manner of carrying on the great work
of Closet-Prayer; a copious Subject, a precious Duty.

In which are 1 The Place for it, a Closet. 2 The clossness of the place,
Door-shut. 3 The object of the worship, Thy Father. 4 The Arguments to enforce
thy Duty; 1 Gods omniscience, he sees. 2 His munificence, will reward.



SECT. II. The words opened.
FOr a more distinct opening of the words according to the parts
beforementioned, consider:

1. What is meant by a Closet, here. Some understand and interpret it, not
literally but mystically, making an Allegory of it, as though it did import
[interiorem cordis recessum] the inner recesses or motions of the heart, but
though that be a truth and duty, That we must pray in the closet of the heart;
yet, I humbly conceive, that is not the proper meaning of this place: for we
need not interpret this plain word in such a borrowed sense; since multitudes
of Scriptures are so express, for worshipping God with the heart. Besides, that
is not suitable to the scope of the place, which opposes self-retirement to
the Pharisaical modes of devotion: Leigh. in Crit. Sac. in verb.
The word then is to be literally taken, and in general imports any secret
place where a thing is laid up: Mat. 24.26. Luke 12.3.
particularly, it signifies a Safe, or Cupboard, to lay victuals in; or a
locked Chest, wherein a treasure is usually reserved: or its taken (as indeed
here and often elsewhere) for a closs or secret chamber, a withdrawing-room,
Quemvis locum occultum notat. Par.
retiring-place, where a person is not seen or heard, nor yet is disturbed in
his devotions by any noise or commotion: a secret conclave or locked Parlor,
where no company is to come.

2. Shut thy door: this word imports yet a further degree of secrecy: q. d.
That thou may make thy self to be less observed, shut up thy self in a room;
let none come at thee to disturb thee in thy conversings with God, bar the
door, and make it fast: yea let none over-hear thee in thy retired devotions.
For, observe it, in true Closet-Prayer there should be an including of the
voice as well as the body: some pray so loud in their chambers that they may be
heard into the streets; this is not properly Closet-Prayer, since it does not
attain the end of this retirement, which is an approving the heart only to God,
and avoiding all shows and occasions of hypocrisy and vainglory; for it is
all one (as to this end) whether the body be seen or the voice be heard: Only
remember, this is spoken of secret Prayer; for it does not exclude public
Prayer in a congregation, where the body is seen, and voice is heard: Yet it
does by a kind of Synecdoche require self-denial, singleness, and sincerity in
all kind of Prayer, Unae specie simplicitatis pro toto genere posita.
public, private, secret, for one part or sign of uprightness in the duty is
put for the whole, shutting the door, for integrity of heart in the whole
management of this great Affair.

3. Here Is the object of Prayer: Pray to thy Father: Thy business is not with
men, but with God; seek therefore to please and enjoy him: Nor yet art thou to
fetch a compass and pray to Saints and Angels, but go straight to God in the
name of Christ, and be sure thou look upon him as under the sweet relation of a
tender Father; yea, Quod nomen, nemo nostrum in oratione auderet attingere,
nisi ipse nobis sic permisset o^are: Cyprian. Sermon. de Orat. Dom. p. 414.
Thy Father. Oh, a sweet word, a blessed word, and such a word as we durst not
have taken into our mouths; had it not been for Christ's glorious undertaking
to purchase for us the adoption, and this gracious commission, and in the
platform of Prayer the prescription: and for God the Father's voluntary
condescension. Come then, and fear not, poor Disciple of Christ, come with
filial affections, and the Spirit of Adoption, and thou art sure to speed: for
this paternal relation imports affection, provision, condescension, and
compassion. If thou will be a Child to him; he will be a Father to thee: 2 Cor.
6.18.

4. Here Is the Arguments and encouragements to this duty of secret Prayer.

1 Thy Father sees in secret. All Is one to him whether you be in a public
Church, or private Closet; God (whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than
the Sun) sees you in the one place, as well as in the other, and though men see
you not, yet content your selves with this. That God and your consciences are
competent witnesses of your uprightness; with whom you have to do, and from
whom you have your reward.

2. He will reward thee openly. There Is two things in this expression. 1. They
shall be rewarded, 2. They shall be openly rewarded. So that men shall say,
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in
the earth: Psalm. 58.11. The Scribes and Pharisees do all their works to be seen
of men, and of men they have that sorry reward: you do yours in the sight of
God, and from him you shall receive your abundant and eternal recompense.
Though men see you not, fear not, you shall be seen and accepted by him that
searches hearts, and knows the mind of his spirit: But of these, more anon.

The sum and design of the Text is this. Thou, my Disciple, see the plausible
practices of thy hypocritical Pharisees, to gain credit and applause; they
perform their private duties in public places, as Markets and Synagogues, that
they may pass among men for eminent Saints; and they are generally so esteemed;
that is their reward. But thou that have given up thy name to me, in the
profession of my Name, take my counsel for regulalating this sweet Duty of
secret Prayer: Let none see what thou go about, steal time from all
observers, withdraw thy self into some Closet or private place; and when thou
have made all fast, do thou set thy self in the presence of God, approve thy
heart to him, lay open thy bosom before him, tell him all thy grievances; and
though no creature is privy to thy secret groans, yet be sure that all thy
desires are before God, and thy groaning is not hid from him, and he takes
notice of thy tears; and reserves them in a bottle by him, to be rewarded in a
visible manner in a seasonable time, thy labor is not in vain, thy work is
with the Lord, and thy reward with thy God.

SECT. III. Doctrines raised, and cleared.
THere are many Doctrines lie couched in the words, I shall but hint them, and
pitch upon one:

1. Prayer is a choice part of religion; its a piece of natural worship; though
the right ordering of it is by institution, yet it is a main part of Religion.
Therefore often put in Scripture for the whole service of God: He that calls on
the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13. A prayerless soul, is
graceless:

2. Prayer is a duty much abused: There Is scarce any thing so much perverted
and corrupted as this choice duty, by formality, hypocrisy, superstition, base
and by-ends, as is clear by these Pharisees many ways, and their younger
brethren the Papists at this day, Masses, Dirges, Invocation of Saints, etc.

3. There are several sorts of Prayer: Both as to the kinds, modes, and
circumstances. The Apostle distinguishes of Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks: 1 Timothy 2.1. There Is also Publick-Prayer,
Family Prayer, and Closet-Prayer. Now a Christian must pray with all Prayer and
Supplication: Ephesians. 6.18. The last, is here insisted on.

4. A Christian must do nothing for praise or applause, especially in matters
of Religion: It is a base prostituting the highest things of God, to our
beastly lusts. It is to feed an humor, and damn the soul with that which
should save it. Let no Christians, (as the Pharisees here,) make Prayer truckle
to their credit, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory.

5. There are set and stated times of Prayer: This is hinted in this word,
When, when thou prayest. A time there must be for it, though the point of time
is not determined, yet a time must be set apart for the duty, every day; a
Christian must choose out the fittest time for the duty, by the due use of his
liberty and discretion.

6. Circumstances are of great use in all our actions: The streets are proper
places to walk, talk, buy and sell in, but not so fit for Prayer; the Church is
a fit place for public devotion, not so for a solemn performance of the duty
of secret Prayer. Although mental ejaculations are fit enough in both, yet it is
not convenient to kneel down or use outward gestures of secret Prayer there.

7. Closet-Prayer must be with all secrecy and solitariness: In a Closet, door
shut: As we must not blow a Trumpet when we give Alms, so we must not hold out
a flag when we go to wait on God in the Duty of Prayer: It was carnal counsel
the brethren of Christ gave him: Joh. 7.4. Show thy self to the World. The
reason is given, v. 5. For neither did his brethren believe in him: A sad sign
of carnality!

8. God alone is the proper object of our Prayers: pray to thy Father. As he is
the object of our Faith, so of Prayer: For he alone can help, therefore he is
to be sought, none else sees our state, or can satisfy souls: Isa. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us.

9. In all our addresses to God we must own God as our Father; as having
adopted us in Christ: because his, therefore ours: I ascend (says Christ) to
my Father and your Father, Joh. 20.17. Indeed by nature we were children of
wrath, but by grace children of his Love; so that they may say, as Isa. 64.8.
But now, O Lord, thou art our Father. Oh plead and improve this relation.

10. God is omnipresent: Hinc omnipraesens est quia nullum est Ubi, unde est
exclusus, neque alicubi est inclusus. Ames. Med. Theol. lib. 1. Cap. 4. 47.
Thy Father which is in secret: the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, 1
King. 8.27. He fills all places with his immense and infinite essence: Heaven
is his throne, the Earth is his footstool; he is excluded from no place,
included in none: for he is without all limitation, dimension, or termination.

11. God is omniscient. Thy Father which sees in secret. The darkest night, or
secretest closet, or most hidden thought of a reserved heart, can neither hide,
or be hid from God's all-seeing eye: Heb. 4.13. God beholds all things in
Heaven and on Earth with one simple single act of his Understanding; without
composition, discourse, or representation of Species.

12. Every believing Prayer has a sure reward: He will reward thee openly: Not
a good word to God, or work for God, shall be lost: To him that sows
righteousness, shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11.18. And we know every right
Prayer is a real seed, Psalm. 126.6. And it will rise in a full and plentiful
crop another day.

13. The reward of secret Prayer shall be open and manifest: They have already
a reward and gift in secret; Communion with God is an abundant recompense. In
keeping thy Commandments there is great reward: Psalm. 19.11. But this is a
[praemium ante praemium] reward before the reward: the other shall be in Heaven
before Angels and Men.

14. A Christians reward is from God: Thy Father will reward thee: Not men.
Scribes and Pharisees have their reward from men, from men they expect it:
Saints expect their reward from God, and God gives it them: Men reward them
evil for their good will, and they expect no better: If better come from men,
they own it as a gratuity sent from their Father: It Is a principle of Religion
to know and believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. And as God gives a reward, so he is the reward
of his Saints, Genesis 15.1. Yea an exceeding great reward. It can admit of no
Hyperbole, it cannot have a sufficient Emphasis: to enjoy God is a reward
sufficient, in and for the service of God. These Doctrines would afford large
discourses, but none of these are the subject I shall insist upon.

I shall raise one from the main scope of the Text, which is this.

Doct. That Closet-Prayer is a Christian Duty.

Secret Prayer is an Evangelical exercise.

Every child of God may and must perform the duty of Secret Prayer.

As a Christian must pray all manner of Prayer, so in all places, 1 Timothy 2.8. I
will that men pray every where: And if every where, then in their Closets: This
divine Incense should perfume every room, and should ascend to Heaven from
Chambers as well as Churches: Any place now is fit for a divine Oratory; Psalm.
109.4. Psalm. 30. title.
God and a believing soul may meet in a corner: a Saint should give himself to
Prayer, and dedicate his house to God; he should (as it were) consecrate every
room in his house to be a place of private devotion: Abraham reared an altar to
God wherever he came; so must a Christian make every place where he can get
closs to the duty, a place of Prayer.

Mr. Mede has undertaken to prove, from Josh. 24.26. That the Jews of old, and
Christians in Gospel Times had their [ Proseuchae, or] praying places, which he
thus describes (as to the Jews of old:) Proseucha, says he, Medes Diatribae,
page 279.
was a plot of ground, encompassed with a wall, or some other like mound or
enclosure, and open above, much like to our Courts, the use properly for
Prayer, as the name Proseucha imports: And these were without the Cities, as
Synagogues were within: Of this (as he thinks) were those in Act. 21.31. and
Luke 6.12. Where Jesus Christ is said to continue all night [(...), in
Proseucha Dei,] in the place of Prayer, or Proseucha of God. Now although I
shall say little of the Notion, yet I cannot see how it will prove any relative
holiness of places; nor yet do I believe or find, but that the Saints had other
praying places, as in houses and elsewhere as occasion was offered, even in
dwelling houses, Act. 12.12. But as to this Duty of secret Prayer, it must not
be so narrowly confined, but we may go to any Closet or private Room where our
souls may meet with God: And (as one says) we shall not fail to find that the
Grots and caves lie as open to the celestial influences, The life of Dr.
Hammond in a letter, p. 201.
as the fairest and most beautiful Temples.

SECT. IV. Instances of several in Scripture, that used Closet-Prayer.
THe Doctrine needs no Explication, but Confirmation: which I shall do from
Scripture-Instances and Reasons.

We have several Examples of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles that used this duty
of solitary or secret prayer.

1. Abraham, The friend of God, and Father of the faithful, conversed much with
his God alone; particularly in this duty of Prayer, Genesis 18.22. When the men,
(i. e.) the created Angels that seemed men) were gone toward Sodom, Abraham
stood yet before the Lord, or Jehovah, i. e. Jesus Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant. Standing is a praying posture, therefore put for prayer, hence
Abraham drew near and pleaded with God for Sodom: That was his errand to God at
that time. No doubt he had used this course frequently in other cases: Hence
arose that intimacy betwixt God and Abraham: So that God talked with him, Genesis
15.12. Chap. 17.3.
came to him; and he again discoursed familiarly with God.

2. Isaac, The son of the Promise, a very contemplative man, therefore it is
said, Genesis 24.63. (...) Locutus est ore, vel co^de cogitavit; proprie
significat, submissa voce loqui, uto^antes.
That Isaac went out to meditate in the field at even-tide. The word signifies
as well to Pray as Meditate, it is likely he did both in some solitary Walk,
where he conversed with his God. The Chaldee translates it by praying, but the
Greek by exercising himself, i. e. both in meditation and prayer: And truly
there is a near affinity betwixt these two sweet duties, and it is usual for a
devout soul to fall out of the one into the other, in its retirements.
Soliloquie in the heart helps to a colloquie with God: Locus precibus ubique
commodus; maxim in solitudine, ubi sensus de piis meditationibus minus a
vocantur, Pareus in loc.
But here observe Isaac's oratory, which he had in the field, which he used for
more privacy; There (says Pareus) he continually poured out prayers to God,
and at this time more earnestly for the happy success of his servant; a
singular example of piety: A place it was every way fit for prayer, especially
in solitude where the senses are less drawn off from pious meditations: Some
think he was returning from his devotions, and then it is worth noting, What a
speedy reward of his piety, and effect of his prayers was granted: Would all
young men take the like course for a Wife, they might meet seasonably with a
Rebeckah in mercy.

3. Jacob is a famous instance of this choice exercise, few like him; he was
put to flee, but they could not drive him from his God: They had their
meeting-places and intercourse where none saw: particularly that remarkable
time, Genesis 32.24. Jacob was left alone: And there wrestled a man with him,
until the breaking of the day. It Is likely Jacob had sent his household away on
purpose, that he might wrestle with God alone: I shall not dispute whether
Jacob had any extraordinary natural strength of body, I am sure he had
abundance of spiritual strength of grace, nor shall I take notice of the
Hebrews subtle disputes concerning this man. Hosea tells us, it was an Angel,
yet withal he tells us, That by his strength he had power with God, Hos. 12.3,
4. Therefore this was God himself, the creating, Genesis 48.16.
not a created Angel, even Jesus Christ, the Angel that redeemed him from all
evil, whom Malachi calls, The Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. It was God
himself, Elohim, whom Jacob overcame in this stupendous [ monomachia, or]
conflict. But how did he thus prevail? The Text says, with prayers and tears,
he wept and made supplication: Now he had gotten God to a side (as it were) and
none came to distract him, or to part this strong and blessed duel; he is
resolved to stick to his hold, and not let God go, till he blessed him: And
good Jacob came off a Noble Conqueror; and from that purchased the famous name
of Israel: Oh unequal matches! Oh unparalled conquest! The seemingly-adverse
combatant was Jacobs only assistant, and the conquered was the invincible
Jehovah, and no other seconds or spectators, but the Infinite God and Worm
Jacob.

4. Moses was a choice man of God, whom the Scripture characterizeth as a
non-such, Deuteronomy. 34.10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face: And this intimate acquaintance was
obtained, maintained, and exercised by this secret conversing with God: How
often do we find the Lord and his servant Moses together? And none with them,
yea Moses only must come near, and the rest must worship afar off: Exodus 14.12.
And what business have these familiar friends one with another? Why, sometimes
the Lord speaks to Moses, sometimes Moses speaks to God in secret prayer: See
both together in Exodus 32.9, 10, 11. A strange Scripture, God and Moses had
been conversing with each other in the mount forty days: God tells Moses, the
people had made them a molten calf, and he was angry and would consume them,
and bids Moses let him alone, as though Moses had bound the hands of
omnipotency: Nay then, thinks Moses, if my poor people be in this hazard since
I am with God, I Will ply the throne of grace, and improve my interest for them:
and then he falls closs to the work, and besought the Lord his God and said --
At this time he alone stood in the gap, Psalm. 106.25.
and prevailed by his intercession to turn away Gods wrath from Israel: Here
was a work, and this was the fruit of secret prayer.

5. David the man after Gods own heart, was a man much skilled in secret or
closet meditations and prayers: Hence some of his Psalms of Prayer and Praise
were first composed in Caves, Wildernesses, and solitary places, Psalm. 142.
Title, is Maschil of David; a Prayer when he was in the Cave. And this is for
instruction to us, so Maschil signifies: Yea he purposely compiles the 102.
Psalm. as a pattern to all that may be in his case, that is solitary, As a
Pelican in the Wilderness, an owl in the desert, or a sparrow alone upon the
house top, v. 6, 7. Then they are to pray as he did, and to pour out their
complaint before the Lord: Yea, upon a declaration of Gods covenant, designs of
mercy to David and his house; the good man went either into some private room
in his own house, or into the Tent before the Ark, and there set himself, first
to meditate, then to pray; for he did both, as that Scripture clearly
intimates, 2 Samuel 7.17, 27. And oh what memorable fruits of secret Prayer had
David frequently? Surely he felt the sweetness of it, both in his soul and
body, in his spiritual estate, and political affairs: Therefore he commends it
to all, Psalm. 4. Commune with your own heart upon your bed (or in your
bedchamber) and there also offer the sacrifices of righteousness, And put your
trust in the Lord, ver. 4.5.

SECT. V. Five more Instances produced.
6. ANother example from Scripture of the performance of this duty of secret
prayer, is, the famous man of God Elijah, who wrought many miracles, and was
mighty in prayer, for so the Apostle James testifies of him, Chap. 5 17, 18.
that he could shut and open Heaven; he had (as it were) got the Key of the
Clouds, to open the windows of Heaven, that it might rain or not rain,
according to his word. But how came he by this power? Why, certainly he had
great acquaintance with his God in secret. Take one instance what his practice
was, 1 King. 17.19. to ver. 24. It is the memorable History of raising the
Widow woman's dead Son. It was a great undertaking: none but God could raise the
dead, God is to be implored by earnest Prayer, no place so fit for that great
duty as a Closet, or some closs Chamber, therefore he being to deal with his
God in good hard earnest about this important business, says the Text, He
carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed, and
then he cried to the Lord, ver. 19, 20. It was not the first time Elijah had
there wrestled with God; if it was his lodging room, it was his praying room:
And here God heard him, and wrought the miracle: what he did for Elijah, he can
and will do for us, if he see fit: for Elijah was no more than a man, and
subject to like passions as we are.

7. Jeremiah is a remarkable Instance he was a Prophet of the Lord, sanctified
from his Mothers womb, yet he met with so many discouragements, that he has a
mind to leave his people; Jer. 9.1, 2.
and he wishes for a lodging-place in the Wilderness, i. e. some solitary
retirement, that there he might take his fill of weeping; however he resolves
at present, that wherever he is, he will get retired, and, says he, My soul
shall weep in secret places for your pride, Jer. 13.17. Yet more punctually, to
the business of secret Prayer, see Jer. 15.17. Says he, I sat alone because
of thy hand. But what did he alone? Did he only pore and muse upon the Churches
sins and sufferings? No, he had something to say to his God, ver. 18. Why is my
pain perpetual? And God then has something to say to him by way of gracious
answer, ver. 19. If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shall
stand before me: This is the result of his secret Prayer, a restoration of him
to, and his confirmation in, his office and function, and to the public
exercise thereof: This is worth praying for.

8. Daniel is a famous pattern of the resolute and courageous performance of
this duty, against all opposition: Although he might have pleaded, (if ever
any) There Is a Lion in the way, I shall be slain in the Streets or Den, for my
work in my Chamber: yet he feared nothing, he ventured upon a severe Law, his
Princes displeasure, the loss of his Preferment, the rage of his Competitors,
and the Lions hungry stomachs, rather than he will omit or intermit his
accustomed course of Chamber-worship; he will endure the Lions cruelty, rather
than neglect a known duty: Nay, he is so far from gratifying his proud
adversaries, that he will not in the least abate his wonted frequency, or
visibility in the duty; But his windows being open toward Jerusalem, be kneeled
upon his knees three times a day and prayed, Dan 6.10. But did Daniel hold out
a Flag, or blow a Trumpet, by setting open his windows to declare to men what
he was a going to do? Was not this contrary to the rule in the Text? Are we
here commanded to shut our door, and may Daniel open his window? Is not that
all one? Surely that good man did not open his windows out of hypocrisy and
vainglory; but to show his resolution, courage and constancy, out-daring these
impious impudent commands of men: he did not fear to be seen now in so plain a
case. What spirit are they of, that will rather give themselves to the roaring
Lion, and incur the wrath of the King of Heaven, which is more terrible than a
thousand hungry Lions, than solemnly perform this useful duty of secret Prayer:
Let careless souls consider this.

9. Peter a famous Apostle shall be another instance in the case, Act. 9.40.
When Tabitha or Dorcas lay dead in an upper Chamber, and the Widows stood
weeping by her, and he was to raise her, He put them all forth, and kneeled
down and prayed, and turning him to the body, said, Tabitha arise, and she
opened her eyes -- See here, another miracle like Elijah's, upon secret Prayer:
But this was upon an extraordinary case, did Peter use to pray alone? Yes, turn
but to the next Chapter, Act. 10.9. Peter went up upon the housetop to pray,
about the sixth hour: Which was about noon, another praying season; Psalm. 55.17.
certainly he missed not morning and night for such devotion: He went to the
top of the flat-rooft house, which was a private place, and equivalent to a
Closet; there Peter prayed, and in that prayer he fell into a trance, and in
that trance he had a Vision concerning the calling in of the Gentiles a
glorious mystery and transcendent mercy toward us poor Outcasts, Romans 16.25.
Col 1.26, 27. Ephesians. 2.4, 6.
a mystery which was kept secret since the world began, hid fromages and
generations, this blessed mystery that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel; yet
this transcendent design of love was manifested to a choice Apostle while he
was in the performance of this duty of secret Prayer: This is very remarkable,
and worth observation.

10. The last Instance is of our blessed Savior, our dear Lord Jesus was very
conversant in this Duty: Mark. 1.35. In the morning, rising up a great while
before day, he went out and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed:
Our precious Redeemer went about doing good, and the day time he usually spent
in preaching, conferring, healing diseases, etc. And the night he spent in
prayer, meditation, and such other holy exercises: he had scarce time to eat or
sleep for doing his fathers work; he spent not one moment of time unprofitably
in a above thirty years: How early does he rise, and earnestly does he follow
his business for communion with his Father, and for the work of our redemption?
Yea, Luke 6.12. He continued all night in prayer to God: i. e. in a mountain,
Mar. 26.36.
in secret Prayer and frequently elsewhere we shall find him alone, and in this
work: and wherefore was all this? Was it not principally for our sakes? For our
salvation, and imitation? Yes certainly, he designed our good in all; he prayed
that we might pray, and reap the profit of his prayers and purchases: Nec
verbis tantum sed and factis Dominus orare nos docuit, ipse orans frequentor^
and deprecans, and quid facere no^ oportet exempli sui contestatione
demonstrans: Cyp. Sermon. De orat. Dom. p. 425.
Hear we Cyprian sweetly, He taught us to pray not in words only but deeds;
himself praying frequently, and deprecating, and so demonstrating what we are
to do by the witness giving of his own example: Thus he.

Most Divines hold the obligatory power of Scripture-examples, in things not
forbidden; especially being so laudable a practice, and employed in other
Scriptures, all the former instances seem cogent Arguments; but the last
concerning Jesus Christ, has the force of a possitive precept and command.

But there is few or none that have the face of Christians, dare deny this to
be a duty; but I fear many that would go for Christians live in the ordinary
neglect of it.

CHAP. II. The Reasons to prove that Closet-Prayer, is a Christian-Duty.
SECT. I. The first Reason of the Point.
ALl the Reasons that I shall make use of at this time for the proof of this
Doctrine, and clearing secret Prayer to be a duty, shall be fetched out of the
Text, and they are these.

4. Rea.
1. The convenience of privacy for Prayer. 2. The Relation betwixt God and a
Saint: 3. Gods Omniscience, seeing in secret. 4. Gods Munificence, rewarding.
1. The great convenience there is in privacy for Prayer, and the good
providence of God, bestowing upon us private Rooms which implicitly call us to
the performance of that duty. For there is in retirement a great advantage for
the managing of any work of wisdom, Prove. 18.1. Through desire a man having
separated himself, seeks and intermeddleth with all wisdom, i. e. He that is
really studious of true Piety, will voluntarily sequester himself to prosecute
it. This was anciently the well-meaning design of a Monastic life, which since
has been woefully abused: But yet certainly there is a very great advantage in
solitariness for carrying on a religious business: Take only two at present,
which are advantages particularly referring to this duty of Prayer, whereunto
secrecy contributes.

1. Self-expostulations, and self-abasing gestures and expressions: when a
Christian in Prayer finds his heart hard, dead, dull, distracted, or any way
out of order he may in secret make a pause, and begin to commune; with his own
heart, examine the matter, lament the cause, chide his untoward heart, and
charge his wanton spirit to keep close to his God in duty: Thus David, Why art
thou cast down, O my soul? Awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early:
My soul wait thou upon God. Nothing more familiar in the Psalms than such
intercisions and diversions from the work in hand, to raise up the heart to an
higher tune in Prayer and Praises. And this may be of singular use; for by such
heart-reasonings and debates a Saint may wind up his spirit, and get better
prepared for the remaining part of the exercise: Now such a work as this would
not be so seasonable and convenient, when others join in the duty: So also for
bodily postures; sometimes for an evidence of greater humiliation, a Christian
finds it requisite to prostrate himself before the Lord: And use such gestures
as would not be fit in the sight of others; therefore Closet-Prayer is very
necessary, where a Christian may use his discretion as God shall direct him,
for the humbling, quickening, raising and melting of his heart before the Lord
alone: That Is the first advantage.

2. It is a wonderful help against distraction. When we are (as it were) out of
the noise of the world, we are then fitter for attendance upon God: The
affairs, discourses, troubles, and confusions of a family (if within hearing)
are a great hindrance to the duties of Meditation and Prayer: Experience
testifies this, a man cannot study or cast accounts in a crowd or throng of
People. When we are intent upon any business, how little a noise diverts us? It
may be this was the reason why that hospitable Gentlewoman, in 2 King. 4.10.
would have a Chamber built for her welcom-guest the Prophet Elisha, yea built
upon the wall: for she might judge him to be a contemplative man, and though
she might have lodging-rooms in her house, yet she might look upon that at a
little distance, as more commodious for his devotions and meditations, as being
out of the noise of houshold-business and hurryings: An active fancy quickly
closes with any diversion in our attendance upon God: Therefore ought we to
study to attend upon the Lord without distraction: When Abraham went to worship
in the Mount, he left his servants below in the valley, lest they should
obstruct his communion with God: When Moses was to go up unto the Lord, though
Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy Elders went further than the People,
yet the Text says, They should worship afar off; but, says God, Moses alone
shall come near the Lord, Exodus 24.1, 2. Observe it, when Moses had parted with
his company, and was alone, then he should come near the Lord; common
professors worship not God at all acceptably, sincere Saints worshipping God
with others are comparatively far off; but souls in a corner or Closet are
admitted to come near God, and have sweet intimacy with him, as I shall show
anon: Yet mistake me not, not as though I preferred secret Prayer alone, before
public Prayer with others; for as God delights in the joint prayers of his
People, so a soul may enjoy God in communion of Saints, and is ordinarily more
carried out to God than in private, according to the helps and advantages he
has with others; yet when the heart is in frame, there is usually more
intimacy expressed betwixt God and the Christian in secret, than with others: Yet
further, mistake not, not as though solitariness freed us from all
distractions: i^ we take our hearts with us, we shall have a principle of
diversion, and need neither noise nor visible objects to hinder us from God:
And this those that have magnified solitariness most, have found by sad
experience, and left upon record: Take an instance; Locus secretus eligitur,
quia solus Dei judicio ^e^unia suut agenda, and singularem inspectorem,
adjutoremque Deum volunt haec habere c^tamina, neque in agon bus aliquibus
periculosus militatur: -- Prop^er hoc, Solitudo carent arbitris, and Eremus,
assentaterum satellitio vacua, a jejunan^e Christo el gitur, ut non cum carne
and sanguine, sed cum spiritualibus nequi^iis dimic^tur, and amotis minorum
occasionibus homo cum Diabolo colluctetur, and soli sint in palastra Christus
and Antichristus, Spiritus and Antispiritus: Neque putet homo, se evasisse
pericula cum in eremum venerit, quia quanto saltilius tanto difficilius a
Te^tatore invaditur, qui cogitationum foribus assilens omnia virtutum germina
in ipso ortu strangulare molitur: Cyp. De jejun. and te^tat. Christi: Prope
init. page 300, 301. Verum siberius, anima expedita obviat impugnanti, ubi
compedes impedimentorum defueriat and aspectus irritamenta non noveriat:
Securiorque est congressus, ubi singu^a non vellicant dimicante nec inebriant
animum lenocinio voluptatum, vid. plur.
Cyprian speaking of Christ's fasting and being tempted in the Wilderness,
choosing that place for its secrecy, because, says he, Fastings are to be
observed so as God alone may be Judge, and in such contests as these we are to
call on God alone as spectator and helper: And shows notably the danger of
vainglory, and advantages of secrecy; yet adds, Let not a man imagine he has
escaped all dangers, when he comes into a Wilderness or solitary place: because
he is invaded by the tempter, so much the more difficulty, because more
subtily, who sitting before the doors of the thoughts, seeks to strangle all
the buds of virtue in their very birth. Yet the disentangled soul will more
freely resist its enemy, when the fetters of impediments are wanting, and the
sight discerns no allurements, and the conflict is more secure; when particular
affairs pluck nor back the combatant, nor the delights of enticing pleasures
inebriate (or make drunk) the mind: Thus he: But this is the first Reason, from
the advantages of s^

SECT. II. The second Reason, is, From the relation betwixt God and a praying
Soul.
2. ANother Reason held forth also in the Text, is drawn from that relation
which is betwixt God and a believing Soul: therefore our Savior bids, pray to
Thy Father: and this Reason has two parts.

1. The poor Soul can more freely open his heart to God in a Closet. 2. God
will more clearly manifest himself to the Soul in secret.
1. A Soul in secret making its addresses to God, goes to him as a Father: Now,
we know children cannot be so free in their addresses to their Father, in
company and before strangers, as when no body is present: Hence it is, that
when a child has any special business to his Father, he takes him aside, or
whispers to him, that none may over-hear him: And observe it, Gods children
have an errand to God that none must know of: As Ehud said to Eglon, I have a
secret errand to thee, O King, Judge. 3.19. So a gracious soul may say, Oh my
King, my God, my Father, I have a secret errand to thee. A lust to confess, or
mercy to beg or bless thee for, that I would not have others to know of: It is
not fit any should be privy to that which a gracious soul tells God of: In this
case it may be said, Discover not thy secret to another, Prove. 25.9. Two may
keep counsel, but three cannot: God and a gracious Soul will be faithful to
each other, but a third must not know of these matters; nay in this case we may
say, Keep the doors of thy lips from her that lies in thy bosom, Mic. 7.5.
There are many things a Saint tells God of, that he will not acquaint either
Father, or Wife, or Friend with, that is as his own soul, but only his heavenly
Father; he opens his bosom freely to him, and tells him his whole heart, best
and worst; hides nothing from him, because he only knows the heart: And truly I
have often in this admired the wisdom of God, that has so far consulted his
peoples credit and modesty as to appoint them place and ways of speaking to him
privately, designing secret Prayer for this very end, that the soul may spread
its letter of wants and complaints before its Father, and present its petition
to the King of Heaven: The Spouse of Christ is modest (says an Ancient) and
cannot so freely let out her self to her beloved before others as in a corner:
here then comes in the use and advantage of Closet-Prayer, that a Christian may
(as Jonathan and David did, unbosom themselves to each other alone) open his
heart to God where no eyes see, or ears hear his secret groans and tears: But
further.

2. God will more familiarly communicate himself to the soul in a corner: he
also has something to whisper in the believers ear, that none must know of;
and therefore gets it by it self: a lively emblem whereof we have in Joseph's
making himself known to his Brethren, when his bowels were working, and he
could not refrain himself, he cried, Genesis 45.1, 2, 3, 4.
Cause every man to go out from me. -- Then he wept aloud, and said, I am
Joseph. And, oh what endeared reciprocal affections did work in all their
breasts toward each other! Just thus, is it betwixt our Joseph and his
brethren, Jesus Christ and his members; there stands none with him while Jesus
makes himself known unto his Brethren: And though at first they be (as it were)
troubled at his presence, yet when he speaks lovingly, and passes by former
unkindnesses, and says, Come near unto me I pray you, then they come near, and
he says convincingly, I am Jesus whom ye sold and crucified: This melts and
humbles their rocky hearts, and being broken, he pours oil into their troubled
spirits, and speaks many sweet heart-reviving words unto them: Then, then the
child of God has most sweet refreshing in-comes: Hos. 2.14.
When God has allured the soul into the Wilderness, he speaks to its heart.
(...) Desertum, sic dictum per Antiphr. quasi locus a sermon remotus.
A Wilderness is a solitary place, where other speech is not heard, (as the
word imports:) then speaks God to the soul when men cannot speak to it: When
men are remote, God is near at hand; yea nearest to help, melt, comfort,
quicken, when men are furthest off: Our Savior says of himself, Joh. 16.32.
You leave me alone, yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me. q. d. When
you go away, my Father comes to visit me with most familiar endearings, Oh
blessed exchange! Thus it is often with the Saints: when men leave them, or
they withdraw from men, they have many times most of God: and, Is it not
infinitely better, to have the presence of God, than the company of men? It Is
worth noting what God says of Abraham, Isa. 51.2. I called him alone and
blessed him. Mark it, when God had enticed Abraham from all his friends, and
got him alone, then he blesses him, and you know what the blessing of Abraham
was, even a Covenant-blessing; such God distributes to his Saints when he has
withdrawn them from company into a corner: Mihi oppidum carceder, est, solitudo
paradisus, Hieronym.
This is that which made an Ancient profess, that a Town was his prison, a
solitary place his paradise: Cities or numerous societies draw a veil betwixt
God and the soul, which solitariness withdraws; and so many times becomes most
sweet: We often lose God in a crowd of business or company, but find him when
alone: Hence a corner of our house may be a little corner of Heaven, and in our
closets we may find the sweetest cordials and contentment: You know, Friends do
most familiarly enjoy one another when others are not present, Jonathan sent
away the lad when he would be familiar with his friend David: And then they
kissed one another, 1 Samuel 20.40, 41.
and wept one with another, until David exceeded: Even so, husband and wife
alone have the sweetest embraces: There lies a restraint (as it were) upon God
by company, which is taken off in a sort by solitariness. Oh when God finds a
soul alone by it self, having set it self purposely to meet him, then he
reveals his love, unvails his face, unlocks his blessed chest, distributes
doles of love and grace, kisses it with the kisses of his mouth, and sends it
not away empty, but full of grace and peace. Thus that word of Solomon is
verified, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows his own bitterness, and a stranger
intermeddles not with his joy, i. e. No creature on earth is privy to the
secret groans or sweetest solace of a retired Saint: That Is the second Reason.

SECT. III. The third Reason is drawn, from God seeing in secret.
ANother Reason is drawn from Gods Omniscience and Omnipresence, the Text
says, Thy Father sees in secret: And the strength or force of this argument
lies in these four particulars.

1. God sees in secret, Therefore he takes notice whether thou pray in secret
yea or no: He looks after thee (as it were) when thou go into such a chamber
and solitary place, and says, That soul has now an opportunity, a convenient
place and fit occasion, to wait upon me, and will he not? Will he be always so
busy in other company, that I must have none of his fellowship? Must his
converse be so much with men, that he can spare no time for communion with God:
Nay, will he go so often into such a room to do such and such a business, and
can he never find a time to go down upon his knees, and visit me? Has he so
much to do in the world, that he has no leisure to look up to Heaven? Do his
worldly occasions still thrust out spiritual meditations? Will he never set
himself solemnly to transact betwixt my self and him in Prayer and Meditation,
the most important business of his soul? Ah sirs, the Omnipresent God takes
notice of all your motions into and out of your chambers, and expects that
sometimes at least your souls should wait upon him: And why should Christians
frustrate his expectation?

2. God sees in secret, Therefore he has seen thy secret sins, and sins in
secret: Thy closs and Closet-wickedness is naked and open before the piercing
eyes of an all-seeing God; therefore should thy Closet-tears and Prayers
testify thy sound and saving repentance. For this is a rule in practical
divinity, that sorrow for sin must bear some proportion to the nature and
circumstances of the sin, both as to degree, and circumstances of time and
place. Manassch humbled himself greatly for his great abominations. So for
place and manner, them that sin openly must be rebuked before all, and testify
their repentance before the Church. 1 Timothy 5.20.
So, if the sin be private or less known, the rule in Mat. 18.15.16. is to be
observed for private admonition and confession: And consequently secret sins
must be secretly mourned for. When thy sins are known to none but to God and
thine own conscience, thou art not bound to discover them to any other but to
God, in an hearty secret repentance, except in some few cases. Here then comes
in secret prayer and godly sorrow: Well then, there is none of us without our
secret sins, and God sees them all though never so privily committed; we may
hide sin from men, we cannot hide it from the Lord: he sets our secret sins in
the sight of his countenance, Psalm. 90.8. His eyes are open upon all the ways
of man, and who knows all the errors of his life? Job 34.21, 21. Jer. 32.19.
Pro. 5.10.
Therefore must we get alone and enumerate all the sins we know of, and desire
God to show us what we do not know, and with holy David, breath out that devout
Petition, Psalm. 19.12. Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

3. God sees in secret, Therefore thou do not lose thy labor, though men
know not where thou art, or what thou art a doing, yet thy God takes notice of
thee: thou do not thy good works incognito; though thy groans are not seen or
heard by men, yet they are well known to thy God, Psalm. 38.9. Lord, all my
desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee. As if David should
say, Lord, I many times withdraw my self into a Closet or retired place, and
there I open before the Lord the sorrows of my soul, I pour out my heart like
water before the face of the Lord, Lam. 2.19. Sometimes in the night-watches,
or in solitary places, none knows what I am doing; no eye sees, no ear hears,
my briny trears or bitter outcries; but the all-seeing God hides not his eyes
from my tears, stops not his ears to my cries, but knows my groans, yea my very
desires: Observe it, There is not a believing Prayer but it is upon the file,
and on record in Heaven, though offered up by an obscure person and in an
obscure place; yea God knows the meaning of his spirit in the hearts of his
people, Romans 8.17.
though the troubled Saint cannot tell whether it be indeed the spirit of God
or no: But this know, that secret prayers in a chamber are as well known to
God, as open prayers in a public Church; heart-ejaculations are owned by God
as well as loudest acclamations. God took notice of Hezekiah when he turned his
face toward the wall, and wept, and prayed, and says God; I have heard thy
Prayer, I have seen thy Tears, Isa. 38.5. Though men did not much take notice,
God did: yea more, he expresses his approbation and acceptance of these
sacrifices in secret. But of that, anon.

4. God sees in secret, Therefore Closet-Prayer is a solemn acknowledgment of
Gods omniscience and omnipresence: When you pray in a corner you testify your
faith in Gods ubiquity, and look upon him as filling Heaven and Earth; and this
God commands us to believe, yea would have us to lie under the sense hereof.
Hence that vehement expostulation, Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and
Earth, says the Lord? Yes, says the believing soul, I know thou art every
where; no thought can be withheld from thee, therefore I wait on thee here:
all is one where I am, for wherever I am I cannot run away from thee; and
wherever I am, I may approach unto thee: And the Lord is nigh to broken hearts
and praying souls; Psalm. 34.15, 17, 18.
He is not far from every one of us, but his special presence is with his
Saints in duty. David composeth a Psalm of God's Immensity, Psalm. 139. Wherein
he shows, 1. Gods omniscience, in the six first verses, Thou know my
down-sitting and mine up rising, etc. 2 Gods omnipresence, ver. 7. to ver. 14.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? If to Heaven, thou art there, etc. Darkness
and light are both alike to thee: And, what use does holy David make of this
Heavenly doctrine? surely, if God will be with him wherever he is, he is
resolved to be with God, v. 18. When I awake I am still with thee, i. e. by
secret prayer and meditation: when I lie down I commend my soul and body to
thee, and when I rise up I meditate of thee; when I go to sleep I pray, when I
awake I am with God by holy and precious thoughts. So that I am still with God,
all my days, in all places, conditions, relations, companies, I am still with
my God; and as a good man used to say, My God and I, are good company: This,
this is to be thorow-paced in religion; this is Enochs walking with God, a
conversation in Heaven, a fellowship with the Father, an emblem of glory, and
the sweetest, happiest life a soul is capable of in this world; and much of
this consists in a conversing with God in the duty of secret Prayer: And all
this flows from a due apprehension of Gods omniscience and omnipresence, and
this reason Cyprian renders, Denique magisterio suo Dominus secret nos orare
precepit in abditis and secretis vel semotis locis, in enbiculis ipsis, quod
magis convenit fidei, ut sciamus Deum ubique esse praesentem, audire omnes, and
videre, and majestatis suae plenitudine in abdita quoque and occulta penetrare,
sicut Scriptum est, Jer. 23.23, 24. and Prove. 15.3. Cypr. Sermon. de orat. Dom.
p. 409.
why Jesus Christ here does prescribe our Closet-devotions, as most agreeable
to our Christian Faith, that we may know God is everywhere present, hears all,
and pierces with the fullness of his Majesty into the inmost rooms, and hidden
places according to the Scriptures: And truly, this is a Doctrine worth
confirming by such a practice; and this is a practice worthy of such a
Doctrine: That Is the third Reason.

SECT. IV. The last Reason is drawn from Gods rewarding openly.
4. LAstly, The Text says, Thy Father that sees in secret will reward thee
openly: This Reason is drawn from Gods munificence: Wherein we have, 1. The
promise, that is a reward, 2. The manner of performance openly: This is a
comfortable Circumstance, it is worth something to know that our labor is not
lost, it shall be rewarded, yea it shall be rewarded by God, whose rewards are
great like himself, yea it shall be rewarded by thy Father. A Father takes in
good part a little service from an obedient child, and gives a great reward for
a little work; yea Closet-Prayer shall be openly rewarded. The observableness
of the mercy inhanceth the rates of it; tending more to the Christians comfort,
example to others, encouragement to right worshippers, and glory to God: All
these things might take up much time, but I shall only hint what is that open
reward that God gives to such as are constant in Closet-Prayer: That Is these
four ways.

1. By returning a visible answer to secret Prayer: None saw Jacobs wrestling
hand to fist (as it were) with the Angel; Genesis 32.24. with Chap. 33.4.
but all might observe the loving embraces betwixt that good man and his
hostile brother Esau: There was no witness of Moses's intercession for Israel
in the Mount; but all the congregation and the whole world, Exodus 32.10, 11, 14.
may bear witness of Gods hearing his Prayer, for sparing an offending people:
When Eli observed Hanna's lips move, and heard no voice, he misjudged her to be
a drunken woman: but the truth is, she was busy with her God in earnest
Prayer; and though he knew nothing of it then, yet afterward he saw the
effect, 1 Samuel 1.13. with ver. 27. For this child I prayed; and the Lord has
given me my petition which I asked of him: (Ecce signum) behold a sign of his
favor! behold an evident token that I prayed in truth! Many a time, yea many a
time was I provoked by my scoffing adversary Peninnah, and as often did I make
my moan to my Heavenly Husband; and see here the fruit of my sincere devotions
in a corner: None saw my Tears, all may see my Child; none heard my cries in
Prayer, but the voice of my Samuel may be heard by all Israel: He shall carry
the memorial of answer to secret Prayer in his name to the grave: And cannot
many a soul speak the same language? Cannot you seal to the same or like
experiment? Cannot some of Gods children say, This mercy I got from God in such
a Room, Chamber, or Closet? No creature upon earth knew what I did there. But
now all may see the happy effects of my hard travel, I find that it is not in
vain to seek God in private; none knows the meaning of the mercy but my self. I
may call it Napthali, Genesis 38.8.
for with great wrestlings have I wrestled with my God and prevailed. This
mercy bears a double price to all the rest, for it is won by Prayer, and now may
be worn with praises and triumphing; so that a soul may say, This is my God, I
have waited for him, he will save me, Isa. 25.9.
this is [my God] Jehovah, I have waited for him, I will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation: Lo here he is, I can now make my boast of my God. Wicked men are
wont to say, Where is thy God? Now I can answer them, Lo this is he that
returns such answers to my Prayer, that, appears so gloriously for me, This is
my God in whom I have trusted, on whom I have called, and he has answered, I
am not disappointed: Blessed be God, these appearances are the visible returns
of my secret prayers.

2. God rewards secret prayer openly, by discriminating Providence in a common
calamity: God usually takes them into the chambers of his protection that
retired themselves into chambers of devotion: Isa. 26.20.
They that enjoy most of God, shall be best secured by God: Psalm. 91.1. He that
dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty: i. e. He that by faith and prayer has got most intimate
communion with God, is lodged in the safest shelter in the day of danger: And
who is so likely to enjoy God as that Christian that waits much upon God in
secret; he gets into Gods secret place, who is much with God in secret places:
David put up many a hearty prayer in solitary caves; and how remarkably does
God secure him in the day of apparent hazard, to the conviction of Saul and his
Courtiers? We find the mourners in Sion lamenting secretly the abominations
committed openly, and God sets an obvious character upon their foreheads, seen
discernably by the destroying Angel, and known apparently by the effects
thereof to the world in their exemption from the general stroke of desolation,
Ezekiel. 9. Jer. 13.17. with Chap. 39.11.
4, 6. Jeremiahs soul weeps in secret for the pride and profaneness of Israel;
and he was strangely secured in the day of Isreal's dreadful destruction: It Is
very remarkable, what is recorded in Genesis 19.29. God remembered Abraham; and sent
Lot out of the midst of the overthrow: Why, what did Abraham? The former
Chapter tells us, that Abraham had been with God in Prayer in secret, and this
was the effect of it, God will snatch Lot out of that dreadful burning as a
return of secret Prayer: God takes a time to put a difference betwixt his
praying people and others: Faith and Prayer are two feet of the soul, whereby
the righteous run into the Name of the Lord which is their strong Tower and are
safe: Prove. 18.10.
A soul hid with God, cannot be hurt by men: If any be secured in a day of
danger, it is those that are most with God in a corner: Floods of great Waters,
shall not come nigh to praying Saints. Psalm 32.6. Hence says David, ver. 7.
Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: Some way or
other God will attest and testify the integrity of his praying servants before
the World: See Psalm. 31.19, 20, and 91.15.
Thus he dealt in the case of Job: God's Children may be long concealed from
the view of men, both as to their persons and actions; but in God's good time
he brings them out with honor, as he did with Elijah: Sometimes God gives
clear demonstrations of his tender affection to his despised Saints in the view
of the world: Rev. 3.9. -- I will make them to come, and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee: This is not a religious adoration,
(...) Sese ad pede^ alicujus subjectionis causa provolvere; qualiter catelli
heris suit adblandiuntur.
but a civil reverence due to real Saints as an evidence of repentance, or
special respect; as dogs fawn upon their Masters, laying themselves at their
feet: As the word imports. Natural conscience sometimes does homage to the
image of God in the Saints: However, this is a well-known truth, that as God
has brought forth wicked men's secret works of darkness, into open light, to
their confusion in this world: So he has clearly discovered his Saints upright
services in secret corners, to their honor and safety in the nick of time:
Jaddus hearing of Alexander's approach to Jerusalem, set himself to pray; then
put on his priestly garments and met the Conqueror, who fell down on his face
before him. Parmenio asked him, why he adored the Jews High Priest, See Clarks
general Martyrol, Fol. 5.
when as other men adored him; Alexander answered, I do not adore him, but that
God whom the High Priest worshippeth; for in my sleep I saw him in such an
habit, when I was in Macedonia: -- But examples of this nature are frequent
everywhere, what strange effects prayer has brought forth, both for defense to
the Saints, and offense to their Enemies; so that the clear evidence hereof
has wrested from many stout opposers, that acknowledgment of the Queen of
Scots, that she feared more the prayers of John Knox, than an Army of ten
thousand fighting men: But this is the second branch of this last reason. God
openly rewards by manifest deliverances in time of danger.

SECT. V. The third way of rewarding secret Prayer, is, Increase of Grace.
3. GOd rewards secret Prayer openly by conferring upon secret wrestlers more
eminent gifts and graces of his Spirit, and such as shall be taken notice of by
others: They that are most constant in secret Prayer, shall be most eminent in
open Prayer: Such as with Moses converse with God in the Mount, shall have
shining faces: The beauty of the Lord shall be upon them: When a soul has been
with its God in a corner, the effects are so remarkable, that others shall take
knowledge of him that has been with Jesus: And it must needs be so; for,
conversing with God is of a transforming nature, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: God's
appointments are as glasses through which we may see the face of God. Now there
are two sorts of glasses, broader and narrower; the broader glasses are public
Ordinances, and the narrower glasses are these private Duties: In both these a
soul may seek and see the face of God, and so become like him; for, seeing here
is assimilating; as the Vision of God hereafter is glorifying: Oh it is a
beautifying and beatifical fight to see God! Fullness of grace is the best thing
in glory; peace and joy are but (as it were) the gloss and varnish of this
fullness of grace: Now the more a soul enjoys God, the more God-like and
Heaven-like he is, for his graces shine brighter, and he is still mounting
higher: And private or secret duties are notable ways of communion with God:
yea sometimes a soul may miss of Christ in public Ordinances, and find him in
secret; so some interpret that place in Cant. 3.24. See Mr. Cotton in loc.
The Soul had sought her beloved in the bed of Templeworship and public
Ordinances: In the streets and broad ways of Synagogues and communion of
Saints, still she found not her beloved; then she seeks him in conferences and
occasional meeting with the watchmen, but she can yet hear no tidings of Jesus
Christ, but, says she, It was but a little that I passed from them, but I
found him whom my soul loves. Observe it, this was not when she was past all
means in a way of neglect of, or being above Ordinances; for she was seeking
him still, which implies the use of means, only she had past the public
without finding, and now she is in the use of private helps, the after-duties
of Meditation, Self-examination, secret Prayer, and therein the soul finds God;
not that this reflects disparagement on the public Ordinances, but to show
that God is a free Agent, and to be an engagement and encouragement to us in
the use of all Gods appointments: And when the soul thus finds God in a corner,
it carries away something of God that casts a sweet perfume upon his person and
acting, that is taken notice of by others; It may be said of such a soul as
Isaac spoke of his son Jacob, Genesis 27.27. See, the smell of my Son is as the
smell of a field which the Lord has blessed. So when a serious Christian comes
down from his Closet where he has met with his God, oh what a sweet perfume of
well-scented graces does he cast forth? The savor of Religion is upon him,
some breathing odours of holiness break from his lips, hands, and feet; the
power of Godliness does manifest it self in his expressions, actions,
conversation: Where has such an one been? Surely he has been conversing with
God; there is the lively image and inscription of God upon him, and while that
blessed frame continues, he is not like himself; as he excels carnal men at all
times, so now he excels himself: Yea observe it, A soul conversing much with
God in the duties of Meditation and secret Prayer grows taller by head and
shoulders than other ordinary Christians: As all godly men are more excellent
than their neighbors, so a soul that waits much on God in secret Prayer, is
more excellent than most of his Godly neighbors; and it appears so at present
by his gifts in Praying, and may appear in his support and comfort in the day
of suffering: Oh what a mighty man in Closet-Prayer was magnanimous Luther? And
what noble achievements did he go through? Clarks general Martyr. c. 29. fol.
243.
William Gardener Martyr in Portugal sought out solitary places for prayer
before he attempted that strange act of public opposition to Idolatry, in
taking the host out of the Cardinals hand, trampling it under his feet, and
with the other hand overthrew the chalice: Which act though it may seem scarce
warrantable in an ordinary way; yet showed an heroical spirit for the main,
obtained by a conscientious attendance upon God in the duty of secret Prayer:
Ibid. fol. 318.
Take one instance more, it is Mr. George Wischard [or Wise-heart] one of the
holiest men and choicest Reformers that Scotland ever had. One night he gate up
and went into a yard, there he walked in an Alley for some space, breathing
forth many sobs and deep groans, then he fell upon his knees, and his groans
increased; then he fell upon his face. Two men watched him, and heard him
weeping and praying, near an hour, so went to bed again: As this Saint was much
with God, so the Lord was much with him in preaching, prophesying, acting
bravely, and suffering death cheerfully. Surely the Spirit of God and of glory
rested upon this man of God, if ever upon any, the adversaries themselves being
Judges: This is a great truth, they have been most eminent, that have been most
with God in secret Prayer: let Scripture and History speak, time and room would
fail me to enumerate. Who more famous for piety and learning of late years,
than the great Usher? It was his usual practice to sequester himself into some
privacy, Dr. Bernard, the life and death of Dr. Usher, p. 27.
and to spend it in strict examination, penitential humiliation, and ardent
supplication, and this he found sweet to his soul; and others saw the effect.

SECT. VI. The last reward of secret Prayer is at the great Day.
4. THe last and chiefest reward that our heavenly Father will bestow on those
that have waited on God in secret Prayer, will be the open acknowledgment and
acceptance of them at that solemn day of Judgment, when the whole World shall
be summoned before the Lord, And every one shall receive the things done in his
body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.
Then our blessed Savior, who shall be Judge, will single out this seed of
Jacob, and tell them they have not sought his face in vain; he will now
solemnly acknowledge them before his Father and all the holy Angels, as persons
with whom he has had familiar acquaintance in a corner: Oh the joy and triumph
in such a public acknowledgement! When our dear Redeemer shall speak such a
language as this before those myriads of creatures! This or that soul (calling
it forth with honor) though not taken notice of in the World for Religion,
much less for worldly Greatness, has yet had intimate familiarity with my
self, and I with him; he has performed many a solemn duty which none but an
omniscient eye has seen: though he has lived obscurely in the World, and has
been little known to eminent Preachers or Professors; yet he and I have been
long and well acquainted. I have had his company many times in a corner, and
now I cannot but remember the kindness of his youth and old age, the love of
his espousals when he went after me in solitary places, rather than want my
presence: He has visited me in duty, and I have visited him in mercy: Oh what
mutual embraces, and reciprocal exchanges of love have there been betwixt us!
He has owned me, and I have owned him in the day of adversity: When ever he
had any doubt or want, or fear, or affliction, I heard from him in a Closet; he
sent his winged messenger of a believing Prayer to the throne of grace, and I
took it well from him. I did not despise his person, or deny his suit; when
others have been sporting away time in vain recreations, or damning their souls
in profane practices, this ransomed Believer when he could steal a little
time, run into a corner, and there did make his moan to me; and then I gave him
something worth his pains, I sent him away with a cheerful heart and thankful
tongue: And now take notice all ye Angels and Men, I declare that I accept this
Soul's labor of love, and pardon all its imperfections, and set him in my
immediate presence in eternal mansions: He that separated himself from the
world, shall now be separated from the goats, and be set on my right hand; he
that longed so much to enjoy me, shall everlastingly enjoy me, without
cessation, or interruption: Oh blessed day! Oh transcendent reward! Is not this
a rewarding openly? You Will say, How do you know that Jesus Christ will thus
bespeak a praying Soul? I reply, though we know not the form of words he will
speak, yet that a discovery shall be made of the acts of piety and charity,
Mat. 25. evidently declares. Yea, that secret duties shall be brought to light
as well as secret sins, the Scriptures declare, 1 Cor. 4.5. -- Who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God: Then good
men shall receive open approbation and commendation for their holy exercises in
secret places: Then will God wipe off all reproaching calumnies of
black-mouthed liars, wherewith they have bespattered the reputation of praying
Saints, and clear up their uprightness as the noonday, by letting the world
see, how the Saints spent their time in corners, both alone, and with their
Fellow Christians, not in plotting but praying; yea pleading for those that
persecuted them. Oh blessed day! Oh happy Resurrection of bodies and of names.
Surely then praying souls will not then repent themselves of all their pains in
private, when they poured out their hearts in prayers and tears, since now they
are rewarded with such a blessed Euge, and are openly entertained into their
Master's joy and Father's Kingdom.

CHAP. III. The first Use, of Information.
SECT. I. Concerning Places of Prayer.
1. IF Closet-Prayer be a Christian Duty, then it shows us, that in
Gospel Times God stands not precisely upon places: this holy Incense may ascend
to Heaven with as much acceptance upon the golden Altar (the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ) as well in a private Chamber as a public Church.
Some have scornfully called private devotions, by the derogating title of
Chimney-Prayers; and think to confine all religion to public places: yea a
great Scholar said once, God heard Prayer in a consecrated place [Non quia
precatur, sed quia ibi] not because men pray, but because they pray there, as
though the conceited holiness of the place added some virtue to the Prayer,
Judaismus est, alligare religionem ad certa loca. Hospin de orig. Temp. lib. 4.
c. 2.
or rendered it more acceptable to God. This is worse than plain Judaism, to tie
Religion to places: The true Gospelized Christian has otherwise learned
Christ. It Is true, in the Old Testament dispensation, after the erecting of the
Temple, Prayer was to be made at it, or toward it, as it typified Christ, by
whom our prayers are accepted: But that holiness being ceremonial, it is now
abolished by the Gospel: Now that takes place, in John 4.21. Woman, believe me,
the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem,
worship the Father, i. e. God now does not so much stand upon the place, as the
manner of worship, that they worship in spirit and truth, ver. 23.24. Now is
the prophecy accomplished, Mal. 1.11. In every place, Incense shall be offered
to my Name. Which the Apostle also asserts expressly, 1 Timothy 2.8. Much has been
said in controversy concerning the holiness of places; but this seems to be an
undeniable argument against that Conceit, that if some places be holy by the
Churches consecration of them to holy uses, then it follows that other places
not so consecrated, howbeit applied to the same holy use, are more profane,
and less apt to divine worship than places consecrated: which would directly
contradict the Scriptures last mentioned. Eccles. polit. lib. 5. c. 16.
Indeed Hooker teaches that the service of God in places not sanctified, as
Churches are, has not in it self such perfection of grace, and comeliness, as
when the dignity of the place (which it wishes for) does concur, and that the
very Majesty and holiness of the place where God is worshipped, bettereth even
our holiest and best actions: Thus he. Confer. with Heart. c. 8. Divis 4. page
491.
To whom we dare not subscribe; but rather say with Dr. John Reinolds, that to
us Christians no Land is strange, no ground unholy: Every coast is Jewry, every
town Jerusalem, and every house, Zion; and every faithful company, yea every
faithful body, a Temple to serve God in.

But I shall not undertake a dispute upon this subject: The duty of the Text
clears it, If God command and accept Closet-Prayer, then he does not make so
great a matter of the place for this duty as some imagine, since it cannot be
imagined that Closet-Prayer can be performed ordinarily in a consecrated place
(as they call it;) and there being no such place where a duty can be performed,
to which God has more expressly promised a reward, than what is performed in a
Corner or Closet; and therefore we have no warrant to expect acceptance merely
upon the account of one place more than another.

Indeed, there is a common practice of some persons, which is, to perform their
private devotions in public places. For you shall see some at their entrance
into a Church or Chapel, whatever public worship is in hand, fall down upon
their knees, or put their hats or hands before their faces, and so fall to
Prayer. I will not call this the sacrifice of fools, but I judge it very
unseasonable: for we should join with Gods people in the public Ordinances,
and prefer them before any thing that we can then undertake: The original of
this practice was, Eo proposito Dominus ^etat in conventu or are, ut a conventu
videatur: Chrysostom. Ho. 13. op. im. perf. sup. Math.
a conceit that the place was more holy than their own houses; and that their
Prayer shall be heard there rather than at home: It Is too sad a sign they had
not prayed before they came thither. I am sure, it favors rankly of a
Pharisaical spirit, for this is the fault our Savior here rectifies, which was
their private praying in public places; and in opposition thereunto directs
his Disciples to the duty of the Text, which is to pray in their Closets.

SECT. II. The Nature of Prayer.
2. WE may hence be informed concerning the nature, usefulness, excellency, and
efficacy of the duty of Prayer: I speak not now of Prayer in general, but in
reference to Closet-Prayer. And on that account there are two Consectaries
hence, concerning Prayer.

1. It follows, that Prayer is an immediate worship of God: For what has been
said, shows that we have to do immediately with God, yea that a man alone
singly has to do with God: therein it is different from other parts of Gods
instituted worship, which does necessarily require company; as in preaching of
the Word, there must be hearers; in the seals of the Covenant, as in Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, there must be a society, such a number as may be called a
Church: Hence the latter is called a Communion, because says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 10.16, 17.
We being many are one bread, and one body: But it is not absolutely or
essentially requisite to Prayer, that there be a society; one man or woman, by
him or her self alone, may perform this duty of Prayer as acceptably to God, as
if in the company of a thousand Saints: We deny not the public or private
Meetings of Gods people for Prayer; but withal affirm, that the nature of the
duty is such, that it may be performed solitary and alone: Hence Schoolmen
distinguish of Prayer, Aq. 2: 2ae q. 83: Art. 12.
that it is either [ Communis or Singularis] Common or Singular: Both have
their place and use: Though they lay great stress upon Christ's promise, in Mat.
18.20. promising to be where two or three are met in his Name; which as we deny
not, so we assert the force of this Prayer of a single person according to the
Text: We give both their due, without comparisons.

2. Prayer cannot be stopped in its ascent to God: All the persecutors on earth,
cannot hinder a soul's praying. This is demonstrated two ways: 1. A Child of
God banished out of all human society may pray still. Suppose a man were
rejected by men, and ejected out of all companies of men, and were shut up in
the Closest Prison, or shut out in the remotest Wilderness; suppose a man were
in the Caves and Dens of the Earth; yet still he might pray and be heard,
according to Solomon's Prayer, that, If Gods People were carried captive into
the Land of their Enemies, far or near, yet if they repented and prayed unto
God toward their Land, and that House of God; then he begs that God would hear
them: and God testifies that he did hear this Prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8.46,
48. with chap. 9.3. The passage to Heaven is as near and open from one part of
the earth as another: therefore David says he will cry to God from the end of
the Earth, Psalm. 61.2. A notable instance for this we have in Jonah: he was got
into the bottom of the Sea (as far from Heaven locally as one could imagine)
into a great Fishes belly, which he calls the very belly of Hell; and as he was
then far from men, so he looks upon himself as cast out of the sight of God,
and he pathetically expresses his misery and hopeless state. What does he in
this doleful plight? Why he will look toward Gods holy Temple, Alas poor Jonah
knew not now which way the Temple stood, he had but a short prospect in that
dark and narrow Prison; yes, faith can set Jonah upon one of the Mountains of
Israel, that thence he may see as far as Mount Zion, and reach as high as
Heaven; he prays, yea cries; God hears, and delivers: as low as he was he
knocks at Heaven gates, and his Prayer does pierce the Clouds, it makes bold,
and steps in, My prayer, says he, came in unto thee, into thine holy Temple,
Jonah 2.2, 7. Oh the strange and swift motion of a believing Prayer! Let the
praying soul be where it will, the Prayer will come to God's ear, and get an
answer.

2. A Child of God that cannot speak a word, may put up an acceptable Prayer:
suppose the tongue which is the organ of speech, were cut out, yet a Saint
cannot thereby be obstructed in his access to God by Prayer. For, as Amesius
says, [Oratio formaliter est actus voluntatis] Prayer is formally the act of
the Will; desire is the soul of Prayer which God may hear, though it be not
expressed, for he knows the heart, Psalm. 10.17. Lord thou have heard the desire
of the humble: A Saints desire is a real Prayer; if the desire be right, words
are but the outward garb, habit, or clothes (as I may so say) of Prayer, the
carcass or shell of the duty, ardent desires are the life, kernel, Exodus 14.15.
1 Samuel 1.13. Neh. 2.4.
marrow of the performance: Hence we find that Moses, Hannah, and Nehemiah, are
said to pray, when Scripture does not express a word they speak, nor is it
probable they did make an articulate sound: I speak not this to indulge carnal
men in their lazy conceited ejaculations, Deus exaudit non solum preces
indicativas sed and optativas, Luth.
as though they could pray well enough, and never speak; or while they are
working, walking, talking: Let me hint a word by the way to these. Consider,
silly soul, God has given thee a body, and thou must offer it to God as a
reasonable sacrifice; thou art bound in conscience to pray and praise God with
thy tongue, which is thy glory; yea let me tell thee, if thou have those
members of body, and an opportunity to pray thus solemnly with thy tongue upon
thy knees, and do never do it, I question whether thou prayest at all or no,
since thou live in the apparent neglect of a known duty: What I speak of the
Saints real (though sometimes without vocal) Prayers is to commend the duty,
and comfort those Saints that may be put to these exigencies, that though they
cannot speak, yet they may pray, and be heard and answered.

SECT. III. Showing the Power of Prayer.
I Might from hence take occasion to discover the strength and efficacy of this
duty of Prayer, from the consideration of Closet-Prayer: though but a poor
single person get upon his knees in a Corner, and have no creature to help him,
yet he can even undertake to grapple with the omnipotent and eternal God, yea
by his strength may have power with God, as we heard of Jacob; who by single
wrestling with him (hand to fist as it were) wrestled a blessing from him: One
poor single Elijah could stand against at least four hundred Prophets of Baal,
1 King. 18.36.
and prevail, having recourse to the living God by Prayer, yea the Apostle
tells us, that this Elijah, though but a mortal man, yet he shut up and opened
Heaven, that it rained, and rained not, according to his Prayer; hence he
infers an universal Maxim, that the effectual servent Prayer of a righteous man
avails much; and illustrates it by that notable instance, James 5.16, 17, 18.
But some may object, Elijah was a great Prophet, an extraordinary person; he
might prevail when we cannot: he answers, He was no more than a man, a Man
subject to like passions as we are, a sinful creature; he prevailed not for any
merits of his own, but through faith in the Mediator of the Covenant, and so
may we. There Is not the meanest Child of God but has the same plea: Mr. Gurnal
on, Ephesians. 6.10. p. 42.
God has strength enough to give, says one; but he has no strength to deny.
Here the Almighty himself (with reverence be it spoken) is weak: even a child,
the weakest in grace of his family, that can but say, Father, is able to
overcome him for Prayer is in a sort omnipotent; it can conquer the invincible
Jehovah, Vincit invincibilem, ligat omnipotentem.
and bind the hands (as it were) of an omnipotent God, so that God is fain to
cry out to wrestling Moses, Let me alone: It Is said of Luther; That man could
do with God even what he would. Prayer has a kind of commanding compulsive
power: That Is a strange Text, Isa. 45.11. -- Ask me of things to come
concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me: So some
take it; ye shall find me as ready to do you service, as if ye had me at
command: yet this must be warily received, not as though God were forced to any
thing against his will, but when Gods people pray aright in the name of Christ
according to his will, 1 John 5.14.
he hears them; and this he attributes to Prayer, for the credit of that duty
and encouragement of praying souls: That Is a notable Text to show the readiness
of God to answer Prayer, Joh. 16.26, 27. -- I say not unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you, for the father himself loves you. -- Christ in this
place does not simply deny, that he will intercede for them; but shows how
ready God is of his own accord to grant the Saints petitions: They shall not be
put to any great trouble about it, but shall be quickly dispatched in their
errand to the Throne of Grace: For as Exiguus gemitus in auribus Dei
fortissimas est clamor; and ita coelum and terram replet, ut praeter eum Deus
nihil audiat, atcompescit omnes omnium aliarum rerum clamores: Luth. tom. 4.
Luther speaks, a poor groan in the ears of God is a mighty noise, and does so
fill Heaven and earth, that God can hear nothing besides it, and silenceth all
other tumults to hearken to it.

Of what an easy quick access
My blessed Lord, art thou? how suddenly
May our requests thy ear invade!
To show that State dislikes not easiness:
If I but lift mine eyes my suit is made:
Thou can no more not hear, than thou can dye:
See more in Herberts Poems, page 95.

SECT. IV. Showing the property of a true Christian.
ONce more I might show the duty and property of a sincere Christian, that can
make this excellent use of solitariness: Carnal persons love not to be alone,
except they be such whose constitution inclines them to Melancholy, and then
they sit poring on things without profit; it is only the gracious soul that can
tell how to make the right use of solitariness by having recourse to God: No
man cares for being alone but the serious person; and no man cares for going to
God when alone, but the sincere Christian: Man is a sociable creature, and
naturally we have no mind to entertain our selves by our selves; A carnal heart
hates a domestical audit, men that have shrewish wives love not to be at home,
and persons that have guilty consciences cannot endure to hold discourse with
them, left they be tormented before the time: Oh but a Christian that is
upright, and downright, would know all that concerns his own heart; the best
and worst; therefore he communes with his own heart, Psalm. 77.6.
as David did; and left he miss or mistake in his search, he turns him to the
heart-searching God by Prayer, and cries out to him to search his heart and
discover him to himself: The life of Religion consists in a souls communion
with God in secret; a man has so much Religion as he has betwixt God and his
own Soul, and no more: A true Saint dares approve his heart to God in a Corner:
He is there exercising himself, like a Soldier by himself handling his Pike,
and keeping his postures, that he may be better fitted for a more solemn onset:
Yea a Christian does purposely withdraw himself from company that he may
converse with God: Papists are true Christians Apes: hence comes the solitary
life of Monks; pretending to imitate Eliah, and Elisha, John Baptist and the
Apostles: but it is acknowledged by Hierom, and great sticklers for a monastic
life, that this practice begun not till about the year 260, or 300. Some say
Hilarion, others Paulus Thebaeus, others Antonius, begun this manner of
conversation: But certainly there is a vast difference betwixt those ancient
Christians solitary life, and the Papists way of Monastic living, 1. Those
first Christians lived solitary of necessity that they might lie hid more
safely in a time of persecution: 2. They were not compelled to give all to the
poor; 3. They were not bound to a certain Rule, nor did they engage themselves
by a perpetual Vow to that place and state, Vid. Perk. Demonstr. problem.
Monach. p. 227, 228.
but might change their manner of life if they saw good; they were not bound as
to meats, marriage, fasting; 4. These ancient Monks were of the Laity, not of
the Clergy, nay not so much as Deacons, or Presbyters: 5. They had no conceit
of merit in a Monastic life, till these latter ages: I may add, 6. Clarks
Eccles. Hist. fol. 13.
Those ancient Monks had a particular Calling and did work, as the Monks of
Bangor that lived by the sweat of their brows; and, 7. They were not tied up
from conversing abroad as there was occasion; and occasions there are manifold:
It Is not fit persons should be always coopt up in a Corner, but that they be of
use to others in their places and capacities: We were not born for our selves,
nor must we live only within our selves, which would contradict the Law of Love
and Charity: Vita solitaria communi inferior est; quia importunis
cogitationibus plena, quae tanquam muscae minutissimae de timo surgentes,
volunt in oculos co^dis and interrumpunt Sabbathum mentis: Ivo Carnatensis
Epist. 258. Videsis plura in Perk Ubi supra, demonstrat. Monasteria veterum, ut
plurimum, faisse scholas publicas, i. e. communitates docentium and discentium.
A constant solitariness exposes persons to a world of temptations, it is not
good to be alone, says Solomon. An ancient could speak it from his own
experience, that a solitary life is inferior to a common conversing, because
it is full of importunate cogitations, which like little flies arising from
dung, fly in the eyes of the heart, and interrupt the Sabbath of the mind: Thus
he.

But I need not trouble you with the mention of Popish Fopperies. A right-bred
Christian, that has learned the truth as it is in Jesus, being thrust into a
Corner, knows how to improve solitariness for soul-advantage; and voluntarily
does withdraw himself into a Corner, that he may set himself to the work of God
in good earnest: Hence says the Apostle, concerning Husband and Wife, 1 Cor.
7.5. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that
you may give your selves to fasting and prayer: -- Thence note, that it is
convenient sometimes for Christians to sequester themselves from nearest
Relations, Vide Pareum in loc.
that they may have freer communion with God in holy Duties: Only let these
four cautions and limitations of the Text be observed, 1. That it be with
mutual consent, 2. But for a Season, 3. The end, an advantage for Fasting and
Prayer, 4. That they come together again: This respects not every days ordinary
performances; but some solemn undertakings of stated and extraordinary Fasts in
a day of danger or calamity; at which time, the Bridegroom is to go forth of
his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet, Joel 2.16. i. e. to sequester
themselves from conjugal delights, to afflict their souls by Fasting and
Prayer: But in these cases, a sound Christian's due discretion regulated by the
general rules laid down in Scripture, will help in such performances, that he
may not dash on either rock, of Superstition or Negligence; but maintain a
closs and constant communion with God, both in the duties of his general and
particular calling in public Ordinances, and in private and secret duties.

Thus much for the first Use.

CHAP. IV. The Second Use, viz. of Reprehension.
SECT. I. Wicked men reproved.
1. HEre is just ground of sharp rebuke to all graceless, prayerless persons,
who understand nothing of this duty; they know not what it is to tug and
struggle with the Lord in Closet-Prayer, David says, The wicked through the
pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God is not in all his
thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. He cannot pray aright any where, much less in secret: the
same Psalm tells us what he does in secret, ver. 8, 9, 10. In the secret places
does he murder the innocent, his eyes are privily set against the poor: The
Apostle says, It is a shame even to speak of those things that are done of
them in secret, Ephesians. 5.12. Oh the abominable practices of profane spirits in a
corner! Their consciences can tell them sad stories of secret sins, which none
but the God of Heaven and themselves know of, yea because they see not God,
they think God sees not them; like the silly bird, because she thrusts her head
into a bush, thinks she is hid from the Fowler, though her body be exposed to
open view; carnal men's Maxim is like that Monkish one, [Caute si non Cast,]
Carry it warily, if not chastely, if they can hide their sin from men, they take
no notice whether God see them or no; and, from wishing that he did not see,
begin to suspect whether he do see or no; and at last arrive to those men's
arrogant demand, Who sees us? Or that positive conclusion, Psalm. 97.4. The
Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard. But what says the
Psalmist to these brutish So^s? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He
that formed the eye, shall he not see, ver. 9. Let these Atheists know that God
sees, and sets down all their secret wickedness, and will bring it forth before
Angels and Men at the great day of reckoning: The sin of Judah is written with
a pen of Iron, Jer. 17.1.
and with a point of a Diamond, it can never be razed out but by the blood of
Christ; and though, by multiplied acts of notorious sinning, some may blur the
engravings of sin on the table of their heart, yet it shall be as writing with
the juice of Lemmons, being held to the fire of Gods wrath, it is as legible to
the conscience as the first moment when the sin was committed: Oh the secret
wickednesses that wicked men have to reckon for! But where are the secret
Prayers? Alas, how rarely or how formally do they wait on God alone? Custom,
vain glory, and carnal interest may put them on joining in public Prayer, or
Family-duty; but they are strangers to this spiritual self-denying duty of
Closet-Prayer: The carnal hypocrite exposes all to open view; he is like an
house with a beautiful Frontispiece, but every room within is dark, as one
says; he is a rotten Post fairly gilded: he has dressed himself in the garb
of Religion, and will be as devout as the best in Temple-worship; but follow
him to his Closet, he cannot afford God one hour in a week; he does not make
conscience of secret Prayer: this gains him no credit with men, and therefore
is little used. This (rightly performed) opens the heart to God, which the
unsound professor dare not do: I shall show hereafter, whether the Hypocrite
may use Closet-Prayer, and wherein he is distinguished from a sincere soul in
that duty: At present I am reproving those that never use it, that look upon it
as below them; they either dare not be alone, or scorn to stoop so low, and
sigh out their hearts to God in a corner, as though they would not be beholding
to the great God for any mercy; but in their hearts and practice speak the
language of those proud Atheists in Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will come no
more unto thee? But let such know they shall dye like Men, and be damned like
Devils; that imagine they are gods, and will not be beholding to our God for
mercy: Lord have mercy on these poor prayerless sinners, that understand not
the necessity and mystery of Closet-Prayer, but look upon it as needless, and
are ready to say, Its more ado than needs: but let these prepare to make good
that desperate assertion at the Bar of Gods justice with flames about their
ears, and let such know that God will answer their cavils against plain duty,
after another manner than his Ministers can do now. To which dreadful Judgment,
we leave them, except prevented by a speedy and sincere Repentance.

SECT. II. The Godly reproved.
BUt the persons to be principally reproved at present, are the professors of
Religion, that acknowledge this to be a duty, but grievously neglect it. I
fear, God's Children are not so constant and conscientious in the performance
of this duty of Closet-Prayer as they ought to be. Are not good Souls guilty of
frequent omissions, intermissions, at least negligent performance of this duty?
It was one of old Mr. Dod's Instructions, that at night we should ask our
selves, Have I twice this day humbled my self before God in private? Who goes
to bed and does not pray,
Makes two nights to every day.
Herbert.
And again, How did I pray, in Faith and Love? I am afraid, many of us should
give but a sorry account of these serious inquiries. Let Us be ashamed, lay it
to our hearts, and give God glory by repentance and reformation.

For the humbling of our hearts in this case, let me propound these ten
awakning Interrogatories, that we may mourn for our neglect of this duty of
Closet-Prayer.

1. Are you not very unlike Jesus Christ? Is not he the perfect copy that we
should write after? And do we not find him often in private Prayer? We meet
with him in this solitary duty sometimes in the day, Luke 6.12. Mat. 26.36.
sometimes in the night, sometimes all night; in a Garden, in a Mountain, he
took all opportunities to go to his Father; All the days of his flesh he
offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. As
he was a man of sorrows, so he was a man of Prayers, and the sharper his
sorrows, the stronger his cries, Luke 22.44. Being in an Agony, he prayed more
earnestly: And was not this for our example? And for our advantage? Should we
not learn of him? Nay, does not our very Christianity consist in our conformity
to Christ? Alas, how unlike him are most of us? Shall we pass for Christians,
that follow not his steps? Was it not blessed Paul's study, and ambition to be
conformed to this blessed Pattern? Can we imitate a better person? Was it
necessary, Christ should wrestle for us, and is it not as necessary we should
wrestle with God for our own souls? Or, does Christ's praying for us excuse our
pleading for our selves? No no, as it was for our example and benefit in the
days of his flesh, so his present intercession in Heaven does both imply and
encourage our praying: for we are to ask in his name, and employ our dear
Advocate, that we may speed: And shall not we (as it were) set him awork, and
send up our Prayers to be mixed with his sweet incense? The Lord humble us for,
and pardon to us our neglects and omissions!

2. Are you not herein very unlike the Saints of God? The seed of Jacob are
wrestlers with God. God has no Children still-born, they all cry Abba Father:
Jacob wrestled with God in secret Prayer, and ever since, all the Saints in all
ages have born that name, Psalm. 24.6. This is the generation of them that seek
him, that seek thy face, O Jacob, Selah, i. e. That seek the God of Jacob, as
Jacob did. Psalm. 32.6.
And indeed every one that is godly will thus pray. There might be brought a
cloud of witnesses in all ages of praying Saints, that conversed with God in
secret: it is recorded of the Apostle James, that his knees were as hard as
Camels feet with praying: Some have sought out for private places to pray in,
others have risen out of their beds to pray; others have set days apart to
humble themselves in secret by Fasting and Prayer, others would never adventure
on business without seeking God: Such as are acquainted with Ecclesiastical.
Histories, or Christian Experiences, may find store of instances of this sort:
And why should we be unlike our Brethren? Have we not all one Spirit, as well
as all one Father? And is not this a Spirit of Grace and Supplication? And is
it not that which on all occasions draws the Soul to its Father? It Is said of
Paul, when newly converted, Behold he prays! Act. 9.11. Others do not see it,
but I know it; there he is in a corner, sighing and seeking me, Go Ananias,
enquire for him, he is now one of you, a real Convert, for, Behold he prays:
A Soul praying in secret is worthy observation, there is an Ecce put upon it,
Behold he prays! And why should we that pretend to be Saints be unlike our
brethren?

3. Are you not herein unlike your selves in former times? When God did at
first work upon your hearts, did you not then run to God in a corner? Did you
not set your selves intently to the duty of secret Prayer? How often did God
find you by your selves, sighing, sorrowing, weeping, bleeding, breathing after
God, pouring out your hearts like water before the face of the Lord? And your
heavenly Father pitied you, spoke very kindly to you, wiped off your tears,
cheared your hearts, heard your prayers, and made those days of grief, times
of love. Oh the sweet embraces that then were betwixt your souls and God? Have
you forgotten such a Chamber? Such a Closet, such a Barn, such a Wood? Where
you sometimes walked and meditated, sometimes fell prostrate and wept before the
Lord, till you had no more power to weep? If you have forgotten those blessed
days, your God has not: He remembers thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love
of thine spousals, when thou wentest after him in a solitary Wilderness, Jer.
2.2. Can not thou remember the day when thou would rather have been with
thy God in a private Room, than upon a Princes Throne? Yea, thou thoughtest
thou wast to do nothing else but cry and pray in secret: thou wast at it every
day, yea many times a in day: How comes it to pass that there is such a change?
That thou do so rarely go to visit thy old friend in a Corner? Is he changed?
Is he not so good and kind, as he was wont to be? Have thou found any fault in
God? Or art not thou blameworthy? What Is become of thy ancient Spirit of
Prayer? Why do thou forget thy sweetest wrestling-place? Why do thou not
inquire for these good old ways of communion with thy God.

SECT. III. Saints neglects, further reproved.
4. LEt me further expostulate with Gods Children, that are rarely exercised in
this duty of Secret-Prayer.

Do you not deprive your selves of many sweet refreshments? Have not your souls
had sweet experience of ravishing incomes in secret duties? How many pleasant
morsels have you eaten alone? Have not these stolen waters been sweet? And
would they not be so again, if you would open the same sluice? Oh what hints of
love might your souls have, that no creature would know of! Secret influences
are conveyed to souls in secret duties; these you block up by neglect: Ah,
sirs, Are the consolations of God small to you? Is communion with God of no
worth? Why are you so unwilling to take pains to go to your Father? Especially
when you know he has a kindness for you? Have you ever lost by such duties?
Will not your gains infinitely countervail your pains? Ask those that use it
most, they will tell you, it is the sweetest time they spend: Yea, cannot your
own experience attest it? Did you ever lose your labor when you set your
selves about the work in good earnest? Has not this closs and privy trading
with God brought in much spiritual profit? Beloved friends, you little consider
the good you miss of, for want of performing this excellent duty: But that is
not all.

5. Do you not by neglect of secret prayer expose your selves to many sad
temptations? Watching and Prayer are singular helps against temptation, Mat.
26.41. I have heard, that Satan has openly professed, that he has watched
when some of Gods children have gone out without Closet-Prayer, and that day he
has gotten great advantage against them, sometimes by tripping up their heels,
and casting them down from their excellency, into some gross iniquity;
sometimes tormenting their hearts with blasphemous, or soulperplexing
injections: Sometimes God has left them to fall into some afflictive snare,
laid by this subtle Fowler, which has cost them many bitter pangs, all this
and much more has been the fruit of such neglects: Christians, Have you not
found this too true by sad experience? When you have gone abroad without
calling on God, has not God secretly withdrawn from you? Has not Satan
obtained his designs upon you? Have not your hearts been growing out of frame?
Some lust increasing, grace decaying, and your souls at the brink of some
astonishing fall? When you have gone out in the morning without a good
breakfast with God, Have you not been apt to gather wind and vanity to the
prejudice of your souls health? If you engage not God by Prayer to go with you,
What security have you for that day? If God leave you, the Devil may do what he
list with you, and hamper you in a thousand snares and sins.

6. Does not your neglect of secret Prayer argue little love to God? Or delight
to be in his Company? When persons have a dear affection to each other, they
love to be together: Love delights in union and communion. Yea, when persons
love entirely, they withdraw from other company, that they may enjoy each other
with more indeared familiarity; the presence of a third mixeth the streams of
Communication, and mars their intimate communion: And if you did passionately
love the Lord, would you not withdraw from others, that your souls might enjoy
some fresh and refreshing intercourse with your best Beloved? How can you say,
you love him, when you have no mind of his company? If you did indeed love him,
Cant. 3.5.
you would hold him, and not let him go, Amor meus, pondus meum.
until you had (with the Spouse) brought him into the Chambers of intimate
communion, and solitary recesses: Love is the weight of the soul, and draws it
to the object beloved: If your hearts were ravished with him you would take more
pleasure in conversing with him, you would bless God for an opportunity of
enjoying him: But this strangeness speaks a great defect in this noble grace:
And would you be esteemed such as love not God? What a sad thing is it to be
low and scant in love to God under such strong engagements to love? Poor soul!
have not those silken silver cords of love which have been cast about thee,
drawn thee nearer, and bound thee faster to thy God than thus? Have not such
bellows and incentives, kindled and increased thy spark of love into a flame?
Lament thy sin, and shame thy self before thy God, for this decay of love, and
dangerous neglect.

7. Do not you by these omissions declare your selves ungrateful to the grace
of God? It Is Gods way to hire souls to approach to him, by holding out promises
of reward, as we do offer Apples, Fruit, etc. to children, to entice them to
us: nor is it a Bait to cousen and ensnare us but real offers of kindness to
us, whereof we may partake, and wherewith we may be happy: Suppose a Prince
desire a Beggars company, with expressions of dear affections, and promises of
many kindnesses, Is it not gross ingratitude, if she fling away, and scorn the
motion? Or suppose a potent Person send to a poor man a loving message, telling
him he has considered his case, and has appointed time and place, that they
two together may confer about the necessary concernments of this poor man; he
shall have free admission and liberty without disturbance to present his
petition, and ask what he will, and it shall be granted; none shall be present,
but only they two shall converse familiarly together, for the good of the poor
man: But instead of a thankful acceptance of this kindness, the poor man picks
quarrels with the messenger or message, grows sullen and perverse, runs away
and says, I need neither his counsel nor assistance; Let him bestow his
kindness where he will, I will not meddle with him: Were not this gross
ingratitude? And how would it be taken? The case is thine, Soul that neglectest
secret duties: the God of Heaven gives thee notice to meet him in such a room,
to negotiate freely the main concernments of thy precious soul, and thou art
coy and shy, and wilt not come near him, but either plainly deniest, or
heedlesly delayest: Oh monstrous folly! Oh gross ingratitude! Be ashamed of it,
be humbled for it, thy God takes it ill that thou art so loath to be happy,
that thou even forsakest thine own mercies, and wilt go twice as far another
way to gratify a friend, rather than go alone into thy Closet to please thy
God and profit thy poor soul: How long must God watch and wait, and strive and
sue, to have thy company; and thou do still neglect and grow averse thereto?
Oh be ashamed of it.

SECT. VI. Three more sad Considerations for our Humiliation.
8. DO you not, by neglect of Secret Prayer, resist the motions of the blessed
Spirit? And is this no fault? Is it nothing to neglect communion with God the
Father, or to improve the intercession of Jesus Christ the Mediator, but you
must also slight the motions of God, the blessed Spirit? This is sad: How often
does the holy Ghost knock at your doors, stir you up, spur you forwards unto
duty, and take you by the hand, offering its assistance if you will go to God, and
yet do you refuse? Do you make nothing of quenching, grieving, yea vexing the
good Spirit of God? Consider what you do: as you deal with it, so it will deal
with you; if you do not embrace its call, perhaps it will not be present at
your call: And what can you do in duty, without it? If you strive against it,
it will cease striving with you: Be it known to you, you have not this Heavenly
wind at your command; and you may toss in the boat of duty long, but shall not
approach the port without it: Nothing but the Spirit of God can carry thy soul
to God: And what can excite and comfort thee when thy Assistant and Comforter
is slighted and sadned? Grieve therefore, Christian, for thy grieving of the
Spirit, lay to heart thy careless quenching of this holy fire; and let those
waters of lust or negligence cost thee the waters of godly sorrow and
repentance, that this sin may not be laid to thy charge: Say as that Divine
Poet --

And art thou grieved, sweet and sacred Dove
When I am sour,
And cross thy Love?
Grieved for me? The God of strength and power
Grieved for a worm? which when I tread,
I pass away and leave it dead:
See the rest in Herbert's Poems, on Ephesians. 5.30. Page 128.

9. If you can only pray in company, what will you do when your company is
gone? A time may come when you may be left alone, as Christ says he was. You
had need engage the Father to be with you, that you may say as the Apostle, 1
John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with the Father: It Is true, communion of
Saints is desirable, but external communion is not always attainable: you may
be thrust out by divine Providence, now it will be sad to be at a loss when
persons are alone: It Is a strange expression of some, that they know not how to
live, it such and such Christian friends or godly Relations be taken away; why
what is the matter? Are they in the place of God? Is your spiritual life
maintained by the leaden pipes, or by the living springs that stream through
them? Alas, sirs, if you more understood and used this art of drawing
influences from God immediately through Christ by secret Prayer, you would not
be so discouraged with the loss of friends; you would say, Indeed it is true, my
loss is great, such a one had a notable gift in Prayer, and spoke my very heart
to God, but though he be gone, is my God gone? Is Prayer gone? Though I cannot
get such moving expressions as such had, yet I opened my heart to God as I
could in secret formerly; and there is the same refuge now, the same road unto
this City and Sanctuary I went in, and therefore all my comfort is not gone,
blessed be my God: But a poor soul that has leaned upon the staff of others
inlargements will be shrewdly put to it when that staff is gone: And, Is it not
a great disparagement to a noble and immortal Soul, that it cannot treat and
entertain its God alone? What, cannot God and an Heaven born soul converse
together without Auxiliaries? Must another interpose as an instrument, without
whom you cannot enjoy communion with God? Be ashamed of it, and chide your
selves, as not acting suitably to your rational spirits, much less to a
supernatural Principle of grace.

10. Lastly, let me further demand of you, what if our Lord should call you
away and find you under the guilt of the neglect of this known duty? What
confusion, grief, and jealousy would possess you if death arrest you in such a
state? What an hurry was forlorn Saul in, when the Philistines were upon him,
and he had not offered sacrifice unto God? And what a desperate plunge will you
be put to when the King of terrors is upon you, and you have not personally and
privately been seeking God? Though you may be right and safe for the main, yet
your spirits will be much perplexed, and you will suffer shrewd rebukes from
your own consciences for your omissions, and will be put to that last prayer of
a dying Saint (eminent in the Church) The Lord forgive me my sins of omission;
and possibly may want that spiritual solace in a dying hour that praying souls
may have: Oh what a blessed thing will it be, if our dear Redeemer find a soul
upon its knees before the Lord? Oh the hearty welcome it will give unto its God!
This is the time he waited for, he was got into a corner, was sighing for his
sins, pleading for mercy, breathing after grace, and panting for glory, and
behold, what a quick return does his God make? Even while he is speaking and
praying, the Lord does send a guard of Angels to conduct the soul into eternal
Mansions, where God and the soul shall part no more. Blessed, for ever happy is
that soul whom its Lord, when he comes shall find so doing! Now consider of
it, Whether state would you be found in? And do not you know, his Coming may be
sudden and unexpected? Would you be found under neglect, or in the faithful
performance of a duty? Would you not be carried from your Closet-devotion to
eternal communion with God? Oh then take our Lord's most wholesome counsel, Take
ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not when the time is, Mark 13.33.

I might here challenge Christians also, not only for their neglect of, but
careless performance of this duty of Closet-prayer: with what sorry shifts do
we put off God? How hard, dead, unbelieving, distracted are our hearts in
secret? God takes much pleasure in Adverbs: it pleases not God that a duty be
done, except it be well done. Many satisfy their own consciences that they
have prayed, but consider not how they prayed: there is a curse on such as do
the work of God negligently; Jer. 48.13. Mal. 1.14.
and, that have in their flock a male, and offer to the Lord a corrupt thing:
And it is a fearful thing to get a curse upon our knees, when we come for a
blessing: Look to it, God takes notice how you pray, the Devil stands under
your Closet-window, and hears what you say to God in secret, all the while
studying how he may commence a suit against you for your duty: Like those that
come to Sermons to carp or catch at what the Preacher says; or (as one says)
like a cunning opponent in the Schools, while his adversary is busy reading
his position, he is studying to confute it; and oh, what advantage do we often
give Satan to trip us and take us tardy? What occasion do we afford him to
accuse us to God and to our selves, while we have our filthy garments on us?
Yea remissness in our duties brings decay in grace. Tradesmen may go behind
hand by being careless in their dealings, as well as by being much out of their
shops: Alas, what sad decay is in our souls for want of closs and constant
communion with God? We have very perverse hearts, we have much ado with them;
when we would do good, evil is present: it is our great sin we are so much out
of order, even upon our knees. Satan sends his imps to haunt and torment meant
us, he jogs our hand when we are to write a Letter to Heaven in our prayers; so
that we can scarce make sense of what we present to God: Our thoughts are
unfixed, ranging abroad like a Spaniel to a thousand objects, so that sometimes
we have lost our selves, and know not where we are: Oh let us lament our vain
and trifling spirits in secret duties, and turn us unto God for help, as a
Servant, when the child he tends is troublesome, and will not be ruled by him,
calls out to the Father to come to him, who no sooner speaks the word, but all
is whist with him; our God can set in order our unruly spirits, only he will be
called upon by earnest Prayer.

Thus much for this use.

CHAP. V. The Third Use is of Instruction.
SECT. I.
MY next and main work is to help us in the duty of Closet-Prayer, by
propounding some helps and rules for our direction: which I shall reduce to
these four heads.

viz.
1. Preparatives to it. 2. Essentials in it. 3. Circumstances about it. 4.
Consequences upon it.
1. Look to your State and standing: If you be not real Saints, you are not fit
for this spiritual duty: Your Relation must be changed by converting grace:
Hence the Text says, Pray to thy Father. See then that God be your Father in
Jesus Christ; else you cannot truly cry Abba, Father; If we must be reconciled
to our Brother before we offer our gift, much more to God, for how can two walk
together except they be agreed? I deny not but a carnal soul should retire
himself into a corner, examine his state, fall down on his knees, and beg
converting and pardoning grace; and thus they must acquaint themselves with
God, that they may come before him; for unsound unconverted sinners have no
right as children to call to the King of Heaven, though as creatures they may
and must seek unto God, yet they worship afar off. It Is the gracious Christian
only that prays acceptably; wicked men's prayers are abomination; an hypocrite
shall not come before him, John 13.16. And indeed, till you be real Saints,
you will have no mind to buckle close to this duty: truth of grace will capacitate
you for secret approaches to God; strength of grace will elevate you to God;
and evidence of sincerity will make you come boldly to the Throne of Grace:
Therefore try your state, inquire what relation you have to God, or else expect
no familiarity with him. God will not take the wicked by the hand to lead them
into these Chambers of communion the throne of iniquity has no fellowship with
him. Our Lord Jesus marries none but Widows that are divorced from all other
Husbands, and he opens his heart to none but his betrothed Spouse, her he leads
into a solitary place and speaks to her heart: Oh sirs! come over clearly to
God, by closing with Christ, renounce your selves, get united to him, and then
come and welcome to enjoy communion with him in Closet-Prayer.

2. Dispatch other things off your hearts and hands: Let not your earthly
occasions intrude into your Closet-Exercises: Say to the cares and affairs of
the world as Abraham to his Servants, Stay there while I go and worship the
Lord yonder: Or as Nehemiah in another case, I am doing a great work, and I
cannot come down to you: So do thou say, I have appointed other times and
seasons for attending worldly businesses, let me alone with my God, every thing
is beautiful in its season: Communion with God is as much as I can attend at
once, I must not be diverted by other objects, the business I am about is of
the greatest importance, I must consult how I may attend upon the Lord without
distraction, and worldly matters have distracted me in God's service, and have
cost me many a tear; therefore get away from me. Why should the work of the
Lord cease? Why should I be hindered from my God? What can you afford me that
can be worth one hours communion with my God? Thus do you actually renounce the
world, for you cannot mind two things at once: And observe it, If you leave any
matters of the world tarrying for your attendance, the thought of them will
attend you, and make you cut your duties short, and run away before your hearts
be warmed: Therefore, if it may be, dispatch them, however rid your hearts of
them: The Heathen left their shoes at the Temple-doors, to show that all
earthly occasions and affections must be left behind when we go to God.

Let vain or busy thoughts have there no part,
Bring not thy Plow, thy Plots, thy Pleasures thither,
Christ purged his Temple, so must thou thy heart,
All worldly thoughts are but thieves met together
To cousen thee -- Herbert.
SECT. II. Two more Preparatives to Secret Prayer.
3. SEt your selves in Gods presence: Although you be not within the view of
any mortal creature, yet the eternal God sees what you are a going about: So
says the Text, Your father sees in secret, darkness or clossness hides not
from him: and it is more that one God sees you, than if all the men on earth
gazed at you: His eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, and he is
of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; Heb. 1.13. Psalm. 26.6. Psalm. 66.18.
therefore wash your hands in innocence before you compass his altar: For if
you regard iniquity in your heart, God will not hear your prayer: Therefore set
the Lord always before you, especially now you are setting your selves before
the Lord; if that Caveat was enough to beget reverence in an Heathen, Cave,
spectat Cato.
Cato sees thee: Oh what reverence would the sense of Gods omnipresence beget
in thy heart, if duly weighed? Christians, weight your spirits with such
meditations as these, God's eye is never off me, I am daily walking in the Sun;
but now, I am setting my self to pray in secret; I come to appear before God in
a special manner; I may deceive men and my self, but God will not be mocked; I
had need now engage my heart to approach unto God, that is the thing he looks
for. Oh for a spirit suitable to such a Majesty whom I come to worship! Lord,
draw out my affections, unite my heart, excite my graces that my whole Soul may
be carried after God: Thus commit thy works to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall
be established: Psalm. 37.5. Prove. 16.3.
when thou art setting thy face toward a duty, where thou art sure to meet
Satan, and carry with thee a corrupt deceitful heart, let God know from thy
mouth whither thou art going, what thy fears are. Never (says one) does the
soul march in so good order, as when it puts it self under the conduct of God;
and never is it so awful, as when it sets it self under the eye of God, Genesis
17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me, and be thou perfect. When you sensibly
discern you are kneeling before God, will not this make you perfect, sincere,
and grow holier? If you think God be not in your Closets, what do you go to
pray there for? And if you know he sees you there, why do you not think so, and
set your selves as in his presence? The child will stand demurely before his
Father, the Scholar before his Master; and so will the gracious Soul before God
in duty, if sensible of his presence.

4. Muster up your thoughts and ways: Our thoughts and affections are like the
strings of an Instrument out of tune, and therefore we must take some pains to
wind and skrue them up. This is that which Zophar advises to, Job 11.13. to
prepare the heart, and then stretch forth the hands: And for this end, it would
not be amiss when you come into a private room to pray in secret, first to read
some portion of Scripture, which may be of use to compose your spirits; and
like David's harp to Saul, drive away your wild imaginations: yea the word
read, may afford you suitable matter of prayer to God. More particularly, let
me add one experienced Help, which is this: When you are addressing your selves
to God in secret Prayer, endeavor to fix your thoughts upon some particular
subject to enlarge upon; there is no question, but you have sometimes one
special errand to God, sometimes another, if you observe your condition well;
be sure to mind that, whether it be to confess some predominant sin, to beg
pardon of it, power against it. You may have in your eye some grace that you
need more than ordinarily, and see your weakness and defect therein, etc. Now
do not satisfy your selves in running out into generals only, but set your
selves to plead the cause of your souls in that very case, which you have found
out by serious inquiry, would most engage you at that time to go to God about;
expatiate principally upon that subject: And this I conceive to be a taking to
our selves words (which the Holy Ghost directs us to, Hos. 14.2. (...)
Verbum, res, negotium: Vid. Buxt. lex.
in Prayer) not a form of such and such phrases, but some special subject
matter to speak to our God about: the word in Hebrew imports so much.

Now an intent and earnest pursuit of such a special subject at the Throne of
Grace is of use in these two respects:

1. You will find it an help against distractions, wanderings, withdrawings from
God; when you purposely set your selves to mind one thing, you will be more intent
upon it, and lay out more pains about it, than when you allow your selves
liberty in variety of matter. When the stream runs one way, Vis unita fortior.
it is stronger than dispersed into several channels, so, when the Christian
unites his strength to plead with God about a particular business, he is
usually more warm and affectionate, and so less subject to distraction.

2. It will help you to enlarge your selves in spreading particular cases
before the Lord, in pat and proper expressions, even before others as you have
a call and opportunity; and this is that which is called, the gift of Prayer,
which is of singular use, when a person can particularly and pathetically lay
open a condition, plead with God, improve promises, and rationally expostulate
even with the Almighty about a spiritual or temporal concernment: This holy Art
is got by a frequency in secret Prayer, and particular pleading for a man's own
soul: This is the last preparatory; think beforehand what business you have to
God in a peculiar manner, and drive that nail (as it were) to the head: you
cannot think to speak of all things to God at one time, but take that which is
of present emergent use and importance, and set your selves to enlarge upon
that; follow that home till you feel your hearts be warmed and affected, and so
have some tokens for good that God will return a sensible answer: You Will say,
Must we thus prepare our selves before every duty of secret Prayer; we have not
time for it? I shall answer this in the words of my dear and reverend Father
Angier: His Book, called An help to better hearts for better times, Page 196,
197. read more of this Subject.
there are some separating duties that prepare for others, as examination,
meditation, prayer; and they do prepare by stirring up the grace of God, and
providing an heavenly assistance to begin with us in the duty: If thou can
not always have separating time betwixt other occasions and Gods worship, yet
have some separating thoughts ere thou enter upon the duty; thou art not fit
else to meddle with wisdom: Thus he. It Is true, some have not the leisure that
others have, yet so much preparation is necessary for every duty as may
withdraw the heart from other objects, and weight the Spirit with a due sense
of the work we have in hand, and sometimes this may be done suddenly; yet as
for such as have more time to work upon their hearts, and state their souls
case by mustering up themselves to the work, neglect a duty and cannot
groundedly expect the Lords presence: and this I conceive is the reason why the
Lords people miss of God in secret Prayer, at least one reason is, because they
do not make such conscience, and take such care of preparing their hearts as
they ought: Ah Christians, when you come into your Closet, sit down and pause a
little, before you fall down upon your knees, clear up your state, shake off
other business, set your selves in Gods presence, and muster up your sins or
wants, or mercies you purpose to spread before the Lord; a Client will consider
all his matters, before he come to state his case to his advocate; a poor
patient will bethink himself, how he is, that he may tell his ailings to his
Physician; and a petitioner will not go hand over head unto his Prince, but
order his cause before hand, that he may plead it more effectually: And shall
not we much more prepare our selves to wait upon the God of Heaven.

SECT. III. Directions concerning the essentials of secret Prayer.
2. THe second sort of rules is concerning some things essentially requisite to
the right performance of the duty of secret Prayer, which you are to look to in
the duty; and these are such as are required in all sorts of Prayer.

viz. that it be performed,
1. With the heart. 2. By the help of the spirit. 3. According to Gods will. 4.
In the name of Christ.
1. Secret Prayer must he hearty Prayer: an heartless duty is a worthless duty;
yea the whole heart must be engaged in it, Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart
have I sought thee: It is the heart that God chiefly looks after, Prove. 23.26.
My Son, give me thy heart: nothing else can please God, if the heart be
wanting; if the heart be engaged in the duty, he will rather dispense with
other weaknesses, where there is not wilful negligence: Observe it, in that
worship of God we perform with others, a man's gifts may be of use, though his
heart go not along with his voice; but in Closet-Prayer it does no good at all,
except the heart be engaged; therefore God principally requires the heart in
other duties, in this he only requires the heart, for the voice is not
necessary: To love and serve the Lord our God with all our heart, Mark 12.30,
33.
soul, mind, strength, is a keeping of the Law, and more than all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices: We should pray with every faculty of the soul,
and with the utmost strength of every faculty: Mat. 15.8, 9.
God deserves and requires our strongest affections: That Is but a vain worship
that is performed without the heart; right attendance on God is an engaging the
heart to approach to God: Christians, Jer. 30.21.
in all your addresses to God, mind the object of worship; let the subject
worshipping, and object worshipped, be closly united; look beyond the duty:
it is one thing to have communion with an Ordinance, and another thing to have
communion with God in an Ordinance. Gods dear Children know what this means;
for sometimes they are more taken up with expressions, affections, or some
accidentals in the performance, than with the object of worship they should be
intent upon: But this is very dangerous; for whatsoever interposeth betwixt the
soul and God, to divert the thoughts from God, is an Idol: (...). 70.
Ezekiel. 14.3. These men have set up their Idols in their hearts. Sept. reads it,
they have put their thoughts upon their hearts, i e. They have committed
Idolatry with their own imaginations: instead of worshipping God, their minds
have stuck upon something short of God, after which they have (as it were) run
a whoring even in the duty. I shall not deliver that as the sense of the place,
yet it may be an useful note: I fear many of us are guilty of a kind of
spiritual fine-spun Idolatry, by heterogeneal thoughts in holy duties, that
pluck us from God, when we are approaching to him. The Lord humble us for this,
and fix our thoughts upon God, that we may say as the Church, Isa. 26.8. The
desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Cyprian
says, Cogitatio omnis secularis and carnalis at sced, nec quicquam tunc
animus, quam id solum cogitet quod precatur: ideo and sacerdos ante Oratione^
prefatione praemissa, parat sratrum mentes, Dicendo, sursam corda, ut dura
respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, ad moneatur nihil aliud se, quam Dominum
cogitare debere. C^p. Sermon. de orat. D^m. p 246.
every secular thought must depart, and the mind must be taken up with nothing
but what we are about: he tells, the practice of the Church in his time was,
that the Minister before Prayer, prepares the peoples mind, saying [Sursum
corda] Lift up your hearts, and they answer [Habemus ad dominum] we have them
up to the Lord: whereby, says he, we are admonished, that in Prayer we must
think of nothing but the Lord: What the Minister said to the People, do you say
to your selves; [Sursum corda] lift up your hearts: Let every one say, I am now
worshipping an Heart-searching God. Oh that my heart were with God. Ascensus
mentis ad Deum. Luth. Coll^q. mist fol. 239.
The Ancients (says Luther) finely described Prayer, to be an ascent of the
mind to God: Oh that I did experimentally know, what this means in Syntaxi, i.
e. in coupling and joining of my heart to God. Lord, gather in my roving and
wandering spirit: This is the first direction, Mind the frame of your hearts.

2. Implore and expect the Spirits assistance: Prayer must be by the Spirits
enlarging influence; hence it is called the spirit of grace and supplication:
Zech. 12.10. Romans 8.26.
it helps our infirmities by making souls to cry out Abba Father, with
unutterable groans: A Christian should spread the sails of his soul for the
gales of Gods grace, which will carry the praying Saint apace toward God, yea
and reach the ear of God, for he knows the mind of the Spirit: Phil. 3.3.
Jude 20.
This is that which is called, a worshipping God in the spirit, a praying in
the holy Ghost, i. e. either as to the matter of the Prayer dictated by the
Spirit, or as to the manner of praying, the soul being actuated by the holy
Ghost: See Mark 11.36. and 13.11.
For I conceive it may import the former as well as the latter, as other
Scriptures compared hold forth: Alas, flesh and blood will put up such
petitions as God will not accept, or in such a manner as is no way suitable to
his spiritual Nature: The truth is, Christians, you will but bungle at the work
without this help of Gods Spirit, and God will take notice of you except he
hear his own language: do not think you can wrestle out the business your
selves, you must be beholding to God for help in Prayer, as well as for hearing
your Prayer; your own spirits will not carry you to Heaven: that which is from
the earth is earthly, and rises no higher than earth, but the holy Ghost will
elevate your souls to God: Therefore, I beseech you, Sirs, beg the Spirit,
yield to its motions, improve its operations; say when you are going to duty,
Lord, now stir up thy self, and stir up thy grace in my heart: Awake, oh
North Wind, and come; thou South, blow upon thy Garden, Cant. 4.16. [My Soul]
that the spices thereof may flow out [that graces may be exercised and
exerted:] Lord, I am low, flat, hard; send the powerful arm of thy blessed
Spirit to work all gracious dispositions in me, and raise up my affections to
thee: I see I am below the duty, and infinitely below thee in the duty, but
thou, and thou alone can raise me up, quicken, soften my dead and rocky
heart; come Lord, and show thy powerful Arm, let it appear what God can do for
a sorry worm. Oh lift me up to thee, that my soul may enjoy some sweet
communion with thee: Send thy spirit to fetch in my wanton wandering heart: Oh
for some fire from Heaven to burn up my sacrifice, or else it will lie like a
lump of flesh, and be no true Holocaust of pure Incense before thee: Let thy
Spirit scatter these mists of ignorance, and drive away these flies of
distracting thoughts, that my heart may be with thee, and my performance may be
as sweet savor in the nostrils of God.

SECT. IV. More Essentials in secret Prayer.
A Third ingredient in Prayer is, that it be according to God's will; it must
have a warrant from the Word; a word of Precept, or Promise, or Example, must
be the ground of our petitions: a command is our warrant, a promise our
encouragement; an example is our tract, and the footsteps of the flock wherein
we must walk: He that asks amiss shall not speed, but if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us; and then we know we have the petitions
that we desired of him, 1 John 5.14, 15. Now, we ask according to his will,
when both the matter of our petition is aright, and our end in asking is Gods
glory, and our own or others spiritual good: otherwise, if we ask of God what
we conceit to be a mercy, and have not asked counsel at God's mouth; or ask so
as to consume it upon our lusts, we may well meet with a denial: My friends,
you may not say what you please in the presence of God. Consider, God is in
Heaven, you are on Earth, therefore be not rash with your mouth, and let not
your heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, let your words be few, and
well weighed, Eccles. 5.2. The work you are about is a solemn business, do not
ramble in extravagant desires of unlawful things; think not that God will
patronize your lusts: and when you have asked that which you conceive is
according to his will, refer it wholly to his Will, say, The Will of the Lord
be done: submit your selves to his dispose, for time, manner, means, and all
circumstances for giving of it: ask temporal mercies conditionally, and
spiritual Comforts with submission to Gods will; learn that petition, Thy will
be done, to pray it, as well as say it. Indeed Luther could say, Let thy will
be done, but he come off with this, My will, Lord, because my will is melted
into thine, there is but one will betwixt us: Let God's will be your will; it is
fit it should be so, our heavenly Father is wiser than we: Consider, Haec
repraesentatio debet esse submissa and humilis: alias enim non esset precatio
religiosa a creatura subdita, ad supremum Numen and Creatorem directa; sed, vel
imperium superioris ergo inferiorem, vel quasi familiaris collocutio, quatis
est inter aequales: Ames. medull. theol. lib. 2.6. p. 255.
a man cannot pray in faith, for that which he has no warrant to ask: Besides,
Amesius says, If a man come not with an humble submission to Gods will, it
were not a religious prayer directed to the supreme Creator, but a kind of
command by a superior to an inferior, or a familiar discourse as amongst
equals: Therefore let us humbly plead Gods. Will as Abraham did, Genesis 18.27.
Further consider, the design of Prayer is not to incline God before unwilling,
to our mind and desire; for with him there is no variableness nor shadow of
change; but that we may obtain of him by Prayer what we know aforehand he is
willing to give: Lastly, consider we Christ's example, Mat. 26.39. If it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will: This is right praying, to ground our petition upon a promise, yet freely
to leave all at Gods feet, to dispose of us as he sees good: Our prayers and
Gods promises should point toward each other as those two figures 9 and 6.
Promises do bend downwards, and after the same motion must our prayers ascend
upwards; so will there be a blessed harmony and seasonable return: This is the
third Direction; Let your Prayers be warranted by the Word.

4. Improve your Advocate, Joh. 14.13. Whatsoever you ask in my name, that will
I do: To ask any thing in his name is not, rudely, customarily, or
complementally to conclude with these words, Through Jesus Christ our Lord,
etc. but, in confidence of his merit and intercession to call upon our heavenly
Father, as Daniel pleads, for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17. For, since the Fall,
none can come immediately to God but through a Mediator; nor are we to fetch a
compass by the groundless invocation of Saints and Angels: I hope you have
otherwise learned Christ: I am most afraid in the practick part, that, in
particular acts (at least) precious Souls are in danger to miscarry, especially
in Closet-Prayer; when a Christian is got alone, and there finds a sweet gale
of the blessed Spirit, helping his heart to mourn for sin, bewail his misery,
plead for mercy, and giving God the glory due unto his name; oh then he goes
away much satisfied, and God must needs accept his person and hear his Prayer:
Why so? Why he has sound abundant assistance, meltings, quicknings, and
inlargements: Alas Sirs, where is Christ all this while? I am afraid your
advocate is quite forgotten, your surety set aside as a poor insignificant
Cipher: And tell me, soul, thou that boastest thus of thy inlargements, dare
thou appear before an holy God in those rotten rags? Suppose thy rags be
Velvet, they are but rags still, and are too scant a garment for thy naked
soul; thou come to unlock the ear of God, and open his heart with a wrong
key; we are accepted only in the Beloved, and not because we are enlarged. It Is
true, evangelical assistance may be a sign of acceptance, but it is no cause
thereof: No no, our persons and prayers are owned only upon the account of our
surety and intercessour: Our dear Lord Jesus, who dyed for us, he lies leager
at the Court of Heaven as our Ambassador, to plead for us, and to see matters
carried fairly, betwixt God and ransomed souls, and shall we not employ our
advocate, and find him work? Or shall we think to go our own errand? Lord,
forgive this gross ingratitude: Oh Christians, whatever your straitness or
inlargements be, make use of him, who is at Gods right hand, lay your
sacrifices on this golden Altar; lay the whole stress of your acceptance upon
Christ's meritorious intercession; act faith on him who mingles his sweet
incense with your sorry performances: Oh look after our Aaron who is gone into
the Holy of Holies for us: Consider, friends, it would be sad with you if you
were to be judged according to the best secret duties that ever you performed:
It Is good to have an enlarged heart in secret, yet there is danger in it, and it
may undo us, because our naughty hearts are apt to boast of, and trust to our
inlargements; therefore it is better for us sometimes to be straightened than
constantly enlarged in our Closet-Prayers: This is that which has made some
say that their duties have done them more hurt than their infirmities; and the
reason is plain, because our corrupt hearts are so apt to depend upon the
former, when as we are daunted and emptied of our selves by considering the
latter: The Lord help us all in this main busin^ss of Prayer, yea this
principal part of our religion, to depend wholly upon the righteousness and
intercession of Jesus Christ; for access to, and acceptance with God: Study
these Scriptures, Joh. 16.23, 24. Ephesians. 3.13. Heb. 4.15, 16.10.19, 20, 21, 22.
Phil. 3.3, 18. The Gospel is full of this, yea, this is the main hinge of our
Religion: you are not Christians, unless you make Jehovah your righteousness in
all you do, as well as God your ultimate end: You Will go away as the proud
Pharisee without acceptance, if you plead your inlargements with God: but if
you come as the Publican, pleading only Gods mercy and Christ's merits, you
shall be owned and crowned with abundant incomes.

There are also several other necessary Ingredients in all prayer, which I
might urge with reference to this duty of secret Prayer, as 1. A right
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with understanding: For blind devotion
is not pleasing to God: 2. A sensible feeling of our wants, we must come weary
and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. Pressed with the guilt of sin, pinched with want
of grace: 3. Fervency of spirit, James 5.17. arising from a consideration of
the necessity and excellency of what we desire, burning Zeal: 4. A reverent
disposition, Eccl. 5.2. an unfeigned abasing of our selves before him, from the
sense of his infinite Majesty and our own indignity: 5. Secret persuasions of
prevailing, 1 Timothy 2.8. grounded on Gods All sufficiency and Fidelity, though
the soul be unworthy: 6. A charitable disposition, forgiving others, Mat. 6.14.
bearing an endeared affection to all Saints: 7. Perseverance in Prayer, holding
on without cessation, Ephesians. 6.18. Following God in the duty all our days: Such
as these constitutive ingredients essentially requisite in the duty of Prayer,
I might urge, but must contract.

This is the second sort of Directions.

CHAP. VI. The circumstances of Secret Prayer, opened.
SECT. I.
THe third head of Instructions concerning Closet-Prayer, is the Circumstances
that attend it, which may be a great furtherance or hinderance in this
performance. These are four: Referring either to the
1. Place. 2. Posture. 3. Season. 4. Voice.


I shall but briefly touch at these.

1. For the Place, I advise you to choose the most retired room, where you may
be freest from disturbance, that you may not hear the noise of the family or
distracting commotions of a tumultuous world: be not curious in the choice of a
place, so it accomplish your end for secrecy or retirement; no matter how
homely it be, the sweetness of the company will compensate the meanness of the
place; Lovers care not where they meet, so they may conveniently be together:
If you have not a convenient room within doors, yet a good heart will not
disdain to go meet its Beloved in any coat, or barn, or wood: Isaac walked out
into the Fields to pray and meditate: See you choose a private place wherever it
be, according to the nature of the duty, before opened to you; observe God's
providence in disposing of you, and accept such place as he shall offer to you.

2. For Posture; In general, see that you use an humble gesture, there are
examples of several laudable gestures in prayer; sometimes we find Saints
standing, ordinarily kneeling, spreading forth their hands, lifting up their
eyes toward Heaven; sometimes prostrating the body all along upon the Earth
before the Lord; you may do in this as you find most advantageous in your
experience: no universal rules can be given as to these particular
circumstances; only see that your Closet-Prayers be with as much reverence as
if you were before others, consider, your bodies are Gods, and must be
presented as a sacrifice to God: He will be worshipped with the outward as well
as inward man; you cannot without dangerous sacrilege rob him of either:
Besides, observe it, there is both evidence and assistance in the bodies humble
gesture; it is an help to make you humble, and it is a sign that you are humble:
But on the contrary, an unsuitable sight and position of the body in Gods
service, is a sad sign of an unhumbled soul, Cogitemus, nos sub conspectu Dei
stare: placendam est Divinis ^ulis and habitu corporis and m^de vocis: Cyp.
Sermon. in Orat. Dom. p. 409.
and hinders humiliation: Therefore though you be never so solitary, yet
remember, your Father in Heaven sees you. Therefore as Cyprian exhorts) let us
consider we stand under the presence of God, and seek to please the Divin(...)h
in the habit of our body, and manner o(...) Think of this Rule.

3. For the Season, The Apostle says; Pray continually, or without ceasing,
yet there are some (as it were) canonical hours of Prayer, wherein a
Christian's discretion must interpose: only in this case, take the fittest
seasons for secret Prayer, as when you are most at leisure from worldly
business, most free from company, least in danger of drouziness: Oh Christians,
if it be possible, put not off your secret devotions too long, till you go to
bed; then you are fitter for rest and sleep than for wrestling with God on your
knees: And then, for the frequency, no certain rule can be given: David and
Daniel prayed three times a day, Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10.
mourning, noon, and night: Noon-time was the sixth hour, which was also a time
of Prayer, ( Act. 10.9.) others also observed the ninth hour, which was three a
clock in the afternoon ( Act. 3.1. Dr. Ham. pract. Cat. l. 3. Sect. 2. p. 274.
) Certainly the third hour, i. e. nine in the morning, was an hour of Prayer, (
Acts 2.15.) and so was evening, six at night, say some. David adds a seventh in
Psalm. 119.164. Seven times a day will I praise thee, which may only denote
frequency in the duty: Some of these may seem extraordinary cases: The ordinary
seasons the Saints have taken, Exodus 29.38, 39. Psalm. 5.3. and 88.13. and 141.2.
have been morning and evening, according to the Jews sacrifice of a Lamb at
those seasons. In the morning our spirits are fresh and lively: at evening we
may find the bypast matters of the day, a fit occasion for Prayer and Praise:
it would do well to take Isaac's season for devotion, even about sunset, or
the shutting in of the day; but I shall not too peremptorily impose in these
undetermined circumstances, only take that general rule, 1 Pet. 4.7. Watch unto
Prayer: That Is the third.

4. For the Voice, The articulate sound of words is not absolutely necessary in
Prayer, and it may be not so convenient in Closet-Prayer, which should be
managed privately betwixt God and a man's own soul, approving the heart to God
as sole witness of his sincerity; except through some ecstasy and strong
motion of the affections, the soul's desires break out in the lips beyond its
first intentions: I know, Mr. John Carter, that eminent man of God, did
purposely use his voice in secret prayer for these two reasons, Mr. Clark, in
his life.
1 Because he sound it an help to his affections, 2. Because it was an example
to his family: I must not therefore lay any necessity in these variable
circumstances, only I humbly conceive, it is most suitable to the nature of
Closet-Prayer, to perform it so as none else may take notice thereof: Give me
leave to mention a few passages out of Cyprian to this purpose, Nam, ut
impudentis eis clamoribus strepere, itae contra congruit verocundo modestis,
precibus or are: Quia Deus non vocis, sed cordis auditor est: Et Paulo post,
Quod Anni in primo Regno um libro, Ecclesiae typum portans, custodit and
servat: Quae Dominum non clamosa petitione, sed tacit and modeste intrae ipsas
pectoris latebras precabatu^ Loquebatur prece occulta, sed man fe^a fide: Cypr.
Sermon. de Orat. Dom. p. 409. 410.
it is a token of unmannerly impudence, to make a noise with loud clamours, but
it is most suitable to a modest spirit, to pray with silent groans. For God is
the hearer not of the voice, but of the heart: He makes Hannah a type of the
Church, who prayed not with clamorous petitions, but with working affections
within the lurking holes (as it were) of her breast; she spoke with hidden
Prayer, but manifest faith: So he.

Thus much for circumstances of Closet-Prayer, wherein I am more short and shie
in imposing any thing on the people of God, which God has left free in his
Word: Only in general take notice, that though accidental circumstances that
concern a duty be mutable, yet by the wise ordering of those circumstances,
they will become singular helps in the managing of a duty.

SECT. II. Duties concomitant to Closet-Prayer.
4. THE last sort of duties and directions concerning Closet-Prayer, are such
as are to be practiced after the duty is performed, which I call consequent, or
concomitant duties. These are four, Viz.
1. Observing God's appearances. 2. Walking suitably. 3. Waiting for returns.
4. Communicating experiences.


1. When you have been before the Lord in Closet-Prayer, observe how God has
been dealing with your hearts, that you may be suitably disposed and affected:
If the Lord has withdrawn himself from you, left you under hardness,
deadness, distraction, uncomfortablenesse; you are to mourn for it, inquire
the cause of it, reflect upon your selves, see what guilt there is upon
conscience, which separates betwixt God and your souls: And then (if time
permit) fall to it again, lament the sin; be ingenuous in confession, make
stronger resolutions, remove all obstructions, that God and your souls may not
be at any distance, reckon straight, and make up your accounts, part friends,
that you may meet friends the next time you go to him: If you find that God
has helped, melted, and graciously manifested himself to your souls, take
special notice of it, record that for time to come, slight not the least
appearances of God, own him in, praise him for these sweet manifestations of
his love: Learn this lesson even of Hagar the bondwoman: when she was in a
solitary Wilderness, the Angel of the Lord comforts her, tells her God had
heard her affliction, she was with child, her seed should be multiplied, she in
an answerable return to God for his kindness, sets an Asterism of Observation
upon the place, as a memorial of God's seeing, and looking after her, So the
well was called Beer-la-hai-roi, i. e. the Well of him that lives, and sees
me, Genesis 16.13, 14. Thus do you: think and think again, Oh, who, or what am I,
that God should look after me, or take notice of me in this desolate state and
place! I shall remember this time of love whilst I live, in such a room I met
with God, such a Chamber or C^oset was a Bethel, a Mount Nebo, a Sycomore-tree,
where I beheld my Jesus, and took a blessed view of the promised land. -- Thus
Christians, reflect upon, and recollect your experiences in Gods presence;
which may be of use unto you all your days,

2. Let your cariages at all times be suitable to your closet prayers; let it
appear that you are wholly devoted to God: cross not your prayers with your
practices, pray much and live well: Let it appear you have been with God, that
you have been drawing your influences from the springhead; walk with men as
those that walk with God: Let the smell and savor of your heavenly conversings
break forth in your gracious expressions, and exemplary conversations: Live not
after the ordinary rate of professors: As your heart is God-wards, so let your
light be Men-wards, that they may see your good works, and glorify God: Carry
something out of your Closets, that may hold forth the word of life and work of
grace; be able to say in works what David speaks in words, Ps. 119.55, 56.
After he had said, He remembered Gods name in the night, he adds, This I had,
because I kept thy precepts: He tells not what it was, but certainly something
it was, worth having: Possibly, it was some strength to obey the will of God,
some power over a corruption: Oh Christians, let your actions demonstrate what
you get in Gods presence: What a sin and shame is it, when persons do that
morally that Moses did literally, Even come down from the mount, and break the
tables of God's Law, as soon as they are off the place? Oh how sad is it for a
soul to come down from Closet-prayer, and be proud, passionate, envious, or
covetous? And observe it; then you are most in danger: for then does Satan
tempt most, and your hearts are then most apt to be secure, conceited, and
carnally confident, as though you had done enough, and might now sit down and
take your ease: And having sweat at duty, and suddenly cooling, the gracious
soul does contract a dangerous surfeit, and fall into a languishing condition:
Be jealous therefore of your selves when you have been with God in secret, and
have an eye upon the devil, who is like a cheater who strikes in with a young
heir, when he has newly received his rents, and never leaves him till he has
eased him of his money: Oh now walk warily and watchfully, consider where you
have been, and do nothing contrary to your communion or profession: Let it
never be said of you as some are apt to say, I wonder what such persons do so
much alone! unless they lived better, and carried themselves after another
order: they pretend devotion, but there is little seen in their conversation,
they will talk as vainly, live as wantonly, be as hard and false in their way
of trading, and be as proud, scornful, perfidious and injurious as others are:
Ah Christians, let it never be said thus; at least give no occasion of such
speeches: Let the world see, your Prayers have some efficacy; that you get some
strength in duties which you lay out in your practices.

SECT. III. Further duties after Closet-Prayer.
3. ANother duty after you have been with God in secret, is, To expect a
seasonable return: Stand upon your watch, hearken what God will speak; Unto
thee, says David, will I direct my Prayer, and will look up, Psalm. 5.3. So do
you: Christians, look up to see what becomes of your Prayers, observe what
answers God gives in. It is an unmannerly mocking another, ( Pilate-like) to
ask a question and expect no answer: and is not this a gross soloecism in
Religion, to speak many things to God, and expect no return? It Is certainly a
great fault among Christians, to pray and pray, and never to consider or gather
up the fruits of Prayer: Is it not a strange piece of folly, for men to be
always sowing, and never to look for an harvest? Surely Christians have more
harvests than they are aware of: Therefore, Sirs, observe how you reap, take
special notice of any thing that looks like a Return of Prayer; examine it
thoroughly, gather something out of it, catch at what comes from the King of
Heaven, as Benhadad's servants did by the King of Isreal's words; and if there
be but an hint, lay it up, make much of it, improve it, praise God for it, and
hope for more: It is the negligence or unwarrantable modesty of some
Christians, to think that they can expect no fruit of their Prayers, because of
the imperfection of their duties, forgetting Gods gracious Promise to
upright-hearted seekers, by remembering his strict Justice to such as seek him
not in the due order: But sirs, you must so be humble, as also to believe, so
deny your own righteousness, as also to improve Christ's intercession; you are
to renounce all conceits of merit in your selves, and yet look up for mercy
from God. God has graciously annexed his promise of acceptance to the
performance of the condition; and if God have assisted you to pray right for
the main, you may expect his audience: 1 John 1.9. 2 Timothy 4.8.
for, God is faithful and merciful, both in forgiving our iniquities, and
giving us mercies: Gods answers are larger than our askings; when we truly pray
for a piece of bread, God gives a whole acre of Land: as Luther says, and
tells us, That when his wife was sick, he prayed to God that she might live:
Luth. Colloq. men's. fol. 245.
so says he, He not only granted that request, but also therewith he has
given us a goodly Farm at Zolfdorf, and thereto has blessed us with a fruitful
year. Instances of this sort are endless: There Is never a sincere Prayer lost;
God always gives in returns, only we either do not observe or mistake them, and
lose the comfort of them: An answer of Prayer does not always come in the way
we expect it; we look for it at the fore-door, and it comes in at the
backdoor, and while we are still expecting the friend we look for, he is in
the house; the mercy we desired is received, only it comes in a way we thought
not of, and are therefore apt to overlook it: Therefore take heed of confining
God to your way or limiting him to your time: That Is the third.

4. Communicate your experiments: And thereby commend this duty to others: Thus
David, Come, says he, and I will declare what he has done for my soul; Psalm.
66.16. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, Psalm. 34.6. -- Do you as I
have done, and you shall speed as I have sped. Do not mistake this: I would not
have you tell every one when you go to Closet-Prayer, or when you have been at
it (that is a Pharisaical blowing a Trumpet) but you must, at some times, to
such persons as you can confide in, or that you have some grounded hopes of
doing good to, tell them your experiences, for their direction and
encouragement; in this case, acquaint them how God is wont to deal with your
hearts, what good you have found from God in that duty, and you question not
but upon a conscientious use thereof they may find the like advantage: And this
would be of singular use; for hereby they have not only a rule for it, but the
exemplifying of it in a Precedent; and we know Examples are of a prevailing
nature: Especially, see that you put your families upon this practice; Oh what
a blessed thing were it, if every person in several rooms of the House were at
work with God in secret Prayer! How bravely would that house be perfumed? How
well would the Trade of godliness thrive? Surely such an House were a more
blessed beautiful edifice than any Princes Palace under Heaven: It Is the
disposition of Gospel-penitents to mourn every family apart, husbands and wives
apart, Zech. 12.11, 12. And of gracious souls, to be like Doves of the valleys,
every one mourning for his iniquity, Eze. 7.16. There must be joynt-Prayers and
separated Prayers together and apart: Let not Christians be content to find
Christ in a Corner for themselves, but let them do what they can that others
also may enjoy him: this was the frame of the Church or believing Soul, Cant.
3.4. When she had found him, I held him, says she, and would not let him go,
until I had brought him into my Mothers house, i. e. into more public
assemblies: And truly, Christians, that man has not found Christ at all that
would not have all others to find him; Oh, thinks the Christian in his
retirement, that others did but feel and enjoy what my soul has sweet
experience of, would to God, my Husband, Wife, Brother, Father, Child,
Neighbor, would but try this course a while; Oh what advantage would they get
by it? Though I eat these sweet morsels alone, yet fain would I have others to
partake with me: In things of this world, persons are apt to grudge others any
benefit by what they have stolen, from others a view, but in spiritual
advantages there is no envy, and if there be, it proceeds not from Grace, but
from corrupt Nature; the more grace the less envy; and when envy is gone,
persons will be communicative. Take away envy, Toll invidiam, mea tua sunt and
tua mea.
and mine is thine, and thine is mine; true Grace or Charity is kind, envieth
not, 1 Cor. 13.4. Now this I am persuading to, that they that have found Christ
would be so charitable to souls as to communicate the knowledge of him, and the
way to enjoy him, unto others: Thus does Andrew come to Simon, and Philip to
Nathaniel, and both of them were (as a man finding a jewel, and cannot contain)
overjoyed, and cry out [(...)] I have found him, We have found the Messiah,
Joh. 1.41, 45. And when the poor woman of Samaria had been privately conversing
with Jesus, down she threw (at least, left behind her) her water-pot, and all
in haste went to the City, and said to the men, Come see a man which told me
all things that ever I did, Is not this the Christ? John 4.28, 29. Thus do you,
sirs: promote and propagate this choice duty, commend it unto others practice;
and so you may be instruments of good.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the matter or words of Prayer.
SECT. I.
THere is one thing yet remains, which it may be expected something should be
spoken to; and that is, The matter in praying, or words of Prayer, Whether it
be lawful or requisite to use a form or no? Most judge, Videas Ames. Cas. Cons.
lib. 4. c. 17. p. 190.
that as forms are lawful; so prescript words may be requisite to some young
beginners in Religion, and other Christians of weak parts that cannot express
their desires to God in fit words, to help their rudeness, yet Christians ought
to press after more growth and proficiency, that they may lay aside those
Crutches, and arrive at that gift of Prayer, that may be of singular use: As
for Closet-Prayer, Practical Catech. page 277.
Dr. Hammond does assert it, that every one may ask his own wants in what form
of words he shall think fit: And indeed all particular cases incident and
variable, can scarce be comprehended in one constant form: besides, in secret
Prayer, God does not so much stand upon phrases or pat sentences, as the
workings of the heart in sighs and groans, which are the best Rhetoric in his
ears: It Is inquired, Whether we may use the Lords Prayer? I answer, we may use
it as other prayers in Scripture; but, I conceive, the principal end of it, is
not to be rehearsed every time we pray, but an example, platform, or directory,
according to the contents whereof we must direct our prayers.

Therefore for the further help of young professors, I shall briefly touch at
the several branches of that admirable compendious rule of Prayer you have in
Mat. 6. ver. 9. to v. 14. And the rather because it may seem to refer chiefly
(though not only) to Closet-devotion: what I shall say to it may be a practical
analyzing of it, in its several parts and branches.

1. For the preface, Our Father which art in Heaven, You may thus make use of
it: Infinite and Eternal Majesty, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, who dwell
in the highest Heavens, and in the lowest hearts, who see all things here
below, and art a God that hear prayers; I am a poor worm at thy footstool,
looking up to the Throne of thy Grace; cast a Fatherly eye up on me, and though
I be by Nature a Child of wrath, yet through Jesus Christ make me thy child by
Grace and Adoption, teach me to cry Abba Father, with holy reverence and filial
confidence, raise my heart to Heaven, beget in me Faith in thy promises, love
to my brethren, and due apprehensions of thy Sovereign power, and gracious
condescension; that praying by the help of thy Spirit, in the name of thy Son,
I may obtain good at thy Fatherly hands. Secondly for the Petitions.

1. Petition, Hallowed be thy Name: Thus, O my God, I have dishonored thee all
my days by my ignorance, pride, hardness, and unthankfulness, and I am unapt
and unable to glorify thee, but do thou glorify thy self in my conversion and
salvation: help me to know and adore thee, to make an high account of thy
titles, attributes, ordinances; to believe thy word, admire thy works, in mercy
or judgment: help me with spiritual thoughts becoming my holy profession, with
divine lips speaking good of thy Name, and a suitable conversation to walk
before the Lord: Holy God, destroy Atheism, Ignorance, Idolatry, and
Profaneness; magnify thy Name through the World; and direct and dispose all
things to the advancement of thy glory, by thy overruling providence, and thy
infinite wisdom.

2. Petition, [ Thy Kingdom come:] Thus improve it: Lord, I must confess, that
by nature I am dead in sin, and a bond-slave to the Prince of darkness, who
rules in my heart, and leads me captive by ignorance, error, disobedience; but
do thou, by the power of thy grace, cast out the strong man, take possession of
my heart; sway thy blessed Scepter in me, bring my whole man to obedience,
destroy Satan's kingdom, propagate the Gospel among all Nations, purge thy
house, furnish thy Church with officers, orders, and pure ordinances; make
Kings nursing Fathers to it, convert sinners, confirm Saints, comfort the sad;
hasten thy second coming to judgment, and the blessed Kingdom of Glory.

3. Petition, [ Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven] Thus, Holy
Majesty, I acknowledge my natural ignorance of thy will, impotencie to obey
it, yea, enmity and antipathy against it; my best services are imperfect, my
spirit repining under thy hand, and my will wilfully resisting grace, and
rushing into sin; but Dear Lord, inform my mind, conquer my will, order my
affections sweetly to comply with thy mind; teach me to do thy will in
obedience, make me content with thy will concerning me in every providence;
beget in me those heavenly dispositions that are in the glorious Angels, and
glorified Saints, that with humility, cheerfulness, diligence and
faithfulness, zeal, sincerity and constancy, I may be actively and passively
at thy dispose.

4. For that Petition, [ Give us this day our daily bread;] Say in this manner;
Heavenly Father, I must confess, that by my wretched apostacy in Adam, I have
lost my right to every morsel of bread, and deserve not to breath in thy air,
or tread on thy earth; my sin has put a curse and sting into every comfort, I
can obtain nothing by my industry, yet am prone to desire, get, and use thy
mercies unlawfully; thy blessing is only the staff of my bread, help me to wait
on thy providence in a moderate use of lawful means; give me a competencie of
outward comforts, thy blessing in the use thereof, and contentment therewith;
and, above all, a right thereto in Christ, and prevent needless cares and
sensual delights.

5. As to that petition, [ Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors:]
Thus plead it; Lord, I am woefully guilty of original and actual sin, and am
thereby a debtor to divine justice: I owe millions, and cannot pay the least
farthing, therefore deserve to be cast into the dark dungeon of eternal
torments; but, dear Lord, thou have found a ransom who stands in man's stead
to be surety for him, O accept me in thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, wash away my
sins in his blood, cloth my naked soul with his glorious robes, give me saving
faith to embrace him upon his own terms, free my soul from guilt and punishment
of sin, pardon my daily failings, and seal an acquittance in my conscience,
which tells me I do freely forgive all offenses against my self.

6. The last petition [ And lead us not into temptation, but deliver from evil]
you may render thus: Lord, it were righteous with thee to leave me to be
assaulted and conquered by Satan, my souls cruel enemy; my heart is growing
wanton, proud, and careless, apt to thrust my self into temptations, but unable
to resist or overcome them: thou may justly bring me into occasions and leave
me to my self therein; but oh my God, keep my soul from being tempted, or
assist me in the hour of temptation, or recover me out of my foils and falls;
sanctify my slips make my standing surer in thy strength, tread Satan under my
feet conquer the world for me, crucify me unto the world, subdue my flesh
within, and in due time take my soul above all sins and snares, into thine
immediate presence.

And then shut up all with such like words as these on that conclusion. [ For
thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen:] Oh my God, I am
unworthy thou should grant my petitions for any thing in my self; all my
arguments in Prayer, and grounds of acceptance I fetch from thy self: Thou have
a Kingdom of Grace, and Throne of Grace, from whence thou hear prayers, and
dispensest blessings; all the Power is in thine hands, to give and forgive, to
kill or make alive, and the Glory shall be thine, if thou hear my Prayer: and
blessed be my God, for all my mercies. I ascribe to thee, and thee alone,
eternal soveraigntie, omnipotency, and glorious excellency, which as I desire
all may be given to God, so I am humbly emboldened by Faith to rest upon thy
power and promise, that in due time thou will hear my requests; And as a token
of that my desire and confidence, my soul does echo forth, Amen, Even so be it.

Thus I have given you an hint from the Lords-Prayer, of directions for the
matter of our prayers. I shall but propound another Scripture-Instance
concerning Arguments in Prayer.

Sect. II. An example, from Jacob, of pleading with God.
GOD would have his people converse with him in a r^tional way, and Gods
children have made use of many pleas in Prayer, which they have produced in
vehement Expostulations, as we may find sprinkled up and down in Scripture, as
Moses, Nehemiah, Ezra, and Daniel, in their approaches to God: and above all,
David through the book of Psalms is exceeding full this way. But I shall pass
by the rest, and fix only upon one Scripture-instance, and the rather because
it was a secret or solitary prayer (of which we are now speaking:) and there
are notable Pleas therein, which may possibly suit our condition; therefore I
shall briefly touch the parts of it, and recommend it to our imitation: It is
that of good Jacob (who was trained up in this holy Art of wrestling with God)
in Genesis 32.9, 10, 11, 12. His plea's there may be reduced to these ten Heads.

1. He makes use of suitable Titles of God, he calls him Lord or Jehovah; which
denotes Gods self-existence, and giving Being or existence to the promises, in
first making them, and then making them good. Thus do you; Sirs, raise in your
hearts suitable apprehensions of God, and let your expressions be answerable;
tell God, he is an infinite, omniscient, omnipotent Majesty, able to do beyond
what you can ask or think, and that you neither need nor desire any more than
what his almighty power can effect: tell him, if All Sufficiency cannot supply
you, you are content to go unsped; but you question neither his hand nor heart;
you are sure he both can and will help his Children in their need; he will make
good with his hand, what he has spoken with his mouth, for he is Jehovah.

2. He pleads Covenant Relation to God. O God of my Father Abraham, and God of
my Father Isaac, and so my God! this is an admirable plea: if God own a soul in
a Covenant Relation, he will certainly do it good; though his grace be free,
yet when God has chosen a soul to be his, he has (as it were) engaged himself
to own it; now he has laid his truth to pledge. Thus then a soul may plead,
Lord thou have been my Fathers God, and will thou not be my God? And will thou
be my God, and withold such a mercy from me? My Ancestors found grace in thy
sight, and obtained those very good things I am craving; and am not I under the
very same Covenant with them? Are not promises the same? Is there not the same
Mediator? Lord, I come to thee in a Covenant Relation for a Covenant-mercy, and
will thou deny me?

3. He pleads a warrant for his undertaking, appealing to God that he was in
his way, saying, The Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy Country: Oh
with what encouragement may the soul plead for assistance and protection, that
is in Gods way and work, according to his own appointment? Thus then plead,
Lord, have not thou set me about this work? Have thou not given me a charge to
do what I do? Have I not a plain positive Scripture-warrant to bind my
conscience? I dare not do otherwise: I may say, If I be deceived, thou have
deceived me, but I am sure, plain Texts are no cheats, I cannot otherwise
understand such a Command: and oh my God, since thou have thus engaged me in
thy work, will thou suffer me to miscarry therein?

4. He pleads a particular promise, I will deal well with thee: Surely a
comprehensive word, containing in it all that Jacob wanted. Thus must a
Christian search the Scriptures, get hold of a promise, spread it before the
Lord, whether for spiritual grace, inward comfort, or outward supply, as thus:
Lord, I find a promise in such a place, to a person in my very case, pat and
pertinent to my very condition, as if it had been calculated purposely for me
in this juncture; now Lord, make it good to my Soul, and Seed; thou have made
it good to others in my state, and why not to me? Am not I an heir of promise?
And must not I have a share therein?

5. Jacob lays himself under the sense of his own unworthiness, I am not
worthy, says he, of the least of all thy mercies. This is the property and
excellency of a Saint, to nullify himself, and Omnifie God, as I may so say:
thus Abraham in his pleading calls himself dust and ashes, and the Centurion
judged himself not worthy that Christ should come under his roof. Thus then,
abase thy self. Lord, I am not worthy to enjoy any common mercy, not fit to
lift up mine eyes to thee, less than the least of thy mercies; behold I am
vile, I am not only destitute of merits, but full of demerits. Hell is my
desert, I can challenge nothing as mine but sin, and the fruits thereof, Lord,
I condemn my self, do not thou condemn me, and cast me from thee.

6. He is affected with Gods faithfulness in the performance of his promises;
acknowledging the truth of God showed to his servant. There is mercy in Gods
making a promise to Abraham, Mic. 7.20. truth in making it good to Jacob. Well
then, with Jacob, thus plead: Lord, it is true, there was nothing of desert in
me to engage thee, either to make or keep thy gracious promise, but sure, the
word is gone from thee, yea and notwithstanding all my treachery and
unfaithfulness thou have kept it to this day: Oh keep it still it depends
wholly on thee; let not my vanity alter the course of thy mercy, but pardon and
accept as thou have done from my Egypt until now.

7. Jacob further recounts his former meanness, his low condition: With my
staff I passed over this Jordan, I came hither in a poor contemptible manner, a
sorry pilgrim: thus do you plead, Truth it is, Lord, thy grace is absolutely
free, there was neither wit nor wealth to move thee to do what thou have done;
I can remember the time when I was as sorry and silly a creature, as was in all
the Country; there was no capacity in me to do thee any remarkable service,
thou did not set thy love upon me for any natural or moral accomplishments,
even so Father because it pleased thee: and will thou now forsake me? Thou
might have done that at easier rates.

8. Here Is Jacob's Stone of memorial for bypast and present mercies, Now,
says he, I am become two bands, i. e. two great companies of wives, children,
servants, flocks, herds; I may say, These where had they been? It Is strange to
see poor worm Jacob thus rich, oh the bounty of God! So do thou say, Lord take
notice what thou have done for me, must all this be in vain? Will thou throw
away these good things? Will thou not rather crown these gifts with continuance
of thy kindness? Will thou return to do me hurt, after thou have done me all
this good? Do thou not remember my convictions, consolations; my fears,
tears, doubtings, refreshments? Oh the passages of love betwixt thee and me!
Shall I be the grave of these mercies? Lord forget me not.

9. Here Is his sense of approaching danger, Deliver me, I pray thee, from the
hand of my Brother -- for I fear him, etc. A Brother offended is harder to be
won than a strong City. Jacob's danger was a spur to his Prayer. A pursued Heart
runs fast for shelter; so do thou, Soul, when afraid; fly to the Lord, and
say, Oh my God, I have deadly enemies, within, without; my case is forlorn,
desperate; I have none to run to, but thy self: Have not thou said, that in
thee the fatherless find mercy? Other refuge fails me, no man cares for my
soul: Lord relieve, deliver this sinful wretch, else I go down into the pit.

10. Once more, does Jacob plead the promise, and enlarge the granted Charter:
Thou said, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the
Sea: Thus do you; still seek out, suck sweetness from, and put in suit the
promises by earnest prayer: In this manner; Lord, have thou not promised an
heart of flesh, a broken heart? Why then is my heart hardened from thy fear?
Do thou not say, thou will give thy holy Spirit to them that ask it? This
Lord, I want, to be a spirit of truth and illumination, a spirit of prayer and
supplication, a spirit of grace and sanctification, and of satisfaction; Oh
bestow this mercy upon me: Do thou not promise to take away my inqiuities by
pardoning Grace for thine own Name sake? And to subdue my corruption, and
increase grace, and bring me to glory? Lord, remember thy word unto thy
servant, in which thou have caused me to trust:

Thus much, for helps in pleading with God, and for that use of Instruction.

CHAP. VIII. An Use of Exhortation, urged.
SECT. I.
THe last Use is for Exhortation, to put us on to the performance of this sweet
duty of Closet-Prayer: My beloved friends, I beseech you suffer the word of
Exhortation: you see the work before you, you see a plain Scripture-warrant for
it, you have heard many Instances of Scripture-patterns, you see the manner of
the performance; let none now plead ignorance, or look upon it as needless, or
make excuses or evasions. Is it not equal and reasonable? Is it not worth the
while to converse with your God in a Corner? Look over the reasons of the
Doctrine, and see if there be not some weight in them:

But, besides those, I shall propound to you these expostulatory Motives.

1. Would you not be such as make conscience of every commanded duty? You are
no real Saints, unless you have respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.6.
If you pick and choose in your obedience, you are hollow-hearted hypocrites: And
can you deny this to be a duty? And will you stand dodging with God? Must he
raze this Sentence out of the Bible, to humor your conceits and sloth? Is not
Closet-Prayer a Christian duty? Dare you argue against it? Out of what Topics
will you fetch your Arguments? And do you acknowledge it to be a duty, and will
not practice it? Your own mouths will condemn you: What needs any more
Witnesses? But if you be real Saints, I dare say, you do approve of it; and
practice it sometimes; and why are you not constant in your obedience? Is it
not the property of a Saint to do righteousness at all times? Psalm. 106.3. Oh
consider this, and do not either neglect a command or omit this known duty*

2. Would you not have the truth of grace cleared up in your souls? Surely,
there is no Christian but would arrive at Assurance; and this is one way to
evidence sincerity, being much with God in secret duty: As he grieves truly
that grieves without witness; Ille do^t vere qui sine test dolet.
so those religious actings are most evidential of grace that are least obvious
to the view of men; and whereby a Christian approves his heart, only to the
heart-searching God: Here Is the true Israelite that can, Romans 2.28.
with Jacob, converse with God alone, and seeks his praise, not of men, but of
God: Observe it, a Christian ordinarily has not that comfort in a duty exposed
to others view, which he has in that he performs betwixt God and his own Soul:
For, there is most danger of selfishness in the former, and more self-denial in
the latter: The wind of applause may blow men far in a creditable performance,
but humility and sincerity is most evident in secret Appeals to God: Consider
this, Christians, you run to Sermons, Ministers, good Books, and take much
pains to try your state by marks and signs, make trial of this more compendious
course to clear your state; be much with God in Closet-Prayer.

3. Would you not be found in the practice of the power of godliness? Oh then
fall closs to Closet-Prayer: Alas, sirs, hearing Sermons, reading Scriptures,
discoursing religiously, praying in the family, may be done only for fashion
sake, and the person that does them, may have no more than the form of
godliness: Mistake me not, I do not condemn the practice of these, nor them
that do them, as formalists for that: God forbid, they are Scripture duties,
but the outward part of these may be done without the power of godliness, but
to struggle with a man's own heart, to wrestle with God in a Corner, to
meditate and give up a man's self to these duties, as in the presence of God;
oh, this shows something of the power of grace, and life of holiness. This is
heart-work, and that is hard work, costly duties, spiritual exercises, which is
more than to offer God thousands of Rams, or a firstborn Son: David would not
offer that to God that cost him nothing; and shall we be content with the
ordinary duties which may be consistent with an easy plodding formality?

4. Would you not have your hearts cased under pressing burdens? Are you in
love with your sorrows? would you not be rid of them? Behold, I show unto you
an excellent way to get ease, which is a recourse to God in secret Prayer! I
have heard some precious Christians say, that when any thing has lain upon
their hearts, ready to overwhelm them, they have run to God in a corner, and
there have left their load, and thence have gone, with good Hannah, and have
been no more sad: And experience tells us, that when any pressing affliction
lies upon us, if we can unbosom our selves to an intimate friend, though not a
word of counsel or comfort pass from him; yet that opening of our hearts does
ease, as vomiting does an oppressed stomach. And hence, says Job, I will speak
that I may be refreshed: And Scripture backs this in Phil. 4.6. Be careful in
nothing, but in every thing make your requests known to God, and unload your
cares and fears into the bosom of God: but how? Why by Prayer and Supplication
in Thanksgiving: lay your load on God by Prayer, and he will bear it.

5. Would you not obtain boldness in access to God, and familiarity with him?
Oh, go often to God in Closet-Prayer. Princes take more state upon them when
conversing with their favorites before others, but when none are present, they
open their hearts more familiarly to them I know Abraham, says God, he and I
are well acquainted, he is my friend, he visits me often, and shall I hide any
thing from Abraham? I Will take him to a side, and tell him my whole heart; so
will God to you, he will communicate much to you, and you may say any thing to
him, you are not strangers to him, but may come into his presence boldly, and
he will make you welcome, Heb. 4.16. On the contrary, what a dreadful thing will
it be to have strange thoughts of God in duty, or at death? Strangeness betwixt
God and a soul is a sad uncomfortable thing: Wicked men are total strangers to
God: gracious souls little employed in secret prayer, are little acquainted
with God, and worship afar off; but sincere souls conversing much with God in
secret, attain to abundance of intimacy with the Lord: and is not that a mercy
worth a World?

6. Would you not have the sins of others to bring wrath and judgment on the
place? Oh then, let your souls weep and pray in secret places, as Jeremiah did,
Chap. 13.17. This is the last and safest way to be delivered from the guilt of
open crying sins in the Land, even a mourning for them in prayer before the
Lord: thus did Lot, and David, Paul, and all Saints: Yea Moses's solitary
prayer interposed betwixt flaming wrath, and offending Israel: thus did he
stand in the gap, and you may make an atonement for the Nation: a gift in
secret may pacify that wrath that is already broken out against us. Wicked men
sin in secret, let us mourn in secret; yea they sin openly, let us lament
privately. The truth is, 2 Kings 17.9.
secret sins may undo a Nation, except the cry of the Saints secret prayers be
louder than the cry of wicked men's secret sins: Oh fall to it. Arise, cry out
in the night, in the beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water
before the face of the Lord -- Lam. 2.19.

7. Would you not have your own secret sins set in the light of God's
countenance? Psalm. 90.8. then repent and pray alone, humble your souls in
secret for your secret sins. Are you not conscious to your selves of much
secret guilt? And does not God expect that you should set your selves to mourn
over them, and cry to God for pardoning grace in secret? Eccl. 12.13.
Do you not know that God will bring every secret thing to light in the great
day of accounts? Nay, God may punish you openly, 2 Samuel 12.12.
as he did David for his secret sin. Well then, anticipate that sad severe
judgment, by judging your selves, and deprecating his righteous judgment: I may
say to thee, Soul, as Solomon bespeaks Shimei, Thou know all the wickedness
which thy heart is privy to: and where are thy prayers, and tears, and
groanings in secret? Oh, sirs, if others sins draw you not to secret Prayer,
let your own, which may afford matter of abundant grief in your Closets and
retirement.

8. Would you not prevent and circumvent wicked men's secret plots? Be sure
then, you undermine them by secret Prayer: The Devil and the Pope have many
closs and conclave consultations to undermine the Protestant Religion, and to
root out the name of Israel from under Heaven: they are working under ground to
do us mischief; we have seen by the light of London's flames their hellish
devices in their dark vaults; Wicked men lie in wait secretly as a Lion in his
den, to catch the poor and murder the innocent, Psalm. 10. Psalm. 64.1, 2, 4, 5.
8, 9. And now what course is to be taken for preventing these horrid designs?
Alas, we have no other remedy, but the ancient Christians weapons, Prayers and
Tears; these may break their nets, and blunt their weapons; good Jeremiah knew
not that they had devised devices against him, but he reveals his cause to God
in prayer, and then God shows him their doings, and prevents their attempts,
Jer. 11.18, 19, 20. Saints Closet-prayers may break wicked men's Closet-plots:
Fall closs then to this great duty.

9. Would you not be condemned by the Heathens Chamber-Idolatry? Oh then, do
you perform Chamber and Closet-Duties? They had their [ Divos penetrales, or
Penates] their Houshold-gods, and Closet-images, they had their [ opertanea,
and tenebrosa sacra] their covered, veiled, and mysterious exercises in secret
places: And the Jews borrowed several mystical rites of the Heathens: hence we
read in Ezekiel. 8.12. of Chambers of imagery, as the Papists at this day have
their Crucifixes, their petty-Chamber, Closet deities, where they drop their
Beads, and do homage to their Idols; and shall these in their blind
superstition condemn our irreligion? Shall it be said of a devout Philosopher,
that in so many years he spoke more with the gods than with men? And shall it
be said of any of us, that God (even the true God) is not in all our thoughts?
or so little in our lips; at least, in secret solemn addresses to him? Let not
poor ignorant Papists outstrip us in devotion; Since there is such vast
difference.

10. Would you not be suitable to Gods dispensations? When the Lord our God
puts us to silence, and into solitary places, he expects that we should visit
him there: Cant. 2.14. Oh my Dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in the
secret place of the stairs, i. e. in an afflicted persecuted and desolate
condition, Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, i. e. in the
duties of Prayer, praise, and Gospel Ordinances: For then was her voice sweet,
and countenance comely; when they are cast out, then does God expect and
entertain them: And this advantage have Gods children had by privacy, into
which they were cast, as we heard before of Jeremiah, Chap. 15.15. So the
afflicted Church, Lam. 3.28, 29. When she sits alone in solitariness, then
she puts her mouth in the dust, in fasting and prayer; and so a particular
person as there: Now a man is at leisure for it: While persons have their full
employment or enjoyments, they are too busy; but when persons are taken off
other ways, it is time to retire themselves and retreat to God: The less
comfort persons find in public Ordinances, the more serious must they be in
Closet-performances; that the loss may be supplied some way.

SECT. II. Several Objections, Answered.
It Is strange if our carnal hearts and cavilling spirits have not something to
say against this difficult duty: I shall therefore mention what Objections, I
can foresee may be made, and briefly answer them.

1. Obj. We pray in our families, and is not that enough? What needs all this
ado?

Answ. 1. This Objection cannot be made by all: some have no Families to pray
with, but if thou do pray in thy family, it is well; there is many graceless
heads and prayerless houses: Of which it may be said, The fear of God is not in
this place: Oh the wrath that shall be poured out on such Families: But suppose
thou do, Family Prayer is one thing, and Closet-prayer is another: and let me
tell thee, God never made one duty to supersede another; you must not justle
out one work, because you are bound to perform another. Every thing is
beautiful in its place and season. Gods Commandments are exceeding broad, and
take in a great compass of duties. You must worship God in your Houses; that
exempts you not from worshipping God in your Closets, no more than in the
public Assemblies: There Is equal commands for all, necessity of all; neglect
any at your peril: Besides, I told you, a Child of God has a secret errand to
his Father, that it is not fit his family should know of; and upon this account
God has appointed Closet-Prayer, as tendering the credit of his people, that
they might not discover their spiritual nakedness to any but to that God who
knows their secrets, and will keep their counsel: And I must tell thee, Soul,
thou art very little sensible of thy spiritual state or wants, if thou have
nothing to say to God that thou would not have others to hear.

2. Obj. But I am a poor man, and busy in my calling, and cannot take so much
time in Closet-Prayer, I have other occasions.

Answ. Friend, have thou any greater business than the affairs of thy soul; let
thy calling stand still rather than thy soul should be damned: Cursed be those
occasions that eat out Religion: But consider, you may follow both Callings, if
you be observant; our general and particular callings must not interfere. Clean
creatures divided the hoof, considerate Christians are such as rightly
proportion works to their particular seasons. A chief part of David's
Arithmetic of numbering days, was in that which we call Division, to cast the
account of this our short life, so as to divide the little total sum thereof
into the several portions of time due for performing every duty in: The
handmaid may not thrust out the Mistress; nor the Shop have all, and Chamber
none of our time: You are flat Atheists, if you think Praying will hinder your
work: No, no, Nobis pietate pecul^a C^escunt. Mant.
it blesses and expediteth temporal affairs. We use to say, Meat and Mattins
hinder no work. Can thou not get time for eating, sleeping? Yea, do thou
not spend as much time in idleness, and vain discourse, as would be required
every day for this duty? If thou had an honest heart, thou would redeem
time from thy meat, or sleep, or recreations, for Prayer, rather than neglect a
duty, or damn thy soul: The truth is, we complain we want time, but we waste
time: There Is not the poorest Labourer, but he mis-spends more time than
Prayer-time comes to: And why should any water be left off, when there is little
enough in the channel to turn the Mill for, or toward our God?

3. Obj. But I am a Servant, and must obey my Master; I am kept too hardly at
work, to get time for secret Prayer; I am called to work betimes, dogged to it
all the day.

Answ. Though you be servants to do men's work, yet not slaves to their lusts:
in that respect you must not be the Servants of Men; if you be Servants, you
are the Lords Freemen, if free, yet you are Christ's servants, 1 Cor. 7.22, 23.
Remember, you have a Master in Heaven; no mortal creature can discharge you
from your attendance on God: You must do Gods work as well as your Masters, and
your Masters work for God's sake. Ephesians. 6.6, 7.
Oh sirs, do not neglect your duty to God, to pleasure men. Can your superior
answer for your neglect? Or interpose betwixt flaming wrath and your sinning
souls? But I am afraid, some lay the blame on Masters, when the fault is in
themselves: Deceive not thy self by accusing others to clear thy self; this was
Adam's fault: Think not that another rigor can excuse thy neglect: Let me
tell you, there is never a servant so strictly watched, but might steal some
time from his Master for his God; and yet do him no wrong: Only see that you be
prudent in choosing such seasons as may not justly provoke your Master, or
prejudice his occasions: And be often in your callings lifting up your hearts
to God; be content with your condition: had you more liberty, it may be your
hearts would not be in so good a frame: But let me bespeak Masters indulgence
to poor and pious Servants; oh hinder them not in any good work, rather put
them upon it, encourage them in it, bless God that you have praying servants,
this is a hopeful presage of good success: Let not your servants fare the
worse, but the better, for being God's servants.

4. Obj. But I have no Closet to pray in, no convenient room for secret Prayer;
I have a little house, a busy full family, and cannot retire my self.

Answ. A good good heart will find room, either within doors, or without: a
gracious soul will seek out places to pray in; any sorry cote will be a Bethel,
where it can enjoy its God: or, if he cannot get to it under the roof, he will
(with good Isaac) walk out into the fields to meditate, and to pray: Could
Heathens and Idolatrous Jews plant groves for their superstition, in an Apish
imitation of Abraham's practice? And cannot a Bird of Paradise take its flight
out of some Wood or Arbor into Heaven? But, most need not make this silly
slight excuse; they have good roofs to be in, and need not worship God [sub
Dio] in the open air: few of us but we have convenient rooms, but most of us
want affectionate hearts to visit God therein: But, Christians, make good use
of your houses to serve God therein, else they may justly spue you out, and
leave you harbourless; and then, what a dreadful sting and guilt will follow
you whither-soever you go? Oh consider London's flames and ruins; your houses
are no better built, nor more secured from the like Catastrophe: do not weaken
their foundations by wilful neglects, or scandalous sins.

5. Obj. But I know some good Christians that never use it, yea, that maintain
it in their judgments that it is not necessary, except in some extraordinary
cases; What say you to that?

I Answ. I never yet met with such persons that had the face of Religion, that
ever spoke against the ordinary practice of this duty of Closet-Prayer. I
confess, I have met with some, who being urged to Family Prayer, have put it
off with this evasion, that they would pray in their Closets (how well, the God
of Heaven knows.) But if any professors judgment be so far bribed to plead for
the flesh in this neglect, the Lord rebuke them, and forgive them, they know
not what they say. This is a lamentation, that there is scarce any truth so
sacred, or duty so spiritual, but it has been contradicted in these licentious
days: Some have pleaded against Family Prayer, Catechizing,
Christian-meetings, and what not? But they can produce no solid arguments: do
not you follow their example contrary to plain Scripture, precepts, and
precedents. Many were produced for confirmation, most whereof were not only in
extraordinary cases, but were an ordinary practice: And can you find the day
that affords not some special matter to occasion you to make addresses to God
in secret Prayer? If you be sensible and observant, surely you will see great
need for such retirements in ordinary practice. Remember this, that you follow
no man, but as he follows Christ: but I am sure our precious Savior used this
practice.

SECT. III. More Objections, answered.
6. Obj. BUT I find not my heart affected or prepared: Is it not a tempting of
God, to go when the spirit does not move me?

I Answ. It Is a dangerous mistake to think you may not go to duty, but when the
spirit moves you: For it may be long before it stir; the spirit blows where,
and when it lists: You are therefore to lay your selves in the way of the
spirit, call in its aid, which ordinarily comes when souls do their duty: Holy
performances are (as it were) the walk of the spirit, the air where he breaths:
and be sure he is most likely to be found in his own way, and walk; but you
cannot expect him in the neglect of plain duty: Try this way, put God to it,
plead his promise, you cannot think to be warm, if you run from the fire: If
you have not an appetite to pray, you must pray for an appetite; for neglect,
or omission of a duty, never fits, but always unfits for a duty: If you will
heed your trifling spirits, and accept every excuse which they make, you shall
never pray: If you play the truant one time, you will have less mind to go to God
the next time; guilt makes you afraid, and you dare not come near that God whom
you have wronged; as Adam run from God, and Peter would thrust Christ from him,
when conscious of guilt. How dare you look God in the face, whom you have
slighted? Besides, you will find that neglect of duty, does not make the next
performance more easy, but more difficult. It will (as one says) require more
time and pains for you to tune your instrument, than for another to play his
lesson: And is it not more likely God should come to you in pains-taking, than
total omission? Do you not read in the Psalms, how often David begun faintly,
and ended triumphantly? Try the Lord, and see if he be not better than you
expect.

7. Obj. I, but (says a poor soul) I meet with temptations when I go to God in
secret; Satan assaults me, I am timorous, and dare not be alone, or in the
dark, but am afrighted.

Answ. It Is a sign the duty is good, because so bad a spirit opposes it: the
more Satan sees a duty is for the souls advantage, the more diligent he is to
hinder the performance; but must Satan be gratified rather than God glorified,
or thy soul edified? Will thou give way to him? Resist the devil, and he will
flee from thee: think not thou can perform a flesh-displeasing duty, when
Satan is quiet, and does not molest; he will be busy to tempt when thou art
going to thy God; this is no new thing, he will jog thy hand when thou art
writing thy letter to thy Friend in Heaven: think not to be more exempted than
even thy Savior himself, he was set upon by the Devil in his solitary recesses
in the wilderness; and, oh the horrible nature of those temptations! Mat. 4.
When Joshua the High Priest prayed, Satan stood at his right hand to resist
him, but the issue was good, God rebuked him, Zech. 3.1, 2. And thus he will do
for thee, he will tread Satan under thy feet, and make thee a conqueror; only
when thou art annoyed with this foul spirit, turn to thy God, leave not thy
work, let not Satan take thee off duty; then he has attained his end: fall
closer to the work; consider, fasting and prayer cast out the devil; Matt.
26.4. Ephesians 6.18.
watching and prayer are preservatives from infection, yea, Prayer it self is a
chief piece of a Christians Armor: if you be beat off this, you are routed;
this ingageth God for you; without this, you are but like other men, and the
Philistin will put out your eyes, lead you captive, and make sport of you:
stick close to this what ever you do; though all the devils in hell roar upon
you, yet run to your God in Prayer; they are sluggards, or cowards, that say
there is a Lion in the way, when they are called out to hard service, or
difficult duty; nay, rather say as he once in an arduous undertaking, Here Is a
work fit for the spirit of an Alexander; so, here is a duty that becomes a
Christian to manage: By your God you may run through a Troop, and leap over a
Wall. But more of that anon.

8. Obj. But I get no good by Closet-Prayer, I have used it so long, and still
my heart is as cold, hard, dead, as ever; I will give over now.

Answ. Is not this too like the language of those that say, It is in vain to
serve God? Mal. 3.14. And are you like those Atheists, that think Prayer is to
no purpose? I hope not: You think it does good to some, but not to you. Well,
what is the reason? Is it not because you do not pray aright? Therefore search
your selves, see how you prayed, mourn over your defects, and mend the matter:
It Is true, one who sees the Well dry, breaks, or throws away his Pitcher; but,
Is God a barren wilderness? Is it not good for you to draw near to God? Were
they ever ashamed that waited on him? Have not thou sometimes found benefit by
secret Prayer? God is good to the soul that seeks him: try again, you will not
lose your labor; be not weary of well-doing, in due time you shall reap, if
you faint not, let not your hands hang down, let not your knees grow feeble;
the Text tells you, your Father that sees in secret, will reward you openly,
and dare you not trust him beyond sense and experience? There may be more
advantage by this duty, than you are aware of, you shall not yet know the
profit you have by secret Prayer, you must keep on in a patient continuance in
well-doing, and not give over till you receive a full reward; but oh take heed
of giving over prayer, because you think you want present profi^: You cannot do
Satan greater service, or your souls more prejudice: But more of this anon.

9. Obj. But I am weak in parts, and know not what to say; Fain I would, but
alas I cannot open my wants to God in Prayer, I want gifts, abilities.

Answ. I am glad to hear thee thus complain: thou art fitter for praying, when
thou can lie under the sense of thy inabilitie to pray, that is an useful
disposition in duty: But thou say thou can not pray, then I Will tell thee
what to do; Go thy ways alone, and fall down upon thy knees, and plainly tell
the Lord thou can not pray, and entreat him to help thee by his blessed
Spirit, which he has promised to them that ask it: tell the Lord, that thou
can not think a good thought, or speak a good word without that blessed
Spirit, but it shall help thine infirmities, and teach thee what to say: oh beg
hard for that holy Spirit; and then, let some means be used to get matter of
Prayer: you know it consists of confession of sin, petition for good things,
deprecation of evil, and thanksgiving for mercies: Well then, sit down, and
think with thy self, what sins thou art guilty of; original, or actual; of
omission, or commission; this is too too fruitful a subject: take them home,
tell God of them, by ingenious confession: Then bethink thy self what thou
want at the hands of God, as Pardon, Grace, Peace, Heaven, and beg these;
consider also what thou art afraid of, as guilt, strength, effects of sin, Gods
wrath, Satan's malice; and desire the Lord to prevent, and remove these, for
Christ's sake: And lastly, recollect what mercies thou have had from God, and
reckon them up to God, with expressions of thankfulness: Do this with
plainness, and seriousness; heed not so much for exact method, or fine phrases:
the gilt of the key makes it not open the door a jot the better; and a Prayer
does not work upon God any, rather because of the neat language therein, but
unbosome thy self plainly, and seriously before thy God, and thou shall find
present assistance and acceptance, and future enlargement and encouragement: Be
honest, though never so homely in Prayer.

10. Obj. But I like not this stir, it is an hard and difficult work: I would
rather do any thing than this, my spirit is wonderful averse to it; say what
you will, it will not down with me, to make all this ado in Closet-Prayer; it is
pretty fair if I can keep up such duties as Church and Family require.

Answ. This is the pleading of flesh and blood, this is the bottom of the
former objections, I expected this all along: if the tongue speak not thus, the
heart does: let a duty be pressed never so home, a carnal heart will make some
evasions; though the mouth be stopped, yet a cavilling heart will have
something to say against a spiritual duty: And if it cannot be mad with reason,
it grows mad without reason, and against Scripture: It Is easier to bring
arguments to convince the judgment, than to draw the will and affections to a
through obedience: But soul, will thou plead for Baal? Will thou take the
devils part, and yield to carnal reason? or will thou baulk any divine commands
to gratify a lazy humor, or a base lust? God forbid; methinks, if thou can
not obey as thou ought, yet thou should take God's part, and plead for
obedience: Paul does so, Romans 7.15, 16. Though he says, What I would, that do
I not, But what I hate, that do I, -- (yet says he) I consent to the Law that
it is good: i. e. I take patt with God, and join with Gods will against my
corrupt and carnal affections, that would draw my neck from under this heavenly
yoke: And if you have not something within you that takes part with Gods
revealed will, you are not of God: But a principle of grace does facilitate and
make easy the hardest duties, because there is a likeness betwixt holy hearts
and holy performances: Love makes every thing easy; hence it comes to pass
that Christ's yoke is easy, Mat. 11.30. His ways pleasant, and his commandments
not grievous, 1 John 5.3. If thy heart were right, duties would be sweet to thy
soul; it is no burden to eat, drink, sleep; the acts of nature are delightful to
persons in a right temper; if they be not, nature is oppressed, and out of order:
A child of God in duty, so far as regenerated, is like a man in his calling, or
a creature in its proper Element: Besides, were thou more accustomed to duty in
secret, it would be more familiar to thee, and less irksom: We see by
experience, Use makes heavy things light, we hardly feel the weight of our
clothes, because fitted to us, and constantly carried by us, when as the same
weight upon our shoulders would trouble us: Christians, consider all Christian
duties are not of equal difficulty; yet withal observe it, Duties that are
hardest to go through, many times bring in the sweetest income: And so is this;
the profit of it will abundantly recompense for your pains in it: Be sure when
a duty is lined with difficulty, and your corrupt hearts draw back, and have
most averseness to it, there is something of God in that duty, and God aims you
more than ordinary advantage by it: Therefore do not say a word against it, but
stir up your selves, spur on your hearts, shake off sloth, and run to God,
whatever Satan, the World, or Flesh say to the contrary: thus much for the
Objections.

SECT. V. Some Cases of Conscience, briefly answered.
THere are yet four Cases of conscience I shall briefly propound and Answer.

1. Case. Whether may not an hypocrite or graceless soul perform this duty of
Closet-prayer; and what difference is there betwixt a real Saint and an
unregenerate person in this work?

I Ans. It is possible a carnal man may pray in secret, but with these
differences: 1. He is urged to it by the challenges of an accusing conscience,
he is (as it were) dogged to it, he dare not but do it; but a Child of God has
a gracious principle, inclining him to it, from love to God, and a desire to
please and enjoy him: Yet through the remainders of corruption, there is much
unwillingness in the best; so that sometimes a Saint must even force himself to
the performance.

2. An hypocrite will not thus pray always, Job 27.9, 10. It Is but in some
pang, or under some pressing affliction; and when this good mood is over, he
takes his leave of God, till whipped to him again by the like: But a child of God
is in some measure constant and diligent in the duty, though he may have sinful
omissions and intermissions, yet never a total cessation from duty. Grace works
the heart Godward, and the soul is not content without Him.

3. An hypocrite does not make conscience to get his heart up to God in the
duty, he is content with the work done, words said; but a real Saint has most
ado with his heart, that is the hardest piece of the work; he dare not leave
that behind him, and he has much ado to get it up.

4. A carnal man keeps his round in formal duty, but gets nothing; he prays to
little profit or purpose, and indeed does not much study to gain a spiritual
good: But a child of God is a great gainer, he gets at sometimes communion with
God, communications from God: Oh what good does his soul meet with! Though not
always, yet at sometimes.

2. Case. Whether may a Christian bind himself to the performance of this duty
of Closet-Prayer at stated times? Or, suppose a Christian miss his times
designed for that work, what must he then do?

Ans. To the former; that in general thou may and must swear and vow that
thou will keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.106. so does David. And in
Scripture we are bid to make vows, and pay them to the Lord, Psalm. 76.11.
Vowing our selves and all that we have to God, is necessary: Sequestring some
part of our time to his service, is requisite: And in some cases for some
persons, it may be expedient to bind and task our selves by an holy resolution,
to take so much time, at least every day for Gods worship, yea at such a time
as may be judged most commodious by our experiences. And this may be a good
help to keep in our treacherous hearts from delay or dallying: But to engage
our selves to a particular hour so punctually and unalterably, as not to take
another, may not be so safe; partly, because our times are in Gods hands, and
we know not what intervening Providence may fall in to prevent our performance,
whereby conscience may be entangled in a perplexing labyrinth; besides, our
outward occasions, and the frame of our Spirits, may discover a greater fitness
at another season: Yet, though I would not have Christians bring a snare upon
their souls by Vowing, yet I humbly conceive that they may consult conveniences
and design some time for that work and purpose, God willing, to keep an hour of
Prayer: And if they be hindered by a journey, or any unexpected unavoidable
occasions, they must mourn for it as their burden, redouble their diligence
another time, not plead needless diversions, lift up ejaculations to God, keep
a praying frame of spirit, and God will graciously pardon and entertain them.

3. Case. How may a Christian know that he enjoys communion with God in
Closet-prayer?

Ans. Communion with God is twofold. 1. As to Graces, 2. As to Comforts.
Sometimes a Christian may feel the joy of Gods salvation, have the sweet kisses
of his mouth, smiles of his face, seals of the Spirit, and the lively
springings of joy and ravishing pleasures; these carry their own evidence along
with them: But all have not these, nor any at all times; therefore the surest
way is to inquire after communion with God, with reference to the exercise of
grace in duty: then has a child of God true fellowship with God, when by the
sweet assistance of Gods Spirit his mind is knit to the object of worship, the
understanding is fruitful in spiritual and suitable thoughts, when the will and
affections are carried out in strong and panting desires and longings after
God: When the heart is thoroughly broken in the sense of sin, melted into godly
sorrow, affected with the sweetness of pardoning grace, and ardently pleads
with God for acceptance; again, when the graces of the Spirit are acted in the
duty, as, an holy awe and fear of God, faith, love, humility, zeal and
fervency, and a willingness to forgive others, as well as to be forgiven by the
Lord: Lastly, a soul may know when it has communion with God, by the
consequences of duty, as when the Christian is more vile in his own eyes, as
Abraham was, gives God all the glory, sees and bewails his defects in greatest
inlargements, when the spirit is left in a better frame, and fitter to bear
crosses, and perform after-duties, etc. I do but hint these things.

4. Case. Suppose I have prayed and prayed, and find not my heart affected;
it is dead, dull, distracted, I do no good; get no good in duty, I fear I offend
God, What shall I do?

Ans. Such a case is sad: yet consider, 1. It may be the case of gracious
hearts, David was so depressed and troubled, that he could not speak, Psalm.
77.3, 4. Gods best Children are sometimes out of frame, their spirits unfit for
duty:

2. A total neglect will not mend the matter, nor help the frame of your
hearts; one sin will never cure another; running from the fire is not the way
to be warm: your hearts will not be better, but worse, by forbearance; omission
indisposeth.

3. Who knows but God may come in the next time? Keep upon the Royal Exchange
still, ply the oars, give God no rest, gratify not Satan by neglect. Tradesmen
keep their Markets, though for small gains: you will get something at last worth
your pains; they never were ashamed that have waited on him: The issue will be
good.

4. God may graciously accept thy obedience, though thou have not sweet
enlargement, the obedience is thine, the enlargement God's, he is a free Agent,
and works when he pleases, he loves to see poor souls tug and struggle with
their own hearts, though they can get little forward, yet they would be better
and do better: The Father takes it well when the Child is striving to obey him,
though it fall very far short: He sees, the Spirit is willing, though the flesh
be weak, and accepts of upright endeavors: Nay, observe it, a Christians
conscientious attendance upon God without inlargements, may be more acceptable
to God than when he has the sweetest inlargements; because there is most
obedience in those duties, but in the other a Christian is (as it were) hired
to performances by the Earnest-peny of inlargements: Oh, it is a brave thing to
persevere in duty under discouragements; he that can trade when times are so
dead, that all his wares lie upon his hand, yet trades more; surely his stock
is great. So it is an evidence of much Faith, Love, Sincerity, when the Soul can
maintain this Heavenly Trade, when his sensible incomes are small: Yet when God
thus withdraws from you, you must deeply lay it to heart, inquire the cause,
make your peace with him, and ply the Throne of Grace with greater importunity:
Thus much briefly, for these Cases of Consciences.

And now, beloved friends, I have dispatched this Subject concerning
Closet-prayer, What remains, but that we should all fall closs to the constant
practice of this duty? What do Ministers preach Sermons, or print Books for? Is
it to be seen and heard in public? Is it to be applauded? Or, is it not rather
to do good to peoples souls? And can people get any good by hearing a sound of
words, or a complemental reading what is written? Is there not something else
required of you now, even a setting about the conscientious practice of what is
before you? What say you sirs, to this Point? Is Closet-Prayer a Christian
duty, or is it not? If it be not, why does Christ direct us to the right manner
of performance, and assure us that our Father will reward it openly? Will God
reward any thing but commanded duty? There Is no question but it is a duty, I
challenge any man to disprove it now, and to stand to his assertion another day
before the God of Heaven: But I think none will deny it to be a duty; and sirs,
dare any man that professes Religion, live in the gross neglect of plain duty?
Do you think it is fit it should be done, and will you not do it? Shall your own
tongues be brought in as witnesses against your selves? Will you be like that
Son that said, I go sir, but went not? Shall God wait your leisure, and you will
not give him a visit? Will you go into your Closets to make up your accounts?
And will you not reckon straight betwixt God and your Souls? Dare you go from
day to day under the guilt of a known sin? If you do not what you have read,
this Book will fly in the face of conscience another day. But I am most
afraid, lest Christians trifle about this work, and shuffle it off after any
fashion, and so put off God with a mere outside performance, to pacify
conscience, without that warmth and life we should have in our Closets: It Is
recorded of Luther, that he prayed every day three hours, and even then when
his spirits were most lively, [Per tres horas, easq, ad studia aptissimas] Nor
were his Closet-Prayers dull, careless, heartless; be so fervent and ardent,
says Melancthon, that they which stood under his window where he stood
praying, might see his tears falling and dropping down: Oh but where is this
zeal and ardency in our secret devotion? Are we not ready to drop asleep, even
upon our knees? Alas, how formal are we? The fire of God is wanting in our
sacrifices: Nay, do we not take Gods Name in vain many times, and know not what
we say? Oh, why do we thus forget Gods omnipresence and omniscience? Does not
he know our hearts? And should not we approve our selves to God in our Closets?
Yea, does not Satan stand under our Closet-window (or rather at our Elbow) and
hears what we say to God in our Closets? If you take not notice of your
mistakes in Closet-Prayer, Satan does; and takes advantage by them: Indeed, I
have heard some make this a scruple, whethey should in secret confess
heart-sins, lest Satan should be acquainted with what he knew not before, and
so be furnishd with matter to accuse them of, but an ingenious confession
prevents Satan's accusation, because we have a promise of remission annexed
thereunto, Romans 8.33. And who shall lay any thing to the charge of justified
persons? He has little reason to take your confessions, and dash them in your
teeth; since that was both the means and evidence of pardon: But if you fear
that, you may do as Hannah in Prayer, speak in your hearts, and then Satan
cannot tell what you say, but your God does: However neglect not the duty; for
this you may be sure, that Satan will catch more advantage by omission or
negligent performance, than by an ingenuous acknowledgment of heart-sins,
though he do hear you.

Sirs, Awake to righteousness, Rouse up your selves to the work, put not off
God or conscience with a negative answer: you may as well say, Nay, as pretend
and promise to do it, and not perform; fall to the practice of it therefore
this day, there is danger in delays, if you do it not to day, you will be more
unfit to morrow: At this instant, fall upon thy knees, beg a blessing upon this
book for the good of thy soul and others, look upon Closet-Prayer as thy
privilege, as well as thy duty? It Is a mercy thou may go to God as often as
thou will, and for what thou need: It Is no small favor that God has
allowed thee the use of this privy Key to open Heaven-gates when thou have not
the more public key of others help in Prayer; yet this is thy encouragement,
Thy Father that sees in secret will reward thee openly.

I shall shut up all with a piece of Herberts Poetry, called Artillery.

AS I one Evening sat before my cell,
Methought a Star did shoot into my lap,
I rose and shook my clothes, as knowing well,
That from small fires, comes often no small mishap:
When suddenly I heard one say
Do as thou usest disobey,
Expel good motions from thy breast,
Which have the face of fire, but end in rest.
I who had heard of Music in the Spears,
But not of speech in Stars, began to muse;
But turning to my God whose Ministers
The Stars and all things are, if I refuse,
Dread Lord, said I, so often my good,
Then I refuse not even with blood,
To wash away my stubborn thought:
For I will do or suffer what I ought.
But I have also Stars and Shooters too,
Born where thy Servants both Artilleries use,
My Tears and Prayers night and day do woe,
And work up to thee, yet thou do refuse:
Not but I am (I must say still)
Much more obliged to do thy will,
Than thou to grant mine, but because
Thy promise now has even set Thee Laws:
Then we are shooters both; thou do deign
To enter combat with us, and contest
With thine own clay: But I would parley fain
Shun not my Arrows, and behold my breast:
Yet if thou shunnest I am thine,
I must be so if I am mine,
There is no articling with thee,
I am but finite, yet thine infinitely.
FINIS.

