A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Pagett,
Baron of Beaudesert, etc.

BY JOHN HEYNES, A. M. and Preacher of the New Church, WESTMINSTER.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Fox, at the Sign of the Angel in Westminster Hall.
MDCLXIX.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Thorp, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a sacris
domesticis.
December. 13. 1678. Ex Aedibus Lambethanis.
A Funeral Sermon,
ON PHILIPPIANS iii. 21. Who shall change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself.


THE Blessed Apostle having fully declared, not only the vanity and falseness,
but also the dangerous consequences of that Doctrine, which mixes the
righteousness of the Law with that of Faith in the point of Justification,
comes in the close of this Chapter to press the more adult and grown Christians
among the Philippians (whom in comparison with others he calls perfect) to a
firm belief of, Verse. 15.
and an unanimous adherence to this great and fundamental Article of the
Christian Religion; giving them good ground to hope, that if any that were
upright among them, were through the craft and subtilty of false Teachers
deluded into a persuasion of the necessity of observing the Ceremonial Law, or
any part of it, God in his due time would discover this Error unto them, and
upon their sincere endeavors after truth, effectually reclaim them from it.
Verse. 16.
In the mean time he exhorts them to walk orderly, to live as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, in mutual love and amity, avoiding as much as may be all
contentions and quarrellings, that so the Church of God might not through their
means be rent into parties and factions, and the work of the Lord retarded and
hindered. In order to this, Verse. 17.
he advises them to be followers of him, and such others as were acted by the
same Spirit with him; and not of those deceivers, whose Life was as bad as
their Doctrine, of whom he had frequently forewarned them, Verse. 18, 19.
and could not forbear to do it again with tears, for that they were the
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end without repentance, would certainly
be destruction; and that this (says he) is no rash and uncharitable censure,
will be very evident to any one that shall consider the course, and manner of
their life: for whatever their pretenses to holiness be, they are mere Slaves
to their sensual appetites, and under the power of their lusts, the whole
design of their life being nothing else but to gratify the immoderate cravings
thereof. Their God is their belly, their glory is in their shame, they mind
Earthly things; Verse. 20.
but such through grace we are not: for our conversation is in Heaven, our
thoughts are exercised upon, and our desires and affections are carried out
after Heavenly things, even to the neglect and contempt of Earthly things: we
mind not the concerns of this present life, but since our treasure is above,
our hearts are there also: and as our way of living is contrary to theirs, so
shall our end be likewise, for when Christ shall appear he shall publicly own
and assert us, as such who have been faithful to the trust committed to us: he
shall in a solemn manner testify his respects to us, Crowning us with glory,
Verse. 21.
honor, and immortality, and receiving us into Heaven, where we shall to
Eternal Ages dwell under the invigorating rays, of his glorious presence, which
is the highest felicity and happiness our natures are capable of, perhaps this
may seem strangely improbable to those who have their eyes fixed upon the
weakness and infirmities of these bodies that we carry about with us, but the
difficulty will soon vanish, if ye consider that Christ at his coming shall
change this vile body of ours, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself.

Thus I have cleared the coherence of the words, in which we have an account of
the present, and of the future state of the bodies of holy men. Our body is now
a vile, base, abject thing (...) as the Apostle calls it, but hereafter, that
is at the coming of Christ, it shall be raised up, and made like unto his
glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.49.
that so as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we might also bear the Image
of the Heavenly.

I shall speak to both these particulars beginning with the first, concerning
the present state of the body, in treating of which I shall observe this method.

First, To explain in what sense our body is called by the Apostle a vile body.

Secondly, To enquire how we came to have such vile bodies.

Thirdly, To improve it by a close application of what has been delivered to
our selves.

As to the first, these bodies of ours are said to be vile, not as they are the
creatures of God, and the workmanship of his hands, for so considered, they are
so far from being vile, that they are to be admired as one of the greatest
instances of the infinite power and wisdom of God: certainly he that
deliberately considers the stupendous Art, that appears in the frame and
structure of human bodies, must needs break forth into that expression of the
raptured Psalmist, That they are fearfully and wonderfully made.

But they are said to be vile, in respect of the present circumstances under
which they are, and the many evils they are obnoxious to, whilst in those
circumstances. The words may be understood, either in a more limited and
restrained sense, with respect to the condition of the Apostles, and other holy
men at that time, or in a more large and comprehensive sense, as expressing
what is common to all; if we take them in the former, they are a high cordial to
the suffering Saints: these bodies of ours (says he) that are now so liable to
the injuries and cruelties of wicked men, these bodies that are haled and
dragged into Prisons, these bodies that are scourged and abused by our inhuman
Persecutors, these bodies that are galled with bonds and fetters, that are
laden with irons and manacles, that are broken upon wheels, that are rackt with
engines, that are torn with the teeth of wild beasts, that are consumed in
flames, these bodies that are neglected and starved, and pined and famished,
these bodies that are cast forth as dung upon the face of the earth; even these
very bodies shall he transform into a likeness to his own most glorious body,
and therefore let this quiet you, let this support and bear up your spirits in
the midst of all these afflictive Providence wherewith God sees fit to
exercise you: look not at the present ignominy, but at the future glory; think
not of the reproach and shame you are now exposed unto, but of that honor that
shall hereafter be done unto you. As Haman who in his heart despised and hated
Mordecai, and did what he could to bring him to a shameful end, was made to
lacquey it at his horse-side, and to proclaim through the chief streets of the
City; Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights to honor: so
those very persons who now look upon you as the filth and offscouring of all
things, and treat you accordingly, shall one day admire your excellent glory,
and be forced not by arguments, but by the evidence of the thing it self, to
cry out as they in the Book of Wisdom, Wisd. v. 3, 4, 5.
These are they whom we had sometime in derision, and a proverb of reproach: we
fools counted their life madness, and their end without honor, but how are
they new numbered among the Children of God, and their lot is among the Saints.

But though this sense be very applicable to the condition of those first
Christians that were contemporary with the Apostles, and their immediate
Successors, yet we conceive with submission, that the words are to be taken in
the more large and comprehensive sense, as expressing that vileness of the body
which is common to all, which wherein it does consist I am now to declare unto
you.

I. In the meanness of the matter of which they are constituted and composed,
we are framed and made out of the Earth, We dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, Job iv. 19.
as Eliphaz in Job speaks: we are enclosed and compassed about with mud walls,
and this is a vile habitation for so quick and sprightly a being as the Soul of
man is to dwell in.

II. In the qualities of them: The body of man it is a gross and heavy, a dull
and stupid, a dark and comfortless thing, it depresses and bears down the Soul
and Spirit, that it cannot without great difficulty mount up above this dark
atmosphere: it pulls us down from our mounts of vision, it clouds the serenity
of our minds, and stifles the joy and pleasure thereof by those clouds and
vapors, that are continually arising from its lower regions; it obstructs and
hinders the Soul in its most noble operations, and will, if great care be not
taken to prevent it, stupifie it into an utter forgetfulness of its Divine
Original. In a word, (as a learned Jew speaks) it is instar veli vel parietis
apprehensionem creatoris impedientis: More Nevoch. p. 3. c. 9.
like a veil or rather a thick wall intercepting our sight of divine things.
And in this respect it was that the Apostle says, Whilst we are at home in the
body, 2 Cor. v. 6.
we are absent from the Lord; not as though we had no converse or communion at
all with him, 1 Ep. Job. i. 3.
for the experience of all holy men speaks the contrary: (...) Plato Phaed.
Our fellowship says S. John, is with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ. But so little are we capable of knowing God, so little are we capable
of enjoying him whilst here, that we may well be said to be absent from the
Lord in respect of those more full discoveries, and manifestations he shall
make unto us, when we are released out of the body, and disburthened of this
cumbersome load of mortality. If this be the natural state of the body, by
reason of its innate qualities, how much worse is it with them who render their
bodies every day more gross and vile, whilst they make provision for them to
fulfill the lusts thereof? they are (...) altogether fleshly and carnal, or as
Simplicius speaks, (...), they are mere lumps of flesh and blood, and their
Souls in such moist and dissolute bodies are in no better condition than a
spark of fire in a clay lake, which cannot long continue unextinguished.

III. The vileness of our bodies consists in this that they have so many
necessities that must be satisfied, if we would preserve them in any good
plight; the decays of Nature must be every day repayed with the constant
supplies of meat and drink, and the frequent returns of rest and sleep. Fateor,
insitam esse nobis corporis nostri charitatem: fateor nos hujus gerere tutelam:
nec nego indulgendum illi, serviendum nego. Sen. Ep. 14.
Now though God not only allows, but commands us to have a due regard to our
bodies, and he that neglects himself in this kind, so far as to hazard his
health and unfit him for the necessary offices of human life, does thereby
contract no small guilt, yet surely the Heaven-born Soul of man does not
without some reluctance and trouble, condescend to this mean service,
especially when it can hardly ever perform its duty without being entangled in
some inconvenience or other in the very performance of it. There Is none among
us, but has had often experience of this, whilst we think we are gratifying
the lawful desires of Nature, we are many times nourishing those lusts which
war against our Souls, Dum ad quietem satictatis ex indigentiae molestia
transeo, in ipso transitu mihi insidiatur laqueus concupiscentiae. Cons. lib.
10. c. 31.
and for fear of starving a friend, feed and maintain a deadly Enemy within us.
St. Austin speaks excellently well in his Confessions: Whilst (says he) we
pass from the trouble of hunger to the quietness of satisfaction, we are
ensnared in the Cords of our own Concupiscence, necessity bids us pass, but we
have no way to pass from hunger to fullness, but over the bridge of pleasure:
and although health and life be the first cause of our eating and drinking, yet
as that good man sadly complains, Adjungit se tanquam pedissequa periculos a
jucunditas, dangerous pleasure thrusts her self into attendance, and sometimes
endeavors to be the principal. O this is it that afflicts the Soul and
Conscience of many a tender Christian, and makes him to cry out, not without
some kind of impatience: Lord, why are the days of my Pilgrimage prolonged?
Wherefore do thou continue me any longer in this vale of Sin and Misery?
Psalm. cxx. 5.
O woe is me that I dwell in Mesech, and inhabit the Tents of Kedar.

IV. The vileness of the body consists in this, that it is subject to so many
miseries and calamities, to aches and pains, to wounds and bruises, to diseases
and diverse kinds of maladies, surely however some of us through the kind
indulgence of Heaven, may be in a great measure free from these things, yet we
are never secure from the fear of them, whilst we have a nature liable to them,
and see the lives of others whom we have no reason to think worse than our
selves, so far imbittered by them that they spend their days in sighing, and
their years in sorrow and heaviness.

V. To conclude, there needs no more be said to the making out the vileness of
the body, but that it is a corruptible perishing dying thing, and has that
within it self, which if there were no danger from without, would not fail at
last to destroy it: ye that are of the strongest and most athletick
constitution, must at last yield to the necessity of Nature, Heb. ix. 27.
for it is appointed for all men once to die, this is the Decree and Ordinance
of God; a Law that shall never be either repealed or altered. Eccl. xii. 2.
The time is coming when the Sun and Moon and Stars shall be darkened, and the
Clouds return after the Rain: Verse 3.
When the Keepers of the House shall tremble, and the strong Men bow
themselves, and the Grinders cease because they are few, Verse 6.
and those that look out of the Window be darkened: When the silver Cord shall
be loosed, and the golden Bowl broken, when the Pitcher shall be broken at the
Fountain, and the Wheel be broken at the Cistern, Vehse 7.
then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit to God that
gave it.

Thus you see by what has been said, wherein the vileness of the body does
consist. S. Paul comprises all in a little room, 2 Cor. v. 1.
when he calls it our Earthly House of this Tabernacle, by which words he
intimates unto us, that it is a poor mean Cottage, so strait and narrow, that
the Soul is as it were crowded and thrust up in it, and cannot enlarge nor
stretch forth it self to its just dimensions? so dark that it can see nothing
but through the chinks and holes thereof, and that only that lies in a strait
line before it; so weak and ruinous, that it is ever and anon ready to drop
down on our heads.

(...) 11.
I come now to the second thing designed, and that is to enquire how we come to
have such vile bodies.

The followers of Pythagoras and Plato, who held the prae existence of Souls,
tell us that they are adjudged and condemned to this condition for their ill
demeanor in that higher state: that the Soul growing impure in it self,
forthwith loses its vital congruity with the more thin and subtle vehicle of
Ether or Air, and requires one of a more gross consistency, as being more
suitable to the moral turpitude, and impurity she has contracted through her
sinful Apostasy and turning aside from God.

But these are the conjectures of men in the dark: let us see what account the
Holy Scriptures will give us in this matter. There we read that Man when he
came first out of the hands of God, was an excellent Creature, and the
Masterpiece of the whole visible Creation: the Image of God was resplendent in
him, and the Divine Glory rested upon him, his Soul was full of light and
purity, and his body that was framed out of the uncorrupted Earth, was wrought
into a delicacy and fineness correspondent to it, so that it was as a Crystal
Case through whose transparent sides might in a sort be seen the sparkling
luster of that Jewel that was enclosed therein: the humors were equally mixed,
and every part most exactly fitted and proportioned, there was no defect nor
deformity in him. This was the state of Man whilst innocent, but alas he
sinned, and no sooner had he sinned but immediately he found the sad effects
thereof within himself, the light and joy which was ere while within him, was
now turned into darkness and sadness, his hope and confidence into fear, and a
dread of the Divine displeasure. He who before did familiarly converse with
God, now flies his presence, and would if possible hide his guilty head from
him. Now it was that death according to the threatening got within him, and
planted there the principles of corruption: now the body became as it is here
called a vile body, a necessitous indigent body, a passive suffering body, a
weak and frail body, a perishing and corruptible body, it was sin that was the
true cause of all this misery and infelicity of ours, it was sin that spoiled
the harmony, that broke the peace, that stirred up the humors, that discomposed
the spirits, that clouded the glory and majesty of the body, and reduced it to
that mean and contracted size that now it is of. Through sin it is that we
became liable to so many changes, to perils from above, the malignant
influences of the stars, and the poisonous blasts of the air; to perils from
below, the deadly productions of the earth, which nourish for a while, but lay
the seeds of death within us; to perils and dangers from every thing round
about us, and with which we do converse. It was sin that cast us out of the
Paradise of God, that drove us from under the shade of the Tree of Life, that
shut us up in our prisons, and sealed us up in our vile bodies as in a grave:
had we never sinned we had never been thus restrained by our bodies, thus
oppressed and burdened with our bodies, thus wearied and tired with our
bodies; had we continued in the condition wherein we were at first created,
they would have been no more a burden to us, than are feathers to the birds
whereby they fly from place to place.

Thus having cleared unto you the second particular, how we came to have such
vile bodies, I proceed according to the method proposed to improve the point,
and that I shall do by way of Information, by way of Reproof, and by way of
Exhortation.

I. By way of Information, and it will inform us of two things.

1. Of the great evil of sin, in that it has marred and spoiled one of the
most beautiful pieces of the Creation. Perhaps we cannot, or at least will not,
see the evil of sin in its own nature and as it is considered in it self: O see
it in its effects and consequents, you may know how corrupt and impure the
fountain is, by the muddy and polluted streams that flow immediately from it;
you may know how bad the tree is, by the bitter and unwholesome fruits it
produces. There is no evil in the world, no vanity in the creature, no
disorder within your selves, that does not owe its original to the sin of man,
all your deformities, all your imperfections, all your decays and weaknesses,
all your pains, and griefs, and maladies, are the effects of sin. O think of
this whenever you are tired and wearied with a dull and heavy body, whenever
you are afflicted and troubled with a sickly distempered body, and endeavor to
work your hearts to a perfect abhorrency, and detestation of that, which has
been the Author and Occasion of so much mischief to you. All men cannot see the
disorders and confusions that sin has wrought upon the Soul: to this there is
required the special illumination of the Spirit, whose peculiar work it is to
convince the world of sin; but we may all see the fearful work it has made
upon our bodies. O take heed of it, fly from it, as from the face of a Serpent;
the more you sin the more vile you will be, the more you sin the more gross,
the more earthy, the more sottish and stupid you will be: Nay your very Souls
themselves though in their nature and substance Spiritual and Immortal beings,
shall at last be entangled in the same condition with your bodies: and when at
the coming of Christ, holy men, Romans viii. 13.
who have by the Spirit mortified the deeds of the body, Gal. v. 24.
and crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Esaiae xl. 31.
shall mount up as upon the wings of Eagles; you shall be forced downwards by
the weight of your own carnal and corrupt affections, and remain below as the
dregs and sediment of the Earth, to be burnt (though not consumed) in those
last flames, as the filth and ordure of Jerusalem, in the Valley of the Sons of
Hinnom.

2. This informs us of the rare harmony and agreement of the Divine Attributes
manifestly declared in Gods dealing with fallen man. Behold the justice of God
in the punishment of man upon his transgression, with such a body as this is:
Behold the wisdom and goodness of God, in that he makes the punishment
inflicted on him, the means of his recovery: it was for our sins that our
bodies were made thus vile, and yet through this vileness of our bodies, are
our Souls by the powerful grace of God, raised and exalted to a state of glory;
for hereby it is that we are tried and exercised, hereby it is that we are made
patient and subject to the Divine Will and Pleasure, hereby it is that we are
humbled and made vile in our own eyes, and our humiliation is the way and means
of our exaltation. Man fell by pride, but he is raised by humility, he fell by
affecting to be like unto God, but he is raised by knowing himself to be a poor
vile wretched sinful man, who is wholly helpless in himself, and can do nothing
to any purpose in order to his own happiness, without the special Grace of God
inabling him thereunto.

II. This Doctrine may be applied by way of Reproof, and it reproves three
sorts of Men.

First, Such as pride and glory in the body.

Secondly, Such as bestow all their thoughts and care on the body.

Thirdly, Such as are unwilling to die and leave the body.

First, Such as pride and glory in the body. Why should dust and ashes be so
proud? Man that is a Worm, and the Son of Man that is a Worm? Is it because of
his strength? Yet a little while and his haughty looks shall be abased, and his
threatening countenance that strikes a terror into the hearts of his fellow
creatures, be covered with a ghastly paleness: his pomp shall be brought down
to the grave, and his glory laid in the dust: Isa. xiv. 16.
They that see him shall narrowly look upon him, and consider him, saying, Is
this the man that made the Earth to tremble, that did shake Kingdoms? cap.
xciii. 17.18.
His remembrance (as it is in the Book of Job) shall perish from the Earth, and
he shall have no name in the Street: He shall be driven away from Light into
Darkness, and chased out of the World. Again, is it his beauty that he pleases
himself in? Yet a little while, and his comeliness shall be turned into
deformity, and that face that men now stare and gaze at, not only with
admiration, but with a kind of adoration also, shall become so loathsome, that
they who were formerly so exceedingly taken with it, shall not endure to look
at it: We may all say to corruption, Job xvii. 14.
thou art our Father, and to the worm, thou art our Mother and Sister: Where Is
then the cause of our glorying?

Secondly, This reproves those who bestow all their thoughts and care on the
body, whose work and business it is to adorn and beautify it, to indulge and
pamper it, to please and gratify it in its most unreasonable appetites and
desires. Perhaps it will be a difficult matter to convince you of the sin and
folly of this now, whilst your bones are full of marrow, and your blood
circulates freely in your veins: whilst you are well at ease, and have nothing
to molest and trouble you; but tell me what will your thoughts be, when you
shall stand upon the sides of the grave, and are ready to go down into the pit:
when the foundation begins to sink under you, when the pillars of the house
tremble, when your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, when death lays his
palsy hands on you: but I would not have you tarry so long for a conviction;
walk forth into the Churchyard, enter into the Charnel-house, and there view
the bodies of thy deceased friends, post peractum Sepulchri mysterium, Pudeat
corpus tantae soe^itati reservatum sic amare, sic ornare, sic colere, sic
nutrire. De Lingend.
after they are turned into corruption and rottenness, and then return to thy
self and say, As they are so must I shortly be, and shall I for such a vile
body neglect my God, my Soul, my Happiness? Oh what folly can be greater, or
more below the reason of a man than this is!

Thirdly, This Doctrine reproves such as are unwilling to die, and leave the
body. This branch of the reproof concerns the Christian only, I mean such a
one, who has the Spirit of Christ in him, and has hopes toward God, through
the Mediator; Mori timeat sed qui aqua and Spiritu non renatus gehenn^e ignibus
mancipatur. Cypr.
as for other men who either know not what shall become of them, or else being
condemned by their own Consciences, antedate their torments by their just
fears, I cannot blame them to be unwilling, yea very unwilling to die, though
the body be a prison, yet it is better than the place of Execution: though it
be a dungeon, a place of darkness and horror, yet it is much better than the
Rack and the Wheel; and therefore no wonder if they be desirous to tarry here,
and cannot endure to think of going forth: but for the Christian who has
assurance of the Pardon of his sin, and knows that when he goes hence, he shall
be received into the Paradise of God, and be admitted to the participation of
those joys, that infinitely transcend the highest entertainments of sense, is
one of the most unaccountable things immaginable. What would thou have
thought of Joseph, if after so long an imprisonment, he had been unwilling to
come into the presence of Pharaoh, or to be advanced in the Kings Court? or of
Daniel if he had chosen rather to have sat still among the Lions, than to be
delivered thence, and restored to his former dignity? or of Jonah, if he had
preferred the belly of a Whale, where the depth closed him round about, and the
weeds were wrapped about his head before the enjoyment of light and liberty with
other men? Why, thy folly is much greater, inasmuch as thou refusest a greater
blessing than any of the forementioned ones, and choosest a condition far worse
than theirs. Search into the causes of it and you shall find, that it proceeds
from the weakness of your Faith, from the remisness of your Love to God, from
the flatness of your desires, from the lowness and darkness of your spiritual
apprehensions, and from your unmortified affections: you are not yet thoroughly
crucified to the world, nor is the world crucified to you: there is a secret
hankering after it, a secret delight, and satisfaction in it, whatever you
pretend to the contrary, were it not so, you would long earnestly for your
enlargement, and with Saint Paul, Phil. i. 23.
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is far better.

III. This Doctrine exhorts us to a noble and generous contempt of the body. Is
it so vile a thing; so mean and contemptible a thing in the sense I have
explained it? O then do not spend thy time, thy strength, thy substance in
providing for it, or in the satisfaction of it: but think of the poor Soul that
is imprisoned in it, labor as much as you can to in large its condition here,
to separate it as much as may be from the body, to advance it as far as your
present state is capable, above the body. Would you not think him a mad man
that should stop up all, both peeping and breathing holes in his Prison, that
should desire that the walls thereof might be made much stronger, and the doors
be bolted much faster? Such is the folly of those men who mind nothing more
than the good habit of their body. O transfer your care from the Body to the
Soul; for that must shortly lie down in the dust and perish, but this shall
abide for ever. Think therefore how thou may provide for its security, how
thou may get a mansion in the Heavens, that so when thou go hence, thou
may not be at such an uncertainty as the generality of men are, who know not
what shall become of them, or where their Eternal abode shall be. When thou
do disregard, and slight thy body, upon the design of promoting the health
and happiness of thy Soul, thou show the highest regard to and care for it
imaginable: for as our Savior says, He that loves his life shall lose it,
John xii. 25.
and he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. So
he that expresses his love to his body, by studying the pleasure and
satisfaction of it, does take an effectual course to destroy it, but he that
despises and neglects it for the sake of Christ, does hereby infallibly secure
its everlasting welfare: for whosoever has an interest in Christ, may be
assured that at his coming, he will change this vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself: and so this leads me to the second
thing contained in the words, namely what shall be the state of the body at the
resurrection, it shall be transformed into the similitude or likeness of the
glorious body of Christ.

In treating of this I shall observe this order or method.

I. To declare unto you what kind of change this shall be, and wherein it does
consist. II. To show what assurance we have of it, or what grounds and reasons
to persuade our selves, that thus it shall be. III. To stir you up to a serious
meditation of it, that you may find the power and influence of this great truth
upon your own hearts.
As for the first, what kind of change this shall be: it is evident that it
shall not be a substantial change from the word (...) here made use of, by
which is intimated unto us, that the same substance shall remain, only it shall
have (...), that is, not another shape, for the form and figure and lineaments
of the body shall not be altered, but another appearance, as being freed from
all those evil qualities that were contracted by sin, and adorned with all the
excellencies and perfections it is capable of. This body of ours, that we now
carry about with us, this vile body that is liable to so many injuries, that is
deformed with blindness, cripled with lameness, weakened with sickness, pined
with hunger, dried with thirst, scorched with heat, contracted with cold, this
very body shall Christ change that it may be fashioned like unto his own body,
and that not as it was upon Earth, but as it was when raised up by the mighty
power of God like to his glorious body. Saint Chrysostom when discoursing upon
this place, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Ep. ad Philipp.
could not contain himself but break out into a rapture of joy and admiration.
Oh wonderful, says he, that this vile body, this earthy, this corruptible
body, should be made like unto that body, wherein Christ sits at the right
hand of the Father: like unto that body wherein he is Worshipped and Adored by
all the Heavenly Host. Who has heard such a thing? who could ever have
imagined such a thing? it shall be made like unto the glorious body of Christ,
in the participation of the same excellent qualities. This is strange and we
cannot but wonder at it, but yet we may, nay we must believe it, for he has
said it, and he will do it since he is able according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things to himself. If you desire to understand more
particularly the nature of this change, Scritur (...) manitum and usque quaque
vestitum. Tertul. de Resur. carn.
the Apostle will inform you fully in the 15. Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, and the 42, 43, and 44. verses, It is sown in corruption, it
is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it
is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. O consider this well, we shall have spiritual bodies:
not in the strict and most proper sense of the word, for so a spiritual body is
a contradiction, but we shall have pure refined quick and agil bodies, which if
compared with these to which we are now restrained, may well be called
Spiritual. We shall have spiritual bodies, that is, such as the blessed spirits
wear when they go upon Heavens Embassies, plyant and yielding to all the
motions of the Soul, like their vehicles of Ether. We shall have incorruptible
bodies, that is, such which shall not stand in need to be repaired, and kept up
by the constant supplies of meat and drink: such which shall subsist
unchangeably without those helps which nature now requires as necessary to the
preservation thereof: we shall have incorruptible bodies, that is, such which
cannot be assaulted with sickness, with pains and aches, and distempers: such
which shall never decay, myriads of Ages shall not make the flower of our youth
to fall or fade, nor bring the least wrinkle or deformity upon us: there shall
be an everlasting spring, our greenness and verdure shall never be turned: we
shall have incorruptible bodies, that is, we shall never die, for where there
is no sin there can be no death: there shall be none of the causes of death,
neither natural within us, nor accidental from without us: There shall be no
Serpent in that Paradise of God, no Tempter, no forbidden fruit: there shall be
no infectious Air, there shall be no death in the land of the living.

Again, our bodies shall be raised in power; they shall have a wonderful
strength and vigor, whereby they may be enabled to bear that exceeding weight
of glory.

We shall have glorious bodies, God shall refine them, and make them like the
purest sky, they shall shine like the brightness of the firmament, Dan. xii. 3.
and as the stars for ever and ever. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. xiii. 43.
as our Savior tells us, adding immediately, who has ears to hear let him
hear. Fulgtbit anima luce divinae sapientiae ex qua luce r^spiendescentia
quaedam in ip^a quoque c^p^ra transfundet^r.
Now, besides what Scripture has said, it is clear and evident to our very
reason, that there shall be such a change wrought upon the body, whether we
consider the exalted state of the Soul, which is to be united to it, or the
nature of the place where it is to have its constant residence and abode, even
the Heaven of Heavens, the Court and Palace of the great King, where there is
no Earth nor Water, nor any other of the Elements of this lower World, neither
any of the Creatures that live in them, but pure light of unconceivable
brightness; now since we are to be in such a place, our bodies must have such
qualities as shall be correspondent and suitable to the purity of it; for
otherwise we should not be capable of living in it: the grossness and heaviness
of our bodies, would incline and sway us down to this dull Earth again: we
should soon be weary of that strange place, and groan and sigh to be delivered
from it, as the pure and holy Souls of good men do from this. Now consider
seriously with your selves, what the advantages of this glorious change shall
be: it is a thing agreed upon by learned men and approved by experience, that
the frame and temper of our minds does much depend upon the prevailing humors
of our body; nothing is more plain than this, the mutability and changeableness
of the disposition of our minds may convince us of it: how are we at some times
pressed down with the weight of the body, being almost stifled and suffocated
with the noisome vapors that do ascend from it, insomuch that we can neither
think, nor act with that force and vigor that is proper to the Soul and Spirit
of man: we become in a manner mere lumps of clay, and it is an hard matter to
discern any thing in us that may distinguish us from the very brute creatures;
and yet we the very same persons, when the cloud is removed, when the fog that
benighted us is dispersed and scattered, what an alteration do we find? how
serene and clear are our minds? how free are our thoughts? how nimble and
active is the Soul, and how quick and lively in all its motions and operations?
Now think with your selves if a good temper of body, can so much promote the
pleasure and happiness of our minds whilst we are here, what an exalted
condition shall we be in when our bodies are become wholly spiritual; when
there shall be no gross or earthly alloy in our constitution, when the clouds
arising from these lower regions shall never interpose or come between the Soul
and its glorious object. But so much may suffice to be spoken concerning the
first particular, viz. What this change shall be, and wherein it does consist.

II. I come now to the second thing intended, and that is to show what
assurance we have of it, or what grounds and reasons there are to persuade our
selves, that thus it shall be, and this I shall dispatch in a few words: we
have as great assurance as the thing is capable of, and it lies in these four
particulars.

First, in the promise of God who in his Word has declared, that whomsoever he
leads by his Counsels he will bring at last to his glory, besides my Text there
are diverse other passages of Scripture which I have occasionally mentioned
already, and therefore shall not trouble you with a needless repetition of
them, only give me leave to show you what reason you have to acquiesce and rest
satisfied in these promises, and that both upon the account of his power, and
of his truth and faithfulness: upon the account of his power, he is Omnipotent,
he is Almighty, he can do whatever he pleases: men may promise and not be able
to perform, but we cannot conceive any such thing concerning God, without doing
him the greatest injury imaginable, he that made the world of nothing, and
framed these bodies of ours out of the dust, how easy a thing is it for him to
change these vile bodies of ours and transform them into the likeness of that
of our glorious Redeemer. Again, we have reason to depend and rely, without
scruple upon the promise of God, if we consider his truth and faithfulness, he
cannot lie nor deceive his creatures: those are weaknesses and imperfections
utterly inconsistent with the holy nature of God: and therefore the Scripture
pronounces them blessed who trust in God in a right manner, because it is
impossible they should be deceived, or disappointed. Psalm. 146.5, 6. Happy is
he who has the God of Jacob for his help, In omnibus Deum frielem invenim is,
in ultimo deficiet, and faliet? August.
whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made Heaven and Earth, and all that
therein is, which keeps truth for ever. Now this God who is just in all his
Actions, and true and faithful in all his sayings has told us, that he will
glorify these vile bodies of ours, 1 Tit. 2. In hope of Eternal Life, which
God that cannot lie has promised unto us.

II. Our assurance lies in the resurrection and glorification of Christ, which
was not only an Example and Pattern of ours, but is also the Cause; because he
is risen we shall rise also, because he is glorified we may be sure we shall be
glorified together with him. This appears from the relation we bear unto him:
he is our head, we are the members of his body; now if the head be glorious, so
shall we his members be also: we are his servants and followers, and therefore
may conclude he will in his due time receive us unto himself, according to
those gracious words of his; J^^. xii 26.
If any man serve me, let him follow me. And where I am there shall my servant
be also: If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

III. Our assurance lies in that full persuasion of it, which is in the hearts
of all holy men, the friends and lovers of God, who live in the expectation of
this great and wonderful change and rejoice in the hope and glory of God. 2
Cor. v. 1.
We know, says St. Paul in the name of all the faithful, that when our earthly
house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. We know, that is, we are
assured of it: it is not a bare conjecture, a mere probability, a groundless
conceit or opinion; no, what were this but to build upon the sand; but it is
knowledge, that is, a thing truly demonstrable, we may see the firmness of this
persuasion in the mighty influence it has upon them, both as to piety, and as
to courage and patience: as to piety, 2 Cor. vii. 1.
for having these promises, they endeavoar to purify themselves from all
uncleanness both of flesh and spirit, 1 Col. 12.
and to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, that so they may be meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: as well knowing that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. xv. 50.
and that corruption shall not inherit incorruption. Again, as to Courage and
Patience, it is the full persuasion of this, that makes them to engage upon the
most difficult duties and to despise the greatest dangers that are in their
way; to hazard their persons, Mat. x. 39.
knowing that if they lose their lives for Christ's sake they shall find it:
Heb. x. 34.
to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they
have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Now is there such a
confident expectation in the hearts of holy men? is this persuasion begotten in
them by the Word, and shall we dare to doubt of it? But to conclude.

Our assurance lies in the first fruits and beginnings of it within our selves:
But what are these first fruits? they are the graces and workings of the Spirit
within us, whereby we are changed from what naturally we were, and created
again after the Image of God in righteousness and true holiness. This
renovation of our minds, this restoration of our Souls to their original
qualities, is a certain pledge of the resurrection of our bodies, and their
glorious advancement by Christ. R^^. viii. 11.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you. In this respect it is, that the Spirit is called
the earnest of our inheritance, 1 Ephesians. xiii. 14.
and we are said to be sealed by the holy spirit of promise, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

To carry this a little farther, there are some who tell us that this change is
begun in our bodies even in this life, they being by virtue of that true and
real regeneration, that is wrought upon the Soul rectified into a divine
temperament, and this they think the Apostle does not obscurely intimate in the
five first verses of the fifth Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Corinthians. But to wave this, by what I have already said you may see that we
have very good reason to believe, and expect this glorious change.

I come now to the third thing proposed, and that is to excite and stir you up
to a serious meditation of this great truth, think much of your future
happiness, and of the glory that is to be revealed at the coming of Christ. The
covetous man is always thinking of the world, his heart goes out after his
covetousness as the Spirit of God describes him: the voluptuous man is always
thinking of his pleasure, either he entertains himself with the images of his
past delights, or he lays the design of some new one. The Ambitious man has
always the pleasing Ideas of greatness and honor before him. O do you who are
(...) free Denizons of Heaven, Citizens of the New Jerusalem, that City that is
above, employ your thoughts upon more worthy objects: while others mind Earthly
things do you mind those that are Heavenly, set your affections on things
above, Col. iii. 2, 3.
not on things on the Earth, for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God. It will be of great benefit and advantage to you, for

I. It will raise and innoble your Souls and make you look down with an holy
disdain upon all things that are circumscribed and confined within this sphere
of vanity, as things that are below you, that are utterly unsuitable to you: he
that remembers that life above, will never be very fond of this present life;
he that remembers the fullness of joy that is in Gods presence, and the rivers
of pleasure that are at his right hand for evermore, will be ashamed that those
imaginary joys, and momentary pleasures of sin, which the sensual Epicure is so
much transported with, should ever control or have any power over him: he that
often remembers the unspeakable glory with which Christ shall honor those who
have been his faithful friends and followers, will never have his eyes dazzled
with any worldly pomp or greatness. Nay, should we suppose the Devil should
deal with him, as he did with our blessed Savior, take him up to an high
mountain, scatter an airy horizon about him, and therein according to the best
of his skill represent to the utmost advantage all the glory of the world, he
would presently see through the imposture, and discover the cheat: for what can
be great or glorious to him who by faith has seen things invisible, which do
infinitely excel and go beyond whatever is seen. 2 Cor. iv. 18.
For the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen
are Eternal.

II. The frequent meditation of this glory would quicken our diligence, and
make us more serious and earnest in our respective duties. The Apostle makes
this use of it in the close of his excellent discourse concerning the
resurrection, Therefore my dearly beloved brethren be ye steadfast and
unmovable, 1 Cor. xv. 5^.
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know, that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. What can we do sufficient to express
our love to him who has done such great things for us? who has prepared a
state of endless glory for us? shall we be careless, and slighting and drowsy
in the service of such a Master? No surely, if we have any sense of gratitude,
let us labor after the counsel of the Apostle, to abound in the work of the
Lord: Phil. i. 11.
let us endeavor that we may be filled with all the fruits of righteousness
which are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God. Let us give all
diligence to add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, 2 Pet. i. 5, 6,
7.
and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience
godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness
charity, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Never object the
greatness, never urge the difficulty and hardness of the work required of you,
but consider, he that has commanded you to do it, will enable you to go
through with, and your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. O did thou
think of this, it would inspire a new courage into thee, it would invigorate
thy fainty resolutions, and carry thee through the greatest impediments and
obstacles that are in thy way; truly the reason why we do so little for God,
why we are so careless and cold, and unconcerned in what we do, is because our
thoughts of the recompense of the reward are so seldom and slightly.

II. The serious meditation of this, would support and uphold us under the
greatest trials, and afflictions that God should at any time exercise us with:
this made Job stand upright under that great pressure of calamities that was
laid upon him; He knew that his redeemer lived, and that he should stand at the
latter day upon the Earth: Job xix.
though says he, Verse. 25.
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, Verse.
26.
whom I shall see for my self, Verse. 27.
and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my reins be consumed within
me. This upheld David, Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is
fullness of joy, Psalm. xvi. 11.
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. I had fainted, says
he, unless I had believed to have seen the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living: that is, not only here in this life, as the most understand it, but
in that other world which is truly and properly Terra viventium, Psalm. xxvii.
13.
the land of the living. Whatever your troubles are this is sufficient to
comfort you under them, that there is a state of happiness to be enjoyed
hereafter by all such who are followers of those who through faith and patience
have inherited the promise, yet a little while, and all your sufferings shall
be at an end; for no sooner shall you lay down your Earthly Tabernacle, but God
shall receive you into his Kingdom, where there is neither sin nor sorrow, but
perfect peace and joy; such peace that passes all understanding, such joy that
is unspeakable and full of glory. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. ii. 9.
Can we believe these things, and yet repine and murmur under any of the divine
dispensations, as though God had dealt hardly with us? Oh how unreasonable is
this, since our afflictions are the way to glory! for through many tribulations
must we enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Acts xiv. 22.
since they fit and prepare us for our glory, and make us meet to be partakers
of it; 2 Cor. iv. 17.
Let us rather rejoice in our trials, forasmuch as the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us; forasmuch as they work out for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. This would be more becoming the faith of a Christian,
and much more conduce to the credit and reputation of that excellent Religion,
that we do profess.

IV. The serious meditation of this glorious change to be wrought upon our
bodies, would make death much less dreadful, and terrible unto us: death as it
is an extinction of life, as it is a dissolution of the frame and structure of
our bodies, is a frightful thing, and full of horror; nature starts back and
cannot endure to look at it; (...). Chrysostom. Hom. (...), etc.
but did we seriously consider, that when we die to this present life, it is
that we may live a much better life; and that when God pulls down our earthly
house, it is for the erecting a more stately and magnificent fabric for us, we
should soon be satisfied and composed in our minds, and be so far from fearing
it, that we should with submission to the will of God desire it: for in this
says the Apostle we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from Heaven, if so be, that being clothed we should not be
found naked. 2 Cor. v. 2, 3.

THE END.

