A SERMON PREACHED AT THE SPITTLE UPON TVESDAY IN Easter-Week, Anno Dom. 1672.

BY THOMAS HACKETT, D.D. Formerly DEAN of Cork in IRELAND. Now VICAR of
Chesthunt, Hartfordshire: And Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, and are to be Sold at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1672.

A SERMON Preached at the SPITTLE Tuesday in EASTER Week, 1672.
MATTHEW. VI. 19, 20, 21. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon Earth, where
moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay
up for your selves treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal. For where your
treas;ure is, there will your hearts be also.
ALL things in the world affect Society, as well as Man. Virtues pair, and
Vices herd together. For our Savior having no sooner dispatched vainglory out
of the way, verse;e 16. of this Chapter; but a new one meets him in this Text
about Riches, which he opposes in these verses Lay not up, etc.

And very well does the discourse of Riches follow that of Vainglory, because
vainglory is begot, or much swollen by riches. The Syriack word here (...) for
Treasure comes from the root (...) to blind; Guido.
because Wealth often blinds men with Vain glory. And on this score it is, that
our Savior (after having absolved this period) descends unto the discourse
about our Eyes, v.22. It is hard if in so great an Assembly as this of Rich
men, none need a gentle lesson against vainglory. Chrysoft. Ser. 2. in Psalm. 48.
Does any man here value himself for what he has, not what he is; or think all
others do so? Nay for this he is often reproacht and shamed. One bursting with
envy to see his great Estate, presently spits it upon his mean Original. His
brave House in which he glories, did it not lift its crest into public view,
the goers by might not mock it, for being gilded with the Revenews of sad
Widows and despoyled Orphans. If others Civility should spare a man in this,
yet his Reason might reclaim him from any huff of himself on such an account.
Does a fine Livery make a servant good? Does a Jade become a good Horse by
putting a Golden-bit into his mouth? Has the Moth cause of pride, because wrapped
up in a fine garment? Chrysest. in Psalm.
Psalm. 49.16. The Prophet tells us Emphatically, such things may be the glory
of our house, but not of the man. Max. T^r^ differ. 11. N. 70.
If the house be well adorned, does any man say the man is brave? If the ground
be good, may not the Owner be bad? Nay, he is the lower for aspiring so high:
As the Fallen Angels that were before above the good, Greg. M^r. 1.4. c.12.
are now for Pride condemned to be under them.

This is the reason of the Connection; now for the Text it self. Which is made
up of a Prohibition, and an Admonition. Both of them attended with their
Reasons by their sides.

The Prohibition is, Lay not up for your selves treasures on Earth.

The Reason, Where the Moth, etc.

The Admonition, But lay up, etc.

Lay not up for your selves, etc. A sour Inhibition! Judas renounced Christ for
money. Would not some their Christianity? Let us see whether there be no
dulcifying of this harsh Injunction: What is the true intent of our Saviors
mind in it: I shall show you, 1. What is not enjoined us here; 2. What is.

1. Beggary, no nor Poverty assumed or by constraint, are here affianced to
Christianity; as Salmeron ingeniously grants against the common current of his
Popish Brethren: whose Arguments for it are as poor, Salmer. T.5.^^.55
as the Clients they plead for: For whose further credit, you may know that it
was Coelestius the Heretick's Opinion. Aug. Ep.
But S. Augustine advises us better: Vtiliuas terrena opulemia tenetur
humiliter, quam superbe relinquitur. Aug. Epist. 34.
That wealth is better retained humbly, Max. Tyr. diss. 37. N.220.
then discara'ed proudly. It Is no perfection but infirmity, which they fearing
and knowing fled the temptations of Riches. Paulin. Epist. 2. ad Sever.
It Is more valiant to despise what you have, then to have not to despise. The
Champion stripping himself is but entering the fight; has not overcome.
Therefore lend such the pardon of their infirmity, load them not with the envy
of perfection. Who shall by lying naked on the water get to shore, but by
swimming stoutly? It Is one thing to be Christ's Apostle, Disciple, and another
to be a Christian. Eusebius. Gall. in Natal.1. Martyr. Hom. ^.
To those he commanded this, not us. If we may not care for to Morrow, Why do
we build Houses, plant Vineyards, sow our Grounds, lay up in Barns or Sellars?
Zachaeus renounced but half; but he has left all (that possesses much) if his
heart have forsaken it. Doubtless there are some Poor good: Apostasius vir
Ditissemae paupertatis; Jer.
that is, a Poor Rich Apostasius, and a Lazarus. But yet, (...). Luke 16. Orig.
1.6. in Cols.
These poor grounds have weeds enough springing from them. As Rich men like
Rich grounds, may yield great good crops; fair, sweet Flowers: Witness this
prospect of not a dead but living Spring, beautifying this Circle that lies
here before your eyes, of Violets in their Blue Coats, etc.

Were all These like Glasses blown up by Air; Or does not Rich Abraham to this
day Nurse up Poor Lazarus in his bosom. Aug in Psalm. 86.
Let not the Poor therefore envy, rail at the Rich, August. Ser. 110. de Temp.
like Children fighting with their own Nurses. Would not the Beggars likewise
(if they could) be Rich? But I think a little Rhetorique may finish this work,
and persuade a Tradesman, that to take money is not ill, if the money he takes be
but good.

2. There is another way of opposing Christ's mind, by keeping his word in this
Law. The Idle man lay's up no Treasures upon Earth: but does the Scripture
countenance Idleness? Tertual. Apol.
In the Apostles times, Ignatius Epist. ad Tarist. 2 These. 3.10. Basil.
and after, some were seduced by a mistake of their Christian liberty, Not to
Work; which gave the Rise to Almshouses, Hospitals, and Zenodochia. Such S.
August ad Quod vult Deum Haeres. 57.
Austin makes the Euchetes to have been. So the Messalians, whom for their
sloth the Fathers called Epiphan. ^ 3.
(...). And the Bishop of Ptolemais, gave them a coined name of Synes. Epist.
67.
(...); because they were (...), Vagrants compellible to no employment. But
when they multiplied too fast, that Bodinde Rep. 1.1. c.5.
Charity grew oppressed with the burden, some brisk Laws of the Emperors spurred
them out of this Easy Walk, making them mend their pace, or wear gald sides.
And this was Charity too. Of the same kind with that of our most excellent K.
Edward the 6th. who Endowed not only a S. Thomas's Hospital, but a Bridewel for
Vagrant, and Idle Persons. The unciviliz'd parts of the world were still the
Idle parts of the world. Witness the naked hunting, sporting Americans: whose
first Reduction begins in the fastening them to some Trade, whereby they become
Responsible to the places they inhabit, putting in hereby a kind of Hostage to
Fortune. But all the Eastern Civilized parts of the world, were by the
Constitution of their Laws compelled to learn some Trade to fence off the blows
of the worlds Casualties: Not excepting the Noble, the Priest, nay the King;
Knolls Tur. Hist.
which the Emperor of the Turks retains (though but for fashions sake) even to
this day. Talmud. Berec.
So the Jew, (...) etc. (...) Let a man teach his Son some Trade or other, if
he intend him not a Thief or a Robber. For Trade is the Vulgars Chemistry; The
glue of Nations; The Providore for Kingdoms; Max. Tyr. diff. 21. N. 125, and
diss. 36. N. 20^.
The Chariot of Religion, carrying it to remotest Regions; Maintaining all
things, and starving nothing except Tyburne. But,

Idleness is the Devil's Anvil, Jer. Ep. 4. ad Rust.
whereon he forges much mischief: Facito aliquid operis ut Diabolus inveniat te
semper occupatum. Ambros.
It Is his pallat, whereon he sleeps; His grave, wherein men are buried alive.
Neither Heaven, Clem. Alex, Strom.
nor Air, nor Fire, nor Earth are Idle, as the busy brood of Spring now evince,
but only Man. Aug. S. 17. ad Tr. in Ere^.
Some Philosophers made the world Eternal, least God should have been thought
ever to be Idle. There are several employs; some for the hand; some for the
head; Janson. in loc.
and even ( Prove. 30.28.) the Kings house is not free.

There is a Law, that the new Erectors of Houses, planters of Vineyards, Deuteronomy.
10.8.
should be excused from going to War. That Idle persons might not inherit (says
Philo) in case they were slain: might not (like drones) consume the Honey that
these industrious Bees had gathered. Philo de Furtitud.
Good humane Laws likewise tended to the cutting off such Idle suckers. Amasis
and Solon exacted an yearly Account how men lived. Camerar. Medit.
Isay 9.3. tells us, O'easter. in loc.
that only the laborers and fighters must divide the spoil. Do you believe
this ample noble Theater of Senators that sit worthily here before us, obtained
these Seats or Furnitures by lying still, and gaping like Oysters, till a Tide
of wealth should flow in upon them. You Seedlings of the next Age, that fill
the Intervals of this Scene, grow up and thrive by Industry, that you may be
high trees your selves. You Saplings of Livery's and Common Counsel men; You
Aldermen and Majors in Reversion, look yonder and learn Faith and diligence.
Whose turn may it not be amongst you, to have his Blew Coat dyed into Scarlet:
and in exchange for his chains of servitude, which he thinks he wears now, by a
strange Alchymie to turn it into a Chain of Gold hereafter.

3. A new troop remains behind, not intended in this Text; who are so far from
laying up treasures, that they prodigally melt away that which others have laid
up, to the consumption of themselves, and ruin of many others. Think we, that
among all the Fathers which appear at this Solemnity, there is none that has a
Prodigal Son or Servant to weep over? How can such Excesses above most degrees
and ranks of men (with the wasling and breaking of others) owe themselves
reasonably to any other cause than this? Men are grown too dear for themselves:
The well-ordered Old sober ranks of Citizens are broken: Youths and Mean men
flutter it out with their Betters, and the City vies it with the Court.

These Prodigals that will keep nothing else, the Scripture reads their Doom,
Luke 15.16. that they will be at length glad to keep Hoggs, and their delicious
palates to take their suppings out of Troughs. Ancient Lawgivers were both very
severe to such, and careful over them. Demades was banished his Country for
being seven times accused of not paying his debts, Volaterr. Anthr. 1.13.
and yet lavishing in Riot profusely himself. The Graecians permitted not such
to be Interred with their Ancestors. Alex. de ^. Gen 1.6. c.14. Vlp. ff de
Furios.
But the Law took care likewise to prevent this: For the Decemviri appointed
Guardians over the Estates of such Persons; V^p ff. de verb. obl.
and permitted them to make no Wills. It seems it looked upon them as Madmen
(as indeed they are:) And so you have a Bedlam, which would be the best Charity
for such a Mad crew.

These three things are not here intended. What then is it that will arise out
of these words to be our Duty?

First of all, We must not restrain the word Treasures here to Moneys, or what
we style Wealth: for we read of other Treasures, Mat. 13.52. whatever a man
counts precious and has a value for: So v. 21. of this Text, expounds by what
our heart is set upon. Vis nosse ubi Thesaurus? Fulg. Ser. de conf.
attend quid amas. It Is affection makes any thing a treasure. And St. Austin
excellently, Quicquid homo modo facit, in Thesauruin mittit, Aug. Ser. 220.
sed nescit quid colligat. A man tells all the acts of his life into a Bag. Let
no man speak therefore out of the Company, that are to pay the shot in these
words; as if the Banker were the only man to be staid for it; the whole force
of this Text were to spend it self in a Declamation against the Mony'd man. No;
Honor is the Ambitious man's Treasure; Pleasure the Delicates; Dalliance the
Wantons; Revenge the Choleric man's: these are sad Treasures which S. Paul
shows, Jer. in loc.
Romans 2.5. Thus large do the arms of this Text reach; and so St. Jer. expounds
the Words in this place.

Secondly, But the Syriack word used here comes from (...) Silver, Gual. per.
in loc.
and the residue of the Chapter casts a full aspect on ordering that which we
call Wealth; forbidding (...), the heaping of it up: which some draw, a (...),
Rhem. Test. Rem. Harm.
to the extending our Cares to such long futurities, as not to rest in the
Providence of our Alsufficient God who provides for his whole Family in heaven
and earth.

So that 1. the gross of this is: To condemn that Boulemia or dog-like appetite
of greedy Covetousness; Lucra damnosa, Aug. Reg.
or loosing gains, as St. Austin calls them elegantly, condemned by Heathens
themselves: as Celsus observed (though falsely) that our Savior borrowed his
Rhetoric against this out of Plato. Orig. in Cells. 1.6.
For certainly it is a Prohibition hugely stored with Religion as well as
Reason; That it is better to want little then to possess much: nay, Rather to
be possessed by it: so the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 76.5. not rich men,
Ambr. Hex. 1.6. c.8.
but men of Riches. Do good Angels Canton out heaven among them? Or the Birds
and Beasts, Earth and Air? Nature in life and death knows not this immense
appetite, introducing us and carrying us off the Stage of this world naked.
Does not overlading ruin a Ship? and slifle a man, making him inert to all
business? Chrysostom. de Fat.
Therefore Nature wisely ejects all their superfluities, and we can our selves
(gravely, truly) call them Excrements. Chrysest. Hom. 18. in Joan.
Could not God, had he liked this way, hoarded up all to himself, and then
where had been room for thy impertinent thrift? who now like one of Fortunes
Eunuchs sit embracing what thou can not enjoy. Chrysostom. Hom. 91. in
Math. Max. Tyr. diff. 34. N. 198. Chrysostom. Hom 64. in Math. Chrysostom. Hom. 9.
in Math.
And how less miserable is he that has but little, then thou, who can not
satisfy thy barking-stomach with much? Tell not me that you are sreed hereby
from the importuning cares, and fears, and scorns of want. If you fear not
Hunger, you fear many things which are much worse? you fear wars, thieves,
false accusations, murders; and are crucified with continual Cares. Nay,
Covetous men bring often hunger upon whole Cities, and into their own Families.
How few in the Weekly-bills do you read dye by starving: but Volumes swell with
those that have perished in Camps, Orig. Hom. 4. Diver.
Courts, highways for their Wealth. It banishes men their Country, making
them with linen wings to search out Remotest coasts, and be perhaps swallowed
by the Sea in the enterprise. Max. Tyr. disser 20. N. ^^^, 115. disser. 36.
N.208, 2 10.
It makes them begin wars, disturb peace, break Leagues, and spoil all
Relations both to God and Man.

Thus like slaves we are led about by it, all over the world in triumph,
disturbing our ease and others with fumes and pains like the Spleen, which is
always drawing, and not discharging and unlading like the stomach. And when it
has done us all this evil, it robs us of the sense and feeling of it; stopping
our mouths (as it were) that we cannot call for help. How can we retain our
Faith, love Honesty, if Money can corrupt us? Or how shall we war with spiritual
powers, if we cannot overcome dead matter? O then, subject not thy rational
Soul to these irrational things: md lay not up treasures upon Earth.

2. And what thou may lay up lawfully thou must not lay up for thy self; like
the Dead-Sea swallowing up all the fatning showrs from Heaven, and Crystal
Rivers; as not to thy own behoof, so nor the benefit of others. For as thou
have a share of the World, and more than thy proportion; so the World claims a
share in thee. I shall now produce only three of the grand Creditors.

1. The King and Government under which you sit (and may you do so long safely
in prosperity;)but then, as this as an arch that supports, so must it be
supported. If you will have the Lamp light, you must supply Oil. And, for this
cause, says the Apostle, pay you Tribute, Romans 13.6. You see even your own
grandeur (this day and others) cannot stand without the Contributions of your
Inferior Assistants. And this famous Opulent City, like Judas, carries the Bag
for the whole Nation; but I hope will never be like him in betraying their
Master. So was lost Constantinople, Lionard. De Sco.
the Seat of the Eastern Empire.

2. The Church which Anciently had their Treasuries, but now may be called in
this City, many of them once again, Pauper Senatus. And for the Structures! for
these, Psalm. 102.14. Aug. Ser. 20. de T^mp.
England was once famous, Anglia Mons, Fons, Pons, Ecclesia, etc. But now St.
Paul, who lost his head at Rome, has lost both head and body here in England.
So have diverse of the other Apostles and Saints suffered, been twice Martyrs,
as the Epigrammatist says of Phaeton. Martial.
And now, as it was usual Primitively to hear of Wonders at the Tombs of
Martyrs; so it ceases not still; for these, though dead, now speak, and invoke
your Charity no them. By which, your selves may gain the Name of working
miracles too, to raise the dead. It might relish of Popery to advise you to
pray to Saints: but then I hope it is good Protestanisine to say, the Saints
pray to you. The Widow of Sarepta ventured her life to preserve the Prophet, 2
Kings 4. and by a strange Arithmetic, her substraction was blessed into a
multiplication: This is the benefit of the Clergy. A sinful City may need it as
well as an unfortunate man, sometimes.

3. The Poor. But an opportunity to speak of this will be again suggested, from
the second part of the Text; and therefore to that time I shall Remit; If
charitable works cannot be forgiven, yet some will count it a kindness to have
them delayed. Therefore I shall proceed to the Reason of these words which have
been Discourst of: Lay not up for your selves treasures on Earth, where the
Rust and Moth does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal. In which
I must first open the Sense; and then secondly Infer the Reason.

The Words are an Inventory of the Worlds whole Estate, and the detriments that
do accrue to them; Creditors on one side and Debtors on the other, do balance
this account.

1. For the Charge. O, how little a room does that which we think so much,
shrink into! what we eat and drink; what we wear, and Metals; the first
natural, the second artificial Riches. For so the Ancients valued their Apparel
into their Stock; which were according to the Qualities and Ranks of Persons,
so that Habit was a kind of superscription directing you to some knowledge of
the Person that wore it. Tertul. Apol. 32. Pamirol. Tit. 43.
And this the Wise Romans thought so useful as to digest it into Law, whence
our Old Statutes might Copy; and then it became a Revenue, being made Standard,
and not Fantastical, as if it were made for the Moon, and not for the Man:
Whereby Ancient Codicils came so Repleat with the mention of these in their
Wills, and Legacies.

The Jews mention these standing Wardrobes where peculiar Vests, on stationary
occasions, were Reposited, or brought abroad: Mat. 12.11, 12. Friend how came
thou in hither, not having on a Weddinggarment. Juven.
The Romans speak of their Trechedipna. In the Greek Histories (...) is
frequent. Ziphil. Vit. Hadr.
But above all, the softer Ancients abhord a being Apes to other Nations
Apparel, suspecting it as some presage of Servitude to them. So the prophet
threatens his People, Zeph. 1.8; as some we read did imitate the Ammonites
(...), 2 Chronicles. 20.1. And then that the end of Apparel was not observed
likewise. Some wore Garments so thin, that they did not hide but show their
shame; Jer. Epist 7.
contrary to that holy sobriety of the Jewish Ladies, upon Divine record, even
to this day, Philo de Migr. Abr.
That they consecrated their Looking-glasses to help to make a Laver for the
Temple.

At these three accommodations of Men there are enemies that have vigilant eyes
and an ak^ng tooth: And they are all drawn up into this little Battalia; Where
the Rust and Moth does corrupt, etc.

The Words in the Greek, Scult. ex Fl. Cansab
are (...); which we render Rust and Moth: But the Rust does discolor not
corrupt; and (...) is not Rust, Beza in loc.
but any fretting or gnawing thing. And therefore some would have this to be
inferred but (...), by the figure (...), as in James 5.2.

2. And (...) is a general word, comprehending besides the Moth other things:
for the LXX. do not only Translate (...), Rem. Her. Al^hoser.
that which eats wool, by it; as in Isay 51.8: But for (...), in Job 4.19. a
corroding worm, they have (...); Saidas.
and indeed Suidas expounds (...) by (...), a Worm. But in Prove. 14.30. they
have the word (...) again, Ludov. de Dieu in lo.
which is in the Hebrew (...) to putrify: Therefore Moth and Rust must not be
coupled here by a Hendyadis, because v. 20. they are dis-joyned.

We must therefore put our Wealth into these three dividens: Garments, which
the Moth devours; Meat and Fruits, which Men or the Canker; and Money, or
Jewels, which some steal clancularly, and some take by violence; breaking
through. And farther,

3. The word (...), which we [word] to corrupt, has a greater vigor; for the
LXX. Translate (...) by it, or Anathema, Deuteronomy. 7.2: Originally it signifies to
disappear. So that our Rich Bank (supposed) examined, Luke 12.33. Eccles. 1.1.
yields but thus much really; That all wordly things do impair and end; both,
which we can possess, as we that possess them: That Death has not one, but many
avenues to them (the Moth, Rust, Thief) and that by weakest assailants (even
the Moth, and Worm) undoing us often by surprise, Psalm. 78.43. Psalm. 105.30.
Psalm. 92.^. Greg. Mor. l.11. c.25.
(for the Moth and Rust beat up no Drums, nor ring Bells when they consume.)
Pas l.103 15.
Nay without any foreign foe, these things would ruin themselves: for the
Moth and Rust are intestine foes, Chiysol Ser. 7. Feels. 1.5
and of Natures own breeding, and not to be secured by Bars or Gates; for what
keeps other enemies out, lets them in. The Garment hid is the Moths prey, and
Treasure, under surest guards, Eccles. 1. 6.
is given away to the Rust: And if they were not, they will be wrested by
violence from us by the Thief: for where there is Necessity there will be
Thieves; nor are the Keepers of Treasures ever secure. And there are many
Thieves, Chrysol Scr.22.
as Care a Thief, will break into a man's head and heart, depriving him of his
rest and sleep, James 5.2, 3, 5.
one great piece of Natures treasure. And if after all, we could charge this
only on the unkindness or injustice of men, Vid. Camerar. Medit. l.4 C.3.
the worlds accidents, or natures imperfection, which cannot subsist of her
self, 'twere ease. But God appears, and strikes the dead stroke; for who can
oppose his brandisht sword? Now as we have some of us stolen secretly, or used
bolder violence to strip others of their Goods; so are we by a just Talio,
doomed to be used our selves: And as some men like Spirits have sat over
hidden Treasures, never suffering them to behold the Sun: Therefore will God
make our Treasures disapppear; and that by a Curse or Anathema: whose execution
sometimes falls in their own days, or sooner or later upon their descendants.

But all this were a Province too large to be managed in this time, I shall
therefore insist upon their deficiency in the bulk.

God showed Joseph an image of his Future ascent in his sleep, Ambros de Joseph
c.6.
Genesis 40.9. because when he possessed it, he should count it but a dream. As his
holy Father Jacob, Philo de Somniis
Genesis 28.12. had an Idea given of the World, wherein some were still going up,
and others down (as the Jews expound it) to heal the grief of his present
expulsion from the warm nest of his Mothers kindness, and to be put upon the
wing unto an unknown Land. To agnize which, and commit it to Memory, Job made
his Fortunes Godfathers to his 3 Daughters, Greg. Nyss Hom. 9. in Cant.
Job 4.2.14: from the fair morning of his first state of life he called his
first Jemima: then clouds and great darkness muffled him, Drus. in loc.
which for the sweet odor of Patience, he calls Cassia: and lastly his Sun
breaking out again, according to his dialect for Prosperity he names the last
his Horns Reversion.

But to leave the shore, and take a small Brize from the Sea, to see if that
will relieve us in this exigent. In the 27 of Ezech. v.3. you have Tire, a
Maritime City, compared to that goodly sight; A fair Ship, with all her Cable,
Tackle, Streamers, Wastcloths and glory; so that we would think the Shipwright
had left nothing un-enterpriz'd that was fit for beauty, much more safety. And
yet looking more nearly, I see no Anchor set down in the Catalogue. A perfect
imperfection of a glorious transitory world, wherein we are now tickled with
the most pleasing delights, but have no anchor, that is, any thing to fix us;
and then a storm coming, we are presently lost upon some obdurate rock, or
swallowed up by a devouring quick-sand.

But we need not gad abroad beyond our own late sad experiences, of the ebbings
and flowings, waxing and wainings of this Worlds Treasure, which was sent with
too much light, in dreadful Fire, upon this poor City; a demonstration that
made its way into the Estates as well as Understandings, making; you acknowledge
the small monys you have left to be rightly called Sterling, because of its
wings with which it flew away.

This Path has God trod constantly, and ever will in this World ( that the
good men may be tried, Aug Epist. 7.
and the bad men justly tormented) to let us walk abroad in the day of our
life, Chrysostom. Orat. 5.
with all our gaudy braveries for show put upon us; but at the night of Death
we must undress sadly, and go naked into our Beds.

And now secondly to show the nerves of this Reason, and how fast they bind.
Besides the horrid slavery, that it was always deemed, Pamirol, Tit. 61.
to be condemned to the Mines: who can endure this constant cheat of the World
(as the Apostle Paul singularly calls it) (...) 1 Cor. 7.31, Theophil in loc.
to be deluded with a figure and apparancics, without any basis to stand steady
upon? Orig. Hom. 5. Diverse.
Who would desire to lay up his treasures here, where he can neither joy in the
possession, nor grieve for the amission? who can neither promise himself the
long continuance of them, nor a devolution of them to his dearest posterity
(for some sweetness there were in that) with an entayle that cannot be cut off.
Chrysostom in Text.


The World is repleat with real Miseries, Aug. 5^^.
but with fantastical Delights. Aug. Med.
O World! more slippery then Ice, if thou art so doted upon by us, perishing;
what would thou have been always enduring? Aug. in Psalm. 36
Thou complainest thou art robbed, undone; did not Christ forewarne thee not to
lay up thy treasure in such a place? What is then to be done by us? O man, if
thou art to remain always here, lay up thy treasures here; Chrysol. Ser. 22.
but if thou art to march away, why will thou leave thy beloved behind thee?
Would thou go light, Chrysol. Ser. 45.
let thy luggage pass before thee so shall thou not go, but fly to Heaven and
meet in. Which enters me fairly upon the Second Part of the Text: Lay up for
your selves treasures in Heaven, where the rust and moth does not corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal.

But lay up, etc. Chrysol Ser. 22.
It is a retarding to many in their Religion, that their Profit stands in their
light; but you may be here instructed that Christ intends to enrich us, not
empair us; nay, to indulge our utmost Covetousness, giving us scope to glut our
selves with what is to our palate, To lay up Treasures. Chryso^ in Romans
Only he advises us where (in Heaven,) and when you read Romans 8.22, That the
brood of the Creation do groan and long after a future state, be not thou only
buried in the present.

That we may Obey then, Mat. 2.11.
let us first ( like the Wisemen) open our Treasures; and secondly, offer them
up to Christ in Heaven.

1. All know not what a Treasure is. AEs. Fab.
Not AEsops Cock, who coveted most a grain of Barley; nor the simple Merchant,
that is un-acquainted with Outlandish Commodities; nor the Church of Rome,
though she truck much, and know money well; for she tells us of an Exchequer in
her Church that is full of Treasure, Bellar.1. de Indulg.
nay running over with the Merits of Christ, and his Saints; to be given (I
suppose, upon some consideration) to the indigent sinner. But as it happens,
that men fall out about Monyes, so do these Tellers; for some will by no means
allow the greatest Saint to have any thing to spare; believing if he had done
more, Francise. Macr. de Indulg.
God has sufficiently gratified him. But the tide of Christ's Merits, they say,
swell much; and yet, Cajetan. Opusc. 15. C.2.
others think not so full, but the Saints streams must flow in to raise it up
to the High Water mark.

But this Treasure was Leather Money in the Middle times of the Church, but on
no account Current in the Scripture, Roff. in Art. 18. Luther.
or Primitive times; coming from Purgatory, not Heaven; and Coined, as is
supposed, not for any rich Veins there were in the Mine; but rather for the
poverty of those that were to issue them out: Lay these by, not up.

2. But God knows, and his Holy Word is the faithful Touchstone to discern all
true from adulterate Metal. In St. Matthew. 13.44. we are told of a great
Treasure hid, Iren. 1.4. c.43.
which some interpret of Christ, hid in the Types of the Scriptures: Or the
desire of heavenly things: Or the life of a Just man, Greg. Hom. 11. i^ Eu.
whose several virtues and graces are a coacervation of the most excellent
Treasures. Anselm.
Treasures these are, because Secret; and so Rich, Macar. Hom. 18.
that a man may have any thing with them, even Heaven it self, for God values
them above all things. Therefore our Savior wondered not, Mat. 8.10, Orig. Hom.
5. Dive^s.
at the Centurions Honor, nor Riches, but his Faith. These are things so Rich,
Basil. Hom. 19. in Gord. Mart.
that if Earthly things were eternal (as they are not) yet these Heavenly
treasures were preferrable to them.

3. But there is one Grace that Antonomastically has obtained this name, and
that is Charity; which is a way, both of convoy to our own Treasures to Heaven,
and a rewarding us with greater when we come there, for them. Luke 18.22. Math.
19 29.
And so the Hebr. interpret this Precept, in whose Writings it was, and perhaps
there extracted for us. In the Talmud, Talm. Massech.
King Mumboz is introduced, as complained on by his Relations, for consuming
both his own Treasures, and Ancestors on the accounts of Charity: To whom he
there shapes this Answer (like Sr. Lawrence, who called the Poor the Churches
treasure) (...) My Fathers laid up treasures on Earth, but I in Heaven: They
laid it where the hand of the Thief might invade it, but I in Heaven where none
can attaque it. Eusebius. Gall. Hom. 2. in Not. 1. Mart.
And indeed this must be a great treasure there. For as he that would be Rich,
carries to a Port not things that are common there or, a Drug; but what is most
rare. So he that would thrive in Heaven, must not carry delights, and joys,
and pleasures, and long life (which are their already;) but Faith, and
Repentance, and holy desires, and works of Mercy, Castle. Lex. Po cock. Hist.
Arab. 306.
which are not there. The Arabic Language does well conclude this, the same
word (...), signifying both Alms and Riches; and reason does accord and
experience which is firmest. You know the way to make the Ground rich is to
scatter the Dung, not let it lie on an heap: and your selves rich, to sow the
Corn, Chromal. de Beat. Sed. Pasch 3.
not hide it in a Barn. Thus we may make gainful losses: Gain life from that
which is dead it self. Lend a little to Christ upon Earth, that you may receive
greater proportions from him in Heaven. Aug. in Psalm. 48.
Give Earth that you may receive Heaven; a penny to buy a Kingdom; Chrysol.
Scr. 8.
a mite to gain all good.

We read in Story of a Bishop of Millan, that bad his Servant give three Crowns
to the Poor, but he foolishly wise gave but two. Within a while one sent him
200 Crowns: the Bishop returning to his Man thus accosts him; Johan Manlig.
Ah, says he, what have thou done? thou have lost us 100 Crowns; for if thou
had given 3, we had received 300. Thus the Poor are our Porters, Greg. Mor.
we lose not what they carry, but Mercy makes us better for their being worse.
Piety makes their evils ours, and Charity makes our good theirs; by which we
get fame, love, prayers, blessings here on Earth, and a Crown in Heaven. (...)
etc. (...) (i.e.) Omnis Eleemosyna and pax magna, and advocatus apud patrem
Coelestem. B. Basr. sol. 10.
So from one crop of Mercy we receive two harvests; one here, and another
hereafter.

And now consider, though by Giving thou may miss some treasure in Earth, yet
it is a greater matter to find it in Heaven. For if in this life in which we
are strangers, Chrysol. Scr. 22.
rambling but for a short time, it is so pungent a grief to suffer the
hardships and contempts of Poverty; What will it to be for ever in Heaven so?
where all the rest are Rich; and to see the Poor of the Earth before thy eyes
promoted to Heaven, and thy self, who wast a Rich man, scornfully to be
precipitated to Hell. Therefore lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven.
Which that you may do, you must be directed by two Cautions, needful to be here
annexed.

First of all, Nothing that is Evil can get into Heaven; and so nothing that is
well given, Max Tyr. differ. 14. N. 85.
if it be ill gotten. As pure water cleanses, but filthy defiles; so does this
dirty Charity; which many think to bribe God withal, when they rob himself, or
his People; and with a little laid out in Charity, to make satisfaction for a
great deal obtained by Injury. Therefore the Jews call Alms by the name of
(...), Justice, because it should be so gotten. Now there are two ways of
sinning thus:

1. By great men's Oppression. In this world Men and Trees are not all of a
growth; so top-boughs commonly shade, and drop on those which are under them:
But there is nothing of God, nor can be acceptable to him out of this. Genesis 28.
In Esaus Blessing, there is not a word of God mentioned; Cat. Grac. Patr.
and the reason was, because he was to get it by Violence: But in Jacobs there
is. So God in his Sacrifices refused Honey; Levit. 2.1^.
it is strange, being so sweet! yet the reason is, because 'twas got by Rapine:
So have Good men. Sheodor. in loc.
We read in History, that the Friars Minors refused a load of Friez sent by
Henry the Second, Dan. Cl^ron.
because he oppressed; his Subjects; or if it be received by men, he rejoices
that has it, but he mourns that lost it; Aug. Scr. 19. de verbis Apost.
and which of those two, think you, will God first hear? God bids thou should
give of thine own not another. How can thou cloth Christ and rob a
Christian?

But I find a strange invective against a peculiar mode of this sin, which I
think worth the mentioning, because falling within our sad past late times; and
perhaps may be adapted to future. And that is, Against those that made use of
Gods Judgments to Rob their Fellows: as in times of Wars, Gregor. Thaurat.
Epist Con.
Plagues, and Fires; And O that in our great Fire, no man had burnt his fingers
with this Sin. Like Thieves that steal when they see others on the Gallows for
it; Who should have cause of joy, where so many have of mourning? or gain in a
greater loss. God will tear up their Intrails with his hook for swallowing this
Bait. Hott. Hist. Orient.l.^. C. 5.
The Arabs cloth it with a pretty Apologue: etc (...) (i.e) The Wolf had one
time forced away a young Pigg; presently comes the Lion and rends it away from
him: Ha, says the Wolf, Balscmon.
how could I hope another should not take that from me, which I first took from
another? The Civil Law determines, Leg. 2. C. 20. Tit. 62.
who shall be guilty of the Case I mentioned last (if within a year discovered)
should pay fourfold: if after, quantity for quantity singly.

But, there is another more retired and honest way of doing this, as men think,
because secret (and that is Fraud and Cheating;) of doing which there are so
many forms and methods (as by false weights, measures, and the ignorance of
Buyers wrought upon) that I cannot number them; and need not tell them, I fear,
too many in this large and Opulent City. Bear, I beseech, with my open honesty
in this; for we have long, and I fear must longer (notwithstanding all our
powerful Laws, and Care of some vigilant Magistrates) with the secret Knavery
of such. Let those who have a gall only, wince here; the sound are not hurt by
this touch. Trades and Occupations are called indeed by the name of Crafts; I
hope it is not for this mystery. There lie great Temptations upon them I
confess, as the gain and unpunishableness by Law, where this sin is
undiscernable; and I doubt there is some practice of it, that People exclaim
they can hardly safely go into any Shop to Deal, but they are either cozened of
their money, or (better) of their expectation, if they be not.

The Prophet in Nahum 3.16. calls the Merchants of Niniveh, by the name of
Locusts, for their devouring all, and then flying away with it. Would not he
that does thus steal, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in 2 Timothy
rob openly if he durst? both proceed from the same principle of mind. No
wonder that so many Estates are blasted, moulder away in a short time, that are
thus purchased. It must be so. Jacob was cozened into a Marriage with Leah
before Rachel: and so Rachels Children were cozened of the benefit of their
Primogeniture. Brought. Con.
But Divine Justice and Vengeance will in a short time do right in this case.
For in Genesis 48.5. you find Reubens Prerogative reverts back to Rachels
Offspring; Terra Restituit quod accepit, Gen.1.11, homines saepe decipiunt;
The Earth is faithful in restoring the seed which the Husbandman lent her,
Ambr. ^ 3 E^^ c 1.
but men are unfaithful. How gravely boldly will some men discourse of Princes?
and exclaim, they invade their Subjects Rights, waste their Fortunes, etc. And
we our selves do this one to another; but because Incognito, we think we are
blameless. Nay, do not we more, not only because unlawfully, but in value? A
Prince raises a Tax for some one difficulty, but this Subject does for all his
life long. Neither let any man think to palliate his Crime, with this
ridiculous Salvo, That this is an insensible hurt, being done to so many, and
but in a little: to them a great gain, and to others but a small loss. For so
the Mouse does but nim and nibble away a little; Cyril. Alex. l. 14. de Ador.
and yet for this, is rankt by God in the list of unclean Creatures, Levit.11.

Petty-Larceny is Felony in Divinity, though not Laws of man. In Giving is
there not Charity, whether it be much or little? and then in taking away is
there not Incharitableness? You would have God reward the two mites put into
the Treasury, as much as a Talent; and then should he not punish as much for
two mites withdrawn? Nay, in some regards, the small cheat out balances the
great: For who takes great things, will many times not stoop to small; but who
takes small, will never despise great. Though there be disparity in the
Persons, the Law calls it Murder to kill a Beggar as well as Burger; and so
it is of Theft.

But I read of a worse devise to palliate such dealing, to violate Religion
upon the account of Religion. They cheated only the Pagans, excusing themselves
in St. Austins days. Aug Ser. 19. de v. Apost.
That is, in the Idiom of latter days, we make bold only with some men, we
spoil the Wicked. To whom the Father gravely Replies; But while you spoil a bad
man, you breed such an aversation in him to your way, that you hinder him from
turning to be a good man.

The 2. mistake to be prevented about Laying up your Treasures in Heaven, is,
That some may hence not think themselves obliged to do their Charity on Earth,
or but in the very article of Parting: which, how troublesome, and imprudent,
and fallacious such ways are often, I leave to many here (able to inspect such
things) to determine. He has dispersed abroad, Psalm. 112.9.
and given to the Poor. Dedit, non reliquit Dari: He gave it himself, left it
not to be given, Max. Hom.
is observed by an Ancient on this place. God was pleased to ordain, Levit.
19.6, that the relict of the Peace Offering should be eaten the same day, or to
morrow; Philo de Vict.
to show (as the Jews comment) that we should not be dilatory in our Charity:
not like dung, do no good till we are carried out. We should rather be said
then, To be left by these things, than to leave them: They to be called our
spoils, rather than our gifts; our Testaments, than our Wills, when thus
extorted. In the 25 of St. Matthews Gospel our Charity is compared to Oil,
Chrysostom. Hom. 3^. in Math.
because it should be on the top of all. He that is Charitable in his life, has
his Lamp carried before him; it yields him fair light: though at death behind
him. (...). Arist. Eth. l.4 c. 1.


And yet on this emergency (not to encourage such Givers, but to honor such
Receivers) I should not only count my self Uncharitable (whilst I am speaking
of Charity) but likewise unjust to the Fathers of the Heads of the Tribes in
this City, before me, and all others who hear me speak this day; if I should
not deposit with you this measured honorable Truth concerning them: That among
all the channels wherein these Interests of the Dead run, none do, I believe,
flow more purely, none do come more liberally than those which pass under the
public conduct of the Heads and Companies in this City. Of the true experience
of which, this Fair show is an Annual probat: which, may it continue whilst
this World lasts, according to both Givers and Distributers designs; and then
attend them in the future World, according to God's Promise; that so they may
rejoice that they found there, what they only heard here; That there Charityes
are eternal, and not invaded by any Thief, nor consumed by any Moth, nor
corroded or lessened by any Worm. And that will conduct me to the second Part,
The Reason of this Command in the Text; But lay up: where the Rust and Moth
does not, etc.

You have heard before, that Charity is Treasure in Heaven; how, and when you
are to lay it up there, But the stress of all will lie upon the Reasons moving
a man to part with his own: how to unlock the hard man's Heart! And three there
are expressed here by our Blessed Lord in the Text. The 1. drawn from us; We
shall there have them our selves. 2. From them; They shall not be lost, but by
this perpetuated to us. 3. From us again; The frames of our spirits shall
hereby be bettered. For where your Treasure is there will your Heart be also.

Of the First; We shall there have them our selves. Lay up for your selves.
Covetous persons are afraid, Aug. Ser. 4. de Diverse.
and Unbelievers; God would have us lose our Goods; But He teaches how we shall
keep them: What you give thus is not lost: nay all is lost which you part not
withal thus; either condemned by us, Aug. in Psalm. 38.
or taken from us. How suitably to our own desires is Christ's Precept framed,
and will we not answer it? Chrysol. Ser. 8.
What you give the Poor, you shall have your selves; what you give not, another
shall have beside your selves. The Prophet tells us of the Charitable man,
Psalm. 112. 9, He has given to the Poor: his Righteousness remains for ever.
Bern. Epist. 24.
His Money could not, but his Righteousness ( the Hebrew word for Alms) does. A
happy exchange! And the Wiseman, consonantly to his holy Father, Eccles. 11. 1,
Cast thy bread upon the waters, Drus. Class 2. E. 2. Adag. 48.
and after many days thou shall find it again. The Waters in Scripture denotes
the People for their unquietness, weakness. As the seed of Bread cast into
moysten'd Earth is not lost, but increased; so is the product of thy Charity.
The Jews do illustrate this place with a handsome Parable: etc. (...) ( i.e.)
There was a man that used every day to cast a Loaf into the Water: one day he
buys a Fish, Rosul. Rab. in loc.
in exenterating which he found a precious Stone. This is the Man, say they,
that lost not his bread which he seemed to cast away; but found it again after
many days. Si sint vestra, toll vobiscum, August.
says a Father: If they are ours, let us take them with us when we dye. But we
neither brought them into this world, nor can carry them out. Others may take,
and we must surely leave them. Therefore to make sure, Chrysol. Ser. 22.
let us do as Merchants, Send before us Bills of Exchange; by them to be repaid
in Heaven.

But, then you will say, The life of this stands in the Security and good
Caution; this shall be performed, they not protested. I Answer; A man is bound
by a bit of Paper; Chrysol. Ser. 23.
and are not many Volumes of God Security? Some may Reply, Who shall require
it? compel him if he fail? I Return; His Truth, Himself, because he cannot
lie: Will he be hard in repaying, that has been so liberal in bestowing on us?
We will believe our Father on Earth; Chrysol. Ser. 22.
will we not our Father in Heaven? He cannot keep thine from thee; who has
given his own to thee. But you desire to see them your self: And have you all,
this day, brought your Estates with you to Church; Aug. in Psalm. 39.
yet hope well they are secure at home? Fools! Dare you trust your Servants,
and do you fear your God? Stay till the time that your Monyes grow due, and
then complain if you receive them not with Interest. And it is strange Man will
allow but 6 in an 100, but God an 100 for 6; yet had we rather make Contracts
with Man than God.

We do not lose then by Giving, but keep; and what we keep, we shall keep for
ever, because laid up in Heaven; that is the Second. There the Moth and Rust
does not corrupt, and Thieves break not through and steal.

If your Friend should tell you, Aug in Psalm 48.
your Corn which with great labor you have collected, would be spoiled, lost
in a moist Low place, were it not removed to a higher; will not you credit him?
And will you believe your Friend, not your Savior? is any so much your Friend?
Your Heart pants for the insecurity of Earth, for the theft of Domestiques, the
violence of Externs; Aug in Psalm 38.
and therefore you would fain put your Money into a sure place, and you put it
into this you say, because you cannot find a stronger. But I can show you a
stronger; Lay them up in Heaven, where neither Rust nor Moth does corrupt, etc.

Did ever any Thief scale Heaven: here are indeed no bars or bolts to these
Gates, Aug. Ser. 50. de Temp.
no long retinue of guarding Servants; Chrysostom. Hom. 58. in John.
but yet all security, and yet no trouble. Here God is the keeper, who was the
Donor; and he that can save thy Soul, cannot he save thy Money? Aug. in Psalm.
90. Euch. Lugd. Epist. ad Valor.
What we obtain here once we shall keep ever. How securely may he sleep who has
God for his Keeper: how needless are other Guards. Servile fear cannot take
such care as Paternal love. Chrysol. Ser. 7. Chrysol. Ser. 16. Chrysostom. in Cor.
What need any Bulwarks where the guard is Innocence it self? What Armies must
come to take that away, which Charity concredits to so many hands to keep. Dan.
Opuse. 19. c.8.
If your Charity be wine, it never sowrs; if bread, it never moulds; if
clothes, they never consume; if meat, it never corrupts. Miraculous Charity!
Methinks God has given an evidence beyond speculation of this truth, even in
this World below: Where what has not been invaded, removed by changes and
alterations in the World? Temples have not been a sanctuary to themselves; nor
things devoted to God, free from the prey of rapacious Vultures: But in the
great Rotations both of Religion and Governments, the Estates devolved on
Charity stand inviolable still: and they that were most weak, have proved most
strong; to prove, That Treasures once laid up in Heaven, the Rust and Moth does
not consume, and Thieves break not through and steal.

Who then is lover of Treasure, Chrysol. Ser. 15.
let him wisely love it at this rate: And if he will not follow his God, let
him follow his Bags to Heaven. Plutarch.
As the Tyrant did; which fearing deposing, sent great Treasures before him
into a Foreign Country: Which must one day be the condition of us all. And who
loves not an Eternal before a Temporal Estate? and who does, let him lay it up
here: Where he shall have what he cannot lose, Aug.
because he gave what he could not keep. For if he does not, himself will also
be excluded there; because of the propensions of his heart, which will be
anxious always upon his Estate, and turning on that axel where ever it lies.
Which is the third and last Reason. For where your Treasure is, there will your
heart be also.

The Heart is the intention and intuition of the Soul. Castal.
Will you know where your Treasure is, Chrysostom. in Psalm 1.1.
advise where your Love is. Elegant. Ser. de Confess.
The Heart is the Needle, and Treasure the Pole to which it tends, let it be
what it will. Even God himself does not turn our hearts, but by changing our
Treasure, exchanging our Loves. Therefore in our pretended truths, even with
God himself (as in Prayer, and other divine Duties,) our fugitive Souls absent
themselves too often; and are in the mean time ( undoingly) complemental to pay a
Visit to somewhat which they accost as their Treasure. A man s lost to himself
and all his Relations, if his desires be vagrant and extern: for he neither
regards himself nor others as to Necessities, much less Civilities. His Soul is
gone abroad (having left the key under the door,) which he is very uneasy until
he take up and follow. This is the blind-side of Wisest men, if you can hit
them in their delight, there is no Vessel that is so plyant to the winding,
conquering Rudder, as they. It is remarkt as a kind of a Monstrous thing, that,
Numb. 22. 29. (upon Gods opening the mouth of Balaams Ass) the Prophet was
nothing amazed, Gloss. ex August.
but parled with her not uncompos'd, but at the common rate. To which it is
said, That he was so over gone with the Meditation of Balaaks rich Booty, he
wot going to invade; that such an uncouth accident was even lost to him, and he
scarcely regarded the difference of a Man or Beasts discoursing with him.

Such an Empire has our Trensure over us, and therefore we had need beware to
whom we give up our keys; for as if a man's Amors happen to be placed in a
great inferiority to his Estate, it is looked upon as the greatest infortune
among men: So if we place our values upon unsuitable Objects, our Souls are
undone. And against this God enters therefore his Caution here. As to drown a
thing, we use to tumble it with a great weight about the neck: so if the Soul
be glewed to the whole World, Will not that sink her low enough think you?
Chrysostom. Hom 21. in loc.
And besides, our Souls and Hearts will be embased by the mixture of this mean
alloy: We, whose Original was Celestial, shall be metamorphos'd into low pieces
of sordidness by this unworthy Truck. Aug. 1.2. de Sermon. Dom. C. 13.
To omit in this Condition, all the Cares that must perpetually sting us in our
life; the fears that will ague us; but above all the intolerable agonyes that
will be at the parting of these two dear Friends (at our quitting the Scene of
this World,) which we must do when Death shall storm the Fortress of our
Bodies, and force a surrender of our Souls. When there will not be a taking
leave, but divorce, and shrewd shrikes (above the feigned Mandrakes when it is
violently cruelly torn up,) for the forsaking of our beloved Treasure behind
us. After which when (like Larks we should be climbing up the blew welkin) we
shall cast so many liquorish eyes of desire, that God will never bid a Soul
welcome to Heaven that thus comes not to him; but is Ravished. But indeed her
Seraphick wings are so luted here, they cannot raise her; have contracted so
many vices, with this tincture, that she is not fit to be a Candidate of
Heaven; which would be a Hell to her, because her delight is elsewhere. F.ench
Hist. H. 4.
Therefore as some Kings in their life, by way of Testimony of their Respect
unto some Religious Monastiques (above others) have devoted their hearts to be
Interred among them: So let us bequeath ours to God and Heaven; which can only
be done (as the Text directs) By laying up our Treasures there. Our Soul is
from above, Chrysol. ser. 25.
and our Gold from beneath: and better it is to advance our Coin to the throne
of our Souls; then depress our Souls unto the dungeon of our Mines.

Let no dry Miser this day then think, his sagacious Nose has scented out a
profound design that was contrived, in this Exhortation, against his Pocket.
It Is not his but himself that God seeks: nor to lay up your wealth in Heaven,
because he needs it there, but you love it here; and therefore would be
miserable without it even there; because where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.

And now by this time, I hope, all that hear me are somewhat ripened toward
this Exhortation of laying up your Treasures in Heaven. You may yet see more
Feathers for your wings, that you prove not hagard in this flight: from these
few subsequent Considerations. Bern. in Sent.
It is needful that all who are to be examined before the Tribunal of Christ,
should either have the Judge their friend, or some friend to intercede with the
Judge. And the Judge himself has taught who this Friend is, Luke 16. Make you
friends of Mammon. Your common Proverb you see may be truer then you are aware;
That Money may be a Man's best Friend.

If the Brother of our King, Isodor. Char. Or. 7.
or some grand Favorite of his, should pass through this City, by the
presenting of whom we should be sure to purchase his Majesty's favor, and
abundant compensation; How would you contend to outdo one another in Gifts?
But Christ our King is not ashamed to call the Poor his Brethren, Friends; by
being kind to whom, we may oblige him, and right our selves much: and here most
strive, yet who shall be hindmost; or be excused altogether.

Think we that God who made all, Chrysostom. Hom 5. de Poen.
could not have enricht all? But that some might get Heaven by suffering ill he
left some Poor, and made others Rich, that they might get Heaven by doing well.
Or could he not take these things by force from us; but he bids us give, that
he might reward us: and it is His to dispose of, not ours. We are but his
servants to carry hit purse, and should not keep his money to our selves. Chrysostom.
2. Conc. de Lazar. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de laud. Pauli.
We are his Almoners, and that is Honorable as well as profitable. O! what an
Honor methinks God has done thee in this; To suffter thy Fellow Creature and
his Member, to fall down before and pay thee a kind of worship: to pray unto
thee, Leo Scr. 5 Quadr.
and weep more humbly, truly to thee for a Farthing, then thou do to the
great God to pardon all thy Sins, or to give thee Heaven for thine Inheritance.
The full Cow loves to be milkt, Avg. in John.
and kicks not if fulch't to make her give it down: But most men abbor the
Dunnings of Charity, and are waspish if the Preacher importune them. Chrysostom.
Ser. de A.
But is not the stomach offended if it communicates not the Meat; and our Veins
their Blood? Ambr. de Naboth, c. 12.
Wells are the better for being drawn, and why not we. Has not God made the
Poor partakers of thy Nature, and thou will not of thy Fortune; which is Most
Honorable. Chrysostom. in Psalm.
Your very Trades, which are not for your selves, but that one may help
another, teaches you a Necessity of such Communications. You cannot live one by
another, unless you likewise live one upon another; and each calling assist one
another mutually. What has God thought too good for thee? he has given thee
known Son: Or, what Christ too dear for thee? He gives thee his own Flesh and
Blood. God has purchased man with the price of our Saviors life; and will not
Heaven with a bit of Silver or Bread. Aug.
It was Charity that brought God down from Heaven upon Earth; and it must be
Charity that must send Man from Earth up to Heaven. It is a Grace which those
that dare not practice, are compelled to admire. Chrysostom. in Tim.
In GOD himself, Which of his high Attributes is it that takes us most; Max
Tyr. diff. 36. N 207.
His Wisdom, Power and Glory, or his Mercy? So of all your perfections, it is
your Mercy that will take God most. Some may think this is said not ill, but
it is not timed well: Our City is undone by Fire; Our Treasures exhausted; Our
Banks drayn'd, and what are we able to do now?

But, why then was I summoned hither, to make an impossible Exhortation to you?
What Judge will allow, nay command a Councellor to come before him, and then
check him for making his motion. I hope the Court of Lord Mayor, and Aldermen
will not be cruel beyond all places of Judgment, and you know they allow a Suit
in Forma Pauperis. If the Body of your City (to allude to St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.)
were burned and you have not Charity it is nothing. Was Charity buried in the
Rubbish, ruined in the Ruins? Must Fire be an Argument, that Charity must be
cold? Then the Needs of many will be increased, and so your Mercy needed; and
you, if you help, give that Proverb the best sense, To make your Virtue out of
their Necessity.

It may be that late dismal Fire was Gods Ordeal to try you by. You were called
to his Bar, arraigned, condemned, but escaped then only with being burnt: But
still you are to pay your Fees, and then be at liberty. But, God be thanked,
though this was, it is not the state of this sumptuous City; whose Buildings now
shine not in flames but Gold: whose Towrs and lofty Stories, seem emulous to
vye height with those Affrighting flames. Which, as it is the Phoenix of
Christendom, so Phoenix like it is raised more young and glorious out of its
own Ashes! All Houses noblyer furnished; and shall our Hearts be empty, and our
Hands? Who spies a symptom of sad Want in this days rich solemnity? unless
want of Charity. Horses beautifully Caparison'd, champing gilded Bits; I hope
the Poor shall not go naked, or want a bit of Bread to put in their mouths.

I might grow vehement now upon you, and pray you for the Passion of Christ
(which is but newly past by you) that you would extend your Charities. And from
his Resurrection (which you now celebrate) that you would pay your Easter
Offerings; or, as you read it was in the Scripture, Math. 27.53, that many dead
Bodies of the Saints rose to wait on his: So you would never suffer the virtue
of it to cease; but that now some of the Bodies of his dead Saints may be
raised likewise. Let it not suffice you to be like the Banks, wherein the
streams of Ancient Bounty ran; but add something of your own. Ambr. l.2. de
Virg Eccles. l.2
Let their Life be your Discipline; lest I be forced with Solomon, to praise
the Dead above the Living. Levit. 11.
You know that by Moses's Law, the Beast that only chewed the Cud was unclean,
if it did not divide. I leave to your selves to make the application: If you
divide nothing, but only ruminate in in your Counsails, and chew the Cud at
your Feasts, all was laid up before. Truly they have set Posterity a fair Copy.
And now they are dead you guide their hands still: But God must guide yours,
and your hearts to follow their line. I would tell this day what their Charity
was, but it is so big I cannot: That gives me so great a scope to speak, that I
undersaying so much, Cyril. A^x. de fide R^c^.
you may rather call it silence: accuse them not me for making their actions
transcend speech.

Many Daughters in this Nation have done Virtuously; but this Noble City has
exceeded them all. It is the Head for Greatness; call it the Hand for Bounty.
Let no man hereafter twit your Professions for Mechanic; you have showed that
they are Liberal: and Novices are now fain to decry their old Dry Sciences, and
court (wisely) Mechanisme.

Not to make any blasphemous comparison, but a suitable, grateful allusion to
our Blessed Savior. Mat. 21.16.
You read, Luke 19.40, That he went in Triumph to Jerusalem, and the people
sung Hosanna's before him; at which, some Envious Persons repining, they
desired him to command their silence: But our Lord made this Reply; That they
might have read in the Prophet David, That out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings GOD would perfect his Praise: And, that if these should hold their
peace, the Stones would immediately cry out. You have this day Rid in Triumph
through our Jerusalem. The Young People ( Children of the Hospitals) have Sung
their Hosanna's; their Hospital Psalms: Nay the Mouths of many Babes and
Sucklings elsewhere do perfect your Praise: But if these should hold their
Tongues, even the Stones would cry out; The Stones of those several sumptuous
and beautiful Edifices that you have built to harbor them in. You have outdone
the Builders of Babel; for they brought a Curse upon themselves: But your
Charities have reared up Towers, whose tops I doubt not reach to Heaven, and
have gained a Blessing for it.

But if any man think I have been too tedious in speaking of Charity; let not
him condemn himself, in being longer in doing it. I have commended you as
highly as I can to Men; there is nothing beyond it, but that I now commend you
to GOD the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; to whom be all the
Honor, all the Glory, the Power, and the Praise of this Charity; and to your
selves, the Reward and Comfort, from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

