THE REBELS CATECHISM.

COMPOSED IN AN EASY and Familiar way; To let them see, The Heinousness of
their Offense, the weakness of their strongest Subterfuges; and to recall them
to their duties both to God and Man.

ROMANS 13. 2. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. Printed, 1643.

To the Christian Reader.
REader, thou must not look for all things new, in a Point so agitated, so
thoroughly discussed and canvassed as this has been. It Is well if they who come
behind both in time, and knowledge, add any thing though it be but little, unto
those before them. All I shall promise thee in this short discourse, is that I
have contracted into a narrow compass, what I found scattered and diffused in
many and those larger Tractates: which I have offered to thy view in a more
easy and familiar way than has been formerly presented. And some thing thou
shall meet with here, which thou half not found in any other discourses of this
argument, besides the fashion and the dress. These are the most prevailing
motives I can lay before thee, to tempt thee to the studying of this Catechism:
which if it shall confirm thee in thy duty unto God and the King, or reclaim
thee from thy disaffections unto either of them, it is all I aim at. And so
fare thee well.

January 25. 1643.
THE REBEL'S CATECHISM:
Composed in an Easy and Familiar way; To let them see, the heinousness of
their Offense, the weakness of their strongest Subterfuges; and to recall them
to their duties both to God and Men.
1. QUestion. Who was the first Author of Rebellion

A. The first Author of Rebellion; First part of the Homily against Rebellion.
the root of all Vices, and the mother of all mischief, ( says the book of
Homilies) was LUCIFER, first Gods most excellent creature, and most bounden
Subject, who by Rebelling against the Majesty of God, of the brightest and most
glorious Angel, became the blackest and most foulest fiend and Devil, and from
the height to Heaven, is fallen into the pit and bottom of Hell.

2. Q. How many sorts of Rebellion are there?

A. Three most especially, that is to say, the Rebellion of the Heart, the
Rebellion of the Tongue, and the Rebellion of the Hand.

3. Quest. What is the Rebellion of the Heart?

Ans. The Rebellion of the Heart, is a rancorous swelling of the Heart against
the authority and commands of the supreme power under which we live: which tho
it be so cunningly suppressed and smothered, that it break not out either into
words or deeds, yet makes a man guilty of damnation in the sight of God. And
this is that of which the Wiseman tells us saying, Curse not the King, no not
in thy thought, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter. Eccles. 10. v. 20.

4. Quest. What is the Rebellion of the Tongue?

Ans. The Rebellion of the tongue, is a malicious defaming of the person,
actions, parts, and government of those Sovereign Princes to which the Lord
has made us subject, of purpose to disgrace them amongst their people, to
render them odious and contemptible, and consequently to excite their Subjects
to rise up against them. Of this it is whereof the Lord God commanded saying,
thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People; Exodus 22. 28.
acknowledged for a divine precept by St. Paul, Acts 23. 5. See to this purpose
also that of Solomon, Prove. 24. v. 21. where it is said, It is not fit to say
unto a King thou art wicked; And if it be not fit to speak evil to him,
assuredly it is as unfit to speak evil of him. And finally of this it is that
Aristot. in Problem. sect. 40.
Aristotle the Philosopher tells us saying, (...), he that speaks evil of the
Magistrate offends against the Commonwealth. But I must let you know withal,
that tho this of the tongue be a distinct species of Rebellion, and so judged
in Law: yet many times this and the other of the heart, are but the ground and
preparations to the Rebellion of the hand, or actual Rebellion, as they call it
commonly. And this appears most plainly in the story of Absalon, whose heart
first swelled against his Father, for being so difficult in restoring him to
his Court and Presence, upon the murder which he had committed on his brother
Amnon, (2. Sam. 14. v. 24, 28.) and his tongue found the way to disgrace his
government, which he accused of negligence and injustice, to the common people
(2 Samuel 15. v. 2, 3 etc.) before he blew the trumpet, and took Arms against
him, and made him flee with some few servants, from the Royal City, v. 14. But
here we take it not for a preparation, but for a species distinct, as before
was said.

5. Quest. Why do you call the swellings of the heart, and the revilings of the
tongue by the name of Rebellion, considering that the Law which punishes
Rebellion with no less than death, does take no cognizance of men's thoughts;
and that when Merc. An^i^. Sept. 52.
Gervase Shelvey of Sandwich said lately to a Gentleman of that Town that if
the King came thither he would shoot the Rogue, for which he was imprisoned by
the Major now being, it was resolved by the High Court of Parliament, that
these words were but a misdemeanour; and so he was released again.

Ans. The House of Commons, which you call the High Court of Parliament, did
not so much deliver their judgment in the case aforesaid, as betray their
disaffection in it to His Majesty, whose Person they endeavor to destroy that
they may keep his power still amongst themselves. Or if they did, it was a very
false and erroneous judgment, directly contrary unto the resolution of my Lords
the Judges, and other Sages of the Law in all former Ages, V. Stamfords Pleas
cap. 2. Coke on Littleton I. 2. c. 11.. 200.
by whom it is affirmed expressly, that if any man Stat. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2.
do compass or imagine the death of our Lord the King (as all Rebels do) and
does declare the same imagination by any overt fact, either deed or word, he
shall suffer judgment as a Traitor, licet is id quod in voluntate habuit, ad
effectum non perduxerit, as Bracton. l. 2.
Bracton has it, although it do not take effect, and go no farther than the
thought or purpose of the first contriver. Upon which ground it was, no
question, that Shimei suffered death by the hands of Solomon. For although David
spared him upon submission, because he would not intermix the joy of his return
unto Jerusalem with any sad and mournful Accident (as that must needs have
been unto Shimei's friends) 2 Samuel 19. 22. yet he gave order to his son to
bring his hoary head down to the grave with blood, because he had cursed him
with a grievous curse in the day when he went to Mahanaim, 1 Kings 2. 8. which
was accordingly performed by Solomon, v. 46.

6. Quest. But Shimei's case can be no Precedent to us, who are not governed by
the Judicial Law of Moses, but by the common Law of England, and the ruled
cases in that Law* And therefore tell me, if you can, whether our own books of
afford you any of the like examples.

Answ. Our own books do afford us many: as viz. in the case of Walker a Citizen
V. Speed, Hollingsh* and others, in the life of Edw. 4.
of London, and that of Mr. Burdet V. Speed, Hollingsh* and others, in the life
of Edw. 4.
an Esquire of Warwickshire, both executed in the time of King Edward 4th* for
words which might be construed to a treasonable and rebellious sense, tho
perhaps no ill meaning was intended; that of the Windsors Id. in Hen. 8.
Butcher in the reign of King Henry 8th* for saying that rather than sell his
meat at so mean a rate, he would send it to the Rebels in the North; and
finally of one Oldnoll, one of the Yeomen of the Guard in Queen Mary's time,
Compton in his book of Justices.
who had judgment of death for certain traitorous and seditious words spoken
against her Majesty, although no insurrection or Rebellion did ensue upon them.
For the particulars, I must refer you to our law books and the common
Chronicles.

7. Quest. Proceed we now unto your third and last sort of Rebellion, and tell
me what you mean by the Rebellion of the hand, and how many sorts there are of
it.

Answ. The Rebellion of the hand is of two sorts, whereof the first is the
composing and dispersing of false and scandalous Books and Pamphlets, tending
to the dishonor of the King, His Subordinate Officers, and Form of Government,
of purpose to alienate the affections of his Subjects from him, and make them
the more apt to Rebel against him. And this is punishable with death also by
the law of England, as may appear by the examples of Stow. in Hen. 7.
Bugnall, Scot, Heath, and Kennington, being Sanctuary men, in S. Martins
Legrand London, who had judgment to be hanged, drawn, and quartered in the time
of K. Hen. 7th* for setting up seditious Bills to the scandal of the King and
some of his Council: of Penry, Udall, Barrow, Greenwood, Studley, Billott, and
Bowdler, Id. in Elizabeth.
zealous Puritans all, all of which were condemned and three of them hanged in
Q. Elizabeth's time, for writing treasonable and seditious Books, by which the
peace of the Kingdom might have been disturbed, tho no Rebellion followed on
them: of Copping and Thacker, Hollingsh. in the life of Q. Elizabeth.
who were hanged at S. Edmunds bury in the said Queens time, for publishing the
Pamphlets writ by Rob. Brown against the Book of Common Prayer; which Compton
thus reports in his Lawyers French, Compton in his book of Justices.
Deux executez pour poublier les livres de Robert Brown, encontre le livre de
common praut. And finally witness the example of Mr. Williams Howes addition to
Stowes Chronicle.
a Barrister of the Middle Temple, who was executed in King James his Reign for
writing a defamatory Book, against the said King and his Posterity.

8. Quest. What is the other sort of that Rebellion, which you call the
Rebellion, of the hand.

Answ. The other sort of the Rebellion of the hand, is that which commonly is
called Actual Rebellion, and is defined by the Statute of the 25 of King Edward
3. Cap. 2.
to be a levying of War against our Sovereign Lord the King in his Realm, or an
adhering to the Kings Enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in
the Realm or elsewhere. And so it is determined also in the Civil Laws, by
which all those, Spiegel in Lexico ^ur. Civil.
qui arripiunt arma contra eum cujus jurisdictioni subditi sunt, who take up
Arms against such Persons to whose authority they are subject, are declared to
be Rebels. Where note, that not the open Act only, but the attempt and
machination is brought within the compass of Rebellion. Rebellio ipse actus
rebellandi est, qui non solum facto sed machinatione committitur, as those
Lawyers tell us. Bartolus in Constitut. Hen. 7.
And it is worth our observation that not only the bearing Arms against the
King is declared to be Rebellion by the law of England, but that it was
declared to be Rebellion by the chief Judges of this Kingdom Camden Annal.
Eliz. An. 1601.
at the arraignment of the Earl of Essex (the Father of him who now is in the
head of this Rebellion) for any man to seek to make himself so strong, that the
King should not be able to resist him, although he broke not out into open act.

9. Quest. What is the end that Rebels do propose unto themselves, when they
put themselves into Rebellion?

Ans. The deposition and destruction of the King in possession, and an
alteration of the present Government. And so it was determined by the joint
consent of all the Judges Camden ibid.
at the Arraignment of the Earl of Essex above mentioned, by whom it was
resolved for Law, that in every Rebellion there was a plot upon the life and
deposition of the Prince; it being not to be conceived that the Rebels would
suffer him to live or reign^ who might have opportunity in the change of
things, to punish them for their Rebellions, and avenge himself upon them for
their Treasons. And this they did confirm by the Civil Laws, and further
justify and confirm by the strength of Reason, with which it seemed
inconsistent, ut qui semel Regi jus dixerit, that he who had once overruled
his King by force of Arms, should either suffer him to live, or recover the
possession of his Realm again. All which they made good by the sad examples of
King Edward the second, and King Richard the second, who did not long enjoy
either life or Crown, after they came into the hands of those who rebelled
against them.

10. Qu. But those Examples which you speak of, were in times of Popery; have
you the like to show since the Reformation?

Answ. I would to God we had none such, but we have too many. For not to look
into our neighboring Realm of Scotland, and the proceedings of some there (who
called themselves Protestants) against their Queen; the Rebellion plotted by
the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's time, (though there was nothing less
pretended) was to have ended in the death of the Queen, and the alteration of
the Government. For as was afterward confessed by some of his Accomplices, the
secret part of the design, was to have seized upon the Queen, and secured his
Adversaries in the Court; whom when he had condemned and executed, Id. Ibid.
Parliamento indicto reipub* formam immutare statuit, he then resolved to call
a Parliament, and settle a new form of Government. Which how it could be done,
and the Queen alive, I believe you know not. And so much was acknowledged by
the Earl himself, after the sentence of death was passed upon him, when he
affirmed to certain of her Majesty's Council, Reginam sospitem esse non posse
si ipse supersit, Idem. Ibid.
that whilst he lived it was not possible for the Queen to continue in safety.
Thus have you seen the main design of that Rebellion (as of all others
whatsoever) what his pretenses were which he cast abroad, the better to seduce
the people, I shall not stick to tell you if you put me to it.

11. Quest. I shall not trouble you with that at this present time. But being
you say, that levying of War against the King is properly and truly to be
called Rebellion, I would fain ask, whether you mean it only in such cases
where the Subjects take up Arms out of pride and wantonness; or in such also
when they are necessitated and enforced unto it in their own defense?

Answ. I mean it equally in both cases, tho of the two, the former be more
odious in the sight both of God and man. For even defensive Arms, as your Party
calls them, are absolutely unlawful in the Subject against his Sovereign: in
regard that no defensive War can be undertaken, but it carries a resistance in
it Romans 13. 1.
to those higher powers, to which every soul is to be subject. Which powers
being obtained by Almighty God, it follows by the Apostle's Logic (who was a
very able Disputant) that they who do resist the powers, resist the Ordinance
of God, Romans 13.
and consequently shall receive to themselves demnation. A rule which took such
deep impression in the Primitive Christians, that though for personal valor,
numbers of men, and leaders able to conduct them, they were superior to the
adverse party in the Roman Empire; yet they chose rather to expose their lives
unto the merciless fury of the Persecutors, than take up Arms against their
Princes, or disturb the peace of their Dominions, under pretense of standing in
their own defense, being so tyrannically and unjustly handled. For proof
whereof, we may alledg Tertullian, In Apolog.
Cyprian, Cyprian* Epistola ad Demetrian.
Lactantius, Lactant* Institut. divin. l. 5.
and some other Eucher: Lugdun^^ns. and alii.
Ancients, whose words we will produce at large, if you think it necessary.

12. Quest. You need not put your self to that trouble. For we deny not that
the Ancient Christians did rather choose to suffer, than to take up Arms;
Mercur* Britannicus. number. 19.
but when we say, that tho they were exceeding numerous, yet they were not
formed into States and Kingdoms, and that when they were once estated in laws
and liberties, as in France, Holland, Scotland, Germany, they made no question
then to defend themselves. What can you answer unto that?

Answ. I trow the Roman Empire was a settled State, as strongly cemented with
all the ligaments of power and policy, as any one of these you mention; and
that the Subjects of that Empire had their laws and liberties, which as their
Ancestors had received from the indulgence of their Emperors, and the Roman
Senate, so they transmitted them to their posterity. And yet when all the
Empire had received the faith in the time of Constantine, and that no Religion
but the Christian had public countenance from the Laws, during the most part
of his reign, and the whole reign of his three Sons (which was for fifty five
years, no fewer,) the Subjects kept themselves to their former Principles.
Insomuch that when the Emperor Julian began to entrench upon their liberties,
and infringe those laws, which had been granted them by the grace and goodness
of those Princes; they knew no other way, nor weapons, by which to make
resistance to such lawless violence, but their prayers and tears. (...),
Nazianzen. Oration 1. in Julian.
and this was all the Medicine which they had to cure that Malady, as we find
in Nazianzen. The like I could produce from St. Ambrose also, Ambros. Orat. 5.
were not this sufficient. And for your instances of France, Holland, Scotland,
Germany, which you have mustered up to make good your cause; I am sorry for the
Protestant Religions sake, that you have furnished me with so many examples of
Rebellions since the Reformation; some of which ended in the death, and others
in the deposition of their natural Princes. Which was a point you seemed to
doubt of in your tenth Question.

13. Quest. But tell me seriously, do you conceive that all resistance of this
kind made by force of Arms, may be called Rebellion; and that there are no
cases which may make it lawful, and warrantable by the Laws of God or man?

Answ. Your question has two several parts, and must receive two several
answers. And to the first I answer seriously (it being now no time to trifle)
that all resistance of the kind you speak of, nor only may be called Rebellion,
but is Rebellion in the true and natural sense of the word. For if (as the
Civilians say) Rebellis dicitur inobediens Principi circa concernentia
prosperitatem Imperii, Bartolus in repertorio.
that every one may be said to be a Rebel, who yields not obedience to his
Prince in all such particulars, as do concern the flourishing estate of his
Dominions* assuredly he is a Rebel in the highest degree, who takes up Arms
against his Sovereign (whatever his pretenses be) and by so doing does embroil
his Kingdoms in all these miseries, which most inseparably are annexed to a
Civil War. Now frame the second part of the present Quere, into a distinct
question of it self, and I will give such answer to it, as I hope shall
satisfy.

14. Quest. My question is, whether the condition of the persons which are
engaged in such resistance, the grounds on which they go, and the end they aim
at, make not an alteration in the case: so that Resistance qualified by these
several circumstances, become not warrantable by the Laws both of God and Man?

Answ. The answer unto this is already made in the book of Homilies; where it
is said, First part of the Homily against Rebellion.
that "though not only great multitude of the rude and rascal Commons, but
sometimes also mention of great Wit, Nobility, and Authority, have moved
Rebellion against their lawful Princes; though they should pretend sundry
causes, as the redress of the Commonwealth, or Reformation of Religion, tho
they have made a great show of holy meaning by beginning their Rebellion with a
counterfeit service of God, and by displaying and bearing about diverse Ensigns
and Banners, which are acceptable unto the rude ignorant common, people, (great
multitudes of whom by such false pretenses and shows they do deceive and draw
unto them) yet were the multitudes of the Rebels never so huge and great, the
Captains never so noble, politic and witty, the pretenses feigned to be never
so good and holy, yet the speedly overthrow of all Rebels, of what number,
state or condition soever they were, or what color or cause soever they
pretended, is, and ever has been such, that God does thereby show that he
allows neither the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any people,
nor the weight of any cause, as sufficient for which the Subjects may move
Rebellion against their Princes." So far the very words of the Book of Homilies.

15. Quest. Why do you tell us thus of the Book of Homilies, composed by a
company of ignorant Bookmen, men utterly unskilful in the Laws of the Land.
Think you that we ascribe to them so much authority, as to be overruled by
them in this case?

Answ. It may be not. But I must tell you that there was a Statute made in the
thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, S^at. 13. Eliz. cap. 1^.
entitled, An Act for Reformation of disorders in the Ministers in the Church,
etc. in which it was enacted amongst other things, that all who were to be
admitted unto holy Orders, or instituted into any Ecclesiastical preferment
should first subscribe unto the Articles of Religion agreed upon in
Convocation, Anno 15^2. One of which Articles recites the names and titles of
each several Homily, and approves their doctrine. So that although the Homilies
were at first composed by men unskilful in the Laws, as you please to say, yet
they received both strength and approbation from the skilfullest Lawyers of
those times, convened with the Nobility and Gentry in the Court of Parliament,
and consequently have as much authority as the Parliament could add unto them.
But since you are not pleased with this general answer, give me your doubts and
Queres in particular, and see what I can say unto them.

16. Quest. First then, I ask, whether if the King become a Tyrant, it be not
Lawful in that case to bear Arms against him?

Answ. Yes, if G. Buchanan may be judge, Buchanan. de jure Regni.
who tells us plainly, that he would have rewards proposed to such as should
kill a Tyrant, as formerly there were for those who destroyed Wolves. But if S.
Paul may rule the case we shall find it otherwise. For if we ask to whom it was
that the Apostle did command Subjection to be given even by every soul, to whom
it was that he forbad resistance to be made upon pain of Damnation; Romans 13. v.
1, 2, 3.
we shall find it was no other than the Emperor Baron. and Chronol. alii.
Nero, the greatest Tyrant, the bloudiest and most terrible Prince, the
greatest monster of mankind, that ever yet was born of Woman. Yet St. Paul
writing to the Romans, over whom he did so cruelly tyrannize, commanded every
soul to be subject to him, not for wrath only but for conscience sake, and that
upon the pain and peril of damnation, no man should be so bold as to resist his
power, or rebel against him. And doubtless Nebuchadnezzar was a mighty Tyrant,
one who had taken from the Jews, their, Laws, their Liberty, their Religion, 2
Kings 25. and 2 Chronicles. c. 36.
and whatsoever else was most dear unto them. Yet were the Jews commanded to
submit unto him, and patiently to bear the yoke which was laid upon them; and
not to hearken to their Prophets, not to their Diviners, nor unto their
Dreamers (mark it, for this is just your case) which speak unto you, saying, ye
shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they Prophecy a lie unto you that ye
should perish, Jerem. 27. v. 9. Finally, to oppose the saying of an Heathen
man, unto that wicked speech of him who did pretend so much unto Reformation,
we find it thus resolved in Plutarch, (...), Plutarch. in Agis and Ceolmenis.
that it was contrary both to positive Laws, and the Law of Nature, for any
Subject to lift up his hand against the person of his Sovereign.

17. Quest. Is it not lawful to bear Arms against Sovereign Princes, for the
preservation of Religion?

Answ. Yes, for those men who place Religion in Rebellion, and whose faith is
faction; but for no men else. The Jews might well have pleaded this against
Nebuchadnezzar when he destroyed their Temple, and forbad their sacrifices; and
the Christians in Tertullian's time (when they were at the strongest) against
the Emperor Severus, who did not only labor to suppress Religion, but utterly
to root out the Professors of it; and yet the contrary doctrine was then
preached and practiced, as before was showed you. What weapons the poor
Christians did make use of in the time of Julian the Apostate, in his
endeavors to subvert the Gospel, and establish Paganism again in the place
thereof, we told you lately out of Nazianzen: and shall now add, that the
Christian party was then so strong and powerful in the Roman Armies, that when
Iovinian was elected Emperor on the death of Julian, the Soldiers with one
voice cried out, (...), Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 22.
that they were all Christians. So that it was not consciousness of their own
weakness, nor the fear of wrath; but conscience of their duty, and the fear of
God, which made them patiently submit to the present storm. Thus when the
younger Valentinian endeavored to supplant the true Religion, and to set up
Arianism, to which he strongly was addicted, the Tyrant Maximus made offer to
S. Ambrose of his Arms and Forces, the better to enable him to resist the
Arians, and to preserve the true Religion: Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. l. 3 c. 4.
but the good Father absolutely refused the offer. And though he was so well
beloved and honored by the people generally, that he could easily have Armed
them against the Emperor, and crushed the Arian faction in the Court, by whom
his Councils were directed; yet he betook himself to no other weapons than his
Prayers and Tears, the ancient weapons of the Christians. Coactus repugnare non
novi, dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere; Aliter nec debeo nee possum
resistere; Ambr. Orat. 5.
other resistance knew he none, tho pressed and oppressed too, then his Tears and
Prayers.

18. Quest. What if he violate our Laws, and infringe our Liberties, may we not
then bear Arms against him?

Answ. Somewhat in answer unto this you received before, in the command imposed
upon the Jews by the Prophet Jeremy, not to Rebel or take up Arms (which come
both to one) against Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, Jerem. 27. 9, 10.
although he did so tyrannize and Lord it over them, that neither their old
Laws nor Liberties were a jot regarded. But that which I shall tell you now, it
S. Paul's case in the 23. of the Acts. Being brought to plead his own cause, and
the Gospels too, before the Council of Jerusalem, in the first entrance of his
Plea, the high Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by to smite him on the
mouth; Acts 23. v. 2, 3.
and sitting there to judge him after the Law, commanded him to be smitten
contrary to the Law. S. Paul, upon the apprehension of so great an injury, so
plainly contrary unto the Laws, and Liberties of the Jewish Subject, calls him
whited wall, and threatens him with vengeance from Almighty God. Ibid. v. 3.
But finding that it was the High Priest whom he had reviled (who had sometimes
the supreme Government of the Jewish state) he cried peccavi out of hand,
imputed his offense to ignorance, Ibid. v. 4.
I wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest; and finally condemned
himself with a scriptum est, saying, Ibid. v. 4.
it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, if so, in
case we may not speak evil of our Rulers, when they smite us contrary to the
Laws, the Subjects Liberty, which is the rebellion of the tongue; assuredly we
may not take up Arms against them under those pretenses, which is the rebellion
of the hand.

19. Quest. What if the King be in the hands of Evil Counselors, may we not
take up Arms to remove them from him?

Answ. Yes, if the Earl of Essex may be Judge, whose Father fell into Rebellion
under that pretense, Camden, Annal. Eliz. Anno 16^0.
ut regnum ab impotenti quorundam dominatu liberaret, as to free the Kingdom
from some men who had got the Queen into their hands, and consequently
engrossed unto themselves the principal managery of the Commonwealth. But he
had other aims than that, as before was told you; and so had they that went
before him in the self same road. When as Watt Tiler, and Jack Straw, and the
residue of that Rascal Rabble had took up Arms against King Richard the second,
they made the Londoners believe (who have been always apt to be deluded by the
like pretenses) that when they had seized on the evil Counselors, Hollingsh.
in Rich. 2.
which abused the King, and brought them to a legal trial, then they would be
quiet. But under this pretense they broke open Prisons, robbed Churches,
murdered the King's good Subjects, and finally arrived to so high an impudence,
that Watt Tiler did not stick to say, that within four days all the Laws of
England should proceed from his mouth. Id. Ibid.
And when Jack Cade had drawn the Kentish to Rebel against King Henry the
sixth, he gave it out, that if he could get the King and Queen into his hands,
he would use them honorably; Id. in the life of Henry 6.
but if he could lay hands on any of the Traitors which were about them, he
would take care to see them punished for their misdemeanors. But in good truth
the end and aim of the Rebellion, was to depose King Henry and the House of
Lancaster, in favor of the title of the Duke of York.

20. Quest. What if the King assaults a Subject, or seek to take away his life;
may not the Subject in that case take up Arms against him?

Answ. Yes, if Paraeus in ep. ad Romans c. 13.
Paraeus may be Judge, and some of the Genevian Doctors who have so determined.
But David's case, which commonly is alleged in defense hereof, if looked on
with the eyes of judgment, does affirm the contrary. For David, though he had a
guard of some friends and followers to save him from the hands of such wicked
instruments, as Saul in his unjust displeasure might have used against him: yet
he preserved himself from Saul not by resistance, but by flight, 1 Samuel 22. v.
5. 23. v. 13. 26, 27, etc.
by flitting up and down as the King removed, and approached near him with his
Armies. For had he had a thought of War, though Defensive merely, it is probable
he would have took the opportunities which were offered to him, either of
seizing on Saul's person when he had him all alone in the Cave of Engeddi, 1 Samuel 24. v. 3.
or suffering Abishai to smite him as he lay asleep in the Hill of Hachilah, 1 Samuel 16. v. 3.
or at the least in making sure of Abner and the Host of Saul, who lay sleeping
by him. Ibid. v. 12.
But David was not so well tutored in the Art of Rebellion, as to secure
himself this way, and wanted some of our new Masters to instruct him in it. If
from the practice of a pious and religious Jew, we will look down upon the
precept of a grave, wise, and learned Gentile, we shall find this rule laid
down in Aristotle, Aristot. in Polit.
(...), that if the Magistrate assault the person of a private Subject, the
Subject may not strike again, nor lift hand against him. Finally, that you may
perceive how much all sorts of men do oppose your Doctrines, Calvin himself,
although no friend to Monarchy, does affirm thus much, Calvin Institut. l. 3.
c. 10. 5, 6.
qui privatus manum intulerit, etc. that any private person of what sort
soever, who shall lift up his hand against his Sovereign (though a very Tyrant)
is for the same condemned by the voice of God.

21. Quest. Perhaps we may so far agree with you, as to disable private persons
from bearing Arms, and lifting up their hands against Kings, and Princes of
their own authority: But think you that inferior Magistrates are not enabled
by their Offices to protect the People, and arm them if occasion be, in their
own defense?

Answ. It Is true that some Divines of the Reformed Churches, who either lived
in popular States, or had their breeding at Geneva, or thought the Discipline
by them defended could not be otherwise obtruded upon Christian Princes, than
by putting the Sword into the hands of the People, have spared no pains to
spread abroad this dangerous Doctrine; in which they have not wanted followers
in most parts of Christendom. But S. Paul knew of no such matter when he
commanded every soul to yield obedience and subjection to the higher powers,
and upon no occasion to resist those powers to which the Lord had made them
subject. So that although inferior Magistrates may expect obedience from the
hands of those, over whom and for whose weal and governance they are advanced
and placed by the Prince in chief; yet God expects that they should yield
obedience to the powers above them, especially to the highest of all, than
which there is not any higher. There is a golden Chain in Polities, and every
link thereof has some relation and dependence upon that before; so far forth
as inferior Magistrates do command the People, according to that power and
those instruments which is communicated to them by the supreme Prince, the
Subject is obliged to submit unto them, without any manner of Resistance. Men
of no public Office must obey the Constable, the Constable is bound to speed
such Warrants as the next Justice of the Peace shall direct unto him; the
Justices receive the exposition of the Law from the mouth of the Judges; the
Judges have no more Authority but what is given them by the King: And thereupon
it needs must follow, that though the Judges direct the Justices, and the
Justices command the Constables, and the Constables may call the People to
their aid, if occasion be; yet all must yield a free obedience, without
reluctance or resistance to the King himself. The reason is, because as Kings
or Supreme Magistrates are called Gods Ministers by S. Paul, Romans 13. verse. 4.
so the inferior or Subordinate Magistrates are called the Kings Ministers by
S. Peter, 1 Pet. ^. verse. 14.
Submit your selves to the King, as unto the Supreme; next to such Governors
as are sent (or authorized) by him for the punishment of evil doers. Besides,
there is no Inferior Matistrate of what sort soever, but as he is a public
person, in respect of those that are beneath him, so is he but a private man in
reference to the powers above him; and therefore as a private person disabled
utterly (by your own rules) from having any more authority to resist his
Sovereign, or bear defensive Arms against him as well as any other of the
Common People. The government of States may be compared most properly unto
Porphyries Tree, in which there is one Genus summum, and many Genera
subalterna. Now it is well known to every young Logician who has learnt his
Predicabiles, that Genus subalternum is a species only as it looks up to those
above it; a Genus in relation unto these below it. If you have so much Logic
in you as to make application of this Note to the present case, you will
perceive inferior Magistrates to be no Magistrates at all, as they relate unto
the King, the Genus summum in the scale of Govenment, and therefore of no more
authority to resist the King, or call the People unto Arms, than the meanest
Subject.

22. Quest. If so, then were the Christian Subject of all men most miserable,
Merc. Brit. numb. 19.
in being utterly deprived of all ways and means, by which to free his Country
from Oppression, and himself from Tyranny. And therefore tell me if you can,
what would you have the Subject do in these extremities, in which you have
deprived him of all means to relieve himself?

Answ. That which the Lord himself prescribed, and the Saints have practiced.
When first the Lord acquainted those of the house of Israel, how heavy a yoke
their violence and importunity in asking for a King, had pulled upon them; he
told them of no other remedy for so much affliction, but that they should cry
out in that day, because of the King whom they had chosen. 1 Samuel ^. verse. 18.
No casting off the yoke when we find it grievous, nor any way to make it
lighter and more pleasing to us, than either by addressing our Complaints to
the Lord our God, or tendering our Petitions to our Lord the King. Kings are
accomptable to none but God, if they abuse the power which he gives unto them:
Nor can we sue them for a Trespass in any other Court, than the Court of
Heaven. Therefore when David had defiled the Wife, and destroyed the Husband,
he thought himself responsal for it unto none but God, against whom only he had
sinned, Ps. 51. v. 4.
as he says himself. And thereupon S. Ambrose gives this gloss on those words
of David, Homini ergo non peccavit cui non tenebatur obnoxious. Ambros. in locum.
David, says he, confesses no offense to man, by whom he could not be
impleaded; but only unto God who had power to judge him. St. Gregory of Tours
understood this rightly, when he did thus address himself to a King of France,
Si quis de nobis, etc. S Greg. Tur. Hist. Franc.
"If any of us (O King) do transgress the Laws, thou have power to punish him;
but it thou go beyond thy limits, who can punish thee? We tell thee of thy
faults as occasion serves, and when thou listest to give ear, thou do hearken
to us: Which if thou should refuse to do, who shall judge thee for it, but he
that calls himself by the name of Justice." And that you may be sure, that it
is no otherwise in England than in France and Iewry, Bracton, a great and
famous Lawyer of this Kingdom, does affirm expressly, that if the King proceed
not in his Government according unto Law and Right, there is no legal remedy to
be had against him. What then is to be done by the injured Subject? Locus erit
supplicationi quod factum suum corrigat and emendet; quod si non fecerit, satis
ei sufficit ad poenam, quod Dominum expec^et ultorem. Bracton. 1. cap. 8.
All that he has to do (says he) is, that the does petition him for relief
and remedy; which if the King refuse to consent unto, it will be punishment
enough unto him, that he must look for vengeance from the hands of God. Which
said, he given this reason for it, Because that no man is to call the Kings
Acts in question, multo fortius contra factu^ suum venire, must less, to go
about to annul and avoid them by force and violence.

23. Quest. We grant it to be true which you cite from Bracton, as it relates
to private and particular men; but think you that it does concern or oblige the
Parliament, which is the representative body of the Kingdom?

Answ. Hoc sumus congregati quod and dispersi, Tertull. Apologet. c. 39.
as Tertullian tells us of the Christians in another case. We showed before
that Subjects were in no case to resist their Sovereigns, in the way of Arms,
either as private persons on inferior Magistrates. And thereupon we may
conclude, that the People of this Realm in the diffusive body of it, having no
power of levying War or raising Forces to resist the King, without being
punishable for the same, as in case of Treason; cannot enable the two Houses of
Parliament, which are the representative body of it, to do those Acts, which
they want power to do themselves; for no Man can confer a power upon any other
which is not first vested in himself, according to that good old rule, Nemo dat
quod non habet, And therefore if it be rebellion in the English Subject out of
times of Parliament, to levy War against the King in his Realm, or to adhere
unto his Enemies, and be aiding to them: I know not how it can excuse the
Members of the two Houses of Parliament from coming within the compass of that
Condemnation, if they commit such Acts in time of Parliament, and under the
pretense of the power thereof, which are judged Treason and Rebellion by the
Laws of England.

24. Quest. But Master Prynne has learnedly removed that rub, In his
disloyalty of Papists, etc.
who tells you that the Statute of 25. Edward 3. runs (only) in the Singular
number, If a man shall levy War against the King, and therefore cannot be
extended to the Houses, who are many and public persons; What can you answer
unto that?

Answ. That Mr. Prynne having so often shown malice, may have a little leave
sometimes to show his folly, and make some sport unto the Kingdom in these
useful times: for if his learned observation will hold good in Law, it is not
possible that any Rebellion should be punished in a legal way; because so many
(and some of them perhaps may be public persons) are commonly engaged in
actions of that wicked nature. And I suppose that Mr. Prynne with all his
learning, did never read of a Rebellion, that is to say, of a War levied by the
Subject against his Sovereign, plotted and executed by one man only, in the
Singular number. Had Master Prynne affirmed on his word and credit, that the
Members of the two Houses were not men but gods, he had then said somewhat
which would have freed them from the guilt and danger of that dreadful Statute.
If he admit them to be men, and grant them to have levied War against his
Majesty, or to be aiding to the Rebels now in arms against him; he both
conclude them to be guilty of this great Rebellion, with which this miserable
Kingdom in almost laid desolate. His Sophistry and trim distinctions touching
their quality and numbers will but little help them.

25. Qu. We have another Plaster which will salve that Sore, viz. The
difference that is made between the King's Person and his Power by which is it
made visible to discerning eyes, that though the Parliament have levied War
against the Person of the King, yet they do not fight against his Power, but
defend it rather. And it is not a resistance of the Person but the Power of
Princes, which is forbidden by Saint Paul. How do you like of that distinction?

Answ. As ill, or worse than of the other, as being of the two the more serious
folly; and coming from an Author no less factious (but far more learned I
confess) than your other was. For if I do remember right, Buchanan was the
first that broached this Doctrine in his Book De jure regni apud Scotos; in
which he tells us that Saint Paul in the place aforesaid does not speak of
Magistrates, Sed de functione and officio eorum qui aliis praesunt, but of the
Magistracy it self, the Function or Office of the Magistrate, which must not be
resisted, though his Person may. Which foolish Fancy serving fitly for a Cloak
or Vizard, wherewith to palliate and disguise Rebellions, has since been ofen
used by those who pursue his Principles, (though never worn so threadbare as of
late, in your treacherous Pamphlets:) but draws after it as many and as gross
Absurdities as the other did. For by this strange division of the King from
himself, or of his Person from his Power; a Traitor may kill Charles, and not
hurt the King, destroy the Man and save the Magistrate, the Power of the King
in one of the Armies may fight against his Person in the other Army, his own
Authority may be used to his own destruction, and one may lawfully set upon
him, beat, assault, and wound him, in order to his preservation. So that you
make the King like Sosia in the ancient Comedy, who being well beaten, and
demanded who it was that did it, made answer, Egomet, memet, qui nunc sunt
domi, Plaut. in Amphitr. Act. 2.
that Sosia, who was at home in his Masters House, did beat that Sosia which
was abroad in his Masters business. But questionless Saint Paul did better
understand himself than either Buchanan, or any of his followers since his time
have done: Who does interpret the word power, which he uses in the first and
second Verses, by that of Principes and Ministri, Rulers and Ministers, which
be uses in the third and fourth: Which as it plainly shows that he means the
Magistrate, and not the Function or the Office, as your Masters tell you; so
does it leave you liable to the wrath of God, if you endeavor to defend these
wicked and rebellious courses by such wretched shifts.

26. Quest. What say you then, if it appear that the two Houses of Parliament,
(for I use your terms) are not subordinate to the King, but coordinate with
him: Observations on his Majesty's Answers, etc.
I hope then you will yield so far that the two Houses have a power, if they
cannot otherwise provide for the common safety, to arm the People of the Realm
against Him, as against an Equal.

Answ. We grant indeed, that People which have no Superior, but stand on equal
terms with one another, if injured by their Neighbors, and not receiving
satisfaction when they do desire it, may remedy themselves by force, and for so
doing by the Law of Nations, are esteemed just Enemies; but so it is not in the
point which is now in question, the Realm of England (as it is declared by Act
of Statut. 24. Henr. 8. ^. 12.
Parliament) being on Empire, governed by one supreme Head and King, having the
Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom^ Body
Politic compact of all sorts and degrees of People, divided in ^erms and by
Names of Spirituality and Temporality, been bounden and ought to bear next to
God, a natural and humble Obedience. Assuredly, had the Lords and Commons then
assembled, conceived themselves coordinate with the King in the public
Government, they would not have so wronged themselves and their Posterity, as
to have made this declaration and acknowledgment so prejudicial thereunto, not
only in a Parliament time, but by Act of Parliament. Besides, if this
Coordination which you dream of could be once admitted, it must needs follow
thereupon, that though the King has no Superior, he has many Equals, and
where there is equality there is no subjection. But Bracton tells you in plain
terms, not only that the King has no superior in his Realm, except God alone,
but that he has no Equal, neither, Parem autem non habet in regno suo, as his
words there are Bract^n I. 1. c 8. ^ 5.
And then he gives this reason of it, Quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in
parem non habet imperium, because he could not have an Equal but with the loss
of his Authority and Regal Dignity, considering, that an Equal has no power to
command another. Now lest you should object that is spoken of the King out of
times of Parliament, but that when once the Lords and Commons are convened in
Parliament, the case is otherwise. First, you must think that had this Doctrine
been on foot in the times preceding, it would have been a great impediment unto
frequent Parliaments; and that our King* (as others) being very jealous even of
the smallest points of Sovereignty, would not admit of Partners in the Crown
Imperial, by the assembling of a Parliament, having been used to reign alone
without any Rivals. And Secondly, you may call to mind, that even sedente
Parliamento, during the sitting of the Court, the Lords and Commons call
themselves His Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects, which is not only
used as a style of course in such Petitions as they use to present unto him,
(and by the way, it is not the use for men of equal power to send Petitions unto
one another) but it is the very Phrase in some Acts of Parliament, 25. Hen. 8.
c. 22, etc.
for which I do refer you to the Book at large. And if they be his Subjects, as
they say they be, they cannot be his Equals, as you say they are; and therefore
not coordinate with him, but subordinate to him; by consequence the levying War
against the King, no more excusable in them than the meanest Subject.

27. Quest. You take great pains to make the Parliament, or the two Houses, as
you call them, to be guilty of Rebellion against his Majesty without ground or
reason. For tell me seriously, think you the Parliament has not power to arm
the people, and put them into a posture of defense against the Enemies of the
Kingdom, if they see occasion?

Answ. Yes, if the King do give consent, and that there be such Enemies against
whom to arm them. For properly, according to the ordinary rules of Polities,
there is no power of raising Forces, and putting the People into Arms, but only
in the Prince or Supreme Magistrate. The Civil Laws have so resolved it. Nulli
prorsus, nobis insciis and inconsultis, quorumlibet armorum movendorum copia
tribuatur Constitut. Valentin. and Valent.
; let none presume to levy Forces, whatsoever the pretense or occasion be,
without our privity or consent, says the Constitution. If you consult with the
Divines, Saint Austin, a most Learned Father, will inform you thus, that the
natural course and arts of Government accommodated to the peace and welfare of
us mortal men do require thus much, Ut suscipiendi belli autoritas atque
consilium penes principes sit, August.
that all authority of making war and levying forces appertain only to the
Prince. And if you please to look on Bracton, or any of the Lawyers of your
Native Country, they will tell you this, that the material sword is put into
the hands of the King by Almighty God, Bract. l. 1. c. 8. ^. 4. and l. 2. c. 24.
that by the material sword is meant a power and right to look to the defense
and preservation of the Kingdom; and that it is no less than Treason to enter
into any association, Proclam. Feb. 16. 1642
or to raise a war without the Kings consent, or against his will. And this the
Houses, as it seems, understood full well, when purposing to levy Forces to
begin the War, they took the Kings authority along for company, and raised them
in the name of the King and Parliament, the better to seduce the People to a
blinded Rebellion. As for the Enemies of the Kingdom, against whom the Subjects
were to arm themselves by the appointment of the Houses, I can tell of none; no
nor they neither, as I take it, unless they saw them in their dreams. And for
your posture of defense, as you please to phrase it, (besides that I have
proved before, that even defensive Arms are absolutely unlawful on the Subjects
part) the war has been offensive plainly on the part of the Houses, which as
it was contrived and followed without the least color of necessity to induce
them to it, so did it aim at nothing else than the destruction of the King, and
the alteration of the Government, which are the purpose and design of all
Rebellions, as before was told you.

28. Quest. How prove you that the Parliament did begin the war, that on their
parts it was offensive, not defensive only, or that they had a purpose to
destroy the King? if you can make this good you shall gain me to you.

Answ. This point has been so agitated and discoursed already, it were but
labor lost to speak further in it. The Votes and Orders of the Houses for
putting the Kingdom into a posture of war, the taking into their own hands the
whole Militia of the Kingdom, raising of Money, Men, and Horses, in all the
quarters of the Land, mustering their new-raised House and Foot in
Finsbury-fields, and Tuttle-fields, seizing upon the Arms and Ammunition which
the King had bought with his own money, and laid up in his own Magazines,
before the King had either money enough to pay a Soldier, powder enough to kill
a Bird, or Men enough about him to guard his Person from any ordinary force and
violence; what was all this but a beginning of the war? and who did this but
some prevailing Men in the two Houses of Parliament, under the name and style
of the Lords and Commons? Then for the managing of the war, if it had been
defensive only, as you say it was, what needed a Commission to the Earl of
Essex to kill and slay all such as opposed their doings? What needed they have
sent some part of their Forces into Hampshire, to pluck the Town of Portsmouth
out of the Kings hands, which by reason of the distance of it could not do them
hurt; another into Dorsetshire to beat the Marquess of Hertford out of
Sherborne Castle; a third, and that the greatest part as far as Worcester, and
beyond it, to find the King, and give him battle before he was within an
hundred Miles of them? What needed they have sent their Emissaries into all the
Counties of the Kingdom, to put the People into Arms, in which the King had
neither Power nor Party that appeared for him; or to exhaust the blood and
treasure of this Nation, under pretense of settling their own privileges and
the Subjects liberties, when the King offered more by his frequent Messages
than they had reason to expect? Doubtless they could pretend no danger, as the
case then stood, which might necessitate them to take Arms in their own
defense: and therefore now of late they have changed their terms, and do not
make the war defensive merely, but in part preventive. Merc. Brit. numb. 18, 19.
It seems their consciences told them what they had deserved, and so for fear
the King might right himself upon them when he was of power, they thought it
best to strike the first blow and begin the Quarrel; in hope to make such sure
work of it, that he should never strike the second. But to say truth, the War
was not preventive neither on the Houses part, but a design that had been
plotted long before, and was made ripe for execution, when there was neither
ground nor color to possess the People with the fancy, that the King intended
force against them. For what purpose else did Sir Arthur Haslerig and M. Pym
sojourn two years together with Mr. Knightly, so near the habitation of the
good Lord Say? to what end held they correspondence with the discontented Party
in the Country, and took such pains in canvassing for Knights and Burgesses
(when this present Parliament was called) in most Counties, etc? Or to what end
and purpose had the zealous Citizens so used themselves unto their weapons,
frequented the Artillery Garden, and stored themselves with Arms in so large a
measure, but that they were resolved to be in readiness when the time should
come? This if it were not a design, must be done by Prophecy, not in the way of
a prevention.

29. Quest. But to the other point you spoke off, touching the purpose which
you say they had to destroy the King; can you make any proof of that?

Answ. I have already told you from the mouths of our greatest Lawyers, that
all Rebellions aim at no other end then the destruction of the King, and the
change of Government; and that this end was aimed at more especially in this
particular Rebellion. I shall tell you now, you cannot choose but call to mind
with what heat and violence, multitudes of the rascal people, as they flocked
toward Westminster, clamoured against his Sacred Majesty, even at Whitehall
Gates; and how seditiously they expressed the secrets of their traitorous
hearts: some saying openly as they passed along, that the King was the Traitor;
some, that the young Prince would govern better; and others of a more
transcendent wickedness, L. Digbies Apol. p. 13.
that the King was not fit to live. Next look upon these very Men, (for out of
them the body of their Army was at first compounded) trained to the Wars, well
armed, and marching furiously to find out the King, against whose Sacred
Person, and most precious life, they had before expressed such a dangerous
malice. Then add to this, that when they came unto Edgehill, they bent their
Canon more especially, and spent the hottest part of their shot and fury
toward that part of the battle in which (according unto that advertisement
which the villain Blague had given their General, a Man as full of discontent
and malice, as the worst amongst them) the King in Person, and the two young
Princes meant to be. Put this together, and compare it with some subsequent
passages which have been desperately vented in the House of Commons (touching
the deposition of the King) without check or censure; and the inviting of a
foreign Nation to Invade this Kingdom, the better to effect their business,
and tell me, if you can, what is aimed at else, then the destruction of the
King, and his Royal Issue?

30. Quest. I must confess you put me to it, but I must take some time to
consider of it, before I tell you what I think. In the mean season I have one
more doubt to propose unto you, which if you can remove, I am wholly yours. The
name of Parliament is sacred to me, and I am loath to scruple any of those
actions, which receive countenance and authority from the awful body. Can you
make proof that the Party which remains at Westminster have not the full
authority of the two Houses of Parliament? If you could make that clear, then
the work were done.

Answ. I dare not take that task upon me; it is too invidious: but I shall
offer these few things to your consideration. First, it would seriously be
considered, Whether the King, whose presence, as the head of that awful body,
gives life and motion to the acts and results thereof, do purposely absent
himself to make their consultations frustrate and their meeting fruitless; or
that he has been driven from them by force and violence? Secondly, Whether
such considerable numbers of the Lords and Commons, as are now absent from the
Houses, have left the Houses and the service, for no other reason than for
compliance with the King, and to serve his ends (in hope of getting honors and
preferments by him,) or on the motion made by the rascal multitude, to have the
names of these given up, who Voted not with Say, and Pym, and other the good
Members of both Houses? Thirdly, What mischief would ensue both to the Church
of Christ, and the States of Christendom, If when the greater and sounder part
of Parliaments and General Councils shall be driven away, either by the threats
and practices of the lesser, and the worse affected; the less and the worse
affected part may have the reputation of the whole body, and their actions
countenanced by the name thereof? Fourthly, Whether it be not one of the
greatest prejudices which the Protestants have against the Council of Trent,
Histor Con* Triden. Sleid. and alii.
that it was held in an unsafe place, which they could not come to without
danger; and that the Prelates there assembled, were so prelimited by the Popes
instructions, or awed with an Italian Guard which was set upon them, under
pretense of safety to their Persons, from affronts and injuries, that they had
neither freedom to debate the points which were there propounded, nor liberty
of suffrage to determine of them? Fifthly, Whether the King calling the
expulsed Party of the Lords and Commons to some other place, and summoning all
the rest also to assemble there, may not with greater reason take unto
themselves the name, the power, and reputation of a Parliament, than the
remaining party now at Westminster, consisting seldom of above an hundred
Commons, and sometimes not above three Lords, have challenged and usurped the
name of the two Houses? Sixthly and lastly, --

31. Quest. Hold, I must interupt you there. The King by Writ appoints his
Parliament to be held at Westminster, and by a subsequent Act or Statute has
so bound himself, that he can neither dissolve nor adjourn it without their
consent; How can he then remove it to another place, than that which was at
first appointed?

Answ. No doubt but he may do it with as good authority, as the two Houses, or
either of them may adjourn to London, which you cannot choose but know has
been often done, since the beginning of this Session. For tho they sit not
there as Houses, but by turning the either of the Houses into a Committee of
the whole House: yet this is but an Artifice to elude the Writ, and act their
business in a place of more advantage. The change is only in the name, but the
power the same. Witness those Votes and Declarations which they have passed and
published in the said Committees, as binding and effectual to their ends and
purposes, as any thing transacted in the several Houses. Nor is the place so
necessary and essential unto the being of Parliament, but that the major part
with the Kings consent, may change it if they think it profitable for the
Common wealth. Otherwise we might say of Parliaments, as once Victorinus did of
Christians, S. August. Confess. l. 8. c. 2.
Ergone pariete; faciunt Christianum? Is it the place and not the persons which
do make a Parliament? Or grant we, that of common course the Houses cannot
regularly be adjourned to another place, but the adjournment must be made in
the House it self; yet this is but a circumstance, or at most a ceremony, not
of the substance of the work. And if that speech of Caesar carries any weight,
(as all wise Men conceive it does) Legem necessitati cedere oportere, Val. Max.
l. 3. c. 7. n. 3.
that even the strictest Laws must yield to the necessities and uses of the
Commonwealth: no question but so slight a circumstance, as that of place must
needs be thought in the present business, is to give way unto the peace and
preservation of this wretched Kingdom.

32. Quest. These points I shall consider of as you have advised; only at
present I shall tell you, that I am very well resolved of the unlawfulness of
this War against His Majesty, and think them guilty of Rebellion, who either
laid the plot thereof, or have since pursued it. Tell me now for the close of
all, what punishment the Laws do inflict on those who are convicted of so
capital and abhorred a crime?

Answ. You cannot be so ignorant of the Laws of England, as not to know, That a
convicted Rebel is condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, his belly to
be ripped up, and his bowels to be taken out, whilst he is yet living, his
head and limbs to be advanced on some eminent places, for a terrible example
unto others, his blood attainted, his estate confiscate, his possessions
forfeited. The Civil Laws go somewhat further, and execute them after death in
their Coats of Arms, which are to be defaced and razed, in what place soever
they are found. Rebellium arma and Insignia delenda sunt, ubicunque
inveniuntur, Bartochinus in Repertorio aureo.
as Bartolus has it. I end as I began with the Book of Homilies; "Turn over
and read the Histories of all Nations, look over the Chronicles of our own
Country, call to mind so many Rebellions of old time, and some yet fresh in
memory, ye shall not find that God ever prospered any Rebellion against the
natural and lawful Prince, but contrariwise, that the Rebels were overthrown
and slain, and such as were taken Prisoners dreadfully executed. Consider the
great and noble Houses of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and other Lords, whose
names ye shall read in our Chronicles, now clean extinguished and gone, and
seek out the causes of the decay, you shall find that not lack of Issue and
Heirs Male has so much wrought that decay, and waste of noble Bloods and
Houses, as has Rebellion."

1 Samuel 26. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and
be guiltless?
Prove. 24. 21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both?
FINIS.

