A SERMON PREACHED Before the CONVOCATION OF THE Clergy in Ireland.

At the Cathedral Church of S. PATRICKS in DUBLIN, May 9. Anno 1661.

At the time of their General Receiving the H. COMMUNION.

By THO. HACKET, D. D. and Vicar of Chesthunt in Hartfordshire.

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell, for Tho. Davies and Th. Sadler, at the Bible in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD MICHAEL LORD BISHOP of CORK, CLOYNE, ROSSE.
And One of the Lords of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council in the
Kingdom of IRELAND.
May it please your Lordship,
THis ensuing trifle was not a voluntary, but a piece of obedience to the
collected body of the Clergy of Ireland; their Commands gave it first life,
since publication: Some Schoolmen say Angels (to the enervating Christ's
Divinity) may Create; surely were the sentiment true, it might be useful to me
at this time: I might hope those Analogical Angels might work something out of
this nothing. However I desire that nothing of Divinity may be injured by it;
of which it contains many remnants such as Pedlers use to broak in, and those
but narrowly handled, because being many they shoulder one another for elbow
room: yet I must assert something of Election in them too; Your Lordship knows
the Meridian of Ireland, and they were in some measure fitted for the Longitude
and Latitude of many of the Clergy there: That is, the state they have been
(not are) in, through the wise conduct and great sedulity of the Reverend
Fathers of the Church, and your Lordships (in a most eminent manner) in your
own Province, where you have wrought great changes with little; not made ruin,
and power the Instruments of your Reformation, but solid convictions, and
amicable insinuations; So that now, though all the Diocese be right, no man
complains of wrong; and the once seduced are not afraid of their Bishop, but
ashamed of themselves: a virtue so much the greater in you because acted on the
scene, and to many of the persons by whom in bad times your self suffered, when
Loyalty and Orthodones were your Lordships greatest Crimes, and Schism and
Persecution their Virtues, yet their Repsntance has kept them safer, than your
Innocence could you; and your mercy has changed them, when their cruelty could
not you.

My Lord finding your influence so generally benign, I could not fear a sour
aspect; if my understanding could not, my memory might relieve me from your
favors to my self which are fresh and recent; my hopes must be the same with
the Moons now, who by sheltring her self under the Suns beams, has all her
spots hid: Your Lordship has goodness enough to communicate these truths; that
these papers were the scrapps of an ill memory, divested of all helps from
Books, the products of almost an inch of time (but two poor days) the subject
insolite (to preach on a Sacrament before a Convocation) and the Author having
the Sea so newly floating in his brains, that it might well drowned all things
which it found there. And who will not believe such an Authority, especially
when the work it self conspires to give in so clear an evidence to it. Had
those obstacles been removed, possibly another air might have animated these
papers: However, in the unhappiness of having done ill, I have the happiness
that charity may construe I might have done better. If any think this discourse
bends not enough on practice, they must remember, that it was not conposed for
the body of the Church but Quire; it was practical for them, it must be more by
them: the dress of it I leave to your Lordships favor, but the truth of it to
the greatest severity; for as I cannot offend that, so I would not this; being
a Father of the Church submits all truths to your cognizance, but having a
particular charge of the sphere whereto I have the honor of a Designation, my
motions in it more especially; wherein as I would at no hand prove erratick, so
my judgment shall take its measures of access or retreat always from your
Ecliptic, whilst your charge: Thus my Lord design and duty have stepped in to
dishonor you with this patronage; but had both failed, friendship and love
would not; that (before this late more August dependence and subordination) had
the power of making, and (if they should expire) will always have of keeping
me.

Your Lordships Most Faithful, And Most Humble Servant. THO. HACKET.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. marg. r. (...). p. 5. marg. for pral. r. prat. p. 7. marg. r. Eutich.
l. 29. r. Jehudah. p. 8. l. 8. r. though. l. penult. r. (...) p. 9. l. 32. r.
large. l. 35. r. comes. l. ult. whence. p. 10. l. 2. r. is. l. 23. r. were. l.
24. r was. p. 14. l. 1. r. reports. p. 15. l. 6. r. extatically. p. 10. l. 20.
r. or. l. 27. r. (...). l. 33. r. Acoluthoi. p. 18. l. 17. before sound add
will. p. 19. l. 23. r. Mumbaz. p. 23. l. 31. r (...). p: 24. l. 31. r. began.

TEXT. 1 Cor. 14.16. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he
that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of Thanks.
THe Jews had among their Classes of Science, Introduct.
one who particularly devoted it self to the opening mysterious places in
Scripture; Vilc Drus 14. obs l 4 c 6. Full. Misc l. 3. c. 7.
the Master of which house was called (...) and seems to be one of those
alluded to 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the
disputer of this world?

So had the Primitive Christians (but theirs was by Inspiration) as appears,
not only that it is numbered amongst the gifts, Lemper Not ad Bert. Rep. Heby
1 Cor. 12. and 1 Cor. 14. but by some fragments that are left of this way
still (in the mystical expositions of many places of the Old Testament, that go
under St. Barnabas name) and by the pretensions of the Gnostics, who (as if
their Sect had monopolize'd the Spirit) set out a Pandect upon the whole
Scripture in this way,

Would to God (had it so pleased him) for the sake of this present Chapter,
that some of those Guides had remained with us till this day; we should not
then have labored under those great Obscurities that have confounded all our
Critics in their sagacious Conjectures upon the Nature, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 12.
Number, and Distinction of Primitive Gifts: These are now such Stellae
nebulosae, clouded Stars, that the most Nasuted indagators of sublime things
know not within what Numbers or Figures to comprise them: It Was St.
Chrysostom's complaint, That we have not only lost the Gifts themselves, but
the very Memoir's of what they were are ravished from us. Therefore I shall
wave the guidance of such Erratick Lights as might make me stray up and down
this Chapter, and fasten my self immediately to the words of the Text, Else
when thou shall bless, etc

In which (apposite to the great Solemnity of this day) you have the Scheme of
a Sacrament or Holy Communion (which I must desire may for the present be a
concession, Division.
till the explication of the several parts do evince it) and in it, 1. The
Service or Office at the Sacrament, (Bless.) 2. The Minister or Mystes, (thou.)
3. The manner, an extraordinary adjunct concomitant, (with the Spirit.) 4. The
Eucharist or Banquet it self, expressed in the words (at thy giving of Thanks.)
And 5. The Communicants, who are described 1. by their Name (the unlearned,) 2.
Their Room or station, (occupies the room of the unlearned,) 3. Their Duty at
the Celebration, (to say Amen at the giving of Thanks:) Of which clause I shall
say nothing, because the Idiot (and so his duty) is excluded this day from this
Society.

With the first of which (the Holy Communion or Sacrament) I should begin; but
that the first word of the Text is a part of it likewise, and a string by which
some sap will climb to it from the main Roots of the Context: Thence I shall
therefore commence my Observations.

Else] Is the method of establishing a Principle by that Metaphysical way of
probation called, Else.
Ductu ad incommodum; the Principle in this Chapter laid, is, That the Gift of
Tongues (like Foreign Ambassadors) ought not to go without their Interpreters:
The incommodum will be, Else, how shallthe unlearned sing his part in this
Divine Quire, give up his assent or Amen to a Prayer which he understands not?
Besides which, the Apostle seems to press another Absurdity from the speaker, 1
Cor. 14 14. If I Pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, but my
Understanding is unfruitful. A Prayer in an unknown Tongue, (though that
Tongue dispensed miraculously) eludes all the benefit that should redound from
it, both to the speaker and hearer, the Priest and the People. Only to this
there will lie something cross from 1 Cor. 14 4. He that speaks in an unknown
Tongue edfies himself. One of the Ancients labors to solve this, by a
partition of those that were gifted with Tongues; S Chrysos;t in 1 Cor 12.
(...); And what if some understood not (says he) what themselves said? As if
he should say, Of those in the first times that had the gift of Tongues, some
understood what themselves said, and these (as verse. 4 expresses) edified
themselves; but others did not, and to such (as it is verse. 14.) their
Understanding was unfruitful. But the Knot may be another way untied, by
making this (not a several, but) the same Absurdity which is mentioned in the
Text; and then the importance of (...) verse. 14.) My understanding is
unfruitful, will be, My understanding will be unfruitful to others. And this
acception of (...) (besides that it seems so comented on, in verse. 15. of this
Chapter, so) it is derived from Antiquity, like the former. Theodor.


Use. Which Principle, and the attending Incommodum, I shall enforce no other
sequel from, then that the Palm seem; to be put into the hand of the Protestant
against the Papist (in that great question about Prayer in an unknown Tongue)
by the determination of this Chapter. And when the Doctors of the Romish
Confession do not only reconcile, but wring Arguments out of this Chapter
against Prayer in a known Language, they seem to me to show us that little
pretty device taught out of Optics, Aguilor. Opl.
that is, On some sheets of Paper (through the light that their Glasses conveys
to those Novices that must remain all the while within the Chambers of
darkness) they give an umbrage of all the radiant Truths that shine in this
Chapter; but so transposed, that their Elocations are quite contrary to their
natural site; the head set where the heels should be, and the left hand marches
into the room of the right. The same Orders the Jews prescribe for Prayer In a
known Tongue amongst themselves, Lib. (...) Number 586.
(...) etc. If one come to you ignorant of Hebrew, yet fearing God, bid them
learn to pray in that Tongue which they understand, etc. Thus did Gods first
People begin the Copy for us to write after.

2. As [Else] therefore redargues this practice in some persons, so it must
some persons for this practice; the practice was the abuse of the miraculous
gift of Tongues, and therefore the persons must be such as were endowed with
this miraculous Largess; from whence this other sequel will gently be drawn out.

That even those that were immediately inspired, and gifted from God (both to
and by a miracle) were subject to the Governors and Church Reiglement of those
times and places where in they lived; Observe. 2
I shall enlarge this position only from a double process: 1. Their
institution, or the apertures of the doors of the Church to them: 2. Their acts
and doctrine after their reception into office.

1. Primitive Doctors and Prophets were accountable to their Superintendants or
Governors of the Church, for their calling or ordination into it.

Saint Chrysostom says (...), Chrisost. 1 Cor. 12.
(...), that when the Devil had minted a great deal of false coin with the
current gifts of the Spirits in the first times, so that men wanted a
touchstone to discern the true prophet from the false, God gave the Church
likewise a miraculous gift to separate between the impostor and the true; which
is alluded to Revel. 2.2. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles and
are not, and bast found them liars: the thing and manner too is plainly
confirmed by that expression of Clemens concerning St. John, Euset.Eccles. Hist.
that he used to go abroad into the Country (from his abode at Ephesus) (...)
To ordain such into the Clergy as the Spirit would give him secret indications
of; yet besides this, they had it seems some established public Canons to be a
standard to measure such by: The only (or a chief and grand one) was that
which 2. Apostles mention in words tantamount, 1 Cor. 12.3. and 1 John 4.1. The
confessing of Jesus Christ's Divinity and Humanity.

This seems to be a rule of a wide extension; but we must understand it, 1.
either negatively, that the denying these Capitals in Religion showed a false
Prophet, though the affirmation demonstrated not a true: or 2: (which falls in
nearer with the words of those Scriptures and the sense of antiquity) that God
in those time would not suffer any fallacious Spirit, to be able to preach
those foundation Truths, not only to discover those persons that belonged to
Satan, but to evidence that those truths did only proceed from God; (...),
^co. Epist. 4. Policarp. Epad Philippe: Soc. Hist. Eccles 7.32.
was said long ago by Policarpus: Socrates would have this place anciently to
have been read, he that dissolves Jesus, which if true, would make up another
Reason. 2. For their Carriage and Doctrine, Sentiments and Actions; It shines
clear from the rays lent it in this Chapter, v. 26. The Apostle corrects the
confusions, exorbitances of such; How is it then brethren; when ye come
together, every one of you has a Psalm, a Doctrine; and v. 29. Let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; This was not a mixed
preaching of diverse at one time, as some persons of a separate profession have
of late thought and copied: But an exercise for the trial of probationers in
the Schools, how far their proficencies answered either their own ambitions, or
their friends expectations; The Pseudo St. Ambrose runs it up to a Jewish
Original, whose candidates for degrees and their novices too, Ambrose in 1 Cor.
14. Drus. Pral.
were by an Assembly of their Doctors posed; and sometimes for their clearer
understanding they asked them questions vicissim, and their Seniors naturelly
putting all together, passed their grave judgments on them; This account seems
to untie that knot of our Saviors sitting among the Doctors, and interrogating
them at 12. years old, Luke 2.46. which expounded for a Scholastical exercise,
will not seem very insolent; these Jewish posers were called (...) from (...)
inquirere; and by analogy to this the judging of the Prophets in the verse may
be without constraint interpreted; But farther ver. 32. the Apostle says, The
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; (i.e.) not only to the
Prophets that possessed them, so that they might command their own Spirit to
stop when they pleased, that place might be given to another Prophet to take
his turn in speaking, and not after the wild fury of the heathen affllations,
whose spirit was a storm within them, forcing them with impetuous hurricans
beyond the conduct of their natural bent, and not conducting them by silent and
pleasing gales, like the waftings of the holy Spirit; But it signifies a
subjection of their Spirits ( ie. their prophecies the effect of their Spirit)
to the judgment and discussion of other Prophets: First to enquire into the
verity of them; or secondly, to add improvements or elucidations to them;
sometimes a thing being revealed to one, but the full extension of this in its
use or latitude was to be interpreted by another; As in this Chapter it
appears, that many of them abounded with miraculous gifts, but the true Uses
and Limits of them they received from the Apostles ministration, who subdues
them here to a true and orderly use of them. And this practice reached down to
Tertullians days, Tertullian de anima.
who tells us, That the pretensions to all Inspirations (and his age abounded,
and himself was not free of such) were opened before, and submitted to the
Censure of the Church-Rulers, and according to their palate for them accepted,
or totally cast out. And this is more then was in the Principle laid down: For
we see extraordinary Gifts were subject for trial not only to extraordinary
persons (as the Apostles were, which slints the wonder) but even to ordinary
and stationary Presidents; for so it was in the Prototype of the Jewish Church,
where their great Sanhedrim had the judgment of Prophets reserved to the
discussion of their Chairs: Which was the meaning of that saying, (not
prophecy, as it is vulgarly thought) That a Prophet could not perish out of
Jerusalem; that is, notlegally or judicially, for violently he might: Which
saying of Christ's has its strength founded on the sovereignty which the
Sanhedrim had over the Prophets.

Use I. Me thinks, when persons immediately inspired were so humble and free in
their Regulations by Superiors; those who have no claims to such an elevated
sphere, should not withdraw their necks from the easy and profitable yoke
Christ has put upon them, but be accountable to their present Ecclesiastics
for either of the Heads, of Ordination and Instruction.

Let me freely speak a word of each, before this Reverend and Learned Assembly;
not that I hope any of you need incentives to draw to this Duty, but because
the times we have lived in needed, and perhaps the present have not had a
perfect deletory of this Error.

1. For Ordination: However some persons may look upon it but as a perfunctory
Ceremony, yet the Right is of hoary Veneration, and necessary Institution. The
Jews derive it as high as Moses's laying his hands on the 70 Elders; and make
it so necessary, that they admitted no person into their Sanhedrim (greater or
less) without it: Which I urge in this instance, because some persons thereby
think they wound us with our own weapon: Ordination (say they) being proper,
not to Ecclesiastics among the Jews, but to Senators of the Long Robe, nay
indeed to all Officers; But now it is thought impertinent to the last, and why
then with so much acrimony and fixtness to be required from the first. To which
I say, That as the Priesthood was an Office, so it was contempered to the
condition of other Offices; but as it was a Divine Office, so it was
distinguished from the common ordination both in the substance and shadow; for
first, the learned know that there was a different form of words in the Jews
Rituals for those several kinds of Ordinations, and a diverse latitude
expressing their power; The Church Ordination was called, Mr. Seldom on Husih.
(...) A Faculty of discerning about things bound or free. And secondly, the
Priest had an appropriate Ceremony (by the filling of his hand) which we never
find received into any Laick Ordination. Scrarius in Josh Scal. Elench Tribaer.
This Rite, the Symbol of Office, the Jews Church set at so high a rate, that
when in the Emperor Adrians time an Edict (on forfeiture of life) came for
repressing Jewish Ordinations, (that is, the continuation and succession of
their Church) R. Jududa for ordaining Five Presbyters (and so keeping their
coal alive) gained the title of (...) The Ordainer, and is loaded with the
titles of, Most holy, etc. and all appellation proclaiming an honorable
estimation. I cannot insist here upon the several requisites they exacted from
the Ordinand, their questions, forms of approbation or rejection, their
garments, and expressions of joy or mourning by their white or black raiment.
All this is alluded to, (and was plainly understood by those who were
contemporaries to those Solemnities) Rev. 3, 4, They shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy; (i. e.) approved, as the Jewish Candidate was, who
when approved remaind walking in his white garment in the Parlour for trial;
but the reprobated went out with mourning, and clad in Sables; nay, when many
of the Jewish train were discarded by our Savior, as of pomp rather than use,
yet this was adopted into his Family; required of those that were called
immediately from Heaven, Acts 9.17. thought a Prophetic Trumpet had sounded
his Excellency, Hormisd. Pont. c. 1. de cler
2 Timothy 1.6. And the primitive severity was such, that a temerarious intrusion
into the Church without Ordination, was a perpetual exclusion from the
Ordination of the Church: Nay the very Heathens would not ape Gods Priests, and
leave their Ordinations behind, but retaind it in a very solemn and grave way,
Alexand. ab. Alex.
and called it Dies Natalis, the birth day of their Minister. 2. For Doctrine,
there is great need of searching after this, that wandering brains may not
homilize in their own sense; for if the fountains be poisoned, what will become
of those that drink; There is a spiritual circulation of blood as well as
bodily; what is in the head of the Minister, will not be long absent from the
heart of the people; especially if it be bad, for that like venom is easiest
imbibed: Therefore all the Jewish ProPhets first brought their speculations and
nailed them on the gates of the Temple, Calvin in Is
that they might be pryed into by every eye, before they past Canonical: But
the Authentic Iustration was by the great court of 72. that had their rules
pricked down to examine by; Maimonpraf in Misd
excellently described by Maimonides: And they counted a false Prophet such a
Wolf, that they thought it pious to way lay him with any toils and traps: and
therefore that was not an envious insidiation which they laid for our Savior,
in summoning false witness against him; but a peculiar Stratagem they had for
the discovery of any (supposed by them) grand Iinpostor; Acts 6.13.
to tell a lie (as the law says) to find out the truth: Heretical Teachers
they punished with excision; nay, their censures persecuted them even unto the
confines of another life; Pirk Ave. 1.
for thus bitterly they prognosticate their Doom; (...) Who explains the Law
against its mind And reason, R. Elics in Avc 3.
although he have in always in his hand, and perform many good works, yet he
has no share in the world to come: Therefore the Pillars of the Gospel Church
do so much labor to uphold the faith; command to keep the form of found word;
and the first Church so meek and unpersecuting, did not think her self too
tetrical; when she pronounced those sentences against pertinaciously heretical
Doctors; that their blessings might not be received by the people, nor their
tombs visited, though they should die Martyrs for other Articles of
Christianity, etc. Council. Load. c. 32, 34.

Use 2. Yet another lesson may be attained by us before we part with this; from
the persons exercising this government, as the last was from those over whom it
was exercised: The Apostle holds the reins in his own hand in this Chapter, and
ver 29. Let the Prophes judge: and 32. They are subject to the Prophets.,
Salmas. app^^
Then sure the lay-mans claim to Church Government is usurpation; and those
Critics delude us with a false scheme of the first times, who in their
Horoscopes say such was the figure, and that the Layman was ascendent in the
Nativity of the Church: I demand, did they rule the Apostles or not? if they
did not, then they can have no Scripture for ruling now, since all Scripture
was written during the Regimen of the Apostles; And for the Records that next
succeeded, I shall quote but one from an ancient Role.

(...), etc. Constit Ap. 2.47.
On the Monday Consistories let the Deacons and Presbyters be present and judge:
This is an account of the first word of the Text, with its reflections on the
faces of what anteceded and followed. Now the service or office at the
Sacrament follows.next, Else when thou shall Bless;

Bless,(i.e.) Pray at the receiving the Communion, Bles
so Iinterpret it now; for although (...) be not so straightened in
signification, but as long as the Hebrew (...) to which it answers, and so in
Scripture signifies either to praise, wish well, or do good to a person, yet by
a Jewish custom and accep^ilation it come to be narrowed in application: thus;
before their meals they used a Grace which began thus, (...) Thou art blessed
and praised O Lord; and this Prayer they called by the name of (...) a
sanctifying it; from whom in their Rituals this word was traducd to thire holy
things which came to be eaten; as 1 Samuel 9.13. (...), to praise God, or give
him thanks for the Sacrifice; from them it is borrowed by the Apostle St. Paul, 1
Cor. 10.16. for the Eucharist; The cup of blessing which we bless; and by
Ecclesiastical writers almost appopriated to the Holy Communion; so this word
to a holy use; and in Justin Martyr, and Clemens Romanus is expouned by (...).
Occumon: Apol 2. ad Ant. Constit. Apost.
Beside this will be made more conspicuous, in expounding the next word of the
text, till when I desire may not be vexed with any scrupulous solicitation, but
on the presumed verity of it, rather to entertain your selves with this
practical note.

That in the first purest times, receiving of the Sacrament was the frequent
companion of Church Prayers: For our forefathers thinking the blood of Christ
to be the best Rhetoric could be used to God, and that he was like Admetus:
held up his son to him in the offertories of their prayers, especially their
solemn, general prayers for all the great necessities of mankind; as we still
have these prayers as the handmaids on our Communion: they mounted their
prayers on the wheels (as I may speak) of Crist blood, and of prayers were used
in the presence of the Cateachment, exorcises, etc. but the Communion prayers
was only the service of the fideles; the Eucharist the chief ingredent of this
office: and therefore in the Dialect of the fathers Orationes Sacrisiciorum and
the Eucharist, are but coincident terms to signify one thing. Tertul. de
Ora^ion. 6.14.


Use. If Church prayers and the Eucharist were by God thus hand-fasted
togather, why should they by any man be afterward put a sunder? if prayers
must be frequent, then why the Sacrament so great a stranger to most of our
Assemblies? Would to God we might by this argument be solicited to confederate
them again; for, from the beginning it was so; Every day was the Virgin
Churches practice, Acts 2.46. which the the Syriaque interprets of the
Eucharist: And why joyed with religious duties there, if not meant of one? In
St. Basills time, (...), four times a week we communicate, besides on Martyrs
days: at A exandria twice; then once every Lords day; afterward it descended
to thrice a year, Socrates Corcil. Lat.
in a latter Council to once, and now in our unhappy times not once in: twenty
years in many places: thus a great flame by succession was reduced into a
spark, and afterward vanished into pale ashes.

But God be thanked that your zeal has promised life again to this grand piece
of devotion; this days practice is our Matriculation again into our old duty;
what is done in the mount this day, I hope is but the pattern of what is to be
set up in your little dispersed Rural tabernacles; Since you thus aim on high,
give me leave to imp a few feathers to help mount your flight. Innocent Adams
was said to possess a symbol of this Sacrament, and therefore needed it: And
lapsed Adam expulsed from it is made by Jews to mourn for his excommunication
300. Gregor
years on the mountains of India. The Jews contempt of their Passover was
punished with a Cherith, Exodus 12.15. which the best Critics stretch to its
utmost capacity of civil, spritual, and eternal excision without Repentance;
Buxtorf. of Cher.
and when in their dispersions they could not have a formal Passover, their
writers tell us they upheld the memorial in a commemorative one, that hindered
from doing what they would, they might show their affections to it by doing
what they could: This Practice has kept for us the Annals of Christ's Ministry;
St. John reckoning them by Pasches; and our blessed Savior himself traveld
once (that we read of) 56. miles to observe one, John 2.12. The Suspiria
Epoptarum, Causab. exerc. 9 tra. Baron.
or breathings toward the Communion was a Proverb among the Primitives, so
flagrant was their zeal for it: Nay, the Heathens had and communicated
frequently in a Sacrament much of the same species with ours, with great
purifications for it, rejoicing in it. The great wickedness and especially
uncharitableness of our people calls loud for this Catholicon, Julin firm.
that feast of love to combine us together; of which sin, it may go for no
light suspicion that those breaches have been the judgment. Some person it may
be now might fear, that from this whetting them to the Sacrament, I should pass
to some more minute considerations by way of preparing you for it, but I am not
so vain to think that you either do need that, any more than I am fit to
perform this: Such a project might well suit the occonomy of a Country charge,
not a Convocation of Clergy, whose duty it is habitually, and whose care it was
actually to possess themselves of time, on purpose to secure the interest of so
great a design; I am like the Apostle, discoursing before Prophets men of great
gifts, and therefore waving this, I must consider that; for it is the next and
third circumstance that was propounded in unfolding the text; The Minister or
the Priest performing the mysterious celebration, and he is expressed in the
word thou; Else when (thou) shall bless.

Thou) Now the sense of the Text like the rising morning begins to open its
eyes wider on u^; this is the word (as in Italian locks) that will help us
possess the treasure; for as the person is here found to be, so will the whole
action be denominated: he will prove that to be an Eucharist, and that will
lend us something too to assert him a Priest; But for the present so I assert
him to be from 3. apparent arguments lodged fairly in the bosom of the words:
first of all he is opposed to the sayer of Amen here, which being the duty of
the people, the opposite to it must be the Priest. 2. The learned must confront
the Idiot or unlearned in the Text; and 3. His place proves him so; for if the
Unlearned, Idiot, the sayer of Amen take up all the people, and possess but one
place (or Room) in the Assembly, then the vacant chair must be left for: the
Minister, to omit the force of the context, that the Apostle is speking of
spiritual exercises, of Prophets, and of Blessing, the Priests Act; Supposing
then this assertion redeemed from some obscurity, I shall pass but this one
observation upon it.

That in the time of dispensing extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts, Observe.
yet God was pleased ordinarily to make the Ministry the seat of these: For of
such gifts the whole chapter speaks, and in such persons the text incircles
those gifts; the wind of the spirit is free, but here it was pleased to become
a trade wind, and to blow (commonly I say) from one corner; for besides what
the text seems to favor this in, there are two circumstances more to help
conclude it. First, the Scripture is clear, that these gifts were ordinarily
distributed by imposition of hands; Gods hands never coming empty: And it will
be as easily yielded that though laying of hands was sometime on other persons
for their significations, yet on no whole tribe of men else (and upon all
those) hands were laid. Secondly, But the Prophets Disciples had a particular
cultivation into which fallow the seed of the Spirit did ordinarily inject it
self; their breeding in Universities, Schools, was an ambush as it were, laid
to catch this spiritual wind; Instructions, and Tutorage, and Prayer, and a
sedate Spirit lead to it, which are the effects of those fraternities: Thus
when Saul came within the air of Ca^mel he was inspired, 1 Samuel 10.1^. But the
wonder was, who was his Father, that is, his Master? or how he came to be so
without one (...), for the Disciple is the Spiritual son of his Master; Basil.
and therefore I suppose Acts 3.34. The Prophets are numbered form Samuel, not
because he was the first Prophet, but the first Provost of a prophetical
College, under whose tutorage they became such, and so might well be said the
Prophets from Samuel; Nay the Prophets, R. Kimchi, in 2 Kings 22.
Jeremy, Haggai, Zachary, Malachy etc. that go only for immediate Prophets
among us, are by the Jewish writers enrold as members of their great. Assembly,
and made such by Imposition of hands.

Use. From whence that common Argument will be much invalidated, that men
preach now by virtue of their gifts who are no Ministers; because we do not
read all were Ministers whom we find in the first age to have preached from
their gifts: For if God was pleased to Center his Gifts ordinarily in the
Ministry, then the supposing them to have such gifts, will bid somewhat fairly
(though not demonstrate) that they were of the Ministry: Besides, the people
are said to do many things representatively in Scripture (as they do in
Parliament) by such Members as among them are capacitated, and not that every
one is fit for every thing; So I conceive they try Spirits, prove all things,
which are other popular arguments in the former plea; that is, by their guides
whom God has enabled so to do for them. The common voice of late ran that the
People were the Church, let that be made good when it can; I am sure the
Governors of the Church and Ministers do pass for the whole Church in
Scripture and primitive language: What God commanded Moses to tell the
congregation of Israel, Exodus 12.3. he report only to the Elders, verse. 21.
And it is to be supposed that Mases understood, and disobeyed not Gods command:
So St. Chrysostom. expounding that Speech of Christ's, Tell the Church (...); That
is, says he, those that are the Presidents of it. A number of those trivial
reasonings might find their answer here, but that the Topic is large, and
right Logic would first state the question before it determine; Chrysostom. Hom. 6.
in. March.
all which I have not time for: All I assert is the unconclusiveness of their
Argument; especially when persons shalter themselves under extraordinary gifts,
who have not been guilty of so much as ordinary, whom as a mean Subject I shall
take my leave of, and think my time better spent in conversing with those of a
higher illumination, which will be presenred me in the next words of the Text;
actings by the Spirit: Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit; with the
sprit) that's the manner of this Office, or Service; The context speaks it to be
a miraculous gift of the Spirit; 1. By speaking by a sudden elocution; 2. in a
strange language: and antiquity stamps that image upon it too; (...) St Chrysostom
in 1 Cor. 12.
of old there were many that prayed in the Persian, Roman, and other languages;
nay they could tell the secrets of the heart: all this is not an ordinary work
of the Spirit.

From whence I shall but ventilate this only problem; Whether this do not
justify extemporary prayer to be the praying by the Spirit, and thence condemn
all fet forms? I answer no; For first, Praying in a tongue (miraculously given)
is here the chief note of praying by the Spirit, not a volubility and affluence
of expresson; let those that would bind us to this, bind themselves to that. 2.
If any man now pray by the immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, than that
written, is Scripture, and then we may have new Bibles; but if men pretend not
to such actions, why are the people deluded with the quoting these examples. 3.
The mediate acts of the Spirit are no less the Spirits acts, than his
miraculous; as Christ's going in a Ship was as truly his passing on the water
(though not so wonderful) as his walking on the Sea. Now thus he may pray by
the Spirit, that prays by a Form; if he pray for such things as the Spirit
has told us in the Scripture are pleasing to God, and for such ends, and with
such conditions, and such words; many patterns of which we have dictated
difusedly up and down in the Word, either as prayers for us, or model, to us;
And all this is praying by the Spirit objectively: But besides, when he does
enlighten us and enliven us (not extatically but) rationally, and in the way of
men, not Spirits; then we pray by the Spirit enabling us subjectively. 4. This
way is better for us; For first, afflations were not by way of habit to be used
when the person, but when the Spirit pleased; which must be sometimes prepared
for (not excited as I suppose) by Music in Elisha, and sometimes waited for as
by Jeremy 10. days, cap. 42.7. Who would be content to abstain ftom a voyage
to Heaven so long, waiting till this Miraculous wind should blow. It Is 2. more
honorable for the people; for such gifts pretended, supposes them Infidels; 1
Cor. 14.22. And so indeed they have been made for else what needs the making
new Churches? By a just judgment God has suffered those to debase the people
whom he honored, because they honored whom he would have debased. It Is 3. more
sure for us than even an inspiration or voice from Heaven to another, 2 Pet.
1.19. That which is Inspiration to him, is but Tradition to me; and if it were
true, I am not bound to believe it, unless it were delivered to him to be
communicated to me; and it may be the suggestion of a black Angel who is
ship-wrackt already, and therefore is kept a while from sinking with the joy of
seeing others swimming: But man teaching has the venture of his soul in our
Boat, and he cannot wilfully ruin us without damning himself by
compartnership. 4. It Is more orderly, as appears by the confusion in using those
truly miraculous gifts in strange tongues, and those again had like to have
rebuilt old Babel. The first ages after the true gifts vanishe were so pestred
with the putative ones, that they were feign to reduce things to a common
standard, rather than let every man measure according to his private bushel;
from whence proceeded these cause of new prayers and Psalms that every day
flies from the furnace of private brains, Council. Laod. 18. Conc. Milevi(...).
therefore the Church appoints that the same Prayers be made at Morning and
Evening. And in arother Council Placuit ut preces qua probatae fuerint a
concilio celebrentur; such prayers were only to be used publicly by the
Church, which were ratified by the Council: So in a 3. Quicunqite sibi preces
alicunde describ.t, eis non utatur, nisi prius cum instructioribus fratribus
contulerit; let no other prayers be used unless upon collation first had with
our more learned brethren But there is a better subject awaits me than this
altercation, and that's communion, God send us a good and more of it. I shall
fly toward it as fast as I may, that's the fouth particular I observed in the
Text: the Service, the Priest, the manner of Celebration, and fourthly the
Communion; to that I come now, and desire you to bear with my ordering this,
for that you will be sure to be invited to a better anon. Council Carthag 3.


The Communion) Give thanks.
I found that on the word giving of thanks, not singly, but with the aspects
that the other parts of the Text have onit; we give thanks it is true, or ought
to do for all benefits; for our Refections particularly: the jews had then a
large one, though many in late days have neglected it on the pretense of
wanting Scripture warrant; but their Cos Hillol, Cup of Praise after the Pasch,
our Savior endenizond into the tribe of Christian Ceremonies, making the cup
half the dividend of our Sacrament; the Apostle without doubt aims at this, 1
Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion, etc.
But besides this, Eucharistia not only in Scripture, but Church language is
put for this Sacrament; Inat. ad Magnes.
(...). Let that be counted says a Father a sound Sacrament which is under the
Bishop, or to whom he gives leave; And another (...). having done their Prayer
and Thanksgiving (i.e) the Sacrament: 3. Eulogia (which is in the front of the
Text, Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
when thou that Bless) signify in antiquity those parcels which were sent by
the Deacon or Acoluthor of this Communion to the absent: (...). says Justin;
Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Damas 9^
and the reason of it is given. Ut se a nostra communione non judicent
separatos, that they might not suspect themselves aliend from our Communion.
And therefore because this was a thansgiving, neither did they use to celebrate
on fasting days, or in lent (except Sundays) because mournings and thanks
givings were opposite; but in some places the contrary custom did obtain.

Use 1. The true use of the Sacrament first breaks out from the very word, that
it is to be a blessing and lauding God; because he blesles us with it,
therefore we do him in it; and that not only for that great and inestimable
benefit of the redemption of the world by his Son, whereof this is not only
the scene but seal: But there was another sort of blessing God, commemorated in
this Ordinance by antiquity, which Pancirotius might have recorded among his
deperdita. And that was the blessing of God for his creation, the agnizing his
dominion over the creatures, by this little tribute of the creatures as a chief
rent we offer up to him, to acknowledge our holding all the demesne of our life
from him: Thus Ireneus urges against the Heretics Who denied that God created
the World, Irencus 1.3.34.
this acquittance of the Church under her hand (and seal) confessing the
contrary, by offering up daily to him the marrow of all the creatures and
staff of the world, in bread and wine.

Use. 2. But moreover the very throat of Transubstantiation seems to me to be
cut from this denomination of this Sacrament, by destroying the foundation or
basis that supports it; for if thanksgiving be the nature, and almost the whole
office of the Sacrament, than it is not transmuted from what it was to become
What it was not by any operative words of Institution: it is true this is annexed
to the office of the Sacrament, but the whole viptue of that lies in the Prayer
(or Thanksgivings) of the Church, that God would be pleased (for his people) to
effect this; Epist. ad Smyp.
this

Ignatius sense: The prayer wherein the Church and Bishop agree, prevails to
make the Sacrament the Bread of God: The Eucharist denominates the whole
action, because the thanksgiving was that which consecrated. And therefore in
some Ancient Liturgies after the words of Institution read, prayer is made that
the Elements may be sanctified by the Holy Ghost for Liturg such and such
effects of grace in the worthy Receivers. Cassander de Liturg.
Therefore that the Papists infist oil of its being called a Sacrifice among the
Ancients is hugely frivolous; for they call it so before it was consecrated,
When barely presented or offered by the people to the Minister, or by him to
God: Beside, some of the them remember a very curt office of St. Peter's
consecrating the Lords Supper with the Lords Prayer; Gaegor and Isidore.
but from the feast it is time to behold the guests which come in the fifth or
last place, and they are the Communicants, charactered here by their names, the
Unlearned; and secondly their place, The room of the Unlearned.

1. The Unlearned
Their name The unlearned, Idiots it is in the Greek; which word by custom
sounds but coursly toward the vulgars credit, (as blasphemy and the like) but
in the Original sense means only the Unlearned, or indeed the Laick; the
populacy in opposition to Ecclesiastiques, we translate it the Unlearned.
(...), Lucian Dial
The wise men call the multitude or common people Idiots, says a good Critic
in the Greek tongue: The Hebrews gave them a contemptible name by Origination,
which yet custom mollified into a fri^^dly reception from the Commons. A son
of the Earth, as terrae filius, found civilly in our Universities (...). R.
Lipp. Numb. 128.
An Idiot cannot have the name of (...). because practice does not do well
without Theory; nay, they made the very name Idiot turn Jewish: (...) is read
often in the Rabbis; well the name of Idiot or Unlearned is a description of
the Laick, and a distinction of the Minister or Prophet from him, etc.

Use, And may it be so still; never could I say it more opportunely than in
such a learned Assembly, that this distinction may be always retained between
the Minister and People, that they may be the Unlearned (not simply but) in
comparison of the Minister, and these obtain the title of learned in
contradistinction to them: It is a sad thing when the Ministers are
praeceptores discipulorum (the Masters of Scholars) before they have been
discipuli praeceptorum (the Scholars of able Masters:) Young Physicians (the
old saying was) had need of new Churchyards, and raw Preachers of a new Hell;
Therefore God placed the Rational upon the High Priests breast with Urim and
Thummim, that there should be light and perfection in those. The Jews had but
a sowresaying concerning an illiterate Priest though he were the High Priest;
and their lowest Priests were high enough to what our Gospel Ministers are in
the account of some; (...). if a Mamzer, Hacks R, Lipp
a bastard be learned and the High Priest not, he is the better man of the
twain. It is a vain thought of those who think it suffices him to be honest;
for he had need of a good skull that must knock heads with the infernal
Serpent; such hurt as much by their silence as they benefit by their
conversation, 'Twere a wonder almost beyond credit to say what learning the
Jews required in any they ordained: But so did our Savior, though some are
pleased to take Sanctuary under him and his blessed Apostles for their
ignorance; an excuse worse than the crime; before he commissionated them he
instructed them, and therefore the Saxon Bible call them by a pat name Learning
Chnitas, Learning Servitours; and for himself, not only all the treasures of
Heavenly Wisdom were locked up in him, but he gave demonstrations of all the
learned Books and Writings of his age in his Works. These are feald up to the
ignorant, and therefore I shall point at one or two of them; Mat. 5.18. Not one
jot or tittle of the law shall perish: it is a perfect transcript out of the
books of the Jews, etc. (...). The Book of Deuteronomy ascended before God and
said, Jalket in lib. reg.
Solomon desired to blot Jod out of her; to whom it was answered, that a thousand
such as Solomon should fail before her: So Mat. 6.15. our Savor speaks of
laying up treasures in Heaven; it is a duplicate of that Talmudick saying, or
rather this of that, (...). etc. Talm Mas
(...). Mubaz answered his friends who complained that he gave too much to the
poor; My Ancestors, said he, laid up their treasure on Earth, but I mine in
Heaven; they laid them where the hand of the thief might invade, but I where
the thief cannot break-through and steal: Nor do I expect to be choakt with a
reply that all these writings were after Christ, for the sayings might be
before him, and so preserved by them, who it is unlikely would go to filtch them
out of him: In short, ignorance is virtually every error; and therefore let us
not change names with the people to occupy the place of the Unlearned; which
leads me to the last head, the description of the Communicants by their place;
Else how shall he that occupies the Room of the Unlearned.

The Room) The Room
may seem only to be a paraphrase of the unlearned to unwary Readers; and
indeed some very learned have been imposed on by other places to misinterpret
this; so Buxtorf in his Rabinical Lexicon radix (...). interprets it simply the
unlearned, and from him Dilherus in his Eclect: because the Hebrew use this,
expression without Emphasis: (...). is to be with his Father; but it has here
its energy and weight, D Camius in Esaias.
and is another distinguishing mark of the People and Priest; it was
transmitted first from the Jewish Schools and Synagogues, whose Doctors had the
uppermost rooms, as our Savior notes, quipping therein their pride (these
loved it) not dignity; Else he would not have taken up his own seat among the
Doctors, Luke 2.46. nor would it have had, a remark set upon it, had their
seats been promiscuous among the people; for the order was, that the Rabbis
and Doctors sat on a Throne by themselves, with their faces toward the
people; and their Scholars on Forms or lower seats gradually, with their faces
from the people, toward, the Hecall or Sanctuary; but the People sat or lay
on Mats under them, within the cognizance of the Doctors; and therefore it is St.
Paul prescribes modest and decent behavior in the Church, because of the
Angels (i.e.) their animadversion. of their carriage: The same place befits
not the Scholar and the Master, and thereforeiour Savior Christ copied out
the same state and respect of his Officers: they who reteind the signatures of
the first Church in lively Characters do punctually so express it; (...). Igaet
Let the Bishops Throne be set in the midst, and the Presbyters sit on both,
sides, the Deacons standing; And let the people sit on the other side, viz, in
the body of the Church; whence the Scriptures calls them (...) the Greek
Fathers (...).and the Latin Prasidents, Teroul
from this distinction and eminence of place: And some learned men think that
position of the Church triumphant signified Rev 4.4. was but a copy of the
position and site which was in the Militant in the first ages.

From which (not now seeming in considerable) circumstance of place, these
three Corollaries do seem to me not incongruously deducible: 1. That there is
no such thing as a Lay-Elder in the Church; there is no place here but for the
Minister and Idiot, the Plebs and Ordo in Tertullians language; another Herald
in Scripture must be got to marshall this amphibious Novelty, and assign its
seat and place in the Church; St. Paul's Elders must be teachers, and have
double honor, that is, of respect and maintenance; which whether these shall
have, let the Minister consider well that admit the one, if they can be as
willing to digest the other. 2. This exposition teaches us our place; as well
to as from others: When the Clergy broke in upon their superiors, no wonder
their inferiors invaded them; a propulsation of the first air sucks in the
next into its place, and so did our selves give the invitation to our own
thrusting out, for the place thus delineated, did clearly distinguish the
Clergy among themselves, all in, but not of one place; but a superior place,
and an inferior, and so Persons: so the Jews had Priests and chief Priests; a
high Priest and h^s Sagan; there were Rulers of the Synagogue (the Officers of
the 23.) and Rulers of the People (that is, Officers of the high Court of 72.)
yet both sometimes called Rulers indifferently, without observing this
distinction; we see identity of name, is hence but a bad argument for a
Sameness of dignity; and among our Saviors extraordinary Officers there was a
scale of, First, Apostles; Secondly, Prophets; 1 Cor. 12. and much more among
his Ordinary; when St. Paul says the Deacon had obtained a good degree; thus
the Ancients paraphrase it, 1 Timothy 3.13. (...). higher Station in the
Presbytery or Episcopal Chairs. 3. Here Is a perfect aquator dividing the
Minister and People into two hemisphaeres; Confusion has labored to make them
differ by joining them together; but the Scripture preserves our liberties by
retaining the ancient marks and boundaryes; we are there, distinguish by
names, qualities, commissions, duties, maintenance, and here by peculiar place;
but to adorn this Province, were to light a Candle to the Sun.


Only for conclusion let me make it my request to God for my self first, and
then for us all; that since the people are more affected with, and will be
sooner concluded by sensible and visible arguments, then the most real and
speculative demonstrations, that we would make it our business to distinguish
our selves from them, not only by habit and place, but by these three or four
other differences, with which I shall put a period to your present trouble, and
desire to make a beginning to our future conversation.

1. That we would difference our selves from them by our callings and business:
as that is not of this world, so we should not be, but like men abstracted with
the hopes and promotions of another; neither drowning our selves in the
agitations of this life, nor devoted to pragmacy or policy: Let us give up our
main attendance to reading, doctrine and exhortation, 1 Timothy 4. 13. And not
(...) Apost. can. 6
as the Apostles Canons phrases it, to the revolving the affairs of the world
in our minds; you know how many of the ancient Canons forbids the implication
of regulars in seculars, commands them wholly to attend on divine
ministrations; I shall but point at their instances, because I doubt not better
known to you than my self: Ancient Canons excluded us from Merchandising,
Farming, Warring, from being Guardians, Executors, studying the Law and
Physic, that those might not be pretenses of avocation to our selves or
scandal to others. The Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.4. says, no man going to
War should entangle himself with the affairs of this life; the word is (...),
Theophil.
on which an Ancient thus descants; the word, says he, is taken from an Adder
lying in the way, which does first deceive us by her innocent appearance;
Secondly, retard us by fetterring us in our course; But thirdly does sting us
with Mortiferous poison: So hard a matter is it for us innocently to mingle our
selves with the world. 2. Go beyond them in holiness: The Scripture calls us
Angelis, let us labor to be so in purity; to heal with the tongue only is an
easy way of Physic, St. Austin.
and that which a dog can do as well as we: It Is the Scripture record, that
before the Priest went in to offer for the people, he was to wash himself first
in the great sea or lavour; and a Jew has this note upon it, that it was all
made of locking-glass metal, that so the Priest might see and wash off every
spot in himself, Philo. in vit. Moses.
who was to offer up prayers for the sins of others: If Moses by conversing
with God once gained Divine reflections, how should our faces shine that visit
him daily. 3. Eusib. Eccles.Hist.
Let us be industrious, vigilant ((...)) over our flocks, that so the infernal
Wolf may not carry away any of Christ's Lambs, 1 Timothy 3.2. If the Bishop was so
amazed when he was to give up his account to St. John for the young man
concredited to him, who lapsed without his fault; with what faces shall we look
upon God when we must answer for those who perish with ours; -- fas est and ab
Host doceri.
Let us be awakened by the industry of those that have taken so much pains to
seduce to error; and let not any do more against God, than we shall be ready to
do for him: Shall any false light (those ignes fatui) outshine the fixed stars
whom God holds in his right hand; our peoples necessities are great, that we
should ply them with Cordials after such plentiful vials of poison exhausted,
and so long floting in their veins: their expectations are great from us, that
at such a general Resurrection from the dead as this is, they should hear the
Angels every where sounding their Trumpets; That our sound should go forth into
all lands, and our lines even unto the utmost parts of the earth. Prudence and
justice to our selves calls for something more than ordinary sedulity: that may
undo the hard fate of 20. years prejudice that has seized upon us, and by
undeniable testimonies be able to confront their false prescriptions; the
securest men among us, and that are resolved to sleep, love to hear that their
dogs are abroad and barking.

4. Let us be meek and peaceable, not litigious brawlers, or going to the
extremities of the lines of strict justice; let us not vex the people, lest for
gaining our fleece, we lose our Lambs; Let this high Charity extend it self
even to the gainsayer, 2 Timothy 2.25. As a fierce Mister often drives that out of a
Boys head by fear, August. contr. Manich.
which he would drive in by anger, so may our case be: Ministers must not be
(...) Ketftv, riged in judgment either as to Spirituals or Temporals, says
Policarpus; Epist ad phil.
though many love to fish in troubled waters, yet few do to drink them: Let us
therefore who are of the Ministry labor to dispense this water of life as
clear and limpid as we can, free from the dregs of our own passions and
perturbations: It Was observed that some of the Fathers were so fierce against
sceming Heretics, that before they had done they left them real ones. But meek
St. Austin was of another spirit, more sweet and domitable; when writing
against his most surious Antagonists the Manichees, yet says, Let those rail
against you who know not the hardness to find out truth, and the easiness to
fall into error: Not but that the obstinate and leaders of those may and are
to be rebuk't with all authority and shiarpness: but it may be sharp and meek;
nay, it is then sharpest (for it cuts deepest) when urged meekly; it makes the
Iron (in a good sense) enter even into their soul: As the blunt knife may grate
and bruis;e, so may the blunt man; but it is the fine edg which is sharp; and
whilst for its fineness it is least seen, for its acuteness it is most felt.
Thus our children which have been long striving with us, will willingly throw
us the stick, when they see we yield it to them; our reputation, estates, love,
will be regained by the same means by which they were first gained; Namely, by
Humility, Piety, Charity, and Industry.

God will bless us for doing our duties, and we shall bless God for restoring
us to our Liberties; and his sacred Majesty for settling and defending us in
them, and our most Reverend Father the Lord Primate his grace for his effectual
contributions toward them, who like another Zerubbabel or Prince of our
Captivity, made it his care in England to feek out all this poor Churches
exiles, and has led them with him into the land of their Nativity or
Possessions. Thus the Land and Church may have outward Peace, our Minds and
Consciences inward peace, and our Souls and Consciences everlasting peace:
which blessing that we now so much know to value by the want, may he help us to
improve to his glory when we possess it: The God of Peace, for the sake of his
Son, who is the Prince of Peace, to whom be Praise and Dominion both now and
for ever; and to move in a circle ending as; we begin. Whilst we thus bless
with the Spirit, let the people who occupy the Room of the Unlearned say, Amen.

At this our giving of thanks Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

