Heart-Treasure: OR, AN ESSAY

TENDING To fill and furnish the Head and Heart of every Christian, with a
soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences, and comforts, to help
him in Meditation, Conference, Religious Performances, spiritual actions,
enduring affl^^ctions, and to fit him for all Conditions, that he may live
holily, dye happily, and go to Heaven triumphantly.

BEING The substance of some Sermons preached at Coley in York shire, on Mat.
12.35.

By O. H. An unworthy Minister of the blessed Gospel.

Prove. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but Righteousness
delivers from death. Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink; but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Aug De Civit. Dei
Lib. I.c. 16. Sit igitur in primis positum, atque firmatum, Virtutem, qud recte
vivitur ab animi sed. membris corporis imperare, anctumque corpus usu fitri
sancta voluntatis.

Cyprian Tract ^. De Hab. Virg. Sciant primo illam Divitem esse, quae in Deo
dives est, illam esse locupletem, quae locuples in Christo est: Bona illa esse
quae sunt spiritualia, Divina, caelestia, quae nos ad Deum ducant, quae
nobiscum, apud deum verpetua Possessione permaneant.

LONDON, Printed by A. Ibbitson for ^mas Parkburst, at the Golden Bible, on
London Bridge, 1667.

TO THE READER.
READER,
SO soon as thine Eye views the title of this sreatise, do not slightly cast
the Treatise it self away, but spend some time in the serious perusal of it. If
any value is to be put on my poor Judgment; I do assure thee I esteem it a
choice Treasure. In it, thou will find a most useful Subject treated on, viz.
The furnishing the heart with a spiritual Treasure, an Argument necessary for
these times, wherein we cannot insure outward Treasures. The pious learned
Author in handling this Subject, has approved himself a most experienced
Christian, and a workman who needs not be ashamed.

Amongst the variety of good Books, which through divine indulgence are yet to
be bought; it will be thy wisdom to buy those that are of general use, and
such is this Book, I commend to thee; Buy it, read it often, meditate on it
seriously, and lift up thy heart to God for his blessing, and thou will find
much cause to admire his good Providence in handing this Book to thee, and wilt
be incited to do that work, many Professors are too remiss in, viz. The
getting an Heart treasure, which will greatly support thee under present and
future trial.

In the Appendix thou will meet with excellent helps for the discharge of the
necessary and much neglected duty of Meditation, whereby thou may get much
Treasure for holy thoughts, and so prevent that, which is the burden of many
gracious souls, viz. vain thoughts, and be fitted for Duty, and enjoy much of
Heaven on Earth.

The good Lord bless these Papers, and the labors of all his Faithful
Ambassadors to the good of his Church, so prays,

July the 12th. 1667. The meanest of Christ's servants, and thy soulFriend; John
Chester.

To my very loving and dearly beloved Friends and Neighbors, the Inhabitants
of Coley and the places adjacent.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
GOod Books are not the least part of the Churches treasure and furniture, but
there is not any Book to be compared to that Book of Books, the holy Bible, or
Books of Canonical Scripture, which were indicted by the immediate dictates of
the blessed spirit, penned by holy Men of God, and do contain the whole of Man,
and open Gods heart to the Sons of Men: this precious Book is the common
Magazin of the Saints, the Shop of all Soul-physick, Mr. Torshe^ of harmonizing
Script. page 26.
the greatest treasure of heavenly wisdom and science (says a good Divine)
that the whole Earth has in keeping: he that eats and digests this Book
cannot but be wel-liking: he that digs in these golden Mines, cannot but be
rich; and he that makes this Book his main study, must needs be learned, holy
and happy: the best Men have delighted most in the Word of God, and they that
have delighted most therein, Dr. Gouge see his life. See the life of Mr. Jordan
in Mr. Clarks Collect.
have become the best Men: of some famous Men it is recorded, that they read
every day fifteen Chapters in the Bible, many years together, of others it is
said they read it above twenty times over in their lives, with special
observations of others, that by long and assiduous Meditation of the
Scriptures, their breasts became libraries of Jesus Christ: and indeed it is the
duty and property of a gracious soul to meditate in Gods Law day and night: and
to set an higher estimate upon it, than upon the richest treasures of Gold and
Silver, Pear^es or precious Stones: it were better that all other Books were
burnt (as Luther said) than that they should abate Scripture-study: yet
secondarily the choice Treatises of eminent Divines in all ages are no mean
part of the Churches treasure; as helps to understand and improve the treasures
of knowledge contained and couched in those sacred pages: these are as so many
Philips to the studious Eunuch to take the laborious Passenger by the hand,
through the deeper foards of Scripture studies: these are as tender Nurses, to
lay the breasts of the two Testaments to Gods babes, and feed them with milk or
stronger meat, as they are able: these are those Mineralists that dig out of
this precious quarry such Gold and Silver-oar, that if it have the stamp of God
upon it, will much enrich the souls of spiritual Merchants; only let the
spiritual Man, who judges all things, try the spirits, and distinguish betwixt
the dross of error, and the solid Gold of saving truth, let no p^yson,
dropping from the Pen, infect the eyes, and so bewitch the heart: it is a
blessed thing to have a solid judgment, and an honest heart, to prove all
things^ and to hold fast that which is go^d: Blessed be God for good Books,
which are a better treasure for the Church than the Romish stock of merits and
indulgences, these are as so many sweet reflections from the Sun of Scripture
upon the dark and d^ubting s^ul, they are as pipes to ^nvey the streams of
salvation from those blessed Fountains to private Houses, and troubled hearts;
and there is an advantage in writing, Zecharias, cum loqui non petuit, scripsit.
when Preachers are dead or cannot speak, books may remain and instruct their
surviving people, and what is wanting to the ear may be compensated to the eye,
(which some have called the learned Senses) and through the eye the heart may
be affected, and why may not life be conveyed through the eyes to the heart? as
death came in that way, so God can by his Spirit make Pen and Ink characters,
to leave lively Characters, not on Paper and Parchment, 2 Cor. 3.3.
but on the fleshly tables of the heart.

This in part is my Apology for putting my Sicle into this Harvest, and taking
this pains in composing this Treatise, whether it shall ever have the advantage
of publication by an impression, I know not, but if the Lord will make any
further use of it, for the good of his Church, I shall accept of that
opportunity, and leave my self and these poor labors to the service of that
God, to whom I have devoted my self and all that I have or can do: I look upon
my self as the weakest and unworthiest of all those that wait at Gods Altar,
yet as the Lord has put me in trust with the Gospel, so I have desired in my
measure to be faithful to the Lord and to your souls, and having obtained help
of God I continue a mirror of Providence to this day: I am not worthy to
preach, much less to print any thing of these g^erious mysteries. I rather
wonder that God has had the patience with me thus long in his work; my God
has humbled me amongst you, Acts 10.19.
you know how I have served the Lord with many tears and temptations, which
have befallen me many ways, yet God is faithful who has not suffered me to be
tempted, beyond that strength he has supplied me with, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and has at last made a way to escape: Let God glorify himself whatever
become of this vile wretched worm; the good of your souls lies near my heart,
God is my witness how greatly I long after your spiritual welfare; it much
grieves me to think of leaving any f^ your souls without a saving Treasure
after all my Soul-travel over you, and serving two full Apprentiships amongst
you: Let not my sins or sufferings blemish my doctrine or practice, or be a
stumbling block before any of you: what you have seen good in me, imitate it,
what has been amiss, cover it with the skirt of Love, and beg a pardon from
Heaven for me: Some may think better of me than I deserve, and others worse,
but as I pass not for man's judgment, so both have tended to humble me, because
I do not answer the apprehensions of the one, and my corruptions exceed any
grounded censures of of the other; it were but a sorry business to undertake a
vindication of my self (except wherein the Gospel is concerned); Oh that you
and yours might be and do that which is good, though I should be as Reprobate
and un-approved: 2 Cor. 13.7.
Let Christ live though we dye, let souls be enriched, though we be
impoverished; would to God poor souls did reign as spiritual Kings, for though
they should seek to exclude us as means thereof, 1 Cor. 4.8.
yet we also would reign with them as sharers therein, and in thankfulness to
God for their mercy: let people be truly rich in grace, and we must be full of
comfort, yea, our peoples-faith shall comfort us in all our affliction; Oh, how
much would our peoples spiritual gains countervail our temporal losses? It Is
better, infinitely better that you be rich with our wares, than we with yours,
our greatest treasure as Ministers, lies in your souls Riches, we seek not
yours, but you, and it will be transcendenly more comfort if you give up your
souls to Christ, than if you should give all your estates to us: we shall get
riches enough if we make you rich, (as Constantius said once) this is one of
Paul's Paradoxes, oh that it might be ver^fi^d in our success also, as poor,
yet making many rich, 2 Cor. 6.10.

Concerning the birth and bulk of this Treatise I must tell you, that the
occasion of it was this: I heard a godly Minister preach a Sermon upon this
Text, and I was much affected with it. and resolved when I came home to search
into it, I studied and preached three Sermons (as I remember) upon it, with
which some were so offected, that several entreated me to give them Copies
thereof, which I set my self to; but as I writ it, it swelled in my hands to
this magnitude at lost; and when some had perused it, they entreated me to let
it be printed, and some would be at the charges; it was a sudden, and (to me) a
strange motion, for I never yet judged any labors of mine to be of so much
worth as to be exposed to public view, yet I did not know what hand and end,
the Lord might have in this motion: I sought God about it, and desired to
search my heart, and purge it from the Leaven of vanity and ostentation, which
(God knows) I found too much working in me; then I told my Friend I would
communicate it to some Reverend Ministers, and should be ruled by their
judgment, and and advice: I did so, and four or five eminent men in these two
Counties of Yorkshire and Lancashire have moved me to publish it; and if
Providence clears its way, I am freely content, the Lord do with me and it, as
seems good in his eyes:

The Subject I am sure, is of great importance, nor have lever seen any
Treatise of this nature; if it were profitably handled it might be of singular
use: what is of man. I hope God will pity and pardon the unworthy Instrument;
and what proceeds from his blessed Spirit, may through the help of the Spirit
reach and teach the spirit, as this has been (in a sort) painful, so has it
been very pleasant and delightful to me: and this I can say, I never found
variety of matter so flowing into my mind at any time, as in writing this Book
I have experienced: if the Lord do good by it, I have my end.

Devout Bernard begins an Epistle to a great man with this Text, Bern. Epist.
123. ad Hildeb. Arch. Turon: Sane quod ad me attinet, lego me in litteris tuis,
non quod sum, sed quod esse vellem, and quod non esse pudet:
A good man out of the good treasure of the heart brings forth good things:
and toward the close of that Epistle he has these words, Truly for my self, I
re^d my self in thy letters, not what I am, but what I would be, and that I am
ashamed that I ^m no^: Just so may I say in this case, I have writ of the
Hearts treasure, but alas, how little have I attained of that whereof I have
aritten? the Lord grant that mine own Book may not rise up as a witness against
me, but it is the desire of my heart to have such a Treasure, as is here
described, if it set our souls on longing and praying for it, some good is done
by it.

I shall not any longer detain you in the Porch, I entreat you read it
deliberately, and practice what you read and find backed with the Scripture of
truth, and God forbid that my preaching, or this writing should rise up in
judgment against you: God forbid that any of you should be found without this
Hearttreasure of saving Grace at Death or Judgment: My dear Friends, pray for
me, who have you much upon my heart, when I am upon my knees, pray for me that
Utterance may be given unto me -- that I Ephesians. 5.19.
may make known the mystery of the Gospel: pray, Romans 15.32.
that I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed, for the perfecting of that which is lacking in your faith, that so
you may have a Treasure of grace in your Hearts laid up in you, and a Treasure
of glory in the Heavens laid up for you, which is the constant Prayer of

From my Study at Coley-Hall June. 14. 1666. A sinful Worm, that desires to
continue with you for your furtherance and joy of faith, Oliver Heywood.

The Contents of this Book, or the substance of what is contained in this
ensuing Treatise.
Chap. 1. COntaining the Occasion, Division, and Exposition of the Text, with
Observations from it. Page 1 Chap. 2. A discovery of the nature of a Treasure:
Treasuring up does import 7 things: 1. Carefulness. 7 2. Choiceness. 7 3.
Suitableness. 9 4. Sufficiency. 10 5. Secrecy. 11 6. Safety. 12 7. Readiness
for supply. 13
Chap. 3. A particular account of the Treasure meant in the Text, viz. Holy
Thoughts: Supplied by 4 streams, viz. 1. Scripture-truths. 15 2. Spiritual
graces. 17 3. Large experiences. 18 4. Lively comforts. 20, which are promoted
by 1. precious promises. 21 2. a clear conscience. 22
Chap. 4. How the treasure of holy thoughts thus laid in, is to be laid out.
Which is these 4 ways: -- 1. By the heart in meditating. 24 2. By the lips in
speaking. 26 1. To men in conferences, 26 2. To God in performances. 27
3. By the hands in holy actions. 28 4. By the back in bearing burdens. 30
Chap. 5. Reasons, showing the necessity of laying up this Heart-Treasure. 1.
From nature and humans reason. 33 2. From Christ's offices which are for supply.
34 3. from the end of ordinances and providence 36 4. from our hearts
emptiness of all good. 37 5. from their fullness of an evil treasure. 38 6. from
the inbred motions of all after good. 39 7. from every ones making a treasure.
40 8. from its discriminating between men. 41 9. from its assimilating the soul
to God. 43
Chap. 6. The last Reason showing the advantages of a treasure, as to duty. A
treasure makes a soul 1. Ready in duty. 46 2. Real in duty. 47 3. Uniform in
duty. 49 4. Unwearied in duty. 50
Chap. 7. The first use of Examination handled, showing the necessity of
self-tryal. 54 4. Questions concerning this treasure propounded. 1. How came
you by it? 56 2. How do you value it: 57 3. How do you use it. 61 4. How do you
increase it? 64
Chap. 8. The second use, for the Conviction. Of 4. sorts 1. Careless
loyterers. 67 2. Vainglorious beasters. 70 3. Impious offenders. 76 4.
Unprofitable Professors. 82
Chap. 9. Realsaints rebuked in 4. expostulations. 4. Do you not hereby
dishonor God. 90 3. Do you know what you may need 87 2. Are you in danger of
an overplus 85 1. Is not this worth looking after. 84
Cha. 10. The third Use is of Instruction, 1. To graceless souls how to begin a
treasure. 1. With draw thy self from the World. 93 2. Be at a point
concerning thy state. 95 3. Mourn over thy empty heart. 96, 97 4. Empty thy
heart of all corruption. 98 5. Be gleaning in Gods field. 100 6. Study and
improve free grace. 102 7 Be humble petitioners at the throne of grace this
pressed from Christ's counsel. Rev. 3.17
Chap. 11. General Directions to Christians, how to get a treasure of good
things into the heart. 1. Work on your heart the reality and rarity of the
things of God. 115 2. Reserve your hearts for, and resign them up unto God. 118
3. Live by faith upon Jesus Christ. 121 4. VVarm in your hearts the grace of
love. 125 5. Walk humbly with your God. 126 6. Be much in secret Prayer. 129
Chap. 12 Direct. 7. Trade with God in every performance. 134 8. Spend time
well. 137 9. Gather something out of every thing. 140 10 Maintain communion of
Saints in all God's appointments. 143
Chap. 13. More particular directions, instructing a Christian in treasuring up
these 4. sorts of divine truths viz. 1. Doctrinal truths. 151 2. Disciplinary
truths. 152 3. Practical truths. 154 4. Experimental truths. 156
Chap. 14. 2. Instructions to Christians in treasuring, 4. sorts of useful
graces, viz. 1. Directing graces. 161 2. Subjecting graces. 165 3. Profiting
graces. 168 4. Persevering graces. 171
Cha. 15. 3. Instructions concerning boarding up experiences, of 4. sorts viz.
1. Of the vanity of the World. 174 2. Of the treachery of the heart. 177 3. Of
the bitterness of sin. 178 4. Of heavenly discoveries. both as to Special
providence. 181 Spiritual influences. 182

Cha. 16. 4. Instructions, how a Christian is to treasure up a large measure of
comforts, 4. helps 1. lay up all your comfort in God alone. 186 2. Lay the
stress of your comfort on freegrace in justification. 188 3. store up clearest
evidences of sincerity. 190 4. Lay up 1. Tears in Gods bottel. 192 2. Prayers
in his book. 193 3. comforts in others breasts. 194 4. Promises in your souls.
195

Cha. 17. Some Directions to help a Christian in maintaining and increasing
this heart-treasure. 1. Let not Satan rob or circumvent you. 198 2. Fill not
your hearts with the World. 200 3. Mortify the corruption of nature. 202 4.
Observe the spirits pulses and impulses. 204 5. Carefully watch your hearts.
206 6. Be jealous after your enlargements. 209
Cha. 18. 7. Be frequent and exact in an heart-search. 212 8. Timely make up
spiritual decays. 214 9. Be much in laying out. 217 10. Be thankful for
treasures received. 218
Cha. 19. Further instructions concerning bringing forth out of this treasure,
which must be done 1. Speedily. 223 2. Seasonably. 226 3. Sincerely 229 4.
Suitably. 1. Vouchsafed means 2. appointed ends. 233

Cha. 20. The fourth and last use of the point which is partly of
encouragement, and partly of exhortation, pressing all to endeavor after this
treasure. Several particulars tending to discover the necessity, excellency,
and commodity of having the beforementioned treasure. 1. A treasured soul is of
great worth. 236 2. Such a one is fit for any condition. 239 3. He is enabled
by it for noble enterprises. 242 4. He is the delight of Gods heart. 245 5. He
can live well in a spiritual dearth. 248
Cha. 21. 6. Every thing turns to the increase of this stock. 251 7. This
treasure is safely locked up; and cannot be lost. 254 8. Gods owns this
treasure, though sometimes hid from the possessor. 257 9. A treasured soul has
a rich treasure in Heaven. 260 10. Treasures of glory are proportioned to
treasures of grace. 263
Several Objections answered. Cha. 22. 1. Obj. Of ignorance in the mind,
answered 266 2. obj. of a treasure of wickedness in the heart. 267 3. obj. From
want of comfort, answered. 268 4. ob. from unprofitableness under means, ans.
269 5. obj. from falling short of others, answered. 271 6. ob. from
unserviceableness in our place, ans. 272 7. Obj. From fears of losing,
answered. 274
The exhortation urged, to get a treasure, applied to poor and rich, young and
old. 281

Heart-Treasure.
MATTHEW. 12.35. The former part of the Verse. A good man out of the good
Treasure of the heart, brings forth good things.


CHAPTER I. The Introduction, containing the occasion, division, and exposition
of the Text, and Observations from it.
OUr Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (like a skilful Alchymist) extracts
the pure gold of wholesome Doctrine, from common objects and occurrences: as
from natural water, Joh. 4.10
he discourses of spiritual water of life; from common bread, Joh. 6.27
he ascends to soul-nourishing conferences of his own flesh and blood, that
living bread that came down from Heaven: As he passed through the Vineyards,
Joh. 15.1 Assembl. An. in lot.
he takes occasion to speak of the true Vine himself, and of those Saints that
are really planted into him, and bring forth proportionable fruit: Christ could
preach an excellent Sermon from any Text: But here he takes an occasion of
uttering precious medicinal Truths, from the poysonful blasphemies of the
Scribes and Pharisees; distinguishing the fruit of the lips into good and bad
word, which evidence the nature of the root to be either good or bad: The
occasion of the words, is this, when our soul-saving, and body-healing Redeemer
had cast out a blind and dumb Devil; that glorious miracle had various
effects, upon the possessed person, it wrought soundness, verse. 22. upon the
people amazement, verse. 23. upon the Pharisees madness and blasphemy (though
that was only accidental) whereby they charge God himself with imposture, verse.
24. to these last Christ speaks by way of Apology for himself, and confutation
of their impudent slander, his answer consists of three members.

1. He refutes the calumny by clear Arguments demonstrating his Divine Power in
the Miracle, Vid. Pareum in cap.
from verse. 25, to verse. 31.

2. He detects the heinousness of the stander, calling it an irremissible
blasphemy, to v. 33.

3. He exhorts them to repentance, by a severe and serious challenge, urging
them to conceive more soundly and soberly of divine works; and to speak more
spiritually and profitably, since they must give an account of every idle (much
more blasphemous) expression; from whence there will be drawn sufficient matter
of their condemnation: This exhortation he directs in hypothesi to the
Pharisees, v. 33, 34. in thesi to all, v. 35, 36, 37. to the former
parabolically, to the latter properly and doctrinally.

Or our Lord Jesus shows, that thoughts are the firstborn of the heart, the
fountain of expressions, words are the echo of heart-language; much may be in
the heart that is not vented with the lips, but there is nothing comes out, but
what was first within; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks,
verse. 34. This is illustrated by two similitudes, Viz. 1. Of a Tree, verse. 33.
2. Of a Treasure, verse. 35.


There Is much ado amongst Expositors, to determine what is meant by Tree; but
its clear, by Tree is meant a man or woman, who must be good, before they can
do good: But the latter resemblance of a Treasure, is our present subject,
which is bimembris, or consisting of two parts; The 1. Relates to good men.
Bonus est, non qui talis videtur, sed qui intus cor habet bonum, h.c. (...)
matitia naturali. Spirit. Dei, repurgatum and regeneratum. Par. in locum.
2. Unto bad men.


In both which are 1. Layings up, called a Treasure. 2. Layings out, expressed
by bringing forth.


A few words for explication.

A good man] there is good, 1. Absolutely; so there is none good but God, i.e.
essentially, perfectly, originally, independently. 2. Comparatively, so godly
men are truly good, i. e. sincerely, if compared with profane men, or
Hypocrites: It Is said of Barnabas, that he was a good man, and full of the Holy
Ghost, and Faith, Act. 11.24. There Is also good men, as compared with froward,
1 Pet. 2.18. or choice instruments, compared with persons of an inferior rank,
Romans 5.7. as David was worth ten thousand of the people: This good man in the
Text is to be taken in the former sense, in opposition to wicked men.

Good Treasure] it is a metaphor, (...). quod in crastinum reponitur.
and alludeth to the Husbandman and Tradesman laying up in store what must be
used in aftertimes; or an Huswives provision laid up for all the year: This
crosses not Christ's prohibition, Mat. 6.19. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth, for that is in opposition, this in subordination to the
true Treasure, and Divine Providence, as Joseph's hoarding Corn was; and its
called a good Treasure in opposition to treasures of wickedness, Prove. 10.2.

Of the heart] the heart in man is the first mover of the actions of man, even
as the first mover carries all the spears of Heaven about with it; so does
this little thing in the little world of man, animate all his operations: by
heart I understand the rational soul, with all its faculties of understanding,
memory, will, and affections, the chief part of man. The Jews compare the
heart, Weems his Pourtrait. page 26.
1. To the Holy of Holies, or Oracle, whence the Lord gives his answers. 2. To.
Solomon's Throne, as the stateliest place where the King of Heaven sits, as his
Throne of Residence. 3. To the two Tables of Stone in Moses's hands, in which
the Lord writes the Law of Wisdom: and I may add, 4. The heart of a Christian
is the storehouse of the choicest Treasures, and Cabinet of the most precious
Jewels.

Brings forth] emits or sends out suitable emanations, for his own souls
comfort, and the supply or profit of others: This is a drawing of the Fountain
into several Channels, an educing the habits of grace into various acts, the
exercise and improvement of what was laid up, a stirring up the gift of God, a
trading with the talent, required of every Soul that hopes to give a good
account at the last day.

Good things] there are some things good only materially, good civilly, but
these are good things spiritually, both as to matter, manner, and end, pleasing
to God, profitable to man, and comfortable to him that brings them forth; these
are as streams flowing from the spring of true grace in the heart, by the banks
and bounds of a divine command to the infinite Ocean of Gods glory.

The sum of all is this, every man is, Bona opera non facere bonos, sed prius
oportere bonos esse, quam faciamus bona: sic propriae mala opera non facere
malos, sed malos facere mala.
and acts as principles are stated in his heart; we judge of the heart by
outward acts, but God judges of outward acts by the inward frame of the heart:
and hence that of Luther is a great truth, that good works do not make good
men, but first they must be made good men, before they can do good works: for
habits must be before acts; yet good acts make good men better, as evil actions
make bad men worse; for acts strengthen habits, as we see by experience.

The Doctrines are these:

1. Men's layings out are according to their layings up: That in general.

2. Every sincere Christian is truly good.

3. Every gracious soul has a good Treasure.

4. True grace is a Christians Treasure.

5. A Saints Treasure is in Heaven, and in his heart.

6. A Treasure in the heart vents it self in the life.

7. A Treasure truly good, will send forth good things: the heart, so far as
its sanctified, and does act like it self, produces gracious acts and
exercises.

But I shall comprize all in this one Observation.

Doct. That a good Treasure in the heart, is necessary to good expenses in the
life. No man can do good, except he first be good: there must be first a laying
in, before there can be a laying out.

The Dutch have a Proverb, Bonus Servatius facit bonum Bonifacium.
That a good saver, makes a well-doer; I am sure it is so in a spiritual sense;
he that lays in spiritual provision, is only fit to lay out in the exercises
of Religion.

I shall but give this one proof for the general, Mat. 13.52. -- A Scribe [ i.
e. a Minister] instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven [ i.e. prepared to
declare the mysteries of the Gospel] is like an householder [or Steward, for so
Ministers are called, 1 Cor. 4.1.] which brings forth out of his Treasure
things new and old [a plain allusion to an housekeepers old store, which makes
a daily standing dish, and new supply from the market upon special occasions,
Old and New Testament-dainties:] This Scripture clearly holds forth, that he
had laid up what he now lays out. Joseph lays up abundance of Corn in the
seven years of plenty, else there could not have been supply in time of
scarcity, Genesis 41.47, 48, 49.

This only for a hint in general, for more clear explication and confirmation
of this Truth. I shall endeavor to discover, 1. What laying up a Treasure is.
2. What this Treasure in the Text is. 3. What this laying out implies. 4. Why
laying up is thus necessary.


CHAP. II. A Discovery of the Nature of a Treasure in general.
A Treasure imports the laying up of things for necessary use in aftertimes,
and holds forth these seven particulars, all which suit with the laying up of
spiritual provision in general.

1. Laying up a Treasure, implies carefulness, anxious thoughts, sollicitous
endeavor; its casie to scatter, but it requires some industry to gather, yea
it is easier to gather by filching and cheating, than by trading or working; and
things easily got by evil means, are as quickly lost by strange ways, Prove.
13.11. Wealth [gotten] by vanity, shall be diminished, Male porta, male
dilabuntur.
i.e. an estate procured by base shifts, devices, and juggling tricks, comes to
naught. But he that gathers by labor [ Heb. by the hand] shall increase, and
in time become a Treasure. Experience tells us, that they that would get a
great estate, take pains in the day, and plot in the night, Eccles. 5.12.
and desires to get and keep their abundance, will not suffer them to sleep:
it is so in Spirituals, there is hard tugging to get abiding provision; Spiritual
goods are not got with a wet finger; they drop not into the mouth of a careless
loyterer: Difficilia quae pulch^a.
The choicer any thing is, the hardlier is it attained: an Harvest-mans labor
is hard toyling. O think not to get Heaven by laziness: The Kingdom of Heaven
is taken by violence, Mat. 11.12. A resolute Christian (as it were) storms this
uphil^ City; as Soldiers run to get the prey, or Racers to obtain the prize.

2. It imports choiceness in the things laid up. Heb. 2.13
It Is not all Labor that obtains a Treasure; Isa. 55.2.
they labor in the very fire, that weary themselves for very vanity. Men may
lay out money and labor for that which neither does profit nor satisfy; there
are many things better slighted, than sought and gained: However, stones and
straws make no good treasure; no wife man will account himself rich with toys
and trifles; A Christians treasure consists in Spirituals, which only are of
worth and value; Hab. 2.6.
Gold and Silver are but red and white clay, called thick clay, because more
solid bodies; but compared with Divine things they are but dross: Ephesians. 1.^.
Spiritual blessings only make the Believer blessed; nothing can be accounted a
treasure, but what comes from, and leads to Heaven, Bona throni, the good
things of the Throne, are a Saints treasure, Bonascabelli, the good things of
the Footstool, are a wicked-man's portion, and he may have a large measure,
yea, a treasure of them; Psa. 17.14
their bellies are filled with hid treasures: Yet these do not make them happy;
all undermoon comforts are but sorry trifles to make a treasure of; the whole
world cannot counterballance a grain of Grace: we account of things by their
worth, not by their bulk; a little box of precious ointment is of more value
and virtue, than whole tuns of ordinary Liquor; only Heavenly riches make up a
Souls treasure.

3. Suitableness of the things stored up: No man will lay up what he shall never
need, and account it his treasure: Every Tradesman lays up that which is fit
for his Calling; Cloathiers, Staplers, Tanners, Husbandmen, have all their
peculiar provisions, suited to their vocations: that may be a cumber to one,
that is a treasure to another: Kings have their peculiar treasure, Eccle. 2.8.
i. e. that which none but Kings have; So all Gods Kings have their peculiar
treasure; which as it is different from all others, so in some respects
different one from another. Moses had a treasure of meekness, Job of patience,
Solomon of wisdom, John of love: 1 Cor. 1.7
As the Child of God is to come behind in no gift, so he is to excel in that
which he is more especially called to exercise; It Is a great Duty and mystery
in Religion to be wise in observation, and prudent in provision; let every
Christian lay up supplies suitable to the several ages, estates, sexes,
offices, burdens, duties, relations, places, trials, or temptations, through
which any one may pass, in the whole course of their Lives: So shall they not
be unprovided or unfurnished, but which way soever the Lord leads them in this
uneven world, Psa. 26.12
yet their foot shall stand in an eeven place, and go straight to Heaven.

4. A treasure imports sufficiency. Store has no lack; it is abundance that
constitutes a treasure; the Granarys of Egypt afforded plenty of Corn: A scant
modicum makes not a treasure. Spiritual goods are a Christians riches, Jam. 2.5
1 Timothy 6.18.
and he ought to be rich in these riches, rich in faith, and rich in good
works. What a full expression is that of St. Paul? Ephesians. 3.19. where he begs to
be filled with all the fullness of God. What Paul, can thy narrow vessel contain
an infinite Ocean? Though he cannot hold all, yet he would have all Divine
fullness; i. e. Scientia quae Sp. Sancti Magisterio, non ingenii nostri acumine
discitur. Marl.
he would know the Love of Christ, which passes knowledge; that is to furnish
his intellectual faculty, with a treasure of heavenly knowledge; and he would
be filled with all Grace, as the richest treasure of his will and affections;
yea, nothing less than fullness will suffice. Nay further, the fullness of God;
yet higher, even all the fullness of God, let the vessel be filled to the ^orim,
and let it be made more capacious to receive larger incomes; never has the
believing soul grace enough, til grace be perfected and crowned with Glory, A
gracious heart has an insatiable appetite after heavenly delights, and
dainties; nothing so good as Grace, and the more a soul has of it, the better.

5. It implies Secrecy: A treasure is not exposed to the common view of all
men, it was Hezekiah's pride and weakness to lead the Babylonian Messengers
through his treasures. Isa. 45.3. Mat. 1 3. 1 Pet. 3.4. (...), Occultus ille i.
e. cordis homo.
Treasures are usually hid in secret places; hence we read of treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, and a treasure hid in a field: So
this good man's treasure is said to be in his heart, which St. Peter calls the
hidden man of the heart, none can see into this, but the heart-searching God,
he that knows all things only is the Anatomist of this close and hidden man^
Men see the face, but they see not what lies within; hence it is that the
greatest and best part of a Christians treasure, is invisible; as the roots of
a Tree under the earth, or the bottom of a Ship under water; or rather as a
Merchants goods in his Warehouse. So it is with a Saints treasure; he is a Jew
inwardly, his Circumcision is that of the heart; in the Spirit and not in the
Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God: Romans 2.29. The regenerate soul
is the King of Heavens Daughter, which is all glorious within, though some
sparklings of Grace appear without: the best and the worst of a Soul is hid
from the view of men; happy were it for a Christian if he had no more
corruption than appears outwardly, and wretched were he also, if he had no more
Grace than others can take notice of.

6. A Treasure for safety: This treasure being out of men's view is therefore
secured from men's reach and touch: Treasures lie not loose, but are under lock
and key: those at Rome are now laid up in the impregnable Castle of St. Angelo.
Treasure-Cities are always well Fenced, Guards were appointed to attend them;
Dragons are fancied to wait on treasures: hence come Dragooners, say some: But
sure I am, the treasure of a Christian is safe; Grace and Peace are a Saints
freehold that Men and Devils cannot deprive him off: Grace is an incorruptible
seed, and God has engaged himself to maintain it: Mary's better part cannot be
taken from her; As soon, says one, may they pluck Christ out of Heaven, as
Grace out of my heart: Joh. 16.22
Nay the treasure of joy can no man take from the believing Soul, for this pure
stream of Spiritual Joy, grows stronger and sweeter, til it be swallowed up in
the vast Ocean of our Masters joy in eternal bliss: A Christians treasure is
locked up in his heart, which is a Cabinet that none can wrest open: Christ's
heart was pierced, that a Christians might remain untouched; hence it becomes
impenitrable, and invulnerable. A lively emblem whereof was the heart of John
Husse, which remained entire, even when his body was consumed in the flames:
the heart may be pulled out of the bosom, but not a Saints Treasure out of his
Heart.

7. In a Treasure there is readiness for present supply, It Is but giving a turn
with the key, and taking out provision, and making use thereof, which is as
soon made ready as Abraham's Feast for the Angels, or Jacobs Venison for his
Father Isaac: He that has a treasure of food, has it not to seek when he
should use it; as the man in the Parable, that ran to call up his Neighbor,
Luke 11.5, 6.
to borrow three Loaves because he had nothing to set before his Friend that
came unexpectedly; But the wel-furnish'd Christian can make God welcome in all
his visits, in Mercy or Displeasure, and own him as a Friend, whether he come
by day or by night; a wel-stored soul has something in readiness for his
honorable Guest. Mat. 25. v. 1 to 11.
A notable resemblance hereof we have in the Parable of the wise and foolish
Virgins; The Oil in the Lamp is the treasure of Grace in the heart; and though
the Virgin Christian may slumber as to the Exercise of Grace, yet he is ready
upon a sudden Alarm for the Bridegooms entertainment, but the foolish Virgin is
the treasureless Soul; the graceless Sinner, that has no Oil at all, but while
it goes to buy, is shut out of the presence Chamber. But of this more hereafter
only observe, in General, that he that has a treasure will be quickly
furnished with all accommodations, on all occasions: Thus much for the first
head.

CHAP. III. A particular account of the Treasure meant in the Text, and of a
Christians Treasure.
THe second General head is, what is the Treasure that our Savior speaks of
here? I conceive it is principally intended of the thoughts of the heart, (...)
Hareditarias posessiones cordis mei, a (...) jure hareditario possedit.
which are called the Possessions of the Heart, Job 17.11. because these are
the firstborn of the Soul, and enjoy the inheritance of it. You cannot turn
off the thoughts from their freehold, you may suspend the tongue from
speaking, the hand from acting, but you cannot suspend the soul from thinking,
while it is a rational Soul; for this is the essential property of it, whiles
it is its self. Good or bad thoughts are every man's treasure, and possession;
and these center and settle in the heart; these are the Spring and Source of
Actions and expressions. Now it is said of a Godly man, Prove. 12.5. The thoughts
of the Righteous are right, (...) Lex, Statutu^, Mensura, sive enim Secundum
normam and rationem, vel in judicio. Pagnin.
i. e. Judgment, Law, Measure, as the word imports; the meaning is, a gracious
person thinks as he is, according to the rules of rectified, sanctified Reason;
his thoughts run in a right channel, to right objects, for right ends, and are
therefore very precious, and may well be called a Treasure; Hence David's
Exclamation, Psalm. 139.17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God?
i. e. say some, how rare and dear are the thoughts I have of thee to my soul?
This may be probable from what follows, in verse 18. When I awake, I am still
with thee, in thoughts and Heavenly Meditations: Certainly a Godlymans holy
thoughts are a precious Treasure; if his tongue be as choice Silver, Prove.
10.20.
what are his thoughts, that feed and furnish the tongue with profitable
discourses?

Now as the thoughts feed the tongue, and hand, so there are four Springs that
feed and furnish the heart with holy thoughts; these are like the four streams
of the River of Paradise, Genesis 2.1^
which water the Divine Garden of a Christians Soul, and being followed to the
head, will certainly lead the believing soul to the Heavenly Paradise. Those
thought-nourishing streams are, 1. Scripture-Truths. 2. Spiritual-Graces. 3.
Large Experiences. 4. Lively Comforts.


The first of these; Scripture-Truths, is like the River Pison, which
compasses the whole Land of Havilah, where there is Gold: So this takes in
the large Territories of the holy Scriptures, where there is such choice Gold
of Divine Truths, as are able to make the Soul both wise and rich, unto
Salvation; It is a choice mercy to have the understanding furnished with a
treasure of saving Knowledge of Gospel-Mysteries: Prove. 23.23. Joh. 5.39 Prove.
2.4.
Hence the command is to buy the Truth, search the Scriptures ^o seek for
Wisdom as for Silver; to search for Knowledge as for hid Treasures: That Is a
notable passage, Leigh Crit. Sac.
Col. 3.16. Lot the Word of God dwell richly in you, [ Gre. (...)] copiously,
abundantly, the word notes two things, 1. The Measure, and so it is rendered
plenteously, says one. 2. The worth of the knowledge of the Word, and so it is
rendered richly by some. And surely a great stock of Scripture-Knowledge is a
precious treasure: Sacrae Scripturae sunt Sanctae deliciae and divitiae animae,
Psalm. 119.72. and 111.14.
O what a blessed thing is it to have a man's breast the Library of Jesus
Christ? The sacred Scriptures are the treasures and pleasures of a Gracious
Soul: to David they were better than thousands of Gold and Silver: A Mountain
of transparent Pearls heapt as high as Heaven, is not so rich a treasure as
these; Hence that good man chose these as his Heritage for ever, and rejoiced
in them as in all riches. A covetous Miser could not take such delight in his
bags, nor a young Heir in a large Inheritance, as holy David did in Gods Word.
All the Saints are Priests unto God; Now of Levi it is said, Mal. 2.6. that the
Law of Truth was in his mouth, and his lips kept knowledge as a storehouse. So
it is or ought to be with Gods Spiritual Priests; they have the Law of God
grav^n on their hearts, Rad. (...) Explorare, Scrutari. hinc (...) Lex,
Statutum and (...) G^mmae, Margaritae.
and in their tongues is the Law of kindness and holiness. The word Law, comes
from a root that signifies to try as Merchants that search and prove the Wares
that they buy and lay up; hence also comes the word for Gemms and Jewels that
are tried, and found right: The sound Christian is the wise Merchant, seeking
goodly Pearls, he trys what he reads, or hears, by the Standard and Touchstone
of Scripture, and having found genuine Truths, he lays them up to the great
enriching of this supreme, and sovereign faculty of the understanding.

2. Another Spring that feeds holy thoughts is Spiritual-Graces, the fruits of
the Spirit, which exceedingly help the fruits of the Lips; If the Will and
Affections be sanctified with a Principle of true Holiness, the Lips and the
Life will bring forth heavenly Expressions and Actions in the Conversation:
Hence Prove. 14.27. The fear of the Lord is the Fountain of Life, i. e. a
gracious habit streams freely and fully into all acts of Spiritual Life, and at
last is swallowed up in the Ocrean of Eternal Life. It is said of Jesus Christ,
the Original of all Grace, Isa. 33.6.
that the fear of the Lord is his treasure; and we may say also, it is a
Christians treasure: the head full of Notions will not make the soul rich,
without the heart full of Grace; It Is Grace that innobles the soul with
heavenly Excellencies, and inables the soul to bear burdens, and do duties:
without a principle in the heart, there can be no holiness in the Life; all
works of Piety, Charity, Sobriety, must flow from a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5
a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned; all which do contribute their
influence to every good work. Manton on Jude, v. (...)
Obedience (says one) respects the command of a Superior; Love, the kindness
and merit of the Lawgiver; Faith, his bounty and reward: The first swayeth the
Conscience, the second inclines the Heart, the third gives encouragement:
Sure I am, without these there can be no spiritual actings in an Evangelical
manner. He only has a Gospel frame of spirit, that has the Law written in his
heart, and the works thereof in his hand; whose life is a continual transcript
of this blessed copy; For he that does Righteousness, is Righteous; Yea, it is
he that moves Heaven-wards, from a living treasure of gracious principles, and
not from external compulsion, as Clocks and such dead artificial, yet
selfmoving engines do: Hence the Church (and a believing Soul) says, (...)
Populus and (...) Spoute moveri
My Soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadab, or of a willing people, Song.
6.12. Though some say they are the words of Christ, yet in this they are
applicable to every gracious soul, that is acted by a new and living principle
toward God, and Goodness: Christ's People are voluntaries in the day of his
power, in the way of duty, being acted by a free and Princely spirit, the
renewed will being the great engine that moves the soul in a Christian course;
Exodus 25.2 and 35.21.29.
their own spirits make them willing for God.

3. A third spring that feeds holy thoughts is wel-gathered experiences: the
Christians breast is to be a treasury of experimental observations, which may
be improved as good props to uphold a tottering Faith. It Is said of them in
Luke 1.66. that they laid up all those strange passages concerning John, in
their bearts. And thus we find several Saints carefully gathering, and
seasonably recollecting their former experiences; as Jacob, David, Paul,
Samuel, Manoah and his Wife. Time would fail me to recount all the instances
of this nature: Recording the time, place, manner of Divine discoveries, has
been of singular advantage to believers. Experience begets hope; we lose much
through neglect hereof: Romans 5.4.
Signal memorials of received Mercies, help to present Duties, and quicken
Faith in the greatest future difficulties. All Artists gather knowledge, by
laying up Experiments; and he is the wisest Christian, that in this respect
with Solomon, has his heart filled with experience of Wisdom and Knowledge:
Experience is the best Instructor, Eccle. 1.16.
and helps a man best in instructing others; an experienced Physician and
Lawyer, are seldom Non-plust; an experienced Soldier comes off with honor. O
Christians! lay up in your hearts, what you have seen with your eyes, and felt
in your souls, of the vanity of worldly, and the excellency of Heavenly
seize, and enjoyments: You cannot be too young to collect experiences;
you cannot be too old to recollect and improve them: If your green heads would
use diligence, Seniores sunt Saniores, incipientes insipientes, quae labo iosa
fuere juventuti Studia, ea sunt jucun. da senectu^^ otia.
your gray hairs would arrive to large experiences; by which means, the works
and loads of old age would be easy, that were almost intolerable in your
younger years. A young Carpenter is long with a little, and makes many chips,
that an experienced workman dispatcheth, both more quickly, and more nearly:
It Is so in Religion, experience facilitates every work of it. And how does
experience feed thoughts? Thus, when a soul is at a pinch, and the heart struck
dead with a sudden surprizal, so that the thoughts are puzzelled, Experience
comes in to their relief, and represents the state as feasible, since it calls
to mind as arduous a case, which yet was not insuperable; And why may thou
not get through as well as formerly, says Experience? And thus it Marshals the
souls faculties in their proper ranks, and brings it through the present
attempt with order and victory, whether the undertaking be of doing Duty, or
enduring difficulty.

4. Genesis 2.14 Euphrates sie dict. ab (...)(...). lastifi^andopropterea quod
cireu^jacentem a. g^latum redilat, ut sequente Anno sponre ^resear.
The last refreshing stream that supplies the heart with Heavenly thoughts, is
the wells of consolation; this like the last, yet not the least River of
Paradise [Euphrates] does (as the name of that imports) refresh the heart with
chearing incomes, and influences: This makes the soul both cheerful and
fruitful; in the midst of terrifying thoughts, these comforts delights the
soul, Psalm. 94.19. Oh the joy that these beget in the midst of sorrow! Nothing
can make sad, if Divine Comforts make glad: These bright beams of Light chase
away the foggy mist of darkness, and disconsolate horror; These pure streams of
comfort wash away the bitter effects of despairing thoughts: These comforts
infinitely exceed wine, which Philosophers have called the chief allayments of
men's miseries, Miseriatum him tnatum (...).
but the sense of this love is better than wine; one drop of these divine Joys
would even mitigate Hell torments. This is a treasure indeed, which, as it is
of great efficacy, so it is the satisfying result of the forementioned
provision; saving Truths, savory Graces, sensible Experiences, beget solid
Peace. But besides those, there are two clear streams that much promote the
souls comfortable thoughts: Which are 1. Precious Promises, 2. A clear
Conscience.


1. Promises are the storehouse of comfort, the Charters of our privileges,
the conveyances of our Heavenly Inheritance: Promises are the breasts of
consolation, the [evangelica mulctralia] the milk-Pails of the Gospel; the
great receptacles of that ((...)) sincere milk of the Word, stored up for Babes
in Christ. The Promises, says a good Divine, Manton on Jude page 152.
are Bills of Exchange given you, that you may draw your estate into another
Country: Nothing can cheer up the heart so much as a word of Promise. Hence
David desires to hear [the voice of] joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.8.
i. e. in a promise: There Is a probatum est upon this means of Spiritual
comfort, whether it concern Life or Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8
present or future enjoyments. It is said of the Duke of Guise, that he was the
richest man in France, though not in Lands, yet in Bills and Bonds, and great
Friends: So is a right Christian; he is the richest man in the world, in
possession and reversion, for he inherits all things, and he is Heir to a
glorious Crown at death. 2 Pet. 1 4.
The exceeding great and precious Promises may cheer up the heart of a drooping
Saint, if it were as low as Hell; for they were made and confirmed by an Oath,
that the Heirs of Promise might have strong consolation: Heb. 6.17, 18.
It is strange if the Bucket of Faith do not always draw up the water of
consolation, out of the Wells of Salvation. God has ordered in Nature our
feeding to be with delectation, so in Spirituals; our application and
improvement of Promises is with sweetness and delight: This is the first means
to beget a Treasure of comfortable Thoughts in the believing Soul-inriching
Promises.

2. Clearness of Conscience, This is an help to comfortable Thoughts. Yet
observe, that Peace is not so much effected as preserved by a good Conscience,
and Conversation, for though joy in the Holy Ghost, will-make its Nest no where
but in an holy Soul, yet the blood of Christ only can speak peace, being
justified by Faith, we have peace; Romans 5.1. An exact life will not make, but
keep Conscience quiet; An easy shoe, heals not a sore foot, but keeps a sound
one from crushing. Walking with God according to Gospel-Rules, has peace
intailed upon it, and that peace is such a treasure, as thereby a Christian may
have his rejoicing from himself: Gal. 6.16-4. His own heart sings him a merry
tune, which the threats and reproaches of the World cannot silence: The
treasure of comfort is not expended in affliction; Death it self does not
exhaust, but increase and advance it to an eternal triumph: O the excellency
and necessity of it! Paul laid it up for a Deathbed Cordial; 2 Cor. 1.12. Our
Rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, Isa. 38.3.
-- And Hezekiah dares hold it up to God, as well as cheer up himself with it
at approaching Death. A Conscience good in point of Integrity, will be good
also in point of tranquillity: Psalm. 119.165. 1 John 3.21.
The Righteous is bold as a Lion; They have great peace that love and keep Gods
Commandments: And says the Apostle, If our heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God, and I may add, also toward men. Oh! what comfort and
solace has a clear Conscience? He has something within, to answer accusations
without: He has such a rich treasure as will not fail in greatest straits and
hazards. I shall conclude this with a notable saying of an Ancient: Laetitiae
bonae conscientiae Paradisus animarum, gaudium angelorum, hortus deliciarum,
ager benedictionis, templum Solomonis, Aula Dei, habitaculum Spi. Sancti. Bern.
The joys of a good Conscience are the Paradise of Souls, the Delight of
Angels, the Garden of Delights, the Field of Blessing, the Temple of Solomon,
the Court of God, the Habitation of the Spirit of God.

CHAP. IV.
How the Treasure of holy Thoughts thus laid in, is to be laid out.

HItherto of the laying up of a Treasure of good Thoughts by the accession of
Truths, Graces, Experiences and Comforts, the third head propounded, is how
this Treasure is expended, brought forth, and improved, for that treasure is
(in a sort) useless, that is not made use of. Now this Treasure is exerted four
ways, viz. By the 1. Heart in Meditating. 2. Lips Speaking. 3. Hands Doing. 4.
Back Enduring.

1. By the heart in Divine Soliloquies, and heavenly Meditations, in warming
Notions and elevating Motions, these keep the Christian good company, so that
he is never less alone than when alone; As a very Heathen could say: Nunquam
minus so lus, quam cum solus.
Scripture-Truths are sweet and satisfying Companions in all conditions,
places, stations; When thou go, it shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it
shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee, Prove. 6.22.
And what can we desire more than a Guide in our way, a Guard in our beds, and a
sweet Companion in our solitudes, and serious retirements? Such are Divine
Truths. A Christian may live upon this Treasure in a Wilderness, in Prison,
[etiam in Inferne] even in Hell it self (says Luther.) Gods Statutes were
David's Songs in the house of his Pilgrimage; Psalm. 119.54.
Isaac went out into the fields for Recreation, and took his treasure along
with him, getting a solitary and savoury repast, of Meditation, Genesis 24.63.
When a man is shut out from Ordinances, his soul may be satisfied with Marrow
and Fatness, Psalm. 63.5, 6.
when it meditates of God in the night-watches: Yea, when dull or discouraging
thoughts discompose the spirit: This treasure helps to an holy spell to raise
the spirit of the Believer, Psalm. 39.3 Psalm. 42.5
and drive away the evil spirit of deadness, and distraction. Meditation is a
kind of deliberate Ecstasy; The harmonious melody of the souls faculties
within it self by a mutual and musical consort; it is the souls self-conference
heard only by it self: It is a fetching up meat formerly taken down, and
diffusing it into the several Veins and Arteries of the soul; Meditation (in a
word) is an holy concoction and digestion of Divine Truths, which fattens and
ripens the soul for Heaven. O the ravishing nature of a close and fixed
Meditation. 'Tisa God-injoying, and self-profiting exercise; the devout soul,
that is thus furnished with a Treasure, can expatiate upon all things, and like
the laborious Be, fetch the honey of some comfort out of every object and
subject: When Grace is in the heart, knowledge in the head, and Truths in the
memory; the Christian through Divine Assistance will make good work of every
condition and dispensation: Psalm. 1.2.
It Is both the character and the honor of a Christian to meditate of Gods Law
day and night; he that talks much with his own heart by meditation, and takes
frequent turns in Paradise by contemplation; does far transcend the rate and
pace of ordinary Christians: Dr. Hall Solil. 3. p. 8, 9.
For (says a great Divine) commonly we are transformed into the dispositions
and manners of those, whose company we frequent. And if we keep company with an
holy God, by-meditation, we shall be more exactly holy in all manner of
Conversation.

2. This Treasure of the Heart vents it self by the Lips in heavenly
Communications; and that two ways,

1. Conferences, discoursing with Men.

2. Performances, discoursing with God.

1. A treasured soul does discourse profitably with men: This, I think, is the
chief design of this Text; a bringing forth good things in talking to men's
Edification. A gracious heart freely pours out holy Expressions; Solomon says,
Prove. 16.23.
the Heart of the Wise teaches his Mouth: That inward spring feeds these sweet
streams; and tipps the tongue with Divine Rhetoric. So Cant. 4.11. Thy Lips, O
my Spouse, drop as the Honeycomb, Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue; not like
vainglorious empty Scholars, or conceited formal Professors, that have got
some scraps of confused Notions, then fet open the Pack, and expose all to open
view, but are quickly drawn dry: No, no, these well-furnisht souls have an
overflowing treasure of holy Matter, to produce upon occasion, and can speak a
word in season upon any subject, to any soul. It Is said of Plato and Ambrose,
that Bees swarmed in their Cradles, as presages of their future Eloquence: So
the Honeycomb of Scripture-Truths drops at the Christians tongues end; his
speech is seasoned with salt, Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29
because his heart is seasoned with Grace; his discourses (like Honey) at once
both purge and please the Sanctified Auditor: Prove. 16.24.
When the well-guided tongue is an Interpreter of a cleansed heart, it is food
and physic to him that improves it: For the tongue of the Wise is health,
Prove. 12.18. The same word in the Heb. (...) Josh. 7.21. Lingua auri.
that signifies tongue, is also used (joined with another word) for a wedge of
Gold: The truth is, a Treasured Heart finds a precious golden Tongue; and
nothing more cordial to the fainting heart, than the fruit of those choice Lips.

2. This Treasure is exercised in Religious Dutys, and Holy Performances: The
root of Grace in the heart, Heb. 13.15. Zech. 12.10.
brings forth these Fruits of the Lips in Prayer and Praise. The spirit of
Prayer fumes up to Heaven this Divine Incense: Such a soul needs not to be
prompted by men, that has this lively Liturgy in his heart; Romans 8.26
the Spirit can help both to affections and expressions. A treasured soul has
a stock of prayers, as an able Minister has a stock for Sermons (though he may
be without a stock of written notes;) I mean, the body of Divinity in his head;
which makes a ready Scribe: The more treasure a soul has within, the more
ready will it be to every good work; yea, and the more raised to God in the
work: Such a one is helped very much against Distractions, the great complaint
of good souls. It is a notable expression of a good Author; Cobbet of^ prayer.
(says he) He that has store of Gold and Silver in his pocket, and but a few
brass Farthings, will more readily upon every draught, come out with Gold and
Silver, than with brass Farthings. So he whose heart is stocked with holy
thoughts, will not find carnal cogitations so rife and frequent. If the heart
have indicted a good matter, Psalm. 45.1 Col. 3.16 Ephesians. 5.19
the tongue will be as the pen of a ready Writer; If the heart be filled with
Grace, it will make melody to the Lord, and music to Good men. A treasured
Soul is ready to trade with God in Duty. Yet take this Caution: A true
Christian having a large measure of habitual Grace, is not always in an equal
actual capacity for Duty: David's heart may need tuning as well as his Harp. The
key of this treasure may be lost or rusted: So that the treasure of that man
after Gods own heart, was locked up in great measure, for the space of nine
months, til God sent the key by Nathan to open the Sluice of Repentance, and
draw out the Seeds of Grace.

3. The Treasure in the heart is also drawn out with the hands, in the works of
piety toward God, charity to men, and sobriety with respect to our selves: So
the Apostle distributeth good works, Tit. 2.12. It Is not enough for the soul to
have the Axe laid to the root of the tree, in sound Conviction and
Gospel-Humiliation, Math. 3.8
but he is to bring forth Fruits meet for such Repentance, Romans 10.10. Gal. 5.6.
in a Gospel-Conversation; we must not only believe with the heart, Gal. 5.6.
and confess with the mouth; but Faith must work by Love; upwards to God, by
the Obedience of Faith; inwards to the Heart, by purifying it; and downwards to
men, by doing good unto all: But especially to the household of Faith. Here is a
large field of matter for my pen, and the Christians hand; but the furnished
Christian is universal in Obedience, baulks not the hardest and most hazardous
Duties; will not serve God with that which costs him nothing: And this is a
grand discriminating note betwixt a treasured Saint, and a treasureless
Hypocrite: The carnal person loves a cheap Religion, and is loath to be at any
cost or pains for God, in a way of commanded Duty; but to a Child of God the
more spiritual a Duty is, and the more opposite it is to carnal ease and profit,
the more freely does the soul close with it: He is willing to cut off a right
hand of a beloved Lust, pray for enemies, forgive wrongs, give to the poor; as
knowing that all these (yea, Jam. 1.27
even the last) are essential parts of our religion; therefore when the heart
is full of grace the hands Dorcas-like, Phil. 1.11.
will be full of good works; which are called fruits of righteousness. Col. 1.10
It Is the Christians duty and dignity to be fruitful in every good work; which
cannot proceed from any other root than this Hearttreasure. A willing heart will
find a liberal hand to relieve the poor;^ the Merchandise of penitent- Tire is
treasured up in the bellys, Isa. 23.18. chapter 32.7, 8.
and upon the backs of Gods holy ones: This liberal soul devises liberal
things, and will not make use of carnal reasonings; as danger of poverty
unworthiness of the (...) times, and the (...) the instruments (...), but the
^ugeness of a (...) treasure will make (...) carefully to (...), and objects
and occasions of charity (...) ca^es, (...) power, (...) by the freeness of his
heart, enhanceth the Mite into a pound in true worth, Of this subject of
Almsgiving, See morning Exercise at Cripple-Gate. Sermon. 11. page 240 to p. 278.
and Gods account: Thus the readiness of the heart compensates the weakness of
the hand.

But I must fix bounds to this discourse; Yet a treasured Saint has no stint
of desires and endeavors to be acting for God, and the good will of his heart
adds new vigor to his fainting hand. Naturalists observe, that when the heart
more inclines to the right side, the spirits are more lively and apt for
Contemplation and Action; Eccle. 10.2
hence that of Salomons, A Wise-mans heart is at his right hand: I am sure when
a Christians heart boweth Godwards, his hand is full of activity in the ways of
God, and works of godliness; When the soul is filled with Grace, the hand is
fitted for acts of Religion.

4. This inward Heart-Treasure helps the back and shoulders to bear the
Christians burdens: The time of affliction is a spending time; Romans 5.3.
if there be any Grace within, tribulation will draw it out. Hence it is said to
work patience; not that it creates what was not in the soul before; but educeth
and evidenceth that which before lay hid in the heart: The fiery Furnace will
prove and improve the souls spiritual strength; for if it faint in the day of
adversity, its strength is small, and treasure poor. Now, shall it be clearly
known, whether the Conscience be sound or foundred, if it will pace well in rough
ways: Twice is it repeated in Revelations, Rev. 13.10 and 14.12.
when mention is made of Anti-christ's tyranny and ruin; Here is the patience,
here is the patience, and faith of Saints: q. d. Here Is the trial of it, here is
room for it, here is the root and fruit of it, even Antichrists desolation,
which they have been so long waiting and praying for; surely a glorious sight
worth beholding; Rome flaming, Saints triumphing, yet in the mean time, they
have need of Faith and patience: For immediately before both these passages,
we have a description of Romes rage; the Devil will come down with the greater
wrath, Rev. 12.12. Morientium ferarum, violentiores sunt morsus. Heb. 10.36.
Ephesians. 6.13
when he has a shorter time, and the last bitings of this dying Beast, will be
the fiercest, which may bring forth all the Saints Graces, and all little
enough in times of trial; we have great need of patience after we have done
Gods will, that we may also endure his will, til promises be performed. We must
buckle on the Armor of God, that we may be able to withstand in an evil day;
and having done and endured all, to stand on the Field as Conquerors. In
personal conflicts all our stock of suffering Graces may be put to it; Poverty
will try our Faith; disgrace our self-denial; sickness our patience; delay of
return of prayers in a long expected Mercy, will try our hope; -- and all these
Graces must have their perfect work, (...) ex (...) totu^, and (...) sors,
haereditas tota sort constans.
that the Christian also may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, Jam. 1.4.
He should have the whole heritage of a Christian, the complete accomplishment
of a Saint; every Grace in its height and due proportion. Job, David, Eli, and
Hezekiah had laid in a large stock of bearing Graces, and they found enough to
do with them in affliction; they had no more than they needed. Love bears and
breaks through all things; Faith holds up the head and heart above
discouragements: Nature has furnished the Camel with a bunched back, to bear
huge burdens, and a tractable bowing of his knees to the ground, that he may
be the better loaded: So will the wel-taught and accomplished Saint meekly stoop
to take up, and cheerfully carry Christ's Cross, during his pleasure^ That Is a
sound-hearted Christian indeed, that like the Nightingale can sing most sweetly
when the thorn is at his breast; that like Spices, the more they are bruised,
the better is the savor of their Graces. But a carnal man wanting this
treasure of Grace, kicks at, yea, kicks off his burden; yet though it be
possible that the Spirit of a man, (as a man of a masculine temper naturally,
or by acquired magnanimity) may possibly sustain his infirmity, and not succumb
under outward burdens of sorrow, yet there is a vast difference betwixt a
gracious and graceless heart in enduring afflictions, both as to their carriage
thereunder, and advantage thereby: Hear Austin elegantly discovering the
difference; There is (says he) a dissimilitude of Sufferers in a similitude of
sufferings, and though they be under the same torment, yet is there not the
same virtue and vice, as under one fire, gold brightneth, chafe smoaketh; and
under the same Flail stubble is crushed, Corn purged; Hence also the Lees
mingle not with the Oil, though pressed together; so one and the same onset
proves, purifieth, and sweetly melts the good, condemns, wastes, rooteth
out the bad: Hence in the same affliction the wicked hate and blaspheme God,
the Godly pray and praise: So great is the consequence, not what things a man
suffers, but of what a Spirit is the Sufferer? For with the same motion may
the channel stink abominably, and the ointment smell most * Manet enim
dissimilitudo passorum in similitudine passionum, and licet sub ^odem to mento,
non est idem virtus and vitium, nam sicut sub uno igne, aurum rutilat, palea
fumat, and sub eadem tribuld stipulae cemminuuntur, frumenta purgantur, nec
ideo cum olco, amurca confunditur, quia eadem praelii pondere ita una eadem^
vis, irruens bones probat, purificat, eliquat; Malos damnat, vastat,
exterminat. unde in eadem afflictione mali Deum derestantur, atque blasphemant;
boni autem precantur, and laudant: tantum interest. Non qualia sed qualis quis^
patiatur: Nam pari motu exagitatum and, exhalat horribiliter coenum, and
suaviter fragrat unguentum -- August. De. civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 8 p. [ mihi]
16.
sweetly: Thus he, with which I shall conclude this head: What are the ways of
laying out this Treasure.

CHAP. V. Reasons showing the great necessity of laying up this heart-treasure.
AT last we come to the confirmation of this Doctrine; That a good treasure in
the Heart, is necessary to good expenses in the life, and the

1. Ground is taken from Nature and Reason, which prompteth to us, those
undoubted maxims, Operari sequitur esse. Nihil dat quod non habet. Qualis
causa talis effectus. Ex nihilo nihil fit.
that a thing must first be, before it can act, nothing can give what it has
not, such as the cause is, such are the effects: Of nothing, nothing can be
made, without a Miracle of Creation, and we cannot expect to be fed by
Miracles, where ordinary means are proposed, and supposed to be used: If we
wilfully neglect to lay in provision while we have a season for it, we are
guilty of groundless presumption, if we conceit we can lay out in a necessitous
condition: How can any expect liquor from the Still, meat from the Cupboard,
garments from the Wardrobe, where none of these were laid in? What mad man
would think to reap without sowing, or teach others when he has no learning
himself? Was there ever a bringing forth without a conception? Is it not fond
dotage in a Shopkeeper to think to sell wares, that has none? And is this
preposterous in Naturals, and can it hold in Spirituals? Joseph could not
supply the Country with Corn without a store. A Tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, except it be good: The Scripture says, Jam. 3.12.
Can a Fig Tree bear Olive-berries, or a Vine Figs? And can we think men can
act graciously without a principle of Grace?

2. Reason is drawn from the Offices of Christ, the second person in the sacred
Trinity, was filled with a treasure, that he might fill the Saints with a
Treasure of Grace: In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
Col. 1.3, 9
The fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in Christ. And for this very end
has God stored Christ, that he might supply his Members, that of his fullness
we may receive, and Grace for Grace, John 1.16. Simplex Sensus esse videtur,
quascun^ in ^os gratias cumulat deus peraeij, ex hoc font manare: recte ergo
sentiunt qui nos irrigari dicunt essusis in Christu^ grat^is. Calv. in Loc.
The plain simple sense of which Text, says Calvin, is that, what Graces God
heaps on us, they all flow from this Fountain, therefore are we watered with
the graces that are poured upon Christ. For observe it, this is the nature of
Gospel-dispensations; What spiritual good things the Saints receive, they have
them not now from God as Creator, so much as through the hands of Jesus Christ
as the great Mediator of the new Covenant, he is the Channel or Cistern, or
rather Fountain of all Grace, that our souls expect or receive: He is our
Aaron anointed above his fellows, that the Oil of Grace might in its
proportion fall from the head to the Members. Hence it is that he is called
Christ, and we Christians, from this holy unction: For this end was our Lord
Jesus advanced to be the head of the Church, that he might fill it with all
gracious supplies: and hence it is, that the Church is called his Body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. i. e. the effect of Christ's
fullness, who fills all the Saints, in all Ordinances and means of conveyance
of gracious Influences: Truth of Grace is from him, growth and strength of
Grace are from him; both the least measure and a large treasure are to be had
in him; Joh. 10.10. I came that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly. i. e. the Essence and Abundance are both from him. So then
we see Christ is designed to be our Joseph, to furnish our souls with a
treasure, and therefore he that neglects to stock his heart from this
storehouse does undervalue the great Office of Christ, and does what he can,
to frustrate God of his end in souls-supply: This is horrible ingratitude.

3. Reason is drawn from the end and design of all Providence and Ordinances:
They are given to be helps to promote this Heart-Treasure: God puts a price
into our hands that we may have Grace in our hearts; He gives us a summer
season to lay up for this pinching Winter. Naturalists say, that while the bird
called Halcion sits on her nest, there is calmness and serenity upon the Sea:
Such Halcion-daies of tranquillity, and Gospel-opportunities have we enjoyed in
this tempestuous Sea of the world, not to feather our nests below, much less to
hatch the Cockatrice-eggs of sin, but to warm and ripen the brood of Grace in
our souls, and to lay up a precious treasure for the evil days of Old Age,
Sickness, or Persecution, and for the long day of Eternity. When God affords a
season, he expects things should be done in that season, and if man neglect it,
Eccl 8.6, 8 ^ev. 6.6 Prove. 10.5 ^ermi^a, atis and ^ic^, s^nt vere ^nram (...).
his misery will be great upon him. The very. Ant lays up for Winter, and reads
a Lecture to man, of good husbandry: Gathering in summer is a token of wisdom,
but sleeping in harvest, is a sinful, shameful, beggaring practice. God expects
that we should work in the light, and walk in the day, while this day of Grace
lasts; John. 12.35, It Is a sad astonishing thing, that God should hold men a
Candle for them to play by; especially, when time is short, uncertain; death
and eternity are so near, and of such vast consequence. Oh what a confounding
question will that be one day? Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is there a price in the
hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Observe it, God
takes a strict account of our helps, and of our hoard, and expects a due
proportion. Oh what a sad reckoning will many make, whose negligence will be
condemned by the diligence of bruit creatures, Nullus mihi per atium exit dies,
part^ etiam noctium Studiis vendico. Senec.
and Heathen Philosophers in moral studies? Yea, by the light of their own
Consciences.

4. Another Reason is taken from our hearts natural emptiness of a treasure of
good: In me (says Paul) that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
This barren soil has the more need to be Manured; this empty house to be well
furnished, least the heart continue still destitute of all saving good, and the
soul depart out of this world as naked of saving-Grace, as it entered: It Is pity
so brave an house should stand empty of Inhabitant, and Furniture. The souls of
Gods people are vessels that are to be wel-fraught with the Liquor of all
saving-graces, that they may be fitted for, and filled with Eternal Glory,
Romans 9.23. The Christian is to be holily covetous of these riches of Glory,
that amends may be made for his natural vacuity. Oh the vast Chaos of an
unregenerate heart! A long time, and great pains must go to the replenishing of
it: There Is many waste corners to be filled, even after the truth of grace is
planted, before the soul be enlarged to a due capacity of service here, and
heaven hereafter: The soul of a Believer, Mr. Good. w^n.
says one, is a house well built, where faith lays the foundation: hope helps
up the walls, knowledge sets open the windows, and love covers the roof, and
this makes a room fit for Christ; And I add, there must be every day a
sweeping, and watching, and decking of this House with further degrees of
grace, embellishing it with divine Ornaments, and furnishing it: and every
Room, I mean every faculty, with a rich treasure of heavenly blessings: it will
be some cost and toil to hang every room of the heart with lively pictures of
the divine Image: for it is altogether empty of that which is truly and
spiritually good, or may be called a Treasure: But that's not all; for

5. The soul is by nature filled with an evil treasure: the heart is
desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart
is only and continually evil, Genesis 6.5. the mind, will and affections are
stuffed with a world of blindness, hardness and wildness: the soul is
naturally propense to evil, averse to good, and therefore a treasure of good is
necessary to preponderate and extrude this treasure of wickedness: to season
and seize upon the soul for God, as sin did for Satan; the love of God is to be
shed abroad into those veins and Channels of the heart, Romans 5.5. Romans 2.29
where sin did run with a violent current; the Christian is to be circumcised
in the most polluted part: and certainly, it is not a little grace that will
obstruct the active motions of sin, for though grace be of greater worth, yet
its disputable, whether it attain to greater strength than corruption, even in
the hearts of the sanctified, in this life: But certainly, the greater measure
of grace and treasure of sanctifying truths, the more power against corruption:
the whole Armor of God, (which is also the Saints treasure) resist inward lusts
and Satan's assaults, Ephesians. 6.12, 14. The Spirit is compared to wind, now some
have called the winds, John 3. Scop^s mundt: Because they serve to sweep the
air and the world clean from infectious vapors.
the beesomes of the world. But I am sure the spirit of grace with the fruits
thereof, are choice beesomes to sweep the filth of sin out of the soul, and
also to adorn it with divine Jewels, and assist ^t with notable Antidotes
against corruption, these are as water to wash the heart from filthiness: the
smallest measure helps against sin, but the more grace, the less sin in the
heart; grace is a principle of life and opposes dead works, which otherwise
will lead the soul to the chambers of death: therefore this treasure is of
absolute necessity, and the same might we say of the word, Psalm. 119.11.
which being hid in the heart helps against sin in the life.

6. Another reason is taken from the inbred motions of humane nature: All men
on earth seek after a treasure, it is the harmonious inquest of all rational
creatures, who will show us any good, Homo est. (...).
any thing to make a treasure off? Man has a capacious soul an active and
laborious spirit; the whole world is not a morsel big enough for his capacious
swalow: our covetous desires, says one, are a long sentence without a period:
Finite things are dry meat to an hungry soul, they sooner glut than fill: nay,
they put on this busy Be to buzze about one Flower after another, till it
has weatied it self in vain, and sit down in utter despair of comfort and
satisfaction; only interest in the God of Heaven, and the image of the God of
Heaven make up all defects: See Psalm 73.25, 26. A Christ alone to justify,
and a Christ within to sanctify, make the soul completely happy; Col. 1.27.
Phil. 3.8, 9. Col. 3.11.
for Christ within is the hope of glory; a glorified and a gracious Redeemer,
is the Christians only treasure, his all in all; God has furnished man with an
immortal soul, learning may widen it, but grace fills it: nothing else will
reach its large dimensions: Homo est universi orbis Epitome, and abbreviata
mund tabella: Mat. 16.
Man is a little world himself, nay bigger and better than this greater, by
Christ's own verdict, who is truth it self; the soul it self is better than the
world, and it must have something better than it self to be a treasure for it.
Philosophy seeks, Christianity shows, the sound Believer only finds true
happiness, Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46.
which the wise Merchant fetched out of the field of the Gospel, into the
Cabinet of his own heart.

7. Whatsoever men have or love, they desire a treasure thereof, no man but
would have a large treasure of a precious Commodity, he that has Gold and
Silver would heap it up to a treasure: he that has wisdom and learning would
still have more: Men join house to house, and field to field to procure for
themselves and heirs, a fair demain, a large estate. How many rich men are
still as eager for more, as if they had not enough to purchase a meals meat?
yet these seek for earth, as if abundance thereof would purchase heaven; like
the Partridge, they sit close on these eggs, though they hatch them not, Jer.
17.11.
nor are ever likely to bring them to their desired maturity; Auri saera fames.
Oh the unhallowed thirst after filthy lucre! Many think to fill their souls
with wealth, whereas they cannot fill one of the least members of their body:
Eccle. 1^ 8,
the eye which yet a Nut-shel will cover; the world at the best is like Pasotes
Banquet, which when the guests begun to cat, vanished into nothing: And shall so
many men set their eyes (and hearts too) on that which is not? Pro. 23.5.
And shall not Gods children make a treasure of that which is enduring
substance? Shall men think to make a treasure of coals, and chafe, and empty
shadows? and shall not the Christian gather store of Pearls and Jewels for his
treasure? Shall the children of the world be more wise and wary for earth, than
the children of light for Heaven? God forbid. Surely the Christian has as
great reason to heap up as any; these commodities are more rare, rich and
necessary than any other, and why then should they not get an heart-treasure?
For in these reasons I would both convince the judgment, and persuade the
affections; these are the chief motives I have: for I would spend most time in
Direction.

8. This, and only this does discriminate betwixt persons and persons: my
meaning is, this heart-treasure puts a difference betwixt Saints and Sinners,
betwixt weak and strong Christians: as the treasure in the heart is, so is the
Professors state, as Solomon says in another case, Pro. 23.7. As he thinks
in his heart, so is he; not as he speaks with his lips: Formalists will speak
God as fair as any, they honor him with their lips, 3.19 13. ^salm 78.36, 37^
and flatter him with false and fawning fashions, as though he were an Idol;
But the heart-searching God is not pleased, except the heart be upright with
him, it is the upright in whom he delights: nor is a person as he acts with his
hands, or walks with his feet, in many passages of his life; A man may with
Ahab walk softly: with Herod do many things: with Simon Magus make large
professions of faith: yea, its possible a man may suffer many troubles, and
even death it self in a good cause, yet, except he have a heart treasured with
grace, he is rejected, and may go to hell at last: God judges of the fruits by
the Root, though men judge of the Root by the fruits: a heart after his own
heart is better than the tongue of men and Angels: Pius homo numisma est a Deo
cusum, imp^us adulterinum, non a Deo sed a Diavolo effectum: Ignat. Epist. ad
magn^^.
the distinction of persons, is in respect of inside principles and workings: a
good man may sometimes do an evil work, and a bad man may do a good work, but
how are their hearts? the best conferences or performances are not current coin
with the God of heaven, except they issue out of the mint of an heart where
Gods Image is stamped: a little good is accounted much when there is a treasure
within, much seeming good is looked on as nothing when there is no treasure: this
also puts the difference betwixt a strong and weak Christian: let their gifts
and outward seemings be what they will, yet the greater or lesser degree of
real grace distinguishes their seize; and accordingly these measures
have different influences upon their lives, duties, comforts, or preparedness
for death.

9. This treasure does assimilate the soul to God: the great Jehovah is the
only self-existent, and self-sufficient good; He is the absolute, complete,
and independent Being, and needs no accession of Creatures or created Powers to
make him happy: nothing can add to, or detract from his infinite and
incomprehensible blessedness: He is a treasure of all * Et Deum ipsum verum
recte dicimus divitem, non tamen pecunia, sed omnipotentia: dicuntur pauperes
pecunia carentes, sed interius divites si sapientes: Aug. de civit: Dei l. 7.
c. 12. p. 395.
good, in and to himself; and needs neither Gold nor Silver to make him rich:
(...) Satiatus est abundavitiquidam conferunt oum
parallel to this in some proportion is the Saints sweet and secret
heart-treasure, and solitary recesses: The Christian is a little world, and is
purely independent upon the creature to make him happy: (...), septem, quod 7.
sit numerus plenitudinis: i. e. What he has within, shall be as seven
witnesses, or many.
he can through grace live comfortably without the world, though not without,
but upon God: yea God is so much in him, as well as to him, that he can live
comfortably when other things are dead, a good man is satisfied from himself,
Prove. 14.14. i.e. he shall have sufficient content from his own conscience:
th^s but one word there for a back-slider, being fi^led with his ways of sin
and guilt, and a gracious souls satisfaction from the sweet result of his own
heart, to show that a man's own conscience, is either his heaven or hell, his
greatest comforter or tormentor: the World cannot alter the joy or sadness of
the heart: a through-paced well-tryed Child of God, has his rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another, Galat. 6.4. It Is a pedling beggarly life to
wander abroad for morsels, but that's a noble kind of living, when a man has
all within doors, and needs not creatures sorry contributions: I speak not of
the fancied Familistical deification, which is nothing less then blasphemy,
but certainly the sound Christian in a sound sense bears some resemblance of
the Divinity in this [(...)] self-sufficiency; and the more treasure, the more
like God; for such a soul is elevated above the creature, and fixed in an
higher Orb, whither storms and tempests cannot reach; nay, a soul whose
conversation is in Heaven, has no dependence upon, nor intelligence with the
creature, in order to completing his felicity: no more than the Sun needs the
glimmering light of the Stars to make day: who then would not have this
treasure? I might also add herein, the Christians resemblance to the infinite
Jehovah, because he has a principle of motion within himself, and not from
without, for as God is a free agent, yea a pure act, so in a sense are the
Saints acting from an inward principle: hence those Scripture-expressions of a
man's Spirit, making him willing, and the heart smiting a man or witnessing for
him, Exodus 35.21. 2 Samuel 24.10. Romans 9.1. 2 Pet. 2.8 (...) -- (...).
or with him: And in the exercise of Repentance, it is said of Lot, he vexed his
righteous Soul; or put himself upon the Rack. Wicked men are dead, but Grace is
a principle of life, and resembles the Author of it; For that which is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit; John 3.6. The decayed liberty of the will is in part by
Grace restored; and so far as the soul is Spiritual, the soul of a Saint is a
flame of fire ascending to, and acting for God, and the greater treasure of
this a man has in his breast, the liker he is to God.

CHAP. VI. The last reason, showing the advantages of this treasure.
THe tenth Argument to evince the necessity of this Heart-Treasure, is drawn
from the profit and advantage in having it, and that principally in
facilitating the hardest duties of Religion, 2 Timothy 3.17.
and furnishing the Soul for every good work: And here I shall keep close to the
Treasure of holy Thoughts, fed with those four streams, of Truths, Graces,
Comforts, Experiences: not only a saving principle, but such a measure thereof,
as will make up a Treasure.

Now the frame of a treasured soul for duty, is, 1. Ready. 2. Real. 3.
Uniforme. 4. Perpetual.


1. A treasured heart is ready for Duty, like a wel-stored Housekeeper, you
cannot take him unprovided; a wel-accomplish'd Scholar that is never non-plust;
and a watchful Soldier, that is always fit for service: The Christian has
prepared materials to build the house, and wants nothing but its setting up in
actual performance; Yea, the house is built and furnished in some degree for
the entertaining of this Royal Guest; Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. The bow is stringed, the heart fixed, the
fire glowing in the Cinders upon the Hearth, and one blast of the Spirits
breathing heightens it to a flame: Yet suppose the heart be not in actual
readiness, yet habits are sooner educed into act, than new habits infused, and
this the foolish Virgins knew by sad experience.

But observe it, the more of this treasure, and the more readiness; the reason
why we are not so free to Prayer, Conference, Meditation, is because we are
not so filled with Grace; otherwise, gracious acts would flow from us, as
naturally, as streams from the Spring; had we a treasure, we should never want
suitable matter, and lively affections, we should not need to force our selves
to offer Sacrifice, as Saul in another respect, nor with main-strength to bind
the Sacrifice to the horns of the Altar, but we should come off freely,
cheerfully, delighting in Gods ways as in our proper element, and running with
enlarged hearts; The glorious Angels, and glorified Spirits of the Just made
perfect, have a perfect treasure of divine perfections, and are therefore ready
pressed to do Gods Will. Now we pray that Gods will may be done on earth, as its
done in Heaven, and that will never be, without this living treasure. But Oh how
quickly shall we hear, a command, and how swiftly shall we obey; if we have a
treasure? A good soul is like the Centurion's Servant, half a word will make him
run. When God said to David, Seek my face; Psalm. 27.8,
his heart quickly ecchoed, Thy face Lord, will I seek; his warrant carried the
force of an Argument: He needs no persuading when he knows his Masters
pleasure. This is one choice advantage of having a treasure.

2. A Treasured soul is real and serious, not complemental and forced; Israel
of old made Covenants and seemed very religious, and God himself attested that
they had well said, but wishes: Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29.
O that there were such an heart in them --! We have a strange passage in Jer.
5.2. Though they say, the Lord lives, surely they swear falsely; Why? Is not
that a truth? Yes, a great truth, God alone is the Living God, but that they
say so, yet their heart gives the lie to their Lips; they say it with a
deceitful heart, and that they may deceive, though it be a truth in it self,
yet they speak it not as a truth, wanting an heart to assert the same: It Is but
a fond and frolic ostentation, to invite a friend to dinner, when nothing is
prepared: It Is a mocking of God to bring Cain's Sacrifice, a body without an
heart, a carcass without Spirit, it is as if a Jew had brought the skin of a
beast for Sacrifice and no more: But where the treasure is in the Heart, there
the essentials of the Service are made up, the work is filled up, or complete
before God, (...)
Rev. 3.2. i. e. it is not lame or defective in any considerable constitutive
part thereof; It Is such as may be truly called a real good work. This is the
chief thing that God expects; and if a good Heart be wanting, the Work is as
undone still: But a sincere Christian finds his prayer in his Heart, which he
utters with his Lips, 2 Samuel 7.27. Thy Servant has found in his heart to pray
this Prayer; -- He found it not only in his Book, but in his Heart; he
fetches his Prayer from a Treasure: Such a man will pray a prayer, (as David
here) and not only say a prayer, that finds it in his Heart; What cares God
for a little Lip-labor: He may say, Who required these things at your hands?
Did I not require them of your hearts? A mock-Feast or Fast will not content
me; I shall not be put off with an empty show; I will have your hearts, or
nothing; and I must have a Treasure in your hearts, or all you bring is worth
nothing. The truth is, God takes principal notice of the heart, and observes
how that stands affected: If Idols be set up in the heart. Ez^k. 14^ 3, 4.
God takes no notice of a peoples prayers: Therefore we had need look to the
frame of the heart.

3. An heart-treasure makes the Christian uniform and universal in the duties
of Religion, he takes a Christian-course as it lies, carries on Religion before
him without halting or halving, he practices all righteousness at all times.
There Is a sweet harmony and exact Symmetrie in a Saints performance of duty.
Some can frame to some easier duties, not to more difficult, but the treasured
soul can frame to any thing which God in the word has made his duty, (...).
and hence it is that he is complete in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. the Law
of God in his heart carries an aspect to every part of his (...) in the written
Word; Graces and Duties are concordant one to another, like a company of horses
in Pharaohs Chariot: their cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, their necks
with chains of gold, Song. 1.9, 10. i. e. the sou^e handsomely adorned with a
comely train of graces and duties: yea, such a soul will at all times act like
it self, so that one part of his life will not cross another, as a Liars tales,
and hypocrites carriage do; he does not serve God by fits and starts, in good
moods and motions, so as to be off and on in Religion, Psa. 51.10.
but he has a constant. settled spirit, (...) Spiritus consta is, firmus,
dispositus:
(which David prays for, and the Translators call a right Spirit, and truly so
it is) disposed for God, fitted for duty, bringing forth good fruit in due
season: like a constant good Housekeeper, that is never so s^d len^^ surpriz^d,
but can make a pr^dent shi^^ to treat his friend according to his degree: the
truth is, man in his fallen estate is uncertain, intricate and multiform in all
his ways, you cannot tell where to find him, Jer. 2.36.
gadding about to change his way; but being renewed, he is in part reduced to
that original rectitude, simplicity, and stability of spirit and practice, that
was in Adam, in some proportion; so that according to the degree of grace
received, he has a constant uniform frame and tenor of spirit, and holds one
straight, direct, and even course toward heaven: in all this suitable to the
motion of the wheels in the Prophet Ezekiels Vision, Chap. 1.17. when they
went, they went upon their four sides [there's their squareness and
suitableness to all Gods wil] and they returned not when they went, [there's
their constant, permanent, and un-repentant motion]: that will lead us to the
next Head; only consider, what an excellency and beauty there is in uniformity
in religious duties: when works of Nature or Art are uniforme, what luster have
they? We are much taken with a Building that is compact and proportionable. A
Garden drawn exactly, an Army marshalled in complete ranks and postures are
comely sights; just such are the fruits of holiness, proceeding from a
wel-treasured Heart; and indeed, without this Treasure there can be no such
harmony in holy: performances, but the actings will be like the legs of the
lame, very unequal: That Is the third.

4. A treasure makes holy duties constant and perpetual, though there may be
some temporary intermissions, yet never a total cessation in acts of Religion;
Will an hypocrite pray always? Job 27.10. no verily: the water rises no
higher than the Spring, and waters fail that have no Spring, like Jobs
Snowwaters, which when it waxethwarm, vanishes away: Job 6.16, 17.
but a little brook supplied with a constant spring, holds out in Winter and
Summer: just such is the differences betwixt the performances of a treasured
and treasureless heart: Two men perform duties, the one from gifts, the other
from Grace; the former in time withers, the latter daily increases. The King
of France showed Spaines Ambassador his rich Treasures, the Ambassador looks
under the Treasure-Chests, saying, Have these a Spring? my masters treasures
have, meaning both the Indies: just so it is here, let natural men's seize
be never so excellent, you may come to see an end of all their perfections,
their eye of knowledge may be darkened, and their arm of natural and acquired
abilities clean dried up: for, how can a Well be always giving out water that
receives none? How can a Rose keep fresh without a Root? But they that are
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; yea,
they shall bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm 92.13, 14. For a lively
principle, is the seed of God that will never dye, and this spring of grace is
fed with supplies from the fullness of Jesus Christ, who is the fountain of
Gardens, and Well of living Waters; In summa, hic tam perpetuitas donorum
spiritus, quam affluentia nobis promittitur, Marl. in loc.
hence he says, John 7.38. He that believes in me -- out of his belly shall
flow Rivers of living Water, i.e. he shall have a perpetual supply of grace, and
shall send forth constant emanations of gracious a^ts: A wel-furnisht Christian
shall never be drawn dry, his Savior and treasure ever live, and because Christ
lives, the Saints and their graces shall live for ever; O friends, what would
you give in these backsliding times to hold out to the end? that you may not
make shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience. Behold, I show unto you an
excellent way, heap one grace upon another til you possess a Treasure; tie a
chain of these Pearls together, and lay them up in the Closet of your hearts,
and you will never be spiritually impoverished; be holily covetous after all
graces that are attainable: Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge,
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly-kindnesse, charity, for if you have
these, you will not be barren or unfruitful in good duties; and if you do good
duties according to that treasure, you shall never fall; See 2 Pet. 1.5. to
verse. 11. These are a chain that link the soul to God, and reach as high as
Heaven: But do not think you can endure to the end without a Treasure, for he
that has not root in himself, dureth but a while; Mat. 13.21.
no wonder if many drop off like leaves in Autumn, they have not any thing to
bea^ them out, they spend upon themselves, as the Spider which spins her webs
out of her own bowels, but they are swept away as the Spiders web: But the
gracious soul has no less than an infinite God to supply the treasures of
grace; so that let a Christian fall off to many acts of sin, carelessness in
Duty, and a course of looseness, yet this Treasure will work him off: as a
Spring clears it self from mud in time, so he shall be reduced to God; there is
something in the heart of a backsliding Saint that makes him restless in that
estate, and moving toward the Center; David says, I have gone astray like a
lost sheep, [there's his acknowledgement] Seek thy servant [there's his
request,] for I do not forget thy Commandments [there's the argument to
enforce it] q. d. there is yet something in my heart that owns thee, though I
be fallen far, yet not so far but that I am still reaching after thee, and I am
not fallen below thy reach: the truth is, a Child of God has more hold-fast
of God in his lowest ebbs than another sinner has; as the Spinster leaves a
lock of wool to draw on the next thread, so there is something left in the
heart, the seed of God that ascends Heaven-words: though a Saint be in a very
dead frame, yet he is not twice dead, as wicked men are: there is yet the root
of the matter in the heart, that by the sent of water (the heavenly dew of
divine Grace) will sprout again, and bring forth fruit: I dispute not how far
men may fall, and whether a true Saint may not be brought back to the bare
habits of grace as they were at first infused, and lose degrees of grace
obtained: But sure I am Christ prayed for Peter, (and so for all Believers)
that his faith should not fail, Vid. Suff. Brit. de quin. Artic. these. 6. p.
189. In Sanctorum cordibus secundum quasdam virtutes semper manet Spiritus:
Secundum quasdam recessurus venit, and ^^^turus recedit, in his virtutibus,
sine quibus ad vitam non pervenitur in elcolorum suorum cordibus permane^ Gr.g.
Moral.
Luke 22.32. and God always hears him: therefore our Divines have
determined, That the seed of Regeneration, with those fundamental gifts,
without which spiritual life cannot consist, are kept safe and entire: for the
same Holy Ghost that infused that seed of Grace, has imprinted in it an
incorruptible virtue, and perpetually cherishes and maintains it: Mary's
better part shall not be taken away. This fear in the heart, keeps them from
departing from God, Jer. 32.40. They have [ constantiam in proposito, and
perseverantiam in opere] constancy in their hearts, and perseverance in their
hands. Holy resolutions produce successful performances: and thus does the
treasured Christian hold on in a Christian course, til these smaller measures
of grace end in the vast Ocean of Glory: Thus much for the Reasons of the Point.

CHAP. VII. The first lise is for Examination, whither we have this Treasure.
NOw for a more close application of this to our own souls: is it so, that a
good treasure in the heart, is necessary to good expenses in the life? then

1. It stands us all in hand to try our selves, and dig into our own hearts to
see if we can find a treasure there, both in respect of sincerity and degree
of grace: Know it, You are beggarly souls unless you have truth of grace;
graceless souls are the only treasurelesse souls, and I fear there is more
than a good many, that could never experimentally distinguish betwixt Nature
and Grace, and therefore are increasing guilt, and treasuring up wrath: O
Christians! See whither you have the true Riches, try what proficiency you have
made to grace, and in grace; you have long had a day of grace, and you must be
accountable for all opportunities. Cheat not your selves with Counters instead
of Gold; Bristol-stones may make as fair a show as Pearls; true grace is a rare
and rich Commodity. Thousands conceit to themselves a treasure, that are empty;
Proud, conceited Professors are apt to boast of their seize, whilst some
self-denying humble souls, are apt to bear false-witnesse against themselves,
by denying what they have: Solomon says, There is that makes himself rich,
yet has nothing; there is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches,
Prove. 13.7. Sounding Vessels are often empty, and stil-running waters are
usually deep: Vapouring Tradesmen jingle their money in their hands, whilst
sober Chapmen keep it in their Chests: You shall find more of a Merchants goods
in his Warehouse, than in his Shop-window. So it is with a sober, serious and
judicious Christian: his glory and treasure is most within, whilst
vainglorious Mountebanks in Religion set all upon the Stage. I entreat you
read those Books, that lay down marks of true grace, hear and attend the most
heart-searching Ministry, take much pains in descending frequently into your
own hearts, and the God of Heaven make you serious in a through search.

More particularly, that I may help you in a discovery whether you have laid up
a treasure of holy thoughts; flowing from truths, graces comforts, experiences.
Ask, I beseech you your own hearts these four questions.

1. How came you by it? 2. How do you value it? 3. How do you use it? 4. How do
you increase it?
1. Let me ask you, and do you ask your selves if you pretend to such a
treasure, how you came by it? Men usually know how they get a treasure, the
hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 10.4. i.e. the blessing of the Lord
upon diligent endeavors, verse. 22. men that would be rich ply the oars, run
to markets and faires, Jam. 4.13.
travel from City to City, to buy and sell and get gain, they travel by Sea and
by Land, compassing the World to possess a small portion of it: Why now, what do
you in spirituals? Where are your thoughtful cares and painful hands? though
labor will not get this treasure ('it is a free gift) vet it will not be had
without labor. Gods Ordinance must be honored; it is the immtitable decree of
Heaven since the fall: In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, G^.
19.
yea this holds good for the Soul. Joh. 6.27. Labor -- for that meat which
endures to everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you: mark
it, Man's endeavors are very consistent with Gods free grace, and Christ's dear
purchase. God will be found in his own way, he ordinarily conveys the first
grace, in and by his own institutions, but seldom shall a soul grow up to a
treasure without a long trading in the royal exchange of holy duties, and
diligence has the promise of increase. Mark 4.24. -- And unto you that hear,
shall more be given: Well sirs, has the care of your hearts put labor into
your hands, and travel into your feet, to repair to the Markets and Faires of
public, private and secret performances, to get a solid treasure? have you
both dug and begged for it? where is your sweat and ageny? has Jesus Christ
sweat blood to fit you for Heaven, and have not you gone through a bloody sweat
to get interest in him? and possession of his grace? Oh the pangs of
conscience, and sad pantings of a convinced sinner to obtain a portion in these
riches of grace! (...) Proprie est sanguis, fed apud Chald. notat petuniam,
quta sa^guine at surore pauperum parain. Bith.
never did a poor labourer royle so hard for his days wages as an humbled soul
to be f^ed with Christ: a treasure of money is got with sweat and blood; or to
be obtained of alms with weary steps, and l^ud cries: but if thou be too
idle to dig, and too proud to beg, thou art without a treasure, and may pine
away in everlasting poverty.

2. How do you value this treasure? Where the treasure is, there will the heart
be also. Mat. 6.21. The thoughts, cares, affections will center upon a Man's
treasure, for he accounts his treasure the best thing he has; yea worth all
his other possessions; no Man would willingly part with his treasure. As Naboth
did tenaciously adhere to his haereditary possession: Mat. 13.44 Phil. 3.7.
the wise Merchant parts with all to purchase this: Paul accounted his gain to
be no better than loss for Christ, nay it stunk like dung and Dogs-meat in
comparison of his sweet and satisfying Savior: all the World is a Christians
prejudice, when it obstructs or obscures the grace of Christ: Is it thus with
your souls? do you account your spiritual portion your only riches? the truth
is, the riches of the soul, and the riches in the soul, are the very soul of
riches: Meretricius est amor, plus annulum, quam sponsum amare.
I confess that is a meretricious love, that prizeth receipts from Christ more
than the Person of Christ! but here I understand Jesus Christ to be the marrow
and treasure of this treasure, and all these as insuring evidences of interest
in him: for all that the soul has is wrapped up in him, well then, let me pose
the most dark and doubting (if sincere) Christian, what faist thou, poor soul,
would thou quit thy share in Christ and spiritual treasures, for a Crown and
Kingdom? would thou not answer, no? would thou cast away thy trembling
hopes of acceptance with God, to be delivered from the infamy, poverty and
persecution that attends the powerful profession of Christianity, that thou
may live in honor, pleasure, and worldly delights? surely thou would
answer, no: would thou change thy present, low, afflicted, and conflicting
state with thy former carnal but confident condition, or with the pompous,
prosperous state of graceless sinners? I dare say thou will answer, negatively;
yet again, art thou not willing to part with thy dearest bosome-lust, and
earthly enjoyment, for a true immortal treasure in Heaven, and in thy heart? I
am confident an upright heart will answer, yes: And if I mistake not, this (if
not only, yet chiefly this) is the very parting point betwixt a sound
Christian, and a rotten-hearted hypocrite, the one chooses Martha's many
things, the other Mary's one thing needful: this is indeed a discriminating
note, for a gracious soul will cry out, none but Christ, none but Christ, give
me Christ, Christus meus est omnia.
or else I die, give me Christ, and I shall live: Christ is my life, my crown,
my joy, my all, if I may have him I have enough, without him I have nothing:
when one asked Alexander where his treasure was, he answered, where Hephestion
my faithful friend is, just so will a good soul say: Song 5.10.
Christ is the chiefest of ten thousands. I prize him above my life, who loved
me unto the death; I account that of great value that does evidence my interest
in him: As the Mari-gold opens to the Sun in the Firmament, so does the heart
of a sincere Christian to the Sun of Righteousness; take an instance of Moses,
who chose the bitterest Cup of affliction, rather than the sugared cup of
sensual pleasures, that he might enjoy Jesus Christ: see Heb. 11.25, 26.
Observe the strange disparity that appears to carnal reason in that choice: on
the one side there was suffering, on the other enjoying, affliction on the one
hand, pleasures on the other, the despised people of God were companions on one
side, ruffling Gallants in Pharaoh's Court on the other, yet on the one side it
was for a season, on the other but for a season, and that But, cast the scales
in his choice: those were pleasures, but treasures may prevail; the last yet
not the least of Satan's assaults of Christ, Mat. 4.8, 9.
no, good Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt: the worst of Christ is better than the best of the World:
the noble Marquess Galeacius Caracciolus, in imitation of him, being tempted
with large offers to depart from Zion to Babylon, resolutely replied, Let their
money perish with them that account all the treasures of the World worth one
hours communion with Jesus Christ: if all the Mountains were gold, the Rocks
Pearls, and the whole World stuffed with the sweetest delights of the Sons of
Men, and these offered to the Christian to be his proper inheritance for ever,
he would with an holy scorn trample upon them, and look on them as not worth
one glance of his eye, in comparison of one taste of the love of Christ, and a
grain of saving grace in his Heaven-born soul: But a carnal heart sees no such
beauty in Christ, wherefore he should be so desired, nor is he taken with the
comeliness and excellency of grace, a sad yet lively emblem whereof we have in
the hopeful young Gentleman that bade fair for Heaven, yet when he saw it would
cost him so dear, Mat. 19.21, 22.
as to part with all, he would rather go without it, than foregoe his estate
for it: O sirs, this is a pinching point, look to it, this one mark will discern
betwixt joint and marrow, and a day of trial will discover what you account a
treasure.

3. How do you use and improve this treasure? Habits of grace are no otherwise
known but by their acts: what is a Man better for that he uses not? A talent of
grace of the right stamp will not be confined to a Napkin, though gifts may:
exercising is as necessary and evidential, as having sincere grace: things that
are not, and things that appear not, De non entibus and non apparentibus eadem
est ratio.
are both alike: He is a wicked Man that boasts of his hearts desire, and he
is a fool that trusts in his heart: yet many will say I have as good an heart
as the best, though I do not talk so well with my tongue, or work so much with
my hand, I have as good a meaning as any of them all, though I cannot make so
great a show, I love to keep my religion to my self, none knows how good I am:
Let such know (though I deny not but degrees of modesty, fears of vainglory,
and jealousies of apostasy, may restrain some Christians profession, yet there
may be a temptation on that hand also yet) that where fire is, it will bewray it
self by hear or smoke, Isai. 42.3.
it is impossible grace should be hid or stifled: though there be a smoking
flax (even the week of a Candle that affords little light, much offensive smell)
yet it will appear: Truths and graces in the heart will be (as the word was to
Jeremiah) as a burning fire shut up in the bones and bosom, that cannot be
concealed. Jer. 20.9.
He that is full of matter, is constrained by the internal workings of the
Spirit to vent it, else it is like Elihu's new wine that has no vent, Job
32.18, 19.
it bursts the new bottles: the truth is, its as natural for a gracious heart
to talk and walk holily, as for a living creature to breathe and move, so far
as gracious: thus it cannot be otherwise, and also observe it, it must not be
otherwise. Your treasure within ought to be laid out, what have you it for
else? Profession with the mouth is as necessary in its kind, as believing with
the heart, Romans 10.10. Our Light must not be hid under a bushel, but shine
before men, that it may reflect comfort to our selves and influence to others,
as well as have approbation from the Lord: So then, if thou have a treasure
within, thou do witness a good confession, and thy conversation will be
suitable to thy profession: Thy Trading will answer thy stock. The Text tells
you, a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things: and I told you the manner of laying out was in holy meditations,
savoury expressions, suitable actions, and comfortable bearing, and profitable
improving of afflictions: Why now, Lay judgment to the Line, and compare your
own course of life with these practices of Religion: How do you trade with
heaven, and for heaven? What do you more than others? where is the life and
power of Religion? Do you indeed exercise your selves to godliness? What large
expenses do you lay out for that God from whom you have such liberal incomes?
When we see rich men lay out abundance of money in household goods,
housekeeping, building, Recreations, we guess, certainly such have a good
stock beforehand, a great yearly Revenue; Thus it is here, though many make a
great show of what they have not, yet a ready, real, uniform, and constant
performance of duty. A serious, sensible course of walking with God, and
exercise of grace in all conditions, do evidence a suitable inward Treasure.
What say you to these things? Can our hearts witness with us that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12.
by the assistance of grace we have had our conversation? Can our Relations and
Neighbors witness for us, that we have served the Lord with all humility of
mind, with many tears and temptations? Can our Closets, Chambers, Shops, and
Fields testify our secret groans, meditations, self-examinations? Have we
performed our relative duties with all care and conscience? As Magistrates
punishing sin, as Ministers faithfully preaching at all seasons, suitably to
all persons: as Householders instructing, correcting, and leading a good
example; as Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, that man is
not good at all, that is not good in all relations: Does the treasure of grace
and truths prompt our tongues, act our hands, guide our feet? Do these
principles in our head, and that principle in the heart dictate to us our duty,
and assist us in doing of it? Are we fruitful in good works, words, and
meditations? and are we useful in our generations? let us not deceive our
selves, its not a conceit of some good meanings within that will serve our turn;
but the Apostle tells us roundly and plainly, He that does righteousness, is
righteous, 1 John 3.7. Acts do evidence the state, and a man cannot be good
unless he do good: That Is the third trial.

4. How do you increase this Treasure? To him that has shall be given; truth
of grace is the Prologue to growth in grace: and growth in grace arrives at
full strength of grace; the Saints go from strength to strength, Psalm 84 7.
The true Christian, like his Master, increases in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and man; Luke 2.52.
These waters of the Sanctuary, rise up to the ancles, knees, loins, neck, til
the soul come to the Head Christ, and so be swallowed up in the unfathomable
Ocean of Glory;
It Is monstrous in Grace as well as Nature to grow none, but continue as a
Dwarf; It Is a sad shrewd sign you have no grace, if you think you have grace
enough: Minime bonus est qui m^lior sieri non vult Ber.
he was never good that desires not to be better: They are Hypocrites, and sure
to be Apostates that are contented with a taste; The true Believer is
unsatiable, still hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, daily adding one
cubite after another to his spiritual stature, that he may be a tall man in
Christ; and at last attain to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Habet enim au^ment^ sua fides, habet suam infantiam, habet atatem
viritem, habet Senectam. Mar ^n loc.
Ephesians. 4.13. That is, not so much with respect to the complete stature of our
bodies at the resurrection, proportionable to Christ's full age upon Earth, as
some expound it, though that may be true, but we must be increasing, til Christ
his mystical body grow to ripeness and persection, both in respect of all the
members to be added thereunto, and also particular members growth in grace til
they advance to a full maturity in knowledge and holiness: what say you to this?
are you any better than you have been? are your last works more than your
first? what light of knowledge in saving truths? what heat and warmth in
sanctifying graces? what heart-refreshing-experiences and comforts have you
laid up? are you grown more solid, humble, holy, watchful, faithful and
fruitful? do you get more power against your lusts? more ability to walk with
God? do you forget what is behind, Phil. 3. Ephesians. 3.16.
and press forwards to perfection? are you stirred up more to holiness? and
strengthened with all might by his spirit in the inward man? are you still
sensible of defects, craving for more spiritual riches, as a beggar for alms?
I confess I have sometimes wondered at this strange paradox in Christianity,
that there is nothing does so fill the soul as grace, and yet nothing makes the
soul so hungry for more grace as a principle of grace; nothing conten^s but a
dram of grace, yet a dram of grace will not content: more knowledge, more faith,
more love, and accordingly a gracious soul is still perfecting holiness in the
fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.1 2 These. 1.3.
So that, as the Apostle says of some, their faith grows exceedingly, and
charity, abounds, even til it become a treasure: for observe it, this
spiritual treasure is made up, and increased by accumulation, or by
augmentation, by adding more graces, or strengthening graces already conferred.
See Symonds deserred souls case and cure, page 416 to 421 Manton on Jude, v. 2.
page: 122. to 127. Barlow's Sermon 2 Pet. 3.18
Several good Divines have done worthily in satisfying scrupulous souls in
this great case about growth in grace: let such as doubt of sincerity, read
them, it would be a digression here to speak fully to this point: only take
this note, the more life you have added to your light, the more humility to
your graces, the more watchfulness to your lives by your experiences; and the
more tenderness of conscience, and cheerfulness in holy performances by your
comforts, the more have you grown in grace, and increased your treasure: and
thereby have given a clear evidence that you have a spiritual treasure in your
hearts.

CHAP. VIII
The second use is for Conviction of four sorts of Persons.

IF it be so necessary to have a treasure within, that a Christian may be
fitter to walk, speak and act holily, then this falls with weight upon the head
of four sorts of persons, viz.

1. Careless loyterers. 2. Vainglorious boasters. 3. Impious offenders. 4.
Unprofitable Christians.
1. Careless loyterers, that sleep out a fair Summers day of grace, and forget
the day of their Visitation; many poor Ministers have cause to weep over their
dear people, as Christ over Jerusalem, and say, If thou had known, at least
in the thy day, Luke 19.41, 42.
the things that belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes: If
any soul be without grace, under precious means of grace, let such tremble at
present providence, least they lead on to the loss of Ordinances: if thou have
sat under the droppings of the Sanctuary, and art yet barren, be afraid, lest
God either command the Clouds to rain no rain on thee, or the curse of the
barren Fig Tree be pronounced against thee, Mat. 21.19 Luke 13.7.
Let no Fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever, or else, cut it down, why
cumbreth it the ground? Oh sirs, have your souls been yet empty of grace, under
Ordinances, which are the Channels of grace? have you lived thus long in
Goshen, and are you yet in Egyptian darkness? where is the fault, what can you
say for your selves? Suppose God should put you to it, to bring forth your
strong reasons, (as he expostulated with the Man that wanted the wedding
Garment,) and should say, Mat. 22.12
friend (for so will thou needs be accounted, and as such thou wast invited)
where have thou lived? in my Church? and did thou not there hear of a rich
Wardrobe provided for naked souls, even the fine white linen of Christ's
perfect righteousness? was there not a wellfurnisht shop and storehouse of the
gifts and graces of the spirit to fill and adorn the house of thy heart? how
comes it then that thou art so devoid and destitute of what is good? had thou
lived in Turkey or India, where I did not set up such an office of mercy, thou
might have more to say, but now what apologies can you make? what Fig Leaves
can you find to cover your shameful nakedness, or color your wretched
negligence? how came thou hither? qua front? what can thou say to excuse
thy brazen Impudence, that dare approach such a presence in so sordid an
habit, or rather miserably naked? the truth is, though witty sinners can find
shifts enough to put off Ministers arguings, and silence the bawlings of
conscience, yet how can their hearts endure, or hands be strong, when God shall
deal with them? their mouths shall be muzled up in speechless, yet
self-condemning astonishment: they must needs be condemned out of their own
mouths: Oh consider, if yet you be without a treasure of grace, and rather ask
thine own heart some heart-awakning, than that God should ask thee such
astonishing interrogatories: as thus, say to thy soul, my poor pining soul, How
is it with thee? What have thou been doing? and what wast thou sent into the
World for? what must become of thee? what provision have thou made for an
eternal state? where must thou lodge, if thou die this night? and let me
propose to you these Considerations:

1. If thy soul be yet without a true treasure of a gracious Principle, thy
condition is miserable, for thou have no assurance of any more means to obtain
it, nor to live another day, to hear another Sermon, or of Grace, to make the
means effectual for thy souls good: Remember Esau; have thou stood out so long,
and do thou now presume upon a longer day? Must the earth be forsaken for
thee? and shall God leave his ordinary road (...) thee good, step aside to meet
with thee? ^od sometimes does so, but what ground have thou to expect it, that
have abused Grace so long?

2. Is not this emptiness of good a dreadful sign of rejection? Solomon says,
He that has a froward heart finds no good: Pro. 17.20.
nothing does him good, Word, nor Rod; but he says, the heart of the prudent
gets knowledge; Pro. 18.15.
may not you sadly fear judicial hardness, to punish wilful negligence? One
would have thought, if any good had been intended for you, that you should have
been possessed of it before this: its a black brand of reprobation to live long
under melting Ordinances, and be still hard and dead.

3. Wilful neglect is an act of dis-ingenuity to God, cruelty to your own
souls, and the ready way to banish Ordinances from posterity: What? Must God
always hold you the Candle to play by? Pro. 17.5.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool, when there is no heart to
improve it? Be sure, if Satan find you idle, he will set you a work; Negligence
is a sad prognostic, and preparative for eternal torment, and so much ease
now, so much torment hereafter: Shall the God of Heaven always threape
kindness upon offending Grace-abusing and refusing wretches? No, no, when Love
has said its errand, Justice will act its part:

And 4. Your lost advantages will prove your bitterest torment, all men must be
judged according to their receipts, and wilful Loyterers shall be punished
according to their contempt of Gospel-opportunities: Gospel-despisers shall
account poor Heathens comparatively happy, though their Companions in eternal
misery: their bright Sun of Gospelgrace shall set in more utter darkness, and
greater treasures of wrath shall be poured into those Vessels, that shut out
treasures of Grace.

2. Another sort to be reproved, are empty and vainglorious boasters, gilded
Hypocrites that pretend to a great Treasure, but are sorry beggars: Some devout
Papists there are, which will tell you they have merit enough, both for
themselves and others, that out of the abundant treasure of their good works,
can furnish defective souls on earth, and deliver tormented souls out of
Purgatory: But believe them not, they would make merchandise of souls, and
draw them to delusions and damnation; Jesus Christ is our only Treasury, there
is nothing like merit in a mere Creature. Angels in Heaven stand by Grace,
having their confirmation by Christ; Sure I am, they have no merits to spare,
the wise Virgins could not furnish others, but a boasting Friar pretends he
can: the most of his seeming good works will rather prejudice himself, than
profit others, since they are generally that vain will worship, that is coined in
the mint of a wanton superstitious Brain, and so make the Commands of God to be
of none effect, and provoke the Lords wrath against the promoters and
practisers thereof. But suppose a man could obey positive Commands, in
practicing all Scripture-duties, and avoiding all prohibited sins, yet wherein
has he to glory? Is he not still an unprofitable servant? Does he give God any
thing but his own? Is it not due debt? and is it by his own strength, or by the
strength of God? And can he do what he does perfectly without the least
tincture or stain of imperfection, or of defect? Let any mere creature show
such good works as these, and let him climb up to Heaven upon Acestu's rotten
Ladder, we are resolved to ascend on Jacobs Ladder; let others seek their own
merit, let right Christians study grace. I hope we shall be so wise to choose
Bellarmines dying safe^way, Quaerant ali^, si^elint meritum, nos grattam
studeamus: Bern. Sermon. in Not. Mat. Col. 2.13. Isa. 64.6.
rather than his Disputing politick-way to Heaven, to repose all our trust in
the mercy of God, and merits of Christ, rather than the tottering foundation of
man's best righteousness, which is but a filthy rag, and will rather defile than
cover our nakedness. But I principally design to lash such persons, as
hypocritically and histrionically act the part of Kings and Emperors, but are
poor despicable Mushrooms, that pretend upon the stage of their fair profession
to Coffers of gold, and precious treasures of Grace; But alas, follow them into
withdrawing-Rooms of privacy, and you shall find them woefully destitute of all
saving good; these poor souls conceit with counterfeit graces to purchase
Heaven! and by making lies their refuge to be secured from wrath: But alas, the
God of Heaven sees their false coin and self-flattering hearts; Prove. 16.2. All
the ways of man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits.
Oh, how many hearts and ways would be found light, and wanting, if weighed in
an even balance, even in the balance of the S^nctuarie? At the last day it
will be seen that there are wonderful self-cheating conceits and confidences:
there is many false hearts under fair Vizors, but when these Vizors are plucked
off, all shall appear in their colors: and oh, what strange sights will then be
seen? (...) Signifies both a dec^itfull man, and an Usurer See Prove. 29.13.
^^^g. ^or Usurers are ^^ually ^^audu^^^t. (...).
When wicked men's foul insides are turned out, certainly they will be very
abominable, though now every cunning Hypocrite carries so closely, that none
can detect him, or say black is his eye, yet a time shall come that shall bring
every secret thing to light, and discover the guile of the deceitful Usurer in
Religion; who thinks to truck for Heaven with his stolen wares: Oh, how much
better is a poor soul than such a self-deluding Richling! that thinks he is
something, yet he is nothing, and so deceives his own soul, plays the
Sophister, and puts a false Syllogism upon himself, as the Apostle James
speaks: How many are in a golden dream? that build Castles in the Air, and
fancy they are Kings; but, when they awake out of their frantic dreams do
find themselves miserably mistaken! Solomon says, Whosoever boasts himself of a
false gift, is like Clouds and wind without rain, Prove. 25.14. i. e. He that
pretends to give or receive what is not real, but counterfeiteth either,
renders himself ridiculous to men, and odious to God: Our Lord Jesus cursed the
barren Fig Tree, to manifest his displeasure against hypocrisy; Hypocrites are
the most hateful of all persons, they are hated of wicked men for seeming good,
they are hated of God and good men, for But seeming, and not Being truly good:
As Hypocrites fruit is like the Apples of Sodom that look fair with a beautiful
skin, but touch them, and they are dust: so are Hypocrites ends likely to be
like that of Sodom, which God overthrew as in a moment: yea, these must be
patterns to others of a more dreadful destruction; hence the phrase of
appointing a portion with the Hypocrites. Matthew. 24.51.
But here comes in a carnal, sensual sot, and applies all this to the zealous
Professor, and will needs condemn him for an hypocrite, because he makes so
great a show, and account himself a sincere Saint, because he conceits his
heart to be good; the former censure is contrary to Scripture, and this latter
is contrary to their own sense and experience: for they may find, and Gods
children do feel that the heart is the worst part of the whole man; it is a man's
ignorance of it that makes him imagine it is the best: the truth is, no man will
commend this common Cheater, but he that knows it not, for its known to be
desperately wicked, and it is deceitful, or a Supplanter (as the word imports)
that will trip up the heels of the Christian, Jer. 17 9.
and cheat him of his prize and reward: if ever thou be undone, it is thy heart
that will undo thee; thou do brag of thy heart, alas poor soul, thou have
cause to bewail it, and be afraid of it; and if conviction open thee a window
to look into it, thou shall see a monstrous dreadful sight, that will make thee
out of love with thy self, and cause thy heart to ache, if it do not break with
godly sorrow; As for the Children of God whom wicked men condemn, for making
so great a show, I shall say but this, that it is the most unreasonable,
uncharitableness in the world, to judge contrary to what we see, yea, it is a
blasphemous assuming to a man's self the property of Gods Omniscience, to
pretend to search the heart, in saying, the thoughts of the heart are opposite
to the professions of the Lips, and practices of the Life: the Lord rebuke such
railing Rabshekah's, as condemn all the generation of Gods Children, and that
because of their holy world-condemning conversations; these Moles cannot
endure the light of Saints paths: hence they say, I warrant you these precise
walkers are no better than their Neighbors; if the truth were known, they are
a company of dissemblers, and are rotten at the heart, Pharisee-like they make
clean the outside of the Cup, and condemn others as profane, and then bind
it with an Oath, they are as bad as themselves: and if a Pro^essour slip into
an open sin, then they are confirmed in their censures, and conclude, they are
all alike, a pack of dissemblers: and now the holiest Saint (that hates such
sins, and mourns for it, as his greatest burden) shall have his brothers
miscarriage dashed in his teeth for ever: But if a man might argue with these
sottish, yet censorious souls, in a rational way, what could they answer? Are
not they themselves worse than the loosest Professors? and how far short do
they fall of close-walking Christians? Should all be condemned for the sake of
one? and should we not judge according to what we see, or can attain to the
knowledge of? Is not the Tree known to us by its fruits, and not by its Roots,
which are invisible to us? Lord, set these vain boasters a work in searching
their own hearts, and examining their own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5.
whether Christ be within them (as Paul directs the Corinthians in this very
case) and this will cure their censorious spirits, and find them work enough to
do at home; for as the Eye that looks most abroad sees least within, so the
most uncharitable Censurers are the most empty, unprofitable Professors: when
as a Christian that has most grace himself, judges best of others: and
observe it, they that groundleslie judge others to be worse than they see
apparent cause, Matthew. 7.8, 2.
will be judged by others in like manner in this world, and are in danger of a
sad and just censure and sentence at the dreadful day of judgment: Job 27.8.
What then is the hope of the Hypocrite when he has gained, when God takes
away his soul?

3. Another sort to be reproved, is the impious offenders, impenitent sinners,
that verify the latter part of the Text, and run a course directly contrary
to this good man: An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings
forth evil things: How should it be otherwise? Men must needs act as they are:
It was a Proverb of the Ancients, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, 1 Samuel 24.13. such as the Fountain is, such must needs be the Streams, the Fruit
is answerable to the nature of the Root and Tree: The working Forge of men's
wicked hearts, Jam. 3.10.11. Genesis 6.5.
does sparkle forth suitable imaginations: Why are men so wicked in their
lives? its because they have more naughty hearts, for the cause has more in
it than the effects: Oh, how many vassals of Satan and vessels of sin are
replenishing and preparing for wrath? for as a good man's treasure prepares him
to do the more good, so, too many are filling their souls with guilt; and
harden their hearts by custom in sin, that they may be vile with less
remorse, and swallow down iniquity, as the fish drinks in water: they cauterize
their consciences, and twist a strong cord of customary sinning, that they may
draw iniquity with Cart-ropes, and do evil with both hands carnestly, that
their hearts may not smite them with sense of remorse: As the Scholar that Dr.
Preston speaks of, who having committed a scandalous sin, that he could not
rest by reason of terrors of conscience, the Devil persuaded him to commit
that sin again, and he should be quiet, he did so, and afterward could sin
without remorse: just so do many persons, who have woaded an impudence in their
foreheads by constant sinning, so that at last they are past feeling, (...) qui
non amplius laborare volunt ant possunt. Vid. Hein's Excercis. in lot.
having given themselves over to all lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness: Ephesians. 4.19. The Word past feeling, imports remorselesness,
senselesness, like a member benumbed, scared, and this comes with custom in
sinning: according to that, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, i. e.
The custom of sinning takes away the sense of sin: We are apt to wonder at the
horrid abominations that break out, but if we do consider the prodigeous
wickedness of an Atheistical heart, we may rather wonder that there is no more
profaneness in the World: Jam. 3.6.
If the tongue be a World of iniquity, how many Worlds of wickedness is there
in a wicked heart? the thousandth part of corruption breaks not out, of that
which is within: Surely did not God fet bounds to Men's raging lusts, the World
would not be habitable for the Saints: God restrains that wrath which shall not
turn to his praise, and Saints advantage, and when wicked Men have belched out
as much rage as they can, there is a remnant yet behind, Psalm. 76.10. We are
fallen into the dregs of times, and iniquity does abound, there is a World of
Atheism, pride, uncleanness, swearing, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy,
Sabbath-breaking, contempt, and scorning of Religion, men break out, and blood
touches blood: But, were there a Casement or prospective, whereby a man might
look into a carnal heart; Oh what a filthy sink of un-heard of sin, and full
nest of odious vipers might he behold? certainly it would be the dreadfullest
sight in the World, far worse than to see the Devil in the ugliest hue: we may
stand wondering at the fathomless, bottemless depth of wickedness in the heart
of man, Cor^est thesaurus malorum, fons venenorum caput et origo omn is
iniquitatis. Luth. Tom. 4. fol. 335. 2 Kin. 8.13
it is, says Luther, the treasure of evils, the fountain of poison, the head
and original of all iniquity? Every man has that in his heart which he cannot
believe is in him; but yet may and will break out in its season upon occasion:
as in the known instance of Hazael: the truth is, the seed and spawn of all
haeresies, impieties, blasphemies, are in our nature. Reverend Mr. Greenham
says, that if all errors, and the memorials of them were annihilated by the
absolute power of God, so that there should not the least remembrance of them
remain, yet there is enough in the heart of one man to revive them all again
the next day: And I may add also as to profane practices: so that the
wickedness that is in the World, does not proceed from imitation of Adams first
sin (as Pelagians dream) at least not from thence only, but also, and chiefly
from the propagation of original corruption to all his posterity, for there is
an habitual pravity entailed upon us, and transmitted to us from our first
Parents, which has its regency in the heart, and activity in the life: Romans
5. will stand firm against all Pelagian and Socinian adversaries, that both
Adam and Christ our second Adam, Vide Calvin Instit. lib. 2. cap. 1 sect. 5, 6,
etc.
do communicate to their seed that which is their own both by imputation and
propagation, only the first Adam distributes filth, guilt, death, the second
gives grace, righteousness and eternal life: See M. Perk Exposi. on Creed, fol.
162. Adamus fuit humanae naturae non modo progenitor, s^d radix, ideo millius
corruptione merito, vitiatum fuit hominum genus: Calvin, ubi supra. Conferas
hac de re Baron. de orig. Anim. Excer. ^a Art. 6,7,8. page 91. ad p. 104.
it will remain as an undoubted maxim and sad experiment, that there is an
habitual depravation, and deviation of our whole nature from the Law of God: So
that there is an universael corruption of the whole man, understanding,
conscience, will, affections, and all the members of the body: Now this
propagation (Divines commonly say) is two ways.

1. By divine appointment and designation whatsoever Adam received or lost
should be not only for himself, but for his posterity, being a public person,
so God leaves the soul in respect of his image, and hence follows defect of
original righteousness, this, he does not as Author of sin, but as a righteous
Judge.

2. By natural generation, as sweet Oil poured into a fusty Vessel loses its
pureness, being infected by the Vessel, so the soul created good, and put into
the corrupt body, receives contagion thence: this putting a pure soul into a
corrupt body is a just punishment of the sin of all Men in Adam: So some: But
this is generally agreed upon, that original sin is not in some Men more, in
some less, but in every man equally, as all men do equally from Adam
participate the nature of man, and are equally the Children of wrath: and the
reason why some are more civil, others outrageous, proceeds from Gods
bridling some and leaving others: and truly restraining grace is a choice mercy
in its kind, else what would not men do? or rather, what would they not do?
the truth is, the original of sin is within, every man is tempted when he is
drawn away, Jam. 1.13, 14, 15. See Capel on Tempt. p. 38. to 43. and p. 55. to
70. its excellently and fully hand led. Reynolds Sinf of sin. p. 151. 152, etc.
and enticed of his own lust, says the Apostle, there lust is the father, and
lust when it has conceived brings forth sin, there lust is the mother too:
hence says one, there is no sin but might be committed, if Satan were dead and
buried -- original sin is (vertually) every fin, and could one kill the Devil,
yet you cannot name the sin that original lust would not entice a man to:
Suppose it possible for a man to be separated from the contagious company of
wicked men, and out of the reach of Satan's suggestions, nay to converse in the
midst of renowned Saints, yet that man has enough in himself to beget,
conceive, bring forth, and consummate all actual sins: Well then, sirs, let all
men behold the foul face of their hearts in the pure glass of the Law of God,
and they shall see a strange and astonishing spectacle; which would end either
in evangelical Repentance or final despair, as one says, -- If apparitions
make us sad,
By sight of sin we should grow mad.
Herbert. there is a necessary and profitable sight of sin, which drives the
soul out of it self to Jesus Christ: O labor for that, take the Candle of the
Word, and go down into the dark Dungeon of your hearts, search your selves,
lest the Lord search you as with Candles, know and acknowledge the plague of
your own hearts, be not afraid to know the worst of your selves, it is better we
should set our sins in order before us (while there is hope of pardon) for our
humiliation, than that God should set them in order before us, at the great and
last day, for our eternal condemnation: we may say of an impenitent soul, as
the Prophet of his Servant, Lord open his eyes, and surely he shall see a troop
of lusts. The mountain of his proud heart is covered with monstrous armed sins,
that fight against the soul: Oh that the thoughts of your hearts may be
discovered, pardoned, and purged out, lest by wilful sinning, Romans 2.5.
you heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and your souls perish for want of
a treasure of grace, and by reason of this dreadful treasure of sin and guilt.

CHAP. IX. Unprofitable Christians reproved.
THe fourth and last sort of persons, that fall under the lash of a sharp and
just reproof, is, unprofitable Christians, who, though they be sincere for the
main, and have the root of the matter, yet have not yet arrived to this
treasure: Alas, Sirs, there is none of us, but we have too much bad, and too
little good treasure in our hearts. We cannot but know all the wickedness that
our hearts are privy to, and cannot our consciences discover an emptiness and
vacuity of good? Oh what a Chaos and confusion is in our hearts! and whence
comes this? Have we not had means of gathering a large treasure? What have we
done with all our Ordinances, Sermons, Sacraments, Mercies, Afflictions? If we
had been diligent, we might have furnished our souls with truths, graces,
comforts, and experiences: What could have been done more for us? And have we a
treasure proportionable to our enjoyments? whence then are we so unfit for, and
untoward in duties? so flight, dead, and trifling in performances? so
unprepared for, and unprofitable under Ordinances? so unthankful for mercies,
discontented under crosses? so weak in resisting temptations, subduing
corruptions? so unwilling of, and unsuitable to communion of Saints? Oh whence
is it, that we are so apt to sit loose from God? so little fit for fellowship
with him, and so much at a distance from him? certainly the reason is obvious,
we have not such a treasure as becomes Saints: Especially, the great reason why
we are so little skilful in the heavenly duty of meditation, is the want of a
treasure of holy thoughts, when we are alone, we cannot fix our minds upon an
heart-affecting subject, or at least cannot pursue it, til our hearts be deeply
affected, but our thoughts are off and on, very inconsistent, incoherent,
independent, like the rambling discourses of a Madman, or the ranging motions
of a Spaniel, or like the eyes of a fool, Pro. 17.24
that are in the ends of the Earth: We run from object to object in a moment,
and one thought looks like a mere stranger on another, should our thoughts be
patent, or an invisible notary that is acquainted with them, write them down,
and repeat them to us, how should we blush and be confounded in the rehearsal?
M. Clark's life of Dr. Potter p. 393.
as it is recorded of Dr. Petter, that hearing the fellows of the College talk
of trivial things, said nothing, but after they had done talking, he thus
bespake them. And now my Masters, will you hear all your extravagant
discourses, for I have strictly observed and marked what you said, and he told
them every whit: So suppose some should present to our cares or eyes a relation
of our wild imaginations in one hours time, what a strange medley of nonsense
would there be? we may say the Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are
vanity, Psalm. 94.11. When we have sum'd up all the traverses, reasonings, and
discourses of the mind, we may write this at the bottom, as the total sum,
All is vanity: nothing but vanity, yea vanity in the abstract. And what is the
reason of all this, but a want of the forementioned treasure, a stock of
truths, graces, comforts, experiences.

I shall propound these four considerations, briefly for the Saints conviction
and humiliation: 1. Are not these spiritual things worth hoarding up? look
about you, through the whole Creation, and see if you can find any thing
better to make a treasure of; David says, I have seen an end of all
perfection, Psalm. 119.96. All outward enjoyments are a scant Garment that
cannot cover us, or rotten rags, and are soon worn out; but one part of this
treasure, i. e. Gods Commandments, is of a large extent, hence says that good
Man; thy Commandments are exceeding broad, they reach from Heaven to Earth,
from great to small, to all sorts of sinners, to all the faculties of the soul,
to and through all eternity, thus long and broad is the Christians treasure,
where then can you mend your selves for a treasure? spiritual blessings have
all dimensions of perfection, these are the cream and flower of all blessings,
no other treasures avail in the day of wrath; if heavenly things be not worth
looking after, what are? should not spiritual persons set their hearts on
spiritual riches? Are not these most suitable to your immortal souls, and
spiritual principles? Have not you been married to Christ, Romans 7.4.
and can you be content to be without any part of your dowry? Are not you risen
with Christ, and should you not then seek after things above? Col. 3.1, 2.
Are not the things of God Magnalia, great things of eternal concernment? and
did you not prize them at an high rate at your first conviction? And was not
that your Motto [ non est mortale quod opto] I seek not, I pursue not mortal
things, temporary, fading enjoyments? And are not these as much worth enquiring
after now, as formerly? Yes certainly, these do not decay through age. Heb.
8.13.
It was the matters belonging to the old Covenant, or Legal-dispensation that
decayed and waxed old, and so by degrees did vanish away. New Covenant mercies,
are the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3.
and they are always fresh and green. Hence says the Church in Cant. 1.16. --
Also our bed is green, i. e. Our mutual delights in each other are lively,
sweet and satisfying, never glutting, as earthly delights are; Joh. 4.14.
He that drinks of these living waters shall never thirst, i. e. After muddie
waters of earthly comforts, but shall more ardently thirst and pant after the
living God; Well sirs, look to it, there is nothing worth desiring, but these
heavenly Treasures: if you can find any better, take it, much good may it do
you, yet brag not of your bargain, til you see the issue.

2. Are you in any danger of having too much of these things? Surely there is no
[ nimium or] superfluities in the internals of religion: in the outward part
too much may be done (though not if a man keep to the Rule) so that in some
respects one may be righteous overmuch, Eccl. 7.16.
i. e. in either a self-willed superstitious way, or else in an unseasonable or
unmeasurable performance of religious duties, to tire out a tempted soul, and
run the Christian off his legs: But for inward Graces, sanctified Knowledge,
and real Holiness, there can never be an overplus, or excesse^ whiles you are
on this side the Line, you will be short of perfection; Acts 26.24.
Let Festus-like sots say, that much learning makes professors mad; let us
study to increase and abound more and more in knowledge, faith, love, humility,
experience; as Paul pressed forward, if by any means he might attain to the
resurrection of the dead, forgetting what was behind, Phil. 7.11, 12, 13, 14.
and reaching forth to what was before. Moses's Ark had staves for removing
further. Jacob's Ladder had stairs for ascending higher. Christians must sing
the Song of degrees in this world, and should seek to be renewed day by day.
(...)
We must not sit upon and be satisfied with our measure, but work hard to make
it a Treasure: We must strive both for fullness of grace, and fullness of joy.
Its possible a Christian may attain to a full assurance: yea, that joy
unspeakable, and peace that passes all understanding, that be may think he
has enough, as I have heard of a good s^ul that enjoyed such abundant side of
comfort, that he desired the Lord to stay his hand, least the Vessel should
(...) (though this is ^or ordinary for every Believer, not at a^ times for any)
so that some may possibly have as much comfort as they can desire. But I never
read, or heard of that Saint that had too much grace, or so much as they
desire: All have bewailed their defects, living and dying: and the best men
have been most coverous of divine things, young and old; It Is said of good Mr.
Herbert Palmer, when he was of the age of four or five years, that he would
cry to go to his Lady-mother, that he might hear something of God. And of old
Grynaeus (that savourie Germane Divine) It Is recorded, that when some persons
were discoursing by his Deathbed, he lift up himself, saying, I shall dye with
more comfort, if I may dye, learning something for the good of my soul. Now
Sirs, who, or what are you? Are you wise enough, good enough? Are you afraid
of being too like God? or of having too much of God in and with your souls?
Are you loath to get too ready for, or too readily into Heaven? S^dixisti satis
est, ^^ri^sti:
Alas, alas, You may call your estate into question, if you say you have grace
enough, or are good enough, or if you slacken your endeavors to get more grace
upon a conceit you have enough: it is as natural for a living Saint to call for
grace, as for a livelie Child to cry for food; insatiable desire after grace,
is a clear test of the truth of grace; Oh shame thy self then for thy neglect,
and humble thy soul for thy non-proficiencie.

3. Do you certainly know what treasure you may need? When you go a journey,
you take money enough, because you cannot tell but you may be put to
extraordinary expenses: and truly, in your journey to heaven, you may be put
to unexpected charges: You little know what a day may bring forth: it may bring
forth a burden for thy back; God may call you to sharp service in a way of
duty and difficulty: You are sure to go through a Purgatory to glory; the
way to Heaven is strait and narrow, and you must crowd hard to get in, and
thrust through: through manifold temptations, and tribulations you must enter
into Heaven; Its an irrevocable Decree of Heaven, that he that will live godly
in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. We have had fair weather hitherto,
but the greater storm is behind: we have not yet resisted to blood, Contra quos
deinceps, bellum geretur, ^odieque du^at, nec finictu^, don^c, Best^a in
exitium i^rit: M^de, com. in Apoc, p. 198.
but we may be put to it: Be you sure, as long as the Devil is in Hell, and
Antichrist on earth, there will be persecutions raised against the Church in
some part of it or other, yea, and his dying blows may prove the heaviest to
the Reformed Churches: Woe to those that are unprovided for that sharp day; Oh,
what piteous shirking will there be to save the skin, and damn the soul? O
Christians, get furnished for this Encounter, we little know whom it may reach,
or how long the storm may last: You had need get strengthened with all might --
unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse, Col. 1.11.
least if your patience be short, and sufferings long, you fail in the way, and
fall short of your Crown; What a sad plight are those Seamen in that made but a
scant provision, and meet with a long Voyage: Mr. Clark in his Life.
It was a good saying of Reverend Mr. Dod; That this is the difference betwixt
a Christian that's provided for troubles, and one that is not; that the one are
but blows on the Harness, but the other are blows on Flesh: Aelian says, That
in Lybia men slept with their Boots on because of the Scorpions, that they
might not sting them: We had need also be well shod, or booted with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians, 6.15.
i. e. with a disposition and resolution to walk in the most thornie way, and
stinging company of wicked men, that we may follow the Lamb which way soever
he goes: We had need to count the cost in the profession of Religion, we do
not know what God may call us to do, or to endure. Great services require great
strength, that we may neither be weary of, nor weary in the Lords work, we must
lay in much, that we may lay out much for God, we know not what God will call us
to use: When Israel was to go out of Egypt, Moses would take the Cattle, and
not leave an hoof behind: For, says he, we know not with what we must serve
the Lord till we come thither, Exodus 10.26. Therefore must they also borrow
Jewels to be thoroughly furnished; Exodus 11.2. Dr. Lightfoot G^ean. on Exodus p.
24.
and the Egyptians were more willing to lend them, says a Learned Man,
because themselves were decked with Jewels, that they might be more acceptable
to their fine-decked Deities; so you do not know with what sort of graces, or
truths you must serve the Lord: only let us get furnished with all instituted
qualifications, that we may be so adorned and armed as the Lord may take
pleasure in us, and that we may get through-services and sufferings with
glory to God, credit to Religion, and comfort to our own souls: Those are
unwise Christians, that lose their time, and are not furnished for the Tempests
of a Sea-voyage; since no man knows what he must need.

4. Neglect herein is a dishonor to God, and disparagement to the Treasures of
Grace; Why art thou being the Kings Son, lean from day to day, said Jonadab to
Ammon, 2 Samuel 13 4. So say I, whence proceeds this leanness? Is there not meat
enough at your Fathers Table? Store sufficient in your Masters Treasury? Do
not you disparage the means of your supply? and bring an ill report on the
good Land? God is not an hard Master, but distributes liberally an abundant
dole of Grace: why then are your souls no better liking in Religion? the
reason is not in God, but in your selves: You are not straitened in him, but in
your own bowels, 2 Cor. 6.12.
as Paul in another case. Now, as a recompense of his Love and Munificence, be
ye also enlarged: Indeed, it does (as it were) ease Gods heart to be
communicating, Prove ^.3^
of his goodness; It did please him infinitely from Eternity, to think of
expending riches of grace upon Sinners in time: But he can be perfectly and
perpetually happy without you, it does chiefly concern you to fetch all from
Him; that you also may be happy in the enjoyment of Him: Are you afraid of
being happy? who, Jonah 2.8.
out foolish man would forsake his own mercies? Shall God set up an office of
Grace in Christ, and will indigent souls take no notice of it? You cannot
grieve him worse than to neglect his infinite condescension, and tender
affection. If a mighty King should open his Treasure^, and bid men come, and
bring their baggs, and take as much as they desired, do you think they would
neglect this occasion of enriching themselves? Surely no, they would rather
fetch bag after bag, (for scarce is any weary of taking money) and with the
poor woman in sacred story, borrow Vessels that may contain larger Treasures:
The God of Heaven has made a glorious Proclamation of scattering precious
Treasures; Do you question, whether he intends as he speaks? God forbid; Or,
do you fear being welcome? Why, you are most welcome when you come for the
greatest share; Do you fear unworthiness will hinder you? I say, sense of
unworthiness will help you to be capable of greater Receipts: Do you fear these
Treasures of Heaven will be exhausted by the Myriads of souls that are
supplied therefrom? Know it Sirs, the Royal Exchequer is as rich this day, as
it was when Christ was first promised, or the first man saved; these are riches
of grace, an in-exhaustible Spring: distribution does not impair its fullness,
no more than the Suns shining does rob it of its innate and native light; Oh
then, why are our souls so poor and pining? The Lord humble us that we have no
more, when there is so much to be had in our All-sufficient Treasury.

CHAP. X. Instructions, showing how a graceless heart may obtain a Treasure of
good.
A Third Use is of Direction, how a poor soul may be furnished with a rich and
suitable heart-treasure. Now this is useful to sinners and Saints, it is the
latter to whom I shall principally address my self. But because the treasure of
true grace is absolutely necessary, I shall lay down some few directions for the
graceless soul, that it may have a right principle, without which it cannot
bring forth one good thought, word, or work: this is the habit without which
there can be no gracious acts, this is the root, without which there can be no
fruit unto God, this is that stock to trade with, without which there can be no
trading with God, Aquin. Sum Prim. Sec. Qu. 51. Art. 1, 2, 3, 4. Qu. 109 Ubi
videas 10 quest. de gratia agitatas.
or true heaping up of the forementioned treasure of sanctifying truths,
spiritual graces, heart-melting experiences, or heart-chearing comforts: I know
the Schoolmen have large disputes about the generating, acquiring, or infusing
of habits, as whether there be any habits from nature? or caused by acts, or by
one act? or whether habits be infused by God? but we must distinguish betwixt
inferior habits, that are merely natural, and spiritual, gracious habits that
are supernatural, these are of an heavenly extract and original, yet we are to
wait upon God in the use of his appointed means, What persons may do toward
their own conversion see Morn. Lect. Case of Consc. p. 33 --
so says the Apostle, Phil. 2.12, 13. -- Work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling, for it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of
his own good pleasure: This text both confuteth the speculative free-willer,
and convinces the practical loyterer, grace is to be had from God in his way,
though it is not purchased by man's working. I purposely wave the School-mens
voluminous disputes concerning grace, and shall propound these seven directions
to poor graceless souls: and they are plain and practical duties.

1. Withdraw thy self from the World: at some times learn to sequester your
selves from the cares, affairs, comforts, cumbers, and company here below. Do
not think you can hoard up in a crowd, Satan loves to fish in troubled waters,
but so does not Christ: the noise of Cains hammers in building Cities, drowns
the voice of conscience: A man shall best enjoy himself alone: Solitary recesses
are of singular advantage, both for getting and increasing grace: Prove. 18.1.
Through desire a man having separated himself, seeks, and intermedleth with
all wisdom: in this you may and must be separatists: let me advise you (and O
that I could prevail at least thus far) to treat and entertain your selves by
your selves: he is a wicked man, and resolves to continue so, that dare not
entertain himself with discourses about spiritual subjects and soul-affaires;
it were more safe to know the worst, before you feel the worst: let your
solitary thoughts be working about things of eternity, however accustom your
selves to secret and serious pondering: I read that the father of a prodigal
left it as his deathbed charge, Morning Lect. at Cripl-Case of Consc. page 9.
unto his only Son to spend a quarter of an hour every day in retired thinking,
but left him at liberty to think of what he would, the Son having this liberty
to please himself in the subject, sets himself to the performance of his
promise; his thoughts one day recall his past pleasures, another contrive his
future delights, but at length his thoughts became inquisitive, what might be
his Fathers end in proposing this task, he thought his Father was a wise and
good man, therefore surely he intended and hoped that he would sometime or
other think of Religion; when this leavened his thoughts, they multiplied
abundantly, neither could he contain them in so short a confinement, but was
that night sleepless, and afterward restless, til he became seriously
religious.

By all means use sometimes to be alone,
Salute thy self; Herb. Church Porch, p. 6.
see what thy soul does wear,
Dare to look in thy Chest; for it is thine own:
And tumble up and down what thou find'st there:
Who cannot rest till he good fellows find,
He breaks up house turns out of doors his mind.
O sirs, you little know what good effects a serious consideration may produce.
God propounds it, and men have practiced it, as the great expedient to begin
and promote repentance: Consider, what you came into the World for, whither you
must go if you die this moment, what a state you were born in, what is the need
and nature of Regeneration, what is the worth and price of your immortal souls:
and through Gods blessing, these thoughts may leave some good impressions.

2. Be at a Point concerning your state be exact, and impartial, in searching
your hearts to find out your state, trifle not in this great work of
self-examination, be not afraid to know the worst of thy self: make a curious
and critical heart-anatomy, Try whether Jesus Christ be in you, 2 Cor. 13.5.
(...).
do as the Goldsmith, who brings his Gold to the Balance? So do you weigh your
selves in the balance of the Sanctuary; judge not of your state by the common
opinion of others concerning you, but by Scripture-Characters, and bring your
virtues to the Touchstone: pierce them through, to try whether they be genuine
Graces, or moral Endowments: See whether your Treasure be that Gold that is
tried in the fire, i.e. in the fiery Furnace of affliction and persecution. Oh,
how many are deceived with imaginary felicities, and empty flourishes? Take
heed of being put off with gifts, instead of Grace; Conviction, instead of
Conversion; outward Reformation, instead of saving Sanctification; which is the
damning and undoing of thousands of souls: Why will you not use as much
diligence for your souls, as you will do for your bodies, or estates? If your
Body be in a dangerous disease, or your Estate at hazard in an intricate suit,
you will run and ride, and make friends, and pay any money to know, what shall
become of them, and to secure them: and are not your souls more worth than a
stinking Carcass, or Dunghil-estate? Sirs, pose your selves with serious
questions: Heart, how is it with thee? Art thou renewed? What life of grace is
in thee? Are thy graces of the right stamp? Whither art thou going? and get
distinct and positive Answers to such questions as these: Let not thy
treacherous heart dally with thee; be not put off with general hopes and
groundless conjectures: a man is easily induced to believe what he would
have to be true, but rest not there; try further, make it out, how it comes to
be so, detect, and answer every flaw in thy spiritual estate: if thou can
not do this thy self, make thy case known to some able Minister, or experienced
Christian; tell them how things are with thee, beg advice; ask them how it was
with their souls, and thou shall find much help this way. Psalm. 139.23.
Yet after all, suspect thine own heart: call in help from Heaven, desire the
Lord to search thee, and be willing to be sifted to the bran, searched to the
bottom. David is so intent upon it, and so afraid of a mistake, that he uses
three emphatical words, in that challenge he makes for his souls disquisition,
P^o^avit (...) exploravit, tentavit (...) sig^^ agnoscere conslavit (...)
def^^avit, M^t^pr^^avit ^de Sa^^^^a, civ^t^s ^et^^l^ca, nomen habet ab
officinis quibus metalla ex^oquuntur.
Psalm 26.2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart: The
first word imports a viewing us as from a watchtower; the second word imports
a tempting, or finding out a thing by questions, inquiry by signs, the last
word imports such a trial, as separates the dross from the gold, The dregs from
the wine; so the Christian would be tried, purged, that grace may appear true,
sincere, solid: and indeed, it is as much as your souls are worth: Therefore
take the most effectual course to clear your state to your selves, and be not
put off with any answer, but what will be accepted by God at the great day.

3. Mourn over thy empty heart: if you find things not right in your own
hearts lament your state, cry out with a loud and bitter cry, as Esau did when
the blessing was gone; lament and say woe and alas that ever I was born! that I
have lived thus long without God in the World, at first entrance into it a
Bankrupt, and ever since a spiritual beggar. Oh what will become of me, if I
die in this estate? there is but a step betwixt me and death, and the next
breath I breathe may be in everlasting burnings. It is a wonder I am not hurled
into Hell before this, what shall I do to be saved? Is there any hope of such a
wretch as I am? Oh that I could bathe my self in briny-teares of evangelical
repentance! Oh how shall I believe in Jesus Christ, that I may receive
remission of sins! truth it is, sirs, you will never be filled til you be sensible
of soul-emptiness; spiritual poverty is the Prologue and preparative to true
soul-plenty: Gospel-sorrow widens the soul, and so capacitates it for grace:
Deus oleum non infundit nisi in vas contritum. Bern. Mat. 5.3. Romans 14.17
the Oil of grace is poured only into a contrite heart: the Kingdom of God
belongs to the poor in spirit, and we know, the best benefits of this Kingdom
are internal, as righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: and these as
a rich treasure replenish the penitent soul: for it is the sorrowful soul whom
God does replenish. Jer. 3^.25. Therefore, you are to endeavor to discover the
nature of sin, and danger therein, the wrath of God hanging over your heads for
it: if you were pricked in your hearts, with a pinching pain, you would be
restless til you had obtained an interest in Jesus Christ, if your souls were
weary and heavy laden, you would not be content til you had laid the stress of
all upon an infinite Savior: if the Lord would help graceless sinners these
two steps, to see that they are yet graceless, and discern their misery in
being so, that were an hopeful gradation toward conversion: did you see your
state, you could not but bewail it, and make out for a change: and did you see
the precious nature of the soul, and that grace that is to fill it, you would
not be another day without it.

4. Empty thy heart of all corruption; oh cleanse that filthy sink of all sin,
purge your selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit: shake hands
with that sin that forbids the banes of marriage betwixt Jesus Christ, and thy
soul: lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset you, Heb.
12.
and then lift up your eyes and heart to Jesus Christ: Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, purify your hearts ye double-minded: Jam. ^
empty this dirty house of thy heart, that the King of Glory may enter in;
throw out the Devils household stuff, and make room for a new Inhabitant: the
Vessel must be emptied, or it can never be filled with saving good: Intus
existens prohibet extraneum.
for that which is within, hinders any thing else entering: and alas the heart
is full of vain conceits, and worldly thoughts, and filthy lusts, which keep off
good motions, keep out good dispositions. Now if a Man purge himself from
these, he shall be a Vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Masters
use, and prepared unto every good work. 2 Timothy 2.21. Let me entreat you for the
Lords sake, and for your own souls sake, to search and sweep every dusty corner
of your filthy hearts. Let not this train of graces and treasure of truths be
always waiting your leisure, whiles you are wallowing in the puddle of sin,
and swallowing down the Devils sweet, but dangerous, Pills of soul-murdering
temptations; Oh be willing to make this blessed exchange, to part with thy base
lusts for a precious Christ, to forgo soul-damning corruptions for
soul-perfuming dispositions: if you cannot put off the whole body of sin, yet
you are to cut off the members thereof, you ought indeed to stub up sin by the
roots, but you may lop off its branches: you may abate sin in part, by
contrary actings, knowledge does remove ignorance, as light does darkness,
grief abates pleasure, and fear boldness in sinning, patience daunts passion,
and fasting tames unrulie lusts, these you may do, and these may be good
preparatives to this treasure: See Morn. (...). p. 41. Sermon. 2.
For as one says, when the strength of a Fever is abated by physical means,
a Man is disposed toward health; and plowed ground is (at least) materiallie
prepared for seed; though God is not bound then to sow the seeds of saving
grace, yet thou have encouragement, that thy labor shall not be in vain; use
these means, and try the issue, endeavor to cast off these works of
darkness, Romans 13.12. Ephesians. 4.22, 23.
and to put on the armor of light, yea labor to put off the old Man, and to
put on the new, at least do what you can to wash your hearts from filthiness,
that your vain thoughts may not lodge within you, Jer. 4.14. That you may have
a saving treasure of holy meditations.

5. Be gleaning in Gods Field, be filling your sacks in the divine granary of
Ordinances; Ruth 2.8, 17.
The way for Ruth to be well laden was to glean in Boaz's Field, among the
Sheaves near the Reapers: the Patriarchs must have recourse to Joseph's
Storehouses for provision; and where may we expect supply, but in
Gospel Ordinances? those [ canales gratiae] Channe's of grace; the Posts of
wisdom, the Garden where such precious Spices grow, the Orchard where the soul
may be laden with the fruits of righteousness, Ordinances are the Lords Camp,
where this Heavenly Manna falls; they are the green pastures, Song. 7.5.
where we may fill and feasts our souls, the Galleries where the King of
Heaven takes his walks, and here the Christlesse soul may meet with him: this
is like Solomon's House of the forest of Lebanon, builded for an Armorie, where
the naked soul may be furnished with Shields and Spears; offensive and
defensive weapons to fortify the soul against the fiercest on-sets of the
great Abaddon: If your souls be sick of love, Song. ^.5.
here you may find Flaggons of precious liquor to revive your fainting
spirits, dispensed by the Lords Stewards: Verse 2.
If you sit under this Apple Tree, you shall be under its shadow with great
delight, and the fruit thereof will be sweet to your taste: Chap. 3.2. Chap.
1.8.
O then seek Christ in the broad-wayes of public Ordinances, and go your
ways forth by these footsteps of the flock. Search this Pearl in the field of
Gospel-dispensations, and your souls shall be truly enriched thereby: it is by
these Ordinances, through which, as by golden Pipes, Z^ch. 4 12.
that precious oil is conveyed to us from that fruitful Olive, Jesus Christ. O
do not leave off Ordinances, as some conceited Professors that boast they are
above them: for if you set the Cistern above the Cock, it will never be full;
and therefore you must have a reverent esteem of the Lords appointments:
prepare your selves, and frequent soul-filling Ordinances: live still within
the sound of Aarons Bells, and beg of God that Aarons Rod may bring forth the
buds of grace in your immortal souls: Mr. Lee, on Solomon's Temple: cap. 9.
page 266. Number. 17.8.
The Rod of Aaron (as one well observes) may signify the Ministry [ Effective]
as to the effects it produces, by the blessing of God bringing forth buds,
blossoms, and ripe Nuts all at once, i. e. says he, precious buds of grace,
blossoms of heavenly joy, and holy fruits of righteousness, and new
Obedience: Only let me entreat you to wait upon an heart-searching Ministry,
that the secrets of your heart may be manifest, and conscience may be pricked;
Be not afraid of a Boanerges, but gladly welcome the sharp rebukes of your
Soules-friends, it may be fittest for your sleepie or seared Consciences. It Is
said of the Almond-tree (of which Aarons Rod was) that the Rind thereof is
bitter, Ubi supra
but the Kernel is very delicious, and the oil pressed out of it very Physical,
and of much virtue; just such are the chastising words of a round-dealing
Ministry, bitter at present, but profitable afterward: and observe it, they
are ordinarily the soundest Christians that are trained under the most plain
and piercing preaching; therefore I entreat you, lay your selves directly
under the Hammer of the Word, to be framed by the Lord according to his will:

6. Study and improve Free grace; O let your thoughts dwell much upon Gods
infinite condescension and unlimited invitation of poor sinners: See what you
suck out of Isa. 55.1. and John 7.37. and Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely; there is no bar to your admission, but what your
selves make: Christ Jesus includes you in Gospel-tenders, Oh do not exclude
your selves: the Great Shepherd calls his sheep by name, John 10.3. How is
that, but by speaking expreslie to their Case? as if he should strike the
troubled heart upon the shoulder, and say, here is comfort for thee; what if thy
name be not there, yet the proposition is universal, he that believes, shall
be saved: thousands of poor sinners have ventured their souls upon such a
word, and never any miscarried that cast themselves into the arms of Christ:
you have no reason to suspect acceptance, if you come to him, you have all the
grounds of encouragement imaginable. A Physician offers cure to all that will
come, it were madness to stand off, and say, I know not whether he intends
it for me or no: if men were ready to perish in deep waters, and a Boat should
be offered to carry them to land, that would come into it, it were an absurd
thing to dispute, whether it be for us? If a pardon come from the King for a
company of condemned prisoners, and they shall all have benefit by it, if they
will but accept of it, what mad man would refuse it and question, whether the
Prince intend him particularly. Since his name is included in the general
grant; Surely men would not so fondly cast away themselves in temporals: and
who would be such a fool in the everlasting concernments of his precious soul?
The way here is not to Dispute, but Believe: Is not Jesus Christ out souls
Physician? and are not we sick? Is not the Gospel-design of Grace, a plank
after shipwreck? and are not we drowning? Are not we condemned Malefactors at
the Bar of Gods Justice? and does not God graciously tender to us the
Redemption so dearly purchased by our precious Savior? and why then should
we forsake our own mercies? why will you be cruel to your own souls? If it
were in temporals, you would put out the hand and be very ready for receiving.
Isa 2^.6 Pro 9.1.2. Cant. 5.1, 2. The Po^ch of the Temple was open and without
doors on all sides, on which it was not annexed to the body of the Temple-to
she^ the open-heartedness of Gods Grace under the Gospel. See Mr. Lee on Sal.
Temp. ^a^ 9 f^l 21^.
If you sit at a Feast, and there stand a dish upon the Table that you affect,
though all the company be free to make use of it, yet you say, here is a dish
for me, and you think it good manners to feed heartily upon it, without
scruples and disputes of being welcome, since you were freely invited by your
noble Friend; Our Lord Jesus has made a Feast of fat things, and has bidden
his Guests: he invites you to eat and drink abundantly: Oh do not you make
Apologies for your absence from this Gospel feast; when he invites, do not you
question whether he means as he speaks, but fall to, and make a long arm, and
take your share of this Provision; I can assure you, he has not an evil eye,
he does not grudge you this heavenly Manna; Nay, rather than your souls shall
famish, he freely gives you his flesh and blood to nourish your poor immortal
souls: Oh you that have torn his flesh with the teeth of cruel persecution, of
himself and his members! You that have trampled upon his blood with the feet of
an odious and abominable conversation! You he calls to eat his flesh and drink
his blood by faith in him, and improvement of him, that your souls may live;
You that have despised riches of grace, Treasures of grace are opened for you:
You that have fought against Jesus Christ all your days with all your might,
he invites you to be his Soldiers, and he will lovinglie entertain you, as if
you had never been in rebellion against the King of Kings: will not this melt
and move you to yield your selves unto your dear and loving Lord? I beseech
you, take these things into your serious thoughts, and accept of Jesus Christ:
only presume not by dreaming of application of Christ without separation from
sin: take a whole Christ to sanctify thy heart as well as justify thy person,
to purify conscience as well as pacify wrath: Take Christ aright, mistake him
not, least you be woefully mistaken to your eternal undoing: You need a whole
Christ, and a broken heart will not be content with a divided Savior; it is the
whorish heart that will divide, a sincere soul must have all, he needs grace as
well as peace: indeed there is nothing of Christ useless, every part of this
Lamb of God is of absolute necessity to the indigent soul: and true faith
takes him in all his mediatorie Latitude: it is as dangerous to divide Christ
believed on, as the heart believing: therefore stir up your selves to a due
consideration of free Grace, and application of it in the right Gospel-way of
Believing.

7. Be humble Petitioners at the Throne of Grace; Beg hard at the Gates of
Mercy for a large dole of Heavenly Riches: Ask, if that will not do, Seek; if
seeking avail not, Knock, and you shall be sure to prevail: the choicest riches
of Heaven may be had for asking, and if they be not worth that, they are worth
nothing; God loves importunate Beggars: there is liberty of petitioning in the
Court of Heaven; it is no bad manners there to heap suit upon suit: the oftener
you come, the welcomer you are: Compare Mat. 7.11. with Luke 11.13.
He will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it, and that is a good thing in
Gods account, and should be in ours; for it enricheth the Soul with an abundant
Treasure. O beg the Spirit of God, open your mouths wide and he will fill them:
We should think our selves made for ever, if we might but have what we can ask:
But the truth is, we cannot ask so much as God is able and willing to give us,
Ephesians. 3.19, 20. Therefore Sirs, stir up your hearts to desire Grace, open
these windows of your Souls: lift up your selves to God upon these wings of
Desires, and fetch a Treasure from Heaven into your hearts: Men's orat, lingua
loquitur.
Strong desires are real Prayers, and shall prevail, for they not only
capacitate the soul for grace, but lay it directly under the Promise, Matthew.
5.6. Desire is the Souls pullies, that wind it up to Heaven, and it is the Souls
stomach, that receives Heaven into the Christian: therefore pray hard; Do not
you see and hear the pathetical cries of poor Beggars, backed with Rhetorical
arguments of soars, and nakedness, at your doors, and in the Road? Go you and
do likewise, fill the ears of God with mighty cries, take no denial, give God
no rest, till you have your share in spiritual Blessings: tell God you will not
be put off with the transient good things of this wicked world: tell him he
has better things than these to bestow upon Children: Crowns and golden Mines
are but crumbs cast to Dogs; tell him thou come to him for a Childs portion:
and if he will but give thee a treasure of grace in thy heart, and reserve a
treasure of glory for thee in Heaven, thou will refer matters of the world to
him, and he shall do for those things as he sees good; whether he give thee
less or more of the Mammon of unrighteousness, any thing or nothing: tell the
Lord he has betrusted these talents of grace with unworthie Creatures and
great Sinners, and if thou be worse than any that ever yet partak't thereof,
yet tell him, he does not sell these precious Commodities to men deserving, but
give them to craving sinners, and thou art one, that needs as much as any: tell
him thou never yet heardest that he refused to give them to any that sought
them for Christ's sake, with a broken heart above wordlie treasures: tell him,
that himself has promised, his Son has purchased, his Spirit will freely
convey these Gospel-riches into thy heart, and if he will but speak the word,
the thing shall be quickly done. Tell the Lord, yet once again, what a Monument
he will thereby raise to his own glory, if he will fill thy soul with this
Treasure, he will thereby make known the riches of his glory on a poor Vessel
of Mercy: Romans 9.23.
And whereas now thou art an useless Vessel, wherein the Lord can have no
pleasure, by whom he can have no profit or honor; Yet if he will be pleased to
own and crown thy soul with saving grace, he may then take delight in thee, and
rest in his love toward thee: and when he has blessed thee with spiritual
blessings in Heavenly things -- Then thou will be to the praise of the glory
of his grace. Ephesians. 1.3.6. Thus come, thus pour out your hearts like water
before the Lord, lie day and night at the Throne of Grace, it is worth all this
pains in seeking; will not you do as much as Esau for this blessing? he took
pains to hunt for Venison, Genesis 27.34, 38. (...)
that Isaac's soul might bless him, and missing of it, he lift up his voice,
and cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, redoubling his request with
an affectionate Echo. Bless me, even me also, O my Father: the words are very
remarkable, and have as notable an Emphasis, as almost is to be found in
Scripture, and will you be worse than profane Esau? O sirs, if you knew your
souls want, and the worth of divine things, your prayers would have an other
accent, and be put up with more fervencie than usuallie they are: and you might
have hopes to speed: so says the wise Man, if thou criest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hidden treasures, then shall thou understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.

Before I break off this subject, let me press a little upon you the wholesome
council of our dear Savior, Revel. 3.18. I council thee to buy of me, Gold
tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich, etc. Consider 1. What is your
estate naturally, and without Christ, you may imagine great things, but God
knows there is no such matter, (...)( Sync. (...)) suffero et (...) luctus.
as he says to this self-conceited Church of Laodicea, Verse. 17 Thou say I
am rich -- and know not that thou art wretched, miserable, poor, blind,
naked: he heaps up many words to aggravate their beggarlie state: the
graceless soul is 1. wretched, i.e. pressed with sickness, misery and
calamity, overwhelmed with reproach, over-thrown in conflicts, cannot stir
hand or foot for God, being always overborn by his Master, Satan: 2. (...)
He is miserable, i.e. though he stand in absolute need of divine help and
mercy, yet he is unworthie and destitute of it; God will have no mercy on this
woeful object, Isai. 27.11. Hosea 1.6. (...) qui ostiatim petit El^emosynam.
(...)
so that the forlorn soul may be called Lo-ruhamah. 3. The sinner is poor,
i.e. in extreme necessity, has not a bit or morsel of brown Bread, but begs
from door to door, these poor souls are ready to famish and pine, and shall
have no relief. 4. Blind, this is a sad aggravation, when a Man must wander
for bread to relieve his soul, yet knows not whither to go, (...) Solam cutem
hab^nt
nay knows not that he needs to go, is miserable, and knows it not; Yea further
he is, 5. Naked, exposed to the injuries of weather, and lashes of Men; thus is
the poor soul destitute of the wedding Garment. Christ's righteousness having
only a naked skin to fortify against the wrath of God, the curse of the Law,
and tormentings of conscience, and what can this avail the wretched miscreant?
Let a man be the richest Potentate under Heaven, yet if he be graceless, he is
thus wretchedlie poor; no tongue can express the misery of an unregenerate
Person; There are seven words in Hebrew that signify poor, and they are all
applicable to a poor Creature without Christ and grace. (...) Pauper
1. He is straitened in the abundance of outward sufficiency, with a griping
conscience; and greedy grasping after shadows. 2. (...) Perditus
His goods are diminished, and he is grown a bank-rupt in Adam, vain inventions
have wasted a fair estate, and daily weaken the relics of natural light.
(...) Attritus
3. He is oppressed with intolerable labor, grinding in the Devils Mil,
toiling in worse than Egyptian thraldom, without any relief for his famishing
soul. (...) Attenuatus
4. He is of a dejected mind, like the Serpent, going with his belly to the
dust, a degenerate Plant, the worst part of the Creation, the basest of
Creatures, the tail, and not the head. (...) Afflictus.
5. Besides all this he is afflicted spirituallie with suits, hatred, exile,
imprisonment, God himself commenceth suit against him, hates him, banisheth him
from his presence, delivers him over into Satan's hands, by whom he is led
Captive, at his pleasure. 6. (...) ^g^nns
He is always needy, desires all things, but has nothing, cannot be content,
snatching on the right and left hand, yet is never satisfied, boundless in
motion toward a wrong object, that increases his thirst. 7. (...) V^^uus
He is empty both of virtues, which are the riches of the mind, for though he
may have some moral accomplishments, yet they are but [ Splendida peccata] more
splendid and shining sins, without grace; and also he is destitute of the
World, for having a curse and not Gods blessing therewith, it does him no good;
nay it is his bane, being both a snare, and a poison, and aggravating sin, and
increasing his torment, having a sadder account to make another day: this and
much worse is the condition of a graceless heart, out of which it is
councelled! Oh who would tarry one hour in such a wretched state, the Lord be
merciful to you, and pluck you out of the Sodom of unregeneracie, lest you
perish eternally.

2. Consider the state into which you are councelled, for this end observe, 1.
Isai. 9.6.
Who is your Counselor, Jesus Christ, who indeed is the only Counselor,
the wisdom of the Father, who best understands the Law of heaven, and what will
stand you in stead, in the Court of God; he that might command you into Hell,
does council you for Heaven; he that died for you, opens his heart to you; he
that will speak to the Father for you, entreats you to make use of him as your
only Advocate. 2. Consider what and who you are and have been, that are thus
councelled, enemies to his grace, in whom he might glorify his justice, and
cast you headlong into the Pit, and there is an end of you, persons that have
been a provocation all your days, that have resisted, quenched, grieved, vexed
his holy spirit, trampled Christ under foot, served Satan and your selves;
behold he pours out his words unto you, Prove. 1.23.
yea he offers to pour his spirit into you: it is the voice of an infinite God,
to a mortal sinful Man, Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the Sons of
Men. Prove. 8.4. And 3. Consider, what he councels to, it is to a rich and
precious purchase: O ye great purchasers, here is a bargain for you, not of a
piece of Land, but the Kingdom, not an Earthly but an Heavenly Kingdom, not
a fair House to live in here, but eternal mansions in the Heavens: come, strike
up the bargain, Isa. 55.1, 2. Jubet em^re non precio, sed mendicoru^ more,
precibu^ emendicare abud Deum. Par. in Loc.
bid freely, but what must you give? money, or moneys worth? no, worldly
treasures are dross here, money bears no mastery, the price is fallen to just
nothing, shall I say nothing? you are to give away your sins, and give God your
selves, yet that is no price, because it bears no proportion to such receipts:
grace and glory are Gods gift, yet God puts this honor upon such as honor him
by believing, as though they buy what they enjoy: Let every soul make this
cheap purchase: But if it be so cheap, is it not of little worth? will it not
prove accordingly? what is the purchase, and what is it good for? That brings
in the four things, viz. the things purchased are absolutely necessary and
beneficial. 1. Gold. 2. Raiment. 3. Eve salve. 4. Every one accomplisheth a
notable end, to make rich, cloth and recover sight: we cannot be without any
of these: I cannot enlarge, take a touch: 1. This gold tried in the fire is
Scripture-truths, P^^. ^3.^3.
and w^ (...) by all means buy truth, Psalm. 12.6.
by no means (...) it, and the words of God are as silver tried in a furnace of
Earth, Psalm 119.1^7.
purified seven times, therefore David loved the Word above fine gold; I told
you we must make a treasure of this refined Gold of Scripture-truths, 1 Pet.
1.7.
but I rather understand this of the tried gold of precious graces, especially
faith, which being tried in the Furnace of affliction is much more precious
than gold that perishes: Hoc (...) est Christi, extra quod nulla ^s^ salus;
this indeed makes the soul truly rich, as money answers all things, so this
will bring us through all conditions, and this is to be had of Christ, therefore
buy or beg it of him, and believe in him for obtaining more of the Riches of
grace. 2. White raiment is the Robes of Christ's Righteousness, the garments of
our elder Brother, fine Linen clean and white, for whiteness is a token of
purity, and it is an allusion to the Roman Candidates, that seeking Dignity or
Magistracy, come forth conspicuously into the Assembly, thereby signifying that
integrity which bec^me those honorable Offices: So the Saints must have the
upper garments of imputed Righteousness, and closer raiment of inherent
Holiness, of both which it is said, Rev. 16.15 -- Blessed is he that watches
and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, i. e. the
filth and guilt of sin: 3. Eye Salve, an Ointment that purges away the dregs
and dimness of the Eyes, this grace banisheth the dark mists from the soul, and
makes it see clearly the state of our hearts, the evil of sin, and excellency
of the things of God: a right understanding of divine Mysteries is a mercy
worth praying for and prizing: This is the only learning, book-learning and
brain-knowledge are not worth naming in comparison of this, 1 John 2.27.
for this annionting will teach you of all things:

Well, Sirs, I am loath to leave this Subject til I have prevailed with you, to
make it your main business to look after this divine Treasure. O that Jesus
Christ were formed in your hearts, and the life of grace were begun in your
souls, if that be wrought you will be fit for all conditions, without it, you will
be fit for nothing, and nothing can suit you, you will make no shift in a hard
time, and you know not how to improve happy times, a day of affliction will
swallow you up, temptation will overthrow you, mercies will increase your guilt,
judgments drive you to despair; you cannot buckle to the easiest Duties, nor
apply the sweetest Promises, and how will you come off in the great day of
Accounts? whether will you go for help, and where will you leave your glory?

CHAP. XI. General Directions, to help Christians how to get a Treasure of holy
Thoughts.
MY principal design is to lay down a Directorie for the people of God, and
because this is a business of great moment, consequence, and concernment, to
have, keep, use, improve, and increase an Heart-treasure. I shall be the larger
upon it, and rank what I have to say under these four Topics or Heads, Viz. 1.
How shall a soul be furnished with a Treasure of good thoughts. 2. How shall a
Christian lay up Truths, Graces, Comforts, and Experiences? 3. How may a
Christian preserve and increase this Treasure? 4. How must a treasured Soul
draw out, and make use of his Treasure.


To begin with the first, which is this: What course shall a Christian take to
hoard up a treasure of holy thoughts? This is the good treasure chiefly
intended in the Text, and I shall be the larger upon this Head. To this end I
shall propound these ten Directions:

1. Work upon your hearts the reality and rarity of the things of God: get
thoroughly convinced that there are such things to be had, and that they are
worth laying up; You must look upon Divine things as infallibly certain, and
incomparably excellent: those were accounted sensual and brutish Philosophers,
that (following Epicurus) placed man's chief happiness in matters of sense, as
profit, pleasure, honor -- But those were the most sublime, and (in asort)
Divine, that placed the ( summum bonum, or) chief good, in what is above, or
opposite to sense, as in the good things of the mind, and moral virtue; Can
Heathens by the light of nature and reason see a reality and excellency in
things invisible to sense, and shall not Christians much more? it is a shame for
a Saint, enlightened by the Spirit, to be so blear-eyed, 1 Cor. 2.10.
as not to see afar off, or view spiritual objects: 2 Pet. 1.9.
it is the duty and property of a Christian to overlook things that are seen,
and intently to behold things not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. O Sirs, could you as
really see with a spiritual eye spiritual goods, as you can with your natural
eyes behold corporal objects, what an advantage would it be to you? Could you
make Gospel-mysteries, and mercies as sensual to your selves, as a rich man's
Bags and Lands are to him, what an exceeding help would it be? This made Moses
forsake the visible glory of Egypt, and endure intolerable things in the
Wilderness, for he saw him that was invisible, Heb. 11.27. Thus Christians are
to realize Divine Things, and account highly of them, for no man will treasure
up that which he accounts not as most excellent, the making light of
Gospel Grace, is the great reason why so many go without it, so it is said in
Matthew. 22.5. the bidden guests made light of it, (...). curam non habentes.
or as the word signifies, they would not take it into their care and thoughts,
they looked upon it as not worth looking after: I am persuaded unbelief, or want
of a through, settled and effectual persuasion of the truth of the Gospel, and
reality of what good is contained in the promises, is the root of that gross
Atheism, and wilful neglect in the World; you are to give your full assent to
the things of God, to venture your souls upon Scripture-principles, Gods ipse
dixit must be in stead of all the demonstrations in the World, you must center
and anchor your selves upon that impregnable Rock (Scriptum est) It is written,
and though you cannot find a reason of the things believed, yet this is to be
accounted a sufficient reason of your belief, viz. God has spoken them, and
you may safely trust your souls upon his word, for he cannot lie, he is wiser
than to be deceived, and he is more righteous than to deceive: you may safely
lay the stress of your souls upon his word: O that I could persuade you to
this, do not put off these things with a slight no^^on and conjectural opinion,
Col. 2.2.
but advance to the riches of the full assurance of understanding, that is an
high word, but you cannot be too sure about these things, your strongest
confidence may be battered, your persuasion may stagger, and therefore get as
well rooted as you can, for according to the degrees of your affiance, will your
graces and duties ebb and flow, rise or fall: And you must not only believe the
truth of them, Romans 8.31.
but urge them upon your own hearts, as Paul says, so say you, What shall I
say to these things? are they true, or are they not? are they worth thinking
of, or are they not? have I an interest in them, or have I not? O my soul let
me press thee to the serious view of heavenly objects, they are choice things,
and deserve our study, rare wherein few have interest, yet absolutely
necessary wherein all must have a share, or they are undone for ever: That Is
the first direction.

2. Reserve thy heart for, and resign up thy heart wholly to God: he calls for
it, My Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. Let not thy dearest comforts,
relations or companions have a share in thy soul, this is the chief tribute
that is due to God, rob not God of any part of it, clip not the King of Heavens
coin, but you may and must let out your hearts solelie and wholly to God, and
things above, as the lines go to the center; 1 Chr. 29.3
David had set his affections to the house of his God, and therefore his
thoughts were vehemently carried out after those things, that made him offer so
much, and offer so willingly: the same man of God prays, (...) Unicum fa^.
Psalm. 86.11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name, the word imports a making his
heart one, he would not have an heart, and an heart; a divided heart is no
God-fearing heart: He that would patch up a contentment both of God, and the
Creature, shall go without a solid treasure, for the Creature cannot, and God
will not fill such an heartless heart: Besides, love, says one, is for one
object, like a Piramid, it ends in a point, affection is weakened by
dispersion, as a River by being turned into many Channels: You cannot serve two
Masters, he that would have a treasure of any thing intends that only, he
contracts his affairs into a narrow compass, and makes that his [(...)] his
only work: So must you knit your thoughts together, and fix them upon this
only object: it is a dangerous thing to divide the affections betwixt God and
the World, like Judah that swear by the Lord, Zeph. 1.5
and by Malcham, or their King: But God does make account, that, that soul is
not at all for him, that is not altogether for him, and not for another: those
Nations feared not the Lord that joined their serving Idols, with fearing the
true God, 2 Kings 17.33, 34. There can no more be two chief delights in one
heart, than two Suns in one Firmament; those spirits are winding and crooked,
that are like that haven we read of Act. 27.12. Mr. Burrough' s heart-divi.
Page 7. Hos. 10.2.
Lying directly toward two opposite points of Heaven: Cyrus took Babylon, by
dividing the River, the Devil soon surprizeth us, if he can but divide out
hearts: if our hearts be divided, we shall be found faulty: O lets take heed
of being voluntary Cripples, to halt between two opinions, let us not
dismember our selves by being half, and hollow-hearted: God is infinite, Christ
is complete, 1 King. 18.21.
spiritual things are most excellent, and these deserve the whole heart:
therefore resign up your selves unto God resolvedlie, unreservedlie and
universallie: Ed condition te accipio, ut te tibi reddam meliorem. Socrat.
fear not, as he finds his life, that loses it for God: so he only
receives his heart as good, and worth having that gives it to God: for he
takes it to make it better, as even an Heathen could say to his Scholar, that
had nothing to give him but himself: give God your hearts, and he will furnish
them with a treasure, commit your souls into his hands, and he will both commit
a treasure to you, and will also keep that which you commit to him, 2 Timothy 1.12.
til the great day of his illustrious appearing: he will preserve both the case
and the jewel, soul and body, the least attome of dust shall not be lost; how
much more will he graciously preserve that good work of grace, and fruits of
the spirit, that he has committed to you: therefore I beseech you take my
council in this, keep no corner of your heart for a stranger, Isai. 6. i. Heb.
3.6. 1 Cor. 6.^9. Verum Christi ^^mplum anima credentis est, illam exor^^,
illam vesti, illi os^^r don^ric, in^ illa Christum susei^^. Hi^^om. a^ pauli^.
Tom. 1. Page 105.
but yield your selves to the Lord, deliver the keys of your hearts into his
hands, let the King of Glory enter in, and his glorious train will fill the
Temple of your souls: he is a treasure where ever he comes; Christians are
called Gods house, his Temple, its therefore gross sacrilege to rob him of his
house, or to keep him out of doors; the soul of a believer, says an ancient,
is the true Temple of Christ, adorn and cloth that, offer gifts to that,
receive Christ into it: herin consists the sum and marrow of our religion,
viz. an heart totally dedicated unto God, and that is the second help to get a
treasure in the heart.

3. Live by Faith upon Jesus Christ: the lively acting of Faith upon the
Mediator of the Covenant will fill your souls with saving and savoury Incomes:
God has appointed Christ to be the Storehouse of his Church; now Faith is the
hand to fetch supplies from Christ to the heart, by Faith is the soul ingrafted
into this true Olive, Romans 11.17, 20. Ephesians. 3.17.
and sucks fatness from it; Christ dwells in the heart by Faith, and still more
of Christ is fetched in by Faith: all the means of a Christians life is by the
exercise of Faith: therefore is the righteous said to live by his faith,
because it lives, and feeds the soul upon Christ: Faith empties the heart, and
so makes room for Jesus Christ, and then lays hold of him, and compels him to
turn into the heart. And our dear Savior is willingly conquered with the
strength of Faith; Faith is the key that opens the Chest where treasures lie,
and the hand that brings them into the heart: Faith opens the heart to receive
riches of grace, Cor clausum habet, qui clavem fidei non habet:
and that man has a shut heart that has not the Key of Faith: O get a great
measure of Faith, for the more faith you have the richer you are, for Faith it
self is a precious Treasure: and it does all for enriching the soul; Truths
cannot be a treasure in our minds to profit our hearts, Heb. 4.2. 2 Pet. 1.5.
except mixed with this precious ingredient, ^aith; all graces of the Spirit
attend this Queen and Captain grace of Faith; Experiences cannot be gathered or
improved without Faith: and that comfort is but a fancy that is not ushered in
by the assurance of Faith: Faith is the great Bucket to draw water out of the
wells of Salvation, Quantum illuc fidei capacis afferimus, tantum inde gratiae
inundantis haurimus: Cyp. Epist. ad Horat. page 108. Rev. 3.7.
and the more faith you bring, the more fullness you receive. Well then, would
you have your hearts stored with a treasure, strive to increase your faith, and
let the Lord Jesus be the direct object of your faith; It Is he alone that has
the key of David, that does both open heaven to us, and an heavenly treasure
for us: Since the fall we have no converse with God, or communication from
him, but through a Mediator; It is a terrible thing, says Luther, even to
think of God out of Christ; You must honor the Son as you honor the Father,
and as you believe in God, so must you also act faith upon Christ God-man; that
as our nature in Christ's Person is filled with all that poor souls can want, so
from that fullness we may receive all things needful for our being and
well-being in grace. O stir up and awake your faith, come poor soul, reach
hither thy hand of faith, Joh. 20.27.
and thrust it into thy Saviors pierced side, and there thou may feel, and
thence fetch abundant fruits of love: be not faithless but believing: do not
dam up the channels of grace by unbelief, do not forsake thy own mercies, by
being shy and fearful to venture at it, thou can lose nothing, thou may
get much by one single act of faith. O Sirs, one pure act of a lively faith
will bring you in more treasure, then many hours tugging and struggling in
duties, and performances: Nothing in the world does [ ponere obicem] shoot a
bar, and bolt the door betwixt Christ and the heart, but unbelief: if thou
can believe all things are possible, but unbelief hinders the working of
Miracles and operations of grace. Away with all distrust, Mark 6.5.
set afoot the precious grace of Faith, break through the quarrellings of thy
unbelieving heart, lie low under the sad sense of thine insufficiency, and
sweet apprehension of Christ's Al-sufficiency: humbly stretch forth the
trembling hand of thy weak faith, though thou have many mis-givings of spirit,
yet say with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief: I am no more
able of my self to put forth one saving act of justifying faith, then I am to
fulfill all righteousness, and keep the whole Law: but the grace of the Gospel
has undertaken to do that which it requires to be done: Lord, I roll my self
upon thee, I come to thee by faith, do not cast me off, do not cast me out as a
broken Vessel wherein there is no pleasure, but fill this empty Vessel of my
broken heart with abundant incomes, which will redound unto thy glory, and my
souls abundant comfort: this do and prosper, thus believe and be thou filled,
poor wanting soul, for whatsoever you ask believing, you shall receive, Matthew.
21.22.

4. Warm in your hearts the grace of love, that noble grace is of an
expatiating and extensive nature; Heaven is the fittest room for its motion,
and eternity for its duration; he that loves much will not be content with a
little, and God will not put him off with a scantling: the more the soul is
filled with love, 1 John 4.8.
the more it is filled with God, for God is love; and can a man have a better
Treasure than God himself? Now if you love God, he will come in unto you, and
make his abode with you, John 14.23. and can you wish a better treasure? Love
makes room in the heart for more grace, he that loves much, because much is
forgiven him, shall have more given in: indeed that expression in 2 Cor. 5.14.
seems to denote the contracting nature of Love, the love of God constrains us
[(...)] straiteneth, Ut non possint non velle extrema quaeque pro Christo
perpeti. Aret. in locum.
keeps us in, but that is from other things, that the soul may have freer scope
for God; this Love diverts the affections from running in any other channel,
but toward Jesus Christ; it captivates the soul for Christ, and forces it to
do, and endure any thing for him whom the soul loves. The grace of Love widens
the arms to embrace Jesus Christ, inlargeth the heart to entertain him, and
spiriteth the hands to act for him: Christ Jesus rides in a glorious triumphant
Chariot, whether it mean his personal, See Ainsworth on the place: Brightman.
or mystical Body, his flesh and humane nature, or his Church, which he fills
with his Presence, I dispute not; but sure I am, the midst thereof is paved
with Love, Cant. 3.10. Certainly, a soul beset with the sparkling gems of love
is the fittest receptacle for Jesus Christ: He that is Love it self does most
freely commit the largest treasure to a loving Disciple, as he bequeathed his
dear Mother to John, Joh. 19.26.
when we was breathing out his last upon the bitter Cross, Rev. 1.1.
and after his death entrusted him with the Revelation, yea, him only with a
description of the state of the Church to the end of the World: O how freely do
a loving Savior, and loving soul open their hearts to each other! like entire
an ancient Friends meeting that let out themselves in ample evidences, and
reciprocal acts of Love: So here, the pure flame of a Saints love mounts up to
Christ, and there meeting with that heavenly Element of perfect Love, brings
more down into the Soul, and still these continued sallies of love to God,
bring in successive incomes and increases of grace: every act of Love exhales
some corrupt vapors, and dilates the souls faculties, that it may be fit for
the reception of more grace; Yea, Love sets the soul on edge for more, and
makes it as unsatiable as it is unwearied in painful endeavors: Faith works
by love, i.e. as by its hand to act for God, and indeed love, in a sort,
works by faith, as its hand to fetch all from God, Faith sets Love on to
crave, and Love ingageth Faith to derive more grace from God: Love is Faiths
Stomach, and Faith is Loves purveyer: And as Love helps the Soul to a treasure
of graces, so of truths; Love to Truths makes the soul look upon them as a
precious Depositum, to think much of them, and so rivet them and clench them
fast in the heart by meditation; Love makes a man contend for the faith by
disputing and dying, if God call him to it. Hence it is, that Love is one of
those hands that hold fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. But he that
receives not the truth in love, 2 These 12.10.
will never make it a Treasure, but will sell it for a lust, and embrace a lie:
See this Subject handled in M. Williams transcend. of Christ's love, on Ephesians.
3.19. p. 73. to p. 145. Plusquam tua, plusquam tu^s, plusquam te: vid. ibid p.
114. very fully: Morn. lect. Sermon. 9. p. 186. Dr. Rein. on Psalm. 110. Pinks
trial.
therefore sirs, I entreat you work up this grace, stir up your hearts to think
of the love of Christ, blow up this spark to a flame, content not your selves
with a low degree of love to God, love him with an intensive, extensive,
appreciative love, let your measure of love to him be beyond measure, let your
hearts ascend to him in this holy flame of entire love, love him more than
your enjoyments, more than your relations, more than your selves: I shall say
no more of this ordinary, yet very necessary subject, because many have done
so worthily herein: read them.

5. Walk humbly with your God: that is another direction: walk close with God,
a hint of that, but I shall speak most of that soul-inriching grace of
humility: O Christians, the best means of edification is an holy
conversation, God communicates secrets, and solace to them that walk with him,
a soul of a wel-ordered conversation shal-see God's salvation; Psa. 50 21.
a Master will betrust a faithful, careful, Mat. 25.21.
painful servant, with a larger Talent; for such an one credits his Master, and
promotes his designs: bringing forth much fruit glorifies God and edifies men,
and surely the Lord will dignifie such fruitful Vines with more care in
dressing, John 15.
and yet more of his blessing to help their abundant fruit-bearing: such shall
have more clear discoveries of God's will, Joh. 7.17.
as carefully do it: and such as do his Commandments have right to the tree
of life, Rev 22.14
that they may come to it when they please and eat abundantly, and live for
ever: there is an incomparable advantage in close-walking: in keeping the
Commandments there is this reward, Psalm. 19.11
that every act of obedience does increase ability to obey; every step
renews strength: Saints go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7
for the way of the Lord is strength to the upright: Pro. 10.29
nothing evidenceth and increases grace so much as holiness, therefore as he
that has called you is holy, so be you holy; in all manner of conversation;
And let me persuade you to be very humble, God gives more grace to the humble,
Jam. 4.6.
humility is not only a grace, but a Vessel to receive more; the high and
holy God fills the humble and lowly heart; Isa. 57.15.
the King of Heaven loves to walk upon this blessed pavement. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, Mat. 5.3.
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: and such a soul is the fittest
receptacle for the precious riches of this Heavenly Kingdom: Much of the
Ancients riches consisted in their Garments, and a Christians treasure lies
much in his vesture, (...) humilitatem, animi vobis infixam habete: Eras. of
(...) a Knot. vid. Leig^ Crit.
some whereof is his larger upper Coa^ that is Christ's righteousness imputed,
which covers all defects and imperfections, some are closer Garments, girded to
the soul by the girdle of truth and sincerity, these are the Garments of
sanctification, one choice part whereof is humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Be clothed
with humility: Some think the word imports that string or ribband that ties
together those precious pearls of divine graces, these adorn the soul, and if
this spring break they are all scattered: humility is the knot of every
virtue, the ornament of every grace: hence I read a quotation out of Basil, who
calls humility [(...)] the storehouse or magazin of all good: would to God we
were all humble and holy walkers, and we should quickly have our hearts
furnished with a treasure. Consecration in the time of the Law was by filling
the hand, and he that is consecrated to the Lord shall have his heart filled,
especially they that are emptied of all self-conceit, shall be filled with much
of Gods fullness: Vally-Soules are usually covered over with a rich harvest of
precious fruits: Psalm 65.13. Jam. 1.21.
Humility is likewise a fit disposition for entertaining divine Truths, these
choice grafts will like best in a low ground: a meek soul will bid truths
welcome: for an humble heart looks upon every truth of God as infinitely above
it self, and therefore falls down under it, and says, speak Lord, for thy
servant hears; an humble soul ownes the authority of God in his word,
wherever it finds it, whoever brings it, so that even a little child may lead
him any whither with a twine-thred of Scripture discoveries: Isa. 11.6.
But proud men and truth can never hit it, for they think scorn to put their
necks under the girdle of Truth, and it will have the victory where it lodges;
Those were proud men that would not obey truth in Jeremiahs mouth, Jer. 43.2.
and therefore must that Prophet take down their crests before they could be
right Disciples of Truth, Jer. 13.15. Hear ye, give ear, be not proud; And
observe this, a proud man is always of the losing hand, both in the account of
God and man, and in his natural or acquired accomplishments: the more a man
conceits to himself some imaginary seize, the more he loses: the stomach
may be stuffed with noxious humors, that a man cannot eat, but that is not
right fullness but a fulsome distemper, and proves dangerous, the belly may be
raised with a timpanie of wind, but that is not solid fatness, but a pernicious
disease, and both these prejudice health: just thus is it with men's souls, the
swelling disease hinders health by either truths or graces: O therefore be you
humble, self-denying souls, sensible of your own defects, be nothing in your
own eyes, and you shall be the Temple, for the God of all grace to lodge in,
and to walk constantly in, yea he will fill you with abundance of grace here and
glory hereafter.

6. Be much in secret prayer: pray much and pray in secret, a word of both. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
O pray without ceasing, i.e. keep a continual praying disposition, and lay
hold on every fit season for that duty: while prayer stands still, the trade
of religion stands still, and there is nothing got: all comes into the soul by
this door, it is good for a Christian to keep up, set and stated times of
prayer: Daniel and David prayed three times a day, Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 55.17.
Psalm. 119.164.
in extraordinary cases seven times a day, it is not lost labor to be much on
our knees, we cannot go to God too often, I am surer not oftener than we shall
be welcome, if we pray aright, for the holy of holies is ever open, our high
Priest ever lives to make intercession for us, prayer was made morning and
evening, and we must be constant and instant in prayer: Romans 12.12. (...) in
oratione perdurantes Beza: continue with strength: a (...) i.e. fortiter
tolerare: Leigh. Crit. Sac.
as the hunting Dog that will not cease following the game, til he have got it;
so must we pursue the Lord, and persevere with strength, til we have obtained
what we want: there is a kind of omnipotency in prayer, as it was said of
Luther, he could do with God, even what he would: At present I would advise all
Christians to keep up a constant set time of prayer: what if thou gettest
little thereby? yet wait on God still: Tradesmen will go to Markets and Fairs,
and set open their Shop-doors, and Windows, though there be little to be done
or gotten many times: so let the Christian keep this market of holy duties,
and go upon the Exchange to spy what good bargain he can meet with for his
soul; learn to maintain commerce with heaven still, lest you lose your custom:
keep canonical hours, (as it were) of prayer, though your hearts be often out
of frame, venture upon duty, and try what the Lord will do with you: it is the
folly of our trifling spirits to put off duty, when our hearts are not in tune,
with expectation that they will be in a better frame another time, but do we
think that one sin will excuse another? or that we shall be better fitted by a
present neglect? no certainly we ought to stir up our selves to take hold on
God, for why should Satan be gratified by a total forbearance? will not disuse
make us loather to go to God another time? yea have we not found it in
Scripture and experience that a dead and discouraged entrance upon duty has
increased to sweet inlargements, and ravishments of spirit? search and see,
usually an heart engagement has ended in an heart-enlargement, and
God-enjoyment: God will bring an engaged heart near himself, Jer. 30.21. None
ever lost their labor in struggling with their untoward hearts: Oh Christians,
be sure you be found in prayer though you come hardly to it; and have muh ado
to keep at it, and have more hazard to get something by it: though with
Jonathan and his armor bearer you clamber up the Hill on your hands and knees,
and fight when you mount the top; yet you shall get the victory, and the spoils
of such a conflict will be the most enriching: one Pisgah-sight of Christ in a
promise will quit the cost, and hazard a thousand-fold: the evidence and
advantage of such a performance will be the best, and worth all the rest; yea
for ought I know though you meet not with God as you desire at that time, yet
God may own and crown that undertaking as much as the most heart-melting
exercise, because there is most of obedience in that, and conscience of duty is
as acceptable a motive to duty as sense of present recompense.

But withal, keep up a course of secret prayer, withdraw your selves into a
corner according to the Rule, Mat. 6.6. God is wont to dispense his choicest
blessings to solitary souls; when Jacob was left alone, Genesis 32.24
he wrestled with the Angel of the Covenant and prevailed: John and Ezekiel had
their visions and revelations, when withdrawn from the World: Solomon says,
Woe to him that is alone, but blessed is he that being alone has God to bear
him company: John 16.32.
Our dear Savior tells his Disples, you leave me alone, yet I am not alone, for
the Father is with me; and when no creature is with us, we have converse most
with God; for observe it, when persons are most secluded from other Society,
they are aptest to be subject to divine impressions, or to Sathanical
suggestions: Therefore Christians, learn to get alone, improve solitary hours,
pour out your souls in your Closets, and he will pour in grace; think not to
seek and find Christ in a crowd: the Lord Jesus and his Spouse are modest, and
have the sweetest embraces when they are retired: You must invite him into the
field -- and there give him your loves, Song. 7.11, 12.
and he also will give you his love tokens, and fill your hearts with a
treasure: an honest intent for retirement to enjoy Christ did occasion a
Monastic life: but certainly there is much sweetness in secret prayer, when
the soul can freely open its bosom to God, and expostulate boldly, yet humbly
with him; there the Christian may use such postures, pauses, pleadings, as
would not be convenient before others: You may tell him your whole heart, and
he will deal with you as with Friends, and open his breast to you. Observe it
Sirs, A Christian has some secret errand to God, that the dearest Friend and
nearest Relation must not know of, Cases that are not to be entrusted with any
but God alone; here then comes in the necessity, and excellency of secret
prayer; therefore again, let me earnestly request you to go alone (as you know
Christ did often) and tell God your whole near, hide nothing from him, plead
no excuse from worldly business: Satan and your corrupt hearts will find many
occasions for diversion: but say to them as Abraham to his Servants, stay you
here whiles I go and worship the Lord yonder: steal time from the world, and
thy work, occasional Duties are like accidental Bargains, that make the careful
Tradesmen rich: Bread eaten in secret is sweet, and such morsels make the soul
well liking: Consult with such Christians as converse much with God in a
corner, and you shall see their faces to shine as Moses's did after his retired
conversings with God in the Mount; 1 King. 17.19, 20.
When Elijah to raise the Woman's dead Son, he took him into the loft, and there
prayed; When thou would quicken up thy dead heart, take it alone, go into a
loft, and fall on thy face or knees and pray, and see the blessed effects
thereof: -- Ac n^ Eloquium nostrum arbiter profanus impediat, aut clamor
intemperans familiae strepent is obtundat, petamus hanc sedem: dant secessum
vicina secreta, ubi dum erratici palmitum lapsus nexibus pendulis per arundines
bajulas repunt, viteam porticum frondea tecta fecerunt: -- Et paulo post --
Accipe quod sentitur autequam discitur, nec per moras temporum long a agnitione
colligitur, sed compendio gratiae maturantis hauritur, and lege totam, Epist.
lib, 2. ep. 2. ad Donat, page (mihi) 105.106.
Cyprian notably describes his sweet and solitary Recesses into a place where
no hearer can hinder his Discourse, or intemperate noise of the busy family
can obstruct: there he perceived, and received what he felt, before he learned
it, not by a long Series of study, but by a compendious act of divine Grace:

CHAP. XII. Four Directions more to help the Christians heart to this treasure
of good Thoughts.
A Seventh Direction to obtain a Treasure, i. e. Trade with God in every
performance: Rest not satisfied with a bare outside of duties, or a trudging in
the common road or round of Formality: if you look not beyond Ordinances in the
use thereof, you will get no more treasure than a Merchant whose ship rides to
the Downs, and quickly returns again: he that would be rich must use Duties as
a Bridge or Boat to bring his soul to God, and as a Chariot to bring God to his
soul; every Ordinance should be like those Merchant ships that bring food or
gold from afar: Pro. 31.^4.
the Christian must travel far beyond the Indies, even as far as Heaven to
fetch an heavenly treasure into his heart, the soul of the diligent shall be
made fat, Prove. 13.4. It is not a show of eating, nor only a sitting at the
Table that fills: a pretense of trading makes not rich: he that stands upon
the Bridge and walks not, will never get over the water, it is not the
goodness of the Boat, but our motion by it that wafts us over: A golden Bucket
will bring us no water except it be let down into the Well: the choicest
Ordinances will bring us no spiritual or saving profit, except we have to do
with God therein; Gods Institutions work not by any innate physical virtue
that is in them, but morally, i.e. by a careful improvement of them, and
especially the blessing of God with them: a man is not therefore a good
Scholar because he went so long to School, and for saying so many Lessons: nor
is an ignorant Papist a whit the better for dropping so many beads, or
pattering over so many Pater-nosters: the Apostle says, bodily exercise
profits nothing, 1 Timothy 4.8. he means not only recreations or superstitious
usages, but even Gods own Ordinances, says an Expositor, Vid. Marlorat. in loc.
the mere verbal complemental use thereof will not advantage the soul: But
godliness is profitable to all things, the right spiritual worship of God
brings along with it abundant incomes: Some observe, that religious worshippers
are said in Latin [ Deum colere] because thereby they sow to the Spirit and
are sure to reap of the Spirit life everlasting. Besides the inward
refreshments they reap in this life: and truly, Gal. 6.8.
in worshipping God there is great reward; But it is easier to be much in
duties, then to be much with God in duties: if we had been as often with God as
we have been before God, we had been readier than we are: Job was persuaded
that if he could find God, and come near to his Seat, he would not plead
against him with his great power, but would put strength into him, Job 23.3-6.
and I dare say, if thou could meet God in Duty, he would meet thee in Mercy,
Isa. 54 5. and if God meet thee he will bless thee, and fill thy soul with a
blessed treasure, a treasure of heavenly blessings: if thou draw nigh to God,
Exodus 20.24.
he will draw nigh to thee. Let me therefore persuade you to make conscience of
getting communion with God, and influences from him in all Ordinances and
Performances; you are great losers if you miss of God in duties, you take Gods
name in vain and lose your labor, nay, you lose a blessing, and get the curse
of doing the work of the Lord negligently; But oh, how blessed a thing is it to
say with holy St. Bernard, I never come to God, but I meet with God, I never go
from God, but I carry God with me! therefore in all your attendance upon God,
carefully prepare before, mind your work and object of worship in, and
diligently examine your hearts afterward how the Lord has dealt with your
souls, and blessed is he that can say as David in the point of obedience,
Psalm 119.56. This I had, because I kept thy thy Precepts: What had he? why, he
had a heart to remember Gods Name in the night, holy thoughts whereby he might
meditate on divine things: So say you, this I got in such a duty or Ordinance,
and this does furnish my soul with heavenly conceptions, and new matter of
meditation: it is the power of the Spirit that must make Ordinances effectual,
though the Gospel be the Ministration of the Spirit, yet the choicest Truths,
Promises, Literae damnatoriae, aut leges mortis.
Sermons, Sacraments will be but a dead letter, and law of death to the soul
without the Spirit: therefore you are to wait for the Spirit to breath and blow
upon the garden of your souls, that the Spices [ divine graces] may be
nourished, and so may flourish in our hearts and lives: Ordinances are empty
Cysterns i^ God be not in them, they are full and filling if the presence of
God be in them, O therefore look after God in every spiritual performance:

8. Spend time well: lose not a mite or minute of this precious creature; fill
up all your waste time with some profitable work in your general or particular
Callings: cast not at your heels the least Filings of these golden Seasons: you
have lost too much time already, now buy up the remainder, ingrosse this
precious commodity, take the fittest opportunities, like good Merchants, for a
dear time is coming, nay the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.16. Imitate such
Tradesmen as miss no opportunity of getting gain at home or abroad, by night or
by day, by plotting or by practicing: only make use of present moments, and
promise not to your selves to morrow, Jam. 4.13, 14, 15. Front capillata post
est occasio ^io calva.
as wordly Tradesmen are apt to do, and be sure you take God along with you,
whom they forget and leave behind: take time by the Fore-lock, for its bald
behind, and you can get no hold of it: You little know what one Big-bellyed day
may bring forth, it may produce a birth and burden of more duty, difficulty, or
misery than hitherto you have met with: Time-redemption is an act of great
discretion, but Time-neglect brings thousands of souls to a despairing,
Had-I-wist: the Apostle said, above a thousand years ago, the time is short,
much more may we say so, since the ship is drawn so much nearer the Harbor, 1
Cor. 7.29. (...) tempus contractum Met. a velis contractis:
the Sails are contracted, and the end of all this is at hand; the world grows
old and naught, your own days cannot be long, it may be this night thy soul
may be required, and leave thy Body as a stinking carcass, O then a treasure
for another world will stand you in infinite stead! O consider often, that this
time, this span-long life is the Seminary of Eternity, the preludium of an
everlasting state, and therefore lavish not away your time, cast it not at your
heels in a brutish prodigality, you will have time little enough when you come
to dye: A rich Gallant at death cried out bitterly, call time again, O call
time again: another, would offer a thousand pounds to purchase a day. But alas,
time cannot be valued with the vastest sums of money: one misspent day cannot
be recalled with the gold of Ophir, that is but dross where time comes, and time
and chance is upon the whole Creation: Eccl. 9.11.
You have but your appointed time, and all your times are in the hands of God,
and if once lost, they are lost for ever, the dead and damned can say, Job
28.22.
we have only heard the fame thereof with our ears, but alas are past the
hopes of time-enjoyment or improvement: when your glass is once run, and your
Sun set there is no more working or gathering time in order to Eternity: and
there whatsoever your hand finds to do, do it with all your might, for there is
no work nor device -- in the grave whither you go, Eccl. 9.10. Be not you like
those silly Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, because they know not their
time, v. 12. Nulla dies sine linea:
but ply the Oars while you have time: let no day pass without drawing some
line toward your great Center: You that are Christians had need be good
Time-students, Time-Merchants, the holiest men have been most careful of Time,
and they that have been the most fearful to lose an inch of time have been best
treasured. See Clarks Lives of Fathers.
Read Histories and observe Experiments, in all you will find men of the choicest
spirits have been most diligent Time-improvers, and some have accounted that
day lost whereupon they have not done some good with either Tongue, or Purse,
or Pen: yea, Heathens have bewailed that day as spent in vain, wherein they
have not done some memorable action: How much more ought Christians to lament
the loss of Time? I heard an eminent Minister say, He could eat the flesh off
his arm in indignation against himself for his lost hours: and truly, the
most of us are Epimethiuses, after-witted, we lose time and then smart for our
loss, it is to our cost: Oculos incipit aperire moriendo quo^ clausos habuit
vivendo. Plin.
We are too like the Mole, of which Naturalists say, it begins to see at death,
we open our eyes when they must be shut: let us therefore improve Time while we
have it, and study profitable things, and lay up every day something, so shall
we find Soul-riches increase, according to that Proverb, many littles make a
mickle: when God offers Grace do not put him off, for delay will be interpreted
a denial. An ancient Christian, now with God, advised me, to be either like
Christ, or Mary: the first was always doing good, the latter still receiving
good: were you and I constantly thus employed, our treasure would soon be
raised to a large proportion, and we should be sooner ripe for Glory

9. Gather something out of every thing: that man is likely to be rich that
will not let a good bargain pass, but lay hold on it, and lay up any thing
that he can get a penie by: A wise Tradesman despises not little things, for
multiplication of small numbers amounts to a great sum: they that wilfully
contemn the smallest good, will in time look upon the greatest as contemptible:
Who say, Herbert.
I care not, those I give for lost:
And to instruct them will not quit the cost,
Hence it is that Christ says, Gather up the fragments that nothing be lost:
Thus should you make a collection of the least things that others cast away;
get something out of every word, Rod, or work of Providence, in a way of favor
or displeasure; Receive not the grace of God in vain, hinder not your own
proficiency by carelessness or inadvertencie; Isa. 48.17.
be you diligent, and God will teach you to profit: see what you can make of
every thing you meet with: A wise Physician can tell you the virtue of every
simple, and can extract some good out of those Herbs, that an ignorant person
casts away, as useless weeds: Prove. 10.14. It Is said, wise Men lay up
knowledge, i. e. They consider all objects occurents, how they may hereafter
stand them in stead, what use may be made thereof, and so gather from them a
profitable inference, and store that up for future times: thus do you, if you
would lay up a treasure, be not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord
is, by all that your eyes behold, or ears hear: Learn to make comments upon
all the Creatures, suck sweetness out of every flower, not for sensual delight,
but spiritual profit. Let not so much as a good or bad report concerning your
selves or others sound in your ears, without special observation and
improvement: what ever your trade or calling be, you may and must spiritualize
it for your souls good; there is never a profitable science, says one, but it
leads to the knowledge of God, or of our selves, so that we, need not be to
seek for a treasure, if we have hearts to improve objects of sense: it was a
good design in the reverend Dr. Hall, and discovered an honest fancy in
improving vacant hours, and visible objects in his occasional meditations: go
you and do likewise, by which blessed art of heavenly Chimistry you may both
please your fancy, and profit your hearts, use your wits, and exercise grace,
and that is the way to increase it: the truth is, there is nothing, but may do us
good, if we have good hearts, the sins of others may be of great use to us, to
consider our standing, and take heed lest we fall: the afflictions of others
will work our hearts to sympathy, prayer, and charity: the indignities we suffer
will awaken, quicken and strengthen us, if our hearts be honest in observing and
improving them: there is not a Minister that we hear preach, but we may get good
by what he says, Clark on his life.
reverend Mr. Hildersham often said, he never heard any godly Minister preach,
though but of weak parts, but he got some benefit by him: Church Porch. Page 15.
Divine Herbert says -- -- Do not grudge
To pick out treasures from an earthen Pot;
The worst speak something good; if all want sense,
God takes a text, and preaches patience.


But above all, get some thing out of every Chapter you read, dig deep into
these golden mines, and you shall be rich: digested Scripture is the matter of
regular prayers, holy discourses, and heavenly meditations; only run not
cursorily over them, but let your thoughts dwell upon them, and extract some
marrow and quintessence out of them: we usually read Scriptures, as Travelers
go over Mountains, that are barren on the surface, but dug into, they afford
precious minerals: so the words and syllables of Gods book it self, slightly
considered, have no great efficacy, but the sense and purport thereof,
contains spirit and life to the intelligent and observant Reader: Joh. 6.63.
Adoro scripturae plenitudinem Tertul.
There is such a depth in Scripture, that if you read the same place an hundred
times over, yet still you may get fresh notions, and impressions from it: O
therefore learn to read, understand, and improve the word of God, this will help
you to a treasure, truths are fed by Scripture-knowledge, and holiness is the
counter-pain of Scripture-precepts, graces are the accomplishment of
Scripture-promises, and if your comforts and experiences be not suitable to the
word, Isai. 8.20.
it is because you have no light in you.

10. Maintain communion of Saints: Oh forsake not the assembling of your selves
together, keep up this sweet good fellowship both in private conferences, and
in public Ordinances: for the first, you must observe and obey the wise Man's
council, through the Book of Proverbs, to converse with the wise: David
professes himself to be a companion of those that fear God, and he, though a
great King, esteems the Saints more excellent, than all his courageous
worthies, or grave Senators, and therefore professes that all his delight was
in them, Psalm. 16.3. But it is not enough to be in good company, but you must
improve it, by hearing and asking questions: that is a notable passage in Prove.
20.5. Council in the heart of a Man is like deep Waters, but a Man of
understanding will draw it out; Profound Men are apt to be silent, -- Doubts
well raised do lock,
Herb. Church Porch. page 11.
The speaker to thee, and preserve thy stock.
therefore must be pumped by profitable questions, and it is an evidence of
knowledge to propound an useful question seasonably, as well as to answer it
solidly: it is our great loss we can make no better use of one another:
un-improved society is the bane of Christian converse: for when we meet one
another, and trifle away time without advantage, it increases our guilt, and
discourageth our hearts, for we are apt to say, we will meet no more, because
our coming together, is for the worse, and not for the better, for many times
our spirits are imbittered by exasperating contentions: But O sirs, when you
meet together purposely, or accidentally, improve your time in some holy
discourses, spend not all your time about news or worldly affairs, but set
afoot some religious talk; talk sometimes as Christians, as well as Men and
Chap-men: let some body begin and break the Ice: many are apt enough to cast
down the bone of contention, do you present the marrow of religion, that you
may edify one another: Sit not together as mutes, or as Men of the World,
discoursing about matters of state or trading, or of the weather, or your ages,
Genesis 47.
which was Pharaoh's question to Jacob, and that to his Sons of the like
import: But if there be ever a wise Man among you, fetch some spark from
Heaven, and throw it amonst your companions, that every one may bring his stick
to the fire, and by the bellows of mutual love, it may be raised to a flame,
that thereby your hearts may be warmed, and even burn within you, as the two
traveling Disciples by Christ's opening to them the Scriptures: And then Record
and lay up what you have got in profitable conversings: thus was the Book of
Proverbs collected, and hereby you might fill Books and memories with useful
observations: yet take this caution, let not your end be to hear stories,
notions, nor yet only polemical discourses, to furnish your heads with
arguments for all subjects and companies, but let your principal end be to get
your hearts bettered, grace strengthened, lusts weakened, lives reformed,
consciences resolved: Oh the advantage you may have by Christian-society! you
may get good by others, do good to others, yea observe it, your profitable
discourses with others will reflect upon your selves with advantage: Scholars
find that conference rubs up their memories, revives their reading, and in a
sort, gives them the mastery over their notions, and imprints them deeper
within them, that were almost obliterated: hence a famous Scholar did return
many thanks, to one that was many degrees below him, for affording him so fair
an opportunity of private discourses: and a Jewish Doctor could say, he had
learned much from his Masters, more from his equals, Docendo didici.
but most of all from his Scholars, hence their Proverb, I have learned by
teaching: experience does tell us that having to do in others doubts,
temptations, desertions, corruptions, directs us how to deal in our own cases:
therefore I advise you, be not shie in helping the weak, because thereby you do
a double courtesy, to your selves and to others, by one act or motion of your
lips feeding others, and digesting your own meat: Besides, this Christian
communion being Gods institution, is seconded with his benediction, and
gracious acceptance: See Ephesians. 4.15, 16. (...)
the members of Christ's mystical body, speaking the truth in love, or truthing
it in love, as the word imports, do grow up into him in all things, even Christ
the head, and so that which is lacking in one joint, is made up by the
usefulness of another: and for Gods acceptance of the Saints holy conference,
see that famous Text in Mal. 3.16. But that which I am urging is, the advantage
that your souls will have by it, one live Coal laid to a dead one, kindles it, a
ripe Grape put to a green one, ripens it: company is of an assimilating nature,
and grace, like fire, will beget its like, and it is an advantage to trade with
rich Merchants in precious commodities, for then we shall get well stocked with
riches, So it is here, yea observe it, when a company of Christians meet
together for spiritual purposes, Jesus Christ makes one more, and he is in
stead of many more, he walks from peron to person, and enquires what they want,
and Joseph-like, richly fills the Sacks of their souls with a transcendent
treasure. Where Christ keeps house, there is nothing wanting, he that girded
himself to serve his Disciples will wait to be gracious, and satisfy hungry
souls: Christ walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, and feeds the
Lamps of the Sanctuary with Oil: go forth therefore, poor soul, by the
footsteps of the Flock, Cant. 1.8.
and feed the Kids, besides the Shepherds tents; Be found in the communion of
Saints, be not content to have that Article in your Creed, but let it be in
your practice; wait on God in public. Ordinances, every work there will help to
fill your souls; prayer, reading, singing Psalms, the word preached, the
Sacraments administered, you may get good by Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
faithfully used, believinglie improved, some apply those two Metaphors in
Cant. 7.2. To these two seals of the Covenant, thy Navel is like a round
goblet, Umbilicus venarum nodus et coitus, centrum corporis.
which wants not liquor; that imports Baptism, because, as the Navel
upholds, and knits together, the Liver Midriff, Bladder, and receives by it all
the nourishment the Infant has from the Mother in the Womb, so the feeble
members of the Church are united to Christ, and supplied with food by baptism,
rightly improved, which is a full goblet, crowned with plenty and comfort; the
latter is the Lords Supper, which is thus expressed, thy belly is like an heap
of wheat, set about with Lillies: the belly is the bodies storehouse, so is
this blessed Sacrament, sending out to all the members of this mistical body,
a due proportion of strength and nourishment, and this affords the finest
purest wheat to every lilly-Saint, and milk-white soul that feeds on Christ by
faith: And therefore let every soul be found in the use of these holy
Ordinances that would have a treasure of grace, yet observe this caution, that
though the Sacraments be necessary, and the great means of spiritual life, yet
not in that manner and respect, as food is to a natural life, Hoo^er Eccles.
Poli^y. Book 5. Par. 57. page 229.
because they contain in themselves no vital force or efficacy; they are (says
a reverend Author) not physical but moral instruments of salvation. -- all
receive not the grace of God, which receive the Sacraments of his grace,
neither is it ordinarily his will to bestow the grace of Sacraments on any, Hugo
de Sacramentis lib. 1. cap. 3.4. Si^ergo vasa sunt spiritualis gratiae
Sacramenta, non ex suo sanant, quia vasa aegrotum non curant, sed medicina.
but by the Sacraments, -- a little after, he says, they are moral
instruments, the use whereof is in our hands, the effect in his, for the use we
have his express commandment, for the effect his conditional promise, and we
may expect his performance of the promise upon our obedience to his command, --
he quoteth Hugo comparing the Sacraments to a Vessel, and the grace therein to
the medicine therein exhibited, and we should apply the spiritual good therein
to our distempered spirits: but I have been too large on this head. I shall shut
up this piece of the Directory for obtaining a treasure, Primo idoneus esse non
potest ad martyrium, qui ab Ecclesia non armatur ad praelium: et men's deficit,
quam, non accepta Eucharistia erigit, et accendit: Cyp. Epist. act Cornel. lib.
1. Epis. 2. P. 41.
with an expression of Cyprians, he cannot be fit for Martyrdom, that is not
armed by the Church to the conf^ict, and that mind faints, which is not erected
and inflamed by receiving the Eucharist, or Lord's Supper: so the communion of
Saints in that choice Ordinance, is a fortifying and furnishing Exercise.

CHAP. XIII. What truths a Christian is to treasure up.
THe second head of Directions, is to Descend more particularly to give some
instructions, what the Christian is to treasure up. In opening the Doctrine I
told you, he is to treasure up these four rich commodities, wherewith he may
furnish his inward-man: Viz. 1. Truths. 2. Graces. 3. Experiences. 4. Comforts.
I shall resume a discourse of these, and give you a particular account of
something in all these, wherewith the bosom of a Christian is to be filled and
furnished.

1. For the first, A Christian is to store up all truths, the filings of gold
are precious, the least star in the Firmament has some influence, so all
truths have their peculiar preciousness and efficacy: Truth is a sacred
Depositum which God has committed into the hands of Ministers and People,
(...) 2 Timothy 1.14. 1 Timothy 6.20. Mat. 5.19.
which must not be lost at any hand, for all the world cannot give a price
proportionable to the least truth: for to this end was Christ born, yea, and
shed his dearest blood, even to bear witness to the truth, and to purchase the
publication of it: It Is very dangerous to be careless of lesser truths, for
there is nothing superfluous in the sacred Canon, Jam. 2.10.
and things comparativelie little may be great in their sphere, season, and
consequences, and it is sad to break the golden chain of truths: yet we are
especially to treasure up fundamental and seasonable truths; Doctrines that we
are to venture our souls upon, and such as we may have a peculiar use of,
truths suitable to the day we live in: hence it is that the Apostle would have
Believers established in the present truth, 2 Pet. 1.12. i.e. Say some, the
Doctrine of the Gospel which was at this time newly revealed: Or else (as
others interpret it) such truths as are most opposed, and contradicted: For we
find that every Church, and Age has its present errors, whereby false
Teachers seek to undermine the Truth, and seduce the professors of it,
therefore should every soul be well stored with such truths as may antidote him
against present prevailing corruptions in Principle or Practice,

There are four sorts of divine Truths that I would council all Christians to
get their heads and hearts well stockt with, which are these: Viz. 1. Doctrinal
Truths. 2. Disciplinary Truths. 3. Practical Truths. 4. Experimental Truths.


1. Doctrinal Truths, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words. This word
[(...)] signifies a Model or Platform, a mould or frame of words, or things,
methodically disposed, as Printers set and compose their Characters or Letters
in a Table: thus Gospel-doctrine is the Mould, and Hearers are as the metal
which takes the Idea and impression that into which it is cast: Romans 6.17.
A Christian is to get the body of Divinite incorporated within him: it is not
below the most able, knowing, and judicious person to read, yea and commit to
memoric Catechisms, and Systems of Divinity. I beseech you lay this good
Doctrinal foundation, and you will find infinite advantage by it, through-the
whole course of life; this will teach you to discourse distinctly, hear
profitablie, and read Scriptures, and good books with judgment, being able to
try all things, and reduce every thing to its proper place: Take a taste and
touch of this sort of truths in these general Heads, 1. That the holy
Scriptures are of divine Authority. 2. That Gods word is the only complete
Supreme Judge of all controversies: 3. That God is an infinite, simple, and
immutable Spirit. 4. That there are three glorious Persons in the unity of the
Godhead. 5. That all things depends upon Gods eternal Decrees: 6. That man was
created in perfect holiness and happiness. 7. That all mankind is polluted and
ruined by Adams Apostasy. 8. That Christ, God-man is the only Mediator betwixt
God and man: 9. That Christ by doing, enduring, dying, has satisfied Justice,
and justified sinners: 10. That such as sincerely repent and believe, are
justified and accepted: 11. That Baptism and the Lords Supper, are seals of
the Covenant of Grace: 12. That there shall be a general Resurrection and Day
of Judgment.


2. Disciplinary truths, these in their kind and sphere are to be stored up,
and contended for: it is true, these are not so fully laid down in Scripture,
nor is there so much stress laid thereupon, as on Doctrinal truths, at least as
to every Punctilio relating to circumstantials, which has occasioned many hot
disputes among the strictest Christians: yet withal, the essentials of
Discipline are of great use and in a sort necessary, if not to the being, yet
to the well-being of the Church; Quamvis enim non sit nota simpliciter
essentialis and reciproca, scil. ecclesiae (sicut neque reliquae duae, i.e.
verbum and Sacramenta) ad completum tamen ecclesiae statum necessario debet
edesse: Ames Medul. lib. 1. cap. 37.
our Lord Jesus is faithful in his House, and has not left every thing to
humane prudence, though possibly something may be said for a prudential
application of general Rules to particular Cases: it is lost labor to enter
into Controversies here, much precious time and pains have been wasted herein,
yet Mr. Hooker acknowledges, that although there be no necessity it should
prescribe any one particular form of Church government, yet touching the manner
of governing in general, the Precepts which the Scripture sets down are not
few: and the examples many which it proposes, for all Church Governors, even
in particularities to follow: yea, that those things, Hookers Eccl. polit. Book
3d. part 4. fol. 69.
finally, which are of principal weight in the very particular form of Church
polity, are in the self-same Scriptures contained: So he^ Neither are these
truths to be slighted, but we are to be attentive to them, and observant and
retentive of them: hence when the Gospel Church is described. God says, Ezekiel.
40.4. Behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart
upon all that I shall show thee: Under correction, I conceive such disciplinary
truths as these are not obscurely delivered by God; As, 1. That upon Christ's
shoulders lies the government of his Church. 2. That Scripture-Precepts and
Presidents, are are the rule of Church-administrations: 3. That Church Officers
are to be duly qualified and called to their work: 4. That Christ's own
Officers have power to dispense Word and Censures: 5. That holy things are for
holy men, Ordinances must be kept from pollution: 6. That visible, credible
Profession is the ground of Church Communion: 7. That Admonition must precede
Rejection and Excommunication: 8. That Heretical Persons, and disorderly
walkers are to be censured: 9. That evidence of Repentance pleads for
re-admittance: 10. That Magistrates duty is to cherish, defend, and propogate
the Church, Ministers to oversee, and Members to watch over, and admonish one
another: 11. That at least there may be Associations of Churches by their
Officers, for mutual communion and consultation: 12. That Synods and Councels
consulting about Church-affaires, are but companies of men subject to error,
are not to have dominion over men's faith, or Lord it over consciences, etc.


3. A third sort of truths to be stored up are practical truths, fundamental
truths of practical concernment, are in a sort the life of Religion. Our
Religion is not a Notion, Christianity lies much in the Heart and Life: the
young Candidate's question in the Gospel, Mark 10.17.
had mainly reference to practice; Good Master, says he, what shall I do that
I may inherit eternal life? Socrates is accounted the wisest man, because he
applied his studies and knowledge to the moral part, the squaring and ordering
of men's Lives: Says Dr. Hammond, and quotes an ancient saying, Practical
Cat^ch. p. 2.
The end of Christian Philosophy is to make them better, not more learned, to
edify, not to instruct: The truth is, conscientious Practice is both the end
of Knowledge, and the means of further knowledge; If we live up to his Will
known, we shall know more of his Will that is to be done: if we give up our
selves to truth, we shall be made free by truth. Truths of a practical import,
Joh. 7.17.
to deliver the soul from the bondage of sin, and deliver up the soul into the
liberty of the Sons God, and makes him account Gods service perfect freedom:
Some truths are to be believed, others to be lived upon, others to be lived up
to, and so are more practical: such as these;

1. That all creatures are made for the glory of God. 2. That the covenant of
Works cannot be kept by any mere man since the fall. 3. That true faith closes
wholly with a whole Christ. 4. That none can expect pardon without a sincere
Gospel-repentance. 5. That good works are the fruits, and evidences of a lively
faith. 6. That those are only good works that have a right root, rule and end.
7. That man's best duties are imperfect, and merit no good at Gods hands. 8.
That the moral Law is a Christians rule of obedience. 9. That God alone is to
be worshipped, and that according to his Will. 10. That the observation of a
Sabbath is a moral and perpetual Duty. 11. That Magistrates are to be honored,
and their lawful commands obeyed. 12. That every man is to attend upon and
act, by virtue of his general or particular Calling.
4. Sort of truths to be hoarded up, are experimental truths, which are vital,
and vivifical, that beget and maintain good blood (as it were) in the soul:
these are the sweetest solace to a sound Believer, these reach and teach the
very heart, bow the will, ravish the Affections, awaken the Conscience, and
influence the whole conversation, the delightful rolling of these divine truths
in the mind, help the soul to walk in the sweetest Paradise of Contemplation;
these mysterious marrowie truths are like that Song that none could learn but
the hundred and forty and four thousand that are redeemed from the earth. Rev.
14.4. Or like that new Name which no man knows, saving he that receives it,
Rev. 2.17. Such truths are better felt then spoken sooner experienced then
expressed, indeed like those [(...)] unutterable words that Paul heard in
Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4. Such truths as are hid from the wise and prudent, but
revealed them unto babes, Matthew. 11.25. This is a right knowing of the truth as
it is in Jesus, a lying under the power and impression of divine Revelations,
without this Experience, Knowledge is a cold, Theologia est scientia affectiva,
non speculativa. Gerson.
dull, Moonlight Speculation, without the clear quickening heat of the Sun of
Righteousness; nay, the choicest truths of the Gospel cannot be discerned but
by Experience. Divinity is not a speculative, but affective knowledge:
Treasure up such truths as these.

1. That by nature we are averse to good, and prone to evil. 2. That we have no
free will to saving good, but are passives in conversion. 3. That regeneration
is a through change of the whole man, in heart and life. 4. That faith and
repentance are the gifts of Gods free grace. 5. That a sinner is justified only
by Christ's merits imputed, not by works. 6. That conformity to God is an
inseparable companion of communion with God. 7. That every child of God has
the spirit of adoption, to help to pray. 8. That the best Saints in this life
are sanctified but in part. 9. That a Christians best and bravest life is a
life of faith. 10. That sincere Saints may be assured of the truth of grace,
and title to glory. 11. That a justified person cannot totally and finally fall
away. 12. That some spiritual good is exhibited in, and conveyed through the
seals of the covenant.
Such precious truths as these, Christians, you are to gather, and seal them up
among your treasures, and you will find that such a treasure will furnish your
minds with saving knowledge, fortify your hearts against errors and
oppositions, satisfy your spirits in all doubts, and objections; teach you to
profit by Gods verbal and real dispensations, and prepare you for fiery trials,
and hottest persecutions: you cannot stand for truths you know not, and you will
not stand for those truths that you are not for, and look not upon as your
treasure: you must hold fast what you have received, and therefore must you
receive that you may retain, and lay up that you may live up to, and live upon
them in an evil day: as a Minister, so a member of the Church must hold fast
the faithful word, as he has been taught -- Titus 1.9. He must maintain truth
with all his might, struggle and contend for it, fight and die in the defense
of it, truth and our souls must be married, and never divorced, there are
truths that we may venture our souls upon, and must venture our lives for:
that is an Atheistical speech of some, that the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days
died o'th pet, and were too prodigal of their blood, and that God requires no
man to be cruel to himself for his sake: but the Saints have otherwise learned
Christ, than to deny him, or his truths before men, lest they be denied by him
another day: Aliter amare non didici.
they have not otherwise learned to love him than to lay down their lives for
him, if he call them to it: and thus by being overcome they do overcome, as
their Savior before them: and as it is on record, Rev. 12.11. They overcame by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not
their lives unto the death; it is the duty of every Christian to lay up such
truths in the close Cabinet of his heart, as he may live and die by and adhere
closely and constantly unto: we must do by truths, as Caesar by his books,
who being to swim through a River to escape the fury of his enemies, Major
fuit cura libellorum, quam purpura,
carried his books above water with his hand, but lost his robe, so though we
should be put to swim through a Sea of trouble in following the Lamb, yet must
we keep the Lords Depositum, though we should lose our Garments of earthly
emjoyments, yea our lives themselves, rather than part with the sacred and
saving truths of God contained in this blessed book of books, the holy
Scriptures, which are to be our treasures: hence says the wise man, P^o. 4.13.
take fast hold of instruction; let her not go, keep her, for she is thy life:
hence some good souls have been willing to be burnt themselves, rather than
willingly to burn their Bibles, and have been rackt in pieces, rather than
suffer themselves to be rent from truth: it is our great duty to hold fast,
and hold forth the word of truth, to be witnesses to the truth activelie, and
for the truth passivelie, and if we maintain it, it shall maintain us, Revel.
3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee
from the hour of temptation -- The word of his patience may be taken either
effectivelie, for such a word as works a quiet, composed, submissive frame of
spirit, or eventuallie, for that word that may put a man upon the exercise of
patience, so that he may suffer great hardships for it, and lay down his life,
as a sacrifice on the behalf of it, yet must not a Christian flinch back, but
in the strength of God run the greatest hazard for approved experienced truths
of God: I know there is a difference in truths, and the value we are to set
upon them, as in coins, says a reverend Divine, See D. Halls Peacemaker,
sect 1. P. 1. read it thorough.
whereof one piece is a farthing another no less than a pound; only take this
rule in general, despise not the meanest truth, prove all things by
Scripture-rules, lay up and hold fast what is consonant thereunto, but above
all lay the greatest stress upon fundamental points of Religion, and be not
beat from your hold, through fear or favor.

So much for treasuring up Scripture-truths.

CHAP. XIV. What sort of Graces the Christian is to treasure up.
THe second head of precious commodities that a Christians breast is to be
stored with, is, Divine graces, every grace is of vast worth, and excellent
use, yea the least degree of sincere grace is worth a Mine of Gold, or a
Princes Crown and Kingdom, it is said of the grace of faith, that the trial of
it (or faith tried in the furnace of affliction) is much more precious than
gold, that perishes -- 1 Pet. 1.7. None can set a right estimate upon a grain
of true grace, which is no other than the offspring of Heaven, the purchase of
Christ's blood, and the blessed fruit of the spirit of grace: it is part of the
divine nature, the Image of God, and seed of immortality, grace is the
muniment and ornament of the soul, it is the only emolument and accomplishment
of a Christian; let the World be hurryed to gather great estates, filling their
houses with goods, their barns with grain, and bags with gold, let the good
soul get filled with the fruits of righteousness, the graces of the spirit.

There are four sorts of graces, that I shall advise all Christians in a special
manner to treasure up in their hearts.

Which are these 1. Directing graces 2. Subjecting graces 3. Profiting graces
4. Persevering graces


I. The believing soul is to lay up, with diligence, directing, conducting,
resolving, and satisfying graces, that is, abundance of knowledge, wisdom,
prudence, and judgment, that he may have light and sight, about the things of
God: Days are coming, Mat. 10.1^
when Christians may need the wisdom of the Serpent, as well as the innocence
of the Dove: a Christian in his journey is often puzzled with various paths, and
intricate Maeanders, O how much worth is a spirit of understanding, whereby we
may choose the good, and refuse the bad, and keep the straight road to Heaven?
hence the Apostle prays for his Philippians, that their love might abound more
and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, that they might approve things that
are excellent, Phil. 1.9, 10. The means to keep us from failing about [(...)]
things indifferent, is to have a solid apprehension concerning these [(...)]
things that are excellent, or differenced from others as the word imports, i.e.
those things that tend to sincerity and innocence of life, therefore he adds,
that ye may be sincere, and without offense til the day of Christ, that is the
best policy that helps on piety, a spirit of discerning is useful to exact
walking, an enlightened conscience helps the soul to be without offense: Ephesians.
5.15. Eccl. 2.14.
no man can walk circumspectly, but he that has his eyes in his head; he that
walks in darkness with a blind eye knows not whether he goes; the eye of the
mind is the light and guide of the will and affections, and if that be blind,
those blind faculties fall into the ditch of error, terror, apostacy and
misery: the Christians eyes must be full of light, we cannot have too much
knowledge if it be sanctified, in one act of Religion, a Christian is to look
many ways, inwards at his principle, upwards, to the pleasing of God, forwards
at the reward, and his end, down-wards at the profit of men, etc. There are
many eyes upon us, and our eyes must be upon many, some long to see our
well-doing, others watch for our halting, we had need get wisdom to carry
usefullie toward the good, and wisely toward those that are without: there is
great necessity of true solid knowledge, to discern our own duty and exercise
charity, to mind our own business, and yet to do good offices to Saints, and
sinners, and to keep within our place and station: we shall find some
difficulty so to carry our selves as not to give offense carelessly, or to take
offense causelessly: we should learn to see with our own eyes, and not be led by
multitudes, or wise, or learned; or godly: Romans 16.19.
Oh what a blessed thing is it to be wise unto that which is good and simple
concerning evil? with how much more ease may a Christian go through his
Christian course with, than without, Eccl. 10.10. Chap. 7.19. Chap. 2.13.
a solid knowledge? for wisdom is profitable to direct: yea it strengthens
the wise more than weapons of war: therefore it excels folly as far as light
excels darkness: practical wisdom is infinitely beyond speculative, hence
says Solomon, the wisdom of the prudent, is to understand his way, Prove.
14.8. this treasure of directing graces is practical, it helps the tongue to
answer discreetly, the feet to walk exactly, the hands to work completely, to
spend no time or pains in by-ways, or by-blows: and it also concerns a man's
self it does not range abroad, and forget home, the greatest Politician is a
very fool that cannot order his own affairs with discretion, he that is not
wise for himself is not wise at all, God will accept, and men will praise that
man that does well to himself: Paul prays for the Saints at Coloss, that they
might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, Quicunque ad h^nc scopum non dirigunt studia sua, fieri potest
ut multum su^n^ a^ laborent, sed nihil quam vagantur per ambages nullo
profectu. Calv. in loc. Col. 1.10.
Col. 1.9. For what end? why not to talk, but to walk worthy of the Lord, verse.
10. That Is the only knowledge that ends in holy practice: soul-profiting is the
end of spiritual understanding: they that aim not at this end, and by their
studies are not furthered in this work, may have the repute of learned men, but
shall never pass for judicious Christians.

Oh sirs, take much pains to lay up these graces that may direct you;
certainly there is a vast difference betwixt a Christian of a solid judgment,
and another of a weak head, though both sincere, the one knows duty, and lawful
liberty, the others conscience is woefully perplexed with nice and needless
scruples, which render him a burden to himself, and offense to others, and
expose him to a World of temptations: An unsettled soul, that yet is wel-meaning
but ignorant, is a Theater upon which Satan and seducers do act dreadful
Tragedies: 2 Pet. 3.16 Jam. 1.8. Ephesians. 4.14.
it is unstable souls that wrest and pervert the Scriptures, that are only
constant in inconstancy, and are tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine:
Alas, these receive a new impression by every Sermon or Company, and as quickly
part with, as they speedily close with a new notion, so that you cannot tell
where to find them: But now a sober solid, wel-taught Christian has fixed the
Staff, and you may know where to find him, and he knows where to find his
own Principles, he moves always upon the solid Axle-tree of Scripture-truths
and Duties, and by the help of this Sun can ordinarily find his way in the
dark mists of Error, and by the hand of the Spirit he is led through the dark
entry and narrow passage of Duty to rest and satisfaction: hence it is said,
that a spiritual man judges all things. 1 Cor. 2.15.
i.e. that are doubtful, and is by this stock of directing graces assisted to
behave himself wisely in a perfect way: Psalm 101.2.

2. Treasure up subjecting graces, that may help you to bear Gods will, and
freely to submit to his dispose: Such as patience, humility, self-denial,
weanedness from the world, heavenly-mindednesse, and that Rare Jewel of
Christian contentment in all conditions: Oh what a happy soul is that to which
nothing can come amiss, that is furnished for every storm? Paul was a brave
Scholar in this suffering School, Phil. 4.11, 12. he had learned in all estates
to be content: Its an hard task, and long Trade, but what cannot grace
undertake and overcome, through the help of assisting grace? The truth is, a
treasured Christian may say with David, Psalm. 26.1^.
My foot stands in an even place, and so is stayed for all assays, as it is in
Meeter: come what can come, the gracious soul will light upon his feet, and
stand upright, and not wrench his foot by turning aside into crooked ways: as
a good man lies square to every command of God, so he does righteousness at all
times: Wicked men's design is to push away the feet of the godly from their
standing in holy paths and outward comforts, Job 30.12.
therefore must they make strait paths for their feet, lest that which is lame
be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.13. i. e. Get a principle of health and
rectitude in opposition to that way-ward and wandering disposition of heart that
is naturally in all men, that you may not turn aside to the right hand nor to
the left, but hasten with a right foot in a straight course to the goal of
Glory: Grace strengthens the souls joints and helps against halting, Courage
and holy resolution is a shooing of the Saints feet that they may walk steadily
in slippery places: the whole Armor of God, even the precious stock of
Christian graces will fortify the believing soul against the sharpest
Encounters: Above all preparative for sufferings, there is none does so bow the
spirit to bear burdens, subject the heart to the Lords pleasure, help the soul
to wait his leisure, and secure from danger, so much as that Heart-quieting
grace of Faith: Psalm. 125.1. Pro. 18.10.
this is the way to strength and safety, a believing soul is fit for any
condition, and will live by his Faith when all things fail, Invictus ad labores,
fortis ad pericula, rigidus adversus vol^ptates, d^r^ adversus illec^bras: Ambr.
nothing can daunt him, all things are easy: He is, says an Ancient,
invincible in labors, strong for dangers, rigid against pleasures, hardened
against the alluring baits of the world: Oh the excellency and necessity of
Faith, courage, and a Christian magnanimity, a believing soul moves in an
higher Orb than other Saints, as one says, and leads up the van of the Militia
of Heaven: Faith sets the soul as an impregnable Rock in the midst of the Sea,
and splits the waves of men's malicious threats and hot revenge, so that it can
say, as David, in God have I put my trust, I will not fear what flesh, what man
can do unto me, Psalm 56.4, 11. Amongst other subjecting graces be sure you lay
up a good treasure of that incomparable grace of meekness, which captivates
the understanding to the obedience of Faith, and moderates the will to a due
submission to the Lords dispose, and silenceth the lips against all murmuring
expostulations: this precious grace takes all well that God does, See Meekness
largely discussed in Dr. Hamonds Pract. Catec. p. 107. to 118.
this precious grace take all well that God does, and does not rage against the
Instruments, it yields active or passive obedience to Superiors with
cheerfulness, though it dares not yield up its judgment to the guidance of any
mortal man, or Church on earth, yet it meekly lies under the censures and
punishments of men, committing all to him that judges righteously, as Christ
did, 1 Pet. 2.23. These and such like suffering graces, and dispositions must
Christians store up, that they may suffer according to the will of God, both
for cause and call, and carriage in the sharpest conflicts they may meet with
upon earth: The truth is, Sirs, You little know what lies betwixt you and the
grave, you have not yet resisted unto blood, but you may: you little know what
Religion may cost you, you may go through a long Vale of the shadow of death,
to death, and fight with beasts at Ephesus, Luke 14.26. to 34.
and then mount up in a fiery Chariot to Heaven: Sit down then and reckon the
charges in building the Tower of Religion, and whether you have armor of proof
to carry you through an Army of dangers and difficulties: Luke 14.26. to 34.
Stock your selves for a storm, frame your backs for a burden, melt your wills
into Gods Will, as you desire to hold out against fainting and despair, and as
you desire to heat that blessed Euge, and sweet Encomium, from Jesus Christ, in
Revel. 2.3-7 -- And have born, and have patience, and for my Names-sake have
labored, and have not fainted -- to him that overcomes I will give to eat of
the tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

3. Endeavor to treasure up profiting graces, I mean such as will help you both
in doing and receiving good: For the first, lay up such graces as will render
you serviceable in your places, Romans 14.19. -- Let us follow after the things
which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another, such as
brotherly-love, or kindness, charity, meekness, forbearance, gentleness,
condescension, mutual Sympathy, compassion to souls, and zeal for Gods
glory, a public Spirit, and an heart to lament the sins and sufferings of the
Church; it is a blessed thing to be of pu^lick use, it adds luster to what is
truly good to be diffusive, and communicative. Some Christians have those
useful gifts and graces, that others (though truly good) may want: the more
good you have, the more good you may do; the Administration of the Spirit is
given to eve-man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. God lays in, that we may lay
out, and we are to lay up great treasures on purpose that we may do the more
good: that is an excellent expression of Luthers, Omnia libera per fidem, omnia
serva per charitatem, Luth.
that all things are made free by Faith, and all things are made serviceable by
charity or love; It is the property and pleasure of a good soul to be doing
good: Living Springs send forth streams of water, dead Pits must have all that
they afford drawn out with Buckets; the fuller a gracious soul is, the more
freely will he communicate: there is as much comfort in doing, as in receiving
good: you must be fitted for both, therefore pray for, and put on (as the Elect
of God) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, Col. 3.12, 13. that you may be disposed to glorify God, edify
others, and serve your generations according to the will of God, and at last
give a good account of your Talents and Stewardship: Blessed is the man that
has his Quiver full of these blessed shafts, Boxes full of Cordial Receipts,
whereby he may both wound sinners by admonition, and heal them by the sweet
words of consolation. And then 2. You had need treasure up profiting graces, i.
e. such as will help you to get good to your own souls by all Gods dealings
with you: Mix the Word and Rod with Faith, receive all with meekness, bring
forth fruit with patience: All that God does is for our profit, even tokens of
his anger is for our advantage, Corrections are for our instruction, Heb.
12.6-10.
partaking of his holiness is the peaceable fruit of righteousness that God
aims at in all our troubles: All things would work together for our good, if we
had a receptive principle, to him that has a treasure shall more be given,
according to the proportion of grace received and improved: Ordinances would do
us more good if we had grace to get good by them; an heart sanctified and
stored with improving graces, is like Tinder, which soon takes fire, and is apt
to keep it, till it be forced out: Naturalists observe, that Transmutation is
easy in Symbolical Elements, such as agree in some prime qualities: Water is
more easily turned into Air than into Fire: even so, an holy and spiritual
heart will be easily wrought on by holy and spiritual Ordinances: for here is an
agreement in qualities, gracious qualities make the soul both receptive and
retentive of heavenly impressions: grow in grace every day, and then you will get
good by all that God does: There are several graces that dispose the soul to
spiritual proficiency, as sensiblenesse, brokennesse, and tenderness of heart,
fit to receive divine impressions, which plowes up, Jer. 4.3.
and prepares the ground for the seed: and then apprehensivenesse of spiritual
wants, burdened with sin, breathing after God and grace with longing hungring
desires, which capacitates the soul for both sanctifying and satisfying
incomes: strength of Grace is usually seconded with sweet discoveries, 1 John
2.14. I write unto you young men, because ye are strong and the word of God
abides in you: Strong and stored Christians have many precious Epistles from
Heaven; That Is the third.

4. Treasure up persevering, perfecting and crowning Graces, furnish your
hearts with such Graces as may help you through this world, and through death,
and land you safe on the shore of Eternity, such as these, sincerity,
humility, faith, hope, love, the fear of God, delight in him, resignation to
him, resolution for him, contempt of the world, desire of Heaven; if you have
these Graces you shall never fail or fall: unsound Professors may and will fall
away, but such as are thus rooted shall grow up as high as Heaven, Hypocrites
may ascend many steps toward Heaven, but he that has sincerity at the bottom
and perseverance at the top of this Ladder shall not miss of Glory: O see to
the uprightness of your hearts, and truth of your Graces, be not mistaken
about your state, build high by laying the foundation low, if the root of the
matter be in you, it shall not be eradicated; saving grace will end in eternal
Glory: the girdle of Truth, the breast plate of Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14,
15.16, 17, 18.
the shoes of Heroic Resolution, the shield of Faith, the Helmet of Hope, the
Sword of Scripture-truths, and constant fervent prayer, will help the
conflicting soul to a glorious Conquest, and God will set an inaccessible Crown
upon the conquering Head of a persevering Saint: if you lay up persevering
Graces, you shall hold on and hold out, if your love abound in knowledge and in
all judgment, your souls shall be without offense till the day of Christ, Phil.
1.9, 10. What would you give Sirs, to come safely to Heaven? Why! Do but lay up
a good foundation for your selves against the time to come, and thereby you do
(as it were) lay hold upon eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.19: Press foward, and be
aiming at perfection, take heed of (so much as) seeming to fall short: heap up
such Graces, so many, and such degrees and measures of them, that an abundant
entrance may be made for you into the Kingdom of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.11. the
great direction there prescribed is an addition of one degree of Grace to
another, or rather of one sort of graces to another, and the word in Greek
that is translated add ye [ verse. (...) proprie significat chorum ducere, ab
(...), duco. Beza. (...). Allude to Psalm 45.14, 15.
5.] is an elegant allusion to Virgins dance, who link themselves hand in hand,
and observe a decent order in their recreating exercises: and it is observable
that the same word is used in ver. 11. to express the adding or ministering to
such a soul the entrance into Glory: to note to us, the nearness and
propinquity betwixt the highest degrees of Grace and the state of Glory, the
link and chain of divine Graces, reaches from the first uniting Grace of
Faith, to the God-injoying grace of perfect love, these Virgin-graces going
hand in hand in a believing soul, lead it higher and higher, til they bring it
into the Princes presence, and Bride-groomes Chamber: Oh how merrily will you
dance to heaven, with these concatenated graces! the Lord still taking by the
end of this golden Chain, and drawing your souls every day nearer to glory, for
the same Apostle says, We are kept by the power of God, through faith, to
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. So that the soul is happy, by the Lords keeping and
acting the grace of faith; we shall persevere, by the assistance of God, as the
efficient cause, and in the exercise and increase of all graces, especially
faith, as the means: thus are Christians to treasure up all persevering
graces, that they may not faint by the way, but hold out, and that their last
may be more than their first, and this brave fabric of grace may be raised up
as high as Heaven: only I entreat you, be sure that you lay Christ for a
foundation, and dig deep in humiliation; you will never have a perfection of
degrees, except you have a perfection of parts in integrity of heart; and you will
never reach glory, unless Christ draw you with him, in his ascension by his
merit, and spirit, therefore see to your interest, and then grow in grace, and
if you do these things, you shall never fail.

CHAP. XV. What experiences are to be treasured up.
THe third sort of precious useful goods, that the Christian is to lay up, is
those various experiences, he has in all passages of his life; certainly a
Christian may be a great gainer this way, this is a grand duty, a Character of
solid wisdom, and a means of more: So says the Psalmist, concerning the
various acts of divine providence, in Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise, and will
observe those things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord: q. d. Such as set their hearts to consider of the Lords blessed and
embroidered workmanship in the World, have wise and observant spirits, and shall
grow still wiser, and see more of God in his dispensations than other men: Psalm.
25.14 Isai. 5.12.
God opens his secret Cabinet to observant Christians, but he is much offended
with those that regard not his works, and threatens to destroy them, and not to
build them up: Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7
Psalm. 28.5. But this is too high a work for brutish so^tish souls, it is the
good soul that lays up experiences, the righteous man, says Salamon, wisely
considers the house of the wicked. Prove. 21.12. i. e. He takes notice what
becomes of it, how the Lord deals with wicked men, and their houses: and so in
all other affairs, both public and private, Jer. 9.12, 13. Hos. 14.9.
God's carriage to both good and bad, in mercy and judgment, as Scripture
testifies.

But I shall rather keep close to the Christians personal experiments that
relate to himself, and desire every child of God to treasure up experiences of
these four sorts. --

VIZ. 1. Of the vanity of the World. 2. Of the treachery of his heart. 3. Of
the bitterness of sin. 4. Of Heavenly discoveries.


1. Lay up experiments of the Worlds vanity, Solomon made such a Collection all
his life long, and recollects it in his Ecclesiastes, in his declining old age:
he had great opportunities, and large faculties that did capacitate him for
such an experiment, he knew better than any man breathing, what the flattering
World could do for her beloved minions, yet cries out at last, all is vanity,
yea vexing vanity: Eccl. 2.12.
and the whole book is an Induction of particulars, to prove this assertion:
And what can the man do that comes after the King? alas, sirs, if you make the
like disquisition, you must needs make the same conclusion; you cannot search
more into, nor make more, of the creature, than Solomon, yet he found vanity
engraven upon the choicest enjoyment: and have not you also found the like in
your time and observation? Well then Christian, rub off the rust and dust of old
experiences, read the wise-mans last and soundest lectures on the whole
Creation, and let your dear-bought experiments comment thereupon, and lay up
both text and comment in your hearts for aftertimes; poor soul, consider,
did thou ever trust the World, but it deceived thee? Has it not failed thee
at such a time? and disappointed thee in such a case? O how did thou bless
thy self in such an expectation? but alas, thou did but grasp the sand or
smoke: have thou not found riches uncertain? 1 Timothy 6.17
friends inconstant, relations vanishing? have you not seen the World passing
away, and the treble en'oyments of it, pleasure, profit, and preferment, 1 John
2.16, 17.
(just like the sliding stream of a swift River) hastening toward their
primitive Chaos of vanity and confusion? However men may be bewitched with the
Worlds bravery, yet the spirit of God judges of it, Act. 25.23. 1 Cor. 7.31.
(...)
but as a mere fantasy, or Pageant-shew, or as a Mathematical figure, which
is but a notion, an Idea in the fancy or imagination: at the best it is but an
accidental figure without substance: what solid content have you ever found in
it? when you have sought to the Creature, has it not answered, it is not in me
to fill the soul, or do you good? or at best but like a dream of the
night-vision, when the hungry and thirsty think they eat and drink, Isai. 29.7,
8.
but are faint when they awake: have not your souls found this too true by sad
experience? why now, lay up these things, produce them out of your store, and
learn thereby to trust the World no more: Oh what good may these do you upon a
temptation to carnal confidence! tremble to pierce and prejudice thy soul
again, never lean upon this broken reed, that will run into thy hand and heart,
and pierce thee with many sorrows here, and be in danger to drown thee in
eternal perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Nihil aeque adeptis et concupiscentibus
gratum. Plin.
The truth is, there is nothing answers our desires and hopes in this World,
nothing pleases us so well in the fruition, as in the expectation, we find the
World but a lie, and the sweetest comforts, lying vanities, and (as one says)
our leaning-staff becomes a knocking Cudgel: well then, since you have found it
so, look upon it as so, and lay up that experiment.

2. Lay up experiences of the treachery of the heart, read over Mr. Dykes
Treatise of the deceitfulness of the heart, and compare your own experiences
with that book: But especially read and study well this multifarious book of a
base heart, consider and remember those ways of guile and guilt, that have
cost thy soul so dear: as thus, in such a duty my heart gave me the slip, in
such a temptation my heart led away my hand or foot, and caused my flesh to
sin, in such an enjoyment my perfidious heart was stolen away, in such an
affliction I had discontented risings of heart, and my tumultuous quarrelsome
spirit made me to speak unadvisedly with my lips, I Will never trust this
deceitful heart again; who but a fool will venture his whole estate with a known
Thief? what wise man will trust a known Jugler? Pro. 28.26
Solomon says, He that trusts in his own heart is a fool: and I shall be the
most errant fool that breaths, if after so many cheating tricks, I should
confide in this perfidious Traitor. Ah Christian, I appeal to thine own
experience, how many a woeful instance have thou had of the hearts
deceitfulness? It is apt to deceive, and as easy to be deceived, and
self-deceit, is the most dangerous: the heart, since the fall, is naturally of a
va^rous, subtle, and fickle temper, and is still made worse and worse, by the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. which is as it were woven and twisted in the
frame and constitution thereof, and so those two cheats conspire to undo the
poor soul: and were not God a more fast friend to the Saint, than he is to
himself, there were no salvation for a sorry sinner: Quisque sibi Satan est.
for every Man is a Satan to himself, and the sincere Saint will pray most
(with Divine Austin) to be delivered from that evil man himself; A ma^o homine
meipso libera me Domine
and is more afraid of the folly that is bound up in his own heart, than of
assaults from without: and indeed the reason of a souls self-confidence, is
self-ignorance, or not laying up experiences of the hearts deceitfulness; ^Ut
nemo in sese tentat descendere nemo.
the truth is, a poor self-deceiving sinner dares not look into his heart, lest
he find not things there as he fancieth, or would persuade himself, but puts
all to the venture, like a desperate bankrupt; but a child of God cannot but
see this treachery that others hide or counterfeit, and willingly sees it, and
as sadly laments it, and as watchfully avoids those deceits: observe it, though
deceivings by the heart be bad, yet observing and laying up such sad
experiments is certainly good, and of singular use to the sincere and serious
soul: the Lord help us all so to note, and be afraid of our naughty spirits,
that we may trust them less, and God more, while we live.

3. Lay up experiences of sin's bitterness: consider what were the insinuating
ways of sin and Satan to entangle you, and the sad effects of sin, what tears,
and groans, and bitter bickerings it cost your captivated souls, to extricate
your selves, and regulate your state: Oh the intricate windings of that crooked
Serpent? what strange and subtle methods and devices did Satan use, to trap
and overtake you with his fresh and furious assaults! how often has he
presented the bait and hid the hook, has he not set before your credulous
souls, the pleasure or profit of a base lust? has he not extenuated sin at
first to bring you to commit it, and afterward aggravated it to drive you to
despair? sin does cheat us with golden Mountains, as one says, but leaves us
in the suds at last: Jam. 1.14, 15. See the slights of sin opened in Capel on
Temp. page 21. to 36.
the first act of delightful conception ends in painful or mortal travel under
divine indignation: though sin was delightful at the first, yet it always
proved bitterness in the end: ask your own hearts, what fruit had you of those
things whereof you are now ashamed? the awakened conscience will answer the end
of those things is death, deadly pain, or eternal death, Romans 6.21 Job 20.12
13, 14. Deuteronomy. 32.33. (...) Et caput, per metonym. Venenum, quod capiti aut
dentibus serpentis vel aspidis inest; venenum capitale et mortiferum
repentance, or vengeance: your wild Oats sown in youth with delight, rose up
in bitter Hemlock and Wormwood; though wickedness was sweet in the mouth, yet
it is turned to be as the gall of Aspes within: yea the cruel venom of Aspes,
as Moses testifies, i.e. capital, deadly, biting poison, so it proves: Oh the
dreadful stings and pangs that sin left behind it! with what fears and tears,
terrors and horrors did it fill the poor penitent soul! what broken bones and
affrighting cares had the offending prodigal before he was admitted into his
fathers sweet embraces! how long did the humble suitor lie at the gates of
mercy before he could get admission! or see the Kings face, or obtain the joy
of Gods salvation? not that God is so hard to be entreated, or delights in a
poor Creatures malady or misery, but that he may affect the heart with the evil
of sin, stir up more longings after grace, prize Christ and pardon, and learn
to sin no more; therefore he keeps the soul long in suspense, even when his
bowels yearn upon it, as Joseph's did upon his brethren, upon the like ground,
as he dealt with Miriam in healing her body of the Leprosy, if her father,
says he, had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days, Number.
12.14. Thus God would have us to know, the worth of his favor, by the want of
it for a season: surely, sirs, if you would lay these sad experiments in store,
it would prove a notable Antidote against the next assault: the burnt child will
dread the fire: Oh what sin-abhoring resolutions had the penitent soul in its
deep humiliations? if you had come to David whilst he was bathing himself in
briny tears, and said, what say thou now to murder? how do thou like thy
fleshly lusts? will thou buy repentance at so dear a rate? and fall again into
uncleanness? would he not have answered, O no, God forbid that I should sin
again? I will be rackt or torn in pieces, rather than dishonor my God, grieve
his Spirit, and fill my poor soul with such tormenting troubles: Certainly,
when poor David was roaring, Psalm. 38.3, 8.
by reason of the disquietness of his Spirit, when there was no rest in his
bones because of his sin, he had other thoughts of his sin now, then when he
was entering and adventuring upon the act, or engaged in it: there is no man so
brutish scarce, but will abstain from that which experience tells him has done
him hurt: a wise man will forbear stale-drink when he knows infallibly it will
cast him into a fit of the stone: So the Christian that has laid up
experiences how dear sin has cost him, will thus argue, I remember what an ill
condition sin brought me into, I had need sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto me: Sin broke my bones, but now if I sin again I fear it will break my
neck, sin filled my soul with heart-shaking fears; but I may expect it will now
fill me with heart-desolating despair: it brought a^ hell into my Conscience
before, but now I fear it will cast my soul into hell: Lay up and make use of
these sad experiments, and I may then almost say, Sin if you dare:

4. Lay up divine Discoveries, which your souls have had sweet and satisfying
experiences of: if you be Christians, such you have had, I dare say, and you
dare not deny: I find very many precious Saints that have kept a Diary of Gods
dealings with their souls, Clarks Collect. page 21.
as Reverend Mr. Carter, and many others: there are two sorts of Experiences
that I shall commend to you to treasure up: 1. Special Providence; 2. Spiritual
Influences:

1. You are to lay up Experiments of Gods gracious Providence about you; the
Wise God has so disposed of affairs concerning his People, that one part of
our lives may help us in another, the Van and former part of our days may
contribute to bring up the Rear and remainder of them: as thus, the soul
argues, The Lord has helped in such a strait, directed in such a doubt
prevented such a fear, broken such a snare, and he is the same God still; and
will help for the future: Let the Saints set up some [ Eben^ezer] stone of
help, as a memorial of former goodness: Let souls make use of the excellent
Scripture-Logick, Has, Does and Will Deliver; Write down Signal Providence,
or lock them up in the safe Chest of a sanctified Memory, and produce them
when you are non-plust, and have your back to the wall: Sweet experiences of
bypast deliverances are not the least part of a Christians treasure: though I
would not have you dote upon them, or imagine that God can go no further than
he has gone, which may more daunt you in new and greater troubles, yet withal,
Isa. 51.9, 10. chap. 64.1, 2, 3.
do not despise them, and slight them, but lay them up and plead them with the
Lord as the Church often does: One part of Psalm 74. is a sad complaint of Gods
anger, and the Churches affliction; the other part is an encouraging rehearsal
of former Providence: Thus the assistance formerly vouchsafed proves an
argument for the Saints future encouragement:

2. You must also lay up Experiences of soul-inlargement and refreshing
Comforts: as thus, In such an Ordinance I met with God, and beheld his
Reconciled Face: In such a Duty my graces were quickened, exercised, increased:
In such a Chamber or Closet my heart was warmed, melted, satisfied: In such a
Company, with such a Society was my soul enlarged, resolved, and sweetly
transported beyond my self: Oh what a blessed day or night was that unto me,
when I had the kisses of Gods mouth, the smiles of his Face, and had a clear
acquittance sealed to my conscience of the remission of my sins! I well
remember it, and my heart danceth within me to think of the sweet days of
mutual intercourse that God and I have had together! These are not always to
be expected, such Sweetmeats of divine Joy are not a Christians constant
common fare, a pining time may come, I Will make much of, and long store up such
sweet and secret hints of Love against a time of need. God forbid that I should
lose this Token for good, this broken Ri^^, this Pledge from Heaven: this may
stand me in stead in a dark and gloomy day, when the Lord shall frown upon me as
an Enemy, and put me from him as though he would forsake me, then will I say
unto God, as Job, Thou know that I am not wicked, Lord, Job 10.7.
do thou use to deal so with wicked men, or reveal thy self thus to them that
know thee not? Art thou wont to stir up in the careless world, such penitent
bemoanings, such ardent breathings, and such vehement pantings after thy self?
And have thou ever given in such familiar discoveries to unregenerate souls,
as my heart has had experience of many a time? and is this the manner of man,
O Lord? Are these thy ways with unsanctified souls? Will thou hold communion
with those that never were united to thee? Does not such communion pre-suppose
an union? either these Experiences are false and counterfeit, or I am thine,
for whom thou love once, thou love to the end: though I be fickle and
inconstant yet thou art the same, and unchangeable in thy love; now I dare not
say that all these sweet Experiences are mere fictions, dreams and shadows, no,
God forbid; I humbly hope they were genuine evidences of thy special Love,
arising from and built upon the Word and Spirit, yea they carried their
evidence along with them, and left such stamps upon my soul as can never be
forgotten or worn off: I can appeal to thy self, O Lord, if such passages were
not betwixt thy self and my heart, which no creature upon earth has known off;
and since thou can not deny thine own Name in-graven on my heart, and sealed
sweetly to me, I commit the matter wholly to thee, though now thou seem to
carry strangely toward me, as though thou had quite cast me off, yet thou
art my God still, my loving Father, and only Friend, I cannot part from thee, I
will not let thee go; there was once love betwixt us, and though now in wisdom
and faithfulness thou seem to smother thy bowels of Mercy, and restrain the
effects of thy Love, yet thou have the same heart now as thou wast wont to
have, I know it by the workings I feel in mine own breast toward thee; And
therefore Lord I hang upon thee, and plead (with David) Where are thy former
loving-kindnesses which thou shewedst to me? Psalm 89.49.


Thus, Christians, thus lay up, and thus draw forth your sweet Experiences in
such a time of need, in this Night of desertion, as Thamar once did produce
Judahs Staff, Genesis 38.25.
Signet, and Bracelets, as her Pledge when she was brought out to be burnt. O
Sirs, when God deals graciously with you, cast not these precious Love Tokens
at your heels, as whorish spirits do, but lay up these testimonies of of Love,
sent from your Husband Christ, among your choicest treasures, that you may
produce them as occasion serves.

CHAP. XVI. How a Treasure of Comforts is to be laid up in the Heart.
A Fourth Treasure to be hoarded up in the breast of a Believer, is the sweet
and satisfying comforts of the Spirit. It Is true, these are the Arbitrary and
immediate effects of the sanctifying and sealing Spirit, yet ordinarily comfort
is dropped from Heaven into the believing Soul in a way of Duty and holy
endeavor, the nearer we approach to the Sun, and the more light and heat, now
exercises of Religion are a souls approaching to the Sun of Righteousness, and
for this cause it is good for us to draw near to God, that we may anchor and
center our souls upon him, where only we shall have Rest: This present Reward
we may find in keeping Gods Commandments, Grace and Peace, Holiness and
Comforts go usually hand in hand, for her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
her paths are peace, Pro. 3.17. And great peace have they that love thy Law,
Psalm 119.165. Every gracious act has some degree of comfort annexed to it,
Gal. 6.
peace is in them, as well as on them, that walk according to Rule, and these
good old ways bring us to rest in God, Jer. 6.16.
and produce a blessed Sabbath of Rest in our spirits: if you keep Gods
Commands, Christ will send the Comforter to you, nay, himself will come unto
you, and make his abode with you John 14.15, 16-23. Be much in the performance
of holy Duties, and enjoyment of God in Ordinances, and therein you may behold
his beautiful Face, and hear his pleasant Voice: here you may suck and be
satisfied at these breasts of Consolation, through these blessed Pipes you may
derive solid Joy, and enjoy ravishing sweetness: improve Scripture-truths, act
spiritual Graces, lay up reviving Experiences, and the result of all will be
refreshing Comforts.

But besides these, I counsel you to hoard up and make much of such thoughts as
may be streams to feed and fill the well of solid, settled comforts in your
hearts: Take only these four Directions:

1. Lay up all your comfort in God alone: God is the father of Mercies, 2 Cor.
1.3.
and the God of all consolation; there is not a beam of Light or stream of Joy,
but what proceeds from this Sun and spring of Grace and happiness: the great
God that made all things with a word, can speak and make peace in the confused
heart, it is one of his Royal incommunicable Prerogatives, Isa. 51.12. I, even I
am he that comfort you, -- If God comfort, Job 34.29.
who can sadden? and if God afflict, who else can comfort? The Air lights not
without the Sun, the fuel heats not without the Fire, neither can any
Instrument cheer up a drooping heart, where God suspends his influence; 1 Samuel
30.6.
but Gods Children have been encouraged and comforted in God in the absence of
other comforts, Hab. 3.17, 18.
as David and Habakkuk: O Christians, learn this divine Art of fetching all
your comforts from God, lay up your stock of comfort in the Rock of Ages, this
will be as honey out of the Rock, as water from the fountain, that comes
freely, sweetly, purely and abundantly: if you lay up all your comfort in the
streams, what will you do for comfort when the streams are cut off? if you hang
your comfort on every hedge, it will be far to seek in a day of need: but if
God be your portion, the Antidote is at hand, so that you need not fear
poisoning or perplexing evils, for his very Rod and Staff shall comfort you;
Old Chytraeus had this only and all-sufficient Medicine and Remedy in his
troubled affairs, to support his fainting heart, the Fathers heart, the
faithful Word and powerful hand of Jehovah, and thus he sings, Unae est in
trepida mihi re Medicina Jehovae,
Cor Patrium, os verax, omnipotensque manus:
Hence it was that holy David disclaims all the world, and says, he has none
in Heaven, or earth besides God, Psalm 73.25, 26. and when all was gone he had
still a sufficient portion in the absence or opposition of all the world; hence
it is that the Saints have been like mount Zion, and remained impregnable in
the midst of waves, being settled upon the Rock of Ages: O Sirs, could you
account God your exceeding Joy, how sweetly and cheerfully would you go to his
Altar upon all occasions, Psalm 43.4 And if you lay up your comfort in God, you
may know where to find it when you have lost it, and none can take your joy,
because they cannot take your God away from you: That Is the first:

2. Lay the stress of your Comfort on free Grace in justification: here only is
the spring of all your comfort, Romans 5.1. being justified by Faith we have
peace with God -- Yea, peace within, in our own consciences, for we glory in
tribulations, ver. 3. Gratuitous justification is the ground of all
Consolation: Christ's righteousness imputed is the sweetest word in all the
Scriptures, which is ten times repeated in Romans 4. though Papists make a mock
of it, let Protestants make much of it, it is the sweetest Flower in our
Garden, the Jachin and Boaz of our Gospel-Temple, the Ladder whereupon souls
ascend to Heaven, our only comfort is bound up in the Covenant of Free Grace,
not in that of works: Stick to this, stickle for this, let all go, rather than
let this go, it is the chief Article and principle of our Religion, Articulus
stantis a^t cadentis Ecclesiae.
upon which the Church stands, without which it falls, as Luther says: O
therefore let no mud defile this blessed stream, study free grace, ascribe all
to free grace, lay up thoughts of undeserved distinguishing grace. Remember
what our blessed Redeemer has done and endured, let the dolours of his soul be
the solace of your hearts: fetch your only comfort from his bitter cross:
consider, how fully Christ have satisfied divine justice, how large and liberal
the Gospel-proclamation is, how our dear Redeemer opens his arms and bosom to
embrace repenting prodigals, how he bids all welcome, and never yet cast off
any that came unto him: how he has pardoned infamous sinners, and has
received gifts even for rebellious: roll these in thy mind, clap the promises
warm to thy heart, let the hysop of faith sprinkle Christ's blood upon thy
conscience, for generals afford no comfort; particular application is the only
means of consolation: an hungry man takes little pleasure in gazing upon a
feast, while he tastes not of it, David's Table spread with dainties in the
midst of his Enemies, rather vexed than pleased those envious Spectators: it is
a blessed thing to think of pardon of sin, justifying grace, adoption,
reconciliation, but what comfort can we take therein, except we can say, Gal,
^.20. Joh. 20. Job 19.26. 2 Timothy 4.8.
he loved me, and gave himself for me: my Lord, and my God, my Redeemer lives,
a crown of life is laid up for me? O this, this is the life of our lives, the
support of our souls! yet if you cannot always say, that grace is yours,
Christ is yours, and Heaven is yours, yet be much in the thoughts of
free grace, pore not upon your vileness and unworthiness, but ponder upon that
which can answer all in one word, I will have mercy, because I will have mercy,
and on whom I will have mercy: Lay up such Scriptures as these, Romans 3.24.
Isai. 53.4, 5, 6. and 43, 25. Heb. 8.12. That by the comfort of these and such
like Scriptures you may have hope: they may be worth Mines of Gold, and all the
World, in a day of darkness to the doubting Christian.

3. Store up your clearest evidences of sincerity: the spirit ordinarily
conveyeth comfort by shining upon its own work; and by helping the soul to make
practical syllogisms, as thus, whosoever does sincerely call on the name of the
Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13
but says the soul, I do sincerely pray and perform other Christian duties,
therefore I shall be saved; or thus, grace is with them that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.14.
but says the soul, I love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, therefore I have the
grace or favor of God; the major proposition is a Scripture-assertion, the
minor, or assumption is from a souls inward experience of sincerity, and the
spirit of God witnessing with an upright heart and conscience, helps the soul
to this demonstrative inference and conclusion, that he is a Child of God, in
Gods favor, and shall be saved: and thence arises satisfaction and
consolation: the poor soul by a reflex act does view the seeds and sproutings
of a sincere faith and love, and says, though these have not purchased my
husbands love, yet are they sweet effects thereof; these divine Ornaments of
saving graces do satisfyingly evidence that my soul is betrothed to Jesus
Christ: if your souls be all glorious within in sanctification, it is a good
sign your clothing is of wrought gold in justification^ make sure and clear
your effectual vocation, 2 Pet. 1.10
and then you clear up your eternal election: the sanctifying spirit witnesses
with the sanctified soul that it is a child of God: Romans 8.16
and thus some understand those three that bear witness in Earth, the spirit,
water and blood, 1 John 5.8.
to be the cleansing acts of the spirit, evidencing the souls interest in our
Saviors efficacious merits: but this I desire of you, to clear up the truth of
grace, fall upon the old trade of enquiring after marks of sincerity, yet do
not think the bare hearing of them, or having such notes in your Books or
memory, will be sufficient means of comfort, but lay your hearts by them, in a
close and convincing application, improve them by a self-posing examination,
and then fetch inferences therefrom, in a rational way of argumentation, and
lay up those deductions against a time of need, write it down that thou may
have it to show under thy hand against the quarrels of an unbelieving heart:
treasure up the means and instruments of your peace and settlement, the time
when, and place where your souls were satisfied, the low and hopeless state
your souls were in before the Lord did visit you from on high: O lay up
carefully the various circumstances about your satisfying comforts, the
seasonable incomes thereof, their powerful entrance, and self-discovering,
soul-recovering evidence: lay up the gradual progress, or sudden illapses of
comfort into your hearts, with the strong abiding impression they left upon
your spirits: finally lay up the sweet result and strengthening effects of
those your consolations, that so for the future, in the multitude of your
disquieting thoughts within you, these comforts may again delight your souls:
Psalm. 94.19.

4. Lay up tears in Gods bottle, prayers in God's book, comforts in others
breasts, and promises in your own; I put all under one head, for brevity sake.
1. Lay up many tears in God's bottle, Mat. 5.4. Isai. 61.2, 3
comfort is the portion of mourners, it is promised by God, purchased by
Christ, applied by the spirit of comfort, and only suitable to weeping mourning
souls, 2 Cor. 7.6. Psalm 147.3. Isai. 57.15.
it is the usual constant design of God to comfort those that are cast down, to
heal the broken in heart, to revive drooping souls, and contrite hearts; Do you
mourn for your sins, and God will comfort you in your mourning, the sorrows of
the Saints are like the pangs of a traveling Woman, that tend to and end in
comfort, John 16.21. Repentance is the ready road to contentment: (...) Doluit,
Paenituit, 1 Samuel 15.35.
the same word in Hebrew, that signifies first to repent, does also denote
comforting or ceasing from sorrow, because true comfort belongs only to the
penitent: the Jews fable, Niph. (...) dedoluit, dolor desiit, vel
consolationem dat, invenit, Isa. 40.1.
that with such as weep in the night, the stars and planets weep, and if they
let the tears fall down their cheeks, God is ready with his bottle to receive
them, which he pours (say they) upon the Enemies Edicts to blot the writings
that the Jews shall receive no hurt thereby: But sure I am, God is much affected
with his Childrens tears, and comes (as it were) with an Handkerchief to wipe
away those tears, Psalm. 56.^.
or rather (as the Scripture speaks) puts their tears into his bottle, and
reserves them as a precious Liquor for their future comfort: shedding
penitential tears is a spiritual seed-time, Psalm. 12^ 5.6.
and they that sow in tears shall reap in joy; even sheaves of comfort are the
harvest of this precious seed-plot: this briny water shall be turned into
refreshing wine: according to the depth of your sorrow, will be the height of
your comfort: not a tear shall be lost that is of the right stamp: every gracious
groan is set before the Lord as delectable incense, and every drop distilled
from a broken heart, shall in time multiply to a flood of joy: who was more
dissolved into tears than holy David? and who had a heart more full of joy, or
a tongue so full of the high praises of God, as that sweet Singer of Israel? O
sirs, grieve much for sin, and you shall rejoice in, and for your grief: plenty
of tears prepares for, and ushers in plenty of joy: But 2. Lay up many prayers
in Gods book, as well as tears in his bottle, be much in approaching to the
Throne of Grace: the sighs of your spirits will be ecchoed with the sweet gusts
of God's spirit: the spirit of grace will be a spirit of peace; as prayer goes
up, comfort comes down; God makes Children joyful in the duty of prayer, as
well as in the house of prayer: for this (says the Psalmist) shall every one
that is godly pray unto thee, -- surely then in the Floods of great Waters
they shall not come nigh unto him, Psalm. 32.6. Prayer reaches to Heaven, and
fetches heaven into the heart: prayer seeks, and the soul by faith in prayer
sees Gods face, See Psalm. 34.4, 5.
which is a heart rejoicing sight: it scatters fears, lighteneth the soul,
and preventeth shame and sorrow: ask, says Christ, and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full, Joh. 6.24. Therefore, Christians, pour out your heart to
God, and he will pour in comfort to you: And then, 3dly. Comfort others, as you
are able, empty your selves of experiences, by communicating them to afflicted
souls, and they shall recur and retreat upon you with double advantage: there is
much pleasure in opening our hearts to Christian friends: when you say, come
and I will show you what he has done for my soul, God will do more for your
souls: if you help others, God will help you: you little know how it may comfort
you to impart comforts to others: Mr. Knox rose off from his sick and
deathbed, and would needs go to the Pulpit, that he might impart to others his
sweet Meditations on Christ's Resurrection, and the solacing consolation he felt
in his soul: there is no envy in spiritual things, it is the property of a
Child of God to long, that others might taste of that which his soul feels
comfort in: and indeed, God makes the breasts of some, to be the storehouse of
comfort for others, 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we be comforted, it is for your
consolation, and salvation: not only by way of sympathy and affection, but by
way of intercourse and communication: Besides, the more you comfort others, the
more you have to pity and comfort you, the law of gratitude will engage them,
and the treasure you have laid up in them will dispose them to be helps to you
in the day of your sadness. 4. Lastly, store up Scripture-cordials,
Covenant-promises in your souls: Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in
affliction, thy word has quickened me: this was David's portion, heritage, and
his Song in the house of his Pilgrimage; especially improve and apply
Gospel-promises, these are (fasciae Christi) the swadling-cloaths of Christ,
these are like Aqua vitae to the fainting soul: the Scripture is full of them,
some have observed that the Covenant of grace is mentioned directly an hundred
times, but by clear and necessary consequence a thousand times in the book of
God: God has laid in all these promises for our comfort, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: Romans 15.4.
to this very end is it, that God has not only spoken but sworn, that we might
have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. Promises are the breasts of consolation,
Promissiones sunt sacrae Anchorae, vela candida, mulctralia evangelica,
coelestes uteres, spirituales Aurifodinae: See Dr. Spurst. of Promises.
at which you may suck and be satisfied: promises are sacred Anchors, to fasten
the soul upon the Rock of Ages, white sales for the blessed spirit to waft over
souls by, to the haven of rest; they are Gospel-pailes, bowls and breasts to
suckle and feed the Lords Lambs, and rich Mines to make the Christian rich in
grace, and rich in comfort: therefore let Christians always have these divine
Antidotes at hand, for the help and support of their fainting souls: only look
to your right to, and improvement of the promises: Divines observe a twofold
right to promises: 1. An hereditary right, [ jus haereditarium] as we are
coheirs with Christ, so an interest in, and union to Jesus Christ, gives us
this right. 2. A right of aptitude, fitness, disposedness, [ jus aptitudinale]
and this is by having holy dispositions, Gospel-qualifications, and the
required conditions of conditional promises; this is necessary as well as the
other, look you after both, and then you shall have the comfort of the promises,
and a sure foundation of lively hope.

Thus I have endeavored to help you to hoard up these four precious and
necessary treasures of truths, graces, experiences and comforts, let none of
your souls be found destitute of these, or of a large share thereof
particularly, for this last: O let not the consolations of God be small in your
eyes, Job ^5.11.
set an high price upon them, store them up, they are not the least part of
your treasures; these will fit you for Gods service, qualify you for enduring
afflictions, fortify your spirits against temptations: you that at present are
dandled upon the knee of Gods fatherly indulgence, satisfied with favor, and
sit at the high Table eating and drinking in Gods presence, feasting your
souls with the dainty-meates of Assurance. Consider how soon may the Lord turn
the Tables, give you bare commons and water of gall to drink, and fill your
souls with bitterness, be sure, you shall not always live by this kind of
spiritual sense, a time of heaviness may come, when you must cast anchor in
the dark, and act a faith of adherence upon an unseen Redeemer; yea, Job 13.15
trust in that God whom your souls do also fear as one that is ready to kill,
you: and you will find it an hard thing, to hang about an angry, chiding,
scourging Father; therefore lay up the comforts your souls do now partake of,
give God the glory of them, and recollect them in a time of darkness, plead
them before the Lord, and upon a due sense of those, though now you see him
not, yet love him, and believe in him, and in due time you shall rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

CHAP. XVII. How a Christian is to maintain and increase his Treasure.
THus I have largely handled Directions for obtaining a Treasure, and
particular instructions about particular Treasures to furnish the poor soul.
Now it is also necessary to take heed of losing or diminishing this Treasure,
Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.
it is a piece of wisdom to keep as well as get, to maintain as well as obtain
a Treasure: a little negligence loses that suddenly which had been got with
much diligence: Solomon says, there is a time to cast away stones, and a time
to gather stones together, but there is no time to cast away these precious
Treasures, you must keep what you have and still be gathering more: Now to help
you herein, take these ten practical Directions:

1. Let not Satan rob or circumvent you: he is that evil One that envies a
Saints treasure, he steals away the seed of the Word, lest it become a treasure
of divine Truths; He it is that most grudgeth our growth in Grace, the better
the soul is treasured, the more assaults must he suffer from the evil one, a
Pirate makes most at a rich laden Ship, a Thief breaks not into the Beggars
Cottage; the Devil lets his sworn Vassals live in peace, but raises an hurry
in the Believers heart: This Juggler will transform himself into an Angel of
light, that like a Famili^ he may pick our pockets with more ease and less
suspicion; as he foists in dangerous Errors under the notion of truth, so he
allures to damnable sins under the paintings of Virtue: take heed of both,
observe it, new Notions may eat out the heart-root of Religion as well as
corrupt practices: Satan may rob us of our treasure by subtle insinuations of
new light as well as grosser temptations to apparent works of darkness: for
these drink up the marrow of those spirits that should be laid out otherways:
therefore take Paul's advice, refuse profane and old wives fables, and exercise
your selves rather to godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. Strivings, though they should be
even about Scriptures and the Law, may come to be unprofitable and vain, Tit.
3.9. Great Triflers are no good treasurers, and many great Disputers have
argued away much of their Religion; or at least have filled their heads with
Notions rather than their hearts with saving truths or savoury affections:
Precious Saints have complained that even necessary Disputes have put their
spirits out of tune: You have zeal little enough for the vitals of Religion,
let none run in by-channels: the Lord help you to prize more a fundamental
truth, and a degree of saving grace, than a fine Notion or victory over an
Antagonist: take heed lest Satan cast into you a spark of false zeal and blow
it up to an eager dispute for an opinion, to divert or excuse you from meddling
with the more weighty matters of Christianity. 2 Cor. 2.11. chap. 11.2, 14.
O Christians, be not ignorant of Satan's various methods to get an advantage
against you, that he may rob you of your treasure: you know the old Serpent
when he was young outwitted our first Parents in their best estate: now he is
grown more cunning by almost six thousand years experience, and we more
foolish in this dotage of the world, we are in great danger of undoing: O lets
watch and pray that we enter not into temptation, keep out of Satan's Road, hold
him at staves-end, suspect his wiles, resist his power, that neither his seven
heads by plotting, nor his ten horns by pushing, may deprive our souls of our
precious treasure.

2. Fill not your hearts with the world: Carnal men have the world set in their
hearts, and are therefore called, Eccl. 3.11. Psalm 17.14.
the men of this world; that have their portion therein, and that is totally
inconsistent with this heavenly Treasure: and the more you admit the world into
your hearts, the more you thrust out divine things: As the shining Sun eats out
the burning fire, or as the abundance of weeds sucks up the virtue of the earth
that should nourish the herbs and fruit trees, just so do Riches choke the Word
by a wicked encroachment they have upon the heart: the love of the world
justles out the love of God, Religio p^perit divitias sed filia devoravit
matiem:
1 John 2.15. Love and Royalty can endure no Corrivals: It Is true, Religion
begot wealth, but the daughter devoures the mother, as the Proverb has it,
worldly-mindedness is directly opposite to heavenly treasures: O let not your
hearts be in the world, though your heads and hands be in it: the heart is to
be reserved for God; if Riches be placed in that Closet, Christ must be thrust
into the Stable: Psalm. 62.10. Acts 4.35.
if Riches increase set not your hearts thereon; in the Apostles times, the
Saints cast their money and estates at the Apostles feet, thereby signifying,
says an Ancient, that they were fitter to be trodden upon, than doted upon, or
rather to be a step-stone to divine things, than a burden on our backs: but the
truth is, these outward things are too many, rather a stumbling block to cast
them down, than a footstool to lift them up: it is better be without great
Estates, then to have them for a snare: tremble lest you be overcharged with
the cares of the world, or be bewitched with the delights here below: Be not
like that carnal Cardinal, that preferred his part in Paris to his part in
Paradise: But say, as that noble Commander to a common Soldier, Thou art not
Themistocles, take this trash to thee, for so he called and accounted the
Persian spoils, of richest Jewels and goodliest Ornaments: So do thou scorn to
load thy noble soul with such unworthie baggage, cast out those wares that will
sink the ship of your souls: One staff will help in your journey, but a bundle
will be burdensome carriage; a garment fit for the body is nimble and useful,
but one that is too wide, or with a long train, is in danger to be troublesome
to the party that wears it and others: not that I would have you to cast away
the good mercies of God (though you must cast your bread on the waters) but
cast the world out of your hearts; Let not your precious souls be like the
Serpents belly, joined to the dust: if you possess much of the world, let it
not possess you, fear your selves in this most: How many Demas's are hereby
ship-wrackt? How many Sampsons have lost their best strength by the embraces of
this Dalilah? Alas, thousands have been cheated of their spiritual Riches by
its Siren Songs, and bewitching charms: And therefore let our souls stand at a
distance from it, make no friendship with it, let us more suspect its fawnings,
then fear its frowns, a false Friend will prejudice us more than an open Foe,
let no earthly treasure take off our spirits from an heavenly treasure, lest we
abate of the divine stock that our precious souls are furnished with:

3. Mortify the corruption of your hearts: cast out intestine enemies, carnal
affections. Sin and Grace are like two Scales, as one goes up, the other goes
down, or like two Buckets, as the one mounts up full, so the other falls down
empty: the more full the heart is of sin, the more empty it is of goodness:
Sin is the thief in the Candle that dims our light and comfort, it is as dirt
in the channel that stops the Current of Grace: Sin is a great Prodigal that
wastes a fair Revenue; Adam by one fall lost all: Sin is the Canker and Moth
that marrs all our enjoyments, it is a Pul-back to high seize, it is the
only Make-bait betwixt God and the soul, Isa. 59 2.
which hinders communion with God and communications from God: The Devil, the
World, and the flesh are the souls mortal and mischievous enemies, but the
flesh is nearest and worst, 1 Pet. 2.11. Mr Herl in Treat. of Polit. p. 11.
therefore these fleshly lusts are said peculiarly to fight against the soul:
Divines distinguish of three sorts of temptations, Ascendent, Objected, and
Injected: Ascendent temptations are such as fume up from some stirred humor or
lower faculty within us, that borders next upon the sense or affection.
Objected, are such as reflect from some outward object, baited and suited to
the Organ: Injected, are such as the Tempter immediately affects the faculty
it self with, this last proceeds from Satan, the second from the World, but the
first from our own hearts, which is of all others most dangerous: Joh. 14.30.
Except the wicked one find something in us he can have no advantage against
us; Our base hearts entertain little Thieves within, which open the door to
Satan without, that comes to spoil us of our treasure: Therefore take heed of
this wily beguiling thing, touch not the forbidden fruit, admit no parley with
lust, commit no sin, though never so secretly, a secret way of spending has
exhausted large Estates; Heart-sins dallied with, delighted in, will do your
souls a deadly mischief: a privy stab may let out your Heart-blood: an
unsuspected leak may sink a well-laden Ship: And therefore let a Christian say
as good Joseph, who might have committed filthiness with his Mistress secretly
and safely as to man, yet cries out, How shall I do this wickedness and sin
against God? O Sirs, consider how unsuitable and incongruous it is for a Vessel
of Mercy to admit iniquity, it is as if a Cup of gold were filled with men's
Excrements: O let not your precious souls be filled with the loathsome
excrements of sin, remember your dignity and Duty, and keep your selves from
an evil matter: Ephesians. 5.11. Col. 3.5. 1 These. 4.4. 2 Cor. 7.1.
have not any fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, mortify
earthly members, possess your Vessel in sanctification and honor, purge out
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and thereby you will not only maintain, but
increase your souls treasure.

4. Observe the Spirits Pulses and impulses: yield to the genuine motions of
Gods blessed Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve it not, lest it grieve or leave you, its a delicate thing, and will
deal with you as you deal with it; Christ Jesus has left the Holy Ghost to
supply his place, and now the Spirit is Gods great Factor in the World, if it
knock at your doors it has a good bargain for you; O slight not such a
Chap-man lest you dally away your market: the Spirit never puts you upon Duty,
but it calls you to some profit, now its good making Hay when the Sun shines,
and sailing when you have wind and tide to help you: take this advantage lest
if you miss it, you be left to your own strength, and then what can you do?
Romans 8.26. (...).
the Spirit is that gentle Nurse, and strengthening Hand that helps the
infirmities of the dead or daunted child of God in Prayer, O refuse not its
assistance: the Spirit is that holy Fire, 1 These. 5.19.
that sets the soul in a flame for God, O do not quench it: This Holy Spirit is
a Queen that comes attended with a goodly train of graces and comforts, Gal.
5.22. Ephesians. 5.18.
called the fruits of the spirit; and therefore labor you to be filled with
the spirit, and then you have this blessed treasure: it is true you cannot
expect it as Christ had it, Joh. 3.34.
beyond measure, yet your larger measure will be a treasure, and help you to
maintain and increase that heavenly treasure in the heart: the incomes of the
spirit promote renewed acts of grace: as the Sea ebbs and flows according to
the influence of the heavenly bodies, so does grace in the heart move,
according to the operations of the spirit: the more you yield up your selves to
the guidance of the spirit, the more you shall feel the assistance of the
spirit: this will be a preservative from sin, See Gal. 5.5. ver. 16, 18.
a preparative to duty, an evidence of your state, and an entrance into
glory: yea, then the peace of God as well as the God of peace, shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7. (...) shall keep as with a
guard in a Garrison, i. e. shall stand sentinel for you to prevent the furious
assaults of your spiritual enemies, and be a safe convoy to the ship of your
souls against Rocks and Sands, Storms and Pirates, til you come to the haven of
Heaven: therefore O ye Christians, make much of the spirit, maintain
familiarity with it, and it shall maintain your treasure, keep up intercourse
with it, and it shall keep its interest in you, allies and confederates have the
same friends and foes, and if you have the Holy Ghost to take your part, you
shall be kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation, if received
faith cannot keep you, yet supporting power is able, never did any fall out of
the hands of God; therefore I beseech you give up your selves to the Spirits
guidance, and governance, and it shall be your guard and defense: that God that
preserves his peoples bones, will preserve their souls, and he that keeps the
feet of his Saints, will also keep the fruits of his love, in the souls of his
servants: and if you thus do, he that is able to keep you from falling, will
present you faultless before (...) presence of his glory with exceeding joy.
Jude 24.

5. Carefully watch your hearts; though God has undertaken to guard you, yet
you are bound to watch your own hearts: that is the command, (...)
Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, in the Hebrew it is very full and
emphatical, in or above all keepings, take care of thy heart: thou may and
must look to other things, but above all, let thy eye be most intent upon, and
study be most about the frame of thy heart, But why so? What great need of
industry about the heart? why he tells us, out of it are the issues of life, i.
e. all our treasure is there, our greatest stock and store, if that be
neglected, our wealth is exposed to apparent hazard; therefore keep thy heart
with all diligence, lock up thy treasure, and set a guard upon it, admit no
strangers into this Closet, let not other things make an inroad upon thee, or
at least a through-fare of thee: there is no keeping a treasure in a common
room, a Man that fears his Purse in a strange place, has always an eye upon
it, dare not let it go out of his sight, in a time of great robbing a stranger
suspects every one, and goes not forth unarmed: O Sirs, consider you are
strangers in this Earth, many Thieves are abroad, they aim at you, they have
plundered many of their treasures, (...)
and cast down many strong men wounded, therefore look about you, keep strict
watch, be not found asleep on the Sentinel, as the ten Virgins, or Christ's own
Disciples, but gird up your loins, watch and be sober, and if drouziness at
any time seize on you, rub your eyes, shake off sloth, and awake out of sleep,
and when any motions knock at your door; boldly ask who is there? whence
come thou? art thou a Messenger sent from God, or from Satan? art thou for
me, or against me? what is thy end or errand? make your thoughts stand still, and
go no further til they have under-gone an impartial trial, whether they have a
pass and commission under the great seal of Heaven, and be warranted by the
Word, and tend unto the glory of God, and the souls eternal good: and though
vain thoughts may step into thy heart, yet suffer them not to lodge there, for
thy heart is not thine own, thou do but keep it for thy Lord and Master,
there he has laid up a treasure, and if any thing be wanting through thy
default, thou can not give a good account, but be exposed unto shame, and
grief, and loss: principally and particularly watch thy heart when thou art
before God in duty, take heed of distractions, diversions, and excursions of
spirit from God! Quando animus dividitur ad multa fit minor ad fingula.
these will waste and weaken thy treasure, by running out in a wrong Channel,
and spilling or spoiling the souls activitie, for the narrow shallow spirit
cannot mind many things at once; Besides, wandering thoughts are as a dead
fly to cause this box of precious ointment to stink, Ec^. 10.1.
and putrify; these vain cogitations obstruct the operations of grace, and
insensibly steal away the affections from God; even dust may hinder the Clock
from going, as well as dirt; raise up your affections Heaven-wards, center and
settle your hearts upon God, say to distractions, as Nehemiah to his Enemies, I
am doing a great work, and I cannot come down, or as it is storied of John
Baptist, who being asked of his companions to play with them, when he was a
Child, yet answered. I am not born for sport; thus do you say to your trifling
hearts, it is not fit that I should leave the work of God, to attend upon
toies; I must mind my business, or I shall go behind in my spiritual trade;
that Man is in danger to be on the losing hand, that stands gazing at others,
or runs playing at football on the Market Day, when others are busy making
bargains, and getting money; O Christians you either gain something, or lose in
every performance, if the heart be not fixed on God, you are on the losing
hand: every thing is beautiful in its season, do what you do with all your
might, pray when you pray, work when you work, but let not these things
interfere; set not up any Idols in your hearts, drive away that which may
interpose betwixt God and thy soul, as Abraham drove away the Fowls that sat
upon the Carcassses: Lightfoots Miscell. page 26.
the Jewish Rabbis say, that if a Serpent bite a Man by the heel, while he is
at his Devotions, he must not stop, nor stoop to shake her off: and Heathens
have recorded instances of some that have rather suffered their Arms or Legs
to be burnt, with a Coal from the Altar, than move whilst sacrificing: and do
not Christians blush upon consideration of their slight occasions of diversion
from God in duty: O learn from hence to be more instant and intent in
worshipping God, whereby your treasure will be maintained and promoted: That Is
the fifth.

6. Be most jealous after the sweetest enlargements: there is greatest danger
after you have been with God, and loaded your souls with choicest treasures of
refreshing incomes: I have observed almost a score of Scripture-instances of
Saints saddest falls, suddenly after Gods doing some signal thing for them, or
their doing some notable thing for God: and I appeal to experienced souls, if
they have not sustained saddest shakings and losses, after the sweetest gains:
dear Years usuallie come after great plenty, a great spending follows a time
of gaining, a long journey after a good bait, and a sharp Winter after a
pleasant Summer; God in wisdom usuallie lets Satan loose, upon such as he has
armed to the combat: Paul must have Satan's Messenger to buffet him after
abundant revelations; Peter acts Satan's part in dissuading Christ from
suffering, after he had acted an Angels part in acknowledging him for the
Messiah: the French often got that again by craft, that the English had
obtained by Prowess: and we know in all Wars, supine negligence has undone
many an Army, after famous victories: this Pugna Os^ulana (as Historians call
it) is when the conquered gathered strength, and so returned upon the
Conquerors, when they were dividing the spoils: just thus does Satan with God's
Children, when the soul has been with God, and got its Vessel well fraught with
spiritual riches, then it is in greatest danger of Pirates: then Satan does
bestir himself most, his malice and policy takes that as the fittest season to
foil and spoil the wel-laden soul: and then the soul is most apt to grow
secure and carnally confident, and so gives Satan greatest advantage; as a man
that has run fast, or workt hard, sits down and cools suddenly, after much
sweating does thereby endanger his health, and life too, by a dangerous
surfeit: so when the heart has been sweetly warmed with the love of God, and
is powerfullie chaffed in an holy duty, it is then most in danger of a
spiritual Ague, a chil fit of deadness; for such an one blesses himself, and
thinks now he may sit still, and take his ease, and then comes a fall: this is
the believers round, this is his wheeling condition in the World: Peter
confesses Christ graciously, then magnifies himself too confidentlie, then
denies his Master shamefullie, and at last goes out, and weeps bitterly, and
so was kindly received by his loving Master: this, this is the Christians
round, ebbing and flowing state, up-hil and down-hil condition in this howling
Wilderness: But how sad is it, that a Christian should so soon forget his
inlargements? and so soon return into folly, after his heart is broken, Psalm.
and peace is spoken to him? O why should the soul so quickly turn out of the
way, Exodus 32.^
wherein so lately it had such encouragements? why should we give Satan such
occasion to bid defiance to the God of Heaven, that his Servants will not be
hired to continue with him, for all his present rewards, and promises of future
happiness? Ah sirs, is there not much reward in keeping Gods Commandments? is
there not more pleasure in holiness, than any sin? why should you think to eke
out your spiritual delights with sensual pleasures? think seriously of it, be
afraid to stain your milk-white souls, that are newly washed in the blood of
the Lamb, by wallowing in the mud of sin: be ashamed to dishonor God, torment
your selves, gratify your grand Enemy, and lose that in an instant, that was
so hardly obtained: Be not high minded, but fear, be jealous over your selves
with godly jealousy, rejoice with trembling, cast not off fear, nor restrain
prayer before God, keep conscience tender, eyes open and hearts resolved for
God: pray over David's prayer for the continued settlement of those
affectionate impressions upon your own hearts, in 1 Chronicles. 29.18. For alas, the
best Man on Earth, is no more than the Lord makes him hourlie, we are like a
staff, that must fall, if the hand be removed, or a stone that descends, if not
carried or cast upwards, Nos nihil sumus, Christus solus est omnia, qui si
avertat faciem suam nos perimus and Satanas triumphat, etiamsi aut Petri aut
Pauli simus: sicut deo sacrificium est spiritus contribulatus, ita haud dubie
Diaboli sacrificium spiritus praefractus and securus: Luth. Tom. 1. Lat. fol.
522.
if we were as good as Paul or Peter, we should fall foullie, without
supporting grace: therefore be jealous of your selves, after inlargements, and
take heed, lest by security, you become a sacrifice to the Devil; as Luther
speaks.

CHAP. XVIII. Four more Directions for maintaining an Heart-Treasure.
7. ANother Help for continuing and increasing this good treasure of the Heart,
is, Be frequent and exact in the search of your hearts: be much in reviewing
the frame of your Spirits, commune with your heart, ask it what it gets or
loses every day; wise Tradesmen often cast up account, and provident
Housekeepers look into their provision to see how it holds out, and wherein
there is most danger of want: O Christians be serious in this self-sifting
work, and keep a distinct account how things are with you, whether you get or
lose ground: take the advice of a Royal learned Writer to his Princely Son,
thus: K. James, Basil. Doron, page 16, 17.
Censure your self as sharply as if you were your own enemy, -- a little
further, therefore I would not have you to pray to be delivered from sudden
death, but that God would give you grace so to live, as that you may every hour
of your life be ready for death: thus he. Sirs, study your hearts, try your
ways, deal faithfully with your poor souls, for you must undergo a critical
search at the great day, yea now in this world, Zeph. i. 12.
God is about to search you as with Candles, and rouse up secure sinners from
off their lees: a trying time may come, search your selves first, you may by
searching come to discern your state, and what degrees of grace you have, your
spirits may know the things of man, that concern your selves, 1 Cor. 2.10. Pro.
20.27.
and descend into the inward parts of the belly, therefore make use of this
reflective faculty of conscience, try your hearts, measure your selves at this
time with what you were formerlie, and thereby you will understand how things
are, and this will be a singular help against losing ground, prevent Apostasy,
prepare you for, and engage you in a work of thankfulness or repenting suitable
to what you find in your hearts: only be clear and distinct about your state,
that you may deplore or congratulate your condition as you find cause: thereby
God will have great glory, your souls much comfort, and if you find things
amiss, that self-tryal will be a step to Reparation: O Friends, take some time
to pose and search your own hearts, Dr. Hall Sol. 13. called Bosom discourse.
For this Subject of self-exam. See Baxt. Saints rest. 3 part.
in the multitude of businesses abroad be not strangers at home, you will find
work enough there, I shall conclude all with the words of a contemplative
Divine. The varieties of an ever-changing condition whiles in this vale of
misery cannot want the perpetual employment of a busy soul, therefore, says
he, O God let me be dumb to all the world, so as I may ever have a tongue for
thee and mine own heart: Take yet a Verse from divine Herbert; Sum up at night
what thou have done by day
And in the morning, what thou have to do,
Dress and undress thy soul, mark the decay
And growth of it; if with thy watch, that too
Be down, then wind up both, since we shall be
Most surely judged, make thy Accounts agree:


Thus for the seventh Direction:

8. Timely make up spiritual decays: This seconds the former, if you find
your selves declining, do not rest satisfied, let not an ill matter go on,
decays and delays therein are dangerous, the further you proceed the worse
will things be: a little rent in a Garment, if neglected grows vast and
incurable: a breach of water upon banks is quickly repaired at first, but
afterward in protract of time is widened to unavoidable inundations: Suits in
Law are easily taken up in the beginning, and fallings out amongst Friends may
be soon composed at first, but when contentions beget animosities, and then a
grudge, the agreement is more unfeasable, and the offended party more
un-reconcileable: If you miss your way upon the Road, how suddenly may you at
the first step back, and rectify your error? but the further you go in a
wrong way the more is your danger, and labor in returning: Many diseases might
have been cured had they been looked to in time, Prin^ipi^ obsta, fero medicina
paratur^ cum mala per long as invaluere moras.
that have proved mortal in the issue: and therefore the Rule is [obsta
principiis] hinder the first beginnings of a disease: We know its easier to
keep off an Enemy, then turn him out when once he is entered: the juice of a
Lemmon is soon wiped off a Knife when first sprinkled on it, without impression
left, but its abiding thereon corrodes into the metal, and leaves an indelible
character: Even so, guilt is sooner removed immediately after it is con^racted,
then when its long delaied, deferring doubles the guilt and makes the wound
deeper: David's long absence from God procures to his back a heavier burden and
broken bones, but Peter got the breach made up quickly by a speedy Repentance:
therefore David learned by sad experience to make more have to God, and not to
delay his Repentance and course of obedience, Psalm 119.59, 60. Psalm. 132.2, 3,
4, 5.
O Christians, fall presently about this work, Vow this day unto the mighty God
of Jacob, and you will not find a room for your selves in your Houses or Beds,
till you have found a place for the Lord in your hearts, make not up the day
till you have made your peace with God: give not sleep to your eyes til you can
through grace say, your souls rest in the Lord and, God rests in his love to
you; and if you die in that sleep, you shall sleep in Christ: Go to God poor
sinning, pining soul, tell him, Lord, I feel, my heart growing out of order,
thou do not grant to me thy wonted presence, sin is encroaching upon me,
temptations prevailing; grace-weakening, my spirit cooling, all things go to
wrack within me, but I am not satisfied in this declining state, I cannot live
at a distance from thee, I dare not neglect the means of my Recoverie, O revive
thy work, restore thy quickening Spirit, repair and redintegrate in my precious
soul thy glorious Image, which consists in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness; renew in my heart former affections, and return unto my soul thy
wonted favor: And thus, Sirs, do you betake your selves first to your hearts,
and then to God, and use your utmost endeavors to recruit with speed your
treasure of truths, graces, comforts and experiences, and as a Candle newly
extinguished will quickly catch fire, so the smoking flax of your languishing
graces shall quickly be restored, and revived, and your fainting spirits if
taken timely shall suddenly be recovered: Say then with sweet Herbert in his
Poems, -- Sin is still hammering my heart,
unto a hardness void of love,
Let suppling grace to cross his art
drop from above.


9. Be much in layings out: mental and spiritual treasures have this strange
property, that the more you lay out the more you increase therein: here that
Text takes place, Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given unto you, pressed
down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men [or God] give it into
your bosom -- We see in other things use makes prompt and perfect: it is Use
chiefly that makes the right hand stronger than the left: a Key much used is
bright, dis-use makes it rustie: a Pump much used brings forth water easily and
abundantly: Instruments of Iron and Steel are brighter with use; Thus it is in
humane learning, gifts and graces, expense enricheth the Possessour, and
Solomon says, the liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall
be watered also himself, Prove. 11.25. a liberal soul is a soul of blessing, as
the Hebr. has it, because it is a blessing to others, and the more blessed by
God, for to him that uses well shall be given more, as that is usually
interpreted, Matthew 25.29. (though that must be referred to Talents of the
same kind, for improving common grace does not necessarily procure special
grace); God does not infuse these Habits to lie dead in you, but you must stir
up the gift of God, employ your stock, lay out your money to Exchangers: be not
either non-Residents or non-Agents, Christianity requires activitie; the truth
is, all excellencies in the World are worthless if they be useless, there is
much good ground in the World that is neither cultured nor owned, a world of
precious Metals in the bowels of the Earth which shall never be coined, it is
the constant use of money whereby it answers all things: Soliloq. 20.
Stock-employed-pa. 72.73.
Improvement, says a Reverend man, gives a true value to all blessings, A
penny in the Purse is worth many Talents in an unknown Mine, that is our good
that does us good, and that whereby we do good, and the more we do good, the
more we are good: therefore Sirs, be active for God, read, pray, meditate,
confer, and do all with your might, as men that are bound straight for Heaven,
and will do all the good you can upon earth, and draw with you as many as you
can to glory; O how this will enrich you, and increase your store? but this I
have enlarged upon before: only observe, that it is the property of true grace
to be communicative, and a blessing annexed to its exercise to be aggragative:
a Christian gets most by laying out, God helps those that are ready to help the
souls of others.

10. Be thankful for treasures received, give God praise and God will give you
more grace: as our duty ascends, mercy descends; man's blessing God, brings down
more blessings from God: Adore Free Grace, and you shall have more fruits of
Free Grace: you are bound to bless God for worldly comforts and earthly
treasures, much more for heavenly Riches: Should we bless him for filling our
Houses with goods, and B^llies with food? and shall we not bless him for
filling our heads with truths^ and our hearts with grace? must we bless him for
a Crust, and shall we not much more for a Christ? Will we thank God for
earth, and shall we not for Heaven? I fear Christians are much defective in
this Angelical and Evangelical duty of praise: they are much in complaining of
their defects and imperfections, and that is good in it its due place, and
season, and measure, so as to humble them and promote endeavors: But withal
you ought to be thankful for what you are or have; Self-denial and gratitude
are very consistent, and contribute mutually to each other: You may and ought
to bewail your barrenness, though you must also thank God for the degrees of
fruitfulness: for what you have attained is the fruit of special grace; from
God alone is your fruit found: he alone has tilled, and sown, and given the
increase, let him have all the crop and harvest: to him is this debt of thanks
owing, pay for the old, and fetch new: admire his Free Grace that you have any
divine incomes, though you have not what you desire, yet you have more than you
deserve, and so much as deserves your thankfulness: that is a churlish creature
that drowns past kindnesses in a Sea of desires after more: I do appeal to
thine own conscience, have thou not something in thy soul worth thanks? have
thou not seen thy sin and misery? laid them more to heart than outward
troubles? do thou not prize Christ above the world? long after communion with
him? You cannot deny but you have received sweet impressions of divine truths,
and various experiences, and as for graces and comforts, deal but faithfully
with your own hearts, and see what they will say to you: begin to enumerate
your mercies, and you will see further occasion of gratitude; especially recount
your spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Jesus Christ: Thus does holy
David, Psalm. 103.1 2, 3. He stirs up all within him to praise God, and
reckons up spiritual mercies first, and can not thou say, he has satisfied
thy heart, and replenished thy soul with good things? Lay thy hand upon thy
heart, and ask it whether thou have not abundant cause of thankfulness? and
give God praise according to thy convictions: This is one great end God has in
bestowing mercy, and returning an answer of Prayer, that the soul may praise
him, which is the tribute of glory that is due from the creature to our
Creator: See Psalm 50.14, 15, 23. Mr. Greenham observes, Joel 2.26. inter
opera, fol. 8.13.
That in our Liturgies, among an hundred prayers scarce one thanksgiving is
found, and yet in civil matters, either by a natural Logic or cunning
Rhetoric, we have learned to begin a new suit, with a thankful commemoration
of receiving the old: Thus he* But I beseech you show not your selves
ungrateful, praise God for what you have received, yea bless him for your
certain grounds of hope perform your duty, and trust God for the performance
of his promise ^ Bless God that he has laid up so large a treasure in Christ
for indigent souls^ Bless him that he has laid out so much thereof upon the
many thousands that are now filled brimful of grace and glory, and bless him
for the sweet over-flowings of distinguishing grace to your languishing souls.
Sirs, you are much questioning the truth of Grace, but exercising your selves
in this duty of thankfulness will evidence sincerity, and preserve your stock,
and be a means of further proficiency: Unthankfulness and Unholiness are linked
together in Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.2
and the more thankful you are, the more holy you are and shall be: God loves
cheerful worshippers: the great variety of Musical Instruments in Gods worship
of old, should be ecchoed with cordial praises in Gospel Times: praise is
comely in Gods account, and thankful souls have largest incomes: what Saint was
ever loaded with such riches of Grace as the chosen Vessel, blessed Paul? and
who was fuller of thankfulness, or sounded out the praises of God so much as
he? he had it much in his lips, that had so much in his heart; and the more he
speaks of it, the more he is filled with it: every breath, let out in praises,
draws in new supplies of grace: do you glorify God, and he will satisfy you:
pay this rent, and God will not turn you out of doors: give him this tribute,
and you shall have your freehold: praise God for your little here, and you shall
have fullness of grace, and riches of glory to praise him in and with to all
Eternity.

I shall close all these Directions to maintain a treasure, especially this
last of thankfulness with a sweet Poem of Divine Herbert's, called gratefulness.

Thou that have given so much to me, Herb. the Church, page 116.

Give one thing more, a grateful heart,
See how thy beggar works on thee,
By Art.
He makes thy gifts occasion more,
And says, if he in this be crossed,
All thou have given him heretofore
Is lost.
But thou did reckon, when at first
Thy word our hearts and hands did crave,
What it would come to at the w^rst
To save.
Perpetual knockings at thy door,
Tears sullying thy transparent rooms,
Gift upon gift, much would have more,
And comes.
This notwithstanding, thou went on,
And did allow us all our noise,
Nay thou have made a sigh and groan,
Thy joys.
Not that thou have not still above,
Much better tunes than groans can make;
But that these Country aires thy love,
Did take.
Wherefore I cry, and cry again;
And in no quiet can thou be,
Til I a thankful heart ob^ain,
Of thee.
Not thankful, when it pleases me;
As if thy blessings had spare days,
But such a heart whose pulse may be
Thy praise.
CHAP. XIX.
A fourth Head of Directions, instructing the Christian in bringing forth good
things out of this good Treasure.

THere remains yet another part of this Directorie. How a good Man is to bring
forth good things out of the good treasure of the heart: in the Explication,
this has been largely insisted upon, that a Christian must lay out, and make
use of his treasure in the great duties of meditation, religious performances,
spiritual conferences, and in doing, and enduring much for God: no more of
them: I shall only add something of the manner of improving this treasure, in
the forementioned duties.

A Christians treasure must be drawn out -- 1. Speedily. 2. Seasonablie. 3.
Sincerely. 4. Suitablie.


1. The Christian is to bring forth things new, as well as old; lately
obtained, as well as long since hoarded: you are to improve truths at the first
rebound: many good convictions, conceptions, impressions are lost for want of
speedy use; and many souls are undone by neglect and delay: Pro. 12.27. The
slothful Man rosteth not that which he took in hun^ing, i.e. he lets it lie by,
and mar upon his hands, he takes pains to hunt for it, but will not take pains
to roast it, that meat is best, that is fresh and new, and quickly used, it is
but a folly to keep it til it be old and good for nothing: O how many such
sluggards are there in spirituals! how many have I seen travel far to hear a
Sermon, and be affected under it, yet lose all before they come home, for want
of following it home! many hunt after the means of grace, and take abundance
of pains to run to Ordinances, (which is to be commended) but alas, make little
improvement thereof, to their present advantage: their hearts were full of
desires before, and of delight under the droppings of the Sanctuary, but in a
little time, these things grow stale, and by degrees wear out, for want of a
sudden improvement: the Jews were not to keep any of the Manna, til the morrow,
if they did, it stank, and Gods people must not so lay up the Word, as to
neglect the present use thereof, for that will hinder the Operation thereof;
many a choice notion is lost for want of rubbing it up in a speedy
recognition: many a powerful conviction of sin and duty dies, for want of
speedy observation and application: the Preacher lays on the Plaster, but the
wound is not cured, except it be kept on by the souls voluntary consideration;
when blossoms are knit, though the flourish be gone, yet they are more secured
from injury, by frosts, and winds, than before, good motions speedily brought
into act, are knit, and have a due consistencie, and settled continuance: O
Sirs, your work is not done, when public Ordinances are at an end, you must
(as the welbred Beraeans) try by Scripture what you hear, and see how it suits
your case; a Man will try a pair of Gloves or Shoes, how they fit him, when he
first receives them, and use them afterward, as he has occasion: and will not
Christians honor the Word so far? David can do nothing with the Armor that he
had not proved, nor can you manage that Word that does not fit you, therefore
you must first prove, than approve, and then improve truths, as you have
occasion: yea, you must take the first season you can for it, as soon as you
come home, draw out this treasure, least a days neglect wear it out, 1 Cor. 15^
and so you have heard and believed in vain, as the Apostles hearers, who was
like him, Jam. ^.
that looked his natural face in a Glass, and then quite forgets his own
Physiognomie, and then the Word is as Water spilt upon the ground: Remembrance
has in it apprehension, reposition, retention, and production; as a Man takes
a shaft in his hand, puts it in his quiver, retains it there a season, and when
he would recreate himself, draws it out again, just so is treasuring any thing
in the memory; the end of laying up is laying out, Heb. 2.^
only let not our hearts be as leaking Vessels to let slip what we hear, but
let us lay hold on, lay up, and lay out for our own and others good: the best
help to preserve, is to improve truths: speedy exercise helps to spiritual
dexterity: Speculation will never make a Man an Artist, a few hours practice,
will do more than many days contemplation, and set on the work betimes, the
next opportunity make it appear what you got from God the last season of grace:
let your deeds speak what David in words professes, Psalm. 119.56. This I had
because I kept thy precepts, so in such a conflict, let your practice and
success say, this I got from God in such a duty, this I had in such an
Ordinance, this is by the sweet help I had in such a performance, methinks I
feel the virtue of that repast: O what good will this do you? it will excite
thankfulness, engage you to the like performance, accustom you to this divine
trade of fetching from God and acting for God: this is the first direction,
make speedy use of spiritua profit, draw out the treasure speedily.

2. Seasonably, S^nt aliqui quorum fructus q^^a nimis propere. minus pr^spere
oriuntur. Bern. de sanct. Ben. Ser. 1.
All things are beautiful in their season, though you must draw out of your
treasure speedily, yet not unseasonably you must not be so hasty as to be
preposterous let your Summer fruits be also ripe Grapes: A Christian must learn
to time all his actions and expressions, circumstances much vary cases, that
may be a duty at one time, that is not so at another: Divines lay down this
rule in expounding the Commandments. Negatives bind at all times, and to all
times. Affirmatives bind at all times, yet not to all times, Brotherly
admonition is a Christian duty, yet its not a duty to reprove a Man, when he is
drunk, or in a passion: Here Christian prudence interposeth, and is of singular
use: though David was full of a treasure of holy thoughts, yet he knew there was
as well a time to keep silence, as a time to speak, therefore he kept his lips
with a Bridle, while the wicked were present, Psalm. 39.1. David here did not
bind himself to perpetual silence but to a constant watch: so we must
consider, when speaking may do good, and when hurt: Isal. 50.4
Our Lord Jesus knew how to speak a word in season, and though he was always
full of an heavenly treasure, Mat. 27.14 Joh. 11.16
yet sometimes he answered not a word, and waved doing a good work, until he
saw a fitter season; that God might be more glorified, souls edified, and his
designs furthered: some Companies at some times may not be fit for holy
discourses, and we must not cast Pearls before Swine, lest in stead of
receiving them, Mat. 7.6. Prove. 8.5. Psalm. 1.3,
they rent us, a wise Man's heart discerns time, and judgment, says Solomon,
and a godly Man brings forth fruit in due season, says David: Prove. 25.11. A
word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver; in Heb. it is
a word spoken upon its wheels, fit times are wheels to carry words at greater
advantage: there is a nick of time, into which, if a word or work fall, it
becomes sweet and successful, and because most Men miss of this, their misery
is great upon them: Amb. Christi offic. (...) Lib. 1. ^ur: Cap. 2, 3 fol.
Ambrose observes that very many by speaking, scarce any by keeping silence
fall into sin, -- and quotes the Son of Syrach, saying, a wise man will first
spy his opportunity before he opens his mouth -- and concludes, let thy words
be under the yoke and balance, i. e. in humility and measure, and so thy
tongue shall be subject to thy mind: thus he, so also for self-conference, as
well as discourse with others, you should draw out truths, and press them
seasonably upon your own consciences, threatenings, and promises, precepts and
prophesies. Oh what stead may these stand you in? to check for sin, or to cheer
your hearts in the ways of God, to curb or conduct you in your motion, they
may come in opportunely, as Abigail to David to prevent a rash attempt, to
rouse up your drouzie or drooping spirits, calm your quarrelsome or troubled
hearts: how seasonable was Austin's, take up and read, putting into his hands a
pat and pertinent Scripture, and effecting his ends thereby? Do you awaken your
own spirits, call to remembrance your experiences and comforts at a dead lift,
Psalm. 77. Joh. 14.26.
as David did in a like case, and the spirit of God will bring truths also to
your remembrance, in a fit juncture of time; and certainly, in those dubious
workings and ambiguous debates, betwixt the carnal and spiritual part;
seasonable thoughts carry it and cast the scales for God: a small grain may help
to preponderate in an equal poise; Christians know what this means. O what good
has a seasonable thought done many a sinking soul? On the contrary,
unseasonable thoughts (though good in their own nature) have much prejudiced
and distracted the soul, as when a Christian is at Prayer, to have a motion to
read or meditate, when hearing to confer, etc. See Mr. Cobbet, of Prayer, part
3. chap. 3. page 416. how to discern them, page 423.
this is to make religious duties to interfere, Gods Spirit is a Spirit of
Order, and this is not a Methodical, or seasonable, bringing forth, or laying
out of this Treasure: All Divines conclude, that thoughts, though about good
Objects, if they be impertiment do become vain thoughts, and weaken the worship
of God: Take heed of those, but nourish pertinent thoughts, and make seasonable
use of this Heart-treasure: That Is the second:

3. Sincerely, Jer. 23. Arbores a^^m qu^ fructum faciun^ sed non suum hypocriae
sunt, cum Simone Syrenzaeo crueem portantes non suam: qui religiosa intention
carentes angariantur; and qua non amant, am^re gloriae quam desiderans, facere
compelluntur: Bern. Sermon. fol. 1^^.
be upright in your layings out, my meaning is, make show of no more than
indeed you have, profess not to have that to which you never attained: take
^eed of Hypocrisy, there are many forth-putting Professors, that talk of many
things they understand not, that brag of many truths, graces, comforts and
experiences, which they never felt in their own hearts, like the false
Prophets, that are said to steal the word every one from his neighbor: So,
many steal Phrases, Passages, and observations, that they glean up from other
Christians, which they know nothing of, but learn them by rote, and speak them
like a Parrot: these are just like some Scholars that pretend to much learning,
and acquaintance with many books, which they never saw, and though they talk
much, yet if they be well-sounded, are found very shallow: Herein appears a
great difference betwixt a child of God, and an hypocrite, the latter cares
not how good he makes men believe he is: the former is jealous, lest others
should think too well of him, and is afraid he shall fail their expectation:
his heart is broken with this one thought, that he is not such a one as
Christians account him to be, he has not such a treasure as men think he has:
O thinks the poor soul, by my Discourses, Prayers, Carriage, I have given
occasion to my dear Friends to imagine that there is more good in me than
indeed there is, they see the better side, but God and my conscience know much
rottenness in these garnished Tombs: this made Mr. Bradford subscribe his name
with the Epithe of a very painted Hypocrite: Nay, this is it that lays many a
good soul under a temptation, not to appear well to others, lest his treasure
within him should not answer, or bear out his prayers or professions: though
that may be a temptation, yet it is a good token of sincerity, when a good
report even of the truth it self, does promote self-abasing humility: But that
I urge to, is uprightness in words and works, let your heart and tongue be tied
together, rather be good than seem good, approve your heart to God, that your
praise may not be of men, but of God, profess to be what you are, and be what
you profess: be sure you have that within you, which you pretend unto:
Uprightness is a good means to Evidence and increase your Treasure, Pro. 28.10.
The upright shall have good things in possession: Alas Sirs, what will fair
words, and a false heart advantage you? fine flourishes and a silthie Inside
will render you odious: groundless brags end in woeful disgrace; God knows what
you have, and men shall know in time: Prove. 29.23. Bur^ing lips and a wicked
heart, are like a Po^ ^heard covered with Silver-dross: this gilded earth
makes a fair show of seeming zeal, but a^as, he shall be detected, his
wickedness shall be showed before the Congregation, verse. 26. Some men's
Religion is like Pepper, hot in the mouth, but cold in the stomach: or like a
man in a Fever, whose face and outward parts burn, but his heart shakes and
quivers for cold: and oh what zeal have some in external profession? but alas,
want either a principle at all, or at least want that treasure or measure of
grace they pretend to; Dr. Hall in Medit. and Vows. cent. 1. page 77.
Dr. Hall tells of one, that said, it is good to inure the mouth to speak well,
for good speech is many times drawn into affection: But, says he, I would fear
that speaking well without feeling, Ex duobus imperfectle multo est m^lius
babere rusticitatem sanctam, quam eloqueatia^ peccatricem: m^gis ven^rand^ est
sanctae rusti^^as, quam verbosa loquasitas: Soror in Christo dilecta, si nostra
intentio est simple^ apud Deum, in judicio ejus nostra operatio tenebrosa non
erit: qui cast^ esse per j^stitiam nesciunt, nequaquam esse innocents per
simplicitat^ possant. Dr. Bern. Sermon. 56. fol. 1299.
were the next way to draw a man to habitual hypocrisy: thus he. But let me
earnestly persuade all to sincerity and simplicity, for as Bernard says, of
two imperfect things, its better to have an holy rusticity, than an offending
eloquence, -- If our intention be upright to God-wards, our work will not be
dark and dangerous in Gods account; but they that are not chaste by
Righteousness, cannot be innocent by Simplicity.

4. Draw out of your treasure suitablie that is, not only acting answerably to
what you have within, Ne promus fit fortior condo:
that your layings out be not more than your layings up, which was the last
Head. But you must produce holy Actions, Expressions in some degree
proportionable -- unto Gods -- 1. Vouch-safed Means, 2. Appointed Ends:


1. Let your treasure within, and performances without be suitable to your
Receipts and advantages: where God lays out much, he looks for much, the more
pains he takes, the more fruit he expects: You must bring forth good fruit,
John 15.5, 8.
and much fruit that you may glorify God, and edify others; wicked men
express a prodigious contrariety to the Lords Tillage, but Godly men should
not express any disparitie betwixt their Receipts and returns: Enclosed grounds
must not be like the barren Wilderness; Gods Garden should be more fruitful
than the common Field: Trees of Gods planting and watering, are not to be like
the trees of the Forest: well-tilled souls should abound in fruits of
Righteousness: the Scripture compares the Church to a Vineyard, and particular
souls to Vine-trees that must bring forth grapes: Ezekiel 15.3.
and indeed a Vine is good for nothing if it be not fruitful: not so much as to
make a Pin of, to hang a Vessel upon: Now let us consider, if God have not done
as much for his Vineyard amongst us as for that in Isa. 5. and have not our
returns been parallel to theirs? the most part have brought forth wild grapes,
the best have not brought forth full grapes, ripe grapes, at least not sweet
grapes, but legal acts of too too constrained obedience: Have not Gods Children
often rather acted from a spirit of bondage, than of liberty? Well now, God
has a controversy with his Vine, justly may he command the Clouds to rain no
more upon it, nay, he will cast the wild Vines into eternal fire, and his own
own chosen Vines into the fiery Furnace of sharp affliction: therefore be
fruitful, bring forth abundantly, answer Gods Call and cost, as the Heavens
hear the Earth in sending down fructifying showrs, and the Earth hears the
Inhabitants in bringing forth abundant fruits, so let us bring forth much
fruit, hear we the Lords Summons, and echo back answerable fruitfulness to
the droppings of the Sanctuary and the sweet showrs of divine grace: Fructus
isti, profectus nostri, -- and nostros pr^^fectus suos fructus de putat. Bern.
Su^ Cant. Sermon. 63.
the fruits you are to bring forth are those fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in
Gal. 5.22. Love, Joy, Peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, these fruits are our proficiency, as Bernard speaks, and
God accounts our proficiency to be as his own fruits: that is the former, Answer
the means.

2. Answer Gods designed and appointed Ends: that is, Gods glory, and the
edification of your own and others souls: Be not self-seeking, but
self-denying in all your layings out, else it is a sign you are barren, and you
lose your labor; Israel is but an empty Vine, if he bring forth fruit to
himself, Hos. 10.1. The Vine of Esheol will commend the land of Canaan;
Clusters of ripe grapes will glorify God, the chief Husbandman, and evidence
the fatness of the soil, even the Courts of our God, Gospel Ordinances: God
takes himself to be glorified by our bringing forth much fruit, John 15.
and is it not a blessed thing to be an Instrument to glorify God? this was
the end of our Creation, of our Redemption, of all the motions and operations
of the sanctifying Spirit; awake therefore to much fruit-bearing, and let Cods
glory be the main thing in your eye and aim: Let the observant Christian that
takes care of the Vineyard of his own soul reap some comfort, but let our
Solomon (Jesus Christ the Prince of peace) have the thousand pieces of silver,
all the glory to himself, to whom only it belongs: Psalm. 115.1.
A Christian must speak the language of his Mother, not unto us, not unto us,
Isa. 42.8. Acts 12.23.
but to thy Name be the praise, for God will not give his glory to another:
Herod was eaten with worms, because he made a fine Oration, and gave not God
the glory; it is gross sacrilege to ascribe any thing to our selves: let him
that glories glory in the Lord; If you be called to make a confession of your
faith, and to produce your treasure before Courts, and Judgement-seats, speak
out, be not afraid of men, or ashamed of the Gospel, yet take those two Rules
with you, 1 Pet. 3 15. In the middle of the Verse you have a profession
required, in the beginning and the end, there is the dispositions necessary. 1.
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, there is the Principle and End, see that
you have grace, and do it to Gods glory. 2. Be ready to give an answer with
meekness and fear, there is the manner, Cheerfulness, Humility, without
vain-boasting or ostentation. Some may speak confidently, and carry it highly,
even to suffering for a good cause, and yet be the Devils Martyrs, by seeking
to get a repute among men, or to bear up an opinion, or please a Faction, or
gratify an Humor, or merit something at the hands of God; the end makes or
marts the action: Vae portantibus crucem and non scquentibus Christum. Bern.
Vainglory spoils great Achievements: yet its a miserable thing to bear the
Cross, and not to follow Christ. So I may say of Prayer, almsgiving, or
mortifying acts, or any other excellent ways of laying out of a Treasure, if
they be only to be seen of men, the work is as if it were not done, and the
doer in danger to be undone. Another subordinate end is, our own souls good,
and the good of others, I do all things, says Paul, for your edification, so
must we. God has inter-woven his glory and the good of souls, so nearly that
they are both promoted together: You must make Gods glory the ultimate end of
all your actions and expressions in all things natural, as eating, and
drinking: Civil, in buying and selling, and spiritual in praying and confering.
Take that notable Text in, 1 Pet 4.10, 11. -- As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold grace of God -- that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XX.
The fourth use, discovering the necessity, excellency, and commodity of having
in the Heart the before-described Treasure.

THe last use to be made of this point concerning this Heart-treasure is partly
of Consolation, and partly of Exhortation, wherein I shall both encourage those
that have it, and provoke to emulation those that have it not, that they may
labor to attain to it, and obtain it. And for the better urging this, I shall
further illustrate the usefulness of this Heart-treasure in these ten
Particulars.

1. A treasured soul is of great worth: a gracious Christian is the rarest
piece of all Gods workmanship, called [(...)] Ephesians. 2.10. It is a word that is no
where else used, it signifies an artificial facture, fabric or structure,
that notable Artifice, wherein the God of Heaven showed singular care and skill,
as well as love and grace: this new Creature in one soul is a greater work, and
of more worth, than this goodly frame of the World: a renewed soul is the
Epitome of the Creation, the clearest Image of Divinity upon earth, the true
Portraiture of God in man, and a blessed treasury of spiritual perfections;
Animus cujusque ^st quisque tantus quisque est, quantus est apud deum.
the soul of the Man, is the man, and grace is the Ornament of the soul, every
Man, is so far excellent, as he is religious, a Christians greatest glory, is,
in what he is God-wards: gracious souls are truly precious. and such as are
precious in Gods sight are honorable, Isai. 43.3, 4
and of more worth than the richest Princes, and largest Kingdoms: well may
they be the Lords jewels, that have a treasure of jewels locked up in their
breasts: these precious Sons of Zion are comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2.
though Men esteem them as Earthen Pitchers: it is true, they seem to be of
little worth to the outward view of a carnal eye, like their dear Redeemer, of
whom it is said by his despisers, he has no form nor comeliness, Isai.5 3.2.
and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him; so the
Saints seem squalid and sordid, but if you could see all, you would find them
all glorious within: the Servants of God are like unto the Tabernacle under the
Law, whose outside was Rams skins, Goats hair, and Badgers skins, course
stuff, but the inside was Gold, Silver, precious stones, and curious
work-manship: Just so are the Saints, compared therefore to the Tents of Kedar,
See Ainsworth in locum*
to the Curtains of Solomon, Song. 1.5. The word Kedar does signify blackness,
and Kedarens ( Ishmaels second Sons posterity) dwelt in Tents made of
haircloath; thus the Church and particular souls are dwelling in Tents, and
through afflictions, persecutions, and many corruptions in this howling
Wilderness, and weary Pilgrimage, are black and unlovely to look upon, but if
you could open the Tent door, and see into the secret Cabinet of a believers
heart, you would discover a treasure of rarest graces truths, experiences, and
comforts, that ever mortal eyes beheld; you should behold them as glorious as
the beautiful hangings about Solomon's Bed, as comely, says the Text, as the
Curtains of Solomon: Take but another familiar resemblance, suppose you see all
Earthen Pot full of Gold, let him that only sees the outside, and knows not
what is within, be asked the price thereof, possibly he will answer, not many
pence, but the Pot with the treasure in it, may be worth many thousand pounds,
a sorry Canvas Purse may contain a vast sum of money, nor must the whole be
rated, according to the poor facing, but rich lining: A Christian has an
excellent treasure in an Earthen Vessel, you must not censure him, before you
see him fully anatomized at the great day: his life is hid at present, but when
Christ who is his life, Col. 3.3, 4.
appears, he shall appear with him in glory: the Saints here are as Princes,
walking in disguise in a strange Country, and it does not yet appear, who or
what they are, but God has his time to unveile their glory, and reveal their
excellency: the Pearl cannot be found, til the shel of the fish be broken, and
when these vile bodies are turned to dust, then this precious treasure shall be
made manifest: O the excellency of a poor Child of God, it would make him
holily proud to consider what he is, the honor God has put upon him, and
treasures laid up in him, as a Man is a little World, so a Christian is a
commonwealth, a Church, and a Heaven (as it were) within himself: he has a
monopoly of the best commodities, a rich magazin of precious things for the
delight of God, profit of Men, and comfort of his own soul: though wicked Men
do account them not worthy to live in the World, (as though this Earth were too
good for them) yet God says of the Saints, of whom the World was not worthy,
they are too good to breath in this dirty Air, and shall be translated to
Heaven: here I might far exceed bounds, for a close take brave Luther's
Character of a Saint, he is, Christianus est filius Dei, haeres regni, frater
Christi, Socius Angelorum, Dominus mundi, particeps divina naturae. Tom. 1.
Lat. 106.
says he, a Child of God, an Heir of Heaven, the brother of Christ, the
Companion of Angels, the Lord of the World, and partaker of the divine nature:
Be cheared therefore oh thou trembling Christian, be provoked oh thou careless
soul to look after a large treasure, who would not be of this number? me thinks
it should excite all rational and intelligent Creatures to an holy covetousness
and ambition to be filled with these treasures, and to be clothed with all
this glory.

2. The treasured soul is fit for any condition: nothing can come amiss to the
Christian thus furnished, he is prepared for all dispensations: nothing can
make him miserable; Let Paul and Sila^ have their treasure with them, and they
can sing in the stocks at midnight; Let David be in a Pilgrimage, his treasure
will make him both company and melody; a Christian cannot be banished from his
treasure, he may say more truly than the Philosopher (omnia mea, mecum porto) I
carry all my estate with me; when the Proconsul told Cyprian he would banish
him, he answered, he is no exile that has God in his mind, separate God from
a Child of God, and then you undo him, if you could rob him of his treasure,
you might make him miserable; but not otherwise: he that is out of Hell, and
has an Heaven in his heart, has no cause of shame or terror; when he is
under sharp trials, and others condole him, he may say, as Christ to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves; and of
himself, he can say as Paul, I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus: Act. 21.13. God has laid in a
treasure in his heart, and he is willing to lay it out, which way soever the
Lord shall call for it: by this way of laying out, the treasure is not impaired,
but increased, by afflictions, truths are improved, graces exercised,
experiences added, and comforts wonderfully enlarged, and these advantages
countervaile the smart of the affliction, Mercatur^ est quaedam amittere, ut
majora lucr^ris. Tertul.
this is an holy merchandise, says an Ancient, to lose some things, that we
may gain the greater: the believing Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, knowing in themselves that they had in Heaven a better, and an enduring
substance: Heb. 10.34. Observe it, they know in themselves, i. e. They had
experience thereof in their own hearts, and now by this loss of their estates
this experience was more cleared, increased, confirmed than ever before: Oh
blessed exchange! to part with Earth, and get Heaven, to get riches off the
heart, and to get better riches into the heart: I must tell you that one grain
or degree of grace is more worth than heaps of worldly riche^, and happy is
that soul that endures the loss of these, to get a good share of the former:
Read the 11. of Hebrews, and follow that blessed Army of Martyrs, that fruitful
Cloud of Witnesses, and fear not Man, for you shall be gainers in the result of
all: a treasured soul is still gathering more to himself in every dispensation,
in word spoken, rod laid on, works done for him, the honest heart makes a good
use of, and is qualified for all disposals, and satisfied with, as well as
edified whatever the Lord does with him: But more of this anon, only observe,
that a treasured soul can pick that out of a Sermon, or providence that another
cannot, that is worth nothing, we read of Mr. Ignatius Jurdain (that zealous
Magistrate in Exeter) that a formal Man having once preached a Sermon at the
Cathedral, about Heaven, Mr. Clark's Collect. in the life of Mr. Ign. Jurd.
page 481.
the discourse was for the most part frothy, and beneath the dignity of such an
Argument: after Sermon Mr. Manton having occasion to visit Mr. Jurdain, after
many good instructions he asked Mr. Manton if he had heard the Sermon that
morning, he answered, yes, and did you not, said he, hear those wonderful
things which God has provided for them that love him? and then readily picked
out all those passages that were any way subservient to use and profit: It was
wonderful to me, says Mr. Manton, to see an holy heart could, draw comfort out
of any thing: the Sermon as Mr. Jurdain repeated to me, says he, was another
kind of Sermon, and seemed to be savoury and spiritual: I remember with what
warmth, and vigor he spoke of it, even til this day, and hope that I shall
never forget it: thus he, O sirs, if you had a treasure, you would hear Sermons
with profit, endure troubles after another manner than you ordinarily do.

3. This divine treasure enables the Sai^ for noble enterprises: the People
that (...) know their God shall be strong, and do exploits, Dan. 11.32. When as
unsound persons may be corrupted by flatteries; or ch^sed away by threats: the
greater treasure yo^ have, and the more singular things may y^^ do for God, the
Lord will own you to (...) much for him, and you shall glorify God i^ suffering
much for him: Acts 9.15. (...): Est Hebra ismus. A Vessel of choice.
Paul's Vessel w^^ well fraught with this treasure (and it may (...) for this
cause he is called a chosen Vessel and he only is so called, though doubtless
(...) there is were so also) and what mere Man d^ more for God than blessed Paul?
who ev^^ traveled over so much of the World to prea^^ the Gospel, as this
unwearied Apostle? Romans 15.19.
he preached all along from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum, which is, says
Par^us Sclavonia, in Europe, in a direct line 350 Germane miles: See Hen.
Bunting, in the Travels of Paul.
but he went [(...)] in a Circuit, visiting circumjacent places to preach the
Gospel; yea, a good Author reckons up Paul's travels in the Lords work to be
above ten thousand miles, so that he may be called, as George Eagles, that good
Martyr in Queen Mary's days Trudge-over-the World, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.23.
for he labored more abundantly than all the rest: and whence was it that Paul
was in labors more abundant? it was, because he had a large stock to ex-spend,
a wellfurnisht head and heart, and the Lord made his labors very successful:
and observe it, treasured souls are very instrumental for God: Such God calls
out to be as Captains in the Warfare, and leaders in his Field to go before
others in the sharpest service and most hazardous undertakings, these he puts
to the trial and brings them off victorious; It was a fine speech of Queen
Elizabeth's, when she was locked up close in the Tower, Mr. Thom, Heywoods Engl.
Elizab. p. 10^.
desiring God not to suffer her to lay her foundation upon the sands, but upon
the Rock, whereby all blasts of blustering weather might not prevail against
her: Whereunto she added, The skill of a Pilot is unknown but in a Tempest, the
valor of a Captain is unseen but in a battle, and the worth of a Christian is
unknown but in a trial and temptation: This earthly Globe, O Lord, is but a
Theater on which thou have placed us, to get some proof from hence of our
sufficiency: Thus proceeds that Peerless Princess: Oh the advantage of a well
stored Christian^ such a little David thus furnished with a scrip full of
smooth stones of the Brook, I mean, an head and heart full of Scripture-truths
and saving graces, will be able to vanquish the proud Goliath, or chiefest
spiritual Adversary: How did silly women encounter and conquer the Learned
Doctors in the Marian days? the subtillest Jesuits have been puzzled and
non-plust with the solid answers of savoury Christians: that precious Promise
is sweetly performed to Gods Children, Matthew, 10.19, 20, dictating to them what
they must speak, the reason there given is, the Spirit of your Father speaks
in you; yea, so full of matter have the treasured Saints been, that when bodily
Organs have ceased, their full hearts have found a miraculous vent. Read the
Churches Histories: Take a taste of wonders, when Romanus (that noble Martyr)
had by the Tormentors his tongue plucked up by the Roots, Acts and Mon. fol. 90
91, 92.
he praised God, and said, He that speaks of Christ shall never want a
tongue; when his cheeks were sore rent with Knives, he said, I thank thee, O
Captain, that thou have opened to me many mouths to preach my Lord Christ; So
it is recorded of Barlaam a Martyr, that having Fire and Frankincense put into
his right hand, wherein yet he had some strength, laying him on the Altar, his
enemies thinking that he by the heat of the fire would scatter some Incense on
the Altar, yet the flame eat a^bout his hand, which kept fast closed, he
singing, blessed be the Lord my God, which teaches my hands to war and my
fingers to sight, etc: Sirs, if you have a treasure, fear not, it shall be
produced, though you cannot expect such Miracles, yet in such a manner, and at
such times as may most glorify God, silence the wicked, and comfort your
hearts: I know it is the discouraging fear of trembling souls, if God call me to
sharp Encounters, I shall deny my Lord, betray his truths, bewray my weakness:
But poor Christian, fear not, Gods grace shall be sufficient for thee, See
Revel. 3.8, 9, 10.
thy little strength shall do wonders, if thou have a right treasure within, it
will appear to others admiration, and beyond thine own expectation: Oh for such
a Treasure as is before described!

4. A treasured soul is Gods delight; a full treasure in the heart, of the good
things of Heaven is the pleasure of the Almighty: God takes delight among the
sons of men, and amongst men the Believers heart is the Lords highest Throne,
next to that in the highest Heavens: and amongst sincere Christians none can
make God so welcome, or give him better entertainment, than he whose heart is
beautified with these blessed Ornaments: such a soul makes its Savior a
sumptuous Feast, and gives him a cheerful invitation: So in Solomon's Song, chapter
4.16. says she, Let my Beloved come into his Garden and eat his pleasant
fruits, i. e. Let him enjoy content in the fruits of his own Free Grace; he
has provided himself a Sacrifice, a Feast, let the graces of the Spirit
delight and solace the heart of the Author, no sooner does she invite him, but
he comes, chap. 1. and gathers his myrrh with his Spices, and eats his
Honeycomb with his Honey. i. e. He reaps the graces and duties of the sincere
soul, with as much delight as the Grape-gatherers or Husbandmen reap their
fruits in the Vineyard or Field: Oh with what pleasure does the Lord accept the
holy actings of a treasured Saint! but he contemns the costly sacrifices of
a graceless soul: he cares not for their thousands of Ram^ or ten thousands
of Rivers of Oil; No no, a soul stored with graces is better than an house full
of sacrifices; the Honeycomb of humane infirmities is dispensed with, where
there is store of. Honey in gracious acts, and heavenly dispositions: a little
Honey is better to God than the mere comb of Duties though artificially
composed, and exactly performed: Happy is the soul whom the Lord delights thus
to visit, that is thus fitted to entertain the High and lofty One: O that
Christians could say as the Church in Song, 7.13. -- At our gates are all
manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
Beloved; So the Soul should say, this grace or that disposition I will lay up
for my dearest Husband Jesus Christ, and bring it forth to give him content,
this smell of sweet Perfume shall meet him at his entrance, I will entertain
the beloved object of my dearest affections at the doors at home, in the fields
abroad, I Will bid him welcome upon all occasions, I will walk closely in my
Family sighing out blessed David's Option, Psalm. ^01.2.
O when will thou come unto me! I will get upon my knees in my Closet, and
there I Will seek, Matthew. 6.6.
and shall find my Father that sees in secret; I will go unto his Table and
partake of his holy Supper, and while the King sits at his Table, Cant. 1.12
my Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof; my bruised Spices, my exercised
Graces shall be as pleasant Odours to him, Genesis 8.21. Psalm. 141.2.
he will smell a sweet savor unto my sacrifices, and my prayers and praises
shall be set before him as Incense, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ; It
is not every ones happiness thus to enjoy God, to be well-pleasing to him;
some may come near with Moses, when others must worship afar off: None so
capable of intimate communion with God as the well-furnisht Christian:
ordinarily, he that has the greatest treasure has the sweetest visits: to
such as bring out of their treasure the precious fruits of the Spirit, to such
will God open the precious treasures of his Love: Observe it, there is much good
laid up for them that have grace, but it is brought forth to them that use
grace, see Psalm 31.18. Well then, Christians, lay up much grace and draw it
out, send your Lamb to this Ruler of the Land: bring your Presents to Jesus
Christ: the wisemen set us an Example in that welcome they brought to Jesus in
his Cradle, Mat. 2.11. they opened their Treasures, and presented to him gifts,
gold, frankincense and myrrh, answerable to his three Offices, of King, Priest
and Prophet, no man was to come to the Lord emp^y-handed in the time of the
Law: and if you come full-hearted with this treasure, and full-handed in
drawing it out, be sure the Lord will be open-hearted to admit you, and
open-handed to fill your hungry souls with ravishing incomes: You shall have
Jesus Christ to lodge with you all the night of affliction in sweet embraces:
Who would not have this Treasure that he may be welcome to Heaven?

5. A treasured soul can live well in a time of spiritual dearth, in the da^^s
of Famine such shall be satisfied: when others are hungry and thirsty, Psalm.
73.19.
and their souls fainting; a treasured Christian has good commons: for the
Christian thus st^cked has laid up that which stands him in stead in an evil
day: Amos 8.11, 12.
it is true, a famine of the Word is an afflictive judgment to a child of God;
Ordinances are to the Saints their glory, Ezekiel. 14.21.
and the excellency of their strength, the desire of their eyes, and that which
their souls do pity, the want of the Word for a season does more grieve them,
than the total loss does affect wicked men: though it concern them more, for
Gods Children have that to live upon that natural men have not, they have a
stock of inward strength that will carry them to the Rock of Ages, a stream of
grace in their hearts that will lead them to the Fountain of grace: Real Saints
are never famished but always furnished: they can make a better shift to live
than others can, they have something within doors: a treasure of Truths,
Graces, Comforts, and Experiences makes the Saint a rich Feast, Joh. ^.38.
for God is where these are: the flowing Rivers of living Water, that are in
the true Believers belly, Rev. 2.17.
and the hidden Manna will make a good meal, when God himself sits at the
Table; They that cannot go to public Assemblies may find the Lords presence a
little Sanctuary, he is every where to be found, and can make amends in private
for want of public liberty: the Word opened and applied was convincing,
satisfying and edifying, well they have their Lesson still before them, the
Bible in their hands, and a promise of the Spirit to bring things to their
remembrance: and why may not the treasured soul, whose senses are well
exercised by an habit of Scripture-Knowledge and self-conference preach to
himself in the want of other Preachers? A^b. 5.14.
certainly an able Christian, at full age may digest strong meat though he
carve for himself: one leaf of the Bible was in Luthers account worth a world;
much more all a Christians treasure whereby he is enabled to improve
Scriptures: Histories and Tradition tells us of some good Christians, who in
dark times having got a few leaves of the Bible, run with it into a corner, and
either read it themselves or hired others to read, whereby they received
incredible comfort, profit, and arrived at a strange degree of knowledge and
courage: So likewise the souls of Gods children may seek and see Gods Face in
private communion of Saints, in conference, prayer, and praise, God may make it
an happy exchange to them; the private lesser glass of secret duties may
represent God as clearly to the eye of their souls, as the broad glass of
public Ordinances. I speak not this to derogate from public, it is to be
preferred where God grants liberty, and where God withdraws, the want of open
Vision is much to be lamented, we are to be sorrowful for breaking up of
solemn Assemblies, Zeph. 3.1^. Lam. 1.4.
and mourn sore when the gate^ of Zion mourn: But this I speak, when by
persecution public Teachers are driven into Corners; then the Lord may supply
that want to his children some other way: But lest this be condemned as
Novelty, I shall express i^ in the words of a learned Author: Buchan^^ asks the
question, Institut. Theol. De Sacram. loc. 46. page 601.
What shall they do that want the opportunity of frequenting the public
Ordinances? He Answers, Such must travel abroad, and seek far and near for
them, But if they cannot find them, they must exercise themselves in religious
duties at home, Because, says he, the Kingdom of God is within them, and
because the word without the Sacraments may be the power of God to salvation;
Re Sacramenti nunquam destituuntur fideles, e^iamfi visibilibus signis carere
cogantur:
-- And he further adds, The the faithful can never be without the matter and
marrow of a Sacrament, though they may be compelled to want the visible Sign:
Thus he. Oh what a blessed thing is it to have a principle of Grace, and this
blessed Treasure! It Is surely worth something to have Light and plenty in a
time of darkness and scarcity.

CHAP. XXI.
Five more advantages of having this treasure in the heart.

6. COnsider this benefit of this heavenly Treasure in the heart of a
Christian; that every thing turns to the increase of this stock: it is the
strange attractive property of this Treasure, that it will fetch in all things
to fill it up, and make it greater: like fire, it will turn every thing to its
own nature: it is a divine Limbeck, that can extract pure Spirits out of all
things, according to that Catholic Promise in Romans 8.28.- We know that all
things work together for good -- prosperity, adversity, riches, poverty,
renown, and ignominy, thraldom and liberty, sickness and health, success and
disappointment, satanical suggestions, violent temptations and victorious
Conquests, all work for good: Yea, some extend this also to corruptions, yet
these but accidentally, or being managed by the constant care of a wise,
gracious and powerful Phisician; as Poison may be turned into a Remedy, Venenum
aliquand^ pro remedis fuit: Sen.
or (as they say) the drinking of that wine wherein a Viper has been drowned
cures the Loprosie; even so, God can so husband even the breakings in of
temptation, and breakings out of corruption as to make it turn to good, being
an occasion of deeper humiliation, and a Pin to prick the bladder of spiritual
pride, and a Spur to promote a holy jealousy and watchfulness, and a means to
work in the soul charity and sympathy toward others, to alienate our hearts
from this sinning weary world, and endear our hearts to God for pardoning
grace, and make us long for a sinless state in glory: these and suchlike ends
and uses God has and makes of sin, or else he would not suffer this dead
body, or rather body of death to haunt the souls of living Saints: our wise God
raised a stately structure over the ruins of Adams fall, or he had never
suffered it; God does his servants good by their sins, this uncou^h Experiment
made good Mr. Fox to say, That his graces did him most hurt, and his sins most
good, a strange Paradox, but a gracious soul knows what this means, that has
many a time by divine assistance fe^cht heaven out of hell^ light out of
darkness, sweet advantages from sad miscarriages: Sometimes the Christian can
say, I had sinned except I had sinned, the furthest way about has proved the
nearest way home, God has suffered me to break my bones by falling, that he
might set them more strongly: Mr. Capel, of Tempt. page 234.
We cannot go to heaven (says an experienced Divine) by Geometry, we must
fetch a compass by the gates of Hell, and see what news with Satan, ere we be
duly humbled, or can relish the Promises aright: Yet mistake not, no thanks to
sin or Satan for this, but to Freegrace, that orders all things to the best:
not let any adventure upon sin with such a conceit, for this were to sin that
grace may abound, that is the Devils Logic and dangerous presumption: But when
the Christian has fallen thus, the Lord helps him to improve his falls for
spiritual good; But much more all dispensations of Providence, sweet and
severe, if it go well with the treasured soul, it is drawn nearer to God by
these cords of Love: if ill, it is whipped further from sin and the world by
these scourges of anger; he can fetch a good crop of spiritual Fruit out of the
barren Heath of a wildernesse-condition; if from outward poverty he get this
advantage, to be poor in spirit, it is a rich gain, and worth a mine of Gold:
and so of other afflictions: The North wind is sharp and piercing, the South
wind soft and cherishing, but both blow good to the Christian, and make his
Spices flow out, or Graces break forth into lively exercises, Cant. 4.16. Yet
further, this Treasure does in a sort consecrate all states, so that let a man
have more or less, he has a sufficient treasure if he have this treasure
within, godliness with contentment is not only enough, but gain, yea great
gain: it seasons all things: that man has nothing that wants it, that man that
has this wants nothing: Habet omnia qui habet habentem omia:
wicked men may have much, but godly men have all things; when Jacob and Esau
complemented about the Present, that Jacob sent to pacify his angry Brother,
Esan said, Gen 33.9. (...) multum habeo, (...) su^ mihi omnia^
I have enough my Brother, Jacob also said, I have enough, but in the Hebrew
Esau said, I have much, and Jacob says, I have all, or, all things are to me:
intimating, that Jacobs treasure was far beyond his Brothers, even as the whole
is more than the part: There Is a secret blessing attends this hidden Treasure,
which gives content with want or abundance, and if God see good he will
increase the store: However, a Saints modicum or little, amounts to more than
wicked men's multum or large Revenues, as the word of truth testifies, Psalm
37.16.

7. This treasure is safe, its well locked up, and cannot be lost: Phil. 1.6.
being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: it is true, an external
profession, and mental accomplishments may be lost, but sincere saving graces
shall not be lost, it is also true, a saving treasure may be obscured, but
cannot be destroyed; yea it may be weakened, but is never totally wasted: Psalm.
16.5.
the infinite Jehovah is the Keeper of Israel: he that is the portion of your
cup, will maintain your lot: it is not so much the truth, nor yet the strength of
grace that keeps you from falling, but it is God only who alone is able to keep
you from falling, that supports the weak Christian: received grace will not
preserve without assisting grace, faith as an habit, will not carry on the soul
to death, or through death, but we are kept by the power of God, through faith
unto salvation: 1 Pet. 1.5. The power of God as the efficient cause, faith as
the instrument, God keeps faith, and faith keeps the soul steadfast: they that
have Mary's part and Mary's spirit, shall never be poor: God will fulfill the
desires of them that fear him, and will likewise fulfill the hearts of his
Saints with a rich treasure: my God, says Paul, shall supply all your need
according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.19. it is a mighty
full expression, and refers to all wants, spiritual as well as corporal: our
heavenly father gives his traveling Children a sufficient stock to bear their
charges through the World, and discharge every debt of duty to God and man, in
some measure of sincerity: this is that twopence with which the good
Samaritane furnished the wounded Man, as some Allegorize: Luke 10.3^
it is true some Saints live at high rates, in great expense, in costly duties,
but this very chargable living in high and hard exercises, and enterprises of
self-denial, do much increase the Christians store: a Christian is no loser,
but a gainer by flesh-displeasing performances: the more strength you lay out
for God, the more you fetch in: this is one means to keep a spiritual treasure
from being lost: neither Men nor Devils can deprive you of it, you may take up
blessed Paul's bold and triumphant challenge, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? All the powers of darkness cannot loose this knot
betwixt a precious Savior and a gracious soul: 2 Samuel 23.5 Isaai. 55.3^
the Covenant is ordered in all things and sure, it contains the sure mercies
of David, it is a Covenant of Salt: Isai. 54.10. The Mountains shall depart, and
the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee:
grace is the seed of God that abides for ever, God may repent of bestowing
common gifts, but these saving gifts and this holy calling are without
repentance: All the motions and commotions in the World cannot rob the
believing soul of its treasure; those flames that shall burn the World cannot
dissolve, but rather cement and soder the blessed union of a Saint to his
Savior; the treasured Christian may stand upon the worlds ruins, Domin^, non
excrucier propter aurum and argentum, ubi enim sint omnia mea tu scis: ibi enim
habebat omnia sua, ubi eum condere and the saurizare ille monuerat; qui haec
mala mundo ventura praedixerat: Videsis plura in lib. 1. de (...). Dei cap. 10.
^^i tit. Quot san. etis in amissione rerum tem^^ralium nihil per^at.
and say, I have nothing of all this huge heap to lose, I shall not be a mite
poorer for the stupendous conflagration of this goodly Fabric; let brutish
worldlings weep and wail over their fair Houses, large demaines, full bags,
numerous Cattle, and gorgeous Attire, I am rich still, as rich as ever I was,
and some richer, for what I had in hope and expectation, I have now in full
enjoyment and possession Augustine sweetly discourses concerning one Paulinus
Bishop of Nola, who prayed thus, (having lost a great estate by the invasion of
the Barbarians) Lord, I shall not be troubled for silver or gold, for where my
all is, thou know: for says Austin, there he had his all, where he had
warned him to lay it, who had forewarned the World of these approaching evils:
-- a little after, he says that some were tortured by the Barbarians to
discover their riches, but says he, nec prodere nec perdere potuerunt bonum
quo^ipsi boni erant; they could neither betray nor lose that good by which they
themselves were good; that was their graces and virtues: Oh sirs, what would
you give to have your estates secured in a losing, plundering, desolating day?
here is an insuring office, the God of Heaven will secure the wel-laden Ship,
that it shall come safe to shore: certainly this is a rich privilege in a day
when we can be sure of nothing, that, that only that can make us happy, that
and nothing else can be made sure.

8. God knows and owns that treasure which sometimes is hid from the Possessor:
this is a sweet consideration; Col. 3.3. our life is hid with Christ in God,
that is, sometimes it is hid from our own eyes, as well as from the eyes of
others, but still it is hid with God, and he that hid, can find; Saints are
called Gods hidden ones, and their life is hidden, both in respect of safety,
secrecy, and obscurity: a Christian may have more of God in him, than he knows
of; it is one thing to have grace, another to know that we have grace, a Child
of God may have the seed and root of holiness, yet want the bud and blossom of
actual comfort: a sincere soul has always the solid foundation for, yet may
at sometimes be without the actual possession of divine consolations; sometimes
God with draws the light of his countenance, and leaves the soul in darkness
and desertion, he often suspends that act of the spirit, which may evidence the
souls interest and sincerity; sometimes the Christian is lazy, and uses not
Gods appointed means to beget assurance: or by thinking of more comfort, than
God is willing to impart, may deny what he has: or by entertaining some
beloved lust, or by the prevalency of melancholy, See D. Sibs Souls conflict.
Symonds deser. souls Case. -- Baxters Rest. par. 3 p. 156. to 169.
or impotency of natural parts, this treasure may be hid from the eyes of the
believer himself; these and other reasons Divines have laid down as causes of
Christians want of comfort or assurance: Every Saint knows this by too sad
experience that he is often at a loss, and cannot tell what to make of his
condition, he has his nights as well as days, a nipping Winter as well as a
flourishing Summer: the sap of grace may retreat into the root, the Herbs and
Flowers, and Plants may shrink and disappear, and this goodly new Creation may
droop and lose its glorious verdure, yet life may be there, a Summer may come
at the return of the year, when the glorious Sun of righteousness shall reflect
beauty upon these hidden graces, and draw them forth into lively fruits of
Gospel-Obedience, whereby the Saint shall live again, and know that he lives,
believe, and know that he believes: In the mean time, while such a soul does
walk in darkness and see no light, Isai. 50.7.
let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God, let him
even cast Anchor in the dark, and repose his troubled heart upon the Rock of
Ages; faith is a venture, and you must venture your all in this bottom use Gods
appointed means for obtaining comfort, improve free grace, study the promises,
awake your graces, recollect experiences, renew your repentance, walk close
with God, be importunate at the throne of grace, and certainly joy and comfort
will spring forth speedily; peace is the usual result of the exercise of grace,
and as the striking of Flint and Steel together produces Fire, so the lively
acting of sincere grace, upon its proper object, begets the light and heat
of joy and warmth: Mr. Eurrough's on Hos. 2.19. page 606.
yea it is the observation of a good Divine, that the comfort of letting out our
hearts to God, is a greater comfort, than any comfort we can have in receiving
any thing from God: But this is sure, if you have a treasure of graces, God will
in due time give you a treasure of comforts; and if he do not fill you with joy
and peace in believing, yet he will maintain his interest in you, and keep you
from fainting, if you have not spiritual suavities, you shall have secret
sustentation, if your state be not sweet, yet it shall be sure, his grace shall
be sufficient for you, and that is equivalent to the mercy desired, and the less
comfort you have in the way, the more you shall have in the end; and it matters
not much whether comfort come an hour before death, or an hour after, since it
will certainly come, as a Man of God once said; In the mean time, approve your
hearts to God, he searches the hearts, and knows what you are and have,
though neither your selves nor others know it, he sees how your principles lie
within you, and knows, Psalm. 1.6. Psalm. 37.37
i. e. approves the way of the righteous, and though your way be troublesome,
yet your end shall be peace; and though you may be ready to mis-judge your state
and acts, in a hurry of temptation, yet your happiness does not depend upon
your account of your selves, but upon Gods account of you in Christ; a gracious
foul may not know the acts of faith, yet may be satisfied of the object of
faith; he cannot say sometimes, I know that I do sincerely believe, but yet
may say, 2 Timothy i. 12.
I know in whom I have believed, and desire again to believe; the good soul may
say, I know not how things are with me, I have lost my self in a thicket of
cares and fears, yet I put my hand into his that knows the way, and can lead
me out, and let him see to the safe landing of my soul in that Haven of rest,
and to the lodging of it in the bosom of Abraham, that in tender care of it,
shed his precious blood for it; This is the next head, God will own this hidden
treasure.

9. A treasured soul has a treasure in heaven, and indeed his best treasure is
above: for this treasure in the heart is the counterpane of a treasure in the
Heavens: these are always conjoined. never is any soul brought up to Heaven,
but first God brings down Heaven into it; God furnishes the soul by the
operations of his grace, and then takes possession of it by the earnest of his
spirit, before he fill it with glory; 2 Cor. 5.5. Have thou a treasure laid up
in thy heart? That Is the first fruits of a larger vintage; light is sown for
the righteous, and (I may say) in the hearts of the righteous, if gracious
treasures be laid up in the temple of your souls, glorious things are laid up
in the new Jerusalem for you, such things as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor heart conceived: Happy art thou, Oh poor soul, or rather rich soul, poor in
this world, rich in faith, and heir of a Kingdom, yea, Jam. ^.^.
of the Kingdom: thou may both sigh and smile at the mad and frantic World,
that weary themselves for very vanity, that torment themselves in caring and
toiling for an earthly Treasure; which when obtained, does rather beget torment
than content, and leads at last to final desperation: It is recorded of
Stigandus Archbishop of Canterbury that he lived very poorly, Mr. Fox Acts and
Monum, fol. 174.
saying and swearing that he had nothing, no not a penny: yet by a Key fastened
about his neck, was found great treasures after his death, which he had hid
under the ground: But alas that Key would not open Heaven-gates, nor would that
treasure purchase Glory, but the believing soul has his treasure above, and by
Faith he has interest in the Lord Jesus, who has indeed the Key of David, and
is already entered into the Holiest, and has set Heaven-gates wide open to his
purchased and prepared ones, and he is gone to prepare a place for them. Oh
Sirs, fear not, you that have grace shall not miss of glory, as your flesh is
in Heaven, so Heaven is in your flesh, as it were; he will open the gates of
Glory to those that opened their hearts to receive the King of Glory: the
treasure of grace raises the heart to this treasure above, and lays up
provision for an eternal state, this stream runs to that Ocean, and shall at
last be swallowed up therewith, Psalm 16.11.
where there is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore: And let this excite
all persons to hoard up a treasure in their hearts and in Heaven, which neither
moth nor rust can corrupt, Mat. 6.20.
nor Thief break through and steal it: Alas, poor creatures, if you get a
treasure in the world, what will you do for a treasure when you must be gone
hence? your earthly treasures will not purchase eternal happiness, you cannot
always live here* therefore lay up in store for your selves a good foundation
against the time to come, that you may lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.19.
Make Friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when these fail, you may be
received into everlasting Habitations, Luke 16.9. Like that provident King of
the Spartans, who observing the people to dethrone their Kings at the years
end, and thrust them into a foreign Isle to live in mifery, did not ruffle it
out in that prodigality wherein his Predecessors lived for one year, but sent a
great estate before him into that Country where he was to be banished, that he
might live comfortably when he was degraded: just thus must the wise and
gracious Christian do, provide in the enjoyment of all things for a day of
darkness in the want of all things: as Time is the seminary of Eternity, so
the soul is to lay up here for an eternal state hereafter; Blessed is that soul
that is found with these treasures in his heart, a Crown of Righteousness is
laid up for those in whose hearts is found the work of Righteousness, and upon
whose backs is found the Robes of Righteousness: let such bless God for
grace, and long for glory.

10. Consider yet further, treasures of glory, are proportioned to treasures of
grace in the heart: it is true, they that have least glory in Heaven shall want
none, yet withal, it is very likely there shall be degrees of happiness, and they
that have had most grace shall have most glory; my reason is, because grace does
widen and capacitate the soul for larger Revenues of glory: many Vessels of
great and small quantity cast into the Ocean are all full, but some hold more,
and others less, such is the immense and inconceivable happiness of the
Saints above, that all shall have all, and none shall want any thing to complete
their felicity: as it is impossible for a soul to be in Heaven and not be
happy, so there shall be no nook nor corner of a glorified soul, but it shall be
filled with happiness: these clean Vessels shall be filled with this new wine
of glory: God shall be all in all, all good to all souls, and in all souls,
Yea, such is the vast and infinite Ocean of glory that they shall enter into
their Masters joy, not it into them (though they shall be as full of it as
their hearts can hold): Oh how shall they bathe themselves in those Rivers of
pleasures? the mind shall be full of Light, the will of Holiness, and the
affections of Ravishment and satisfaction, when we awake we shall be satisfied
with his Image, Psalm 17.15. nor shall there be any envying one another
happiness, (though one star differ from another in glory) but every one shall
bear his part in the lower or higher praises of God, (as one says) with an
harmonious variety in perfect symphonie: certainly that immarcessible Crown of
Glory shall be as weighty upon every Saints head, as he is able to bear,
though that weight shall be their delight, nothing is heavy in its proper
Element, and Heaven is the proper Element of the spirits of just men made
perfect, Hence it is said, the four beasts (i.e.) the community of the faithful)
rest not day nor night, praising God, Rev. 4.8. yet their work is their rest,
only some have an Instrument of six, some of eight, others sing praise to God
upon an Instrument of ten strings, having more enlarged faculties fitted to
that Angelical duty: Marth. 20.15. Vid, Bez. quaest. and Resp. p. 98. Caeterum
messis tum, de spirituali mercede vitae a ternae, quam terrenis
benedictionibue, quibus Deus prosequit^^ homines beneficos ex ^oni debet: Calv.
in l^^.
it may seem that as there is degrees of torments in hell (for it will be more
tolerable for some than for others) so there will be degrees of happiness in
Heaven, by the rule of contraries: for, says Beza, that Scripture of sowing
and reaping sparingly, and liberally, in 2 Cor. 9.6. refers not only to charity
and temporal advantages, but piety and eternal incomes: Thus does Calvin
iterpret it also; and the Parable of the Talents, whose reward was
proportionable to their improvement, Luke 19.16, 17, 18. It Is true, parabolical
Divinity is not argumentative, yet the mainscope of a Parable has a
demonstration in it, and it may seem probable that those whom God honors with
most grace, and that honor God with most service and suffering should be most
honored with glory: But nothing of merit in all this, for giving Heaven as
wages for work is an act of commutative justice, but what equality is there
betwixt finite Services and infinite Glory? none at all, no, no, eternal Life
is the gift of God: Let proud Papists say, they will not have Heaven gratis,
let the real Saint look upon Gospel-blessings as fruits of Free Grace, See this
Quest. answer. in Buch. loc. 36. De vita aeterna, pa. 446. Determined that
there shall be degrees of glory from, 1 These. 2.19. Dan. 12.3. 1 Cor. 15.41.
and the City above as built all of this Freestone, and the way paved thither
with the meritorious bloodshed of our dear Redeemer; And whether there be
degrees of glory, or no, be sure the treasured soul shall have his share, and
we shall best be able to resolve this question by experience; Vision and
Fruition will be the best determination. Now these great things are Riddles and
Mysteries to us, because we look but through a glass darkly, we have but faint
Emblems and poor glympses of that glory which shall be revealed, but then we
shall see God as he is, and know all things fit for creatures to be acquainted
with, a thousand of these hard knots shall be untied, and our souls fully
irradiated with the beams of divine Light.

CHAP. XXII.
Some Objections answered, and the Exhortation urged.

BUt here come in many doubting souls with their several sad complaints and
selfpuzzling Objections.

1. Alas, says one, I fear I have no such treasure as here is described, for I
have a very ignorant head, and therefore an empty heart, these treasures enter
in by the door and window of knowledge, but I know nothing yet as I ought to
know; I cannot conceive aright of one truth, and how I should I then have a
treasure of truths?

I answer, It Is well thou art complaining; Unsanctified knowledge puffs up
with conceits of imaginary seize, gracious souls are sensible of defects
and lament their ignorance: David was a Saint wel-treasured, yet calls himself a
beast; Agur was a wise and holy man, yet professes that he was more brutish
than any man: nay, he says, he had not the understanding of a man, Pro. 30.2.
It Is an hopeful sign to hear Christians bewail their ignorance, but it does not
become any man to brag of his Knowledge: the lowest humility is the highest
attainment: self-denial is a sign of, and means to spiritual Riches: it is a
sign thou have profited when thou discernest and bewailest thy non-proficiency:
Besides, you must know, that you are not to determine of your treasure of
truths, by the number of truths known, but by the manner of your knowing them,
and your estimation of them; do you value the truth so, as to buy the truth at
any rate, and to sell it at no rate? nay, are you not willing to part with your
lives rather than truth? Has not truth had efficacy in your hearts, authority
over your consciences, and prevalency in your conversations? Do you give up
your selves to the truths you do know? and, walk with God according to light
received? if so, then you have a treasure both of truths and graces: it is a
wonder to consider how little light, and how much heat Christ's own Disciples,
and zealous Martyrs have gone straight to Heaven with: I speak not this to
sooth up any in ignorance, or to patronize negligence, but to quiet the poor
doubting disconsolate conscience, that is affected with a sense of its ignorance.

2. Ah, says another, Is it possible that I should have a treasure of grace
that have such a treasure of sin; the Lord knows, my heart is even stuffed full
of corruption, there is such a huge fardel on my back, such a monstrous body of
death, that I much fear whether I have any grace at all in my heart or no, my
sin bears me down like a violent torrent, lust is predominant, and can grace be
prevalent?

I answer, I am glad to hear these Complaints from thee, it is no new thing for
a Paul to cry out of a body of death: living men feel the weight of a burden,
but dead men are not hurt: Do thou really complain of the power of sin! then
it is a Tyrant, not a King in thy heart? Do thou sigh and fight against sin?
Deuteronomy. 22.25.
bless God for that Light to see it, and Life to oppose it: the forced Damsel
cleared her innocence by crying out, so does the vanquished soul evidence
integrigrity by zealous groans to God; it is but a Rape not a complete Conquest,
while the soul is struggling with its enemy, and gives not up the Fort of the
heart: But know this, that a Christian may have a large treasure of grace in
his heart, and yet feel violent workings of lust, grace may be strong, yet
corruption impetuous; God may give it a commission to make violent incursions
upon the wel-furnished soul, for wise and gracious ends: only consider whether
thy prayers be ardent, contests vehement, and mournings for it bitter and more
than ordinary; if it be thus with thee, thou may have a treasure for all
that, not only a principle of grace, but a large measure thereof, for opposites
illustrate one another, and though there be strong lustings of the flesh
against the Spirit, yet if there be also proportionable struglings of the
Spirit against the flesh, the souls condition may be safe, and for ought I
know, it may be rich in Grace; That Is for the second Object.

3. But, says the Christian, you talk much of a treasure of comforts, but alas
I know not what that means, alas comfort is far away; surely if I had had any
grace I should have had peace, but I have been long under sadness and in many
disconsolate fears, I fear I have no treasure of grace.

Answ. Grace and Peace are not inseparable, they may be dis-joined, as
Scripture and Experience testify, many a gracious soul has been in deep
sorrows, a soul may have a Hell within it, and yet at last go to Heaven; a
Christian may sail through a tempestuous Sea to a quiet Haven; Yea, further
observe, that a Christian may have a treasure of grace, yet want a treasure of
joy and comfort; the reason is, because comfort is an effect of Gods Spirit,
which acts arbitrarily, and not by necessity, for if the Spirit shine not upon
the graces of the Spirit in the soul, it shall have no comfort, though it be
full of grace; Now God does sometimes suspend the comforting presence of his
Spirit from the best of his servants for righteous and gracious ends: hence we
find eminent servants of God (that feared God above many) complaining of the
want of comfort, as Job, and David, and Heman; yea, sometimes we find our dear
Redeemer (who had a treasure of grace, and the Spirit above measure)
complaining of Gods forsaking him, and consequently of the absence of joy and
comfort: Poor soul, do not murmr that God does not always feed thee with
these Sweetmeats, which are are the fare of the Upper-Table, and reserved for
an heavenly Banquet: what though thou have not always actual possession of
comfort, yet thou have a solid Foundation for it: what if thou be not
continually dandled on thy Fathers lap, and kissed with the kisses of his
mouth, yet thou art a child still, and thou can not deny but sometimes he
does visit thy soul with heart-solacing consolations, and thou might have a
treasure of them if thou could be ready for them, or rightly improve them.

4. Alas, says the troubled heart, if I knew my state were safe, I could be
better satisfied in the want of comfort, but I have cause to call all into
question, I have been so barren and unprofitable under means of grace,
ordinances and providence, I may cry out my leanness, my leanness, woe unto
me, if there had been any real good in my soul, it would have been more
increased under my long-enjoyed helps.

I answer, there is never a soul under Heaven, but has sad cause to complain
under ordinances and enjoyments; where is the man that can stand forth, and say
he has gathered in harvest as much as he might have done? but there is a
profiting to grace, and in grace, have thou experiences of the former? have
thou been wasted over by the boat of ordinances into Jesus Christ, unto a state
of grace, I hope thou can not deny this; well then, thou have attained to the
main proficiencie, bless God for that, and for a progress in grace, examine thy
self a little more strictly, is not Jesus Christ more endeared to thee? do not
the things of God relish better with thee? do thou not more scorn the World,
and all preferments that it offers to thee? is not thy prevailing purpose to
cleave to God, notwithstanding oppositions, more fixed and settled in thy heart,
upon long experience of the ways of God? do thou not every day see more
demonstrative reasons to confirm thee in thy choice of this better part? and
let me ask thee, whether thou have not grown downwards in humility,
self-denial, hatred of sin, love to the Saints? though thou can not say thou
have grown upwards in joy, faith, heavenly-mindedness, and communion with God?
do not think thou art above complaint and proficiencie in this life; none have
attained to a perfect treasure in this valley of tears, and shadow of death;
you will have cause to complain of defects and imperfections, which in your
perfect Saviors complete righteousness, your God will graciously cover and
cure.

5. But, says the poor soul, methinks I fall very far short, not only of what
I might have attained to, but what others (under the same enjoyments) have
arrived to, I am out-stripped by such as set out long after me, they that were
converted some years after me have attained to more treasures of gifts, graces,
and abilities for edification, and I lag behind, what shall I think of my self?

I answer, thou have cause to lament thy non-proficiencie, and bewail that
thou have not kept pace with others, there should be an holy emulation amongst
Christians, and a striving which shall be richest in these good things of
Heaven; but withal, comparing your selves with others, is no good rule, (except
it be to shame your negligent hearts, and excite diligent endeavors) because
some have better parts, and may sooner attain to higher degrees of knowledge,
and some God intends to call out to extraordinary service or suffering, others
God designs to pluck away sooner by death, and so lays up much in a shorter
time. -- Besides, though they may seem to have a larger treasure, yet you do
not know what they may have to do with it, they may be put to it, and all they
have little enough, they may have such corruptions, temptations, afflictions,
desertions, as may exhaust a great treasure, possibly they put the best side
out, and you see the bright side, and not the black side of the Cloud; you hear
their prayers, discourses, exercises amongst others, but you know not the
dolorous griefs, and bitter complaints before the Lord in secret; could you lay
your ears to their Closets, you would over-hear their sad sighs for their
fullness of sin, emptiness of grace, and naughty frame of heart; it may be your
treasure is more settled, and theirs more floating, and you see it when the tide
is high; you should take in all before you judge your selves by others, and
indeed no Man is a competent judge of another frame of spirit, you may even
fall below hypocrites themselves in seeming inlargements.

6. Yea, 1 Cor. 12.4, 6.
says the soul, but I fall below others in real usefulness, if there were a
treasure within, Romans 12.4.
me thinks it would appear more to the glory of God and good of others, but I
do no good in my place, I cumber the ground, and bring not forth fruit as
others do, that do God a great deal more service, than I do.

I answer, the Apostle says, there are diversities of gifts, and operations,
so also, all members have not the same office, and consequently not the same
usefulness, some move in an higher sphere, and some in a lower, but if thou be
set in this heavenly orb of the Church, thou have some influence, there is
not a Finger or Toe in this body of Christ, but it is of some use, and cannot
be spared, but it will be lame and defective, not a loop or pin in this
Tabernacle of the Church, but as it fills up a room, so it bears up some weight:
the body of Christ has need of thee, nay, there is not the choicest members
that can say to the meanest in the Church, I have no need of thee, Paul, though
a great Apostle, stood in need of the prayers of the meanest Christian: an Iron
Key may sometimes open that Lock, that a silver one cannot effect; there is
never a Saint in the World, that knows the good that he does, nor shall it be
known to others the use he is of, til he be taken away, and then the place shall
feel a loss of him, a City, a Country, and Kingdom may be spared upon the
prayers and uprightness of one righteous person: Let not more worthy members
despise the ignoble, since they cannot be without them, and let not inferior
members envy the more honorable, because God appoints every one his station,
and accepts the meanest members faithful service, a sweeper of Chimneys may
honor God in his place, as well as a Pastor of souls in his: a plain Christian
in a leathern Coat may (if faithful in his station) do God as much service, as
a great Doctor in his purple Robes: if thou be serious in the work of God, thou
may promote the cause of God in thy Family, which may reflect a luster to
the whole Church.

7. But alas, says the Soul, I am so far from increasing into a treasure, that
I fear I am on the losing hand; I am in spending, wasting, decreasing by sinful
practices, what I gain in a Duty or Ordinance, I lose by an act of sinning, and
have much ado to recover my self, o^ this inconstant, unstable spirit! what
shall become of me?

I answer, the case is sad, and much to be lamented, but so it is with the best
of Gods Children, David says, thou have lifted me up, and cast me down, while
we are tossed upon the fluctuating Waves of the Sea, we must expect Mariners
motion, Psalm. 107.26.
to mount up to Heaven, and go down to the depths, to have rich enjoyments, and
sadder abatements, that we may know both how to want, and how to abound in
point of enlargement: sometimes our hearts are opened, as the heart of Lidia,
to receive of that grace which becomes our treasure, then again our hearts are
shut up, and we are in danger to shut out divine incomes; sometimes the Sails
of our souls are spread, to entertain the livelie guests of the holy spirit,
but how often are they contracted, and we then resist the blessed motions
thereof? lets complain of this, as our sin and shame: but thus it must be in
this sublunary state, to distinguish betwixt this Vale of mutabilitie, and the
heavenly Mount of unchangable felicity: yet take notice, that the souls
treasure may be maintained, and even increased by this variety of conditions;
by standing still, or falling back, he may grow more self-suspicious, penitent,
vigilant, and diligent, and make the more have after his God, to redeem the
time that he has lost, and pick up his scattered crumbs: when a covetous Man
has wasted any thing; or mist a good bargain, he will seek to make amends, by
future diligence: thus will the gracious soul, so that God may improve slips, to
standing faster, stumblings to a speedy motion forwards, and falls to a greater
heedfulness and sensibleness: Have thou not found it thus? poor soul, have thou
not been a gainer by thy losses? have not these spiritual Egyptians (of raging
corruptions) paid tribute to thy soul, to increase thy spiritual stock? have
not these Gibeonites been hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water, to help thee in
the Service of the Sanctuary? I question not, but thou have found these bitter
Enemies, as occasions at least to put thee on to watch thy treasure better;
Number. 33.55.
the Canaanites were to be to Israel, as pricks in their eyes, and thorns in
their sides, just so are sins to the Saints, these pricks in their eyes, make
them ^eep more for sin, and these thorns in their ^ides, spur them more toward
the City of ^efuge: there are different sorts of Christians, some are solid,
sober, and more settled in their motion, that keep on a good, eaven pace in ^e
ways of God, others are more uncertain, sometimes push forwards, and draw back
again, yet these may be Gods Children, as well as the former, and sometimes it
is occasioned by the natural levity, and fickleness of their spirits, or other
causes, yet still the almighty Arm of Jehovah is under them, and all his Saints
are in his hand, and though these unstable souls may not excel, yet they shall
keep their hold, and every leap they take shall set them nearer to Heaven, and
lead them to that immutable state, where there is fullness of joy, and Rivers of
pleasure for ever more.

Thus much for answer to some Objections: I shall now conclude all with a brief
and serious exhortation, and oh that I could persuade and prevail with all to
look after their share in the treasure, so largely opened to you, methinks it
should be an easy thing to persuade Men to embrace a treasure, but oh how hard
is it to engage Men to look after a treasure for their souls! I see what a
wretched thing a carnal heart is, and poor souls fight against their own
interest, and forsake their own mercy.

One would think that they, that are poor in the World, would be induced to
consider of some treasure at last; I beseech you, let reason be heard, argue
rationally, and let your souls be working in such thoughts as these, God has
cast my lot to be in a mean estate, and I work hard for a bare living, I toil
and travel night and day, and I can scarce get course Clothes for my back, and
food for my self and my Family, I would have got something beforehand, but I
see it will not do, Times are hard, Trading dead, I despair of growing rich, the
world is like a shadow, the more I pursue it, the further it flees from me, and
have I been pursuing after that which I cannot overtake? and if I should
overtake it, can do me no good, may do me much hurt, and in the mean time have
I neglected my immortal soul, and getting a treasure in it to make it rich and
happy? These spiritual goods are the best that can be got, and these only may
be got, and nothing else: O my soul, shall I be poor in this world and poor to
all eternity? must I live in misery here, and be in greater torment hereafter,
oh why should I be such a perfect beggar? doubly poor, of a poor estate and of
a poor low degenerate spirit? Oh rather let me be poor in spirit that I may be
an Heir of a Kingdom, a better than this Dung-hil world can afford. If I want
bread for my body, Lord evermore give me the bread of Life for my poor soul,
the garments of Christ's Righteousness to cover my nakedness, Fine gold that I
may be rich, though I be separated from my neighbor let me be united to the
Lord, though I be despised by men, yet let my soul be owned by the Lord,
although I have not a foot of Land, or house of mine own in this world, yet, Oh
that I may have a right to Mansions above, and may take possession at death of
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Thus do you that are poor argue the
case, and rest not satisfied without the true Riches; if you cannot get Earth,
make sure of Heaven, and then you make no bad bargain: keep up this Trade of
Religion, when other Trades decay, live above the world, learn to act Faith,
put the Bond in suit, make a virtue of necessity, and if you cannot get
left hand mercies, be sure of right hand mercies, and then you are happy for
ever.

Let rich men also look after a treasure above, I know its a hard thing to
persuade such as have treasures on earth, to look after treasures of Heaven,
and in Heaven: it is impossible for them that trust in riches to be saved, and
most men do so; Oh how apt are men of great Estates to please and applaud
themselves in their large possessions, especially after the malicious revilings
of the poor, or the awakening convictions of Gods Spirit by some heart-shaking
Boanerges, they go home and thus bespeak themselves, what need I regard the
vain calumnies of the sons of Belial, Populus me sibilat at mihi plaudo, ipse
domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca, Horat.
or the furious invectives of these bawling Priests, I Have need of none, and I
fear no man, I am able to live of my self, let every man look to himself, its
an hard world, and we must look to our selves, God has blessed me with an
estate, and I trust he loves me, and I shall do as well as others: Such
workings are in rich men's breasts, the God of Heaven knows your secret
self-flattering thoughts, but they shall be found to be vain another day, when
you lie upon a deathbed, ready to breath out your despairing souls, what will
money do in the Chest without grace in the Heart? what art thou better for
hundreds and thousands a year? what art thou the better for the honorable or
worshipful titles of Lord, Knight, Esquire or Gentleman? I have heard of a
Person of quality that cried out upon his sickbed, ten thousand pounds for a
good conscience, but alas, pardon and Heaven cannot be bought with money,
purity and peace of conscience are at a higher rate, they cost the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, and are not bought but given in Gods way and in Gods
time: he was a Fool that pleased himself with conceits of filling his soul
with his full bags and furnished houses, or fruitful Fields, what are these to
the immortal soul, that is of a spiritual nature? No no, Riches profit not in a
day of wrath, you cannot stop the mouth of conscience in the pangs of death
with a little worldly trash: Non domus and fundus, non aris acervus and auri,
agrote Domine deducunt corpore febres: Horat.
try this in lesser things, and see whether money, which answers all things
will fill your hungry bellies, cure the headache, or toothache, or remove
Fevers, alas it cannot, you know it cannot, how then can Riches satisfy, or
sanctify, or save the immortal soul? A time is coming when the careless and
covetous Worlding would be glad to exchange earth for heaven, and would be
willing to cast all his Rare commodities over Shipboard to save his precious
Vessel of his never-dying soul, but he that esteemed the world his God, shall
have no God to relieve him when he is leaving the world: He that spent his
strength and time to compass his worldly ends, shall have nothing but his
labor for his pains in the upshot, Job 27.8
what has he gained, (let him brag of his bargain) when God takes away his
soul? Nay, this very treasure that he has heaped up shall rise up in judgment
against him, (...) Heins Exercit. page 563.
so Heinsius reads, James 5.3. as though their Gold and Silver should become a
treasure of tormenting fire to the rich and wretched Misers: and oh, what an
astonishing consideration is this, that a covetous man should gather the fuel
to that fire that shall torment him for ever, and that his beloved Minion the
world, with which he has committed adultery, shall be the instrument of his
torment; yea, some think further, that this earth where wicked men have had
their Heaven, shall be the place of hel-torments after the great day of
Judgment: certainly this world which has bewitched sensual souls shall be burnt
with fire, and how just is it, that where men have acted their pleasant Comedy,
they should suffer this last and everlasting Tragedy? Oh Sirs, think of this
betimes, do but in cold blood consider whether your great Estates will skreen
betwixt Gods flaming wrath and your sinning souls another day: Bethink your
selves betimes, whether you would have God or the world to stand your Friend at
Death or Judgment, whether you would have a heart laden with this heavenly
treasure, or a conscience laden with guilt and filled with excruciating
worms, whether you would hear that sad word, Woe unto you that are rich for ye
have received your consolation, or, come my Friends, enter into your Masters
joy: Remember you were forewarned of these things, look about you betimes:

Here I might admonish all Ages and Sexes to get their hearts full of this
treasure, you young men begin the world with this stock, this alone will fit you
for all callings, places, Relations and Conditions; you are entering the world,
and you know not what you may pass through betwixt this and the Grave, without
this treasure you are fit for nothing, this will fit you for any thing: this will
render you well-accomplisht Gentlemen, Merchants, Ministers; This will carry you
thorough all Companies with credit and profit: it will be an excellent Guide and
Guard in your Journeys; This will season your younger years with gravitie,
policy and humility, Read (...) 1.4. c. 2.1. etc. 4.1. yea, read the first 9^
Chapters in Prove.
and ripe^ your souls for Heaven as you are ripening for the Grave: Oh my
Brethren, set up with this stock, begin in Grace and you shall end in Peace,
begin with this treasure, and you shall end in everlasting pleasures:

And you that are ancient, look after this treasure, old men are addicted to
hoarding, why here is work for you, be hoarding up in your hearts divine Truths,
Graces, Comforts, and Experiences, in malice be you children, but in
understanding be ye men; Give me leave to admonish old men, and Fathers, to
labor to know him that is from the beginning, 1 John 2.13.
you delight much in Antiquity, here is an object for you to contemplate, even
the Ancient of Days: Oh mind not toys and treasures, even the best of
treasures, let your hoary heads be found in the way of Righteousness, and
hearts filled with these Fruits of Righteousness: Alas, shall you be full of
days and empty of grace? Shall you be drawing to a period of your lives, and
continue destitute of the end of your lives? Ah Sirs, that you should be taking
your leave of the world, and yet have laid (...) Foundation, made no
preparation for a better life, alas what shall become of you? the Lord be
merciful to you, and lay hands on you and pluck you as brands out of the fire:
its a monstrous sight to see a wicked old man, how unbecoming is it to hear an
old man swear, to se an old man drunk, or unclean, it is a prodigious sight,
such are worse because they should be better, every gray hair which should be a
crown of glory, is a testimony of sloth, and monitor of approaching wrath: Ah
Sirs, think not much, if at the great Day you be set on the left hand, that
have all your days made choice of left hand blessings: the God of Heaven
awaken you to provide for Eternity, before the flames of hell awake you, when
there is no Remedy.

Let all and every one without fail, without dallying or delay, look after this
Treasure; Oh let your souls be furnished with a store of holy Thoughts, you are
always thinking, your minds are active, never idle, always in motion: O get
it furnished for contemplation, bring some work to this Mil-stone, else as
Luther says, it will grind it self thinner, or as a Lamp that is soon extinct
without a fresh supply of Oil: You can neither discourse profitably in
Company, nor spend your time in solitary Retirements without this Treasure.
But I have been too tedious, let not all these words be in vain to you, or rise
up in judgment against you:

A^w words to those precious souls into whose bosom the Lord has dropped this
heavenly treasure; these I might urge to bless God for it, live up to it, make
much of it, maintain and increase it, and be sure you do not part with it upon
any terms. As to the last, I pray you to keep this treasure, and let it not be
in the least impaired, wasted or prejudiced: I tell you its a greater loss to
lose one grain of grace than a Mine of gold, or both the Indies, the gaining of
the world cannot countervail the loss of a soul, and if your treasure be gone,
your souls are gone: take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go, for she is
thy life, Prove. 4.13. Let all go rather than part with your treasure. Caesar
swimming through a River to escape his Enemies, carried his Books above Water
with his hand, but lost his Robe, so do you: though you should swim through a
Sea of sorrows, yet before you keep fast the Lords depositum, make not
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, let neither the treasures nor
pleasures of the world rob or cosen you of this glorious treasure; Acts and
Mon. par. 1. fol. 63. fol. 100.
Take two famous instances of constancy in the Primitive times: the one is of
a Soldier, whom the Praetor could not with torments remove from his Christian
profession; at last he commanded him to be laid in a soft bed, in a pleasant
Garden among flourishing Lillies and red Roses, and being left alone a
beautiful Harlot came to him, and embracing him wantonly, solicited him to
lust, he resolutely opposed, at last for very vexation, and to prevent by his
pain the danger of pleasure, he bit off his Tongue and spit it in her Face, as
she kissed him, and so bravely overcame: This Valiant Soldier would not
endanger his Treasure for the enjoyment of a little pleasure; The other Example
is, of one Hormisda, a great Noblemans Son, who, for Religion was condemned to
keep the King of Persia's Elephants, and to go naked. One day the King looking
out, and seeing him tanned with the Sun, commanded a Shirt to be put upon him,
and to bring him before him, whom the King asked if he would now deny Christ;
Hormisda tore off his Shirt, saying, if you think I will deny my faith for a
Shirt, have here your gift again: See here a young man stripped naked of an
earthly treasure, yea, will go stark naked, rather than lose his inward
treasure: go you and do likewise, say as Job, Chap. 27.5, 6. Till I dye, I will
not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I hold fast and will not let
it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live: Live upon your stock,
make use of it upon all occasions, draw forth the seeds of grace, bring forth
much fruits, improve your treasure for maintaining constant intercourse with
God; Josephus tells us that there was a tumult raised among the Jews, Joseph. de
Bello Jud. lib. 2. ca. 8.
because their holy treasure was wasted upon a Conduit, reaching the space of
300. furlongs, but if you spend your treasure in maintaining ways of
conveyance betwixt God and your hearts, it will increase your treasure, and keep
up peace with God, and peace of conscience; communion with God will compose all
mutinous insurrections in your own hearts; pay to God the constant tribute of
duty and obedience, give him the glory of all, that he has done for you; sweep
the Temple of your hearts, free it from all dust and filth, prepare a cleanly
lodging for this blessed guest; the holy spirit is compared to a Dove, and we
know the Dove is a cleanly creature, and leaves its residence when it is
defiled, so will the spirit: be holy in all your conceptions, and in all manner
of conversation, learn that blessed round, that En^ch took of walking with God,
solace your souls in him, scorn any thing that the World can offer, as a
temptation to divert your hearts into another Channel, ask the World what it
can give, that may be a valuable consideration, for the loss of communion with
God, make such a challenge, as Saul did in another case, can the Son of Jesse
give you fields and Vineyards? -- so can the World give me pardon of sin, peace
of conscience, grace here, and glory hereafter? if it say it can, believe it
not, it is a vain brag and loud lie, like that of Satan's to Christ; if it
cannot, (as certainly it cannot) why should thou leave the substance, and
embrace the shadow, oh make not so mad, so bad a bargain; I stand the more upon
this, because there is danger, lest you should be cheated out of your treasure
by the World, as Dalilah beguiled Sampson, or as the Maid got the Apple out of
the Giants hand by fair means, which the Champions could not wrest out: Do not
delight in the Creature, lest it abate your content in God, be not afraid of
afflictions that accompany godliness, you may get a larger increase of your
treasure by trouble, than by any other means, as it is storied of Tiberius,
passing by a Cross that lay upon a Marble-stone, and causing the Cross to be
dug up, found a large treasure under the Cross, so may and do, gracious
souls find treasures under their crosses.

But to draw to an end, the Lord engage all your hearts to make sure of this
treasure, and to make much of this treasure, lock it up in the in-most closet
of your hearts, lay it out in ways of holiness, as the Lord gives opportunity,
raise up your hearts heavenwards, improve solitariness, do all the good you can
in your places, sanctify the name of God in all things you do or receive,
watch over your own spirits, be faithful unto death, and he will give you a
Crown of life: I shall conclude all with an elegant exhortation of Cyprian: thou
only whom the heavenly warfare has sealed up in these spiritual Tents, keep
incorrupt, keep sober this blessed Discipline with religious virtues, be thou
diligent either in praying or reading, sometimes speak thou to God, sometimes
hear God speak to thee, let him instruct thee, Tu tantum quem jam spiritualibu^
castri^ caelestis militia signavit, tene incorruptam, tene sobriam religiosis
virtutibus disciplinam, sit tibi vel orati^ assidu^ vel lecti^: nunc cum des
^oquere, nunc de^s tecum: ille te praceptis suis instruat, ille dispenat: quem
ille divitem fe^erit, nem^ pauperem faciet: penuria esse nulla ja^s poterit,
cum semel pectus cael^stis sagina saturaverit: Videas plurae in Cyp. Epist.
Lib. 2. Ep. 2. ad Donatum.
dispose of thee by his precepts, whom he has made rich, let no Man make poor,
thou can not now be subject to any penury, when thy breast is satiated with
variety of all heavenly delicacies; thus he, Blessed is the soul that has this
blessed treasure, and is mounting upwards to everlasting pleasures.

FINIS.
An APPENDIX Concerning Meditation, with some helps to furnish the thoughts
with suitable and profitable Subjects.
THat the vacant pages may be supplied, it will not be impertinent here to annex
a Specimen or Example, to help the working thoughts, in the great duty of
Meditation, yet here I shall not undertake to handle the commonplace of
Meditation, which you may find insisted upon, purposely by Mr. Fenner, Mr.
Ball, Mr. Baxter, in his Saints Rest, and many others, and abundant examples
thereof in those incomparable works of that reverend contemplative Divine, Dr.
Hall; But what I shall do on this behalf, is only to pursue the design of the
foregoing Treatise, in presenting some considerations, to help the Christian to
a treasure of good thoughts, that he may not want any matter of Meditation,
wherever he is: before I proceed to the examples, I shall speak a few words
concerning thoughts, and good thoughts, and deliberate good thoughts in the
duty of Meditation.

Thoughts in general (according to Scripture) are the internal acts of the
soul, of what faculty soever, mind, will, memory, Genesis 40.14 1 Samuel 9.5. Judge.
5.15.
affections, to remember is to think on a man or thing, to take care is to take
thought, to be troubled is expressed by thoughts of heart, and so thoughts
denote any internal workings of reasonings, ends, desires, designs, and
resolutions, as opposed to external words or works, so Isai 66.18. I know their
works and their thoughts, but thoughts are also taken more strictly, as being
the proper products of the understanding faculty, the immediate musings of the
speculative part, and so not only opposed to words and works, but also to the
motions of the soul of another ^ure, (...).
and thus Critics distinguish (as the word it self acts the critic) betwixt
the thoughts of the heart, and the intents of the heart, in Heb. 4.12. The
thoughts then are the souls self-conferences, discourses, parleys, interviews,
hence there is mention in Scripture of speaking in the heart, Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Communing with our own hearts, Psalm. 4.4. Applied both to the godly and the
wicked, Psalm. 77.6. Psalm. 14.1.
the subjects of these discourses within, are either from without, or from
within,; sometimes the subjects are fetched from abroad, as if good, the
thoughts are furnished from the word of God, or otherways, Pro. 6.22. -- When
thou awakest, it shall talk with thee, i. e. Thou shall find the word as a
sweet companion affording thee matter of self conference; Genesis 6.5. (...) omne
figmentum.
so also the matter of thoughts may arise from within, but they are ordinarily
evil, and so every imagination of the thoughts of Man's heart is evil, the word
signifies every Figment, Creature, or workmanship that the mind hammers within
it self, as in a Forge, Mint, or on an Anvil; for thoughts are as it were spun
out of our own bowels, they are Eggs of our own laying, Webs of our own
weaving, for thoughts can work of themselves when there is no outward objects
presented.

Now my design is to furnish and rectify these internal operations of the
heart, and to help the soul with such subjects and objects as may find it
profitable work when it has no creature to converse with, that the thoughts
may be holy, sweet, savoury, and heavenly; Now there are four qualifications
essentially requisite to the constitution of good thoughts. 1. They must be
materially good, not employed about sinful or trifling things, that do either
prejudice, or not at all profit the soul, but exercised in some spiritual,
suitable meditations about God, Christ, the Word, o^ what may tend to
edification. 2. They must be formally good, i. e. regulated by the Word of God,
as the Rule thereof, to square and order the thoughts, both for Principle,
Manner, and End. 3. They must be seasonably good every thing is beautiful in
its season: a thing may be good in its own nature, yet not good as to those
circumstances of time and other respects wherewith it may be clothed. 4. They
must be eventually good, as to the fruit, effect, impression of these thoughts,
he that thinks, should aim at Gods glory and his own souls good; and the fruit
of the thought must be good, tending to quicken or strengthen some grace, kill
and crucify some lust, ^^large or encourage the straitened or sadened ^eart:
Alas, this is not a mere exercise of the mind and memory about good things,
but a working them upon the heart, the sinking of these things into the will
and affections: it is not merely speculative, but practical and experimental, it
must be a set and solemn acting all the powers of the soul upon divine things
in order to spiritual advantage, or raising the heart Heaven-wards.

And now I shall present to your thoughts ^o. useful Subjects to meditate upon,
which may by the Lords assistance, become in your souls a sacred Treasure of
heavenly thoughts.

1. Let your thoughts insist upon the infinite, eternal and incomprehensible
Majesty of God, here you may soon lose your selves in the vast Ocean of his
blessed essence, yet lanch not too far, but bound your thoughts by the sure
Card of Scripture-discovery; thus think, 1. Oh what an holy omniscient, omni
present Spirit is the Almighty maker and possessor of heaven and earth! What
transcendent mysteries are locked up in the Trinity of Persons in the unity of
Essence! how impossible is it for a mortal eye to approach that inaccessible
Light! none can see God and live, yet have poor sinners a glorious reflection
of the Godhead in the Person of our dear Redeemer, and in his sweet proclaiming
his blessed Name, and displaying his glorious Attributes of Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth to the Sons of men: by these we taste
and see what a One the Lord is: Oh how great is this Jehovah whom we worship?
the heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, He is King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, He sits upon the Circle of the earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are
as Grasshoppers, He is clothed with honor and Majesty, thousand thousands
minister unto him, ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him, He is the
God in whose hands my breath is, the searcher of hearts, the hearer of Prayers,
the Lord of Hosts, and King of Saints: O my soul admire him for his greatness,
fear him for his Justice, love him for his Goodness, trust him for his
Faithfulness, worship him in the beauty of holiness, and delight thy self in
his transcendent Perfections:

2. Fix your thoughts upon the works of Creation, study this large voluminous
Book, every page thereof will find you fresh matter of meditation and
admiration: every creature has a tongue to tell us of the power and wisdom of
its Maker: and thus let your thoughts be working; surely this goodly Fabric of
Heaven and Earth speaks aloud the glory of the great Creator; if this vast
Globe of the Earth be above twenty thousand miles in compass, then what a vast
extent are the Heavens of? which are stretched out as a Curtain; how admirably
has God laid the beams of his Chambers in the waters, and hanged the earth
upon nothing? how firmly has God builded his stories in the Heaven, and fixed
the glorious Constellations as fountains of Light? oh what beauty is there in
the Father of Lights that has set up resplendent Luminaries? these great
bodies were created of nothing by the word of Gods power, and yet there is deep
mysteries in the least and lowest creature, every Herb, Flower, Plant, spire of
grass, Twig and Leaf, Worm or Fly, Scale or Feather, Billow or Meteor, has
enough in it to puzzle the most profound Philosopher, and speaks the power and
wisdom of our great Creator: how much more the curious piece of man's Body? I
am fearfully and wonderfully made, but much more may I stand admiring the
strange nature of my immortal soul: and still reflect with thankfulness and
admiration upon the power and goodness of my omnipotent Creator.

3. Think on the capacity, excellency, and immortality of the precious Soul,
you cannot think without it, and should you not spend some thoughts upon it,
this distinguishes you from beasts, thus then meditate, what divine spark is
this that God has breathed into this lump of clay? this immortal soul which
God immediately created is greater and better than the world, and cannot be
satisfied with the world, it is of a spiritual being, and of the same nature
with the Angels: it is of an active nature, and can make quick excursions to the
creatures, and sallies thorough this vast Universe, and must return with Noah's
Dove, that there is no place to rest her weary foot of affections upon, God
alone, is the anchor and center of this tossed Wanderer: this soul is capable
of communion with God in spiritual Ordinances and eternal happiness, it must
return at last to God that gave it, to receive from him a sentence of
absolution or condemnation; Oh my soul, thou art in constant motion, whether
art thou moving? what art thou doing? what condition art thou in? and what must
become of thee when thy body shall be left a stinking carcass? Soar aloft my
soul, and mind things above, debase not thy noble nature with pursuit of things
that are below thy self: get well adorned with the graces of the Spirit, and
enriched with an interest in Jesus Christ, make God thy portion, lay up lasting
treasures in Heaven, and then return unto thy Rest, and God will deal
bountifully with thee.

4. Think much upon the sacred Word of God, meditate of it day and night, let
the Word of God dwell richly in you, and let your thoughts be furnished with,
and dwell much upon it what is in your Bibles is Gods, but what is in your
hearts is your own; thus then let your thoughts be working: Oh the infinite
condescension of the great Jehovah! What (...) worthless man that God himself
should write so large an Epistle from Heaven to him with the hand of his
blessed Spirit! What care has God taken to direct, move, incite, encourage
fallen sinning man to the attaining of eternal happiness? What Precepts,
Promises Threatenings, Examples are sprinkled up and down in this blessed Book!
Oh the Antiquity, Authority, Excellency and Efficacy, Power and Purity,
Perfection and sufficiency, verity and perpetuity of the sacred Bible! Methinks
when I take up this holy Book, I take wonders into my hands, and when I look
within it I meet with Mysteries, that the wisdom of the greatest Clarks can
never reach, and yet the meanest capacity by the help of that Spirit which
indicted them, may wade this deep foard of divine secrets: how plainly held
forth therein are necessary truths and duties that lead the soul to God and
eternal happiness! How familiarly and affectionately does God converse with man
therein? how pat and proper to my state are the precious Promises in these
blessed pages? every word has its weight, and comes as pertinently as if the
Lord had named me; methinks, there is no such virtue or savor in any other
Writings, what reviving does it bring into my heart! O blessed be God for the
holy Scriptures.

5. Let your thoughts be employed about the glorious works of Providence: oh
how sweet are they? who so is wise will consider them: pause after this manner,
O my soul, take a view of this beautiful Checker-work of divine Providence;
consider the days of old, and the years of many generations, recollect what the
Scripture records, of drying up the Sea, driving back Jordan, the standing
still, and going back of the Sun in the Firmament, reflect upon the miracles of
Mercy for the Church, and of judgment upon the Enemies: nay, consider O my
soul what wonders God has wrought in thy days, in thine eyes: Oh what
national, domestical, personal deliverances have thou seen? even such as may
astonish the Atheist, and silence Unbelief for ever: thou need not want
matter of holy musing, if thou take a strict survey of the course of thy life,
and particular providence about thy Soul, Body, Estate, Name, Relations, and
all thy Concernments, which may afford a vast Field of devout Meditation: those
ways of Providence that seemed uncouth and unlovely whilst seen but in their
birth and parts, how comely now are they in their mature product and
perfection? I saw not then, but I have fully seen since what the Lord aimed at
in his strange Dispensations: Oh the happy composure, symmetrie, and contexture
of all things, conspiring together by the concurrence of Providence to
accomplish, and to center in the grand end of all things, viz. the glory of
God. How wonderful are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out?

6. Think sadly upon man's Apostasy: let your thoughts be sometimes taking a
view of the original of all our present sinfulness and wretchedness in such
thoughts as these: Woe is me, whence and whether are we fallen! God made man
upright, but he sought out many inventions, once man was created after the
Image of God, now is he defaced after the Image of the Devil: once was man
entire and straight, now deformed and crooked in all his faculties, once was he
holy and happy, now filthy and subject to all sin and misery: once he was the
darling of God, Lord of the world, and a fit companion for the blessed Angels
now he is Gods enemy, the Devils slave, and the basest part of the whole
Creation: Oh mutable free will that chose to fall, that might have chosen to
stand! surely man in his best estate was subject to vanity: Oh how little was
the pleasure, and how lasting is the pain! But O my soul, find not fault with
Adam, if thou had been in his stead, thou woulds^ have done as he did, yea,
thou do the same every day, too too voluntarily, and of choice, sin is a
transgression of the Law, and this holy Law thou breakest every moment, Oh my
soul, what miserable case art thou in! what enmity to God, antipathy to good,
and constant tendency to all evil is in thy depraved nature! Woe is me, where is
the light in my understanding, the rectitude of my will, the regularity of my
affections: where is the tenderness of my conscience, the tenacity of my
memory, and the victory over my lower unruly passions! Lord, where am I, and
what will become of me, except Free Grace interpose for my deliverance?

7. Think, Oh think much upon the stupendous work of man's Redemption: here the
ransomed of the Lord may and must expatiate in the heart-melting meditations of
the way of their recovery. Thus, here stand and pause, my soul, upon the sweet
transcendent contrivance of saving lost man: Oh why, wherefore was it, that the
heart of God was working for men, and not for devils? they were as near and
dear to God (when standing) and as perfect in their natures, was it because man
had a Tempter, and they had none? no certainly, though that may be a truth, yet
no reason of choosing man, and leaving devils to be reserved in chains of
darkness to the judgment of the great Day; no, no, Free Grace alone made the
difference: But, what was the way of man's Redemption? why surely, the Son of
God, the second Person of the glorious Trinity must become man, and put
himself into the sinners stead, to do and endure, be, and bear what man must
have gone through and under-gone: Oh stupendous mystery, oh transcendent
Mercy? who could have devised such a way? who durst have desired such a thing,
that God should part with his only and beloved Son for such an end? Oh the
manifold wisdom of God! O^ the inconceivable love of the Father to send his
Son, and of his Son to come upon such an Errand (...) Great is the mercy of
God great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh etc. O the
wonders in the strange hypostatical union! the compleatnesse of his Person, the
usefulness of his Offices! Oh the bitterness of his temptations, travels,
trials, reproaches, agonies, desertions, death, sharp to him, sweet to us:
these will be the subject of Saints thoughts and praises in Heaven, to all
Eternity.

8. Think upon the terms and tenor of the Gospel, how and upon what
conditions Christ and all his benefits may be made over to you, and that is a
Cordial accepting of Christ in his mediatorie latitude, as be is tendered in
the Gospel, to justify, sanctify, and to save, thus then conceive thereof. Oh
strange mercy, boundless love, God might have appointed the conditions of
salvation to have been traveling tedious journeys, conquering Kingdoms, or
lying so many years in misery; he might have said, thou must either keep the
moral Law exactlie or die eternally; but he says, believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, nor has he left thee, O my soul, to do this by thine
own strength, (which had been as impossible as the form) but he that requires
faith of thee, promises to give faith to thee; faith is in the Covenant as well
as forgiveness, Jesus Christ has purchased strength to believe, as well as
salvation for believers. Oh blessed contrivance, all is laid upon the back of
our sweet and solid surety, he is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, he is
the way, the truth, and the life, the Author and finisher of our faith, he
saves to the utmost, all the Elect shall have faith, and none of them shall
miscarry; this, this is the kernel and marrow of the Gospel, that Christ is the
surety for all the Elect, and has undertaken to bear them all to Heaven by
the power of his spirit, and by the virtue of his merit, and he wants neither
ability nor fidelity to bring about this glorious enterprise for poor souls.

9. Think and think again what interest you have in this Redeemer and
redemption, for all are not sharers in it, all shall not be saved by it, nay,
but few of those that hear the tidings of it: think thus, oh my soul, what is
thy state? where is thy standing? what interest have thou in Christ? what title
to the promises of the Covenant? have thou a sound and saving faith, a through
heart-shaking, heartbreaking repentance? I hear in the word that Christ
becomes the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him, oh my soul,
have thou given up thy self to him in the obedience of faith? what operations
of the spirit have thou felt for thy effectual vocation? what regenerating
work, has passed upon thee? art thou translated from death to life, from
darkness to light? art thou indeed trasplanted out of the old stock, into the
new and living Vine? what particular application have thou made of this general
redemption? have thou viewed a bleeding Christ with a bleeding heart? and
looked on him whom thy sins have pierced with a repenting believing frame of
spirit? have thou accepted of Jesus Christ in his mediatory latitude, as
Prophet, Priest, and King, to subdue thy lusts, to guide thee by his Scepter,
and save thee in his own way? oh my soul, be serious in this inquiry, it is no
trifling matter, it is as much as thy soul is worth, it is of great concernment
to all eternity, the way is strait and narrow, thousands are deceived and spend
no thoughts upon it, til they be past hopes or remedy: the stroke of death will
suddenly determine the business, oh look to it before that blow be given, lest
it be too late.

10. When thou have cleared thy state, then think with comfort; oh the rich
privileges of believers! here thou may have a spacious field of
contemplation, God allows thee to solace thy soul in such thoughts as these, oh
the inestimable, incomparable, invaluable advantages of the Saints! what say
thou, oh my guilty weary soul, is it nothing to have sin pardoned, thy debts
paid, the Bond cancelled? certainly to a soul heavy laden under the sense of
guilt, the sense of pardon is the most joyful tidings in the World: and shall my
filthy naked soul be clothed with this blessed robe of Christ's perfect
righteousness? oh the riches of free grace? shall such a base and bank-rupt
beggar become the beautiful spouse of the King of Heaven? it was infinite mercy
that kept me thus long out of Hell, but will the Lord also make this sinful soul
an heir of Heaven? shall Jesus Christ be my elder Brother, the spirit my
Comforter, and God himself my Father^ oh boundless and bottomless riches of
free grace! moreover, oh my soul, thou have interest in all the promises, the
assistance of the spirit in prayer, and free access to the Throne of Grace: the
providence of God are working for thy good, the protection of Heaven shall be
on thy person, and the blessing of the Al-mighty shall be upon thy undertakings;
thou have, oh my soul, sweet fellowship with God, the benefit of communion of
Saints, and the presence and service of the holy Angels: he will guide thee with
his counsel, and at last receive thee to glory: and is not this a ne
plus-ultra of preferment? can thy covetous or ambitious thoughts reach any
further, oh my soul? no, no, God has done for thee beyond thy expectation,
even to admiration.

11. Now then, my soul, let thy thoughts be working upon some returns; what
does God require of thee in lieu of all these rich and royal favors? oh set
thy heart to study duty, lie under the sense of the Law of thankfulness,
desire the Lord to write that blessed Law upon the Tables of thy heart,
consider what thou have to do, but here my soul is non-plust, alas, what
returns can I make unto my God for all these benefits? what can a poor
worthless worm do, in requiting infinite kindness? my self, and all I am, or
can do, are the Lords due, and here I offer up all, to thee, oh Lord, as a
whole burnt sacrifice, which is most reasonable, oh that it may be acceptable
through Jesus Christ; my heart, my lips, my life shall praise thee, b^ess the
Lord, oh my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name: oh that my
heart were well tuned to sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, alas my soul,
how low and dull art thou? how short and shallow in thy poor returns for these
rich receipts, surely my soul will sing a new, and another kind of song amongst
the heavenly Quite of blessed Saints and Angels in eternal Mansions; in the
mean time, oh my soul, be winding up thy heart, skruing up thy faint
affections, be much in the work of thankfulness, lay out thy self for the glory
of thy Redeemer, sin no more, serve him better, walk with God, wait upon him,
worship him with all thy heart, do all the good thou can in thy place, hie
apace toward Heaven, and lift up thy head with expectation, desire, and
exultation, til the day of Redemption draw near,

12. Think much and seriously of the evil of sin, how offensive it is to God,
how destructive to the soul, that so you may eschew and abhor the very risings
and appearance thereof, thus let your thoughts be employed, what a monstrous,
prodigious, venomous thing is sin! it is the very Epitome of all evil, worse
than the Devil himself, the most loathsome Creature that crawls is very good,
if compared with sin, it is a heart-Plague, more evil than all the Plagues and
diseases that are incident to the body of man, it is worse than Hell it self: oh
sin, what have thou done? was it not sin that cast the Angels out of Heaven,
Adam out of Paradise, and thousands, yea, thousands of millions of souls
headlong into Hell? was it not sin that drowned the old World, burned Sodom,
and will set the whole World in a flame at the last day? is it not sin only that
provokes the eyes of Gods glory, grieveth his spirit, breaks his Laws, and
brings swift destruction on impenitent sinners? nay, oh my soul, consider,
was it sin that betrayed, arraigned, accused, condemned, crucified and buried
the Lord of life and glory? oh then who would have any thing to do with these
unprofitable, pernicious works of darkness, what fruit have thou poor soul of
sin, but shame, and grief, and death? oh what hurt has it done thee? what
griefs, and tears, and sorrows, and dolours has it cost thee? and all these
better than the proper product of it, even eternal damnation: Oh my soul, hate
sin with a perfect hatred, God only hates it, or with respect unto it, sin no
more, lest thou offend a good God, gratify Satan, and damn thy soul for ever.

13. Think much upon the vanity of the World, and uncertainty of all things
here below, read to your selves sometimes Lectures of the instability of all
worldly excellencies, and knock off your own fingers from playing with them,
lest God use some severer course to loosen your hearts from things below, thus
think, oh my sensual soul, what is it that thou see in this garish strumpet
to allure and entangle thy affections? how come thou to dote upon her painted
beauty? what real good, what solid comfort have thou ever found therein? what
are the profits of it, but a little white and red earth, of the same nature and
original, with thy vile and perishing body, and far inferior to thy noble
soul? what are the sorry honors of the World, but froth and some, hanging on
the slipperie tongues and ears of mutable men, that can kiss and kill with a
breath and beck? and what are the sordid pleasures here below, but swinish
epicurisme, that debase the best part of man, transform Men into Beasts, and
leave a stinging guilt behind them? Alas, my soul, why will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? what will riches avail thee in the day of wrath?
where is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained the whole World, when
God takes away his soul? what was Cain better for all his fair Cities, or
Nimrod for his large Dominions, or Absalon for his beauty, or Achitophel for
his policy, or Judas for his bags, or Dives for his delicate fare? Hellfire
burns up all these, and Heaven cannot be purchased with them: alas, the fashion
of the World passes away, and when its gone, what is a Man better for being a
Gentleman, a Knight, a Lord, a Prince? Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.

14. Let your thoughts be exercised about the present, and final state of all
the Children of Men, the vast difference betwixt the good and bad, the godly
and the wicked, in this World, and the World to come, and thus let your hearts
be musing, what though the wicked flourish like a green bay tree, and do enjoy
the World at will? they are not in trouble as other Men, but eat and drink, and
laugh and play, and change their sports for more delight, and wash their steps
in butter, and have more than heart can wish: in the mean time, the godly are
daily afflicted by God, tempted by Satan, persecuted by the world, they are
chastened every morning, and lie down with sorrow every evening, they eat their
bread, and water their beds with tears: Oh the bitter heartbreaking griefs, by
reason of the with-drawings of God, the unkindness of men, but especially from
corruptions within! Well now, my soul, will thou call this the only wretched
man, and the former the only happy person? God forbid, so should thou offend
against the generation of Gods Children, thou must not acquit the wicked or
condemn the Righteous: No, my soul, look not with carnal, but with spiritual
eyes, judge righteous judgment, he is not happy that has the world at will,
but he is only happy whose God is the Lord, search the Scriptures, and see
there who is called and accounted happy: Mark the perfect man, the end of that
man is peace, whatever be his trouble in the way, observe the wicked, it cannot
be well with him in the end: Crassus at last found Solons words true, there is
no man happy before death; O my soul, wisely consider the stare of the godly
and the wicked, and it will beget strange effects upthee for thy encouragement
and astonishment:

15. Sometimes let your thoughts run out upon the state of the Church and
people of God, that you may joy or sorrow, pray or praise God, with or for
Zion, and the Saints: upon blessed Paul's heart lay the care of all the
Churches, and shall we cast away the thoughts thereof? Well then, my soul, art
thou a member of the Church, and will thou not spend some thoughts of it and
for it? let me feel the pulse of Christ's mystical body, how fares it with
her? is she in health, or is she sick? what diseases is she laboring under? Do
her sacred lungs move fast in prayer to God? Does she flourish in her pure and
powerful administration of divine Institutions? Is she fair as the Moon in the
holiness of her members? clear as the Sun in the soundness of her doctrine,
especially in that fundamental point of Justification by Christ's Righteousness
imputed? (hence the Woman, the Church, is to be clothed with the Sun) and is
she terrible as an Army with banners, in the due administration of wholesome
discipline, and execution of the Censures; Do the lights shine clear in the
Candle-sticks? Are Ministers in their places burning and shining Lights, and do
the Faithful walk in the light of the Lord? Have the Saints communion in all
Ordinances, walking together in mutual edification? Or, are they broken in
pieces by persecutions or separations? How is it with this militant Church? O
my soul, take a full view thereof, that thou may rejoice with her, or mourn
for her.

16. Think, O think often upon Death, your own death, O that you were wise to
consider your latter end, amongst all your thoughts, spend some upon your dying
day, set a Deaths-head before your eyes, and think to this purpose, oh what a
dying, fading creature am I? I dwell in a tottering Tabernacle, in a House of
clay, that is ready to be crushed every moment like a moth, this vile body of
mine is made of perishing ingredients, and my life is like a vapor; O my soul,
thou lodgest in a brittle case, how certainly shall, how suddenly may it be
broken? and then thou lanchest forth into the vast Ocean of Eternity: Death
will shortly loose the knot betwixt these old companions soul and body, Nature
abhors a dissolution, but what says Grace? is the sting of death plucked out by
the death of Christ? Has the Lord of Life warmed and perfumed the Grave for
thee? Can thou, O my soul, look thorough death at Glory? and own it as thy
Fathers Porter that takes thee by the hand to lead thee into his Palace and
Presence Chamber? surely if thou have a grounded sense of Gods love, thou will
with the wearied Traveller long to be at home, and go to bed to take thy rest,
thou will desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all:
only be sure, poor soul, that thy work be not to do when thy time is done;
get ready for that fatal stroke, it is a solemn business to dye, it is but
once to be done, and it must be well done, or thou art undone for ever: look
upon every day as the last day, defer not another day to repent and make thy
peace with God, that thou may be found of him in peace.

17. Pass on a little further in thy meditations, and let thy thoughts thus be
acted about the great things of the Resurrection of the dead, and the solemn
day of Judgment; O my soul, consider what an illustrious day will that be, when
the great Trumpet shall sound, the Graves shall be opened, the dead shall be
raised, and the living shall be changed, the holy Angels shall gather from the
ends of the earth the scattered bodies and bones of all the Saints, from
righteous Abel to the last Convert on earth, and again marry the the blessed
pair of soul and body together, and hoyse them up to meet their blessed Savior
in the air, that they may with him judge the world of ungodly sinners: methinks
I hear on the contrary the wretched howlings of despairing souls, whose bodies,
will they, nill they, are dragged out of their cursed holes, and are forced to
come trembling before the just Judge; fain would they skulk in holes and not
appear, being convicted of their consciences, and not able to stand in
judgment, but appear they must, and yet they dare not: Methinks I see the
Judge set, the Books opened, and myriads of rational creatures set before the
righteous Judge to receive their final Sentence: on the right hand stand the
blessed Saints in white Raiment, lifting up their heads to their beloved
Husband, who absolves them, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you; welcome home from a weary world, here is mansions
ready for you; sit upon these Thrones; take these victorious Palms into your
hands, I set these Crowns upon your heads, and you shall be with me for ever:
On the left hand lie the filthy Goats, despairing wicked wretches expecting
the dreadful sentence of, go ye cursed, wishing they had never been, or that
now they might not be, calling to the senseless Rocks to fall upon them, but all
in vain; appear they must, and yet they dare not; the despised Savior is their
angry Judge, Devils are attending the pronouncing of the Sentence, ready to
hurry them to the execution of the Sentence.

18. Let this then carry thy thoughts, O my soul, a little further to the
serious meditation upon the intolerable torments of Hell, as soon as that
sentence is out, then take them Devil, surely the punishment of loss is
inconceivable; Oh how bitter is it to a poor Child of God in this World to
endure the short with-drawings of Gods pleasant Face from their souls: what
bitter lamentations and expostulations has it wrung from them? and yet what is
that in comparison of being banished from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power? Cains mark of trembling proceeded from the dreadful
sense of this formidable expulsion: though wicked men care not for Gods
presence here, yet they shall feel to their cost what it is to want his
presence hereafter: together with God they lose all that is comfortable, they
shall never have good day hereafter, they lose Ordinances, mercies, hopes of
Heaven, they shall never hear Sermon more, nor enjoy a day of grace again;
above them is the wrath of the Lamb, whose melting bowels are turned into a
consuming fire to them; under them is the devouring Lake of fire and Brimstone
gaping to receive them; on their right hand are the blessed Saints whom they
despised, triumphing in the execution of Justice on them, and entering into
their Masters joy; on the left hand stands that cursed Fiend who drew them into
sin, now as ready to draw them into Hell to be tormented with himself for ever;
behind them are their short and sorry pleasures in this World, and multitudes
of abominations in wicked life; before them is a sad Eternity of never-ceasing
torments; within them is a gnawing conscience; without them the saddest objects
that ever eyes beheld; old Companions in sin roaring under wrath, legions of
Devils blaspeming God, and scourging their fellow prisoners, their beloved
Minion the World all in a flame, and themselves firebrarnds therein for ever: O
my soul, think on these dolorous subjects sometimes, and let it work kindly on
thy heart, to make thee eschew the way to Hell, and to walk in the way to
Heaven:

19. On the contrary, O my soul, mount up to Heaven in thy contemplations, soar
above the Clouds, and take a view of Paradise, as soon as the Bridegroom of his
Church has admitted his beloved Spouse into his Presence Chamber; O the
ravishing joys, and sweet embraces at this blessed meeting; Heaven echoes
again at the triumphant Hallelujahs of all the Redeemed ones: how shall sorrow
and sighing flee away? Sin and sickness shall be known no more, Satan with
his fiery darts, and wicked men with their drawn swords cannot reach thither;
there shall be no more complaints of ignorant and erroneous heads, of dead and
hard, unbelieving and distracted hearts, of lame decrepit feet, there shall not
be a tear upon a Saints cheek, for God will wipe away tears from all Faces,
not one complaint heard, nothing but joy and triumph, solace and satisfaction,
the blessed presence of the eternal God shall be all in all to these happy
souls: Oh what is a sight of God worth! but what will it be above, where it is
immediate, constant and un-interrupted? no need there of Ordinances, God
himself will be instead of all, it will be another kind of enjoying of God then
poor souls felt in this World, though that was sweet, yet this shall be
infinitely sweeter: now at the best we see but through a glass darkly, then
face to face; communion with God is the Heaven of that Heaven, yet shall there
be every thing beautiful and desirable: there my soul shall be filled with all
perfections, and Grace shall be complete, the mind shall in an instant have as
large a comprehension, as Solomon, or Adam in innocence, my will shall be
conformed to the divine Will in a perfect rectitude and integrity, my affections
shall be spirituallie and regularlie fixed on the Lord my God with fullness of
delight and joy, my body shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, yea,
it shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ, my whole man shall
be fit for the high emploiment in Heaven, and enjoiment of God: there shall I
meet with Abraham, and all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all
my Christian Friends that died in the Faith; and oh the spritful joies that will
arise from such a blessed sight! There we shall meet, and part no more, agree,
and fall out no more, rejoice together, and be sad no more: Oh blessed Day! my
soul, be thou revived in the fore-thoughts and fore-tasts thereof.

20. Once more, then, O my soul, and but this once, fix thy thoughts upon
Eternity; how can thou forget it? What is this sorry point of time in
comparison of the vast Ocean of Eternity? Alas poor mortals, act a part upon
this Stage a while, and then are gone into another World, that must endure for
ever; this little inch of time is a seed-plot for Eternity, upon the well or
ill improving of this time depends an everlasting state in weal or woe: Oh what
wretched folly is it to lose eternal happiness for a transient draught of
sensual delight! Oh what would not any endure here a short moment, to escape
eternal torments! Methinks nothing has weight in it, but as it relates to
Eternity; Eternity is the only accent and emphasis of joy and sorrow; this is
that which makes the joys of Heaven joys indeed, and the torments of Hell
torments with a witness: Oh for a poor damned soul that has been, as it were,
a thousand years, thousand thousands of Ages roaring in Hell, to think that it
is not one moment nearer an end than at first instant when it was cast into
that devouring fire: This cuts to the heart, this adds new terrors to the
despairing soul: here must I abide for ever. Oh that I might be consumed so as
not to be, cannot, may not I poor wretch be once at last annihilated, and be
as if I never had been? No no, once in Hell and for over in Hell, the great Gulf
of Gods Decree once fixed is irrevocable: so on the contrary, Eternity
increases every moment the joy of the glorified, here I am, and here I shall
be for ever, says the happy soul, my estate is better than Adams in the
earthly, or the fallen Angels in the Heavenly Paradise, I shall never lose these
joys: Oh what a durarable reward have I for a little temporary service, my
sorrow is past, my joy remains: how comes it to pass that those light
afflictions that were but for a moment have wrought out for me this exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory? Surely because it was my Fathers good pleasure to
give me this Kingdom, this Eternal Life is the gift of God: Oh, who would not
do or endure any thing for this eternity of joys? Thus the soul will bathe it
self in these Rivers of pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore.

I have now dispatched these set and solemn subjects for your thoughts to work
upon; I shall but briefly add some occasional grounds for holy thoughts, which
(if you have a right frame of spirit) you may gather much from, to be a
sufficient Treasure for heavenly Thoughts. Take some instances in such as these:

1. When you awake in the morning, think the great Jehovah can, and will as
easily raise our mortal bodies at the general Resurrection, as my frail body
now; this sleep is the Image of death, Death is but a sleep, the Grave my Bed,
the Resurrection the Morning; Oh that when I awake, I might be still with God,
and then at my last awaking, I shall be satisfied with his likeness, and the
upright shall have dominion in that blessed Morning.

2. When you have had a good night, think, blessed be the keeper of Israel,
that neither slumbers, nor sleeps, the Lord only makes me dwell in safety,
even thus he gives his beloved sleep; and if natural sleep be so refreshing,
Oh, what is it to lie in the arms of my best Beloved Christ? what soft and
sweet embraces have those souls that walk all the day in the Light of his
Countenance? and sleep all the night of affliction upon the lap of his Love!

3. When you are putting on your Apparel, Think, how came I to the necessity
of covering my nakedness? By Adams fall, sin ushered in shame, and these
garments hide our shame, shall I then glory in my shame, or be proud of that for
which I should be humbled? O rather let me be truly sensible of my spiritual
nakedness, and look after the Robes of Christ's Righteousness to cover my souls
deformity, that the shame thereof may not appear:

4. When you see the Morning sky, or rising Sun, then think, truly Light is
sweet, and it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold this Sun; blessed be
God that has set up this Candle by which poor mortals may see to walk or work,
what a dark Dungeon, and confused Chaos would this World be without it! But oh
the blessed Mercy we have in the light of the glorious Gospel! without which
we should be in the darkness of ignorance, and go to utter darkness:

5. When you pray in your Chambers, think now my Father in Heaven sees me in
secret, darkness or closeness hides not from him, my God sees the motions of my
body, and imaginations of my heart, Oh for an upright frame of spirit! Oh that
my heart were now seasoned for God all this day? the searcher of hearts will
have his eye upon me whether soever I go, oh that I could set the Lord in my
sight in all places, companies, occasions.

6. When your Families are together, think how sadly and suddenly might a
breach ha^ been made! Oh that God should make this Image of death, a means of
life! we are alive, that is rich mercy, we are in health, that is more, we are
called together, so will God gather his Saints together, how many of this Family
shall be of that number! Lord, that none under my charge may be an Ismael, an
Esau, Oh that we may all meet in Heaven.

7. When you are to read the word, or go to prayer in your Families, think, oh
what mercy is it, that I may read this blessed book! Lord open mine eyes, that
I may understand the wonders of the Word: what an infinite, glorious, gracious
God is this, to whom I am to pray, oh for a suitable frame of heart! oh the
mercy of a throne of grace, of a blessed Advocate! who knows but some soul may
be touched now, if I pray aright?

8. When you go out of your houses to work or travel, think, the World is full
of snares and temptations, and my heart as full of sin and treachery, little,
ah little do I know what corruptions may break out, or afflictions break in
upon me before my return, the least occasion of sin will overturn me, the least
accident will overthrow me, the Lord bless and preserve my going out, and my
coming in from this time forth and for ever more.

9. When you are traveling by the way, think, my life is a journey, I am in
constant motion toward eternity, every action is a step, Heaven is my home, I
cannot get thither without diligent travel; Lord let me not miss my way, or
miscarry in the end, take me by the hand, support me by thy spirit, keep me
from fainting, give me some good baits, and bring me to the end of my faith at
last, even the Salvation of my Soul.

10. When you see various objects before your eyes, deduct some holy matter
therefrom, as thus, what a vast World is this? and yet what is this to the
Heavens? and what are both Earth and Heavens to the immense and infinite God?
what multitudes of people are there in this City? but oh what assembly will
meet at the great day? oh my soul, art not thou too like yonder hard Rock, or
fruitless Tree, or barren Mountain? look about thee, make something of these
objects.

11. When you are discoursing with others think, of every idle word I must give
an account, and in multitude of words there wants not sin; Oh my soul, think
twice before thou speak once, will this be to the glory of God and others
edification? let no corrupt communication proceed from thee, what if Jesus
Christ stood by in his humane nature? speak here as thou must speak in Heaven,
or would be sound speaking at death.

12. When you are alone, oh think, I am now in the presence of the omni-present
God, these are precious hours that go over my head, why should I squander away
my time and thoughts about trifles? oh my soul, thou have a noble faculty of
reflection, find work at home, busy thy self about thy soul, thou may
find work enough, oh that I might be never less alone than when alone: when
thou have no Creature to converse with, my soul, converse with God.

13. When you eat, think, oh how officious are the Creatures to us living, and
how serviceable, being dead? they accomplish the end of their Creation and
appointment; oh my soul, sit thou as Queen-regent over thy sensual appetite,
take heed of excess, put a Knife to the throat of intemperate desires, be not
brutish in a sinful abuse, be Saint-like in a sanctified use of the Creature,
look up to God for a blessing, else these dead things cannot preserve life.

14. When you rise up well fed, think, if the Creatures be so nourishing and
refreshing, what is the Creator! oh the sweetness of the blessed Feast of fat
things in the Gospel? oh the delicacy of the Wine in my Fathers Kingdom? why
should I abuse the gifts, forget the donor, eat and drink, and rise up to play?
many better than I want these refreshments: Oh for a thankful heart! what a
bountiful Master do I serve! what a great housekeeper is the Lord? that
provides for so great a Family in Heaven and Earth!

15. When you go to public Ordinances, think, oh how glad am I when people
say, Come let us go up to the House of the Lord! what a mercy is the Sabbath,
this sweet day of rest? what a blessed thing to have the benefit of these
public places, and solemn Assemblies! it is a comely sight to see people flock
to Ordinances, as Doves to the Windows: Lord, that some Soul may be caught
this day in the Net of the Gospel: oh for a prepared and profiting heart? this
may be the last day of grace.

16. When you are to hear a Sermon, think, the Preacher comes as an
Ambassador, from God to me, it is God that speaks, the great Jehovah that can
command audience and attendance, and with a word can command us into
Hel-torments; the truths, oh my soul, thou art to hear, are words of eternal
life, and do nearly concern thy everlasting peace: prepare thy self for the
receipt of them, slight them not, for ought thou know, life or death may
depend upon this Sermon: Heaven and Hell is now before thee.

17. When you are to partake of the Lords Supper, think, I am this day to sup
with Christ, and have I on my soul a Wedding Garment? have I an interest in
Christ the maker and matter of this blessed Feast? where is thy stomach, oh my
soul? do thou rightly discern the Lords body? rouse up thy faith, and love,
thy hope and desire, his flesh is meat indeed, his blood is drink indeed, his
love is better than Wine, Lord fill and fatten my famishing soul with spiritual
repasts.

18. When you depart from public Worship, think thus, oh my soul, thy, work
is not done when public work is over; when that is ended, thou must now begin,
ruminate upon the Word, what have thou got? What light to thy understanding?
What conviction to thy will, what direction unto thy affections? Oh my soul
look to it, thou art either a step nearer to Heaven or to Hell this night for
this day; get good, be good, do good, or all these helps will render thee
inexcusable.

19. When you meet with, or part from your acquaintance, think, if it be so
sweet a thing to meet with my dear and ancient friends, how much better is it
to meet with God, my best beloved, most loving friend, God is a friend that is
nearer than any brother or neighbor, I meet now with friends, oh that I knew
how to improve them, to get good by them; or do good to them, we must part once
for all, on that we may meet in Heaven at the Resurrection of the just?

20. When you are busy in your particular callings, think, who sets me a work?
is it not God? whom do I work for? is it not for God? do I seek my self, or
strive to grow rich? then I am carnal: oh my soul, be moderate in the pursuit
of the World, let not the cares of the World drown thee: drive on evenly, both
thy general and particular calling: let nothing interpose betwixt thy God and
thee, or hinder thee in spiritual worship, abide with God in thy calling.

21. When you reflect upon the nature of your callings, gather something in
your Meditations therefrom; as thus, am I Magistrate? I judge not for Man but
for God, who will judge the unrighteous Judge, and now sits among the Gods: am I
a Minister? the charge of souls is upon me, that cry out we are perishing,
study, travel, pray for us: oh what account shall I give? if I be a Merchant,
Tradesman, Husbandman, Weaver, Lawyer, Soldier, Scholar, oh the spiritual
improvement I may make of all these?

22. When you consider your relation, think, am I am husband? I must dwell with
my Wife, as a Man of knowledge: am I a Wife? I must be an help to my Husband
in all things: am I a Parent? I must not provoke, but profit my Child, and
train it up for God: am I a Child? I must yield all reverence and obedience to
my Parents, as unto God, in whose stead they are; am I a Master or Superior?
my Master in Heaven, sees how I carry and respects no persons; am I a Servant?
oh for a submissive spirit.

23. When you hear any news, good or bad, oh what blessed tidings is the
Gospel? good news from Heaven, glory to God in the highest, on Earth peace,
good will toward Men, the best message that ever Angel brought, or Man
received: Let God say, I am thy salvation, I am fortified against bad news, the
righteous is not afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in God:
let Christ be advanced, Antichrist destroyed, and I am satisfied.

24. When you see or hear of any Prodigies, think, who knows the power of
Gods anger? oh the dreadful Majesty of the Lord of Hosts, who made the Sea and
dry Land, who commands all the Elements, and works his wonders in the Fire,
Water, Earth, and Air; they that dwell in the uttermost parts of the Earth are
afraid at his tokens, Lord, what mean these things? what will thou do with us?
our sins cry for vengeance, prevent it, or hide thy Saints til thy wrath be
past.

25. When you hear or see the sinful acts of Men, think, oh, what are the best
of us by nature? who makes me to differ? free grace stops my course, else I had
been reeling with the Drunkard, blaspheming with the swearer, revelling with
the wanton, Lord, let me not bless my self in morality, but arive at sincerity,
never leave me to ways of mine own heart: ah, how is God dishonored? what
long-suffering does he exercise? but justice will awake.

26. When your own corruptions break out, think, oh the vileness of this
naughty heart, oh wretched Creature that I am, Who shall deliver me from this
body of death? little did I think to have been thus beguiled, and surprised,
God is just, and I am vile, I grow secure, and God has left me, oh how might
he have taken me in the act of sin and cast me headlong into Hell! my soul,
defer not to humble thy self, and make thy peace with God.

27. When any sad crosses befall you in body, estate, name, relations, think,
oh, what sin is it that God now whips me for? Lord, bore mine ears, to hear
the voice of the rod, bow my heart in obedience to thy will; oh that instruction
might come along with correction, my soul, search thy heart and ways, this
hand of God is either a token of Gods love, or the beginnings of his wrath: oh
that I may see a Fathers heart, and feel a Fathers hand, and attain my Fathers
end therein.

28. When you are delivered out of apparent danger of death by sickness or sad
accidents, consider, oh my soul, what if thou had now been snatched away, and
thy body left a stinking Carcass! where had thou been? wast thou ready for
glory? what assurance had thou of a better state? did thou not then wish
thy soul had been in a better posture: mend the matter now, give God the glory
of thy deliverance, serve him better, be more prepared against another time.

29. When night approaches Candles are brought in, and the bright Sky is full
of Stars, think there is one day more of my life n^w past and gone, I am thus
far nearer Eternity; Lord, set up the Candle of thy Grace in my soul in this
night of darkness, error and terror, show me the light of Life, let the
blessed Day star arise in my heart, Oh when shall my soul be translated above
yonder twinkling Stars, to shine as a Star in the Firmament of glory.

30. When you put off your Clothes, and go to bed, think thus, even thus, must
thou my soul, put off thy body at death, thou must be uncloathed, that thou
may be clothed upon with a House from Heaven; O my soul, be daily undressing
thee of the body of sin, and lay thy self in the Grave of Christ, be buried
with him in spiritual Baptism, give up thy self into his hands, and lay thy
self to sleep as thou would be found at Death, or be raised at the great day
of Resurrection.

These, and such like Occurrences must put you in mind of such meditations, and
thus may your thoughts both have, and be a blessed Treasure.

I shall now conclude all with a few considerations to move us all, thus to
employ our thoughts upon profitable Subjects:

1. Consider the strictness of Gods Command, Josh. 1.8. Thou shall meditate
therein, (i.e. in the Book of the Law) day and night, Col. 3.1. Set your
affections on things above: how dare you neglect a positive Duty: the same God
that commands thee to pray and believe, forbids thee to steal, murder, does
enjoin thee to meditate: it is not a thing indifferent.

2. Remember Gods Omniscience and Omni-presence, when David had du^y considered
that God did search and know him, sitting down, rising up, understand his
thoughts afar off, and was acquainted with all his ways, etc. He tells God that
his thoughts were precious, Psalm 139.17. and verse. 18. When I awake I am still
with thee: Let Gods Omni-presence produce in you the like meditations:

3. The Saints of God have thus employed their thoughts, and the better the
Saints, the more holy have been their thoughts: Isaac went into the fields to
meditate, Genesis 24.63. Psalm. 119.15, 23, 48, 78, 97, 99, 148.
David meditated in the Night-watches, Psalm 63.6. on the Word, on the works of
God, Psalm 143.5. Oh be not unlike the Saints, resemble your Brethren, follow
them to Heaven.

4. This is a true Character of a Child of God, Mat. 6.21.
all Saints are described to be such as have thought upon his Name, Mal. 3.17.
for indeed they that are of the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit, Romans
8.5. Holy thoughts are proper fruits of a sanctified mind: none sees the
thoughts but God, a good heart approves it self to the searcher of hearts.

5. Holy thoughts help against Satan's temptations: these are as cool water to
quench Satan's fiery Darts: these are a precious Antidote against the poisonous
allurements of the world; for these find the soul something else to do than to
mind toys, the best way to silence scolding Women, Non vacat exiguis rebus
addesse mihi.
and barking dogs, is to mind our work and way, and let them alone; will a
Judge go off the Bench to play with boys? Give them Nehemiah's answer, Chap.
6.3.

6. This exercise of the thoughts will help against corruptions, See Psalm
119.11.
thereby you will see more of the evil of sin, and in vain is the Net spread
before any Bird, Prove. 1.17. and it lifts the soul Heaven-wards, a Bird in the
the air is not taken by a Net on the ground: yea, when the heart is taken up
with divine Dainties, it cannot relish the husks of sin: the child will not
part with the apple, while the taste of it is in his mouth.

7. This is the highest excellency and improvement of our Spirits: it is the
noblest employment of the soul, and advancement of its faculties: the soul is
of an high birth, its a debasing of it to mind low things: the Saints are of an
high and generous extract by their second birth, must and will mind the things
of Heaven, in all things besides excelling others, in this excelling
themselves, as it is said of Bucholzer.

8. This is the best way for the exercise and increase of grace; gifts are
promoted by verbal, but grace by mental discourses: If the thoughts feed on
Christ, the soul becomes comes spiritual, like its food; the Air, Food and
Climate has great influence upon bodies, conversing with wise and Learned Men
makes persons such, Exercise increases Habits, h^ly thoughts increase Faith,
Love, Joy, sorrow for sin, etc.

9. Holy thoughts excite heavenly affections; While I was musing the (...)
burned, Psalm 39.3. Thoughts are the bellows of the soul, and stir up suitable
motions in the heart: Would a Christian have an humble, tender, melting heart?
let his thoughts be acted upon the Law and love of God, or on such subjects as
are proper to beget such affections, and try what impression they will make.

10. Holy thoughts are a good preparative to holy duties, and help in
performances, Psa. 19.14. Psalm. 49.3.
Divid joins prayer and meditation together, Psalm 5.1, Give ear to my words,
consider my meditation: when the heart is meditating a good matter, the tongue
is as the Pen of a ready Writer, Psalm 45.1. Meditation fixes the heart, and
tun^th the Instrument for Prayer, Hearing, Reading: oh how it composeth the
Spirit!

11. Yea, holy thoughts are a great piece of a Christians devotion, and such a
part of it, when public Ordinances are obstructed, private Societies
interrupted, yet the holy soul may sally out to its God, upon the wings of holy
thoughts, in the presence of the most spiteful adversaries, thoughts are free
from men, no bolts can hinder this access to God.

12. This is an excellent part of Time-redemption, when we are walking or
riding by the way, working in our Callings, shut up in prison, deprived of Pen,
Ink and Paper, still our thoughts may be busy, we may have good thoughts
wherever we are, though we can do nothing else, yet we may think of God and
good Subjects: and that is the way to obey that excellent Precept, To redeem our
time.

13. This exercise of the thoughts is indeed a Christians walking with God, as
Enoch and Noah are said to do: it is the way to have our conversations in
Heaven: it is a Communion with God; a walking in Paradise, an enjoying of God;
it is indeed an Angelical Life, the life of Heaven, an anticipation of Glory,
and a taking possession of Heaven in our thoughts: Oh blessed Frame!

14. This helps the Christian in sad pressures, Soul confl^cts, good thoughts
counter-work bad. David could out-argue his dis-quieting thoughts, Psalm 42.5.
so may the Christian; Thoughts fed and furnished from the Word, will encounter
and conquer the saddest trials, Psalm 119 92. Unless thy Law had been my
delights, I should have perished in mine affliction; These Thoughts are an
Antid^te that keep sufferings from the vital spirits.

15. Holy thoughts help the Christian to rivet and retain divine Truths in the
Memory, ruminating on Truths, turns them into blood and Spirits, juice and
nourishment: our heads and hearts are like riven Vessels, all runs out, unless
the Vessels be well soaked by heavenly Meditation. Oh, what a tenacious memory,
large understanding, and vast abilities have some attained to by this means?

16. Holy thoughts prepare the tongue for profitable discourse, and render
Christians useful: He that has his thoughts best employed when alone, will have
his tongue best exercised in Company: if you converse with such a one in your
Houses, in Trading, on a Journey, upon any occasion, still his thoughts will
prompt his tongue to profitable conference; and oh the good that such a One may
do!

17. Holy thoughts answer Gods thoughts, I know the thoughts, says God, that I
think toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, -- Jer. 29.11. and can
we approve our heart to God, that he knows the thoughts we have toward him,
not evil, but good thoughts, how acceptable will it be to God? On the contrary,
what gross ingratitude will it be if our thoughts be not Godwards?

18. Divine things are only worth thinking of; other matters are not worth a
glance of our eye, or a thought of our mind, what ever relates not to the soul
and to Eternity is not worth minding; We look not, says the Apostle, at
things that are seen, but at things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. These
latter are things of great moment, and nearest concernment to our immortal
souls.

19. Thinking upon these heavenly Subjects helps the soul to the end of its
Creation and Redemption, the supreme and ultimate end is Gods glory, the
subordinate End, (yet involved in the former) the souls salvation; the God of
Heaven takes himself to be highly honored by the heavenly-minded Christian,
this is a sanctifying, (and so a glorifying) God in our thoughts or hearts, 1
Pet. 3.15.

20. Lastly, This is an actual preparing the soul for Heaven, the heart is
there already, and this is a part of making meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. Blessed is the soul, whom its
Lord, when he comes shall find thus thinking and well-doing: Oh the blessed
change they shall make! They may say, as sweet Dr. Sibs, Going to dye, I shall
change my place, but not my Company; and when the poor soul arrives at Glory,
the thoughts shall be fixed, grace completed, and the soul ravished with those
everlasting Embraces.

I have been the shorter in hinting only these Motives, because Mr. Baxter
has fully driven this Nail to the head in such like Arguments to
Heavenly-mindedness in his Book of Saints Rest, part. 4. page 51. to page 96.
Read them seriously.

I have done with this Subject also. Oh* that God would undertake to write all
these things with Power upon the tables of your Hearts, and elevate your
thoughts to Heavenly Subjects, and bring suitable things to your minds to
meditate upon, and work them upon your souls, and keep alive those impressions
upon your hearts, that you may not lose the divine Savor of the things of God,
after your working and awakening Meditations, but pray with holy David, in 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Fathers, keep this
for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and
prepare their heart unto thee.

I shall conclude all with a Poem of divine Herbert's in his Temple, called,
The Temper.

How should I praise thee Lord, how should my Rhymes
Gladly ingrave thy loves in steel,
If what my soul does feel sometimes
My soul might ever feel!
Although there were some f^rty Heavens, or more,
Sometimes I peer above them all,
Sometimes, I hardly reach a score
Sometimes to Hell I fall.
O rack me not to such a vast extent,
Those distances belong to thee,
The World's too little for thy Tent,
A Grave too big for me.
Will thou mete Arms with Man, that thou do stretch,
A crumb of dust from Heaven to Hell?
Will great God measure with a wretch?
Shall be thy stature spell?
O let me, when thy roof my soul has hid,
O let me roost and nestle there,
Then of a sinner thou are rid,
And I of hope and fear.
Yet take thy way for sure thy way is best,
Stretch or contract me, thy poor debtor,
This is but tuning of my breast,
To make the Music better.
Whether I fly with Angels, fall with dust,
Thy hands made both, and I am there,
Thy power and love, my love and trust,
Make one place every where.
FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible, on London Bridge.
MR. Sedgewick's Bowels of Mercy. fol.

Tho. Taylor's Works, the 1st vol. fol.

2. A Commentary on Titus,

3. David's Learning, a Comment upon 32. Psalm.

4. The Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed, upon Luke 8th. and 4th.

Divine Characters, in two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best
dress, by Sam. Crook B. D.

These six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.

1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones
business, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his
Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first part.

2. Likewise a second part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their
duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the conditions of prosperity and adversity.

3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein the
Christian is directed how to make Religion his business; in his dealings with
all Men, in the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good company, in
bad company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a weekday from morning
to night, in visiting the sick, on a dying Bed; as also the m^^ns how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it.

4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True Christian Characterized.

6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: or, One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well; all these by George Swinnock, M.
A.

A Wedding Ring fit for the Finger; together with the Non-such Professor; by
VV. S^^ker.

Books in large Octavo,

The burning of London in the year 1666. in 110. Meditations, in 4. Parts.

1. The Sins procuring that Judgment.

2. The n^tural causes of Fire.

3. The most remarkable passages of that dreadful Fire.

4. Comfort and council to such as a^ sufferers by the said Judgment, by Sam.
Roll.

A Glimpse of Eternity, by A. Caley.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in re^pect both of its causes and
effects, discovered, ^y Theophilus Polwheile.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16.26. y James Livesey.

Moses unvailed, by William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists, by Charles Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death, by Z. Crofton.

God's Sovereignty Displayed, by William Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer.

Joh. Am. Comeniischola, Ludus, seu Encuclo paedia viva, i.e. Januae Linguarum
praxis Comica.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven; by Ed. Calamy.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer; wherein i^ handled the nature and duty of
Prayer; by T. Cobbet.

The Almost Christian Discovered; or, the false Professor ^^red and cast, by M.
Mead.

Spiritual VVisdome improved against temptation, by M. Mead.

A divine (...).

A word of comfort for the Church of God.

A Plea for Al^s, in a Sermon at the Spittle.

The godly Ma^^s Picture, drawn with a Scripture-pensi^. These four last, were
written by Tho. Watson.

The Spiritual Chemist, or Divine Meditation, by VV. Spu^s^ow, D. D.

FINIS.

