THE TRIUMPHS OF ROYALTY In the Person of King Charles II.

A POEM.

By Thomas Heynes, Gent.

LONDON Printed for W. Freeman, over against the Devil-Tavern near Temple Bar
and published by W. Davis. 1683.

THE TRIUMPHS OF ROYALTY In the Person of King Charles II.
LEt Virgil's Muse on coy Alixis dote
Awed by Apollo from a higher Note,
Let modest Cowley to his Mistress prove
That his fond Strings will sound of naught but Love.
Inspired by ambitious Dictates I Will
In a more joyful and Heroic Style,
(With the Almighty's Poet Laureat) sing
Of matters appertaining to a King.
But where shall I the mighty Subject choose?
Or what brave Hero shall provoke my Muse?
Heaven's Index which did to the Magi tell
The place where Shilo from a Virgin fell,
Appearing likewise over the British Sphere
At the Natalia of a Royal Peer
Directs me by it is Luster to the place,
And Person, which my measured Lines must trace.
A Person whose Descent was great and high,
Fit to b'attended with a Prodigy.
Nor did the place Heaven's notice merit less,
Which the Defenders of it is Faith possess,
On whose delightful Soil the Royal Seed
In every Age such Sacred Cyons breed.
It Is most renowned for the Infant Seat
Of the first Christian Emperor, the Great,
And Pious Constantine. It Is ancient Fame
Is likewise much enlarged by the Name
Of Lucius the prime Christian King, they first
Of Monarchs to profess a Jesus durst.
'Twas here the Blood of the first Royal Head
That wore a Crown of Martyrdom was shed.
Who as a Martyr was the Churches Seed,
But being King a hopeful Prince did breed,
A Prince whose early Goodness did reform
His Sisters Beauty sullied in the Storm
Of Persecution and Rebellion. He
The Subject of my Joyful Song shall be.
Like as the solitary Bird that moves
Her pinion over the tall Arabian Groves,
Does from the Ashes of her Dam advance,
And to herself that noble kind inhance:
So the pure Flames of our late Sovereign's Urn
Did to this most puissant Monarch turn;
Who when wise Nature had sufficient strength
On him bestowed to force a Birth, at length
From her obscure Elabratory came
Ushered into the World 'twixt Joy and Fame.
Why should I mention here the curious pride
Of that bright Star whose Subtle Beams did glide
Through the Sun's burning Atoms, and adorn
The Day on which the Lovely Youth was born?
(When Phoebus being afraid, lest on the Pole
The Ghost of his audacious Son did roll,
Dispatched his nimble Paegasus away
Urania to consult about the Day)
The Noble Substance gladly we behold,
Which to the former Age those Types foretold;
This only shall my Loyal pen inspire,
And dictate Verses to my trembling Lyre.
To Charles the Second therefore I Will my Song
Devote, to Charles it does of right belong.
None is more worthy of my Verse then he,
Who did from slavish Yoke our Nation free;
First by a Parthian Conquest, when he fled
Disguised, unto the Oak's Asylum led
By the safe Conduct of his Angel, that
Once on the root of Gideon's Acorn sat.
That fatal Tree to Absalom, and those
Who dare their Lawful Sovereign to oppose,
To his Majesty was not a Foe,
But more propitious much by far then so.
Thrice did the sensible and humble Plant,
(As if it did not Love or Manners want)
It Is Sacred Branches to this Phoenix bow,
Inviting him by kind and silent show,
Who strait to climb the same does condescend,
Whiles the officious Limbs assistance lend,
Proud to receive into their shady Nest
The charge of such a brave and noble Guest;
Him thus advanced unto his strange repose
The spreading Leaves do faithfully enclose.
Nature high Steward of wise Providence
Who unexpected blessings does dispense
To needy Mortals, having thus disposed
Our Prince upon a Throne by her composed,
Thought it unmeet that he should sit alone,
And his misfortunes by himself bemoan.
With a Retinue she supplies his Court,
Of which some are for Service, some for Sport;
Here the Purveyors of Elijah bring
A Tribute of their Berries to the King,
And here the hovering Consort of the Sky
In Carols chant to his delivery.
The Flocks which in the inferior Valleys grazed
At this unusual Object stood amazed,
Until the plunderers them away did hall,
And they like Victims for our Isaac fall;
The Birds of Prey which did those Fields forsake,
To the rebellious Walls themselves betake.
The wild and savage beasts with whom the fierce
Usurper of the East did once converse,
From this Diviner Presence ran away,
Nor of it is Prospect in the Verge dare stay.
Thus were his Senses by External Charms
Freed from the sad Impression of his Harms,
Whiles Comforts far more solid did control
The Melancholy Passions of his Soul,
Full of the Spirit and those Graces which
The Faculties of pious Men enrich,
To his desires he unfolds the Door,
And thus in Jacob's form does God implore:
If thou great Lord wilt bring me back again
To my dear Father's Court, where I may reign
In peace, and to my Troubles put an end,
I vow thy Faith and Worship to defend;
Ejaculations more he did rehearse,
(But sympathizing Tears restrain my Verse)
So melting that a Myrmidon they would move;
Much more the Bowels of the God of Love,
Who heard, and as a pledge of happier Days,
Him for the present to his Friends conveys.
But leave (my Muse) the glory of his Flight,
And of his Joyful Restoration write.
Whose most Victorious Entrance did outvie
The Triumphs of his bare Delivery,
As much as things astonishing exceed
Those which do only Admiration breed.
To's Guardian Angels quick Invention he
His Rescue owes, but his Return could be
The wise and wonderful Effect of none
But of the three United States alone,
Who at Heaven's Altar do in Council sit,
Baffling with Counterplots all humane wit.
'Twas when our patient Prince seemed to despair
He should be ever a possessing Heir,
For Arms could never the sturdy Slaves remove;
Tho strength does not more just a Title prove,
Nor is our Hero to be thought less stout
In that he is not assisted by the Rout:
Then like a Giant flash't with Chion Wine,
The Almighty leader of the Host Divine,
Whose Spacious Tents the numerous Orbs enclose,
From the Tribunal of 's Pavillion rose,
And with a nod the Nations Genius he
Did change, and forced her on her stubborn knee
To sue for pardon of her injured Lord,
Whom whilom she inveterately abhorred;
'Twas God (you see) that did this plot invent,
But Nature the brave Scene did represent.
Who (like the anxious Nurse of Cyrus when
The trusty Shepherd bore him from her Den)
Did not forsake her Royal Charge, but as
In his Adversity a Friend she was,
Did likewise in his Triumph bear a part,
Out-vying in her Pageants mimick Art.
She at his first approach for Joy does weep,
And pearly Showers do from her Temples creep.
With Lightning and with Thunder then she clears
Her Cloudy Eyelids, and more calm appears,
The grand Procession this to move invites,
And straight comes forth our King among his Knights;
Majestickly he rides, and with a smile
The hearts of his repining Foes beguile.
Thus having under the Triumphant Arch
Of England's eldest Daughter passed, does march
In State unto the other of her Twins,
Whose ancient Minister now to roar begins:
There being entered, reverently he bows,
And on the hallowed Table pays his Vows.
Being discharged of them the holy Priest
Devoutly on 's Anointed Crown does rest
The Royal Burden, whiles unto the Sky
Loud Acclamations from his Subjects fly,
Whose shouting Crowd surround the Royal Stall,
The dancing Pillars and the vocal Wall,
(As if the Charms of brave Amphion's Lyre
With Voice and Motion did their Stones inspire)
The sprightly Image of the shout resound;
Nothing in Nature now is silent found,
But every thing combine, they all agree
With joyful noise (Great Charles) to welcome thee.
By them alar'm'd the impatient Clouds again
Break from the Dungeons of the rolling Main
Pleading the privilege of the happy day,
And over the blew Horizon have away:
Whiles Meteors in the Air dance a round,
And Heavenly Canons from above resound:
Not such as from the top of Sinai spoke,
Or which at Readiness Inauguration broke;
But gentler and more seasonable they
Did a more pleased Intelligence obey,
Nor were by Devils mingled in the Storm,
But from a Chymick Angel did receive their Form.
Welcome (Brave Prince) let the seditious Crew
With envy thy Divine Procession view;
In spite of those malicious Wolves I Will sing
Having so brave a subject as a King,
Who when the Fates a Scepter did restore
To his right hand that turned the Jack before,
Did then exchange (I speak it not in sport)
A sordid Kitchen for a stately Court.
See there he goes in such Majestic wise
As would control the strength of Eagles Eyes,
Did not his supercilious Face display,
Through the Transparent pores of a sweet allay
Those different Aires which on his Brow you read
From inward Consternations do proceed,
And of his mighty thoughts the Heralds are,
With combats more then civil did declare,
When mercy with his angry Genius strove
To save the Captive Wretches which he drove;
In vain from his pursuing Love they ran
Chased by the Magic of his Royal Wand,
Their Guilt indeed might prompt them to despair,
And make them think that the incensed Heir
Would do no less then sacrifice their Host
With Indignation to his Fathers Ghost,
And in revenge of Murder give them death.
But he with general pardon spares their breath;
And scarce a drop of Rebels Blood was shed,
Wherewith to mark the Joyful Day with red.
(Howe'r their undeserved impunity
Shall not secure them from Heaven's searching Eye,
Which in its Book of Fate has this Decree
That Traitors shall not always go Scot-free)
Thus the ungrateful Crowd more by the charms
Of Love were vanquished than by force of Arms,
With the Pharsalian Bard I Will not comply,
But Triumph for domestic Victory,
And though some modern Critic may accuse
Of flattering Idolatry my Muse,
His canting Exhortation I Will defy,
And with an Io Paean him reply.
Some are with Joy and Admiration mute
To see their Senses their sad Fears confute;
For me the Inspiration is too strong,
And from m'unwary pen extorts a Song.
Others in silence melancholy are,
And tremble at the memory of War;
Martial debates at home I do confess
With wounds the Body politic oppress,
But if thereby the Fates procure that all
The rotten and superfluous Members fall,
(Such as the Rump under whose brawny sway
The wool sacks in our Capitol decay)
And by their providence preserve the head
By which alone the Commonwealth is fed,
From brinish Tears and British Blood let us cease,
And with a grateful Joy embrace the peace.
First then lets pay our Tribute of applause,
And thanks to him who is the fruitful cause
Of this and all our other happiness
The heathen Poets use to do no less;
Nor will it next to him be thought amiss
To bless the second Causes of our Bliss.
Blessed be the Oak, let it for ever be
Like Aaron's holy Rod a budding Tree.
Which for this hour within it is aged Nest
Preserved him from the raping Vultures quest,
From whence he bore like Noah's Gentle Dove,
A Branch the Emblem both of Peace and Love.
Bless't be the Man (what do I wish as tho
His Noble Soul already was not so?)
But blessed let him be who thought it brave
His Liege by lawful Stratagem to save,
It Is Monck I mean; nor does great Ormond's name
Make a less Figure in the Book of Fame,
Who this auspicious Progress did direct,
And from those Birds of Prey our King protect.
The white Staff which his hand far whiter bore
Declared his Innocence then Office more,
And tho High Steward be a name August,
'Twas honesty preferred him to the trust.
Long may he live, and by his sage advice
Confirm the peace which from him took it is rise!
Like as Maecenas and Agrippa who
To Rome and Caesar's Interest both were true,
Did by their faithful Counsels them unite
Into a Noble Monarchy in spite
Of the malignant Fathers, who before
Had stained their Purple with Imperial Gore:
So when our guilty Senate had of late
Condemned our Sovereign to his Sire's Fate
Opposed by the Policy and Strength
Of these two Loyal Patriots, they at length
The Execution of their Vote forbore,
And did the usurped right to him restore.
How could I here enlarge in blessing those
Whom Heaven besides in this affair chose!
But soft (my Muse) thy blessings are in vain,
I mean superfluous like the drops of rain
After an Inundation which does fall,
The Times do more for Thanks than Wishes call.
Let us a while in Fancy's Chariot ride
Through the bright Mansions where the Meteors glide,
Drawn by the Wings of that amphibious Beast,
Which in the Aionian Rocks does build it is Nest,
Up to the higher Stories of the Air,
Where this inferior Globe looks white and fair
(Bright as the Moon it is Superficies seems
Through the laborious Suns prospective Beams)
Hence lets with Joy behold the spacious Ground
Which first the Julius Agricola.
Roman Husbandman plowed round
Was this fair Isle, alas, of civil War
The meed, to me it seems much more by far
Like the Elizian Fields exempt from Fate;
Well might the Ancients call it fortunate.
Under yon Branch see how the healthy Swain
Surveys his Cattle feeding on the Plain,
Which erst was trampled by the warlike Steed,
And stained by those who wounded there did bleed;
But now the voice of War no more is heard,
The Flocks are not by Drums and Trumpets scared,
Nor do the thundering Cannons make them fear,
For Sounds more pleasant entertain their Ear,
Hark how the Birds among the Branches sing,
Which always wear the Livery of the Spring,
A Livery that does look so fresh and gay
As if 'twere still the twenty-ninth of May,
How do the Corn within the Valleys laugh,
Ready to burst from out their Chaff;
And underneath the Clifts whose lofty Top
Powdered with Light o're-shades the merry Crop,
The reeling Sons of Neptune with their Face
Wrinkled in Smiles do sing the cheerful Base,
Expressing as it were how gladly they
Bore him who over their Billows bears the sway,
When he returned in Triumph from Exile
And with his Presence blessed again our Isle.
Why should I not those floating Towers mention,
The winged Fugitives admired Invention,
Which to the Skies their lofty Spires advance,
And to the Ocean's murmuring Music dance?
See how they fly with artificial Wing,
And in their Bulk from Foreign Countries bring
Supplies Domestic Treasures to recruit.
All this and more our wandering Eyes salute.
In the same Prospection the marshy Strand,
See how the Jolly Shepherd there does stand,
And leaning on his Crook a Past^ral sings,
Whiles through the neighboring woods the Echo rings.
But wherefore bleats the Sheep, why does the Cow
Amidst the fruitful Meads for Pasture low?
Not out of want but wantonness they crave
The blessed enjoyments they already have;
The gentle Sheep, alas, in quiet eat,
Nor moved by discontent for Joy they bleat;
The Wolf of Rome and Caledonian Boar
Are they who under Fleeces whine for more,
Like the Arch-Rebel that first taught the way
To other Spirits how to disobey:
So these the unwary Flock seek to persuade
With horns their Royal Shepherd to invade,
Their devilish Rhetoric did of late prevail
(God grant it may hereafter ever fail)
The Herd then quickly found unto their cost
That when their Pan was dead themselves were lost.
Warned therefore by the Experience of their Ewes,
The Lambs, I hope, a better Fate will choose.
The harmless Kine methinks are quiet too,
And on the Cud of fruitful Blessings chew.
Indeed the Devil now endeavor may
Clothed in a Hide our Albion to betray:
As once he did her Mother Europe, when
He roved about in the Phoenician Fen;
But all in vain, his Hoofs are too well known
To the fair Virgin wise and valiant grown;
It Is neither Force nor Fraud can her beguile,
Nor strength of Arms, she is no unchanted Isle,
But safe from any Plot or Magic Spell
Securely in her temperate Clime does dwell,
So safe that the combining Gates of Hell
(Under whose Arch the Shades of Traitors sail)
Shall never against her comely Tents prevail.
This under God she to the Conduct owes
Of the brave Monarch to whose Laws she bows,
Her foreign Foes it is he alone can aw,
And homebred Rebels fall before his Law.
When his fierce Lions do prepare their chase
Horror and Fear appears in every face,
The Foxes at their footsteps are afraid,
Nor are the dreadful Tigers less dismayed,
When they, the Triumphs of the Forest, sleep,
Their awful snoarings broad awake does keep
The other Beasts, who yet in silence lie;
Scarce dare the trembling Echo make reply.
The ancient Greeks before they could destroy,
Or captivate the Noble City Troy,
Were told they should the sacred Image take,
Whose presence it invincible did make:
So --
Our Modern Augurs (with the old the same
For Plots and pious Frauds, though not in Name)
Contrive to ruin our new Troy, to bring
By the Destruction of it is Guardian King.
Thus that implacable and wretched Tribe
The bloody Wish in Practice to transcribe,
Which the severed Caligula did vow
To kill the common Body at a blow.
But Heaven and he laughs at their vain Design,
And smiles to see how idly they combine;
And let them still their shrewd Intrigues pursue,
Whiles Heaven does still it is Providence renew.
'Twould move indeed a temperate Spleen to see
That any English men should so degenerate be,
That they should thus endeavor to betray
Their King and Country, but for my part they
Themselves and us impunely may abuse.
I Will never espouse a Satyr to my Muse,
Or moved by Indignation and Despite
Against their Folly sharp Invectives write.
This better would those eager Mouths befit
Which in exchange for Coffee spue out Wit,
Seeking by public Clamors to detect
The Plots which they do privately direct.
But I (who might perhaps be thought as smart
At railing which I hate with all my heart
And could as freely wish, nay do believe
That Traitors will a greater Curse receive
Then they the Pope or Hickringal can give)
A Theme have chose which milder Thoughts inspire,
And warms my Fancy by a softer fire,
A Fire so fine and pure, that no dull smoke
Or noisome Vapors do it is Spirits choke:
Nor will I cause so fine an Element
By such impure mixtures to ferment;
In short (to explain the Trope) my Loyal Strings
Are now devoted to the best of Kings,
Whose Nature is for Harmony designed
At once the Joy and Terror of Mankind,
From the utmost Limits of his spacious Land
Humble Addresses kiss his Royal Hand,
To him from far Ambassadors resort,
Him Foreign Nations to their Friendship Court;
And the same Majesty which them invites,
His treacherous Friends and factious Foes afrights,
Who conscious of their Guilt make have away,
Lest to his Justice they should fall a Prey:
And let them gang, but may their grand Design
In which they do so solemnly combine
His Crown and Sacred Person to assault,
Like Vulcan or Ignatius ever halt.
Happy thou art, fair Isle, happy thy Name,
And free, whiles Loyal to thy King, from shame;
The Grecian Poetasters prattle may
Of the Arcadian Groves alas, but they
Are nothing worth if we consider thine,
Whose glorious Rays on every Tree does shine.
And may it shine!
Till the fair Rival of it is Light the Sun
To the utmost Goal of his Cariere is run
And shall (among thy western Oceans drowned)
Forsake his annual and diurnal round;
May he whose Luster does inform with Light
Thy Jocund Sphere, and does create it bright,
Upon thy Joyful Surface never cease
To scatter the glad Beams of Joy and Peace.
But if the Heavens shall claim in him a share,
And still to us his Presence will not spare,
May he in them the Noblest seat obtain,
And turn Boots out of Charles Weign;
Nor do I wish he there may fixed remain,
But that the Constellation, which first brought
To's Mortal Body an eternal Thought,
May at their dissolution it convey
Back through Beam of Heaven the Milky-way
To's Native Mansion, where the Archangel shall
His Royal Shade among the Thrones install.
FINIS.

