GRAMMATICAL Drollery, Consisting of POEMS and SONGS.

Wherein the RULES of the NOVNS and VERBS IN THE ACCEDENCE Are pleasantly made
Easy, FOR THE Benefit of any that delight in a Tract of this Nature.

By W. H. ickes

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Fox, and are to be sold at the (...) and at the Star
in Westminster Hall. 1682

GRAMMATICAL Drollery.
The Adverbs Quarrel.
THe Adverbs had a Quarrel, as they say:
Says ubi, Where? in what place, I pray?
Says ibi, There; and in that very place
Where u and i by u received disgrace.
Then Mr. hic did plainly say, 'twas here:
Yes, yes, says istic, in that very place; 'twas there.
One asked whe'r 'twas within doors or without:
Says intus, 'Twas within doors, without doubt.
No, no, says foris, I Am certain 'twas abroad,
Where some of the Adverbs were severely clawed.
Then one did ask 'em, when began the Fray:
My troth, says honest hodie, 'twas to day.
Says cras, I fear 'twill last to morrow too,
There are such adverse Adverbs in the Crew.
Alas, says perindi^, (without laughter)
I fear 'twill last until the day after.
Says heri, Yesterday I heard something on it.
Say olim, In times past 'twas their wont.
Says aliquando, Sometimes now and then
Such Jars happen amongst such kind of men.
And 'twas of late so, says nuper then,
And may, says mox be by and by again.
Says statim, Presently, for ought I know.
Says cito, Quickly let us prepare to go.
Repent cries, We suddenly must depart;
And subito therein did take his part.
Ocyus said, We quick must have away:
Yes, says jam and modo, just now we say.
But alias for another time did plead.
Says forsan, Perhaps you will repent the deed.
Says lent, Have makes wast, go slowly on;
We Have a weighty matter to think upon.
Says quamdiu then, How long shall we stay?
Diu says, A long while, make no have away.
Quotidie, day by day, ill News does hear.
I Will stay, says donec, till the coast be clear.
Vnde asked from whence comes all this prate?
From hence, says hinc; we are all unfortunate.
Illinc said, From thence, istinc, from that place
Where you and I a Mistress had in chase.
Whither shall we fly, says quo? Hither, says huc.
Illuc says, Thither, or you will have ill luck.
Yes, says istuc, to that place. Says alio,
To another, or I shall fail you, ho.
This Jarring then did breed such a puther,
Aliquo bids go to some place or other.
Which way, says qua? let us well advise.
Says illac, That way take, or you are not wise.
Faith, says quacunque, which way soere you go,
You Will be beset on all sides with the Foe.
How to behave my self, says qualiter,
I know not; but am resolved to rail at her
Has been the cause on it. Says poor primum,
First I Will to the trees, and then I Will climb 'um
To be out of danger, I Am so perplexed.
Says Inde, Then be sure I Will be the next
To follow ye. After, says deinde,
I Will follow too, knew I where to find ye.
Lastly, says denique, Let Us go together,
In regard we are all Birds of a Feather.
And then came in a very scurvy cur,
Asked 'em why they then made such a stir?
Then all did call him cur, which made him cry,
And why cur, says he? because cur is why.
Says quare, Wherefore do ye jar?
I fear you will hear (alas) too much of War.
Quorsum then did ask 'em to what end
They quarrelled, and whither did it tend?
Says heus, Hark ye: so said ehodum too,
What Is the cause ye make so much ado?
Truly, says profecto, you are all to blame.
Indeed, says sane, I do say the same.
Says minime, You must in no wise jar
Nequaquam, by no means, lest't prove a War.
I would to God, says utinam, you were
As good friends as when ye came here.
Sodes and amabo, of all loves did entreat;
And eia said, Go to, unless you will all be beat.
Says age, Well, una together with me,
Will try if we can make 'em all agree.
Now Is the time, says nunc, or else never;
Not only now, says non modo, but ever.
It Is always good, says semper, to be quiet,
Else you will surely get but little by it.
Seorsim does advise to go apart
One after another, lest they all do smart.
Yes, says imo: and potius said, he had rather
Go one by one, than go altogether.
Poor fere said, he almost feared to go;
And hand was scarcely brought unto it too.
Then ecce he came in, and's Brother en,
Saying (behold) here is none but jangling men.
Perhaps, says forte, and fortuito,
You may repent it, yea, and rue it too.
So also said their Brother, good fortassis,
And called 'em all a Crew of drunken Asses.
Veluti and sicut said, They act as 'twere
Like mad men as they go every where.
And sic likewise did say the very same,
And so fell sick, to see all out of frame.
One asked how sic did: was told, So, so.
That Is sic: sic, says he? then he is ill I know.
Quasi said, Although they were to blame,
Something might be done their Brains to tame.
Says quomodo, But how can it be done?
Says been, Well, let each take a Gun
And force 'em to it. Recte said, 'twas rightly spoke:
Optime said, 'twas best way not provoke.
Fortiter then strongly spoke, saying, Let us
Quickly prevent 'em, lest they beset us.
This made fortius more valiant to declare;
And fortissime most valiant to prepare
Against any assault that might attack 'em:
Which made the major part begin to back 'um.
And docte being learned, then began
To give the Character of every man.
But male then being of an evil mind,
Did join with pessime, the worst inclined
To peace of any: Which sicut hearing,
Said, 'twas like as a War appearing.
And so said ceu, As sicut, so say I:
So says tanquam, velut, and all that fry.
Says multum, nay, it much does grieve me;
And plurimum, very much believe me.
But parum little cared for what they said;
And minimum the least of all in dread.
And magis more than all the rest let fly
Likewise at tam, but maxim especially.
Paululum a little while did weep
To see his Brethren laid by War to sleep.
Minus was less grieved than all the rest,
Which prope that was nigh, could not digest.
Valde greatly did bemoan their fate,
And told 'em, they would be all unfortunate.
Nimium said, they were too much inclined
To mischief, and bid 'em change their mind.
Propius and proxime came near'st of all
To make an end of this inhumane Brawl.
And admodum did very much desire
To put an end to this Intestine Fire.
Then satis came, and cried, Enough, enough,
We may ere long have cause to make proof
Of your undaunted Courages: till then
Let Us all shake hands, and be friends again.
Then number and nunquid, both together
Came to 'em, and did ask 'em whether
They resolved to agree: belissime
Most fairly spoke, said, Yes, come kiss ye me,
I Will begin: I Will second you then, says tunc,
And for this, to night I Will make ye drunk,
And declare, though you were lately Madverbs,
You Are now become again sober Adverbs.
And affatim abundantly did spend
To make 'em quiet: They all called him friend
While there: but being gone, said affatim
Was a kind fool, and did laugh at him.
Which vix could scarce put up, being his friend;
But at the last he did: and there is an end.
The POSTSCRIPT.
And being all asate in the Adverbs Hall,
Doctissime, the most learned of all,
Did make a Preposition to invite
All the Conjunctions thither that night,
To join together in this Harmony.
They all cried out aloud, So let it be.
And eke the Interjections, if 't should chance
A sudden passion too far advance,
They may assuage it (as it is often seen)
By casting in some moderate words between.
Then all with one accord again did cry,
Doctissime, that spoke so learnedly,
Shall be our Chairman, let us mount him high.
They were so very drunk, the Neighbors say,
They fell asleep in the Hall, and there they lay.
By which I find, that four of the parts of Speech
Were drunk that night, to soder up the Breach.
The Battle of the Verbs.
THe Quarrel of the Adverbs being known,
The Verbs were much concerned every one,
And in a fury 'gan to take it to heart,
'Cause every one would take his servants part:
For to the Verbs they are servants all,
And obedient to their Masters call.
For without them they neither dare nor can
Speak Sense or Reason unto any man.
Just like those Nouns called Adjectives,
Who truckle still unto their Substantives.
Then impero their great Commander, he
Who was the chiefest in Authority,
Commanded jubeo for to summon all
The Verbs together, both great and small,
With all their Arms that they ere did use
On such a day at a Rendezvouze.
Colligo gathers them; and duco being made
Their Captain, them to the Fight does lead.
Incipio does begin the Battle, and
Valiant pugno fights him hand to hand.
Clango commands the Trumpet then sound out;
But clamo he cries all the field about,
Poor timeo is afraid, and fugio shuns
The Battle, sequor follows, curro runs;
Cedo gives ground; which made bold juro swear,
And often called for vocito to have the rear.
Juvo, though long, at last does bring him aid;
Yet amo's being in love, made him afraid.
He then bid doceo teach him how to weild
His sword: Lego said, 'twas read to him in the field.
And I, says audio, then did hear the same.
Troth, says accuso, then he is much to blame.
Induo was bid to put his Armor on;
And incito to stir up, was wrought upon.
Immediately poor jugulo's Throat was cut;
Says instigo, he egged me on to do it.
Lacco lay hid behind a Quickset-hedge;
Which video seeing, set his Teeth an edge
To make complaint. Says haurio, You will draw
An odium on your self: which when cerno saw,
He bid lacesso not provoke too much;
'Twou'd put, says pono, courage in a Dutch
Man in the next Line. Liveo then was beat
Quite black and blue, by retro's back-retreat.
And salio then over the Ditch would leap;
But aio said, it was too broad and deep.
Dimico in skirmish, got two wounds that bled;
And at his feet poor morior soon lay dead.
Sepelio buried him, fodio dig'd his Grave,
And honest scribo writ his Epitaph.
Which stirred up excito to fight again;
And voco called him valiantest of men.
Bless me, says beo, how valiantly he fought!
And jubilo for very joy did shout.
Caedo, whoere he met, did beat 'em all;
And at the last he made poor cado fall.
Candeo then 'gan to look white with fear;
But horreo dreaded nothing, as I hear.
Amplector says, I do embrace the Fight;
And aperio did open to the left and right.
Altercor 'gan to wrangle with them all;
Which made arcesso presently go to call
Augeo, who did rather increase than stop
This Jarring; that it stirred honest cieo up
To speak to vulgo, that he would publish round
The field, that the Enemy then gave ground.
This made fremo roar, and furo to be mad
To follow them. But hortor did exhort that they*
Should not do it: yet propero did have away.
Increpo began to blame him much indeed,
And jurgo chid him soundly for that deed.
Then blatero 'gan to babble like an Ass,
That calco kicked him as by'im he did pass.
Then cogo swore he would force 'em for to fight;
And cito summoned them all that very night.
Lugeo did mourn, and prayed there might be peace;
And cudo coined a Lie to make 'em cease
Fighting: which made mad execror to curse.
Ejulo and ploro too did wail, fearing 'twou'd be worse.
Duro said that he would endure unto the end,
But damno condemned him for it, like a friend.
Fingo did feign a Lie that he might be gone;
But censeo censured him for it, and every one
Besides. Hio began to gape for breath, they say,
And halo wanted breath that very day.
Macto began to kill without remorse,
And paro did prepare to meet his Force.
Then paveo dreaded this might mischief bring;
And pendo and pendeo did weigh every thing
In the Balance of Justice: Says oleo, I smell
There Is Traitors amongst us; says tumeo, I swell
With grief to think on it; and so did turgeo too;
Says suspicio, I suspect it as well as you,
And blamed vitupero much, that was the cause on it:
Then volo he was forced to fly upon it.
Nego denied that he had any hand in it:
Says scrutor, I Will search it out within this minit.
Trunco then did mangle all came near him,
And trudo thrust so strong, that all did fear him.
Temno did despise all danger that might come,
And vibro brandisht out his Sword, and looked grum
Upon 'em all. Vito to avoid this storm,
Hid himself in a hollow Tree, (poor worm!)
And viso likew^se went to visit him there.
At last vulgo published abroad where they were.
Rogo and peto asked pardon for their fault,
Because they feared they might be brought
To punishment. And quatio 'gan to shake;
Vlciscor swore that he revenge would take:
Which made ululo howl for very grief,
Until that venio did come to his relief.
Vindico did challenge any there to fight,
Which renuo did refuse at the first sight.
Propago did think the Fight for to prolong;
And probro being then among the throng,
Did approve what he had said. And pateo he
Lay open to these slanders, which made him flee.
Repo did creep from thence into a Wood;
Which veto forbid, saying, 'twoud do no good.
Dormio then told 'em he must sleep a while:
Yes, yes, says cumbo, lie down on that Pile
Of Bavins. Says exu^, Then put off too
Your Arms; It Is best, says facio, so to do.
Says cupio, Then faith now I covet drink:
I believe't, says credo; but where is the Chink
Must purchase it? Says do, I give it him.
Come then, says pleo, fill it to the brim.
Bold scindo then was cut into the brain,
And fluo swore the blood flowed out amain.
Says frico, Rub his temples well, be sure,
And I, says precor, will pray for his cure.
Which made poor horreo then to dread the Fight;
And gaudio did rejoice when out of sight.
Gemo began to groan, being wounded sore:
Says bibo, Let him drink a little more
Of The Cordial. But mutio muttering by,
Frango did break his head immediately.
Foveo did cherish all this bleeding Crew,
And nutrio he nourisht some of them too.
Foeteo did stink for fear, when he did see
Ferio strike down another. And fugo he
As well as his Brother fugio, flies. And flo,
With fighting long, began to puff and blow
Fleo did weep extremely for to see
Flagito to beg for's life so earnestly.
I must confess that fateor got renown;
And fatigo was weary too with looking on.
Fido did trust too much unto his broken blade,
Which made festino hasten unto his aid.
Fallo did deceive 'em all: for when he found
The Bullets hiss, he fell upon the ground,
That honest cogito did think him dead;
Experior too did try to rub his head.
Doleo grieved that Death should thus oretake him;
Yet expergiscor did at last awake him.
Exerceo then did exercise his Crew;
But he like desero did forsake him too.
Festo stood to it, advenio then comes to him;
Which when obsecro saw, he then did woo him
To invade bold ingruo: But scandeo he
Did climb for safety on an Oaken-tree.
Then simulo did counterfeit a wound or two;
Singultio likewise sobs to see him so.
Ario being dry, did wish his inside wetter;
No matter, says ardeo, you will burn the better.
I was betrayed, says prodo, to this dismal day;
Yet prurio's fingers itcht to fight, they say.
Pungo was pricked toth' heart, when upon him
Premo did press; yet vinco overcome him.
Meo unto the Battle have does make,
But desino does the Field forsake.
Spiro to breathe, does forbear to smite;
But crafty evito does escape the Fight.
Miror in wonder standing much amazed,
And faint aspicio on the Battle gazed.
Supero did overcome whoere he met;
And gratulor did the valiant Hero greet.
Spero did hope well; sperno despised all flight,
Though redeo returned wounded from the Fight.
Stringo did strain himself to overcome
Bold pulso, who quickly struck him down.
Then tono thundered in with might and main
To help succurro, which was almost slain.
Ferreo waxt hot by all these great Alarms,
And fido trusts more to his feet than arms.
Dimitto sent a Bullet then so right,
The Powder scorcht poor ustulo that night.
Luxo then put his arm quite out of joint,
That ungo was forced at last it to anoint.
Erro mistook the place, and wandered up and down,
And equito after him rod from Town to Town.
Corusco's arms glister'd in the fight that day,
And mico's shined likewise, as some do say.
Metuo did fear to meet too, as I hear,
Yet at last with misceo mingled in the rear:
And occulo did hide himself behind a Tree,
Which monstro showed to all the company.
Sad verto turned from one side to the other,
And muto changed too, as if he were his Brother.
Nuo did nod his head at some were there,
That neco almost killed him when he came near.
But mulceo did assuage his fury then,
And paco strived to appease all these men.
Though congruo advised them to agree,
And allured Lacio of his party to be,
Yet cingo girds his Sword about him then,
And jungo joins with other marshal men.
Ausculto hearkens what they meant to do;
Emo buys Armor to defend him too.
Titubo did stumble by his too much have,
Vacillo staggered too, they struck so fast.
Laedo was hurt, and's Brother noceo too;
And tueor defends himself with much ado.
Tego was covered with a gallant Shield,
Yet being beat by verbero, made him yield.
Plango did much lament his grievous chance,
'Cause ico smote him with his direful Lance.
Ruo did rush into that furious Fight,
Which did, they say, poor terreo much affright.
Sarcio did patch his Armor, 'twas so old;
And demo took't away, he was so bold.
Languio did languish 'cause his wounds were deep;
And serpo from the Battle soon did creep.
Bold voveo vowed that he would have Armor on;
Which obliviscor forgot, till all was done.
Palleo looked very pale, and would a fled; but
Undaunted teneo soundly held him to it.
Findo did cleave his Enemies scull that day;
Yet medeor made a shift to heal't, they say.
Formido did dread to come into the Fight,
And culpo blamed him for it, they say, that night.
Voco did call on vado to go on;
Poor labo faints, when jaceo cast him down:
But recupero recovered incontinent;
For spero gave him hope, being almost spent.
As I live, says vivo, statuo did appoint
Me Ensign, in regard I first did win't.
Nosco said, he knew it; mentior swore he ly'd;
Then acuo whets his sword that hung by's side.
Peace, peace, says taceo; sudo sweat for fear,
And surgo rose and fled into the rear.
Singultio then began to sob, they say,
Because provoco challenged him that day.
Cubo fell down, and capio did him take
Up again, when he could hardly speak.
Frendeo then did gnash with his teeth so hard,
It drove away poor pello from the Guard.
Come, says invenio, I do clearly find
Maneo did well to tarry still behind:
For incendo here has set us all on fire;
And I Will begin, says inchoo to retire.
Oro prays heartily that it may succeed;
Says indico, I Will show you a way with speed.
Consulo's counsel they did not despise;
Condono said, he would pardon his Enemies.
Fascino thought he was bewitched he swore;
But patio said, that he had suffered more
Than all. Impertio did impart to 'em all;
And I command, says mando, great and small.
Obedio vowed that he would the first obey,
And Moneo did admonish the same way.
Says Narro, I will tell it round the field;
Nolo, though unwilling, yet at last does yield.
And volo was as willing, I do protest;
But malo was more willing than all the rest.
I have a mind, says habeo, for to join
With all this Crew. Says rego, And I Will resign
My Rule. Sto was at a stand, and gazed about;
And certo strived to draw this Rabble-rout
To some Agreement. At last loquor's Speech
Did by degrees soder up the Breach.
Tho praedico did preach before in vain,
And suadeo did persuade with might and main,
And fungo did discharge his duty right,
And he with unio caused them all unite,
And dico said, 'Twas best from War to cease,
And sancio he establish did a Peace,
And solvo paid 'em for their service done,
And jurgo chid those from fight did run,
Finio the Battle ends: yet most do say,
Though jacto bragged, yet vinco won the day.
Numero did number all then were slain,
And opto wisht't might nere be so again.
Parco was very glad that he was spared;
And partio did divide the spoil was shared.
Irascor was angry, and began to fret,
'Cause adsum was not present when they met.
I was, says eram, and am glad to see
A Reconciliation so like to be.
Then salto danced, and ludo 'gan to play
On's Instrument for joy of that happy day.
We had better, says lavo, wash our Throats than cut 'em:
And tundo knocked for Liquor; which was brought 'm.
Yet turgeo and tumeo 'gan to swell,
'Cause placeor was not pleased very well.
Says veto, Jove forbid that we again
Should fight: To which they all did cry, Amen.
The Concords.
THe Interjections living so near the Concords,
Were, as I Am told, the only strong Cords
To tie 'em up from War; came in I find
In some vehement passion of the mind,
And affection also: and before they went,
Brought in the three Concords to that intent.
The first was Nominative case and Verb,
Who strived their unbridled passions to curb,
By saying, Yet we never did disagree,
But lived in love, concord, and harmony
In affections; and so I hope will ye:
For we in Case Number and Person still agree.
Then the Substantive, who was substantial,
Came with his Adjective at the very first call,
Who said, that in Case Gender and Number they
Did never disagree, nor disobey
Their Superiors, and were each a sure friend,
As amicus certus can tell, to the end,
In any doubtful matter whatsoere,
Witness in re incerta cernitur.
So we hope in this brangling matter,
To bring't so to pass all Feuds may scatter
Like the dust before the wind. And then
Came in the Relative with his Antecedent, when
The other two were endeavoring to compose
That great difference where every one were foes.
The Relative said, I Have Relations there:
And I, says the Antecedent, should a come here
Before the Relative; but I Am glad he is there.
Then 'twas related to the Relative, how
It did begin. Says the Antecedent, Now
We will endeavor to make 'em all agree,
And add one Concord more to the other three.
Then they both being together,
Did very seriously ask 'em whether
They Would add another Concord to the three before:
If so, then you must never quarrel more.
To which they did concord, cum tota mente,
With a large Huzza, Nemini Contradicente.
The Conjunctions.
WHen the Adverbs Quarrel began to cease,
The Conjunctions strived to make a Peace,
With the help of the Prepositions,
And their Neighbors the Interjections.
Which being done, the Conjunctions they
Strived to prevent such another day:
And by a Conjunction did all agree
For the future to live in amity.
And so did join some sentences and words
Together, and what their Storehouse affords,
To give some reason that they ought no more
To quarrel as others did heretofore.
Says et, And I will join w'ye in the same.
Says quae, And I; or else I were to blame.
Says quoque also, I Will stick by ye still.
Says ac and atque, And also 'twas their will.
Says nec, Neither I nor my Brother neque;
We'll break our necks ere we'll forsake ye.
And these coupled themselves then for that end,
That they might still be each others friend.
Though the Disjunctives did at first disjoyn
From the last, yet now to quietness incline.
And aut, to excuse himself, said, 'Twas either
Ve, vel, seu, sive, or he knew not whether
That did disjoyn 'em; but now all do desire
To stick close unt'ye to quench the fire.
But then the Discretives, that were discreeter
Than the other, did say, It was meeter
For all to be friends. Says quidem Truly
I Have often known Disjunctives much unruly.
But sed and autem, vero, at, and ast,
Thought themselves the Buts, they would shoot at last.
The Causals then resolved next to speak,
And thought they would cause enough their mind to break:
For says nam, namque, enim, and etenim,
That some of the Adverbs then did threaten 'em;
But know not what for. Says quia, 'Twas because
(And so said quoniam) some had broke the Laws.
Says ut, That may be: And quod said That was so.
Says quum, Since that I no Tony am;
And so said quando, that was set for quoniam.
Says the Conditionals, On this condition
You Will never more have any division;
We'll speak for ye. Says si, If I do
Believe their ifs and ands again, let me rue
It. Says sin, But if they should first begin,
Then at their door I Am sure does lie the sin.
Says modo, So that they will but let us alone;
And so said dum, and dummodo, and every one,
We'll never differ more. Says dum, They told me then,
That I should marry Dido, Carthage Queen;
But 'twas by the very consent of some
Of The Gerunds. To make it up, di, do, dum.
The Exceptives then some Exceptions made,
As ni, and nisi, being both of one Trade,
Said, Except they leave off thus to abuse us,
We cannot endure long to be used thus.
Then says alioquin, and praeterquam,
Except that they do this, we mean to firk 'um.
Then says quin, But I neither except that,
Or any thing that is otherwise, that is flat.
The Interogatives then were took to task,
And were resolved some Questions to ask.
And first, says ne, an, utrum, whether
You do intend to speak altogether,
Or singly? Nay, says necne, Whether or no:
And so says anne: Says nonne, Is It not so?
The Illatives then were for bringing in
Some novel Custom, that had long been
Out of use. Says ergo, Therefore: ideo,
Igitur, itaque, and proin, bid ye, ho,
To bring in nothing that was against Law.
Says quare, Wherefore should they do it? thy're raw
That do desire it. Then the Adversatives,
Who had been very adverse all their lives,
And were against every thing that is good,
Now did no more desire to deal in blood:
For says etsi, quanquam, quamvis, and licet,
Although we hated Peace, yet now we prize it.
And before 'em all, says esto, Be it so:
And so shall all the rest say before we go.
The Redditives then said, That they would restore
Whatere they had unjustly gotten; nay, more
To be quiet. Says attamen and tamen,
Notwithstanding that many does blame men
For their wickedness: Yet the Electives say,
With quam, How glad are we to see this day!
The Diminutives also did confess,
That they endeavored to make all things less
Than they were, thereby to have quietness.
Says saltem at least, and so says honest vel,
They were glad to see all things now so well.
The Prepositions.
A Preposition most commonly is set
Before other parts in the Grammar-Alphabet.
Then why the Adverbs and Conjunctions should be
Set before it, a wonder is to me:
For he in Apposition can do much,
And in Opposition too has a touch.
For he to's Father, if he please, can say,
Ad Patrem; and when he has done, go his way.
Likewise in opposition is very bold
With the rest of's Brethren, as I Have been told.
And then for composition, none can be
So great an Artist in that Trade as he,
As indoctus, though unlearned, said to me.
'Twas he that great composition made
To the Adverbs, when they that great quarrel had;
And privately was the cause, they say,
That the Verbs themselves fought no more that day:
And called to all of them that were his Crew,
That they in that thing should join with him too.
And first, says ad, I Will add to any thing
Which may indeed peace and quietness bring.
And I will be, says apud, at the same;
And they that do it not, are much to blame.
Then were adversus, and's Brother adversum,
Against fighting too: but said, There were some
That delighted in it, and they could rehearse 'um.
Yes, says cis and citra on this side the street,
Many often about it together did meet.
Yes, says trans, on the further side too;
But they at my request, themselves withdrew.
Then says circa, circiter, and circum,
About that time we were used to jerk 'um
For it. I was, says contra, on the other part,
And did contrary them in all their Art.
As I went, says erga, toward 'em too,
I forced 'em to peace, do all they could do.
And versus toward 'em went, as I have heard,
And took the untoward and plucked 'em by the beard.
I was, says extra, without when 'twas done:
And I, says intra, within when 'twas begun.
I was just then, says inter, between ye both,
And was much troubled to see 'em all in wrath.
And I was then, says infra, beneath ye all,
Yet not so far as to be out of call.
I was, says pone, behind; ye could not see
Me at all: I stood behind a Tree.
And I was also, says prope, nigh to,
Yet was seeing for a place to fly to.
But I was, says supra, above ye all,
I mean, in the Room which is above the Hall.
And I was, says ultra, beyond the rest,
To sleep in a whole skin I thought it best.
And I, says per, by too; but through my desire
For peace, did endeavor to quench the fire.
I was then, says secus, by or nigh to,
But I Will assure ye had no mind to die too.
Says juxta, And besides I was nigh to, and
Ob, For some reasons, which you will understand.
I had it, says penes, in my power either
To set 'em by the Ears together,
Or to make peace; truth is, I cared not whether.
Says praeter, Besides, or except I had been there,
Great mischief would a been done, I dare swear:
For I being praetor, that is Lord Mayor, you know,
Kept 'em in aw, and brought 'em all to my bow.
Last, says secundum, According to what you have said,
Your will with me shall always be obeyed.
Then the Propositions broke up their Court,
And all to their own Stations did resort.
The Interjections.
AN Interjection is a part, I find,
Which concerns a sudden passion of the mind:
But it is under an imperfect voice, I hear,
(That is to say, within their proper Sphere.)
Some are so merry, they are to mirth inclined:
Says evax, vah, hey brave! We'll not be confined:
Can they want any thing that are merry?
Come, Boy, fill us a lusty Cup of Sherry.
Some are with sorrow attended, still they say,
As heu, Alas! and says hui, Welladay!
Some are possessed with dread; says atat, Out alas,
What shall we do, being brought to this pass?
Some are of marvelling too; which argues change:
And all do cry still with papae, O strange!
Some are of shunning, and all back will run,
And boldly say with (...) avaunt, Be gone.
And of prattling (...) says euge, Well done.
And some of (...) '^is very true,
Who all do cry (...) hoop, whoo!
And so^ (...) and often cry Foh;
And with (...) proh, cry Oh:
As o preceptor^ (...) ^ras?
O, Master, why (...) me? Alas, alas!
And proh (...) Fidem!
O the Faith o^ (...) to guide 'em!
And some (...) delight, I see;
And all say lik^ (...) vae, Woe to ye.
And all the (...) therein,
Saying, Woe (...) that shall quarrel again,
And wish they may go all down quick to the Pit:
Then says all the rest. Amen, So be it.
The Gerunds.
THere be also belonging to the Infinitive Mood
Of Verbs, certain Voices (to be understood)
Called Gerunds, having all their endings in
Di, do, dum; and so of long time have bin:
As amandi, of loving. It Is very true,
A man die of loving, it is nothing new.
Amando, in loving, is brought to's end.
I saw a man do much in that to's friend.
Amandum, to love; that is more than all the rest.
When a man is dumb, how can's mind be expressed?
And as di, do, dum, all their endings are,
And when they do die, they are dumb, I Will swear:
For after death, there is few speak any where,
As I Have been told by some of the Neighbors there.
For those di do endings bring 'em to their ends;
And therefore enemies to 'em, and not friends.
And when they do die, as being Gerunds,
Then Mr. Death does send 'em of his Errands.
The Supines.
THere do also belong unto Verbs, two
Supines; and that they may have their due,
One ending in um, which is called the first,
But the other in u, which is much the worst.
The first is of the Active Regiment,
And clearly to love and loving is bent:
And wherever he goes, says eo amatum,
I go to love, and not to cheat 'um.
But that in u is rugged, harsh, severe,
And very hard to be loved any where,
As difficilis amatu told us there.
They both are descended from one Su Pine,
Who was their Mother, and born under th'Line.
And likewise she her self came from the Loins
Of him that was the Prince of the Isle of Pines.
They Are both of different temper, yet Brothers
As if they would been descended from two Mothers.
The Conjugations.
THe Verbs have only four Conjugations;
Which are known in this manner, in all Nations:
And they are Feminines all, as I hear;
And by that time you know it, you will say it is clear.
First, by their names, as amare, amaris;
That is, one Mrs. Mary was Lady Mayoress.
And indeed they love well three of the four,
But the other they hate for evermore.
And the reason why they love the first, second, and fourth,
Is, because they think 'em of very much worth;
Because they are pronounced long in the middle
Syllable in the next line: and let the third go fiddle:
For he in the middle is found to be but short,
And so by consequence makes them no sport.
And being Conjugations, they are wedded
To the other three, but will never be bedded
To the third; and I certainly know this,
As long as his name is legere, legeris.
Thus you have heard the meaning of all the four
Conjugations; what need I say any more?
The Persons.
THere are among the Verbs, Persons also,
And very great Persons too, you must know.
Their Numbers are great too, nay more than one:
For there is two numbers of 'em which are known.
And seeing the numbers of 'em are so great,
We'll appoint numero them to repeat:
Of which persons there is but only three
That are singular men; which I Will make known to ye.
That Is the most Princely Impero, Mando,
And Jubeo; which command as much as men can do.
Other three there are plurally addicted,
And are for more than one naturally affected;
Which is the cause that they do never marry,
But Misses numberless 'bout with 'em carry.
The Servants to the first, are ego, tu, ille;
Which is as much as to say, I, thou, he,
Will domineer over all the Country.
And the Servants of the last are in number the same,
But not of the same number, yet as much fame;
And they are called nos, vos, illi, they say;
That is to be interpreted, we, ye, they,
We'll all be drunk as often as we may.
Then ego amo, I love; tu amas, thou love;
Ille amat, he loves: Now which loves best?
The other which is called nos amamus,
We love; for which I hope you will not blame us.
Vos amatis, ye love; why should ye not?
Illi amant, they love; Love's all their lot.
It had been well if all the Verbs had been so,
Then we should have had no fighting you know.
Thus have you heard the Persons and Numbers too:
So that I think I Have nothing more to do.
The Pronouns courting a Mistress.
A Pronoun is a fellow much like to a Noun,
And thinks himself the bravest man in Town;
And still in Poetry will be versing,
But's chief business is showing and rehearsing.
A very pretty, witty, and buxom Maid
They Would lately got among 'em, as it is said:
And every one did think himself better
Than the rest; and so did strive to get her.
Says ego, I am chief of all the rest,
And therefore think I do deserve her best.
Says tu, Thou have her! what, 'cause you are Foreman
Of The Jury? Yet she knows you are but a poor man.
But here is one called sui, of himself can say
In's own behalf, more than any of they.
Says ille, He to my knowledge cannot break
His mind: for I never yet heard him speak.
But here is one Mr. ipse, the man will be,
Because she has long known him, ipse, he.
Though ipse be the very man you speak of,
Yet I say iste the match will break off,
'Cause he is an Hermaphrodite, both he and she,
So not fit for that Ladies company.
Says hic, Though iste this and that do say,
Yet I hic, this man, will have her away.
How, says iste, is that the man must do it?
There Is one Mr. meus will hold him to it:
For she is, says meus, mine; therefore I,
Before I Will lose her, am resolved to die.
Then says tuus, Thine she shall be for me;
For I Am resolved not to fight for any she.
Says noster, Ours she is, and ours shall be:
She is, says vester, yours, if you and I agree:
For you know that whatsoever is yours,
If I participate therein, it is ours.
And then began too Monsieur nostras,
Who in his Country-Language was boistrous
To get her from the two last, saying, She is
Of our Country. Says vestras, And so it is:
For your Country is our Country, and so
Our Country is your Country all do know,
And so belongs unto us both; let us go
And take her. Says cujas that was lurking by,
You both lay claim to her as yours; but I
Lay claim to her, not only as of my
Country, but of my Sect too, certainly.
So took her from them all, saying, Know,
Who dares resist, is my perpetual foe;
And they for fear, it seems, did let her go.
Then up the Court rose, and did march in May
Unto their own homes, which is much, you will say.
The Participles.
A Participle does participate
With Noun and Verb in all degrees and state:
With the Noun, in Gender, Case, Declension;
With the Verb, in Tense and Signification.
And yet to make the wonder the bigger,
Takes part with both in number and figure.
There are of Participles but four kinds,
Which scarce do know one another minds:
For they never are together at one time;
Which to offer to do, would be a Crime.
The Present, Preter, Future in rus and dus:
How, two Futures! that is preposterous.
O, Sir, it is most certain; and I say yes:
For is not the next year future to this?
And the third year also future to that?
So now you see there is two futures, that is flat.
The present has two ends to lodge at, ans
And ens; and the Landlord to the first is amans
Loving: for we know that a man's loving is
The cause of his great sorrow or bliss.
And as before-said, the second is called ens,
Whose Masters name is Monsieur docens:
Who is teaching of 'em all perpetually;
But those that are not present, by and by:
But chiefly the present time is his aim,
And every day will be to him the same.
The second is praeter, who likewise has three ends
In English, as d, t, n, who are his friends;
As loved, taught, slain. He has also
Three ends of Latin too, which we also know,
As tus, sus, xus; as amatus, visus, nexus;
Who when we are construing, does always vex us.
And another dull dead word, in uus,
Which is Mr. Morio^'s Son, mortuus:
He hates the present Tense; for he is for naught
But that which is past, which he has dearly bought
By vindicating that which he will never see,
And so to himself is a great Enemy.
But that in rus, which is a Countryman,
Has an active voice (though looking wan)
By being about to love Amaturus Daughter;
That is, if not now, he will do it hereafter.
But that in dus does suffer very much more
Than all the other three that were before:
For he scorns to love, being often moved
To it; but with amandus, to be beloved:
For a man does love to be beloved sometimes;
That is, when young Ladies are in their primes.
And as they were all to Nouns and Verbs allied,
So in their distinct seasons, were to them a Guide.
They all were glad the Verbs a Peace had made;
For when they heard on it first, were all afraid:
And to the Concords for that agreement
Which they had made, they in their seasons went
To give 'em thanks; and then their Healths did tipple:
Which was then done by every Participle.
POEMS and SONGS.
A Mock-Song to Beauty.
1.
MY Love is a pretty Lass
As any's in all the Town;
Her Face does shine like Brass,
And her Skin of a Tawny-brown.
2.
Her Hair's of a lovely red,
With Horsegirt-Ribbands tied,
And hangs about her head
Like Daglocks beautified.
3.
Her Forehead is low and rough,
Just like a pleated Gown;
Her Ears are large and tough,
And always are hanging down.
4.
Her Eyes are sunk full low
Into her pretty head;
From whence a Cream does flow
That over her face does spread.
5.
The one of her Eyes is large,
The other is very small;
Her Mouth it is like a Barge,
For length and breadth and all.
6.
Her Nose of a Scarlet hue,
Well set with Jems about,
And all do appear in view
To adorn her delicate Snout.
7.
Though her Nose and Chin did jar,
Yet now they are perfect friends;
And though at distance were,
Now touch at both the ends.
8.
Her Teeth they are black and blue,
Her Tongue than the Cows more neat;
Her Lips of a silver hue,
And thatcht with Hair complete.
9.
Her Neck it is thick and short,
Just like our brindled Cow;
And when she sings for sport,
She grunts like our old Sow.
10.
Her Shoulders and Arms are strong,
And both of a lusty growth;
To which her Hands do belong,
That are Shoulders of Mutton both.
11.
Her Back it is high and plump,
That some have her Credit defiled,
By saying, that above her Rump
She always did seem with Child.
12.
There Is never a Girl in Town
Of her Breasts can make such brags;
For they still are dangling down
Like half-fill'd Pudding-bags.
13.
Of her Hanches she often boasts,
Because they are very fair;
Her Thighs are two Windmil-posts,
So they would need for the weight they bear.
14.
Her Legs are lovely and great,
Which does her Credit maintain;
And therefore must needs be neat,
Being born in Crooked-lane.
15.
And now for her pretty Feet,
They can her Arms display;
But to see how her Heels do meet,
Now her Toes are worn away.
16.
Having heard the parts of my Dame,
I now do conclude my Droll;
And having no Toes, her name
Is called Stump-footed Moll.
In praise of the Tailors trade.
THe Tailors Trade is ancient, all we know;
For in the first of times they learnt to sow,
And made them Breeches then, and Aprons too:
But was not worth a fig, to what it is now.
Threadneedle-street likewise to all is known
To be the antient'st Street in London-Town.
The Cross-leg'd Sign was there the first set up,
And likewise there was first a Tailors shop.
Their Arms are ancient too, and well them fits;
Which is three Rampant Lice and a Cluster of Nits:
Which Coat of Arms, with something else, has made
More Gentlemen of that, than any Trade.
And now I do believe you would know the cause;
Have patience, and I Will tell you how it was:
An ancient Gentleman that was decayed,
(Who once had been a rich and ruffling Blade)
Brought's Doublet to mend to a Tailors house,
On which were creeping many a lusty Louse;
But one more large and rampant than the rest,
Which made the Tailor think he was the best
And chief of all that sharp Backbiting Crew;
Which he took up, and cut him just in two
With his new Shears, and gave his Wife one half
To eat, and the other half did eat himself.
And from that time did verily think that he
Was a Gentleman, and of antiquity,
Because that Louse he knew had sucked before
Of the ancient Gentleman's blood such store.
And's Wife likewise did verily think she was
A Gentlewoman too for that very cause:
And so did write themselves, do all we could,
Because they eat so much of the gentile blood.
Nay, his man did say he was half a Gentleman,
Having lickt the Shears that cut the Louse in twain.
Then he drank hard, which you know does make us
Gentlemen all that are friends to Bacchus:
And when others would leave half in the Cup,
Yet he would always wind his Bottoms up.
Nay, those which drank not, he would say were dull,
And tell 'em still, 'twas but a Thimble-full,
He could not drink to mend his Blood, I Am sure;
You know his Blood was good enough before.
When other Gentlemen would say they were
Gentlemen of such and such a Shire,
Yet he excels them all in spite of their Ears;
Theirs came from one, his from a pair of Shears.
And whereas other men did call the Court
Behind their house, a Backside; he, in sport,
Commands them all to called a Yard: for he knew
His Wife would be well-pleased with that name too:
And please her he must in all his discourse,
Because the gray Mare was known the better Horse.
And likewise knew it did belong to's Trade;
Without a Yard, no measure could be made.
Some say, by Surgery too he was grown rich:
For never man did better cure a Stitch.
Your Lawyers likewise much a Tailor praise,
Saying, it is an excellent Trade nowadays;
Nay, best for a Lawyer in all the Land,
'Cause he has still so many Suits in hand.
One asked him why he married a Northern woman?
He told him, in their Trade 'twas very common,
Because their Needle still to the North does tend;
And as their Needle guides, so they must bend.
He has a Goose too, that flutters still so high,
And is so proud, that it presses all't comes nigh:
And it is a Goose that never had more than one
Wing at all (when that is off, he will have none.)
Other Geese do swim, but these, Pox rot 'um,
Do still in the water sink down to the bottom.
Besides his Yard, he has another Measure
Which he does clip and alter at his pleasure.
The Barbers Trade is not so gentile as it,
Because they stand, but Tailors always sit
Still at their work: which was the cause, I think,
A fellow said (when he was got in drink)
That a Tailors feet stunk the worst of any
Trade whatsoever; (although there be many)
And reasons gave us why they were so strong,
Because they are under his breech all day long.
A Tailor sent the other day (I know him)
Unto a man for ten pounds he did owe him.
What makes thy Master send thus every day?
I hope he does not think I Am running away?
No, Sir, though you are not, I Will tell you true,
Yet he must do it within a day or two.
A Tailor once was bid to make a Gown;
And who do you think 'twas for? 'twas for the Moon:
And as he tried it still (as all men say)
It was too big or little every day.
The Tailor then was not in fault, you see;
But 'twas indeed the Moon's inconstancy.
How cannot be otherways, being stuffed with Lunacie,
And commonly lightheaded used to be?
There is a Proverb which has been of old,
And many men have likewise been so bold,
To the discredit of the Tailors Trade,
Nine Tailors goes to make up a man, they said.
But for their credit I Will unriddle it to ye:
A Draper once fell into poverty,
Nine Tailors joined their Purses together then,
To set him up, and make him a man again:
Which made him vow, nay bound it with some Oaths,
That none but Tailors hereafter should make his Cloths.
The POSTSCRIPT.
Thus have you heard the Tailor over and over,
And more I think than ere you heard before;
And when he works, does still fit on's breech,
But yet to all he still went through stitch.
And though some Tailors take delight in cupping,
Yet Breadstreet is their best place to set up in.
A SONG,
To the Tune of Well, well, it is true, That I Am fallen in love, and it is with
you.
1.
Go, go, you Slut,
That day and night art cramming of thy Gut
This sad and pinching year:
How can this mean Estate of mine
Supply that Gulphlike Paunch of thine,
Now every thing's so dear?
Remember once, you Jade, at Islington
You eat, besides of Bread and Cheese, a dozen Cakes alone
2.
Once we did go
Abroad into the Fields to walk, you know;
And then, forsooth, you cried,
You were so faint for want of Meat,
And must have something then to eat,
Or else you should have di'd.
Yet thou did eat, when we came out a door,
A Pidgeon-pye the crust and all, but half an hour before.
3.
Nay, more, you Swine:
When I invited once some Friends of mine,
You presently did fall
Upon the Meat was on the Spit,
And ere that we could eat a bit,
Thou had devoured it all.
Retrench this gormandizing trade, you Whore,
Or else I vow by mighty Jove, I Will turn thee out a door.
A Song on a Lady and her Chambermaid.
1.
A Chambermaid was got with Child;
For which her Lady did call her Whore,
And said that sh'ad her house defiled,
And vowed she would turn her out a door.
Who got the Child, says she, you Jade?
Your Husband, and please you, Madam.
Why where, you Whore? Forsooth, she said,
In the Trucklebed a Hadham.
2.
Why where was I? I Will know the truth:
Come tell me, or else I Will make ye.
In the high bed fast asleep, forsooth,
And I was afraid to wake ye.
Why did you not cry out, you Drab,
When first you saw he begun it?
Truly, forsooth, I was never a Blab
Of my Tongue: Would you a done it?
3.
And besides, forsooth, you know
That I your humor know too well,
That if you're suddenly wakt, you will throw
And tear like to a Fiend of Hell.
Nay, you will cry out with loud Alarms,
And fling what your fingers touches,
That I Would rather be in my Masters Arms,
Than ever to come in your Clutches.
4.
Why did you not then sooner go,
You errant Queen, before 'twas known?
Truly, Madam, it is even so,
Because that you had none a your own.
And indeed, Madam, the truth to tell,
I think I well did plot it,
Imagining you would use it well
For his dear sake that got it.
A Song called the Hasty Wedding.
The Tune is the Gunfleet.
1.
I Am in love, says Noll: Indeed, says Doll!
But prithee say with who?
I fear, says he: Come speak, says she:
Why then it is with you.
You jest, says Doll! Good faith, says Noll,
You do me wrong, my Dolly.
But men, says she, to flattery be
Too much addicted, Nolly.
2.
I vow, says Noll, I love thee, Doll:
But pray, Sir, tell me where?
At my heart, says he: At your heart, says she!
And do you love me there?
It Is true, says Noll: But you, says Doll,
Do love another better.
Who is it, says he? Why Nan, says she;
You the other day did treat her.
3.
Fie, fie, says Noll! Why, why, says Doll?
Why Nan did come to me,
And prayed me write that very night
To her Sweetheart Humfrey.
What then, says Doll? Why then, says Noll,
I gave her a pint of Wine, Doll.
What else, says she? Why Cakes, says he,
And yet no Miss of mine, Doll.
4.
But yet, says Doll, my Father, Noll,
Does say you are poor of late.
How! poor, says he! Yes, poor, says she,
And must not be my Mate.
I have, says Noll: What have, says Doll?
Why I have a House and Land, Doll.
Where is it, says she? Why it is, says he,
At the lower end of the Strand, Doll.
5.
What Goods, says Doll? All sorts, says Noll,
That in a house is common.
Indeed, says she! And fit, says he,
For any honest woman.
How, how, says Doll! Good faith, says Noll,
It Is true; and all are my own:
And a Feather-bed, with Curtains red,
For thee and I to lie on.
6.
Then it is, says Doll, a Match, my Noll,
Let Father and Mother chide.
Is It done, says he? It Is done, says she;
And I will be thy Bride.
Let Us kiss, says Noll: Content, says Doll;
And there is another for ye.
When wed we, says he? To morrow, says she.
We will no longer tarric.
7.
Come then, says Noll, we'll go, my Doll,
And see the house before;
And then, says he: What then, says she?
Thou't find I am not poor.
Agreed, says Doll; and -- And when, says Noll,
To morrow we are wedded,
Thy Parents shall, and Kindred all,
Then come and see us bedded.
Iter Orientale: or, a Voyage from London to Chipping-Unger in Essex; performed
by some Gentlemen in August 1674.
HEnceforth I never more will hunger
To ride again to Chipping-Vnger
In Essex County, as I hear,
And month of August every year.
Not but we had a gallant Feast,
And Meat most delicately dressed,
As Turkey, Pig, Goose; and the chief
Was an excellent piece of Beef,
So large, it made the Spit to bend,
And a yard distance from either end;
And when it came up, there were two able
Men to bring it to the Table:
With Pullets, Capons, and on my word,
All that time of the year could afford.
And then we did excel in Drink
Of several sorts. Stay, let me think.
And first we had good humming Beer,
The best, I think, in all the Shire:
And store of Nappy Ale likewise,
Which quickly did our brains surprise:
But then of Wine we had such store,
I thought one house could hold no more.
The Tables filled with Bottles were,
We scarce could set Tobacco there;
That one to ask was then so bold,
Whether the Bottles were to be sold?
And yet to make up more variety,
Of Friends there was a brave society,
So truly merry and so free,
I was never in better Company.
Handsome, witty, and good humor too;
Faith, and that is much in so great a Crew,
That every thing there spoke or done,
Was Object of Mirth to every one:
And all resolved there to be merry;
But alas, poor Captain, he was weary,
And gauled was so much, that he
Could find no part of's Rump was free.
This being so, you will ask me then,
Why I Will no more to Vnger again:
Which to unriddle, I will not fail;
But now comes out a doleful Tale
That ever yet was heard before,
His Buttocks being so vilely tore.
The Horse whereon he then did ride,
Wore Whalebone-Bodies on either side:
For the Spur had made the Ribs appear,
As if you had Glass-windows there.
And then he had so sweet a trot,
By that time I two miles had got,
As if it were for the very nonce:
For it dislocated all my bones.
And then his trotting was so high,
He Would mount me up; then by and by
Would let me down with such a jolt,
I had much ado to keep my holt.
He once did lift me up so high;
(But here you will think I tell a lie)
Far be it from me; I Am not so given:
For I heard the Angels sing in Heaven.
You may think I hyperbolize,
But I hope you do not think 'em lies:
For at that time I did bestraddle
Such a fashioned uncouth Saddle:
For such a one it chanced to be,
From which, good Lord, deliver me
From such another: For allagree
'Twas made of Deal-boards certainly;
But some a better name did give it,
Saying, 'twas Wainscot; you may believe it:
And I began to think so too.
It was so hard, I swear to you,
I thought't had lain in water or mud
That turns all things to stone that is wood:
For I did find a rising bump
Of The top, which often hit my Rump;
And went to cut it, but on my life,
It soon turned the edge of my Knife.
I hope you think, when on it I rid,
A pleasant Saddle I bestrid.
In Stirrup-leathers I was blessed,
'Cause they were like to all the rest:
For they in pieces were so plenty,
I think in number almost twenty;
They were so patcht in knots and bumps,
And other risings just like lumps,
That I protest I broke my knuckle
To draw the Leather through the Buckle.
The Buckles and Stirrups were with rust
So eat, that all that saw 'em, must
Seek for a Faith to believe that ere
They were iron, so unlike they were.
Yet I believe that I am able
To prove, that the straps of the Saddle
Had once been Leather, when I had found
Two or three holes both round and sound.
And for my Girts, I do protest,
I cannot tell whether it is best
To call 'em so: for one I found
Not square, but excellently round;
Which makes me think that it was made
Just when the Roundheads drove their trade,
For its antiquity and make.
But for the other, if I may speak
My mind freely, the breadth's about
A quarter and nail, I dare avow't;
By which you see they were not brothers,
Being so unlike one another.
And for the Bridle, this I Will say,
'Twas only for a Lord-Mayors-day
For an Alderman to ride upon,
If then he could get such a one.
Being thus accommodated, I
Did ride by the Coach triumphantly,
Unto the credit then of all
My Dames that rode there, both great and small.
But now comes out the saddest Tale,
Which my poor Rump does still bewail:
For never Rump was served so,
When they to Vnger ere did go.
I Would rather to endure a whipping,
Than ride again to Vnger-Chipping:
I Am sure I should have lesser whales
Than I had then upon my Tail.
And well they may Chipping call it;
For It chipt my Nock, and did so maul it
In many Chips and cornered cuts,
I could not help it for my Guts:
So gaul'd it was in many places,
That I was forced make many faces
(Whenever I got it dressed)
And yet no Painter, I protest.
Sometimes 'twou'd itch, and then I Would scrat;
Then turn a this side, and then a that:
Sometimes 'twou'd smart, then must I
Not sit at all, but stand or lie.
Some seeing me lean a one side, swear
That I was whispering to the Chair.
Others asked me why I pensive sat,
Saying, 'twas so with me but a late.
Nay, I heard one whisper through a Gap,
That certainly I had got a Clap.
And when I kneeled against a Chair,
They Would ask me if I were at Prayer.
And when for ease I on my Belly lay,
Sure you're ashamed to show your face, they would say.
And when that I came through a Town
From Vnger, says a Country Clown,
Like Crookbackt Richard I did ride,
When I turned my Rump up a one side.
And at another Town, a fellow swear
I was like the Bunchbackt Tailor there.
And when to ease my Nock I lay
On the Horse-neck, then they say,
(When I was in that pitiful case)
Sure that man's a running a Race.
And as through Stratford-Bow I came,
Says one, How do you, Sir? are you lame,
Or are you gaul'd, and is it sore?
Ah, friend, thought I, than all before,
Thou speak truest: He bid me pick
From off a Tree an Elder-stick,
And put into my Pocket; and swore
That at that time 'twou'd gaul no more.
Troth, friend, thought I, I Am o'thy mind:
For I am so much gaul'd behind,
There Is no place free, it is so tore,
How could it then gaul any more?
Thus you may see my desperate case
Being so, to jeer me to my face.
Then I do every man advise
Not to ride as I did, if he be wise:
Which to prevent, let him never paddle,
As I did then, on such a Saddle.
Perhaps you will ask why I did not look
Before I leapt: I swear upon a book
I could not help it; the horse was sent
(As 'twere to me in complement)
And left him at my Lodging-door,
When all the rest were gone before:
So Hobsons choice was left to me,
Either this or none, most certainly.
Then every one began to say,
They did not pity me that day:
For had I gallopt as I ought,
I had to the Town more Leather brought;
But I, forsooth, must often tarry
For my Dog Tango, that was weary.
Sure I think it was good nature
Not to leave a poor dumb Creature
In a strange place: for I Will swear
He never did speak as I did hear;
And being dumb, how could he then
Beg relief from Countrymen?
For some an 'um are like a Hog,
To respect him no more than a Dog;
Unless that he at Barking had bin
In Essex too, with some of his Kin,
Who might relieve him for's barkings sake,
Although poor thing he could not speak:
For Barking was his Dialect; and how
Can Essex-men understand Baw waw?
So Tango might be starved in
A Country where he never had bin.
His feet were surbated, and he sick;
Which touched poor Tango to the quick.
Thus have you heard most certainly,
The Story of my Dog and I.
I now must speak of two Comrades
Which furnished were with arrant Jades,
As we our self was furnished,
Except the Saddle on which I rid.
The young man's horse came from a Butcher,
Who kicked when he did not touch her.
His horse was raw, and lean, and tall,
He looked like Alexander on's Bucephal.
I cannot say he lost much Leather,
Yet brought home less than he carried thither.
And's Comrade too that with him went
Home, did confess his Rump was rent.
Their Rumps were bad, but mine was worse,
That we all may say, God a mercy Horse.
The POSTSCRIPT.
Thus have you heard our Iter Orientale,
Which to us three was very male;
But I the worst of all that Jovial Crew:
So iterum, atque iterum, I bid ye adieu.
A new Song.
1.
I Once for a fancy, did love pretty Nancy,
Till Jenny came into the place;
Who when I did see, there is no man could be
Ever so took with a face.
2.
But when at a Ball I saw pretty Mall,
Methoughts she tript it so fine,
I felt such a smart, that I used all my art
By presents to make her mine.
3.
This lasted a day, until at a Play
I saw my beautiful Jone;
Which made me to think I was just at the brink
Of marriage with her or none.
4.
This humor did last until I did cast
My eyes on my pretty fine Kate;
My heart was so caught, that I verily thought
She should have been my Mate.
5.
But after a while, I seeing the smile
Of my dear bonny sweet Betty;
Which made me to start, that I thought in my heart
That none could ere be so pretty.
6.
But being a Guest at a Wedding-feast,
I there sweet Susan espide;
And truth for to tell, I likt her so well,
I thought to a made her my Bride.
7.
But after a day, at a place where I lay,
I chanced fair Nelly to see;
That I never was so in love with a Lass,
She was so airy and free.
8.
But yet for all this, I soon left that Miss,
When I heard sweet Abigail's voice;
She tril'd it so well, I then 'gan to smell
That here I should make my choice.
9.
And this did remain for a day or twain,
Till I heard fair Dolly to play
So well on the Lute, I then 'gan my suit
For marriage with her the next day.
10.
Fair Hester at last had my heart so fast,
I resolved to make her my own;
But a little after I handsomely left her,
For my humor of love was gone.
11.
Yet I never will grieve, for I still do believe
I Have a Mistress yet to come;
Or else I must say, I Am in love every day;
But I cannot tell with whom.
A new SONG.
1.
Let Us strive to improve our Talent of Love,
It Is that which can give us content;
We'll banish those fears that usher in cares,
And give to our Pleasures a vent.
2.
And when we begin to be stupid within,
We'll march to the Tavern amain:
For a cup of good Sack will supply what we lack,
And restore us to Pleasures again.
3.
For Sorrow and Care does but bring in despair,
And makes us like Drones to sit;
But Cupid and Bacchus will every day make us
Masters of Pleasure and Wit.
A new SONG.
1.
Prithee, Caelia, tell me why
Thou'st been so strange of late?
What Object now has took thy eye,
That I am thus so soon laid by,
As one that is out of date?
2.
Thou know my kindness still was such,
As none could ere be more.
And which is now in Gallants much,
I in my promise still kept touch,
Which no man did before.
3.
Is it because thou love to range
And take thy swing about?
If it be so, methinks it is strange
That any one a friend should change
For one of the common Rout.
4.
Or else do think my Fortune lean,
And cannot entertain
Thee in a handsome Miss-like mean?
(Though I confess it is often seen)
Faith, Caelia, this is vain.
5.
But if it be Pride, then Caelia, know
I gave thee thy renown,
And made thy Infant-fortunes grow,
When thou were it in esteem so low,
Thy name was scarcely known.
6.
Had not my Pen advanced thy fame,
and gave it wings to fly,
Thoud'st been as one without a name,
And in thy Reputation lame
To every vulgar eye.
7.
Then, Celia, since I Have made thee great,
I Will take thee down again,
And make thy Glories so retreat,
That all shall take thee for a Cheat,
And where is poor Celia then?
8.
Thus art thou brought, by foolish pride,
Into this low estate;
Had thou been kind, thou had me ti'd
To make thee at the last my Bride:
But, Celia, now't's too late.
A new Song:
The Tune is, Mr. Staggins his Minuit which he made for the Ball at Whitehal,
1673.
1.
GOne is my Dearest, she I so admired;
Never was man so dejected before:
She so much Beauty had, all hearts she fired;
No one could ever be Mistress of more.
But when her charming Eyes
Once let their glances fly,
None could withstand 'em, but all fell in love.
Nay, some did think she was
Clad in that humane dress,
And by the Gods sent down from above.
2.
And though so fair she was, never did woman
Wear so much modesty still in her face;
And of so great a Wit, that it was common
Still to deliver her words with a grace.
But when her Lute she took,
She on it so sweetly struck,
Never did Mortals such harmony hear;
We thought the Heavenly Quire
All met and fixed in her,
And then did wish our selves nothing but ear.
3.
Then welcome Sadness, and farewell all Pleasure,
Nothing is left for me now but despair;
And of the Gods I beg some little leisure
Only to shed on her Grave a sad tear;
And there deplore the fate
Of my dear peerless Mate.
That after-ages may give her her due,
Also I beg to have
This Motto on my Grave,
Never, O never died Lover so true.
A new SONG.
The Tune is, The Duke of Lorains March.
1.
ROuse up, Boys; Ease destroys
Every martial wight:
Then arm apace, the Foes increase,
And all prepared to fight.
Tantarara, tantarara,
The Trumpets sound amain;
Then let us away to win the day,
That every one may honor gain.
2.
It is decreed, Delay does breed
Danger still in War;
Then let us go to meet the Foe,
Before they advance too far.
Dub a dub a dub, Dub a dub a dub;
The Drums a Charge do beat:
Then let us fight from morn till night,
Until we make 'em all retreat.
3.
And all that can, must charge in the Van,
Until you have broke their Rank;
If'twill not do, then you must go
And charge 'em in the Flank.
And then you must be sure, Boys,
To charge 'em in the Rear,
Until they fly; then you must cry,
Away they run, they run for fear.
4.
When that is done, and Field is won,
The Plunder is your own;
The Spoils in War, most lawful are,
To every man it is known.
And then you may with freedom, Boys,
Drink and take your ease;
Or with a Miss to court and kiss,
As you your fancy mean to please.
A SONG.
To which, the two last Verses were lately added.
1.
NO scornful Beauty ere shall boast
She made me love in vain;
Those men are fools, who once are crossed,
If ere they love again.
To whine and pine, I never can,
And tell you I must die;
It is so much beneath a man,
I Will never do it, not I.
2.
Perhaps some puling fool may weep,
And court her with a Tear;
And at her footstool cringe and creep,
And idolize her there.
Such Coxcombs do deserve to be
Enslaved by women still.
My Soul's too great for any she,
To captivate my will.
3.
Would men be ruled by me, we'd make
Those scornful things recant,
And should from us their measures take,
What we are pleased to grant:
For why should we be subject thus
To things so much below us?
Preeminence belongs to us,
It Is they do duty owe us.
A Song called, My Mistress is all the Genders.
The Tune, Shackle de Hay.
1.
ANd first she is counted Masculine,
Because she is a Virago,
And born at the Indies under the Line,
At the Island called Tobago;
Where she has deceived full many a man,
That they from her have quivering ran,
As if they had an Ago.
2.
Another called her Feminine,
And swore she of that Sex is,
'Cause in her book they would interline,
They never use Indexes:
For turn unto what place you will,
You Will always find it open still,
Which never man perplexes.
3.
Then I heard another say,
He thought she was a Neuter,
Because there came the other day
A Pupil and a Tutor:
But unto neither she would incline,
But unto both would singly join,
That so they might recruit her.
4.
Then I thought her the Common of Two,
From the Couple last was there, Sir,
And to her Parents gave their due,
As hic and haec did swear, Sir.
But if that she be common to two,
She Will never be true to me nor you;
And therefore have a care, Sir.
5.
Then I thought her the Common of Three,
Hic, haec, and hoc being with her;
And foelix, O happy was he
Did catch 'em altogether.
And if that she be common to three,
She Will never be true to you nor me,
Nor constant unto either.
6.
Then I thought, and so would you,
She was of the Doubtful Gender;
For hic vel haec, and dies too,
Did day by day attend her.
And of the Doubtful Gender if she be,
She Will doubtful be to you and me,
Although we do befriend her.
7.
And after we had scanned her faults,
We found her much obsceanea;
And set a period to our thoughts,
To call her Epicaena,
Both he and she, Hermaphrodite;
And Aquila did say she was right,
And called her pocky Queana.
8.
Thus have I showed my Mistress to ye,
Both Feminine, Mas, and Neuter,
Nay, Common of Two, and Common of Three,
And Doubtful to her Suitor.
And Epicaene we may her call,
Because she swears she owns 'em all,
There Is none that can confute her.
My Mistress understands all the Cases.
To the same Tune.
1.
MY Mistress she has Policy,
There Is none can undermine her:
For underneath her self she will lie,
Yet I will not define her.
She all men's Cases makes her own,
'Cause she is to all their Cases known;
And therefore I Will decline her.
2.
And first, she is a Nominative,
'Cause she declineth Nomen;
And in the act Hominative,
Denies not Knights nor Yeomen.
Nay, she can name 'em all at large,
That ere sailed within her Barge,
Whether they be tall or low men.
3.
Next, I call her Genitive,
'Cause she is for Procreation;
And she does use a Lenitive,
As a help to Generation.
Nay, she is for getting all she can
From every stout begetting man,
The best in all the Nation.
4.
Then a Dative she is known,
From Do that was her Founder;
And before you quick falls down
As flat as any Flounder:
But whatsoever she does give,
She ten times more does still receive;
Which seems to me a wonder.
5.
I then Accusative her call,
Whenever they neglect her:
For she will curse and blame 'em all,
Because they do reject her.
But when her blaming fit is ore,
You then may enter Portal-door,
And calls you her Protector.
6.
Nay, all do call her Vocative,
Because she has a Vocation,
And has an art provocative,
To invite 'em to her Station.
But when they offer to go away,
Then O she cries, Whoop Holiday,
Let Us use Conglutination.
7.
Last I call her Ablative,
Because she is always taking;
And though her Suitors much do give,
Yet shell be always raking:
For in, with, through, for, by, and than,
Are the signs by which she knows the man
Must set her Oven a baking.
8.
Thus from the first to the Ablative,
You see she knows the way, Sir:
For when I met her at Bablick-hive
Near Oxford, she did say, Sir,
That she had a Case for every man,
And put him to it, do what he can,
And still will hold him play, Sir.
A new Song,
to the new Jig-tune.
1.
MY Nanny, quoth he: Why Janny, quoth she,
Your will, Sir?
I love thee, quoth he: If you love me, quoth she,
Do so still, Sir.
I Would gi' thee, quoth he: Would you gi' me, quoth she,
But what, Sir?
Why some Money, quoth he: O some Money, quoth she?
Let me have it, Sir.
2.
I Would have thee, quoth he: Would you have me, quoth she?
But where, Sir?
To my Chamber, quoth he: To your Chamber, quoth she?
Why there, Sir?
I Would kiss thee, quoth he: Would you kiss me, quoth she?
But when, Sir?
Why now, quoth he: Neither now, quoth she,
Nor then, Sir.
3.
I Would hug thee, quoth he: Would you hug me, quoth she?
How much, Sir?
Why a little, quoth he: It Is a little, quoth she;
Not a touch, Sir.
I am fickish, quoth he: are you sickish, quoth she?
But why, Sir?
'Cause you slight me, quoth he: Do I slight you, quoth she?
It Is a lie, Sir.
4.
I Am dying, quoth he: O, dying, quoth she!
Are you sure on it?
It Is certain, quoth he: Is It certain, quoth she?
There Is no cure on it.
Then farewell, quoth he: I and farewell, quoth she,
My true Love.
I am going, quoth he: So am I too, quoth she,
To a new Love.
A Song on the Declensions.
The Tune, Shackle de Hay.
1.
MY Mistress she is fully known
To all the five Declensions;
She Will searce them singly one by one,
And take their true Dimensions.
She never declined yet any man,
Yet they will decline her now and than,
In spite of her Inventions.
2.
First, Musa is her Mothers name,
And haec does still attend her;
She is a hujus burly Dame,
Though huic be but slender.
Yet she will have a hanc on every man,
And put 'em to it, do what they can,
Unless they do befriend her.
3.
Magister is her Master too,
And hic is still his Man, Sir;
And filius is her Son also.
And dominus is her Grandfire.
Nay, lucus, agnus, and that Lamb-like Crew,
She Will call 'em hunc's, and haec's 'um too,
Do all that ere they can, Sir.
4.
Next, she is to lapis very kind,
As honest hic has said, Sir:
For she is to precious stones inclined,
Long before she was wed, Sir.
Which made her Parents often say,
That hic and haec both night and day
Was forced to watch her Bed, Sir.
5.
She beat poor manus with a Cane,
Though he did often hand her
From Whetstones-Park and Parkers-lane,
And was her constant Pander.
Yet give him manibusses when
That she could get no other men,
That he could notwithstand her.
6.
'Bout Noon she would with meridies dine,
And sup, and bed him too, Sir.
She Would make poor facies to her incline,
In spite of all he could do, Sir.
She day by day would dies pledge;
Which set poor acies tooth an edge,
And often made him spew, Sir.
7.
Thus have I showed her kindness here,
And all her dear Relations;
As musa, lapis, magister,
And all their antic fashions.
Meridies, manus, and foelix too,
Had happy been, had they never knew
Any of all her Stations.
The COMPARISONS.
The Tune, And it is the Knave of Clubs bears all the Sway.
1.
MY Mistress she loves Dignities;
For she has taken three Degrees.
There Is no Comparison to be made
With her in all her subtle Trade:
For Audax boldly said unto her,
You Are positively known a Whore.
2.
And first, I Positive her call,
'Cause she will be absolute in all:
For she is still to durus hard,
And often with sweet dulcis jarr'd;
Which made kind tristis very sad,
To see poor pauper used so bad.
3.
Next, she is called Comparative,
'Cause she will compare with any alive
In all the illiberal Sciences,
Which she has learned by Degrees.
Nay, was more hard to durior,
Than all the rest of the Crew before.
4.
Last, I Superlative her call,
'Cause she will be uppermost of all.
And yet although she was so high,
Loved underneath her self to lie;
And used durissimus, I hear,
The hard'st of all, when he came there.
5.
Thus have I to ye my Mistress shown,
How she is positively known;
And Comparatively too,
She did outlearn the rest of the Crew.
And of her being Superlative,
'Cause she would be highest of all alive.
Of the Five kinds of Verbs.
THe Verbs a Battle had of late, they say,
Which did consist of five Regiments that day.
The first was called the Active; and they were
The activ'st men of any that were there.
And Amo was their chief Commander then,
Who said, I love ye, 'cause you are gallant men.
And Coronel Amo, with his active Crew,
Did lead the Van, which was indeed their due.
Next was the Passive, which was thought the best,
Because they suffered more than all the rest:
For those that in a Fight do suffer most,
Are thought the bravest men, though some are lost.
And noble Amor did command in chief
That gallant Regiment, though to his grief:
For Amo only says, I love; But I,
Amor, am loved, so shall be till I die.
The next Coronel that appeared in fight,
Was known to be an arrant Hypocrite;
Which was old Neuter: for he would sometimes make
You to believe that he would freely take
Your part; but it would sometimes with curro run
From one side to the other: but being egged on
To fight, then would he have some sly trick,
And with aegroto, say, I Am very sick:
And oftentimes would give good words to either;
When truth to tell, he was indeed for neither.
And being Neuter, he was new-turn'd out;
At which the whole Regiment did give a shout.
Then the Commander of the fourth Regiment,
Was one they called Monsieur Deponent:
Which was for laying down as soon as chose,
And was the first that endeavored to depose
Himself from that Command; and was Brother
To Neuter, they were so like each other.
He was indeed a Jack in a Box: for he
Would sometimes Active and then Passive be.
When Active, then must loquor verbum speak
A word in his behalf, his mind to break:
But when Passive, and then did suffer most,
Yet would he still with glorior vaunt and boast.
Nay, their two Regiments did them so handle,
They both went out like a snuff of Candle.
The first Regiment was commanded by
One Communis of the others Fraternity.
And though that he did always end in r,
Just like a Passive, yet would he always car'
A fair outside to amo; and so free,
As to say to him, Osculor te, I kiss thee:
But when amor came, then who but he,
Saying, Osculor a te, I Am kissed of thee.
Thus to conclude, and the truth to tell,
Had these three Regiments done their duty well,
There had been an end of that mortal Fray
Much sooner than it was, as many say.
Then my advice is, should they fight again,
To choose for Coronels some other men.
And like him, it is very Common to protest
Kindness to one, when we mean nothing less.
The MOODS.
THe Battle of the Verbs being fully known,
And their Regiments described one by one,
The Moods intend, it seems, to let us know
The cause of the Quarrel, and the manner how.
The Indicative being the Primier Mood,
The rest of them then did think it good
To let him speak, as being Secretory,
And therefore being fitt'st to tell the story;
Dear Brethren, says he, I must tell ye,
They were deceived by fallo's Son, fefelli,
Who was employed by all the Verbs about it,
And he deceived 'em, else they had not fought it.
And the chief cause indeed was, as I hear,
From some anomalous Verbs that were there;
Who are Verbs always out of rule, and so
Not to be ruled by any man, you know:
As possum, volo, nolo, malo, and
Edo, fero, (who then was in command;)
And's unde feror too, and all the rest
Of that tumultuous Crew, said 'twas best
To fight it out. Says possum, I may or can,
Nay, am able to fight with any man.
Says volo, I am willing to side with you,
And will participate in what you do.
Nolo said, He was unwilling to have peace:
And malo was more willing than all these
To fight. Says edo, I Will eat my way through 'um;
That Is the ready way, says one, to undo 'um.
But fero was more fierce than all: for he
Said, he would bear or suffer any thing, than flee.
Says ferro, I Have born and suffered more than all,
And in your Cause resolve to stand or fall.
Says fio, How came this to be made or done?
Then all fall on him, every Mothers son.
So some took one side, and others the other,
Until they would near destroyed one another.
This being spoke, they all were at a stand:
Then says the Imperative, I do command
Silence among ye all; and bid ye too,
Strictly to observe what I shall say or do:
For he was one that was imperious,
And never spoke in other manner, but thus:
Saying, Had I been there, I Would a charged 'em all
To cease from fighting, or have made 'em fall
By my imperious hand: for let me but say,
Ama, amato, love thou, and they all obey;
Or pugnate, pugnatote, fight ye,
And if ye do well, then I will knight ye.
Thus my being absent, caused the fight that day;
None knew how to command, nor none to obey.
He having finished his discourse, up starts
The Optative, who wished that all their hearts
Had been as his, then they had not fought that day:
For he and's Foreman utinam ran away.
And though the Imperative had the greatest command,
Yet he of Tenses had five to one at hand
More than the other; and was no good House-holder,
As being so great a wisher and a woulder.
For all good Prayers he did never want;
As, I would God, I pray God, and God grant.
And that there might be no more hatred, he would say,
Vtinam amem, God grant I love always;
Which is the only way to keep's in peace.
And having so spoke, his Speech did cease.
The Potential then stood up, and to 'em said,
Next to the Imperative, he would be obeyed:
For though he had indeed the chief command,
Yet he was more mighty both in Goods and Land;
As may be seen by the Signs at his door,
When others have but one, yet he has six more;
As may, can, might, could, would, should, or ought;
Which unto this Potency has him brought:
And could say amem, I may or can love,
Or let it alone: for he would still move
In his own Sphere; and never would quarrel,
But relieve the needy, and those that are ill:
Saying, I may or do what I please herein;
But it is best not fight, but sleep in a whole skin.
The Subjunctive then began to tell his Tale;
But when he strived to do it alone, would fail,
But must be forced to take a Conjunction
To join with him, or not use his Function:
For the Subjunctive, if the truth were known,
Is but the Adjectives Bastard: for alone
They cannot stand in Reason or Signification,
But must have a word joined to keep the sense warm,
And stick like a Gizzard still under each arm.
The Subjunctive then at last did declare,
He would be subject to any thing else but War.
The Infinitive then to end the Debate,
Said, Of all the Verbs he did participate;
And also he could do, suffer, or be
What he pleased within's own Seigniorie;
And was inferior unto none
Of the Moods, but of himself could stand alone:
For I can force amare to love my Daughter,
And amaturum esse, to love hereafter;
And amandum and amatum, to love also;
And amatu, to be beloved whe'r he will or no.
And likewise can command docturum esse,
To teach hereafter my Daugher Besse.
Nay, I could show you an Infinite more;
But for brevities sake, I now give ore,
And do infinitely desire there may be
No more of fighting, if you will be ruled by me,
Of the TENSES.
THe Tenses they being Servants to the Moods,
They called 'em to account about those Feuds.
The Present Tense did first himself present,
(And truth to say, he did those times lament)
He presently then told them all, That they
Could never think him guilty of that Fray:
For he vowed, Had he been present when 'twas done,
He would have been the first that should a run:
For who knows better to get out of Bands,
When Times and Seasons are all in our hands?
The Preterimperfect Tense did then appear;
But was imperfect in's relation there:
For though his time was not perfectly past,
He confessed that with amabam he did love at last;
But loving not then, they told him 'twas a fault,
And was the cause that all that trouble was wrought.
He vowed he was not there at that same time
When It began; so not guilty of that crime.
The Preterperfect Tense then began to plead,
Protesting himself innocent of that deed:
For though his time was perfectly past, yet he
Said, I have loved amavi ferventlie;
For he and I do all such Quarrels shun,
And never heard of the Battle, until 'twas done.
The Preterpluperfect then was called in,
And brought amaveram with him, who had bin
His long and constant friend, who said, Though their time
Were more than perfectly past, yet that crime
Could not be laid to their charge, 'cause that they
Had loved one another many a day.
And will do it still with leave of the Future Tense,
That they got great applause when they went thence.
The Future Tense at last was called in,
Who plainly told 'em, If he had guilty bin
Of such a thing, he deserved to be blamed:
But yet, say they, methinks you are not ashamed
To confess you did not love. No, says he,
I did not: for that can be no fault in me;
For an Astrologer told me once at home,
That my time of loving was not yet come:
And likewise told me, that amabo and I,
Shall or will love most certainly.
Then all the Court removed, and did pray
They never might see such another day.
On the Squibs and Crackers thrown on the Lord Mayors day.
'TWas just the day before twenty ten
Of dull October, being then
The Lord Mayors show, or eke his day,
So called by the Vulgar, as they say:
I speak not of that glorious Crew
That past us by in open view;
As first, the Companies several,
Belonging to each others Hall,
All clad in black, with half red Tippit,
Who on their Petitoes did trip it.
Nor of those Velvet-coats so black,
With Chains of gold hung on their back;
Nor of that Teem of Scarlet-Riders,
Who of the City-wards are Guiders;
Nor of the Troops and Horses fairness,
Whose Masters all were clad in Harness,
Whose Officers Coats bedecked were
With Gold embroidered every where;
Nor the Foot, with Bagpipe, Fife, and Drum,
Who thither with the rest did come
For to attend our Sovereign,
(Whom God preserve with all his Train;)
Nor of those gallant Princely Coaches,
To all I gave a Bonos noches:
But of those Gallants Treat I do,
That were Spectators of that Show;
Who there were placed in Balconies,
Amongst which were many ancient Cronies,
And Ladies young: who all there stood,
I cannot say sit, they wished they could:
For in the twinkling of an eye,
Such Squibs and Crackers then did fly
In such a horrid fiery fashion,
It forced them all to change their station,
Lest it should burn their Garments gay,
Which borrowed were perhaps that day.
They chiefly flew, like Whirligigs,
On curled Hair and Perriwigs:
Nothing escaped them, they were so set,
That all was Fish that came to Net.
A couple came that day to see
And to be seen, in all their braverie:
And dressed they were most finically,
That all should note that stood them by.
In striped Mantua's they were dressed,
Of all colors in the Rainbow, I protest.
And both were in Balcony set,
Thinking their gayness then so great,
That none would venture their Squibs to fling
At them (being as fine as any thing.)
The Squibs and Cracker-men below
Observing what they did, and how
Confident they were that none would throw,
And being intent about the Show,
Some ten of them together flung,
Which did directly light among
Those which in that Balcony sat,
Which made them stir, but 'twas too late:
And before they could remove their station,
Up came ten more in the same fashion;
Which quickly burnt their curled Hair,
Their Hoods and Scarfs, and all was there;
Their Rain-bow-colour'd Cloths, I find,
Were all burnt both before and behind;
And left 'em in most woeful cases:
For It scorcht the Patches on their faces.
They were so clawed, that one did swear
They both like Gypsies did appear.
Though they came in in merry posture,
Yet when went out, their eyes were moister.
Though they at fore-door did come in,
Yet they at backdoor went out agin:
And forced were to go to their old Stallion,
Being al-a-mode de Taterdemallion.
Also a Lord; but the Lord knows who
It was: for it burnt his Breeches too,
His Velvet-coat, Perriwig, and Hat,
And also his richly laced Cravat.
Nay, they from Windows scarce could peep,
But suddenly were forced to creep
Back again, or those Ladies fair
Were sure to burn their Hoods and Hair.
No Gowns nor Whisks did then escape:
For on Petticoats they made a Rape;
Not on those that were a top alone,
But below too, they were so saucy grown.
Another, it seems, then to secure
A pretty Lady, did then endure
A hot Contest: but by his leave,
It quickly burnt his Half-shirt-sleeve.
The Author caught one in's hand a top,
And flung't in's face that threw it up,
To keep't from them that were above:
But by his favor, it burnt his Glove.
Last I advise, if any chance to go
Again to see the Lord Mayors Show,
They must not in Balconies stand,
Or any place that is low at hand;
But in the Garret, or the Leads a top:
For that is too high to fling 'em up.
A Song,
to the Tune of Thomas I cannot.
1.
COme, my Molly, let us be jolly,
Now we are both come hither;
Thy Mother's from home, and we are alone,
Then let us be merry together.
I Will give thee some Rings and Bracelets fine,
And other Trinkets, if thou will be mine.
In truth, good Sir, I dare not incline;
My Mother does tell me I munnot, I munnot,
My Mother does tell me I munnot.
2.
Thou shall have a Gown of the vinest zilk,
The like was never zeena;
Thou shall ha the Cream of all the Milk
Of the Cows that go on the Greena,
To make thee some Curds and Cheescakes store,
And Custards too, all sugared ore.
I pray you, good Sir, now say no more;
My Mother does tell me I munnot, etc.
3.
Thy Wastcoat shall be of Scarlet too,
With Ribonds tied together:
Thy Stockins shall be of a Bow-died hue,
And thy shoes of Spanish Leather.
And upon each Shoe a silken Knot
For to set out thy delicate foot.
In truth, good Sir, I dare not do it;
My Mother does tell me, etc.
4.
Thy Petticoat shall be of Sey,
The best in all the Towna;
And thou shall wear it every day,
And zo thou shall thy Gowna.
Thy Smock shall be of Holland fine,
If thou in love with me wo't join.
In truth, good Sir, I dare not combine;
My Mother does tell me, etc.
5.
I Will feof thee in a Copyhold
Of Forty pound a yeara;
And I ha Twonty pound in Gold
Will serve to make good Cheara.
O no, you men, I know ye too well,
But give you an inch, and you will take an ell,
And when you have done, you Tales will tell.
In truth, good Sir, I munnot, I munnot;
My Mother does tell me I munnot.
6.
Why then, my Molly, here I vow
My Lips shall still be sealed,
And whatsoever we do now,
Shall never be revealed.
With one sweet Kiss we'll seal the same;
Deny me but this, you are to blame.
O this Kiss does so inflame,
I cannot hold out a minit, a minit;
I cannot hold out a minit.
A SONG.
The Tune, My Dame Joan has pawned her Kittle.
1.
CLear up those stormy Brows, and teach
My weak and wadling Love to go:
Who makes 'twixt Infant-loves a breach,
Sure is no stout nor gallant foe.
Prithee let us prove, that Cupid is above
The firm Votes of immortal Fate:
Though a Child he be, let Malice see
That Love is stronger far than Hate.
2.
Then be no longer fondly coy;
Death's here more welcome than delay.
Love is a nimble sprightly Boy,
And has swift wings, the Poets say.
Let Us lose no time, it is a capital crime;
None sins in Love like him that is slow.
If I wanton be, pray pardon me;
Love's a Child, and Children will be so.
3.
My Senses call me dull, and blame
My calmness, that thus pleading stands.
Come, your Mother she did do the same;
Yield, or I must lay violent hands.
For shall I spare one, such a Rape has done,
And violence on my Soul has lain?
And why should she thus ravish me,
And I not ravish her again?
4.
Why this stir? why this denying?
This pish, pish, Groper, stand away?
Why this proud and coy denying,
'Cause I there my hand did lay?
I did grope, it is true; but in love sure you
Will count it no offense, I hope.
If the cause you will find, know Love is blind;
And they that cannot see, must grope.
A Mock-Song to Come my Daphne.
Man. COme, my durty Pug, away;
What the Pox do you mean to say?

Wom. It Is Rowland calls; what would my Swine?

Man. Come up, you Whore, it is time to dine,
Where Vulcan shall provide
A Whip to claw your hide.

Wom. Were I shut up within a Jail,
It Is Rowland he must be my Bail.

Man. You lazy Whore, make have,
The Meat at fire does wast.
In the burning Fountain I
Must for ever live and die;
And on thy mangy bosom stray,
Would fright, would fright,
Would fright the Devil away.
Chorus. We'll howl and weep, and never give ore,
Because the Fiends do see, do see
The cursed glee
'Twixt thee and me;
But never will deplore
My sad, but fatal Destiny.

Another Drunken Mock to Come my Daphne.
T. COme, my Bully-rock, away;
We do wast this drinking day.

R. It Is Roger calls: What news, you Sot?

T. Come see, you Rogue, what I have got:
For Bacchus still provides
Brisk Wine to stuff our Hides.

R. Were I shut up in Cellar deep,
I Would first be drunk before I Would sleep.

T. Ye lazy Rogue, make have,
The Wine will spoil and wast.

R. With good Sack and Claret I
Will for ever live and die:
And from Bung-hole never will stray,
Till thee and I have sucked it quite away.
Chorus. We'll drink and sleep, and then we'll snore,
That Bacchus he
May daily see
The Bubbing Glee
'Twixt thee and me;
But never will give ore,
Whilst we good Sack or Claret see.

The Wooing Gallant. A SONG.
1.
COme hither my dearest, come hither to me,
And I will be so loving to thee,
As never was man before.
Then gi' me thy heart, and thou shall a mine:
For if I may be certain of thine,
I Will never desire no more.
Then unto my house we'll trip it away,
And fit and provide for the Wedding Day.
We'll dance and we'll sing,
And the Bells shall ring,
And the Fiddlers round about us shall play.
2.
Thy Body with rich Apparel I Will deck,
And round about thy Ivory Neck
I Will place a Chain of Pearl,
So round and so fair, so fine and so neat,
That every one that chances to see it,
Will say you are a lovely Girl.
Then be not so coy, but come away,
And I Will embrace thee both night and day:
For I vow and I swear
Thou shall be my Dear,
And merrily we will sing and play.
3.
The Girl she stood off, and smiling said,
I fear you mean to betray a Maid
That never did love before:
For men will dissemble, and cog, and lie,
And swear they love you faithfully,
When they have another in store.
But if that you mean to be faithful and true,
And that I should be so to you,
Be loving and kind,
And change not your mind,
Or else for evermore adieu.
Upon the taking down of the Kings Arms at Oxford, in the time of the Rump,
viz. 1649. who instead of plucking down them on the Gate of the Physick-Garden
in Oxford, they were such excellent Heralds, that they plucked down the Earl of
Danby's Arms, who was the Founder there.
IN Sixteen hundred forty nine,
When Cavaliers were forced to dine
At Duke Humfrey's Table still;
(But 'twas, poor hearts! against their will)
A dismal time when Rump did fart ye
A thousand cracks against Royal Party;
And when Kings Arms were plucking down
In every City and in Town.
In Oxford-City there is a place
Called Physick-Garden, a little space
From College Magdalen does stand,
Well known to many in this Land.
From Maudling-bridge it stands North-west,
So that must be from it South-east.
This is so plain, you cannot miss it,
That when you are there, you will say this is it.
The Walls that do surround this place,
And noble Gate which does it grace,
And all the Land within the same,
For evermore will bear the name,
As being the particular Bount-
Ty of that noble Northern Count,
Who to's Prince to the last did stand by,
Called Henricus Comes Danby.
This Gift, I say, was only his,
(For which no doubt he is in Bliss)
Unto the poor University,
Made so by the Rump, the more's the pity.
And first of all this Rumpish Crew
That then did there appear in view,
With others that he thither brought
For to destroy, as then they thought,
Their Princes Arms, was a Colonel,
Who indeed was a Preacher, as well
As Soldier; and so he began
Then to preach to every man
His Rumpish Doctrine, and so bid
Them be valiant: and what they did,
He would secure both great and small
By an Ordinance from his Masters all.
An Ordinance it might be called,
(Which often the Cavaliers have mauled)
By thundering of us out a Town,
From Post to Pillar up and down.
But name of Act it cannot bear,
Yet 'twas the Cornel's Act, I Will swear.
And with the Cornel there did go
His Lieutenant Colonel also;
And Major too, and Captains store,
And Ensigns and Lieutenants more.
And of the County-Committee
There were about the number three,
With others at the Colonels call;
I think there was the Devil and all.
But now comes out a pleasant Tale
(If my memory do not fail)
Which in Oxford is very rife
In every mouth, and true on my life:
On the right hand of that brave Gate
Were Kings Arms placed in handsome state,
And likewise Crown and Garter too,
As 'bout the Arms they use to do.
Of The left hand was the Founders Arms,
Bold Danvers, who with loud Alarms
The Irish Rebels conquered so,
In little time he had no Foe
To wreak his Valor on; whose fame
Was spread abroad, that is very name
Would scatter all that Kernish Crew;
But Danvers cry, away they flew.
And before he came from thence,
Forced 'em to own their natural Prince.
For which important service done,
(By way of Retaliation)
King James with Title then did greet him
Of Baron Danvers; which did meet him
Before he came to kiss his hand. And's Son
Charles the first, for other service done,
Did Earl of Danby him create,
And Knight of the Garter, (Honors great!)
Yet none for him too great was thought,
Who for his Prince so bravely fought:
So that by this I Would have you note,
He had the Garter round his Coat,
And Coronet also: which did make
Among our Heroes that great mistake,
Which made for what I do intend,
(And then I Will draw unto an end.)
These gallant new-made Gentlemen
(With the Country-Committee then)
And others of that new-dub'd Crew,
When both these Coats they chanced to view,
Like wise men, did with one accord
Command the Arms of this brave Lord
To be pulled down instead of the Kings:
And so they flew, as 'twere with wings,
For to pull down, as they thought,
His Majesty's most Royal Coat.
Sure of Senses they were bereft,
Not to know right hand from the left.
That they were Scholars, you cannot deny,
'Cause in the University;
And wonder 'twas what Heraldry then
Was among our Rumpish Gentlemen.
Or were they at that time afraid
To touch that Princely Coat? They laid
Not violent hands upon it then;
But I remember the time when
They durst attack, as well as Crown,
His sacred Person too, it is known.
Sure Providence did cast a mist
Before the Cor'nels eyes, and all the rest,
That they could not see that very day
('Cause their chief Light's within, they say.)
If so, then 'twas Prophetic sure,
That they should only then obscure,
And for a time to cloud the Crown,
But for their lives not pull it down.
Though the Officers so little knew,
And Gentlemen of that great Crew,
What did belong to Arms; it is strange
The Soldiers that did use to range
Themselves each day in Rank and File,
(And many times their Arms recoil.)
And then the chief word of Command
Was, Stand to your Arms, to every Band;
Which they being often used to do,
Made 'em let the Kings Arms stand too.
Then after this in Merriment,
They all unto the Tavern went,
To congratulate each others act,
And all to own that prudent fact.
There were some twenty Officers,
With Committee Men, Friends of theirs;
So that there were 'bout thirty two
Of this most Solomon-like Crew:
Who had at last four pints of Sack
Amongst them all to strengthen the back.
And though they would not wench, nor swear,
Yet you see drink hard when they came there.
Nay, that they might seem more profuse,
(Which was indeed their common use)
In half-pint-pots 'twas still brought up;
But yet before they would touch the cup,
With Hat in hand would Blessing crave,
Lest poisoned by a Cavalier Knave.
And as they thus sat carousing,
In comes a bold fellow, using
Great Reverence to that learned Gang,
Saying, They were better to hang
Than keep: And having a pint of Sack
In his hand, he like a mad Hack,
Drank the Kings health, and then threw
The Pot among that Spendthrift Crew,
Saying, Pox take ye all; and then flew
Down Stairs, without bidding 'em adieu.
Though they command Kings Arms pull down,
Yet still hung up some of their own:
Which did prognosticate, I say,
Their Arms should first hang up; they, they.
We were so far from putting down
Their Arms, we set 'em up in Town.
Nay, they were so highly graced,
That ore the Kings Arms they were placed
On every Gate about the City;
Not sooner done, the more's the pity.
The Rump their Juglings so did handle,
They all went out like Snuff of Candle.
And those who bought King or Bishops Lands,
At the happy Change, had their hands
Eased of all that mighty trouble,
After they would brought the Rents to double.
So may they all be served, that persists
Not in heart and voice true Royalists:
And also those that do repine
At this our Change; which by divine
Hand was then so brought about,
To scatter all that cursed Rout
Who had deserved it long before,
For Cruelty, but Treason more.
A Mock-Song to Cellamina:
And to that Tune.
1.
MAll, I never yet knew thy mind;
Once again I Will prove thee:
If thou will but be so kind
To kiss me twice or thrice behind,
Faith I Will ever love thee.
2.
Tom, I Am ignorant, I vow,
Which way to come to it;
But if you the way will show,
First kiss mine, then I shall know
The better how to do it.
3.
We'll draw Cuts then if thou wo't,
Now within this minnit;
And when we have drawn the Lot,
Those that have the shortest Cut,
They shall then begin it.
4.
Hang your Cuts; do you begin't;
You're the first did move it:
And when I see you do it in print,
Sure you will think the Devil's in it,
Should I not approve it.
Iter Occidentale: or, a Western Voyage from the Old Exchange to the Gridiron
near Charingcross in the Strand; and performed by five Gentlemen, Nov. 5. 1673.
THough Squibs and Crackers thick did fly
On Lord Mayors day, like Snow in Sky;
But yet upon November Fifth,
There flew of them so great a drift,
One scarce could pass along the street,
But spite of teeth we did them meet.
And now the reason you would hear,
Why this day's kept so strict each year,
As being Holiday, and why not,
In memory of the Powder Plot.
But let that pass, I now will treat
The Adventures these half ten did meet:
And coming into street called Cheap-
Side some do add, we saw a heap
Of Ribble-rabble met together,
That threw their Squibs they cared not whither,
That we, poor harmless Grigs,
Could scarcely save our Perriwigs:
And I had then no more but one;
Had that been burnt, whoop, all was gone.
I forced was use both hat and hand,
To save my Wig and little Band.
Though but through Lane or Corner turned,
We did expect still to be burned.
Nay, we were forced to skip in the Gutter,
But quickly we from thence must flutter:
For if you are fixed in any place,
Hey Boys, says they: then look to your face.
So that we still skipt up and down
Like Morris-dancers in a Town.
And besides this Rabble-rout,
We there did see a Rope stretched out,
Which was on two Balconies fixed,
With Bonfires two or three betwixt;
And then upon that dangling Rope
We there did see a Reverend Pope,
With Sword by's side, and Crosier too,
And Trident in his hand also,
And eke his Pontificial Gown,
And Miter too, with Triple-Crown
All made of Cards: And being thus,
Methoughts it was preposterous
For Cards made for the hand, not head,
Or I Am like him in Faith misled.
But now I think I Have found the knack,
Why they of Cards his Crown did make,
And on his head Card-miter wore,
'Cause he a Cardinal was before;
And his Supremacy arises
By being the Head of the Cardinal Vices.
But why a Trident in his hand?
My troth, it puts me to a stand,
That he should Neptune's Right assume,
Because it is called the Sea of Rome:
And so we find by this, that he
Is Lord not of the Land alone, but Sea.
Witness that annual throwing in
A Ring into the Sea; which long has bin
Continued by the Venetian State:
And when first done, the Pope he sat
In The Bucentaure triumphantly,
To wed that State unto the Sea:
For had he not a Right unto't,
Why did he at that time then do it?
But now I think upon it well,
The Sea of Rome, we all can tell,
Did overflow all Europe ore
In former times; but the British shore
For this hundred and fifty year,
Has put an ebb to's flowing here.
Besides all this, as some do say,
He also had in's hand a Key,
With Boots and Spurs, as in a fright,
To ride away that very night:
And with his Key, it seems, he meant
To open the City-gates as he went:
For's Keys the Gates do open, we know,
Of Heaven above, and Hell below.
But for all that, such was his fate,
To be that night unfortunate.
The Squibs so pelted him, he swore
He Would never come to England more,
If once he got away: and said,
I now in my own Coin am paid,
For using Heretics so bad,
When I my Papal power had.
All those that heard him then to say,
That he would from England have away,
Him answer made in this same dress:
Good riddance to your Holiness;
For we will never wholly be
Addicted to your Roman Sea.
Which made him fret and fume the more,
That we were forced to give him ore,
And left him in that angry vein;
Anon we'll speak of him again.
And so from thence we marched away
To Ludgate Street, there made a stay;
Where we espied another Object,
That to the Pope is truest Subject;
And that is a Cardinal, who there sat
Triumphantly in Chair of State,
With all things fine, and all things pat,
And eke had there his Cardinals Hat,
Which fixed was upon his head,
Whose Gown and that were colored.
The Rabble there made Applications
To him still in Squib-like fashions;
Which he did for an honor take
Unto all Cardinals for his sake:
And glad he was to England come,
Saying, He was never so served at Rome.
And when in this they grew bolder,
Then he blessed 'em ore the left shoulder,
Saying, I give my Benedicite
Unto all Heretics; but ye
Especially shall not miss it,
For this November-visit:
For I Am the Papal Nuncio here,
And all is under my Paternal care.
Nay, Beloved, I will assure ye,
I can be angry too, yea, in fury;
But not with any here of you
That honor me so in public view.
And had I known that you would a gave
Such honor as to me you have
Unto a Cardinal heretofore,
I had sooner seen the English shore:
But it is not late to come at last,
Since I so freely of it taste.
When they had honored him so much,
It seems they would have another touch;
And with another Card'nal went
Round the City in merriment;
Whose Nose was very long indeed:
No matter for that. But I Will proceed:
He Crosier had in's hand, and Cross,
And on men's shoulders did him toss;
Which does belong to Popes alone,
But here to Cardinals it is shown.
He marched in pomp through every street;
And every one that did him meet,
When to adore could not come nigh him,
Did with their Crackers kindly ply him:
Which he took kindly, and threw about
His Arms, still blessing all the Rout.
At last he fixed was in's Station,
And all is Brethren in the same fashion,
Fixed were in several places,
Who boldly there did show their faces.
And though they Heretics did us call,
Yet coming before the Tribunal
Of that great Rabble, they quickly found
That they were Catholics unsound,
So Heretics themselves, and had
Committed Treason, which was sad.
Nay, they the occasion were, they say,
That this was made a Holy Day;
And so condemned them to the Flame,
Though he with Long-nose smelt the same
Long before: and therefore did advise
Them both to be merry and wise;
And spoke to the Pope, that he with his Key
Should open them the ready way
To steal from all this Rabble-rout
As fast as ere they could get out.
But notwithstanding his advice
Which he had urged unto 'em twice,
They so infatuated were,
They thought the Pope could never err:
Which makes it certain, the Popes Chair
Is not infallible every where.
And after they condemned were,
I do protest I did not hear
One word from either that did plead
In their own defense; 'twas strange indeed!
Nor did they rail, nor scold, nor cry,
But took their deaths most patiently.
Nay, they were so very meek,
Not one ill word I heard 'em speak;
But thought those Flames to them a Glory,
As being those of Purgatory;
And had no need of Pater-Nosters,
Or Ave-Maries dirg'd in Cloisters,
For to fetch their Souls from thence;
They thought that done when they went hence.
That Lutherans now must think it a story,
That say there is no Purgatory.
And now ye are convinced, I hope,
To have a better love to the Pope.
They in that Flame so soon were burned,
That they to ashes quickly turned.
One asked why they were so cruel,
To add a flame unto the fuel
Of that giddy Multitude,
That then were so exceeding rude?
Said, For serving us in the same fashion,
We do it but by retaliation:
They showed the way, we do but follow.
Then all began to whoop and hallow.
And then with many Squib-like flashes,
They took their leave of the holy Ashes,
Saying, Dear Father, we bid adieu
For evermore to all your Crew.
Thus have you heard the story true,
Of The death of three of the seventy two
Cardinals: if so, then I find
There Is but sixty nine left behind;
Which is too many by six times ten,
And three times three, of such kind of men.
And then we unto Fleet Street came,
Where all the way we saw the flame
Of numerous Bonfires for to light
The Pope and's Brothers to the Grave that night.
From thence to the Strand we came amain,
Where we did see so great a Train
Of Bonfires that were so light,
We did no Link-boys see that night:
And they petitioned have, they say,
That this Gunpowder-treason-day
May not come often; for if it did,
They were undone: which Jove forbid.
For Rumpish Cornels two or three,
Of Link-boys Hall have all been free;
Of Majors, and of Captains more,
And eke Lieutenants greater store;
Of Ensigns and Cornets many indeed,
Who had most color for what they did.
Who all, you see, were linkt together
In that great Hall of wind and weather;
Who lighted all the Rumpish Gang
To their Deserts, that is, to hang:
Better destroy any Corporation
Than that of Link-boys in this Nation:
For we in darkness were before,
And but for them, should now be more,
'Bout which the Woodmongers and they
Had hot contest about that day.
The Link-boys begged it might be no more;
And the other did desire good store:
Which did consume their Billets and Faggots,
Which else would be destroyed with Maggots;
They could not vend the smallest heap,
Because that Coals were then so cheap.
And though we burned and broiled were,
Throughout the streets every where;
Yet to the Gridiron did we go,
To make the Proverb good, you know,
Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire:
But yet, according to our desire,
We there did find a broiling for us
(Which quickly drove away our sorrows)
An excellent Fricacy of Rabbets,
So finely done and cut in gobbets;
Good Sauce, with excellent Drink good store:
In conscience we could ask no more.
Then home we went to cushy all,
After this Papal Funeral.
Dated on November Fifth, you plainly see,
A new SONG,
To the Tune of The Flatteries of Fate.
With the ANSWER.
1.
I Always resolved to be from the Charms
That Love with his Subtilty ere could invent;
I laughed at his Deity, scorned at the Harms
That he could inflict to abridge my content:
But now I do find,
Though the God he be blind,
The Mark he has hit, and has changed my mind.
Though a Child thought he be,
Yet his Manhood I see:
For with one poor Shaft he has conquered me.
2.
I often before great Beauties did see
With Charms in their Tongues, and Darts in their eyes,
Who sought by their Wiles to intoxicate me;
But never till now they my heart could surprise.
But now I do see
That a Slave I must be
To that which has been a Servant to me:
For the angry Gods Dart
Has so wounded my Heart,
No Balm that is applied but increases my smart.
3.
Thus have you heard our Love in a Maze,
This called a Labyrinth I never could abide,
Whose turnings and windings are so many ways,
That none can get out, unless by a Guide.
But my Guide is so coy,
Though my Soul I employ
To lie at her feet, yet my hopes she will destroy;
And rather than I
Will keep touch with her eye
To lie at her feet, I Am resolved to die.
The Answer to the last Song.
And to that Tune.
1.
I Pity thy Passion, Intoxicate Lover!
Can Venus's Philtres so prevalent be,
That thou should in a Frenzy thy weakness discover,
And part with thy Manhood and Birthright so free?
Shall a purblind Boy
Thy Courage destroy,
And make thee submit like a Slave to a Toy?
Are a Females Eyes
Such a notable Prize,
As to offer thy Life for a Sacrifice?
2.
What is she some Angel, thou valuest her so?
Is a Goddess engraved on her heavenly Brow?
If she is but a woman, then stoop not so low:
For the woman was made for the man, you must know.
Will thou stoop to the checks
Of the Feminine Sex,
That daily does study poor Mortals to vex?
Our Grandfathers Bride
Was took from his side,
As intended to help him, but never to guide.
3.
But if Reason must yield to effeminate fits,
If Frenzy must rule, and our Senses be splaid,
If a man must run mad, and abjure all his wits;
Then may he thus wretchedly dote on a Maid.
If a courting I go,
My pursuit should be so,
I would seem not to care whe'r I had her or no.
That Is a lawful Trepan;
And if 't were but began,
You Will see 'em run whining and cry for a man.
A SONG. With the ANSWER.
1.
SInce you will needs my heart possess,
It Is just to you, I do confess
The fault to whom it is given:
It is to change much more inclined
Than Women, or the Sea, or Wind,
Or ought that is under Heaven.
2.
The fair, the black, the gay, the sad,
Which often makes me think 'twas mad,
With one kind look would win it.
So natural it loves to range,
That it has left success for change;
And what is worse, glories in it.
3.
Often when I am laid to rest,
It makes me act like one possessed:
For still 'twill keep a puther.
Though you alone I do esteem,
Yet 'twill make me in a dream
Court and enjoy another.
4.
Nor will I hide from you this truth,
Which has been from my very Youth
A most egregious Ranger:
For since from me it often fled,
With whom it was both born and bred,
'Twill scarce stay with a Stranger.
5.
But now, if you are not afraid,
After these truths which I have said,
To take this arrant Rover:
Be not displeased, if I protest,
I think the heart within my breast
Will prove just such another.
The ANSWER.
1.
SInce, Sir, your heart will then away,
Let that be gone which will not stay;
Yet I Will the same be ever:
With wandering Drake you then may range,
And like unconstant Proteus change:
For my part I will never.
2.
But yet mistake me not, my mind
Was never yet to Love inclined;
Much less to any Lover:
For I resolved am to be
Still constant to Unconstancie;
Which you will by this discover.
3.
Methinks it is a pretty sport
To see how Rivals do retort,
And grin upon each other.
A frown on this man makes him sad;
On that, does make him raving mad;
A smile insnares another.
4.
It Is brave to hear such Gothams boast,
And how each other they accost;
Of which some are for fighting:
And some in corners do appear,
A wishing for their Panders there
And some are for inditing.
5.
This, Sir, 's Loves Paradise, wherein
Not a few parts have acted bin.
Since there your heart's a Ranger,
It shall the honor have to pass,
And bray there like a very Ass,
And so shall not a stranger.
A SONG called Francelia: With the ANSWER.
To the Tune of Augusta.
1.
FRancelia's heart is still the same,
Cold and hard as Winters morning,
Round her Love is ever burning;
Yet no sighs or tears can ever Yet no, etc.
Warm her Ice, or cool my Fever.
2.
So much I think and talk of her,
That every Grove and Stream can name her;
All the Nimphs and Ecchos blame her.
If she keeps her cruel fashion, If she keeps, etc.
Only Death can ease my Passion.
3.
All the Arts that Lovers have,
All the Vows and all the Anguish,
All the looks with which I languish,
Move not her to any feeling; Move not, etc.
Beauty takes delight in killing.
The ANSWER.
1.
FRancelia's heart is still the same,
Kind and free to all embraces:
Though variety of faces
Daily court her to obtain her, Daily, etc.
They can never, never gain her.
2.
So much she thinks and talks of me,
That every Room in the house proclaims it;
Nay, the babbling Echo names it
By a kind Reverberation, By a kind, etc.
That she is constant in her Passion.
3.
All the Arts her Lovers use
In their Presents, Vows, and Treatings,
Still appear to be but Cheatings.
Naught she says or does can please 'em, Naught, etc.
Makes 'em wish for death to ease 'em.
A Song set by Mr. Staggins. With the Answer.
1.
WHy should we ere Beauty fade,
Slaves to Care and Age be made,
Since our flying Youth can no more be had?
Where Love and Mirth do call, let us go
And crop new Joys each minute as they grow:
To morrow's fate there is none can know.
2.
Let Us sing and laugh sad thoughts away,
Mirth shall rule the active day;
And the night to Raptures of Love we'll pay.
Thus should Youth in Pleasures reign;
And Gods that cannot put on Earth again,
Shall wish for such delights in vain.
The ANSWER.
1.
WHy should we ere think of Love?
Pox upon it, the Gods above
The Torments on it could never remove.
But if Lovers we must be,
God Bacchus shall be our Deity:
For Wine alone can make us free.
2.
Let Us sing and throw Love-thoughts away,
Which still does make our Health decay,
And our Wit too often run astray.
But Wine is so divine a thing,
Let Us all its praises daily sing,
Seeing naught but that can pleasure bring.
An excellent SGNG.
1.
ALas, what shall I do!
I have taken on me now
To make a Song, I vow:
A woe is me!
I am commanded to it;
I dare not stand it out,
Though I Am put to the rout:
It so must be.
Thou shall do it;
Then stand to it,
I Will set my Muse afoot,
With a good chirping Cup.
There may some hidden Mine
Spring from the Juice of Wine;
Then take it and drink it up.
2.
Pox on it, it will not do;
I must have the other two;
I claim it as my due,
And must lov't:
For where the Land is dry,
The good Husband does hie
To bring the water nigh
To improv't.
Here Is the use of the Juice;
Open me then the Sluice,
And die my Wit in grain.
That Soul's never empty
That takes it in plenty;
It Is the only Spring of the Brain.
3.
Madam, now you may see
What Obedience is in me;
I have done what may be
For to obey.
I have set my Muse on foot,
With the sprightly Grape to boot,
That commands me do it:
It Is they must sway.
If my Pate, soon or late,
Shall bring forth some conceit;
To you my wit I owe.
If I do fall flat,
It is, mark you that,
I Am a Cup too low.
If I spoke sense enough,
Or did speak but stuff,
All is alike to me:
I Will never pause upon it.
You were the cause on it;
And that is my Apology.
On a Beautiful Miss.
1.
I Know I Am no Poet;
My Song will soon show it:
But my Sorrows do flow like a Spring.
Although they do shame me,
The world cannot blame me,
That I should thus dolefully sing.
My loss is so great,
And such a Defeat
No Mortal had ever before:
For she had every Feature
Of a beautiful Creature;
And no man can say any more.
2.
Her Lips, it is true,
Were of Coventry-blue;
But her Hair was a fine Bow-dye.
Her Stature was low,
But her Nose was not so:
For 'twas O most delicate high.
Her upper Lip thin,
Which finely turned in,
And her Teeth were as black as a coal:
But her under stood out
To receive from her Snout
The droppings that came from each hole.
3.
Though some Teeth she wanted,
The rest were so planted,
That Nature did show no neglect:
What in some she denied,
She in others supplied,
Because there should be no defect.
It Is true, we do know
Sh'ad some gaps below,
But yet it was plain to be seen
That her upper Teeth met 'em,
Nature so well had set 'em,
Like Tallies they clapped in between.
4.
Thus with a good grace
They took their due place,
And they stood hither and thither;
We plainly may see
They all did agree,
And lovingly met together.
To stand in a row
Is common, you know;
But the best and the newest way,
Is to see, without doubt,
Teeth stand in and out,
As if they were dancing the Hay.
5.
No Needle nor Pin
Was so sharp as her Chin,
Which her Nose did so lovingly meet,
That like Sister and Brother
They kissed one another;
It was a great pleasure to see it.
No Globe could be found
So perfectly round,
As her Back was, by all that mind her.
And to give her her due,
Her Head turned like a Skrew
To study the Globe behind her.
6.
Her Breath it was strong,
Her Legs short and long,
To make up her perfect shape;
Her Cheeks were like Lent
When it is almost spent,
And her Face was as sweet as an Ape.
Her Skin might be taken
For a gammon of Bacon;
Her Breasts, never Trencher so flat;
So fine was her mouth,
That it stood North and South;
And sh'ad delicate Eyes like a Cat.
7.
I think it is meet
To speak of her feet,
And tell you how well they were made;
I will not deceive ye,
But if you will believe me,
They had the true shape of a Spade,
So fine and so flat;
But when she did pat,
So even a guard she did keep:
With legs high and low,
That when she did go,
You Would think she were playing Bo-peep.
8.
But this Narration
Breeds such molestation
Within my unfortunate breast,
I can say no more,
But must give it ore,
And leave you to guess at the rest.
Search all the world round,
None such can be found,
So well she pleased my Pallet;
That I Will pine all my life
For the loss of my Wife:
And there is an end of my Ballet.
The Patient Man, and the Scolding Wife.
1.
M. WIfe, come gi' me thy hand now,
And sit thee down by me;
There Is never a man in the Land now
Shall be more loving to thee.
W. I hate to sit by such a Drone;
Thou lie like a Log in my Bed.
I had better a lain alone:
For I still have my Maidenhead.
2.
M. Wife, prithee now leave off thy ranting,
And let us both agree;
There Is nothing else shall be wanting,
If thou wo't be ruled by me.
W. I will have a Coach and a Man,
And a Saddle-horse to ride;
I also will have a Sedan,
And a Footman to run by my side.
3.
M. Thou shall have all this, my dear Wife,
And thou shall bear the Sway;
Nay, I Will provide thee good Cheer, Wife,
Against thou come from the Park or a Play.
W. I Will have every week a new Gown,
And a Petticoat died in Grain,
Of the modishest Silk in the Town;
And a Page to hold up my Train.
4.
M. Thou shall have this too, my sweet Wife,
If thou't contented be,
Or any thing else that is meet, Wife,
If thou wo't be ruled by me.
W. I will have a Gallant or two,
And they shall be handsome men;
And I Will make you to know your kue,
When they come in and go out again.
5.
M. Methinks a couple's too few, Wife;
Thou shall have three or four:
And yet I know thou't be true, Wife,
Although thou had half a score.
W. I will have as many as I please,
In spite of your teeth, you fool;
And when I have the Pocky disease,
It Is you that shall empty my Stool.
6.
M. Why how now, you brazen-faced Harlot!
I Will make you to change your note;
And if ever I find that you snarl at
My actions, I Will bang your Coat.
Nay, I Will make you to wait, you Flaps,
At Table till I have dined;
And I Will leave you nothing but Scraps,
Till I find you better inclined.
7.
W. Sweet Husband, I now cry Peccavi;
You know we women are frail:
And for the ill words that I gave ye,
Ask pardon, and hope to prevail.
For now I will lie at your foot,
Desiring to kiss your hand;
Nay, cast off my Gallants to boot,
And still be at your command.
The Doting Lover.
1.
WAs ever man so happy as I, Sir!
My Mistress has gi'n me a kiss:
But I full long at her door did lie, Sir,
Before I could compass this.
I cring'd, and I bowed,
And I sung to my Crowd;
But never could get it before.
And if but another I may be allowed,
I Would lie there a twelve month more.
2.
Though for a time she did deprive me
The favor of seeing her face,
That balmy Kiss did so revive me,
It made me take heart a grace.
And if as I see
Such Virtue there be
In one poor innocent Kiss,
I Will give my Estate, whatere be my fate,
To get such another as this.
3.
For he that is possessed with Riches and Honor,
May meet with a cruel Dame;
'Twill signify nothing until he has won her
To answer his amorous flame.
Let him hunt, let him hawk,
Let him drink, let him talk,
And strive to forget her disdain:
He never in his breast will have any rest,
Until he comes to her again.
A Song on a Wedding.
1.
NOw that Loves Holiday is come,
And Madge the Maid has swept the Room,
And trimmed her Spit and Pot;
Awake, my merry, my merry Muse, and sing
The Revels, and that other thing
That must not be forgot.
2.
As the gray Morning dawned, it is sed,
Clarissa broke out of her bed,
Like Cynthia in her pride;
Where all the Maiden-Lights that were
Comprised within our Hemisphere,
Attended at her side.
3.
But wot you then, with much ado
They dressed the Bride from top to toe,
And brought her from her Chamber,
Decked in her Robes and Garments gay,
More sumptuous than the flowers in May,
Or Stars inshrin'd in Amber.
4.
The sparkling Bullies of her Eyes,
Like two eclipsed Suns did rise
Beneath her Cristal Brow,
To show by those strange accidents,
Some changeable Events
Were like to hap below.
5.
Her Cheeks bestreakt with white and red,
Like pretty Tel-tales of the Bed,
Presaged the blustering night
With his incircling arms and shade,
Resolved to swallow and invade,
And skreen her Virgin-light.
6.
Her Lips, those threads of Scarlet-die,
Wherein Loves Charms and Quiver lie,
Legions of Sweets did crown;
Which smilingly did seem to say,
O crop me, crop me, whilst you may;
Anon they are not mine own.
7.
Her Breasts, those melting Alps of Snow,
On whose fair hill, in open show,
The God of Love lay napping,
Like swelling Buts of lively Wine,
Upon the Ivory stalls did shine,
To wait the lucky tapping.
8.
Her Waste, that slender Type of man,
Was but a small and single span;
Yet I dare safely swear,
He that whole thousands has in fee,
Would forfeit all, so he might be
Lord of the Manor there.
9.
But now, before I pass the Line,
Pray, Reader, give me leave to dine,
And pause here in the middle;
The Bridegroom and the Parson knock,
With all the Hymeneal flock,
The Plum-cake and the Fiddle.
10.
Whenas the Priest Clarissa sees,
He star'd as't had bin half his fees
To gaze upon her face.
And if the Spirit did not move,
His Continence was far above
Each sinner in the place.
11.
With mick stir he joined their hands,
And hampered 'em in Marriage-bands
As fast as fast might be.
Where still methinks, methinks I hear
That secret Sigh in every ear,
O Love, remember me.
12.
Which done, the Cook he knocked amain,
And up the Dishes in a train
Came smoking two and two.
With that they wipt their mouths and sat,
Some fell to quaffing, some to prate;
Aye marry, and welcome too.
13.
In Pairs they thus impaled the Meat,
Roger, and Marget, and Thomas, and Kate,
Rafe and Bess, Andrew and Maudlin,
And Valentine eke, with Sybil so sweet,
Whose Cheeks on each side of her Snuffers did meet,
As round and plump as a Codlin.
14.
When at the last they would fetched their fees,
And mir'd their stomach up to the knees
In Claret, for and good Cheer,
Then, then began the merry din:
For 'twas thought they were all on the Pin.
O what kissing and clipping was there!
15.
But as luck would have't, the Parson said Grace,
And to frisking and dancing they shuffled apace.
Each Lad took's Last by the fist;
Who there did kiss her and turn her, until
The fat of her face ran down like a Mill;
He toul'd for the rest of the Grist.
16.
In sweat and in dust having wasted the day,
They entered on the last Act of the Play.
The Bride to her Bed was conveyed;
Where knee-deep each hand fell down to the ground,
And in seeking the Garter, much pleasure was found;
'Twou'd a made a man's arm have strayed.
17.
This Clutter ore, Clarissa lay
Half-bedded, like the peeping day,
Behind Olympus Cap;
Whilst at her head each twittering Girl
The fatal Stockin quick did whirl,
To know the lucky hap.
18.
The Bridegroom in at last did ruffle,
All disappointed in the bustle,
The Maids had shaved his Breeches.
But let him not complain, till then
In such a storm, I can tell when,
He saved his other Stitches.
19.
And now he bounc'd into the Bed,
Even just as if a man had sed,
Fair Lady, have at all.
Where twisted at the hug they lay,
Like Venus and the sprightful Boy:
O who would fear the fall!
20.
Thus both with Loves sweet Tapers fired,
A thousand balmy Kisses tired,
They could not wait the rest.
But out the Folk and Candles fled,
And to it they went; but what they did,
There lies the Cream of the Jest.
A positive Farewell to Love.
1.
WHen in the month of January,
Ripe Apples grow on Trees;
When Butter does in Fehruary,
At once both thaw and freeze;
When Horses fly, Beasts headless walk;
When Chairs and Stools do move;
When Mutes as fast as Women talk;
Then will I fall in love.
2.
When Cherries in the month of March
As ripe are as in June;
When men instead of Corn sow Starch;
When Bears do sing in tune;
When Fishes on the Trees do chatter;
When Women's Tongues never move;
When Men forbear to lie and flatter;
Then will I fall in love.
3.
If when it rains, the ground be dry;
Or when it is foul, fair weather;
When Sun and Moon shall in the Sky
Both meet and dance together;
When the Heavens fall where the Earth does stand,
And the Earth does mount above,
And I can grasp both in my hand;
Then will I fall in love.
4.
A Lover he no Will does know;
He cannot speak or stir:
He is a Child, and cannot go,
But as he is moved by her.
Whilst I still by my self do move,
And to my Pleasures bend:
Then farewell unto shitten Love.
And so I Will make an end.
FINIS.

