A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND CITIZENS of LONDON, AT
BOW CHVRCH, on the 30th. of January, 168^.

By GEORGE HICKES, D. D.

Chr. Goodman of Obedience, p. 52, 53. Although the Popes for sundry Enormities
have deposed Kings by unlawful Authority, the reason that moved them so to do,
was honest, and just, and meet to be received and executed by the Body of every
Commonwealth.

L. Keeper Puckering in a Speech to both Houses, -- And as the Case stands, it
may be doubted whether They, or the Jesuits do offer more danger, or be more
speedily to be Repressed; for albeit the Jesuits do Empoyson -- -- they join,
and concur with the Jesuits. --

Genesis xlix. 6. O my soul come not thou into their secret, nor unto their
assembly -- Lam. 4.20. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was
taken in their pits.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

Moore, Mayor. Martis xxxio die Januarii 1681/2. Annoque Regis Carol. Secund.
Angl. etc. 34o.
THis Court does desire Dr. Hickes to Print his Sermon Preached at Bow-Church
yesterday (being the day of Humiliation for the Murder of his late Majesty of
ever blessed Memory) before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

WAGSTAFFE.

TO The Right Honorable Sir John Moore, LORD MAYOR Of the City of LONDON, And
to the Court of ALDERMEN.
My LORD,
AS in the primitive ages of Christianity much harm and dishonor happened unto
the Christian Religion by (...). Dial. cum Tryph. and in Apol. 2.
Atheists, Heretics and False-teachers, who were called Christians, and under
that glorious denomination taught ungodly, blasphemous, unrighteous, and absurd
things: So in this unhappy Age, wherein we live, the Protestant, which is but
another name for the Primitive Christian Religion, has been much damnified,
and disgraced, by Atheistical, Heretical, and other Seducing teachers; who
under the name of Protestants have taught the World, wicked, absurd and
unchristian Doctrines, contrary to the true Protestant Religion, and so have
disgraced the Protestant, as Justin Martyr complained, the others did the
Christian Name.

Among these we have great reason to reckon all those who have taught the
People the unchristian doctrines of Disobedience, Treason and Rebellion, of
whom I may say, as that Father said of the foresaid Christians, that although
they be [(...)] called Protestants, yet they are not [(...)] Orthodox and
complete Protestants, indeed no more, than the Sadducees, and other Jewish
Sectaries, which he mentions, by way of comparison, were truly Orthodox Jews.

In this following Discourse I have set the precepts of the Gospel, and the
principles, and practice of the primitive Christians against the principles and
practices of these men, observing the same method, that a learned Divine did
before me in the same Audience upon the next words before my Text, on the 5th.
of 1680. Dedicated to Sir Patience Ward.
November; and one would think, that what passed for true, and seasonable
Divinity then, should not be misliked, and condemned now.

But yet, My Lord, so it happens, for some men, I hear, who like the preaching
of this Doctrine one way, do not like it another, when it is charged home upon
the culpable Parties; to which, it is to be feared, they have too strong an
inclination: Otherwise I cannot well imagine why they should so publicly, and
plainly suggest that I pretended I could name a great many Authors, and some
yet living, for the dangerous principles, which I recited, when I had none to
name.

This Reflection, My Lord, made me send back for the sheets from the Press, that
I might for my own Justification cite the Authors by their Names, and if I have
disobliged any by doing so, they must not blame me, because it was not my first
intention, but those, who constrained me to be so plain.

I could have been far more numerous both in reciting their principles, and in
citing the Authors of them too; for since I made this Discourse, which was a
year ago for my Parish, Dissenters Sayings in 2 Parts.
new Collections have been made out of their Writings, but I have added very
little, contenting my self with what I had before provided out of their
Originals, and out of the Collections, which were then to be had; and as the
Passages, and Authors which I have cited are not the tenth of what has been
Printed; so all that they have printed themselves, or others have printed out
of them, is not the tenth, nor perhaps the hundredth part of what men have
taught and preached.

So much, My Lord, has the contagion of the Popish principles of Rebellion
overrun these Protestant Kingdoms; and if what I have said in the following
discourse may prove as an Antidote to expel them out of the Soul of any one
man, that is infected with them, I shall not value what the incurable and
impenitent sort say of me, but rejoice when they shall revile me, and persecute
me, and say all manner of evil against me falsely upon that account.

I hope I have said nothing neither as to the matter nor manner of Expression
which the Subject and the Day will not excuse, but if any think that any
Passage in it is too keen, let him not be offended, but first consider the
merits of the Crime, and then imagine with himself what any of the Fathers or
Apostles whom I have cited in the first part, particularly what the Author of
the 13th. of the Romans, if he had Preached upon that occasion, would have said
thereupon.

It has formerly been laid with much acceptance to some Parties upon the
Papists, who undoubtedly had a considerable share in the execrable Tragedy, and
therefore I hope I shall not incur their displeasure by laying it upon Popish
principles, by which the Papists have debauched so many Protestants from their
Allegiance; and if upon the dismal view of the whole I have used some warm and
sharp Expressions, it was no more than was necessary upon that occasion, to
show my just Resentments for such a Crying Abomination, and the deadly Blow
which the Protestant Religion has received thereby.

I know your Lordship is very sensible of all this, as every good Protestant
ought to be; I know your Loyalty is part of your Religion, and that, as St. In
Ps. 124.
Augustine speaks, you faithfully serve and obey your temporal for the sake of
your Eternal Lord. The sense of your duty, as a Christian, makes you a most
obedient Subject, and faithful Magistrate under your Sovereign; and also a
most grateful Citizen to such a mighty Benefactor to this Illustrious City,
and as all truly conscientious loyal men now love and praise you for these and
your other exemplary virtues; so they will hereafter honor your Memory for
them when you shall be translated from this, into the City of God.

I pray God assist you under the burden of your present Magistracy in these
difficult times, and bless you with long Life and Prosperity after you shall
retire from it, and I am sure there are great numbers in this City who will
heartily join in this Prayer with

Your Lordship's Most Faithful and Obedient Servant George Hickes.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, Jan. 30. 1681/2.
ACTS xvii. 7. -- And these do all contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying,
That there is another King, one Jesus.

The Context before is this:

These that have turned the World upside down, are come hither also, whom Jason
has received; and These --


AS it is natural to all men to be of some Religion, so it is natural unto them
to be Inquisitive after the best: So that neither the authority of their
Ancestors, nor the Legal Establishment, nor the force of Education can overcome
their Curiosity, or keep them from hearking to new Prophets, or Teachers of new
Religions, and new Gods.

Hence it has come to pass, that the most dangerous Enemies of any Government
have usually been projectors in Religion; pretending a great Zeal for the right
God, or the right Worship, and under that pretense have accused the established
Religion of Falsness, or Faultiness, either, that it was not the true Religion,
or if it were, yet that it was not so Reformed, and Pure, as it ought to be.

These Seditious pretenses have obliged most Governments to secure themselves
by Penal Laws against Innovations in Religion, having found by Long, and
frequent Experience, that Innovators in Sacred were commonly Innovators in
Civil matters, and that the plausible pretense of reforming the Church, did
usually end in the ruin both of Church and State.

For this reason, as De Leg. L. 1. Separatim nemo habessit Deos, neve novos,
sed ne advenas, nisi public adscitos privatim colunto, constructa a patribus
delubra habento.
Cicero tells us it was Enacted among the Romans, that no man should presume to
worship any new or strange Gods, nor the Gods of the Country in private
Meetings, or according to private Rites, or Ceremonies, but in the Temples, and
after the way of their Ancestors, which was established by Law.

These Ecclesiastical Laws of the ancient Romans, were part of the twelve
Tables, which they borrowed from the Athenians, among whom they were originally
enacted; and by virtue of which Socrates was condemned, and St. Paul above 400
years after him, arraigned at the Supreme Tribunal of that City, for a
Setter-forth of strange Gods.

In this state did Christianity find the World at its first publication armed
with Penal, and Sanguinary Laws against Innovations in Religion; and the
Emperor, and Imperial Powers more especially jealous of Jewish Prophets and
Teachers, because Judas of Galilee, Theudas, Barohosbas, and other false
Messiases had frequently drawn the Jews into tumults seditions and rebellions;
which was the reason, that the Romans always kept a strong guard in the Temple,
and that the chief Captain asked St. Paul, if he were that Egyptian, meaning
Theudas; who formerly made an Uproar, and led out into the Wilderness 4000 men,
that were Murderers.

The Emperor, and his Presidents being thus made jealous of Innovators in
Religion in any Province, but especially in Judaea, the unbelieving Jews took
this advantage to traduce our Savior, and after him his Disciples before them
in every City, and Country where they came. They Dial. cum Tryph. 335. c. 348.
b. 350. 363. 371. Ed. Par. 1615.
followed them for this purpose from place to place, and moreover made special
use of the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom, to make the Roman Governors, and
Officers believe that their Doctrine was inconsistent with the Government, that
they were enemies to Caesar, and his authority, and had a secret design upon the
Empire, cloked under the specious pretense of Religion; and when this would not
succeed, they stirred up the Rabble of all the Cities where they came, to make
tumults and uproars against them, as Just. Mart. dial. Tryph. p. 234.
Atheists against the Deities of the Empire, or Setters-forth of strange Gods.

This I shall prove at large in the following Discourse, in which I shall
proceed according to this familiar Method.

First, I shall show, that it was an old charge against the primitive
professors of the Christian Religion, that they were enemies to Caesar, and did
all things contrary to his decrees.

2. I shall prove, that this charge was most malicious, and unjust.

3. I shall enquire, whether any Modern professors of the Christian Religion,
be guilty of this heavy charge.

And last of all, I shall conclude with some Practical Reflections proper to the
Times, and the business of this day.

I. It has been an old charge upon the professors of the Christian Religion,
that they were enemies to Caesar, and did all things contrary to his Laws: A
charge as old as the Founder of it Christ himself; whom the whole Multitude of
the Jews accused before Pilate, saying, Luke 23.2.
We have found this fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give
tribute unto Caesar, and saying, that he himself is a King. And when Pilate
being convinced of his innocence, sought to release him, they cried out the
more earnestly, saying, Joh. 19.12.
If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's friend: Whosoever makes
himself a King, as this Malefactor does, speaks against Caesar.

And Acts 24.5, We find the whole Sanhedrin of the Jews at Cesaraea accusing
Paul before the tribunal of Foelix the Governor, that he was the Ringleader of
the Nazarenes, a pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the
dispersed Jews throughout the Empire.

And so in my Text, The unbelieving Jews of Thessalonica moved with envy, took
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the
City in an uproar, against Paul and Silas, and assaulted the house of Jason,
where they lay; but when they found them not, they drew Jason, and some other
brethren to the Ruler of the City, crying, These, that have turned the world
upside down, are come hither also, and Jason has received them, and they do
all things contrary to the Laws, and Edicts of Caesar, and say there is another
King, one Jesus.

The like Epist. Eccles. Smyrn. de Martyrio Polycarp. apud Eusebius. 4.15.
clamor, and outcry, the Rabble of the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles made
against Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, at the time of his Martyrdom, crying out
against him to the Governor, that he should cast him to the Lions, and when he
answered them he could not, because the Spectacular sports were concluded, then
they cried out, Burn him, burn him, just as the Jews cried out against Christ
to Pilate, Crucify him, crucify him.

And Just. Martyr in his Dial. with Trypho, p. 234.
tells him, how his Countrymen the Jews sent the best men they had from
Jerusalem, into all parts of the world, to Calumniate, and mis-represent the
Christians: From whence, I question not but it came to pass, that the Roman
Governors suspected the Christians to have a design upon the Empire, from the
false notion the Jews had given them of Christ's Kingdom; insomuch, that
Justin p. 58, 59.
told the Emperor and Senate in his second Apology, That if the Kingdom,
which the Christians expected, were of this World, they would renounce their
Religion rather than die, and certainly endeavor by flight, or absconding to
save themselves, for what they expected to enjoy.

Afterward to justify the Christians from all possible slanders, and
suspicions of being enemies to Caesar and his Government, he proceeds to give
them an account of the Doctrines of their Master, Jesus, concerning p. 61, 62,
63, 64.
Patience under sufferings, and obedience and submission unto Caesar, and all
that are put in authority under him.

In like manner Tertullian to vindicate the Christians from the envious
imputation of being Hosts principum Romanorum Tertul. Ap.
enemies to the Emperors, because they would not swear by their Geniuses, nor
give them divine adorations, shows from their principles, and practices, that
this aspersion was Vnde Cassii, and Nigri, and Albini? unde qui inter duas
laurus obsident Caesarem? unde qui faucibus ejus exprimendis palaestricum
exercent? unde qui armati Palatium irrumpunt omnibus tot Sigeriis ac
Parthenicis audaciores? de Romany ni fallor, id est, de non Christianis, Apol.
circa Majestatem Imperatoris infamamur, tamen nunquam Albiniani, vel Nigriani,
vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani, ad Scapul.
false of the Christians, but most true of the Heathens, who had rebelled
against some, and murdered other Caesar's; and therefore in imitation of such
great examples, I shall proceeed to enlarge their several Apologies in this
particular under the second division of this discourse wherein I undertook to
show.

II. That this invidious charge of the Jews against the primitive Christians,
of being enemies to Caesar, and disturbers of his Government, was most
malicious, and unjust. And this will easily appear if we consider the utter
inconsistency of it with the Gospel-doctrines, which they so strictly
practiced; the doctrine of obedience, and Submission; the doctrine of Peace,
and Quietness; and the doctrine of Patience, and Suffering under lawful
powers, commonly called Passive Obedience: All which the Christian Religion
taught, and the primitive Teachers, and Professors of it practiced to the
astonishment and Just. Mart. Apol. 1.50. Eusebius. L. 4.8.
conversion of the Heathen world.

I shall begin with the precepts of Obedience and Submission, which are such,
as these:

Romans 13.1, 2, 3.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power, but
of God; the powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists
the powers, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive
to themselves damnation. Therefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath,
but conscience sake. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man ( 1 Ep. 2.13.
says St. Peter) for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the King, as supreme,
or unto Governors, as those, that are sent by him, for so is the will of God.
And St. Paul in his Ep. to Chapter 3.1.
Titus, has made it the duty of Ministers to remember the people of this, and
to put them in mind to be subject to principalities, and powers, amd to obey
magistrates.

From whence I proceed to the doctrines of Peace, and Quietness, which are such
as these: Study to be quiet, and to do your own business; be humble, and
gentle, and as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men: put away
strife, and clamor, and evil-speaking, and follow after the things which make
for peace.

The doctrine of Meekness and Humility, is comprehended in such precepts as
these: Learn of me (says our Savior) for I am meek, and lowly: The fruits of
the Spirit are Meekness, Peace and Gentleness. And says the Apostle to the
Colossians, put on as the Elect of God humbleness of mind, meekness, and
long-suffering.

It was impossible for Caesar to suffer by a Religion, which obliged its
professors under the pain of damnation to be so obedient, peaceable and humble,
as these precepts oblige all Christians to be; and more impossible yet, if we
consider the doctrines of Patience, and Suffering; which are as plainly, and
copiously laid down in the Gospel, as any other doctrines, that are taught in
the School of Christ.

This is thank-worthy, (says St. 1 Ep. 2.19, etc.
. Peter) if a man for conscience sake toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, for what glory is it, if when you are buffetted for your faults,
you take it patiently? but if when you do well, you shall take it patiently,
and suffer for it, this is acceptable to God. For even hereunto were ye called,
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps: Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered,
threatened not; but was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and, like a sheep,
that is dumb before his shearers, he opened not his mouth. And rejoice (says
he) in as much, as you are partakers of Christ's sufferings: For if you are
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; and if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him glorify God on that behalf. According to which (says the
Apostle to the Hebrews in a time of persecution) Let us look unto Jesus the
author, and finisher of our faith, let us consider him, who endured such
contradiction of sinners, lest we be wearied, and faint in our minds, and
consider also, that you have not yet resisted unto blood-

The Gospel is a suffering Religion, and promises special rewards to those,
who will leave houses, and lands, and wives, and children, and lay down their
lives for Christ's sake. It teaches us, that Christ the captain of our
Salvation, was made perfect through sufferings; that we are baptized into his
death, and that as many of us as shall be partakers of his sufferings, shall
also be partakers of his glory; who when he had endured the Cross and despised
the shame thereof, was set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Therefore (says St. Paul) I endure all things, that I may obtain the
Salvation, which is in Jesus Christ; for if we suffer with him, we shall reign
with him. Thou therefore, Son Timothy, endure hardness, as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ. Accordingly it puts no great value, nor looks upon any Christian
to be a true, and 1 Cor. 26.13. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Epist.
Ignat. ad. Romans Cyprian. ad Thibarit Ep. and de Lapsis.
complete disciple of Christ; who cannot when, he is called thereunto, take up
his Cross, drink of his cup, and be baptized with his baptism; neither does it
prescribe any remedy but flight against the persecutions of the lawful
Magistrate, allowing of no other mean when we cannot escape betwixt denying,
and dying for the faith.

It would be endless to cite all the passages in the Gospel; which show it to
be an obedient, peaceable, meek, and suffering doctrine, and so far from being
prejudicial to Caesar's authority, that it makes him the Minister of God, and
commands its professors to give him and all that are put in authority under him,
their dues, and rather dye than resist them by force. Render unto Caesar,
(says Christ) the things, that are Caesar's, and unto God the things, that are
God's. And ye must needs be subject, says St. Paul, and for this cause pay ye
tribute, because they are God's Ministers. Therefore render to all of them
their dues, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
and honor to whom honor is due.

Hitherto we have seen what Christianity taught, as to active and passive
obedience unto Caesar; Let us now proceed to enquire what the primitive
Christians practiced, and begin our enquiry at the practice of the Founder of
it, Jesus Christ.

As for him, as he taught, so he lived: he verified his own doctrine, and
exemplified his own precepts, both as to active, and passive obedience; for, as
Justin Martyr told the Emperor, he paid tribute unto Caesar, as well as other
Jews of the Province; and rather, than resist the lawful authority, which sent
to apprehend him, he let himself be led as a lamb to the slaughter, saying unto
Peter, who drew his sword: Put up thy sword into his place, for all they that
take the sword, shall perish by the sword; and think thou if I would resist,
that I cannot pray to my Father, and he would presently give me more, than
twelve legions of Angels. And when he was arraigned of high treason before
Pilate for calling himself a King, he made his defense in these words: Joh.
18.36.
My kingdom is not of this world, for if my kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, [but I own
my self to be Caesar's subject] and my kingdom is not from hence.

Thus he set the example, and the Apostles the next Promulgers of the Gospel,
followed his steps: For the first time they were beaten by the Sanhedrin for
preaching Jesus, and the Resurrection, they Acts 5.41.
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for his holy Name. Saint Paul
in particular speaking of his stripes above measure; of his frequent
imprisonments, and of his being so often near death, I glory (says he) in
these things, which concern mine infirmities as he calls his sufferings, and
persecutions) and exhorts the whole Church of Corinth to endure sufferings
after the example of the Apostles, who, as he tells them, were pressed above
measure, and above strength; and who despaired of life, having the sentence of
death continually in themselves.

Yet in all this they finned not, nor never so much, as thought of resisting
the powers, but still suffered according to the will of God, committing their
souls unto him, as unto a faithful Creator. And therefore when Tertullus in
the name of the Sanhedrin, accused Paul for a mover of Sedition before Foelix,
he denied the charge, saying, They neither found me in the Temple disputing
with any man, nor raising up the people; neither in the Synagogues, nor in the
City; neither can they prove these things whereof they now accuse me.

Nay, so eminent was the patience and passive obedience of the primitive
Christians, that St. Paul applies this Text unto them out of the Psalmist: For
thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. They followed the Lamb that was slain, they overcame the Dragon by
the blood of the Lamb, they washed their garments in wine, and their clothes in
the mystical blood of grapes; and if any man (says St. John) have an ear to
hear, let him hear: He that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the
sword. Here is the faith and patience of the Saints.

And as the Apostles followed the Lamb: so their disciples and successors
followed them. For St. Ignatius the Disciple of St. John, gloried in the bonds,
in which he was carried from Antioch to Rome, and rejoiced to think, as he
speaks in his Epistle to the Romans, That he was not of the tares, but of the
wheat, which was to be ground by the teeth of the wild beasts to make the pure
bread of God. That whole Epistle is Such as, (...) --
full of divine, and heroical strains of Christian patience and courage; and in
his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, speaking of his sufferings, he says,
(...); He that is near the sword is near God, and he that is in the Theater
among the wild beasts, is as it were in the midst of God. He suffered at a
time, when Christians suffered in multitudes, and when they were in a condition
to resist; For Pliny in his Epistle to the Emperor about the Christians, told
him, L. 20. Ep. 97. Visa est enim mihi res digna consultatione maxim proptu
periclitantium numerum, multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque
sexus etiam vocantur in periculum and vocabuntur, neque enim civitates tantum,
sed vicos etiam atque agros superstitionis istius contagio pervagata est --
Certe satis constat prope jam desolata templa, -- and sacra solemnia diu
intermissa --
That the contagion of the Christian Religion had so infected the Towns, Cities
and Villages of Bythinia, that the Temples were become desolate, and the
solemnities of the Gods almost quite left of: And Tiberianus his President of
Palestine, in a Letter to his Majesty upon the same occasion, told him, that he
was (...) --
weary with killing the Christians, who discovered themselves unsought for, and
multiplied the more, the more they were put to death. So early were the
Christians in a probable capacity of defending themselves; but yet rather than
do so by resisting the lawful Powers, they were led like Lambs to the
slaughter, and like sheep that were dumb before their shearers, they opened not
their mouths.

About Fifty years after this, when the Christians were grown far more
numerous, Justin Martyr told the Emperor Antoninus, That they were the most
innocent and obedient of all his Subjects, taking care above all things,
according to the precepts, and example of their Master, 2 Apol. p. 64.
to pay him all his customs and tribute; and that next after God, they loved
and obeyed his Majesty, acknowledging Emperors and Rulers to be ordained of
God; and praying always, that together with his Imperial power, he might enjoy
a sound and sober mind.

And Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, another Disciple of St. John, who suffered
about this time, bespoke the President, who had commanded him to swear by the
Emperor's-Genius, in the name of the Christians thus: (...), Eccles. Smyrn. de
Mart. Polyc.
We are taught to yield obedience to all Principalities and Powers ordained
under God, except in doing things which are destructive of our Souls: Therefore
do as thou please, cast me to the wild Beasts, or into the Fire, which is
not to be compared to that Eternal fire, which thou know not to be reserved
for the ungodly at the last judgment.

A little after this: Athenagoras wrote his Apology for the Christians to the
Emperor Marcus Antoninus, and Commodus his Son, which in the Name of the
Christians, concludes thus: (...), etc.
We daily pray for your Empire, and that the Son, as it is just, should Succeed
in his Father's Throne, and that God would increase your Dominions more, and
more.

This was the disposition of the Christians then, when the Emperors, grown
secure of their Loyalty, let them serve in their Armies in times of
Persecution; insomuch that Twenty years after this, Tertullian told them, That
though the Christians were but of In Apol. Hesterni sumus, and vestra omnia
implevimus, etc. Tanta hominum multitudo pars pene Major Civitatis cujusque --
ad Scapulam.
yesterday, yet all places were full of them: the Cities, Towns, Islands,
Castles, and Corporations; the Senate, the Palace, the Courts of Judicature,
their Tribes, their Companies; nay, the Army it self, and that they had left
them nothing but their Temples, and appeals unto them if they were not numerous
enough to make greater Armies than any were in the world. Yet then when their
numbers made them formidable they lived in perfect obedience, and subjection
under the persecuting powers, and daily Oramus etiam pro Imperatoribus, pro
ministris eorum, ac potestatibus -- Nos enim pro salute Imperatorum Deum
invocamus Aeternum -- est and alia major necessitas nobis orandi pro
Imperatoribus, etiam pro omni statu Imperii rebusque Romany -- in Apol. and ad
Scapulam. Christianus nullius est hostis Nedum Imperatoris --
prayed for the Emperor, the prosperity of his Empire, and the success of his
Armies.

And Cyprian forty years after him, writes to the same purpose to Demetrianus,
Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur reluctatur, nec se adversus injustam
violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit populus ulciscitur.
That they were become a very numerous people, and the greater part of the
Empire, and yet not a man of them did resist, when he was apprehended, nor
revenge the injuries, which they endured.

They had power, and force, and opportunity enough to do so, for by this time
great numbers not only of the common Soldiers, but of the Officers, and
Commanders, were become Christians, and some Companies and Troops consisted
almost of nothing else. For about Thirty years after in the time of Dioclesian,
the Vide Eucher. Episcop. Lugd. ap. Sur. Sept. 22. Et Grot. de jure, L. 2. C.
4. 6, 11, 12, 13.
Theboean Legion consisting of 6666. Soldiers, all gallant Christians, is a
most complete and admirable example of patience, and passive obedience, a
Doctrine now so exploded in the world.

They lay with the rest of the Army at Octodurum in Savoy, when Maximian
commanded them to Sacrifice to the Gods. The command being given, they withdrew
a little off to a Village called Agaunum, whither the Emperor sent after them
to come and Sacrifice with the rest. They excused themselves with all
submission; but the cruel Emperor upon their refusal, commanded a Decimation,
which was immediately executed without the least show of opposition or
resistance; Mauritius their Commander, from whom Agaunum has long been called.
St. Maurice, speaking to them thus:

I was very much afraid (fellow soldiers) lest any of you, as it is natural for
armed men especially to do, should have resisted under the pretext of
self-defence: And I was prepared to forbid you to do so in the Name, and by
the example of Christ, who commanded Peter, when he drew his sword, to put it
up again; and so he went on exhorting them to follow the example of Christ.

The first Decimation being ended, the Emperor commanded a second, when some of
them bespoke him thus: We are thy Soldiers, Caesar, and have taken up Arms to
defend the Empire, and have never yet been punished as Desertors, Traitors or
Cowards, and we would now obey thee in this matter, but that our Religion
forbids us to worship Demons, or approach their polluted Altars; do what thou
please, for we are thy Subjects as to our bodies, but our Souls now look up
unto the Founder of our Religion, Christ.

After that, Exuperius the Standard Bearer, spoke thus: You see fellow soldiers
I bear the Eagle, the sign of Secular War, but it is not to these Arms that I
desire to provoke you, nor in war of this nature, that I would have you show
your valor, but in another way of combating, by which and not by your swords,
you shall win the Kingdom of heaven.

He left also this Message to be sent to the Emperor, That desperation which
made all other men valiant in dangers, could not tempt them to use their Arms
against his Majesty, who refused to resist with their swords in their hands,
because their Religion taught them to dye in innocence, rather than survive in
sin.

The Emperor enraged with their invincible perseverance after the second
Decimation, commanded the whole Army to fall in upon them, who presently cut
them off.

This happened between the ninth and tenth Persecution of the Christians, when,
as Lib. 5. Stultosque arbitrantur esse qui cum habeant in sua potestate
supplicia vitare, cruciari tamen and immori malunt, cum possint ex eo ipso
videre non esse structitiam, in quam tanta hominum millia per orbem totum una
and pari mente consentiant, -- cum vero ab ortu solis usque ad occasum lex
divina suscepta sit and omnis sexus, omnis aetas and gens and Regio unitis ac
paribus animis Deo serviant eadem sit ubique patientia, idem contemptus mortis,
etc.
Lactantius writes of them, Cum tam nefanda perpetimur ne verbo quidem
reluctamur, sed Deo remittimus rectionem, When we suffer such unexpressible
torments, we do not so much as use any stubborn language, but call upon God to
avenge our blood.

Such was the Faith, and such the Patience of the primitive Christians from the
time of Christ's ascension, till the time of Constantine the Great. Then the
Church was blessed with peace and quietness, till the short reign of Julianus
extitit infidelis Imperator, nonne extitit apostata, iniquus, idololatra?
Milites Christiani servierunt Imperatori infideli, ubi veniebatur ad causam
Christi non agnoscebant nisi illam, qui in coelo erat, quando veniebat ut idola
colerent, ut Thurificarent, praeponebant illi Deum, quando autem dicebat
producite aciem, ite contra illam gentem, statim obtemperabant, distinguebant
dominum aeternum a domino temporali, and tamen subditi erant propter dominum
aeternum etiam domino temporali, August. in Ps. 124.
Julian the Apostate, who began to persecute again, when the Empire, and Army,
now in a manner wholly Christian, adhered to their former principles, and
withstood him no otherwise; as Orat. 1. in Julian. (...).
Nazianzen tells us, than with prayers and tears.

Hitherto, and much longer the Christian world was utterly ignorant of
seditious and rebellious doctrines both under the Pagan, and Vid. Athanasii
Apol. ad Constable. and Hosium and Liberium apud Athan.
Arrian Emperors

To resist Authority under the specious pretense of defending themselves and
their Religion; to enter into Leagues, Covenants and Associations against the
Emperor and the Empire; to fight him from Field to Field, and from Country to
Country; to hale him from one Prison to another, then to arraign him of high
Treason against his own Subjects, and so cut off his Head, were things not more
inconsistent with the notion of Monarchical government, and the express
doctrines of the Gospel, than with the passive and obedient temper of the
Christians in those happy and glorious times.

Hitherto, and much longer, it had not so much as entered into their hearts See
the Association in the Proceedings, etc.
to oppose, or endeavor to subdue, expel, or destroy any Pagan Apostate, or
Arrian Emperor; they knew not as yet what it was to promise and protest in the
presence of God, to defend the Christian religion against Idolatry, Herisie,
and Superstition; and therefore

III. I proceed in the third place to enquire, whether any Modern professors of
the Christian religion be guilty of this heavy Charge, of which the Ancestors
of our Profession, the primitive Christians, were so innocent and free.

For in the last days (says St. Paul) perilous times shall come; for men shall
be much for self-preservation, or lovers of their own selves; covetous; proud;
boasters; blasphemers; disobedient to parents; unthankful; unholy; without
natural affection; promise, or truce breakers; false accusers; incontinent;
fierce; haters, or despisers of those that are good; Traitors; heady;
high-minded; lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, having a form, or
outward appearance of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Here we see this odious Charge, which was so unjustly laid upon the Primitive,
is Prophetically drawn up by the Apostle against these last times, in which we
and our Ancestors have lived.

And it has been abundantly verified, and fulfilled not only by the Papists,
but by those, who have imbibed the Popish Principles of Rebellion, the Bloody
Reformers of the Episcopal Reformation in these Kingdoms; whom without any
other Apology, but what the Day will make for me, I shall prove, First from
their Principles, and Secondly from their Practices, to have been a pestilent
sort of people, and movers of Sedition, enemies from their first Original unto
Caesar, haters of His Royal Prerogative, and Actors against his Interest and
Decrees.

As for their Principles take them, as I find them laid down by the
Anti-Episcopal Writers, in such Assertions, and Doctrines, as these.

1. That the people are better than the King, Buchanan de jure regni. Knox
hist. and appell. and Goodman, as may be seen at large in Bancrofts dangerous
positions, book 1. chapter 3. and Lysimachus Nicano^^ Letter of thanks, second
Edition, 1679.
and of greater Authority.

2. That they have a right to bestow the Crown at their pleasure. All to the
15th, to be seen in Bancr. dang. pos. b. 1. chapter 3. b. 2. ch 1. and many of them
in Sir W. Dugdales short view of the late troubles, p. 17, 18, 19. out of Buch.
Goodman, Knox, Barrow. See also Herod and Pilate, p. 47.


3. That the making of Laws does belong to the People, and that Kings are but
as Masters of the Rouls.

4. That the People have the same power over the King, that the King has over
any one man.

5. That they may Arraign their Prince. In Eusebius Philadelphus from
Edinburgh, dial. 2. p. 57. Vindiciae contra tyrannos, p. 206. Fenners Sacra
Theol. commended by Cartwright l. 5. c. 13 p. 185.


6. That if Princes be Tyrants against God, and his Truth, their Subjects are
free from their Oath of Allegiance.

7. That they may for just causes be Deposed.

8. That it is not Birthright, nor Propinquity of blood, that makes a King
lawfully to reign over a people professing Jesus Christ.

Tenures of Kings and Magistrates, 1640. Rob. Rollock in Dan. c. 5. p. 150. all
cited in Herod and ^ilat, p. 51, 52, 53. See Knox compared with Eman. Sa,
Suarez, and Philopatris. As to 6, and 7, in Lysimach. Nicanor, 35, 36, 37. Knox
in Fouiis hist. wicked plots, b. 1. chapter 7. As to the 9th, See Buchanan compared
with Suarez, Lysim. Nic. 39.
9. That it were good, that rewards were appointed by the people for such as
should kill Tyrants, as commonly there is for those that kill Wolves, or Bears,
or to take away their Whelps.

Cartwrights last reply, p. 65. The humble Petition to the Queen, p 55. Defense
of the Discipline against Mr. Bridges, p. 127. Cited in the Epist. Ded. to
Herod and Pilate. Cartwright, Travers and Buch. compared with Bellarm. Azor.
and Suarez, as to Excommunication of Princes, Lysim. Nican. 30, 31.
10. That the King may be Excommunicated by the Ministers.

11. And that he who by Excommunication is cast into hell, is not worthy to
enjoy any life upon earth.

Whittingham in his Preface to Goodmans book.
12. That when Kings will not reform Religion, the Nobles and inferior
Magistrates may, and if they refuse, that the People are bound to do it, though
it be by Willock and Knox in Spots. hist. l. 3. p. 136.
Deposing, or the Bancrofts dang. pos. b. z. chapter 1. p. 34. Lex Rex, p. 173.
Death of their King.

Canterbury's doom, p. 290. etc. Staunton to the Commons, April 24. 1644 p. 28.
13. That the Nobility, inferior Magistrates, and the People are bound to
resist Idolatry by force.

14. That if the Magistrates refuse, the People may, and ought to put
Mass-Priests, and Mass-Preachers to death, and that in doing so, they show the
same Zeal, which God commended in Phinehas.

Knox hist. cited in the Narrative of Arch. B. of St. Andrews murder, p. 67.
ib. 17, 18, 19. Bancr. dang. pos. b. 2. chapter 1. View of the late troubles, p.
17, 18,
15. That the example of Phinehas stands to us instead of a command, because
what God has commanded, or approved in one age, must needs oblige in all.

16. That it is not sufficient for Subjects not to obey the wicked commandments
of their Princes, but they must resist them also, and deliver the children of
God out of the hands of their enemies, as we would deliver a sheep, that is in
danger to be devoured by a Wolf.

17. That Kings, Jus populi p. 1. 1644.
Princes and Governors have their Authority from the people, who may take it
away from them, as men may revoke their Proxies and Letters of Attorney.

18. That Noblemen were ordained to bridle Princes, Ruthersord's Lex Rex, p. 177
and that they have their honor of the people to revenge the injuries of their
Kings.

19. That there is a mutual obligation betwixt the Prince, and his Subjects,
See Lysim Nican. p. 11, 12, 13
and that if he perform not his duty, they are discharged from theirs.

20. That to disobey Princes, Covenanters instruction for defensive arms.
Naphtali. p. 157. Lex Rex, p. 267.
which submit their Scepters to Christ's Scepter, and act in subordination to
him, is indeed rebellion: but to resist, and rise up against Princes, which do
not do so, is not to disobey him, but to obey God, who in this case becomes
their Superior, and Liege Lord.

21. That Judges ought by the Law of God to summon Princes before them for
their crimes, Bancr. Dang. pos. p. 36.
and proceed against them as against other offenders, and that L^x Rex, p. 173,
175.
the Sanhedrim ought to have put David to death.

22. That wicked Kings, The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, 1649. Buch. de
jure regni. Goodman in dang. pos. b. 1. chapter 1.
and Tyrants ought to be put to death, and that when Magistrates cease to do
their duty, as to this particular, the Sword falls into the hands of the
people, and that if neither the Magistrate nor the people will do their office,
then the Ministers, or any one Minister may excommunicate such a King, after
which the rest of the people, who are willing to do their duty, may go to any
Moses, or Othniel to be their Captain, and he ought not to refuse them. Nay, in
such a case, a private man having an inward motion from God, may kill a Tyrant;
as Moses did the Egyptian; Phinehas, Zimri and Cozbi, and Ehud King Eglon.

23. That Mr. Robert Blair, at the College of Glascow.
Monarchy is an unlawful government, and Calderwoods altar Damascenum. Not
unlike unto which is that of D. Owens in his Fast Sermon, April 19. 1649. p.
22. The Kings of the earth have given up their power to Antichrist, how have
they earned their Titles. Eldest Son of the Church, The Catholic and most
Christian King, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH? Do not the Kings of all these Nations
stand up in the room of their ^rogenitors, with the same Implacable enmity to
the power of the Gospel?
that there is naturally in all Kings an hatred to Christ.

24. Covenanters information for defensive arms, arg. 3. and so says Bellarm.
de Laicis, chapter 7. as they are paralleled Lysim. Nican. p. 17.
That there were no Kings before Cains days, that the Church of God was well
governed before there was any Christian King, and Dr. Henry Wilkinson of Chapter
Chapter in a Sermon at Oxford a little before his Majesty's Restoration. See
Spotswood 423, 424.
that God gave the Jews their first King in his wrath.

At large in Presbytery displayed. See Bramhall's fair warning to England.
Spotsw. hist. l. 6. Sions plea. Rutherford's Preface to Lex Rex. Covenanters
answer to the Marq. of Ham. Declaration, Lysim. Nic. p. 18. Who compares them
in this to the Papists, p. 32. King's larger Declaration, fol. 407. Th.
Cartwright, p. 645.
25. That the Church in Ecclesiastical Assemblies has power to make Laws
without the King.

26. That the King has no power to call, or dissolve those Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, nor to Ordain a Fast, or Festival, nor to silence or deprive any
Minister, because every Minister in his Ministerial capacity is subject unto
none but Christ.

See Spirit of Popery, p. 9.
27. That the Oath of Supremacy is destructive of Christ's Prerogative, that it
un-kings him, and makes a mortal sinful man supreme in his house; that it is
blasphemy, a cursed Oath, contrary to the second Psalm, and the Doxology of the
Lords Prayer, Lex Rex which calls Mariana the Jesuit an approved author, p.
178. Duglasses Coronation Sermon. See Kings large Declaration, p. 409.
and that whosoever takes it does declare he has no King but Caesar.

28. That it is lawful for the people to enter into Leagues, Covenants and
Associations, without their Prince; and that a King cannot be a King, but by a
Covenant with his people.

29. That the Solemn League and Covenant was Christ's marriage-contract; Mr.
Cases book of the Covenant in Evangelium Armatum p. 42 Zac. Crostons answer to
Dr. Gauden 3 edit. p. 22. See Spirit of Popery, 7. 26. 42. Mr. Caryl in Evang.
arm. p. 26.
that to act against it is to do despite to the Holy Ghost; that it obliges the
people of these Kingdoms, as much as the Mosaic covenant obliged the Jews;
that all Acts of Parliament against it are damnable; that to break it is to
revolt from God, that it obliges children in the Loins of their Parents, who
ought to baptize their children into it; that Poor man's Cup.
the last great Plague, and Fire of London were judgments of God for burning of
it by the hand of the common hangman, and that his Majesty having revolted from
it has no right to rule.

30. That those who engaged in it were unjustly charged with rebellion. Mr.
Calamy in his Sermon before the Lords; Dec. 25. 1644.


31. That the Mr. Calamy ib: Mr. Jenkins in his humble Petition, printed October.
15. 1651. Political Catechism, p. 7. 1679. See Mr. Baxter in Evang. arm. p. 16,
17, 18, 19. and Mr. Herle, p. 28.
Parliament without the King was the Supreme power of this Nation, and Mr.
Marshall, Evang. arm. p. 7.
that as Josiah put those to death, who followed Baal: so might they those, who
will not return to the Lord, and leave their Anti-christianism, which was sworn
in the Covenant to be rooted out.

32. That when Providence depriveth a King of his understanding, or suffers him
to turn wicked, Mr. Baxter in his H. C. W. where there are many more such
Jesuitical Theses. See also the 2d part of the unreasonableness of Separation,
which shows him to have been a man of Rebellion and blood.
or disables him from executing the Law, and protecting his Subjects, that it
renders him incapable, and so deposes him.

33. That it was lawful to take up defensive arms, Stephen Marshall, Evang.
arm. p. 21.
after the example of David, who had sworn Allegiance unto Saul.

34. That those who fought in the late Rebellion, M. Marshall.
fought the Lords Battles, M. Calamy, Evan. arm. 22, 23, 24. Mr. Love to the
Commons. Nov. 25. 1646. in Dedic. to Lord Fairfax: and at Uxbridge, Jan. 30.
1644. p. 7. Tisdal to the Commons, p. 14. Leech his Sermon, 1644. Case to the
Commons, 1644. p. 13.
and that the war was the cause of God.

Buch. de jure. Mr. Case in Evang. arm. p. 25. Covenanters inform. for defens.
arms. So Bellarmin de Council. l. 2. c. 19. de Cler. l. 3. c. 6.
35. That all people, the English in particular, have a right to choose their
own Government.

M. Case, Ev. arm. 25. 35. M Strickland, Ev. arm. 29.
36. That the Loyal Subjects, who adhered to his Majesty were Babylonians,
Midianites, and Idolaters.

37. That Idolaters, and Idolatrous Priests ought to be punished with death.
Cases Sermon, to the Court-Marshall, Aug. 17. 1643. Marshall's Sermon, March
26. 1645. Herle to the Lord Mayor, 1644. p. 22. Marshall to the Commons,
December. 22. 1645. p. 52, 53. and to the Commons, Feb. 23. 1641. p. 9. Love at
Uxbridge, Jan. 30. 1644. p. 7. Spotswood hist. l. 3. Coleman in Foulis hist. of
wicked plots, p. 183, 184.


38. That Mr. Sedgewick and Mr. Strickland, Ev. arm. p. 29. M. Faircloth, ib.
32. Mr. Bridges, ib. 33. Dr. Homes, ib. 34.
the Church of England was Idolatrous, full of Idols, Babylonish garments, and
Popish trumpery, and Mr. Jenkins before the Parl. Sept. 24. 1656. p. 23.
Because he makes so light of the blood and treasure which was shed and spilt in
the late Rebellion; I desire the Reader, probably to compute, how many thousand
men lost their lives on both sides in it: and as for the Treasure, as Mr. Heath
before his Chronicle observes, it exceeds all Arithmetic and belief. For
besides the Customs, Kings Revenues, Sequestered Ecclesiastical profits, Sales
of the Lands of the King, Queen, and Prince, Bishops, Deans and Chapters;
Decimations; 100000 and 120000 l. per men's. it amounted in 5 years time, as he
computes, to near 20000000 l. Much such another unchristian saying was that of
Mr. Marshal's to both Houses, Jan. 18. 1643. ib. I confidently affirm, that our
days are now better, than they were 7 years ago; because it is better to see
the Lord (mark the phrase) execute judgment, than to see men working
wickedness; and to behold a people lie wallowing in their blood, than
Apostatizing from God, and embracing Idolatry, and Superstition, and banishing
the Lord Jesus from among them. See also p. 22.
that the removal of them countervailed for all the blood, and treasure, which
was shed, and spilt in these Kingdoms, not excepting the blood of This day.

Scripture and reason published by diverse anti-episcopal Divines, and ordered
to be Printed by the Committee of the House, April 14. 1643. Evan. Arm. p. 36.
39. That it was as blameless to kill the Kings Person in a battle, as for a
Constable, or Watchman to knock him down if he committed violence in a
disguise.

40. That he had a solemn and fair Trial, Milton in Apol. Preface to his
Iconoclastes, the Pourtraiture of the Kings of England, 1650. p. 15. Armies
Remonstrance, Nov. 16. 1648. Brooks before the Commons, Dec. 26. 1648. p. 17,
19. Cockain to the Commons, Nov. 29. 1648. Dr. Owen a Fast Sermon, Jan. 31.
1648. p. 5. 15. A Thanksgiving Sermon for the defeat at Worcester, Oct. 24.
1651. p. 2. 6. Jo. Goodwins Defense of the sentence passed on the King. Mr.
Herle's Preface before his Sermon on 2 Samuel 22.16, 17. Preached to the Commons,
Nov. 5. 1644. Do justice to the greatest. Saul's sons are not spared, no nor may
Agag or Benhadad, though themselves Kings. Zimri and Cozbi though Princes of
the people, must be pursued into their Tents: This is the way to consecrate
your selves to God.
becoming the Majesty of the people of England, and was justly put to death.

Mr. Baxter. Evan. arm. 17, 18. 39, 40, 41. Slaters Protection Protected, 1658.
Mr. Jenkins in his Petition, 1651. Gods Providence, i. e. his permission of
Events, and Success, are antecedent delarations of Gods Will and approbation. A
refusal to be subject to this authority [the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England] is a refusal to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God,
such an opposing of the Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and
Earth, as none can have peace neither in acting nor suffering for.
Lastly, that the Usurping powers after him, were lawful powers ordained of God.

These, with many other such Popish and damnable Positions, may be found in
these words, or others of the same importance, in the writings and accounts of
the most celebrated Authors, and Ringleaders of the Anti-episcopal parties in
both Kingdoms; and I forbear to name them, both to avoid the loss of time,
which such a long Catalogue would take up, and the envy which would fall upon
me for naming of some of all professions, who yet live, or whose memory is yet
fresh among us.

And as the Authors of this new Divinity have taught: so they and their
disciples have acted in contradiction to the Gospel, and the Primitive
professors of it, and in opposition to Caesar and his Laws. It would make a
large History to relate all their slanderous undutiful Speeches, Petitions, and
Remonstrances; all their Seditious Declarations, and meetings; all their Riots,
Tumults, Insurrections and Rebellions; and all their Treasons, Murders and
Assassinations, in these two Kingdoms, from the time of Queen Elizabeth, and
King James his Mother unto this present day.

As for the Kings Mother they compared her to Herod and Pilate p. 48
Jesabel, and Athaliah, and Cambdens Eliz. p 95. 3d Edit. in English
preached, that it was lawful to put her to death. Spotsw hist, p. 123, 124.
and Foulis hist. b. 1. chapter 8.
They killed great numbers of the Popish Clergy, and pulled down Monasteries,
and Cathedral-Churches by Virtue of Gods Laws against Idolatry, without staying
for Reformation by Law. To be short, as King James complained at Hampton Court,
they renounced her Authority, put her up in several Prisons, fought her from
field to field, beat her out of her own Kingdom, took all into their own hands,
and forced her for his sake, who was in their custody, to resign her Title to
the Crown.

As for him, he declares, in his Preface, to all Christian Monarchs, Princes,
and States: that they Persecuted him not from his Birth only, but from Four
months before he was born. With what inhumanity, and irreverence did they treat
him in his Minority, forcing Oaths upon him against his Conscience, and keeping
his person under restraint! Spotsw. hist. l. 6. Foulis b. 1. chapter 8.
After he got his liberty, their Preachers called him Jeroboam, denounced the
judgments of God against him, said he was possessed with a Devil; and affirmed
that his Subjects might lawfully rise, and take the Sword out of his hand.
Accordingly they did so in Edinburgh, crying out at the time of the
Insurrection, the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. And to the last moment he
lived among them, he had as great contests against their See the story of Blake
in Spotsw. and Foulis ib. l. 6. Presbytery displayed.
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, as ever any King had against the Pope.

As for what they taught, and practiced in Queen Elizabeth's days, may be seen
in the Schismatical Such as Martin Mar-Prelate, H' y' any work, Diotrephes
demonstration of discipline, and many more made and dispersed by Udal, Barrow,
Greenwood, Studly, Bowler, Copping, Thacket, Penry, and others. As may be seen
in Bancr. dang. pos.
books of that time; as also from the accounts we have in History, of the Dang.
pos. b. 4.
bloody Principles, and Practices of Coppinger, Hacket, and their Associates;
who were all the Disciples, or Companions of Cartwright, and Trevers, and
condemned for High Treason, though most of them upon the intercession of the
Archbishop were graciously reprieved by the Queen.

As soon as King James came to the Crown of England, they began to make loud
and grievous complaints against the Church of England, in behalf of the
Discipline, which to satisfy their clamours made him give them a Conference at
Hampton Court: Where his Majesty having considered the vanity of their
Objections, put out a Proclamation for Uniformity; which making them despair of
any hopes from him, they entered into a stricter correspondence with their
brethren in Scotland, In the first Parl. of this King, one of the Members bid
the House take heed lest if they gave too much to the King, they should
endanger their own throatscuttting as they went home. Another said. It would
never be well with England till a Sicilian Vesper was made of the Scottish
Nation, as if he had not known what Country men the King, and Princes were.
and in England privately magnified the power of Parliaments against the
Prerogative; and by those arts so enflamed the people, that the Nation
presently began to ring with clamours of grievances, danger of Arbitrary power,
freedom of Speech, birthright of the People, and such like things, as English
ears had rarely or never heard mentioned in such a mutinous manner before. Nay,
they used all imaginable arts to render the King and Clergy odious to the
people, and so Faction, and Sedition increased more and more among them, till
his Son, our late Blessed Sovereign, who was Murdered This day, succeeded to
the Crown.

I shall not, because I need not relate how this Excellent Prince was abused,
and tormented by them both in, and out of Parliaments. I shall not repeat their
undutiful Speeches, and Slanderous reflections on His Sacred person, nor
trouble my self and you with reciting those Lies and Defamations by which they
represented him to his people for a Papist, a Tyrant, and a Fool.

I shall not, I cannot with patience rehearse the several Acts, and Scenes of
this Execrable Tragedy, from the beginning of the Rebellion to the Vote of
Non-Addresses, which Murdered the King; and from thence to the High-Court of
Justice, which Arraigned, and Condemned the Man.

It pains and torments me to remember the Speeches that were made, the Votes
that passed, the Sermons that were preached, and the Books that were Printed to
delude his poor Subjects; whom in his greatest miseries he pitied more, than he
did his own self. I cannot think upon our Naseby's, and all other British
fields of blood without horror, and indignation; especially when I consider
all the Mock-Treaties they made with him, and that they, as he called God to
witness in his Speech upon the Scaffold, first began the War.

Much less am I able to insist upon the Nature, Manner, or Style of his
Arraignment; or tell you the Barbarous and Inhumane manner, in which they
abused His Sacred, and Innocent person; when the very abjects of the people
gathered themselves together against him, making mows and ceased not. I leave
you to recollect all this, and reflect on the horror of this execrable
Tragedy; especially upon this last Act, of which I shall only say, as the
Israelites said upon another occasion: There was no such deed done, nor seen
from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt until
this day. Consider of it, take advice, and freely speak your minds.

Having now showed, First, That it was an old charge against the Primitive
Christians, that they were enemies to Caesar, and did all things contrary to
his Decrees;

Secondly, That this charge was most malicious, and unjust;

And having in the Third place found upon enquiry, if any modern Christians
were guilty of that charge that the Anti-episcopal people of these Kingdoms
have been highly guilty of it, according as the Apostle foretold: I now proceed
to make some short practical reflections proper to the times, and the business
of this day.

First then, let us seriously reflect on the great difference betwixt the
Principles and Practices of Christ and the Primitive Christians; and the
Principles and Practices of our New-Reformers, and then consider what Spirit
they have been of. Not of the Spirit of Christ, who has commanded us to lay
down our lives without resistance for his sake, and the Gospels; who blamed
Peter for drawing his Sword; and who not only lived but dyed an Obedient
Subject to Caesar, submitting himself unto his Governors, when he had more
Legions of Angels at his, than Caesar had Legions of men at his command.

Nor of the Spirit of the Apostles, who taught the same Doctrine of Patience,
and Passive Obedience to Legal Authority, following the example of their
Masters, and commanding all Christians to be subject to Lawful Magistrates, not
only for Wrath but for Conscience Sake.

Nor of the Spirit of the Primitive Christians, who inviolably taught, and
practiced the same Doctrine under Ten famous Persecutions within the first 300
years. They were mocked, scourged, imprisoned, stoned, sawn asunder, empaled,
crucified, and slain with the Sword: or if they took the Matthew. 10.23
allowed benefit of flight, they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins,
in Deserts, and Mountains, and Dens and Caves of the earth, and all this not
only when they wanted power, but when they were become the greater part of the
Empire, and a great part of the Imperial Army, and when the Powers that were,
did not submit their Scepters to Christ's Scepter, but endeavored to root his
Religion, and the Professors of it out of the world.

Of what Spirit then have they been? even of a Popish Jesuitical sort of
spirit, and of Popish Jesuitical Principles; for all the Positions, which I
have laid down out of their Writings, may be found in the Writings of the Sea
them paralleled with the Jesuits in Herod and Pilate, p. 54. in Lysim. Nican.
in Sir Will Dugdales short view, 16, 17. in L. Keeper Puckerings Speech to the
Parliament, 1585. 27th of Queen Eliz. ib. 13. Dr. Nalsons Introduct. p. 5.
Jesuits, and to the great scandal of the Protestant name they have perverted
the Gospel-Doctrines of Patience and Obedience by them, as much as the Jesuits
have done. They have taught and learned all their damnable Doctrines of
Disobedience, and resistance, not only against Princes in general, but against
their own Sovereign; and as to this part of Popery, I say, as to this part of
Popery, they that hold these Principles, are as rank Papists against the
Government, though many of them are ignorant of it, as any were in This or the
Powder Plot.

Nay the most pestilent, and dangerous piece, that ever was written against
this Government, Dolemans, or Parsons Title to the Crown, they have dressed up
in several disguises, not only in In a Collection of Speeches said to be
delivered at a Conference concerning the Power of Parliaments to proceed
against their King for mis-government: with several other Declarations and
Speeches, particularly, Bradshaws long speech at the Condemnation of the King,
a Treatise of the broken Succession of the Crown of England, 1655. to make way
for the Usurper.
the time of the late Rebellion, but since the A brief history of the
Succession.
late liberty of the Press.

And from the men of these Principles it is, that we have had within these
Three last years so many Impious and Treasonable books Printed, to The appeal
from the City to the Country, which also says the worse Title the better King.
declame against the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; A brief history of the
Succession.
to prove this not to be an Hereditary, but rather an Elective Monarchy, and
that the King is the Employed in the Style of most of the Seditious Pamphlets.
Trustee of the people; A Letter of a gentleman to his friend, showing that the
Bishops are not to be Judges, etc.
that he is one of the Three Estates; Plato Redivivus, first Ed. p. 121. 237,
238, 239. 124. with many other seditious doctrines.
That his Office in the interval of Parliaments, is wholly Ministerial to put
the Laws in execution; that his Prerogative in all the branches of it is rather
the ruin than the support of the Government; that Acts of Parliament were at
first brought unto his Majesty, as the Speaker, and Lord Mayor are now
presented to him, merely out of respect and honor; Dialogue between Tutor and
Pupil.
and that Parliaments should sit till all Grievances are redressed, and
Petitions answered, that is, as long as they please.

And in all the Books special care is taken to blacken and expose the
Universities and the Clergy, and make them odious and contemptible to the
people, because they cannot persuade us to go beyond the Word of the Lord, but
that we still teach, and preach up the Doctrine of Which was called, the new
Oxford Divinity, by G. Gillespy, in the Preface to his Sermon, preached to the
Commons on Ezekiel. 43.11.
Passive Obedience to the Lawful Powers, for Evangelical, and maintain,
according to the Sciant quis illis dederit imperium, sciant qua homines, quis
and animam. Sentiant eum esse Deum solum a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi --
ideo magnus est [Imperator] quia coelo minor. Illius enim est ipse cujus and
coelum est and omnis creatura: inde est Imperator unde and homo, antequam
Imperator, inde potestas illi unde and spiritus. In Apoleg. Colimus ergo
imperatorem -- ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum and
solo Deo minorem -- Sic etiam omnibus major est, dum solo vero Deo minor est.
Ad Scapulam. Psalm. 82.6. Exodus 22.28. Bract. says of the King, Omnis sub eo
est, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo. See the Statute of Praemunire, 16
Rich. 2. cap. 5.
Apostle, and the whole strain of Primitive Christian Writers, that Kings are
Gods Vicegerents upon earth, and that the Supreme, especially the Royal power,
is the Ordinance of God.

But Secondly, if these principles be so contrary to the Doctrines of Christ,
and Primitive Christianity, then we may learn how much it is our duty to abhor
them, and beware of them that hold and teach them, how much soever they may
talk of the purity of the Gospel, and how zealous soever for the Protestant
Religion they may seem to be.

For the Protestant Religion is but another name for Primitive Christianity,
and a Protestant for a Primitive Christian, who protests against all the
corruptions of the Gospel by Popery: and Popery having apparently corrupted the
Gospel in the Doctrines of Obedience, and Submission, and the Divine Authority
of the Supreme power, especially of Kings; they cannot be sound and Orthodox
Protestants, who hold the very same destructive principles to Regal Government,
by which the Papists have corrupted the Gospel in those points.

No they are not sound, and Orthodox Protestants, but Protestants popishly
affected, Papists under a Protestant dress, Wolves in Sheeps clothing;
Rebellious and Satanical spirits transformed into Angels of Light. They were
such Protestants, or Protestant Jesuits as these, that formerly set up Jesus
among us against Caesar, Christ against his own Gospel, the Apostles against
their own Doctrine and practice, and by corrupting and perverting the Gospel of
peace, brought the people of this Nation to turn their This the sword not
disputes nor Treaties, that must end this controversy, wherefore turn your
Plow shares into Swords, and your Pruning-books into Spears, to fight the Lords
battles. Love at Uxbridge, Jan. 30. 1644. p. 7. Contrary to the Spirit of the
Primitive Christians, who, as Justin says of them in his Dial. turned their
Swords and Spears into Plow-shares. You cannot lay out your blood in such a
quarrel [the late Rebellion.] Christ shed all his blood to save you from hell,
venture all yours to set him up upon his Throne. Marshall's Paneg. 1643. See
many more such, Dissent. Sayings, 1 and 2 part, 12 Sect.
Plow-shares into Swords; and rise up against the best of Princes, in the most
causeless, and unnatural rebellion that ever was in the world.

They were such Protestants as these, that have made so many Protestant Plots,
raised so many Protestant tumults and rebellions, and committed so many
Protestant murders and assassinations in these Kingdoms; and perhaps shed more
Protestant blood in them, than was shed in the first Ten famous Persecutions;
and in one word, such Protestants, and zealous Protestants they were, who shed
the direful blood of this day.

You may know them by their works; and by their words, and phrases too. For
their Throat is as an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they use deceit, the
poison of Asps is under their lips. Their mouth is full of cursing, or
fraudulent imprecations and bitterness, destruction and misery are in their
ways, and the ways of peace they have not known.

As there was never so much need to warn the people against the Papists; so
there was never greater need to warn them against these Popish Protestants, who
have brought an indelible scandal upon the Protestant Religion by this great
abomination, and thereby made this Protestant Land an hissing, and the
Protestants of it to be a reproach, and a proverb, and a taunt, and a curse in
all places, and yet we see they are so far from undoing what they formerly did,
and abhorring themselves for their former practices; that if you compare the
former, and these later things, which have happened together, you will find them
speaking to the people in the very same Prologue, and already entered upon the
same prelude that preceeded the beginning of that Execrable Tragedy which they
concluded this day. Search in the books of the Records of your fathers, and you
shall find and know, that the men of these unchristian principles have been a
rebellious people, hurtful to Kings and Princes, and that they have of old time
moved Sedition within this City and Kingdom, and turned the world upside down.

And since the same principles will upon the same occasion, eternally act the
same things; it behooves us as we are Christians, and Subjects to beware of
them, and as we tender our private and public welfare, to be very vigilant
over them, lest by their hands we be brought again to confusion, Anarchy, and
blood.

But in the last place, if these principles, and the practices of the Pharisees
that held them, have been so contrary to the principles and practices of
Christ, and the primitive Christians, we may see how much it is our duty to
mourn, and lament for such apparent and grievous violations of the Gospel by
Gospel-professors, but especially for the last Scene of that horrid Tragedy of
rebellion which they acted this day. That such a wickedness should be committed
in our Israel, in a Protestant Country, upon a Protestant King, and by
Protestant Subjects pretending to so much light, ought to make us ashamed and
blush to lift up our eyes to Heaven, and weep, were it possible, tears of blood.

Was it thus, that we rendered unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's? Was it
thus, that we owned him to be Gods Minister, and our duty to obey him, not only
for wrath, but Conscience Sake? Was this the way to be subject to
principalities and powers, and did we thus submit our selves for the Lords
sake, to the King as Supreme, and unto those that were sent by him? Was it thus
that we resisted unto blood? Did we thus learn of Christ? and was it thus that
we contended for the purity of the Gospel? We, I say, because so many of all
ranks and conditions were engaged in that unchristian Rebellion, which brought
on this detestable act, as to make them both national crimes. All that any way
slandered the King, and his Government; all that endeavored to make him odious
or contemptible to his people; all that preached or printed, or spoke Sedition;
all that raised uproars and tumults; all that furnished plate or money, or set
forth men, horse, or arms against him: Nay all that had evil will unto him, how
much soever they pretended to the Spirit, were more or less in Gods eyes guilty
of the Rebellion, which was begun by the Representatives of the people, and all
along carried on in their name.

Great reason therefore have we, and the children that shall come after us, the
men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, all Israel that are near, and
that are far off, to be humbled before God for this abomination, and for our
own sins, and the sins of our fathers, which has caused him to pour forth the
curse, and bring so great an evil upon us, as on this day.

It was for our iniquities, that We, our King, and our Priests were delivered
to the Sword, to Captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face on this
day.

May it please God to hear the prayers, and accept the humiliation of his
people, and divert his heavy judgments which seem to hang over us for such an
execrable fact. May it please him by the precious blood of Christ, which
speaks better things, than that of Abel, to purge the whole Nation from the
guilt of all the righteous blood which was shed in it, from that Noble blood of
which our Sovereign did repent, to his own, which was shed upon this day. Oh
that it may neither ly upon us, nor upon our children! oh that the voice of it
may not cry unto God for vengeance from the ground! and oh that his Soul like
the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, be not yet crying out, how long O
Lord holy and true, do Thou not judge and avenge my blood?

Grant this, O Blessed Jesu! for the infinite merits of thy own blood, which
was shed for those that shed it, and which is a full, perfect, and sufficient
atonement for the sins of the whole world. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Spirit of Popery speaking out of the mouths of Phanatical Protestants, or
the last Speeches of John Kid and John King, two Presbyterian Ministers. Fol.
Dr. Hick's Spirit of Enthusiasm, a Sermon preached at the Act at Oxford.
Peculium Dei, A Sermon before the Lord Mayor. True Notion of Persecution, a
Sermon. Mr. Long's History of the Donatists. Octav. 's Character of a
Separatist. Octav. 's Answer to Hales of Schism, with Mr. Baxter's. Arguments
for Conformity. Octav. 's Plea for Peace Impleaded against Mr. Baxter. Mr.
Hallywel's Excellency of the Christian Religion. Oct. 's Account of Familism
against the Quakers. Oct. 's Sacred method of saving humane Souls by Jesus
Christ. Oct. 's Melampronea, a discourse of the Polity of the Kingdom of
Darkness. Octav. Mr. Hotchkis discourse of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. Oct. 2d Discourse with a Postscript against Dr. Owen. Dr.
Worthington's great duty of Self-resignation. Oct. Dr More's Reply to an Answer
to his Antidote against Idolatry, with an Appendix. Octav. 's Remarks on the L.
Hales's two Discourses of Gravitation and Non-Gravitation of Fluids, and the
Torricellian Experiment. Oct. 's Exposition on the Revelation. Quar. on Daniel.
Quar. 's Answer to Butler of Judicial Astrology. Quar. H. Mori, Opera
Theologica and Philosophica. Fol. 3 Vol. Dr. Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. Oct.
's Sermon before the Judges at Gloucester. Quar. Mr. Kidder's discourse of
Christian Fortitude. Oct. Dr. Falkener's Libertas Ecclesiastica. Oct. 's
Christian Loyalty. Oct. 's Vindication of Liturgies. Oct. Mr. Scot's Discourse
of the Christian life. Oct. 's Sermon before the Artillery Company. Allen's
Persuasive to peace, and unity amongst Christins. 's Friendly address to the
Nonconformists. Oct. 's Mystery of Iniquity against the Papists. Oct. 's
Discourse of Divine assistance. Oct. 's Danger of Enthusiasm against the
Quakers. Against Ferguson of Justification. Oct. 's Christians justification
stated. Oct. 's Practical discourse of Humility. Oct. Dr. Grove's Vindication
of the Conforming Clergy against Jenkins. 's Responsio ad Celeusma. Quar. 's
Defense of the Church, and Clergy of England. Burnetii, TELLVRIS THEORIA SACRA.
The Roman wonder, being truth confessed by Papists. fol. Dr. W. Smith's unjust
man's doom, and discourse of partial conformity. Oct. 's 2 Assize Sermons at St.
Edmundsbury. 's 2 Sermons at Norwich. 's Sermon the 4th Sunday in Lent. Quar.
Protestant Loyalty fairly drawn to the Life, being an Answer to a Dialogue
between a Tutor, and a Pupil at Oxford, and the Impartial account of the late
Addresses. Quar. Mr. Cutlov's 2 Sermons at the Assizes at St. Edmundsbury.
Brown's Visitation Sermon at Halstead in Essex. Inet's Sermon at the Assizes at
Warwick. Quar.

