MACHIAVELS GHOST. As he lately appeared to his dear Sons, the Modern
PROJECTORS. Divulged for the pretended good of the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

Printed by authority: In the year of Grace 1641.

LONDON: Printed by I. O. for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his shop
in Kings Street, at the sign of the Goat, and in Westminster Hall. 1641.

Nicolaus Machiavelus Dilectis Filijs suis PROIECTORIBVS SALVTEM, etc.
ANd why dear Offspring should you fear to fall,
When you approach to trial, since you all
Can with bold faces firmly stand the test,
And on your inocence securely rest.
Void of all blame, and spite of envy be
As free from punishment as honesty.
Who dares disturb my Darlings, or compel
Them before their times to take their Thrones in hell,
Who can convert your meanings for the good
Oth' public weal to bad? since what you would
Have bravely acted was to increase the store
Oth' kingdom, and your own wealth ten times more.
Sweet Sons of Policy, whose glorious train
Flew like Minerva from my Iove-like brain;
Why should your actions suffer censure, when
You were indeed the only Men of men,
That did with cautious industry supply
Natures defects; and to Monopoly
Reduce all Trades, and Sciences within
The Kingdom, from the Bever to the Pin.
With what a care of soberness did you
Inhance the price of Wine, and made men brew
By License only: not the Coals, or Salt,
But was excis'd, not Butter, no not Malt;
Nay, even the Rags themselves did tribute pay,
Tobacco too, and every thing that lay
Open to your Inventions: Cards and Dice,
Laying an imposition on men's vice.
Just so in Rome, where they do strive to win
Souls, they do raise a profit out of sin:
And to augment the holy Fathers store,
Inflict a set rate on each public whore.
Such a fine quaint invention, such a reach
Had your Aetheriall fancies, as would teach
Furies themselves new Arts: and why then should
You the grand Patriots of the public good,
Suffer or shame or punishment; debarred
Your liberty, when you deserve reward?
Which you shall have, triumphantly to deck,
Like a fair Chain, each ones well-fashion'd Neck.
Nor shall Tiburnian Gregory with stroke
Of paltry penny Cord have power to choke
VVesands so meritorious: you shall shine
Still in your Orbs, bright Stars, and never pay fine
Able to break an Alderman: for should you
Suffer, your punishment does kill virtue too.
But to encourage you, dear children, look
On my last Legacy, this little Book,
Which now emergent from the Press does show,
(Perhaps what others scarce did know)
Your noble quality, how just, how true
You are to the State, what ways you do pursue
For your own profits: so dear Sons farewell,
Ere long I hope to welcome you to hell.
To the Courteous READER.
THe Times being now open, and the mists of error being by our bright English
Sun (the Parliament) expelled, and scattered, I thought it a point of my duty
(worthy Reader) to expand in its right colors some of the fatal clouds that
occasioned our darkness: Projectors being principal vapors that dimmed both
our quiets and our profits; behold them here defined generally and specially:
And as thou read their actions charact'red, loath their condition; for
certain, more pestilent Vermin they are than Foxes; not only content to
devour for satisfaction of their hungers, but making mischief their sport.
Bless heaven that has divulged and given us deliverance from these Vipers, who
got life by eating out their mothers Bowels, feeding on the Blood of the
Common Wealth. And render due praise to this high and honorable Court of
Parliament. Diram qui contudit Hidram, the Hercules that has destroyed this
Lernaean Monster. So with my love to all that shall read me, and service to
those that buy and pay for me.

Farewell.
A Projector in general,
IS a creature whose Genus is animal, and differencia Rationale; only he is
like cursed Cain: Ens projectum, that is a thing cast off all honest men's
societies: he is quoad a man rationalis, and quatenus projector
superationalis, his fine wit transcending his honest reason: and as work of
Supererogation replenishing him with a main propension, to undo others to
enrich himself. He is an Ubiquitary, being at one time in every place, till
all places be weary of him. A Centimanus in his touch, and an Argus in his
sight, though there he participate of the Basiliskes nature, killing all he
looks on first. He is the Egyptian Frog, that creeps into every man's dwelling,
nay into his dish, and sometimes into men's beds, for often he has been given
to Venerie, and invaded men's wives. To conclude, he is every thing but what he
should be, Honest: And is the Genus Generalissimum of a Knave.

Furthermore, as some of the Modernes affirm, He is a Mongrill by birth: His
Father was an Hittite, and his Mother an Amorite. His Education in his youth
was with a Poet, and by him infected with strange raptures, and whimsies, which
he strives to put in practice, and calls them Projects: his riper years were
corrupted with the abominable terms of Lawyers Lattin, and Pedlers French. His
actions at the first view speak him honest, and politic; but the end he
aims at proves him the clean contrary way. He is in his discourse a
Gymnosophist, by Religion a Bannian, and in his Faith an Alchymist.

He is the winter Foul that know their seasons, and you may find as many
Projecters in Parliament time, as Woodcocks in Summer: of all Professions, a
Baud, a Pimpe, a pander, and a Projector, hate to be called by their proper
names, although they love their Trades.

He is one that has always more money in his mouth, than in his purse, and
feeds as heartily upon his Aicry hopes, as the news Mongers in Paul's upon
Duke Humphreyes Cates. He is one that is wiser in his own conceit than the
Privy Council, can reform a Commonwealth better than a Parliament: you may
read all the penal Statutes, if his tongue chance to peep out of his mouth:
only he makes a quaere, and demurres upon primo Hen. 8. where his predecessors
Empson and Dudley were honored with a Hempen Garland, and conclude, that
Session to be Apocrypha, yet makes his bragges in the vulgar, how they
suffered for the Commonwealth, and deserve to be styled Martyrs.

He is made all of Cringes and Complements, as if he dropped out of the Docke of
a Courtier, and can change himself into as many shapes as Painters can do
colors, either a decayed Merchant, a broken Citizen, a silent Minister, an old
maym'd Captain, a forejudged Attorney, a busy Soliciter, a crop-car'd
Informer, a pick-thanke Pettyfogger, or a nimble paced Northern Tike, that
has more wit than honesty.

These are the men that make the bravest Projectors, who in short time may be
dignified with the title of Knight of the Post, or Canker General of the
Commonwealth.

He will pinguisie all manner of Pullen, with Carrots and Turnips, fatten all
four footed beasts without Hay, or Grass, or any manner of Grain, make bread
of Pumpions, and Cucumbers, and will find the Guard Beef and Brues for God a
mercy, till their bellies crack; and victual the King an Army without meat,
and take all the Scots in a pursuit, if they Rebel.

He is an excellent Architecture, he will pull down White Hall, and build
the King a new Palace, to which the banqueting house shall be but half the
Porters lodge, and at his own cost, if the King will not give him leave, he
would turn an hospital into a Court, and annexe the Savoy to Sommerset house,
if the Duchy were not between them, and then all the poor people may be
admitted in Forma Pauperis to seek their Iodgings without certificate of the
Parish. He is the only imitator of Guido Vaux his dark Lantern, and by it,
has made a device to convey people above ground that shall see every body, and
no man see them, with the help of two footed beasts, and has jugled into
credit with a strange name and call it a Sedan.

He will turn all Wagons, Carts, and Coaches into the nature of Wind-mills,
to sail to the Stages for the benefit of the Kingdom in sparing horseflesh
in the wars, and to that intent has got a Patent to make wooden horses, fit
for Brewers, Butchers, Maulters, and Carriers that shall do as good service,
as if they were alive, carry burdens, and fast much longer.

He is one that scrapes up a living in this world, though he be put out of
possession in the next; and has crept neatly into the favor of the Clergy,
by advancing the return of the whole Kingdom a third part, whereby their
tithes are increased more than ever.

He can sail through London Bridge against wind and Tide, clear the Thames
from Sands and Shelves; weigh up all Wracks, though in the bottom of the Sea,
and fifty fat home under water, blow up the enemy with fire: if you seem to
doubt any of these Projects, he hugges himself with conceit of your
ignorance, and his own wit: if you question him, his answer is; This age is a
cherisher of Arts, and new Inventions, the former dull and heavy, that these
times are active, as may appear by the draining of the Fens, building of
Towns, and Churches, repairing of Paul's, his Majesty's expedition to York,
and conceludes, Nihil est quod non Solertia vinea^.

To say truth, he is a man of knowledge, very great in knavery; he is well
read in deceit of all Trades; he knows how to dye silk to make it weigh
heavy: he knows, that diverse forts of wool mixed together, will never cotton
well, to make good Demicasters: he knows those Malsters are knaves that make a
Bushel of Barley pute above nine in Malt; and I protest in good earnest, he
does deserve well, if he can cast out the beams of his own eye, that he may see
the clearer to make themselves honest men.

He is neither fool nor Physician, yet undertakes to reform all abuses in the
body politic with these three words, Carollus Dei Gratia: like Scale the
Mountebanke, that cures all diseases with one powder: He is a great Traveller
through England and Wales; but dares not peep in Scotland, until the King go
in person: he is or would be a man of Government, for he desires all things
to go according to his will, which he suspects to be reason: He discourses
much of the danger of the times, and fortifieth his arguments with old wives
Tales, and believes them to be prophesies, as Lincoln was, London is, and
York shall be; and by opinion of his deeper insight in State affairs, has
frighted a company of silly Citizens out of their houses and estates from
London to York, in hope to be rich, and will make them a Corporation free of
Suburbs.

He is one that thinks he can cozen the Devil, for he will VVire draw the
Covetous, and worm the Usurer of their estates for hope of gain; they will
drop all three into a hangmans budget, if my Art do not cosen me: He is a
rare extracter of the quintences of Beer, Ale, Wine, Tobacco, Malt,
Bricke-tiles, Soap, Starch, Allome, Cards, Dice, and Tapsters, cum multis
aliis; the pure Spirit gat by imposing a fine, and an annual rent upon those
that take Patents to sell them, and suffer others to sell them for nothing.

He is one whose Arse makes buttons by the Bushel at the noise of a
Parliament, more than the Scots do at the noise of English Drums, and has
wrought under hand with Seminaries and Jesuits like a Mole, to set dissension
between the two Kingdoms, on purpose that he avoid a Parliament, and has
gotten a Patent or Grant of all the Blew Bonnets that are taken in the first
battle; but means not to be there himself, but stay behind, and engrosse all
the Carrots and Parsnips that comes to London, to make Dildoes for the Citizens
wives, old maidens, and poor whores that staid behind the Progress.

Now you have heard of his life, pray listen to his death.

He fell sick of scouring at Reference, founded at a Certificate, lay in
trance at Mr. Aturney, and recovering, fell into a relapse at the Privy Seal,
where he dreamed of Angels ascending, and descending, but waking, found not
his Patent sealed, dyed with an obstructing or stopping at the great Seal, and
made no Will, as his predecessors did. Only you shall hear his Epitaph.

REader, here entombed does lie,
One, who thought he could not dye,
Yet Death to show no flesh can be
Composed of Immortality,
Trembling did let fly a Dart,
Which killed him midst of all his Art:
For had he longer drawn his breath,
It Is thought' twould have infected death:
So many hot contagions flew
From his brain, each threatened new
Infections: blasting where they came,
The tree and fruit, nay even the name
Of honesty: But now he is gone,
Like a Comet by his own
Fire consumed: The worms do fear,
Now he is in earth that he should there
Practice on them: for in his grave,
He dead still lives toth' world a Knave.
Now Gentlemen, you have had a sufficient Character of him in general; we will
descend to examine his particulars: and first of the Wine-Proiectors,
ARe Creatures that should seem to be compounded of Sack and Clarret; Sack
being their matter, and Clarret their form: the excise which they have laid
upon either, being the union that cements together. Friends they appeared to
the Vinteners: indeed some of them are supposed to have been so: because by
patent they sought to inhance reckonings, and by license to cheat their
customers. But now they are run to the Lees, and shortly will be searcely
vendable to Aquaevita makers.

The Wine-licence Farmers, and undertakers,
Were maine appendixes to that Apocryphal book, the Projectors: the Projectors
serving as the Text, and they Comments in the Margent: They were Cubs, which
when the old Bears had lickt into Form, became more ravenous beasts than
themselves, and now their design being blind, it is like themselves, fit for
no other exercises, but to be whipped: which if they escape, they fare better
than it is supposed their principalls will do, who may chance meet a worse
punishment: the Country cries out of these, the City of them, the whole
Kingdom of both: these last by license, farming their own ruins, and
undertaking their perpetual infamies.

The Tobacco Proiectors,
Are great foes to Plantations: St. Christophers has cursed them, and it is
thought they would have received a defiance from all the Summer Islands, had
they not now fallen in a civil Duel at home. Most gentlemen took them in
snuff: nay, some had a project upon their bodies, viz. to beat them to
sneezing powder, and transport them into Ireland. The Country Ale-wives curses
has seized them, for it is thought, their Roll is rotten, and their prick
Tobacco even in the pipe putrified: so that they will be smoaked themselves.

The Salt Proiectors,
Were great powdered Beef Eaters, betwixt Nant witch and Stone, begot in a
Salt pan: their scene was the whole Kingdom. In every part of which, they
stoutly acted their well seasoned Interlude, which now at last is proved the
Tragedy of the Actors themselves, who like poor John are powdered up
themselves.

The Ragge-Proiectors,
Were extracted from Dung-hills, the outcasts of a Brokers Fripperie. In Long
Lane they took their originals, and it is believed their endings will be in
Houndsditch.

The Card Proiectors,
Were begot by the knave of Clubs, upon the Queen of Spades, and fostred in a
gaming house: at a long set at Mawe they first achieved wealth, and lost it
again at the same; the Ace of Trumps being taken by the Ace of Hearts: and now
the whole bunch of them are all like their parents, Coat Cards, viz. proclaimed
knaves.

The Butter Proiectors,
Were people that loved meat well, and now they are like to pay for the sauce,
Cattle of a soft disposition; and like May-butter, are all melted in the Sun.

The Soap Proiectors,
Were great enemies to clean Linen, though they appear friends. Their
confection of Lime and Ashes being opposite to its own Color, it would not
wash white. Their Author was a Lawyer: all whose linen were like his Term
bags, black Buckram, and so needed no scouring; they are now grown so
foul, a field of Brooms will not sweep them clean: though now thank heaven
they are swept away themselves.

The Coal Proiectors,
Were of a hot constitution, abhorred good fires here, because they were sure
of a large one hereafter. Their consciences were like their Coale-pits, deep,
and full of darkness in which they desired to continue, for they would admit of
no firelight, but such as was dearly paid for, forty shillings a Chaldron
being a charitable price for their far fet Fuel; which though dear bought
was hardly good for Ladies: They were mere Salamanders, that though lived by
fire themselves could hardly afford it others, having a desire to reduce the
world to a Chaos, and make all the year winter: But like Haman hanged on his
own Gallows, their own Coals has confum'd them almost to ashes, and the pit
which they dug for others, they are like to fall into themselves; where we
let them rest till they have cooled their fingers ends.

The Corporation Proiectors.
Were persons that loved civil government well, as it seemed, for they sought
by Patent to make the whole Suburbs live under rule, to create every Forrainer
a free Denison, though many sold their beds; And more to purchase their
infranchisements made all their movables inthral'd to the Brokers. The City
Charter was of no force with them; for Westminster and the Hamlets three mile
about, by his power bade defiance to London. They had Justice on their side,
and feared not to annihilate the Law, which has now light upon them, and the
City Hangman expects to give some of them their Exit at Tiburne; where, with
the rest of their brethren, they will as we hope make a joyful ending, as it
is imagined they have deserved.

FINIS.

