The Mushroom: OR, A SATYR AGAINST Libelling TORIES and Prelatical TANTIVIES:
In Answer to A Satyr against Sedition CALLED The Meddal. By the Author of
Absalom and Achitophel.

AND HERE ANSWERED By the AVTHOR of the Black Nonconformist.

The Next Day after the Publication of the MEDDAL; To Help the SALE thereof.

Nitimur in vetitum? Quousque?
LONDON, Printed for Fra: Smith Jun. at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill, M
DC LXXXII.

EPISTLE TO THE Tories and Tantivies.
Instead of an Epistle to You -- TORIES! I Will only Preface here with some old
Stories.
ABOUT the Year of Our Lord 1218. at Paris in a Synod or Convocation of the
Clergy; one that was appointed to Clerum, or preach the Convocation-Sermon was
put to his Trumps, and much troubled in his Guizard what to say, or what
Subject to insist upon:

Whereupon the Devil who always watches to take Men napping, and observing the
Preacher, to be melancholy and perplexed in mind) appears to him as he sat in a
brown-study, and asked him why he was so careful what to preach? say thus --
quoth the Devil -- The Princes of Hell salute You, Oh the Princes and Prelates
of the Church, and gladly give you thanks, because that through your default
and negligence all Souls go to Hell, etc. And Preacher added he was enforced by
the Command of God to declare the same; yea, and a certain Token was given him
for a sign, whereby the Convocation might evidently see that he did not lie.
Ex. Catal. Illyr fol. 546.

This is somewhat like that Story that Mr. Fox mentions in his Acts and
Monuments; of a Letter in the Name of Lucifer; (for so were the first words of
the Letter) Lucifer Prince of Darkness, etc. To the persecuting Prelates of
England, etc.

But the true words of the Letter verbatim, (as it was transcribed out of the
Register of the Bishop of Hereford (as some think) by William Swinderby, a
Protestant Martyr in Rich. 2ds. Time, has these very words, namely --

LUCIFER Prince of Darkness, etc.
TO all our Children of Pride, and Companions of our Kingdom, and especially to
our Princes of the Church of this latter Age, and time, etc. send Greeting, etc.

Know ye that in time past certain Vicegerents of Christ, following his steps,
etc. in a beggarly Life Converted, in a manner all the world, from the Yoke of
our Tyranny etc.

But we seeking remedy for time to come, instead of those Apostles, we have
caused ye to be their Successors, which be Prelates of the Church by our great
might and subtlety, as Christ said of you, They have reigned, but not by me,
etc. once I promised him all the Kingdoms of the world, etc. but he would not;
but to you who are fallen from grace, and serve us in the Earth, is that my
promise fulfilled; therefore fill your selves full, and be contrary to those
Fathers in your Life and conditions, and exalt your selves above all other men
etc fight our quarrel, ^ntangle your selves in worldly matters etc.

And climb up from the miserable state of poverty to the highest Seat of Honor
and Princely Places of Dignity, by wyles and subtlety flattery, lying and
perjury, Treason, deceit, and s^^ony, etc.

And after you are advanced thither where you would he, then either by
Violence, Ravening or by Ambition subtlely Pelfer away, and wrongfully wrest,
and by false Titles possess those goods which should be for the sustentation of
the Poor, etc. (Nay) The Devil was in the right on t there, for Tithes were
given by the Doners, as much to the Poor as to the Ministers, only the Priests
and Deacons were the overseers to distribute it, as need required; but instead
of distributing, they laid hold, and laid hold, and laid hold on the Tithes,
that instead of distributing like bishops and Overseers, they bought Coaches,
and fared deliciously every day, and he was counted a Special Bishop, that gave
the poor, ( after his dogs were served) the remaining Pottage, and the scraps
to the poor, waiting a morsel at the door, but I Will show (when I have leisure)
the bottom of this Mystery of Iniquity, I Will turn it Topsy-turvy, and show you
how Covetuousness, Ambition, and Popish Prelacy crept into the Church, which
made the Devil so grateful to them in this letter of thanks, saying, for so the
letter goes on: Consume these goods (Namely Tithes and Glebs that partly belong
to the poor, who need no Poor-rates, if they had their Primitive-Rights, I
mean, (as the Doners first gave it to them) Consume these goods as your selves
list, etc. I would have you to build Palaces, fare like Princes, to eat the
daintiest meat, and drink the pleasantest wines, and hoard up Treasure (Devil!
this advice is needless, it might have been spared, they can do all these
things without thy bidding, of their own Inclination, without thy Temptation!
And be not like Peter and Paul ( never fear it Devil! who said, Silver and Gold
have I none; ye fight for us etc. when Christ called you the Synagogue of Satan
we loved you, etc.

For your deserts which contemn the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace the laws
of Simon Magus, etc.

Ye have made the House of God, a Den of Thieves, ye make Laws, and keep not
the feme, etc,

Ye justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
Righteous from him, etc.

We would also you should do our commendations to our entirely beloved
daughters Pride, Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belly-chear, Lechery especially, to
Lady Simony, who has made you men and given you such, etc.

And if any man will Preach or teach otherwise then you will have him, oppress
ye him violently with Excommunications and Censures, etc. (this was impertinent
( Devil) he might have spared this advice also, they can do these things
without the Devils temptations fast enough) heaped one upon another; And let
him be condemned as a Heretic, or Shismatick, and kept in Prison 'till he dye,
for an Example to all such, etc.

As you ( Dear Tories) may see the same more at large in Foxes Act and
Monuments; and at large in the last Packet of Advice last week by the
ingenuous Mr. Care.

Reynold Peacock Bishop of Chichester said, that the riches of Bishops are the
goods of the poor, and that spiritual persons by the Law of God, ought not to
have temporal possessions, and that personal Tithes is not due by Gods Law;
that the Universal Church of Rome may err in matters of faith, and that it is
not necessary to Salvation, to believe what general-Councels ordain and
determine: These points and others to this purpose, he confessed he held and
taught the space of twenty years; and after the Bishop of Canterbury, and other
Bishops set themselves against him, and he was imprisoned during his life.

Which shows their cruelty to the Naked Tauth men, to smother them in all ages,
for God has raised up some such in all ages, but the Prelates (for the most
part) did their business, which made Aeneas Silvius (who was afterward Pope of
Rome) and wrote the Book of the Council of Basil,) in his Thirty eighth Epistle
to Cardinal Julian, concerning these Cardinals, who so magnified the Authority
of the Cburch, as if they would spend their lives for the same, and yet slipped
home from that Council of Basil etc. deridingly say, that they had rather lose
their faith, then their preferment. etc.

And Prosper (ex Illirico) says -- That holy men did not challenge the
Church-goods as their own, but as given to the poor, to be divided to all them
that have nothing, neither ought they to give any thing to those that have of
their own enough, for that is but to cast away things.

Concel. Lateran. Anno Domini 1179. held at Rome by Pope Alexander, and 110
Bishops. It is Decreed, That none of the Clergy within Orders should meddle
with any Temporal Business, and that Priests should have but one Benefice; and
that Bishops should be charged to maintain such Priests as they did Ordain, etc.

(And not beggar (surely) those Priests Ordained and premoted already, and
swallow them up.)

Which made Cardinal Aralatensis say (in the said Council of Basil -- That all
Bishops ought to understand that they come to have greater power than Priests
only by Custom, and not by Dispensation of the truth of God; and that they
ought to rule the Church together, for a Priest is the very same that a Bishop
is by divine Institution; for there is such a Concordance (says he) between a
Bishop and a Priest; that Paul to Titus calls Bishops Priests.

And Christ says, blessed are the poor in spirit; neither was there any rich
Bishop in the Primitive Church; neither did the Ancient Church reject Dionisius
Bishop of Millan, nor Eusehius Bishop of Vercellus, Hillary Bishop of Pictavia,
although they were very poor; but if we will grant the naked truth ( well spoke
Cardinal!) The poor are more apt to give right judgment than the rich; because
riches causes fear lest they should to be taken from them (too true) And
Poverty causes liberty, for

The poor fear no Tyranny as rich men do, who are given over to all kind of
vanity, idleness and sloth, and will deny Christ (and Truth) rather than lose
their riches;

Not love to the Flock, (for that is too big and numerous for them to feed) but
love to the Revenues makes them Bishops.

John Gerson, a Popish Chancellor of Paris, and a great Civilian says -- that
the neglect to observe that ancient Canon, namely that Bishops should have poor
Apparel, Lodging and Diet, and should not strive for Transitory things, but to
imitate the Apostles -- Hence -- Hence -- the Root of all mischief in the
Church --

Also (he says) their making of Laws such as they have no Authority from God
to make, and their enjoining men by Censures and Excommunications to observe
their Laws, their Courts, etc.

Which is the cause of Division, which (he says) will never be appeased (in
France) until the Heads spiritual be reformed. When Episcopacy first crept into
the Earth it was not so inconsistent with Gospel-rule, and they were chosen by
the people and Ministers who were to live under their inspection, etc. Yea,
Popes themselves were chosen by the People and the Priests, and after confirmed
by the Emperor, and were not chosen by Cardinals and Curtesans as they now
are, etc.

By ancient Canons the Bishop ought not to Ordain any without the Council of
the Clergy, and Testimony of the People: Distinct. 70. Tit. Ordinationis.
Distinct. 29. quando.

And he shall be no Prince henceforth, whom neither Clergy nor People of his
own City has Elected. Distinct. 64. Tit. si forte -- according to Acts 1.23,
24, 25, 26. Acts 6.3.4.6.7.

See more of this Extravag. de Institot. cap. ex frequentibus. Extravagant. de
Prescript Tit. 51. diligent, etc. cum omne.

Mr. Henry Stalbridg (our Countreyman) in his Exhortative Epist. printed at
Basil, has these words --

I say yet once again, and that in the zeal of the Lord; as he is my Judge, I
wish if his gracious pleasure so were; That first the King's Majesty, and so
all those to whom God has given power and authority on Earth may thoroughly see
and perceive, how that not only the bloody Bear and Wolf of Rome, but also the
most part of other B -- and stout-sturdy Canons of Cathedral-Churches, with
other pretty Prowlers, and prestigious Priests of Baal in all Realms of
Christendom, especially in -- do roar about like Lions, fret like angry Bears,,
and like cruel Wolves should enter, not sparing the Flock Acts 20.29.

These Spiritual man-hunters are the very offspring of Cain, children of
Caiaphas, and successors of Simon Magus, as their Doctrine and living declare.

Most cruel Enemies have they been in all ages to the verity of God, and most
Fierce Persecutors of Christ and his Church, marvel not ye Bishops and
Prelates, (says he) though I thus in the zeal of Elias and Phineas stomach
against your Sturdy stubbornness, for never was any Tyranny ministered upon
Christ's members but by your procurement; never did Christ send such bloody
Apostles, and two horned Warriors; But the Devil-vicar Antichrist sent them,
who is deadly destroyer of faithful believers, etc. ( And so on at a great
rate, which see at large. then)

Consider your beginning, never came you in with your Miters, Robes, and Rings,
etc. at the door, as did the poor Apostles, but by the window unrequired, like
Robbers, thieves, and Manquellers, with Simon Magus, Marcion, and Menander;
never was your Pontifical-Power of our heavenly fathers planting* and therefore
must be routed up, Mat. 15.13.

If any thing under Heaven need reformation, let them that mind any Godliness (
Ay, ay, but where shall we find such) think this to be one; for, if these be
not Spiritual Thieves, Soul Murderers, Heretics, Schismatics, Church
robbers, Rebels and Traitors to God and Man, where are any to be looked for in
the world? ( it is strange that this holy man was not bound to the good
behavior, as some common rogue for this Naked Truth, and plain-dealing:) for
nothing can they do (says he) but daily mischief, etc.

And may as well be spared in the Commonwealth (says he) as Kites, Crows,
Buzzards, Polcats, (Bless us!) Rats, Weasels, Otters, ( where Was the Proctors,
Doctors, and Promoters, and Affidavit-men in those days, to plague him with
their Lawsuites and Actions, and Scandal. Magnat's. Articles, old Statutes,
Libels, Oaths, and Writs, Capiasses, Bums, Iaylors, Supplicavits, Silencings,
Suspensions, Deprivations, Excommunications, Apparitors, Hangmen, Promoters?
etc. But listen he goes on --) Wolves, and Foxes, bodily Fleas, or flesh-Flyes,
or other devouring noisome vermin:

-- For so long as they sat in the Par -- (having before said, I reckon it high
time for all Christian-Princes, which pretend to receive the Gospel of
Salvation, and to live in peace and tranquillity for ever, to cast the Bishops
out of Privy-Councels, and utterly to seclude you from all Administrations,
etc. for so long as they sit in the Parl -- House, the Gospel shall be kept
under, and Christ Persecuted in his faithful members: (Indeed and indeed, no
man can do great mischief, except he have great power; for curst-Cows that have
short horns may be handled and kept to the Peace, and good Behavior.)

Take me not here ( says he) that I condemn any Bishop or Priest that is
Godly, doing those offices the Scripture commands, as Preaching the Gospel,
Providing for the Poor, etc.

But against Bloody Butchers that murder Gods People, and make havoc of
Christ's Congregation, to maintain Iewish-Ceremonies, and Paganish-Superstition,
in the Christian-Church;

These are not Bishops, but Sheep-biters, Tirants, Tormentors, and the Devils
Slaughter-men, and the Devils Slaughter-men --

But such as in Poverty Preach the Gospel, provide for the Poor, rebuke the
wicked world of Pride -- Idolatry -- Hypocrisy -- They are not only worthy of
Competent living, but worthy of double Honor: But from the inordinate excess
of Riches, Priests and Prelates ought of all men to be sequestered (will they
not sooner send out sequestrations to beggar and starve the Orphans, whom they
have bereaved and made Orphans? Desolate and Comfortless -- the Lord reward
them according to their works! Consider that the wicked nature of Mammon is
always to Corrupt, yea, the very Elect of God (when they grew monstrous great)
were not more merciful; (says he.) The Learned and Pious Stalbridge, whose
name is yet so precious amongst the Germans and Switzers; ( for his learned
labors, works, books and naked-truth) and an Honor to his Country, this
kingdom of England, and precious to all true English men! But ( onley) that he
was a Protestant.

Therefore, listen to a Papist or two more.

St. Bernard, and Abbot in his Epist. ad Eugenium Papam. To Pope Eugenius --
thus --

For Tithes, Testaments, Administrations, Servitude, Legitimations, and such
like (says St. Bernard to the Pope, and one of the worse of Popes that ever
sat, being deprived by a general Council for his damnable and notorious
cruelties, villainies, etc.) you went beyond your bounds, when you restrained
them) namely, the cognizance of Tithes, Testaments, Administrations, Servitude,
Legittimations, or Matrimony, and the like) To your Courts, and without Caesar,
made laws for things that did belong to Caesar -- (as a Tantivie Preacher) in
the Temple -- upon that Text Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and
unto God the things which are Gods --: said -- what is Caesar's, what things? I
answer, Caesar shall have your Goods, your Lands, your Wives, your Children,
your All -- All is Caesar's --

But some may say (quoth Tantivee-Preacher fitter to preach at Tyburn than the
Temple) If Caesar shall have All, then what shall God have? -- I answer (quoth
he)

God shall have your Souls -- But as for your Bodies, your Lands, your Goods,
your Livings, your Lives, your Children, and your Wives, They are Caesar's. But
listen to St. Bernard.

For the Goods, Lands, Livings, Estates of Laymen, and Clerks also, are Caesar's
charge; (by Caesar he means the Supreme Temporal Government, whether Monarchy
absolute, or a Republic, or Monarchy mixed (as here in England) Caesar's charge
and not yours, nor the Prelates. My Kingdom (says Christ) is not of this World.

If then the Pope, Prelates and Priests, will be the servants of Christ (says
St. Ambrose upon those words, and he was a Popish Prelate too) they must not
challenge any worldly Kingdom: The Servant is not above his Master: And if the
Master deny it, the Servant may not affirm it and usurp it. Soldiers of Christ
must not entangle themselves with the affairs this world, much less to make
themselves Lords and Judges of Earthly matters.

You call the Popes (hard names!) Bears! Wolves -- and Sherks --.
For miscief (what is Rocks so called near the Lizard.
(then) -- the Bishop and's Clerks
At the Lands-end of England? those Dire stones
On which -- Ships -- Men -- are lost -- Body and Bones?
In all Ages God raised up Naked Truth men, but they were crushed and run down;
like the Lord Cobham (Sir John Old Castle) Butchered and martyred and burnt in
Smithfield by the cruelty of Prelates, etc. for Scandal' Magnat' in these
slanderous, seditious, scandalous and Heretical Words, namely, --

The will of God is, That Priests being secluded from all worldliness, should
conform themselves to the example of Christ and his Apostles, that is, in
Poverty, (oh bloody word! and Scandal' Magnat!) and teaching the Scriptures
purely, and giving good Example to others, more than any sort of People.

Where (says he to the Prelates) do ye find in Gods Law, that you should sit
in judgment of any Christian-man? But in Annas and Caiaphas that sat thus upon
Christ? and upon his Apostles after his Ascension? of whom only have ye taken
it, to judge Christ's Members as ye do, since the venom of Judas was shed into
the Church: And by venom (says he) I mean (your Iudas-Baggs, your great
Purses) your Possessions, and Lordships: For then an Angel cried in the Air
wo-wo-wo- This day is venom shed into the Church, as your own Churches mention.

Before that time all the Bishops of Rome in a manner were Martyrs, (if it were
so now) Misses would not be sought to for a --, then they would say? nolo
Episcapari -- nolo Episcopari -- I am not ambitious to be a Bishop -- Or
ambitious of Martyrdom.) But -- since that time; -- Popes and Bishops, one has
cursed and poisoned, slain and done much mischief to another: Christ was weak
and merciful (Oh dangerous word!) But they are proud and Tyrannical -- Christ
was poor, but they are rich, etc.

Well! they did his business for him in Smithfield: (more is the pity, God
knows,) amongst Christians too? you`le say,) nay, amongst the Successors of the
Apostles, Peter and Paul? Oh Hypocrisy! I hourly expect the fruits of the like
rage and cruelty: God enable me to undergo it cheerfully, patiently, and
courageously, (as the Lord Cobham did, of whom they said, as now they say of
me, for the like Naked-Truth, in declaring their Extortions, Cruelty, and
Illegal oppressions) Away -- with such a fellow from the earth -- for it is not
fit that he should live.

Take but one Story more (in good part) and I Will trouble you no more at
present, and it is from a Papist, a Countryman of our own, an English-Papist,
Alexander Fabritius, in his Destructorium vitiorum, part. 6. cap. 79. vixit
Anno Domini 1420. In these words, viz.

Who are more horribly enthralled to the Devils Servitude, than those who are
placed in the sublimity of Honor, Ecclesiastical Fellows, who ought to be the
Light of the World, yet where is more abundant Darkness of Vices?

Where more abundant gaping after Earthly things? then in modern Prelates? who
are fatted in both powers, as well Temporal as Spiritual? where is greater
Pomp, in all Appendixes, yea, and that so much, that having left the Poverty of
the Primitive Church, they are now rather to be termed Princes of Provinces,
than Pastors of Souls, etc. with abundance more to this Purpose; which you may
see at large (Dear Tantivees!) at your best leisure; so much for this time --
from

Your humble Servant E. H.

The Mushroom: OR, A SATYR In Answer to a Satyr against Sedition. Called THE
MEDAL.
TIME was ( John Laureat) when thy pretty Muse
(Young, plump and Buxome) no man would refuse
Though thou did poorly Prostitute her store,
And for vile-Pence made her a Hackney-Whore
Against the Laws of Art: ( Phoebus is just!)
Her former Lovers does her ( now) disgust,
And I, that once in private hugged her well,
(Nay sometimes smyl'd at her Achitophel)
I daign'd to kiss her kindly, and to greet
Her lovely Airs, so charming and so sweet,
(Nay; be not jealous (John!) thou have no cause,
This was) whilst she within the modest Laws
Of a Trur Poet kept -- she is nauseous grown,
Thou needs must blush to own her for thine own,
If thou have any grace -- she is poor and shent,
He Is far from witty that grows Impudent.
Oh! what a silly do thou keepst in vain,
About a Medal thus to break thy Brain?
The Ancient Romans so Renowned for Wars,
Kept Medals of their Friends and Ancestors;
Art thou Red-letter bred, of hopes from Rome?
Yet against Pictures speakst? from whence they come.
A Satyr once ( Satyr's could speak (or) shine)
Why Men did blow their Nails could not Divine;
Nor why they did their Porrage blow: Was told
One -- was to make them -- hot -- the other -- cold.
At which News Satyr set up skut and run,
(As if he had been frighted with a Gun)
How would he run from thee in Naked Truth,
Who blowst both cold and hot from the same mouth?
Thy Stroling-Muse may serve the Bawdy-Stage,
Or a Dull-Ballad, (though she is in age)
Or, serve a Tory when he swears by Book;
But from ingenious Men, -- Not one kind look.
Thy Haggard Muse, that used to mount the skies
(Grown old) for easy Prey, to Dunghills flies.
Thy youthful Strumpet (now) Thy old Hagg staynes,
Thy Nodes (Pox on it) have putrified thy Brains;
Expect not Davenant's Fate -- whose Muse (alone)
Kissed the old Bard, even when his Nose was gone,
And (though a Miss, yet) constant as a Wife,
Never forsook him till he left his life,
But hugged the wretch when he did noseless lie,
And made him sweetly snivel Melody.
But ( John) thy Winter-years it is (sadly) seen,
Can not maintain thy Laurel fresh and green;
It withers every day, This it is to use
A Stageing, bawdy, common, Hackney Muse:
Hang her Whore -- March her off, lest you should lose
Not only Brains, -- she will get thee by the nose,
And pull it off (perchance) whilst we must say,
This comes ( John) of your Whoring, and foul Play,
(...) of his ^^^stle to Whiggs.
But the best Jest is this -- The Doting Bard
Seems to be shy and Jealous, and afraid,
Lest (Sharp set) Whiggs should steal some of his store,
Or (Needy Grown) borrow his Common Whore,
Courage -- Man! -- fear it not; I Will be their Bail;
(For Petty Larceny men go not to Jayle)
Shall Whiggs, who have amongst themselves such store,
Filch thy Stale Taplash Droppings, old and sour*
Shall Whiggs (base Iealousy!) visit the Stews,
Or, Rob the Spittle for a nasty Muse?
A common, Hackney-Strumpet, that so cheap
Does Prostitute her self to every leap?
Shall Whiggs (the Glory of the City grown,
And of the Kingdom too) that of their own
Are stockt -- shall they (when Wit and Wealth combine)
Empty Exchequers Robb -- ( Tory) like thine?
It Is Scandalu^s Magnat' that a Divine
And modest-Muse should deign to talk with thine:
(A sure proof she has little else to do)
Thank the good Bishop for my presence now.
Fear not my Muse, she is no Plagiary,
None of thy Stock by her shall ever miscarry:
She is not rich, but yet for Common Pelf
( Like thine) she needs not seek out of her self:
She has no gaudy Dress, yet clean and smooth,
Not farc't with far-fetched Phrases and uncouth;
Her Helicon's not strong, but needs no pains
To bump it up, no Heaveings, no hard straynes,
But easy flows -- Phoebe at her Birth befriends her,
Her Modesty (if ought) most recommends her.
Her Sheets are clean, though course; she is a young Bride,
She is no French-Miss, nor yet Frenchify'd:
Young Ladies may her naked Features view,
Yet not (their shame) by guilty- Blushes show:
Is It not a wonder then a Muse (like mine)
Should stoop so low as to be seen with thine?
With thy old Hackney prostituted Muse,
That does Her self as (long) the Stage abuse?
In Satyrs (too) against Sedition,
Absalom was the last glory she won:
She Is lost for ever and forlom, her shame
Is now discovered -- she goes limping, lame:
Poets and Beauty play no After-Game. --
Which the old-Bard (though Pur-blind) does foresee,
And therefore now bespeaks our Charity
In two vile Sonnets prefacing his flawes,
(Penned by himself) to wheedle in Applause;
And drill men in -- Thus over Doors are set
Papers -- Lo! Here Is Fair Chambers to be let.
His limping-Verses has the string-halt got,
Some have due length and size and some have not:
In Lincoln-Fieilds have you not Cripples seen
With wooden-legg (the other of Bone has been,
With our old-noded-Poet thus it fares,
Begging Alms for his Feet ( because) not pairs.
Poor Laureat! Thy Bays are forfeit now,
And better will become some other Brow.
Husbands (in Egypt) when their Wives grow stale,
And Beauty ( not by Paint retrieved) does fail,
For a base living watch upon the Strand
The keen and vigorous Seamen (when they land,
Eager to fly at all) by Pimping thrives,
And By false praises drill men to their Wives,
Thus -- this Stale Bard, the Reader to abuse
By feigned Applause, turns Pimp to his own Muse.
That we may be enamored on her dress,
The Gypsee-Cuckold does her Charms confess
In loud-lewd Lines premised, ( Epistle-wise)
Made by Himself, Pandaring in disguise,
That Gentle Readers might kind looks confer
On his Hag-Muse, and be Gallants to Her.
Tapsters with half-wrought Froth thus give a dash
To vend their stale dead-Beer, and sour Taplash.
If Whiggs be silent, then the Tory says,
They Are silenc't -- cannot answer Mr. Bays,
( The Poet Laureat) And if we write,
He swears we learn of him how to indite:
Nay, he is -- so charitable, we -- so poor --
His Epist. 6.
He bids us take and welcome of his store --
And, lest our Verses happen to want feet,
He frankly proffers his; and it is most meet
We should ( in charity accept his proffer now)
For his ( like that) has As p. 6. ^ice also. 10. p. 11.16. p. 17.19. in his
Medal. ^pist. p. 6.
more than should by two.
And we ( poor Blocks) (as our last Refuge too)
Are glad to turn his lines upon him now;
And Satyrize (when our rough Rhymes are trim)
By skill in Satyr only stolen from him.
Thus does the Bladder swell ( and puff to boot)
I Will prick it then, and let the Vapor out.
Go -- and invent Posies for Rings -- or send
Now to condole your late departed friend
And Patroness, the French-Miss, cheer her heart
With Praise-Romantick, and thy ( Court-like) Art,
Make Hue and Cry after the Bitch that is stolen
Away (as Gazette says) or Dead, or gone,
The White-Bitch lost from Court, at the back-stairs,
Give the Pim -- chiff -- notice how she fares,
And bring her back, her Marks -- is one foul spot
Upon her Loins, which I had quite forgot:
But, to write Satyrs thou art (now) unfit,
Satyrs too brisk for thy ( drawing on) wit.
And though it merits not a look of mine,
I Will treat it fair because ( they say) it is thine:
Thus Brats found (in rich linen) at men's doors,
(As being thought to come of no poor Whores)
Though Parish-Charge, yet gentler usage meet
Then other Brats (worse mantled) left in the Street.
Muses, like Women, cannot lovely be,
When they divest themselves of Modesty,
How fair and beautiful so ever they were,
Wickedness is not wit, (for Rhyme) that is clear.
Should All the Nine Court me at once, and say
But one lewd thing, I Would kick the Whores away.
Whores ( that have lost all shame) whose shame is cheat,
Yet (to allure) some shame they will counterfeit.
But thou (old Bawdy-Bard) quite spoils the sport,
With Profane Lewdness, sure thou lives at Court.
Say -- Is the Air infectious? what is the matter?
Thou (thus) Burlesques all good, and sin do flatter?
And ridicules all sober, pious Sense,
And Loyalty, except it come from thence:
As if Whiggs could not to their King be true,
Except they Traitors be to God, like you;
And, with their Prayers, Curses interlace:
Base Mungrel-Loyalty with a Ianus-face!
One looks with Smiles upon the King, (How odd?)
The other facing, braving the great God.
One singing Psalms -- the other -- Curses sing
Damme -- ye Dog! -- Huzzah! -- God bless the King.
For, Praying for the King -- that will not do it,
Except Whiggs also curse themselves to boot;
Prizing God and their Souls (what harm) above him;
And loath to damn themselves; (although they love him)
And therefore though the high-flown Torys be
Now at the desperate push of Loyalty.
Willing to show they love their Prince, How far?
More than their God, or Souls, or Christ -- they dare?
Bold Torys -- march! -- boldly go on -- in ill;
Whiggs will not stir a foot, say what you will,
Call it Sedition, or what next does come,
We'll damn for never a Prince in Christendom.
No -- get you gone together -- go -- be gone --
Better be singled by our selves ( alone)
Then march with you to Hell for company;
Call it Sedition, Schism, Haeresy.
To the late woes ( by which the Land did groan)
Did only the Sins of Whiggs Contribute? None,
None of the Torys-sins clubb'd, nor conferred:
(...).
Yet Charles the First confessed -- both sides had erred.
And these Incendiaries are too blame.
To heat the Kingdom thus into a flame:
Must Men ( fairly acquit by Law) Again
Be thus Arraigned by every Hackney Pen?
When Teagues O Divelly together Plot,
(Though in their Evidence of Truth no Jot:)
When damned Suborners yet unpunisht go,
Alas! may we not joy we have 'scap't so?
And when they got their fingers in, they tore
The wounds wide-ope were almost healed before.
Behold the ghastly Cicatrizes still!
To rend and tear them open again is ill.
How does the Market fail? when Lawreats
With Pimping Rhymes are glad to turn Make-bates,
And for to earn his Pension ( when he gets it)
Writes Scoundrel-like, without or fear or wit.
Pox! who made Poets Politicians now?
Good Politicians sure are scarce I trow,
Go-Pack -- after her Pack -- Poets are poor,
So is the Exchequer, as I said before,
And never the Richer (sure) for a French Whore.
But the French King can pay his debts -- go -- eat
With him your Meals, he can pay for his Meat
Before Digested, and can buy thee clothes
Not eaten (ever they are paid for) up with Mothes.
Our King will little thank such Lawreats,
That think to deck a Crown by being Make-bates;
Judging it wit, in Masquerade, to tell
How Absalom and wise Achitophel
Were wicked (once) two thousand years ago,
And therefore ( whom they hate) must still be so:
Poor witless Sophister! Do but turn the Tables,
And play them I know where, thou wilt call them Fables
And yet the Coxcomb did admire his wit,
And Tories call it ( still) a Lucky-Hit
And why? for Gods sake why? where ars men's brains?
Fooled by Romance and by Poetick-Strains?
And whiffled by a dull old Quixot? (Fy-on't)
The VVind-mill of his Brains (he thought) a Giant.
Thou shows't what true-bred Valor Courtiers have,
Is this Heroic? Hector-like to brave
A man ( thou say) is Crippled hand and foot,
Bound to the Peace (Hard Hap!) by the fell-Gout:
His Brains (though) are not Gouty (John!) like thine,
And for a helping-hand (behold!) here is mine.
Courtiers have from my Naked-weapon run,
The women -- not; -- (what ever the men have done,)
Follow French-Miss -- Be wise -- like Rat and Mouse,
That do (by Instinct) fly a Rotten House:
I Will take thy Laurels from thee (If I list)
An Honor (to my fairer Brow) when mist.
It Is a day thrown away, (no more!) think I,
Nor more it was, yet -- diem perdidi:
Unless it be to make thy Satyr sell
And Tonson Begged this Boon, (some may think well)
Thy Satyr (three months Birth) a Cripple came,
This day to hand, -- now I return it lame,
London March 17. 1681.
POSTSCRIPT.
GOD grant that this Mushrom be not like Jonas (his) Goard, that sprung up in a
night and perished in a night --. Mushroom's though they spring up in a night,
yet ( well dressed and Cooked) are served up, for Daintyes, and last long,
notwithstanding their hasty Birth -- like this, far from the Authors Library,
his Notes, and his Books. And if any man think or say that it is a wonder, if
this Book and Verses were composed and writ in One Day, and sent to the Press,
since it would employ the Pen of a ready Writer, or, nimble Scrivener, to Copy
this Book in a Day (it may be so.)

But it is a Truth as certain and stable as the Sun in the Firmament, and which
(if need be) the Bookseller, Printer, and others Worthy Citizens, that are
privy to it, can avouch, for an Infallible Truth -- Deo soli Gloria -- When a
Divine Hand assists, one (of Despicable, dull, and inconsiderable Parts and
Learning) may do wonders, which God usually performs by most weak and unlikely
Instruments -- Take the advice, (if you be wise) of the great Privy Counselor,
Acts 5.34, 35, 36.37, 38, 39, 40. But (some may say) why was not more time and
more Pains bestowed upon so excellent an Argument?

I answer -- That this is enough in answer to a foolish Libel; and besides, my
Pen is better employed, upon the like Subject and Argument, upon another
occasion, as the world will perceive very speedily, I had much ado, to
persuade my fancy to throw away or spare a Day upon such an Idle occasion; and
with such a Trifler.

But Poetry (like a Miss) is pleasant and delicious now, and then, (in some
men's wanton Fancy) but as nauseous as a Wife (is to their liquorish Humors)
when made a practice, a Trade, and of constant use.

Thus Aerie Poetry interlac't here and there with weightier matter in Prose,
does with the diversity and Lard, willingly charm and bewitch the Readers Eye
(like Landskips of Hills and Dales, Woods and Plains) lovely through variety.

But it is dull, when made a Trade off, and a poor dull Trade, a Rhimer?
Tick-Tock, Knock-Block, a mere Chimer.

And therefore though in Poetic Heat, I seem to threaten Dryd -- s Laurel, Let
him not fear; for none but a Foolish Courtier or some Poor Poet envys this
bloaty, swollen, self-conceited, puffed up, windy and (therefore) empty Bladder.

I shall not make a practice of contending with him, -- I am none of those
Hackney-Rhimers, that (like the Beggars in Poland, and our English Wassals) get
Bread by canting Verses; or, like the Ballad-singers, that live by Rhimes; or,
like the Fiddlers, and Singing-Boys (in Cathedrals) that sing to eat; or like
Country-Fellows at Christmas, that sing a Carol for a Christmas Pie; or like
the Gypsees, that Pick men's Pockets with Canting; nor shall I (perhaps)
hereafter heed him: But, (when he does ( being Hired) abuse the Worthies of the
Nation (because they are so) I shall answer him (as they do) only with contempt
and neglect.

Thus, True-bred Lions stalk and walk on their own way, not heeding nor minding
the little Currs that yelp and bark though (Greater) hearten them (or, set
them) on.

Surely a Politician and a Divine are scarce Commodities, when we fly for
Refuge to Hackney Poets and Hireling Pamphleteers, with their Juniper-Lectures
of Politics and Divinity, to instruct the Tantivy Clergy, every Week, against
the time that Sunday comes, and to Tutor the Corporations and Country Justices,
and Country Commission-Officers!

What sport is it to see an old Country Justice (with his eager Chaplain at his
Elbow) putting his Barnacles on his nose, (Bless us!) How he gapes and admires
when he reads Not. Thompson, the Addresses in the Gazette, Abhorrences,
Heraclitus, or the Observator?

But, show him but -- Ahsalom and Achitophel -- oh -- then the man's born mad,
there is no holding him, then the Hunts up, (and though in his Dining Room) how
he spends with double mouth, and whoops and hallows (just as he hunts his Dogs
when at full Cry) That -- That -- That -- That -- Rattle -- Towzer, -- Bull-Dog
-- Thunder -- That -- That -- whilst the little Trencher-Chaplain Echoes to
him, and cries -- Amen --

But I have more honorable Employment than (like a Schoolboy) to Cap Verses
-- or, to blemish my larger name with that of -- Bays -- or Laureat. Only it
moved my Indignation, as well as Scorn, (when I read the Challenge to the
Whiggs p. 6. of his Epistle, and the Bravado extorted from me this nimble
check, but just rebuke, for such Arrogance, Opiniatry, and Petulancy, to abate
(if possible) his Pride, and the contempt (he seems to have) of the Whiggs,
whom the Hackney-Laureat does so magisterially despise at such a rate, that the
Tory-Courti^rs (poor hearts! They know no better,) Hugg and admire the (
Imbost) Rhodomantade.

Nay, they willingly give him their Jewels and golden Earrings (those Few I
mean that are left unpawn'd) thus Making as well as Worshipping, and Idolizing
the Golden-Calf.

For (like other foolish Bigots) they pay for their worship; beggaring
themselves, poor, though they be and cannot pay (or will not pay) the debts
(they owe) to many a poor widow, oh merciless cruelty, and violence to Justice
and Law, to enrich the shrines of their Craftier Prophet.

Who laughs in his sleeve and smiles at the silly devotion of his zealots, and
soft-pated votaries, except he ( like some other Prophets, that for a liveing
and livelihood tell their lies so often ^till) at last they begin to believe
them themselves being willingly fooled into the faith and good opinion of their
own (gainful) nonsense, by such a profitable Credulity; their Religion (being)
their Trade, as well as their gain.

But how ill does Laurel become the brow of a Libeller* how unsuitable to the
Head?

Thus -- Have we not known and seen that Preferment, Titles, Honor, and
High Places have been given to some, for no other reason, but (because)
villains, grand villains, and (therefore) preferred,

To serve a turn (of State) a Renegade,
(That has his Conscience, God and King betrayed)
Sometimes a base Interpreter is made,
Though he an Atheist be in Masquerade;
And in rich robes (through villainy) arrayed:
Yet, this Apostasy who dare upbraid?
The Villian struts it, and seems not afraid:
Suborners though are shown in Cavilcade;
To publish-wrath may liable be made:
Oh* then the Villain will for all be paid;
Then where is your gay-Apostate Renegade.
For such new Titles, honor, Preferment, and Places, (got chiefly because the
conscience was debauched and apt to any villainy) that an honest man would much
rather be hanged then accept off, on so base Terms, being a mere Slave, Puppit;
and set up for the feat; and his preferment, or Titles, as odious to all honest
men, and men of Honor, as a Rich Turbant on the Head of a Renegade, with which
the Fopp proudly Iets, as the Ensign as well as reward of his Apostasy and
Villainy.

What a blemish is it to a man of so great wit, and sense, to to be so greatly
wicked? or for a Laureat (like a Pimp) to talk Bawdy, and write smutty
Prologues, because the Fops relish nothing that is not such?

Or, for base pelf, to rake up dirt to asperse the glory of most renowned
Patriots? that hazard their lives (Hard fate!) to stand in the Gap, and in the
fury of a Rageing Tide, with great peril, and hazard of themselves, their
estates, families; and Posterities, to prevent ( if possible) a threatening
deluge and inundation: I know it (to my cost) And when by the Almighty arm
their Innocence and their lives (from the man-catchers) are fairly acquit, and
proved Innocent upon trial, and by law redeemed: Are we not at a fine pass,
when their Honors, and fame shall be arraiged again at the Tribunal of every
rascally Scribler, paultry Libeller, witless Satyr, and silly Pamphleteer?

Who live ( like Gold-finders) by dealing in Privyes and Jacques, and make it
their office to be the Kingdoms Scavengers, raking up dirt and dung, and then
malepertly throwing it at every one that stands in the way of their dunghill
designs, and shameful s^am-Plots.

It Is true; a Hangman is a necessary utensil of State, but there are Rogues
enough for the work, to make a noose, and burn men in the hand, brand and
stigmatize; an office much below a man of Honor or Wit.

FINIS.

