JOVIAN. OR, AN ANSWER TO JULIAN THE APOSTATE.

BY A Minister of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by Sam, Roycroft, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE PREFACE
THere are many Remarkable Particulars in the Life of Jovian, and so very
disagreeable to the chief Assertions, which I have found in Julian the
Apostate, that I have been Invited by them to call this Answer to that Book by
his August Name.

For first, He was chosen Emperor next after Julian, although he was nothing
Akin to him, while P. 74, 75, 76.
Procopius, a Great Man, and one of the Blood was Alive, in the Way, and at the
Head of a Great Army; which shows, that the Roman Empire was not Hereditary, as
the Author of Julian has with great Confidence asserted in his 2d. Chapter. He
also left behind him a little Son called Amm. Marcell. l. 25. c. 10. Zonar. T.
3. Eutrop. l. 10. In fine.
Varronianus, whom he had made Consul with himself a little before his death,
and the Empire, had it been Hereditary, must have descended upon him without
Choice; but after a short Interregnum, which is Cook in Calvin's Case.
inconsistent with a Lineal Succession, the Army unanimously chose Valentinian,
without taking notice of young Varronianus, who yet, was as fit for the Empire,
as Valentinian Junior the Son of Valentinian, Amm. Marc. l. 30. c. 10. Zonar.
Tom. 3. Zosim. hist. l. 4. Aurel. vict. Epit.
whom the Soldiers chose Emperor after his Fathers death heing but 4 years
old, and afterward saluted him Augustus, while he was carried in his Cradle
about the Camp.

But secondly, Jovian was a Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 3. c. 22. Theodoret Hist.
Ecc. l: 4. C. 1.
Confessor of the Chistian Religion in the Reign of Julian, who chose rather to
quit his Preferments, than to Sacrifice, as Valens, Valentinian, and other
Great Captains likewise did, quietly, and peaceably behaving themselves, while
Julian did so outrage the Church; which shows, that either he did not Illegally
Persecute his Christian Subjects (as Mr. J. says he did) or else, that they
thought in their Duty, as Christians, quietly to submit even to an Apostate
Emperor, when he persecuted contrary to Law.

Thirdly, Though he was so Zealous and Orthodox a Theodor. l. 4. c. 1, 2.
Socrat. l. 3. c. 24. Sozom. l. 6. c. 3, 4.
Christian, and so great a Blessing to the Church, yet, as I have P. 103.
shown, he was worse treated by the Antiochians, than Julian himself, which
proves, that it was the evil Humor of that People to abuse every one, who did
displease them, which the Apostate did by his Morose Philosophical Humor, and
by setting too low a Price upon the Market-Provisions; upon which account
purely, and not upon the score of Religion (as Mr. J. would make us believe) it
was that they Lampooned, and Burlesqued him, as I have shown at large in the
3d. Chapter.

Fourthly, When Jovian was Elected Emperor by the Soldiers of Julian, P. 171.
(g) they cried out with one common Voice, That they were all Christians; which
shows how absurd it is to ascribe their Passive Behavior under the Apostate to
want of Strength, and Numbers, as our Author has done more like a Jesuit, than
a Protestant Writer, against the consent of so many Pious, and learned
Protestants, who have commended unto us the Christian Subjects of Julian as
most perfect Examples of Passive Obedience, for practicing the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, when they were so much tempted, and so able to resist. To this
purpose In his Book of Christian Subjection, part 3. p. 123. printed at London
1586.
says Bishop Bilson: The Christian Soldiers under Julian, as St. Augustine
says, served their Temporal Lord, though and Idolater and Apostate, not for
lack of Force to resist, but for respect of their Everlasting Lord in Heaven:
Otherwise the Christian Soldiers had Julian in his Voyage against the
Persians, far from Home, and from Help, and might have done with him what they
would; and yet they chose rather to spend their Lives for him, than to lift up
their hands against him; and the Christian World stirred not in his absence
against him, but with patience endured his Oppression, and with silence
expected his Return. The same Observation is made more at large by the Learned
Dr. Hakewell in his L. 3. c. 3. Number vobis vires desunt? At test Sozomeno l. 5.
c. 14. Tanta erat ecrum multitudo, ut magistratus cujusque civitatis aegre
eorum calculum subducere and in tabulas refer potucrint, and in ipso exercitu
tantus numerus, ut cum post Juliani mortem Jovianu^ Christianus ad Imperium
raptus Imperare recusasset, milites port omnes acri voce velut ex composito se
quoque Christum colere acola marent. Number ductoribus vobis opus est habetis
Jovianum, Valen tinianum, Valentem, Avtemium --
Scutum Regium, to whose words in the Margent I refer the Reader; as likewise
by that Prodigy of Learning Ita sub Juliano, licet impio Apostata, merebant
Christiani milites, nec quisquam illi vim fecit, quo nihil fuit facilius, cum
fere totum exercitum ex Christianis constitisse in ejus morte apparuerit. p. 53.
Sam. Bochart, who in his Epistle To Dr. Morley says, That the Christian
Soldiers served under Julian though an Impious Apostate; neither did any of
them offer Violence unto him, which had been very easy for them to do, seeing
it did appear after his death at the Election of Jovian, that almost the whole
Army were Christians.

I have added these Authorities, under this last Particular, which invited me
to call this Book Jovian, because I forgot them, while I was writing the 8th
Chapter, as indeed I found upon a Review, that I have omitted some other
material Observations, which I beg leave of the Readers Patience here to supply.

First then, whereas I have P. 61.
asserted, That there was no such thing as Entail, nor any Notion of it among
the Romans, I think it necessary here to add, That this limited way of
Hereditary Succession unto one Line is grounded wholly upon the Molinae. ad
Consuct. par. tit. des Fiefs. n. 5.
Feudal Laws, which had nothing common at all with the old Roman or Civil Laws,
but were received from the Customs of the Barbarous Nations, which invaded the
Empire, and after settled in it; and particularly of the Germans, from whom the
Italians, and the French received them, and we from the Normans at the
Conquest. Hence, according to Littleton, and L. 1. c. 2, 9, 13, 18.
Cook upon him, Entailing is derived from the French word tailler scindere, and
feodum talliatum, or an Estate entailed is according to them, Haereditas in
quandam certitudinem limitata; or plainer, as in Gloss. v. Feodum.
Spelman, Feodum talliatum est, quod ita talliatur, hoc est amputatur and
rescinditur, ut ad nullos transeat haeredes, nisi a corpore certae alicujus
personae emanantes, etc. Now this way of entailing Estates and of limited and
lineal Succession unto them was never in practice among the Romans, nor had
they any Notion of it, while the Empire was purely Roman, every man being left
at his liberty by the Civil Law to sell the Inheritance of his Ancestors, or
any part of it, or to divide it among his Children by his last Will and
Testament in what Proportions he thought fit; nay, to past by, or disinherit
any, or all of his Children under the pretense of Ingratitude, till Justinian
the Emperor out of favor to the next akin, reduced the pretended Reasons of
Ingratitude to 14. which the Reader may consult. Novel. 11^. c. 3.

Wherefore there being so great a Distance between the Laws and Customs of the
Romans, as to Hereditary Succession, and the Laws, and Customs relating to
Tenures, which we derive from the Sea the Customer of Normandy.
Normans, as the Italians did from the Lombards, it was great Ignorance, or
great Deceitfulness in our Author to assert the Roman Empire to be Hereditary,
and a vain attempt to go about to prove, that it descended upon Constantin,
Constantius, and Julian in the same limited and lineal way of Succession, that
this Imperial Crown descends upon the next Heir in a lineal Order according to
Proximity of Blood. He might with as much Reason have asserted, that the Roman
Senate was such a Parliament as ours, or that the private Estates of the Empire
descended upon the next lineal Heir in a limited Hereditary Succession, as that
the Empire it self did: For the Emperors, no more than their Subjects had any
such Notion of lineal Settlements, nor would any one of them have known how to
entail the Crown, or limit the Descent, or Succession of it to the Heirs for
ever of any one Favorite, although it had been at his Disposal, as much as his
private Lands, and Estates.

This is plain from the Practife of those Emperors, who end avoured as much as
they could, to pass over the Empire in part or in whole, like an Inheritance,
unto those they loved best. For, Sometimes they preferred Strangers before
their own Kindred, and made them Caesar's; and sometimes the Remoter of their
own Kindred, before the nearer in Blood. Sometimes they would make one, and
sometimes two, or more Caesar's, according to the number of their Children, as
the Reader will find in the first Chapter of this Answer; but none of them ever
attempted to get it settled upon one man and his future Children after him,
much less upon his Heirs Males, or Females in a lineal Succession for ever.
They were as Ignorant of this sort of Settlement and Heirship, as their
Subjects; which is worth observing to all those, who read the Latin or Greek
Authors, that they be not imposed upon by the words Heir, Hereditary,
Inheritance, or Patrimony, which never signify in that special manner, as they
do among us in relation to Entailed Kingdoms and Estates, but as they do in
other Countries with respect to goods and Chattels, to which no man succeeds
but as a Testamentary Heir, if the deceased person made a Will, or if he died
Intestate, as Heir at Law. Under the former Character some of the Emperors
indeed might be said in a large, and Thus the Panegyrist to Constantine the
Great, Ut quum tibi Pater [Constantius] Imperium reliquisset, Caesares tamen
appellatione contentus expectare malueris, ut idem te qui illum declaret
Augustum, si quidemipsum ipsum Imperium hoc fore pulchrius judicabas, si id non
haered^^rium ex successione ^^^^sses, sed virtutibus tuis debitum a summo
Imperatore meruisses.
complemental Sense to have the Empire descend upon them in an Hereditary
Succession, because it was bequeathed unto them as much as it could be by the
Testaments of their Predecessors: But under the latter, none ever claimed med
the Empire, but Vid. Vopiscum in Florian.
Florianus the Brother of Tacitus, who had scarce reigned two Months, before
the Senate, and Army chose another Emperor after the usual Manner; whereupon
his own Soldiers slew him, as an Usurper. Indeed the Emperor Quintillus did
also succeed his Brother Claudius, but the Historian takes care to let us know
that it was by virtue of his Treb. Pollio in Claudio. Quintillus frater ejusdem
vir sanctus, et sui fratris vere frater delatum sibi omnium judicio suscepit
Imperium nom haereditarium, sed merito virtutum, qui factus esset Imperator,
etiamsi frater Claudii Principes non fuisset.
Election, and not as Heir at Law, and therefore if the Roman Empire could not
descend like a Private Estate from an Intestate Emperor unto a Brother, as Heir
at Law, I leave Mr. J. and his Oracle Mr. H. to consider, how far it was from
being Hereditary in a limited and lineal Succession, as entailed Kingdoms, and
particularly this of England is.

Thus much by way of supplement, to what I had omitted in the first Chapter; to
which I shall add a few other Observations, which I hope will not be unworthy
of the Readers notice; as first, concerning P. 97, 98.
Lucifer Calaritanus, who, as I have shown, gave his own Sovereign Constantius
Junior, though a Christian, as contumelious Names as any Mr. J. can show the
Christians gave Julian, which besides something of extreme Severity, which was
in the Temper of the Man, is to be resolved into this false Principle which
discovers it self in his Tract De non parcendo in Deum delinquentibus, viz.
That the Servants of God (by whom he specially meant the Clergy) were to take
the same liberty in Reproving and Correcting their Kings, that the Prophets did
under the Old Testament, and upon this mistaken Principle be justifies his
reproachful manner of treating the Emperor, as consistent with his Duty to him.
This I thought worth observing by way of Apology for the Good man, who, as he
Erroneously followed the Example of the Prophets in the great Liberty, and
Severity, which he used in Chastising the Emperor; so, like a Prophet, he was a
great Patron and Example of Passive Obedience, being so far from exhorting the
Orthodox to resist Constantius, when he so severely persecuted them, that he
wrote a little Book to exhort them to Patience, and Constancy in their
Sufferings, Entitled, In Biblioth. Patrum. Ed. Par.
Moriendum esse pro Dei Filio.

In the fourth Chapter among other Arguments which I have used, to show, the
utter improbability of Old Gregory's undertaking to kick Julian, I forgot this,
That it is not reasonable to believe, that so Good and Apostolic a Bishop,
would so deliberately resolve to kick any man, much less his own Sovereign,
contrary to the express Rules of the Apostle, who says, That a Bishop must be
no 1 Timothy 3.3. Tit. 1.7.
Striker, but on the contrary, that 2 Timothy 2.24.
the Servant of the Lord, must not strive, but be Gentle unto all men, apt to
teach, and Patient. This special Rule about the Patient and Meek Behavior of
Clergymen we find enlarged in the 9th. of the Apostolical Canons, in these
words; If any Bishop, or Presbyter, or Deacon beat any Believer, or Unbeliever,
that does him wrong, -- we command, that he be deposed, because our Lord has
in no wise taught us so to do; but on the contrary, when he was stricken, he
did not strike again, when he was reviled he reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not. And Balsamon, and Zonar. on this Canon both say,
That a Clergyman rather than strike another, ought to him that smites him on
the one Cheek, to turn the other also. And as the Church does straightly forbid
Clergymen to strike, so did she also severely forbid both Clergy men, and
Laymen to affront an Emperor, or Ruler, the former under the penalty of being
deposed, and the latter of being excluded from the Holy Communion, as may be
seen in the 84th. Apostolical Canon; which makes it still more Incredible, that
such an Holy Bishop, as young Gregory describes his Father to be, should suffer
his Zeal so outragiously to transport him beyond all the Rules of common
Decency, and Duty to resolve upon kicking the Emperor, against the Example of
Christ, the reiterated Precepts of the Apostle, and the Canons and Censures of
the Church.

Among other Examples, which I have brought toward the latter end of the 5th.
Chapter to show, that there was nothing Singular, or Extraordinary in the
Behavior of Valentinian, Publia, etc. toward Julian, as our Author would make
his Reader believe, I beg leave to add one more of a Johannes dictus in
martyrologio Usuardi, Adonis, Notkeri, et in vetere Romano, die 7 Setp.
Valenius in Annotat. ad cap. 5. lib. 8. Hist. Eccl. Eusebii.
Christian of great Rank, and Quality in Nicomedia, who, as Eusebius, the
Relater of the Story, says, being acted by a Divine Zeal, and a flaming Faith,
pulled down the Imperial Edict for destroying the Churches in Nicomedia, from
the Pillar, upon which it was fixed in the most resorted place of all the City,
and tore it in pieces, as a most Wicked, and Ungodly Order, although two of the
Emperors Dioclesian, and Galerius, were then in the Town. For this Contempts,
not of the Authority, but of the Tyranny of the Emperors, he was seized, and
tortured to death, and had the Honor to be the Proto-martyr of the Dioclesian
Persecution. Now according to Mr. J. had any of the christian Subjects of
Julian, like stout Champions of Christ, served him in this manner, it must not
have been put upon the score of their Zeal to suffer for Christ, but have been
represented as an Effect of their special Hatred, and Contempt of him, as an
Apostate, and a Persecutor against Law. But much more if any Christian City had
forcibly opposed any of his Officers, or Captains, as the Socrat. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 13.
People of Constantinople in a Violent Insurrection opposed Hermogenes one of
the Captains of Constantius, (whose House they set on Fire, and dragged him
about the Streets, till be was dead) or if any Discontented Ambitious Man had
by chance Rebelled against Julian, under the Masque of Religion, as Baron. An.
350. n. 1. Am. 353. n. 5.
Magnentius did against Constants, and Constantius, Mr. J. according to his way
of arguing, would have turned the matter into a general Conclusion, That the
same Men who would quietly have submitted under a Nero, and Dioclesian, do
nevertheless resist an Apostate, and a Persecutor against Law, and pursue him
like a Midnight Robber. But God be praised the Banner of the Cross was never
displayed agianst the Apostate by any of his Christian Subjects; nor did they
raise any Seditions against him, having recovered much of the Primitive, and
Genuine Temper of Christianity, from which many of them, by reason of the great
heats between the Arrians, and Orthodox, had a little degenerated in his
Predecessors Reign. But in his time they behaved themselves with Exemplary
Patience under the highest Provocations; for laying aside their Mutual
Animosities, they prayed together (as our Preface p. 28.
Author observes) and like true Champions of Christ, despised the Power, and
Threatenings of the Tyrant, being ready in the Apostles passive Sense of the
words, to resist him unto Blood.

But what if any of them had risen up in Rebellion against him, or Stirs, and
Seditions had happened in some of the great Cities upon the Account of Religion?
Would the Exorbitant Practices of some, (according to our Authors way of
arguing) have been a sufficient ground for a General Imputation upon all the
Christian of the Empire? Would the Behavior of some particular Persons, or
Companies, have justified such general Phrases, as are wont to be expressed
with they, and their. If this be good Logique, then the Stirs and Tumults at
Paul's Cross in Queen Mary's days may be yet authorized by Mr. J. upon all the
Protestants of London, and the Rebellion of Wyat, and his Adherents upon all
the Protestants of the Nation, as their General Act. He may make another Book,
and tell the People in his deceitful way of writing, that they threw Stones,
and Daggers at Mr. Bourn. Speed in Q. Mary. Fox Acts in Q. M. Dr. Burnets Hist.
Reform. Par. 2. p. 245.
some, and discharged Pistols at Dr. Pendleton. Speed. Ib.
other Priests, who were sent by the Qu. and Counsel to preach unto them; that
they taught a Id. ib.
Maid to speak Seditious Speeches against the Queen in a Wall, so that the
People believed it was the Voice of an Angel; that they put a Cope upon a Cat,
shaved her Crown, and tied something like a Waser between her Forelegs, and
then in derision of Popery hanged her upon a Gallows at Cheap-Cross. In a word,
that they rose up agianst her in Defense of their The Rebellion of Sir Turmas
Wyat, was upon the Account of Religion, as is plain our of Fox, who faith, That
the Queens Marriage was very ill taken of the People and of many of the
Nobility, who for this, and for Religion made a Rebellion; and that Sir Thomas
Wyat the Chief, said, That the Queen by her Marriage would, bring Servitude
upon the Realm, and establish the Popish Religion. So faith Mr. Bradford of
them, in his Exhortation to the Professors of the Gospel in England. Now for
the Victory given to the Queen, if men had any Godly Wit, they might see many
things in it: First God has done it to win her heart to the Gospel. Again, he
has done it, because they that went against her, put their Trust in Horses,
and Power of Men, and because in their doing, they fought not the Propagation
of Gods Gospel, which thing is now plainly seen. Therefore no marvail, why God
fought against them. They were Hypocrites, and under the Cloak of the Gospel
would have debarred the Queens Highness of her Right, but God would not so
Cloak them.
Religion, and so showed their Hatred to her, and how they held her in the
lowest degree of Contempt.

If a Man should set his Wit to give such an Account of the Behavior of the
Protestants toward Queens Mary, picking up such Stories as these, and
concealing their Loyalty in setting her upon the Throne, and their Meek and
Passive Behavior under her Persecution, he might make just such another
Fallacious Book as that of Mr. Js. who has gleaned 3, or 4, Particular Stories
out of the Histories of the Apostate, upon which he has put false Colors, and
suppressed, and concealed as much as he could the Loyalty and Passive Obedience
of his Subject, and what he could not conceal, he has (and I verily believe
against his own Conscience) resolved into a wrong Cause.

In the 7th. Chapter about Julian's death, I omitted one good Argument to prove
he was not Treacherously killed by a Christian, taken from this Expression in
his last Amm. Mar. l. 25. c. 3 Hakewells Scutum Reg. p. 148.
Speech: Sempiternum veneror Numen, quod non clan destinis insidiis, nee longa
morborum asperitate, nee damnatorum fine, sed in medio cursu florentium
gloriarum hunc merui clarum e mundo digressum: I bless the Eternal Deity (says
he) that I do not dye by secret treachery, etc. which very Expression seems to
prove that he himself did not in the least suspect, that he was struck by a
Roman, much less a Christian Hand, as Mr. J. designs his Reader should believe.
I might also have observed, that Mr. J. is the first Writer of the Church of
England, whose Genius has led him to follow the Example of His verbis: Nobilis
Historicus Sozomenus l. 6. c. 2. Militem, si quis forte Julianum Imperatorem
occidisset (uti eo tempore quidam accusabant) Jure and cum laud fecisse ait.
Hakewells Scutum Reg. p. 142.
Mariana (whom Ruteford the Author of Lex Rex accounted an approved Author) in
citing of Sozomen for Justifying (as he says) the Murder of Julian by one of
his own Soldiers. But, as I have observed, Soz. did neither justify, nor
commend, but only extenuat the Crime, for which he has been severely censured
by other Sozomenum mendacii arguit Gregorius Magnus, stupiditatis incredibils
Baronius. Ibid.
Authors; but Mr. J. let him pass without Rebuke, though, I confess, he has
called the Fact a Traitorous Assassination, but with what appearance of
Integrity, let the Impartial Reader judge.

In the beginning of his Preface he makes a mighty Flourish, and in very
fallacious Rhetoric, against the Loyal Addressers for being contrary to
themselves, promising to maintain his Majesty, and the Religion established,
with their Lives, and Fortunes, and a Popish Successor too. But though common
Readers cannot, yet others can look through this Malicious Fallacy; for it was
not the Popish Successor, as popish, but the Succession, which they promised to
maintain, and not the Person, who shall succeed, in his endeavors to overthrow
the Protestant Religion, there they will desert him, as the Suffolk-Protestants
did Queen Mary; but in all other things they will serve a Popish Successor with
their Lives, and Fortunes, as the Christians did a Pagan, and particulary
Julian, so that he may keep the Horns of Mahomets Angels, which were half Fire,
and half Snow, as an Emblem for such Protestants, who can sight against the
Person of their Prince in Defense of his Authority, and who are wont to
qualisie their professed Zeal for him with such Cooling Considerations, as do
perfectly extinguish it, as Snow does Fire.

Then he goes on to tell us, that A Popish Successor will be an Heavy Judgment:
But then (says he reflecting upon the Addressers) Did ever Men pray for a
Judgment, and make it their Humble Request, that they might be sure of it? But
did any of the Loyal Addressers Pray or Desire, that the next Successor might
be a Papist, or is Mr. J. or any of the Excluders sure, that he that is next
will succeed to the Crown? Nay, do not the Truly Loyal Party pray, and
endeavor to make him a Good Protestant; and were they not in Parliament for
making of Good Laws for our Security against him: And has not the Author of
Julian very much Forehead, to say of so considerable a part of the Nation, That
if they be Protestants, yet he thinks them men weary of their Religion, who are
Undone for a Prince, a Great Part of whose Religion is to Persecute, and
Extirpate theirs? But does he not know, That they Love the King, and pray for
his Preservation, and wish that he may live for ever? Does he not know, that
they wish him a Numerous Posterity, and that there were a Succession of many
Young Princes, between him and the Collateral Heir? And have they not (at
least) as good Reasons to declare for the Succession, as the Excluders have to
declare against it, who by an Act of Exclusion would likely bring as great a
Plague, and as Heavy a Judgment upon the Nation, as a Popish Prince will do?

But yet so bent is this Man to Exclusion, that he tacitly commends King Edward
for Impeaching the Succession of his Sister Mary by the most Vnauthoritative
and Unjust, Act, that a good Prince could be guilty of. Every body knows (says
he) that King Edward the Sixth, to prevent his Popish Sister from Succeeding,
bequeathed his Kingdom by Will to the Lady Jane, and every body knows, who put
the young Prince upon it; and I wish too many of those who were for persuading
(shall I say) or forcing his Majesty to Exclude his only Brother, be not such
Self-designing Protestants, as they. And I need not (adds he) say what Bishops
were concerned, nor how far they were concerned in that Business. This (you
must know) is a Reflection on the Bishops for voting against the Bill of
Exclusion; but how little this Story makes against them, you shall hear from
Archbishop Crammer, who indeed was more concerned in that Business, than our
Author is willing the World should know. I am (says he in his Letter to the
Queen) constrained most lamentably, and with most penitent and sorrowful Heart
to ask Mercy, and Pardon for my Heinous Folly, and Offense, in consenting and
following the Testament, and last Will of our Sovereign Lord King Edward your
Graces Brother, which Will, God he knows, I never liked, nor never any thing
grieved me so much, as that your Graces Brother did; and if by any means it had
been in me to have let the making of that Will, I would have done it; and
what I said therein, as well to his Counsel, as himself, diverse of your
Majesty's Counsel can report, but none so well, as the Marquis of Northampton,
and the L. Darcy, which two were present at the Communication between the King,
and me. I designed to talk with the Kings Majesty alone, and at good leisure my
trust was, that I should have altered him from that purpose, but they being
present, my Labor was in vain -- Acknowledging mine Offense with most
grievous, and sorrowful Heart -- The Duke of Northumberland said unto me, That
it became not me to say to the King, as I did, when I went about to dissuade
him from the said Will.

From the Bishops, who consented to the Will of King Edward, he goes on to the
Bishops, who concurred in making the Statute of 13 Eliz. Chap. 1. which makes
it High Treason during the Queens Life, and forfeiture of Goods, and Chattels
after her Death, to say, That an Act of Parliament is not of sufficient Force,
and Validity to limit, and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent,
Limitation, Inheritance, and Government thereof.

This Act of Parliament is the Palladium of the Excluders, but all the
Arguments that can be taken from it, are so well answered in the The Great
Point of Succession Discussed. A True and Exact History of the Succession, to
which I refer the Reader.
two Answers to the Brief History of the Succession, and the Power of
Parliaments in the Case of Succession, that Mr. J. had better not have
mentioned it, nor would he (I suppose) have done so, but to take occasion to
make an Invidious Paralled betwixt the Bishops of that time, and the present
Bishops of the Church. For he presents us with a List of their Names, and tell
us, That many of them were Confessors, and that they were active and zealous
for such Acts as these.

I know not what he means by such Acts as these, for it cannot be proved from
Sir Simon Dewes his P. 140.
Journal, which he has cited, That they consented to this Act about limiting
the Succession, but for any thing we find there to the contrary, they might be
concluded in the Majority of the Lords. But if it were certain they did all
concur to that Act, they had very good Reason for so doing, because it was so
highly conducive at that Season to secure the Queen (whose Title was
disputeable) from being ejected, or dispossessed of the Crown, by the Queen of
Scotland and her Heirs. But as the 28 chapter 7.34 chapter 1. censured as unjust by
Judge Jenkins. Jenkins Rediv. p. 29.
Statutes of Henry the 8th, which empowered him to limit the Descent of this
Imperial Crown, had not the honor to be formally repealed, but were virtually
declared Null, and Void from the beginning by the 3 Estates 1 Jacob. chapter 1. in
an Act of Recognition, of King James his Immediate, Lawful, and Undoubted Right
unto the Crown, as the next Lineal Heir: So this of Queen Elizabeth's, which is
now left out of the Statute-Book, received its deaths Wound thereby, as being a
Virtual Repealing of it, or an Implicit Anti-Declaration, That an Act of
Parliament is not of sufficient force, and validity to limit, and bind the
Descent of the Crown, when the Succession is clear, and indisputable, as (God
be thanked) it now is.

From this Act of Queen Eliz. he passes on to the Paper of Reasons to prove the
Queens Majesty bound him Conscience to proceed with severity in this Case of
the late Queen of Scots. He Fathers this Paper with great confidence upon the
Bishops, contrary to Sir Simons Opinion, calling of it their Writing, although
I am confident, that, would he impartially speak what he thinks, he must needs
say, that he does not believe, they had any hand in the thing. For

First, It is uncertain where, or by whom the Reasons were framed: Sir Simon
says, P. 207.
That most likely they were framed in the House of Commons, P. 215.
and calls them their Reasons. Secondly, It is very probable they were framed
by some private Person, who speaks often in the singular Number, as God I trust
in time shall open her Eyes: To those men I think God himself, and his Angels
will seem cruel; and therefore, Thirdly, It is not probable, that they should
be presented unto the Queen (if they were presented at all, as Sir Simon does
but conjecture) in the Name, or as the Sense of the Bishops, especially if we
consider that the Paper is anonymous, and many of the Reasons in it are, the
very same which the Papists urge for putting Heretic, and the Scotizing
Presbyterians (of which there were Vid. Bancrosts Dangerous Positions.
many in Queen Elizabeth's time) for putting Popish Princes to death. I desire
Mr. J. to read them again, and then to tell me, Whether he thinks in his
Conscience the Bishops of the Church of England could pen such a Popish, or
Presbyterian Piece? It is credible to believe, that they could argue so falsely
upon the Principles of the Jewish Theocracy to the like proceedings in
Christian States? If this way of arguing be true, then the Queen was bound to
burn many Popish Towns in her Kingdom, and smite the Inhabitants with the
Sword, and to pull down all the Churches especially the Cathedrals, because
they had been polluted with Idols. For my part, I must declare, that it cannot
enter into my Heart to believe, that those Bishops would liken themselves to
Samuel, the Queen to Saul, and the Queen of Scots unto Agag; or compare
themselves to the Man of God, her Majesty to Achab, and the Queen of Scots to
Benhadad, or parallel her Case with that of Jesabel, and Athaliah: Or propose
unto her Majesty the Example of Solomon, who spared not his own natural, yea,
and his elder Brother Adonijah for Suspicion, and likelihood of Treason, for a
Marriage purposed only, but put him to death for the same, and that speedily
without course of Judgment; Or lastly, Argue from Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy Brother
the Son of thy Mother, etc. In citing of which it is evident upon whom our
Author did reflect. I would fain know of him, if he approve of this way of
arguing, or no; if he do not, why should be think the Reason of those learned
Prelates so much weaker than his own? But if he do, may be please to consult
Dr. Hickes his Peculium Dei, where he will be better informed.

But besides this inconclusive way of arguing from the Laws, and Examples of
the Jewish Theocracy, there is in those Reasons a Passage about Constantinus
Magnus, which is not consistent with the Learning, and Integrity of those
Fathers. It is this, That C.M. caused Licinius to be put to death, being not
his Subject, but his Fellow-Emperor, for that the said Licinius labored to
subvert the Christian Religion; which is not true, for Licinius had rendered
himself, and his Purple to Constantine upon condition of Life, and so was
become a private Person, and he caused him to be put to death for new Attempts
against his Promise, after he became his Subject, as I have showed, p. 43.

If the Reader please to consult this Anonymous Paper at large, he will find it
Presbyterian and Scottish from one end to the other, and a Brat so unlike the
Bishops, upon whom the true Author has fathered it, that a man may almost
safely swear, that it was none of Theirs. Indeed there is one Good Argument in
it, why the Queens Subjects might have been urgent with her Majesty to put the
Queen of Scots to death, and that is this, That she sought the Life of the
Queen, and endeavored to disinherit, and destroy her. These Attempts put her
perfectly out of the Queens Protection, and though for this Reason she might
lawfully be excluded out of the World, yet still the question remains, Whether
she could be excluded from the Crown? To be excluded out of the World, and from
the Crown, are things of a disparat Nature, and the former may, and sometimes
ought to be done, when the latter neither can, nor ought. As for Example, among
the Jews it was the Birthright of the Seldom de Successionibus. c. 5.
only Son to succeed to his Fathers whole Estate, or when there were more, of
the eldest to have a double share; and though they ought to have been put to
death by the Hebrew Laws for Smiting, or Cursing their Father, yet could they
not be disinherited, or excluded from the Succession, which shows our Authors
great Fallacy in which he Triumphs, in arguing, as it were a fortiori, from the
Exclusion of the Heir of the Crown out of the World, unto the Exclusion of him
from the Crown. They (says he of the Bishops) were Excluders with a witness,
for they were for excluding the next Heir, not only from the Succession, but
out of the World. And again; A Bill of Exclusion is perfect Courtship to these
Reasons. Let those therefore that have run down 3 successive Houses of Commons
for that Bill, turn their. Fury and Reproaches with more Justice upon these old
Excluders. But all these fine Words are nothing to the purpose, for these Old
Excluders were not Excluders from the Succession, which spoils the parity of
the Instance; and to let him see that it does so, he may assure himself, That
the same Loyal Men, who run down 3 Houses of Commons for the Bill to Exclude
his R.H. from the Succession, would nevertheless upon sufficient Proof that he
sought the Life of his dear Brother (to whom hitherto he has showed himself
the most Obedient of his Subjects) be willing to do him Justice, and exclude
him out of the World. Furthermore, to let Mr. J. see what a great difference
there is between these two Exclusions, I must remind him, that in case Queen
Elizabeth had died between the Sentence of Mary Queen of Scots, and her
Execution, that the Descent of the Crown would have purged Her of all Crimes,
and that 'she would have had the same Right unto it, which the Parliament
declared her Son James afterward had upon Queen Elizabeth's death.

But yet, though the Descent of the Crown purges all Defects, and would bring
back the greatest Malefactor of an Heir, not only from a Prison, but from the
Scaffold, and from the Block to the Throne; yet our Author with unparallelled
Considence Preface p. 19.
challenges all that were against impeaching the Succession, To give him but
one Reason to prove a Bill of Exclusion to be Unlawful, which they will own to
be a Reason a Week after, and not be ashamed of it, and he does solemnly
promise to join with them in renouncing these Old Reformers, and thereafter
will follow their New Guides, and New Lights.

I never in all my Life read any thing so bold from a Man of Mr. Js.
mediocrity, who here challenges the House of Lords, the 3 Estates of Scotland,
the University of Cambridge, one of the Secretaries of State, the Loyal
Addressers, and several other Persons of Note, whom he ought to believe, are at
least as wise, and learned, and as good Protestants as himself.

First, The House of Lords, who were the first, that in his Phrase run down the
House of Commons for the Bill of Exclusion, upon which his Majesty sent the
House this Message, That He was confirmed in his Opinion against that Bill, by
the Judgment of the House of Lords, who rejected it; and may not one presume,
that many of them rejected it, because they thought it disagreeable to the Lex
Legum, or great standing Law of this Inheritable Kingdom, That nothing is to be
consented to in Parliament, which tends to the disinherison of the Crown,
whereunto they are sworn. This is the great Rule by which all Acts of
Parliament are to be framed, and if any of them transgress it they are as null
and void from the beginning, as Marriage with a person, who has a natural
Impediment, or Imperfection. By this Supreme Inviolable Law, an Act of
Parliament for dissolving the Monarchy, or for debarring the King of the
Service of his Subjects, or for giving the Crown unto a Forainer, or for making
it Homageable to a Superior Power, or for dividing the Monarchy into
Copartnership unto two Heirs, or for Excluding the whole Royal Family, (as many
of the Excluders grant) would all be Null, and Void from the beginning; and so,
I verily believe, most of them think that an Act for Excluding the next Heir
would be so too, which made them so zealous to back it with an Act for an
Association, which the Author of the Power of Parliaments ingeniously calls a
Club-Law.

I Know not what any Excluder can reply to this, but either to say, That an Act
of Parliament, which tends to the Disinherison of the Crown is nevertheless
valid, or that an Act of Exclusion has no tendency thereunto; To assert the
former would be a Contradiction to the most Eminent Lawyers Ancient, and
Modern, and many Declarations in Parliament, and would also suppose, that an
Act for destroying the Monarchy it self, etc. would be valid. And to assert the
latter, is virtually to say, That an Act for Disinheriting the next Heir, does
not tend to the disinherison of the Crown; which would be difficult to
maintain, because the same Power that puts by One Heir, may put by Ten, either
altogether, or Successively, and so Adieu to the Royal Family, and the
Hereditary Succession, which may be laid aside in part or in whole, when the
King, and Parliament shall please.

But to return to this Fundamental-Law of the Monarchy, which seems to
invalidate all Acts of Parliam. that tend to the Disinherison, or Destruction
of the Crown, and particularly all those, which limit, and bind the Succession.
It was by this Law that the 35 H. 8. chapter 1.1 Eliz. chapter 3.
Act of Parliament which Imp^^vered King Henry the 8th. to dispose of the Crown
by his Last Will and Testament to what person, or persons soever he pleased,
proved Ineffectual to the House of Suffolk, to which he bequeathed it, after
the death of Queen Elizabeth; which made a Gentleman, as was reported, put this
Dilemma in the House of Commons, which I never yet heard satisfactiorily
Answered. Either the Statutes of King H. 8. about Succession were Obligatory,
or Valid, or they were not: If not, then Acts of Parliament, which impeach the
Succession are without any more ado, Null and Void in Law; but if they were, by
what authority was the House of Suffolk Excluded, and King James admitted to
the Crown, contrary to many Statutes against him? notwithstanding all which the
Jacob. I.
High Court of Parliament declared, That the Imperial Crown of this Realm did
by Inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend unto his
Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next, and sole Heir of the
Royal Blood. Here His Succession is owned for Lawful, and Undoubted, against
the foresaid Acts; Lawful, not by any Statute, but contrary to Statutes, by the
Common Law of this Hereditary Kingdom, which seems to Reject all Limitations
and Exclusions, as tending to the Disinberison, and Prejudice of the Crown.

For as the Most Learned, and Loyal Third part of The Address to the Freemen,
etc. p. 98.
Sir L. J. represented to the House of Commons, a Bill of Exclusion, if it
should pass, would change the Essence of the Monarchy, and make the Crown
Elective; or, as another Author of the Power of Parliaments. p. 39.
Ingenious Pen says, It would tend to make a Football of the Crown, and turn
an Hereditary Monarchy into Elective. For by the same Reason, that one
Parliament may disinherit one Prince for his Religion, other Parliaments may
disinherit another upon other Pretenses, and so consequently by such
Exclusions, Elect whom they please.

The next Reason, which seems to make an Act of Exclusion unlawful, is the Oath
of Supremacy, which most of the Kings Subjects are called to take upon one
Occasion, or other, and which the Representatives of the Commons of England are
bound by Law to take before they can sit in the House.

By this Oath every one, who takes it swears to Assist, and Defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities, granted or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, or united,
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And I appeal to every Honest,
and Loyal Englishman, whether it be not one of the most undoubted,
transcendent, and Essential Rights, Privileges, and Preheminences belonging to
the Kings Heirs, and united to the Imperial Crown of England, that they succeed
unto the Crown, as it comes to their turn, according to Proximity of Blood.
Secondly, I desire to know, Whether by Lawful Successors, is not to be
understood, such Heirs as succeed according to the common Rules of Hereditary
Succession settled by the Common Law of England, and if so, how any Man, who is
within the Obligation of this Oath, can Honestly consent to a Bill of
Exclusion, which deprives the next. Heir (and in him virtually the whole Royal
Family) of the Chief Privilege, and Pre-eminence which belongs unto him, by
the Common Law of this Realm; Or how any Man, who has taken this Oath, which
is so apparently designed for the Preservation, of the Rights, and Privileges
of the Royal Family, can deny Faith and true Allegiance to the next Heir from
the Moment of his Predecessors death, according to the Common Right of
Hereditary Succession, which by Common Law belongs unto Him, and is annexed to
the Crown? What Oath soever is made for te Behoof and Interest of the Kings
Heirs and Lawful Successors in general, must needs be made for the Behoof and
Interest of every one of them; but the Oath of Supremacy so made for the Behoof
and Interest of the Kings Heirs, is apparently in general to secure the
Succession unto them; and therefore it is undoubtedly made to secure the
Succession to every one of them according to the Common Order of Hereditary
Succession, when it shall come to their turn to succeed.

I have used this Plain and Honest Way of arguing with many of the Excluders
themselves, and I could never yet receive a satisfactory Answer unto it. Some
indeed have said, with our Author, that the Oath of Supremacy is a Protestant
Oath, and so could not be understood in a Sense destructive to the Protestant
Religion, which is a mere Shift, and proves nothing, because it proves too
much. For according to this Answer we might dispense with our sworn Faith and
Allegiance to a Popish King, if any should hereafter turn such, because the
Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, are Protestant Oaths, and are not to be
understood, according to them, in a sense destructive to the Protestant
Religion.

Secondly, Though they are Protestant Oaths, yet they respect not the King and
his Heirs as Protestants, but as lawful, and rightful King, and Heirs,
according to the Imperial Law of this Hereditary Kingdom; and therefore
Moderate Papists, will take the Oath of Supremacy, as well as of Allegiance (as
indeed it was for substance taken in the Time of 35 H. 8. chapter 1. 11.
H. 8.) which they could not do, were they made to the King, and his Heirs, as
Protestants.

But Thirdly, As they are Protestant Oaths, they bind us the more Emphatically
to assist and defend the King against the Usurpation of the Pope, who pretends
to a Power of Deposing Kings, and of Excluding Hereditary Princes from the
Succession (Witness Henry the 4th;) and therefore as all good Protestants are
bound by these promissory Oaths to maintain the King in the Throne, so are they
bound to maintain and defend their Heirs, and Successors, when their Rights
shall fall.

I have joined the Oath of Allegiance with the other of Supremacy, because in
it we also swear to bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Heirs, and
Successors, and Him, and them to defend to the utmost of our Power; And I here
protest to all the World, That when I took these Oaths, I understood the Words
Heirs, and Successors, for such as hereafter were to be Kings by the Ordinary
Course of Hereditary Succession: And I appeal to the Conscience of every Honest
Protestant, if he did not understand them so.

Other Excluders I have heard maintain, that the King, and Three Estates in
Parliament had a Power by an Act of Exclusion to discharge the People of this
part of their Oaths, Of bearing Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Heirs,
and Lawful Successors, but this seems contrary to the following Clause of the
Oath of Allegiance, (which is also to be understood in the other of Supremacy)

I do believe and in my Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any
other person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
theoreof: And I appeal even to Mr. J. Whether a Man can be absolved from a
Promissory Oath by any Power upon Earth, but by the Person, or Persons to whom,
and for whose behoof it was made.

To assert that the King by the Consent of the Parliament can absolve a Man
from the binding Force of an Oath which he has made for the Interest of a 3 d
Person, is to give him, what his Justice would abhor, a Papal Authority over
the Consciences of Men; which Consideration, I suppose, as well as the Popish
Practice of Exclusion, made the great Man, above cited, say, For my part, I
think there is more of Popery in this Bill, than there can possibly be in the
Nation without it; for none but Papists, and Fifth-monarchy-men did ever go
about to Disinherit Princes for their Religion. But some Men will say, Why
should not Protestants Disinherit Popish, as well as Popish Disinherit
Protestant Princes? To which the Answer is easy by another Question, Why
should not Protestants Depose Popish, as well as Papists have Deposed
Protestant Kings?

I am not Conscious to my self, that I have used the least Sophistry in
Arguing, as I have done, from the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy against
and Act of Exclusion; yet Mr. J. has the Confidence to call these Arguments
taken from those Oaths Preface p. 19.
shameful Sophistry, and the Conscientious Regard, that Honest Protestants have
unto them, deceitful Prejudice, which (he says) is occasioned for want of
distinguishing betwixt Actual, and Possible Heirs. But he is very much, and I
fear very Wilfully mistaken; For the Faith, and Allegiance in these Oaths is
promised to the Possible Heirs, when they shall become Actual according to the
common Order of Succession, or to speak yet more Otherwise thus: Those who take
the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, swear to accept and take the Possible
Heirs for their Sovereigns when they shall become Actual according to the
Hereditary and Lineal Descent of the Crown.
plainly, our Faith and Allegiance is promised to the possible Heirs, and is to
be made good, and performed unto them, and every one of them, when by the
Providence of God, they shall come to be actual, according to the known Order
of Hereditary Succession; and thus for Example, to use his own Instance, The
Excise is granted to the Kings Heirs, and Successors; i. e. To the Kings Future
Heirs, and Successors, upon whom the Crown shall descend according to the
Ordinary Rule of Succession; and every one of them will have a Right to the
Excise by virtue of that Grant, when of a Possible he shall by Gods Providence
(who determines the days of Kings) become an Actual Heir, or have the Crown
fall upon his Head by Lawful and Undoubted Succession, according to the
Fundamental Custom of this Hereditary Realm.

A Third Reason against the Bill of Exclusion is taken from the Author of this
Hereditary Succession to the Crown, which is Coke Littleton, fol. 1.6. The
Inheritance of our Lord the King is a direct Dominion, of which none is the
Author but God alone: And from hence as the Learned Bochart observes, the Kings
of England have always styled themselves Dei Gratia, and the Royal Shield
carries this Motto, Dieu, and mon droit. Nay Queen Elizabeth, who through the
Dubiousness of her Title, courted the People so much, yet in her Declaration
for Assisting the Netherlands, printed 1585. speaks, as it became such a
Sovereign Princess, in this manner; Although Kings, and Sovereign Princes owing
their Homage, and Service only unto Almighty God the King of all Kings, and in
that Respect not bound to yield Account, or render a Reason of their Actions to
any other but God their Sovereign; and though among the most Ancient, and
Christian Monarchs the same Lord God has committed unto Us the Sovereignty of
this Kingdom of England, and other Dominions, which we hold immediately of the
same Almighty God; and thereby --
God alone, who has given it to the Royal Family for a Perpetual Inheritance,
and has by his Providence ordained, that it should come to one of them after
the decease of another, according to Birthright, and Proximity of Blood.

From this Principle many good Men, who are as Wise, and as Learned as any of
the Excluders, infer this Conclusion, That it would be Usurpation, without a
manifest Revelation from God, to Alienate the Crown from this Family, to which
he only has given it, or to preclude any Person of it, much more the next
Heir, whether Apparent or Presumptive, from succeeding thereunto.

This Argument is not so slight, as perhaps Mr. J. will make it; for if the
Imperial Crown of England be Subject to none but God, who has given it for an
Inheritance to the Royal Family, then it is very reasonable to conclude, That
to endeavor to exclude the Whole Royal Line to prevent Popery, would be
Opposition to the Will of God. This I have heard some of the first Form of
Excluders readily grant, and from thence I think the Opposers of the Bill of
Exclusion may well argue, That to Exclude any one Person of the Royal Family,
but most of all the next Heir upon the Line, from the absolute Right, or
Birthright, which God alone has given him, would be also to oppose the Will of
God.

All these Arguments against the Bill of Exclusion are owned by the Ingenious
and Loyal Authors of the Third Part. p. 63, 64,
Address to the Freemen, and Freeholders of England; and were also owned by no
Vulgar Person and Scholar in the Ib. p. 97, 98.
House of Commons; and it is above a Week since, and I am confident they will
still own them, without being ashamed of them, and it will be no Disgrace to
Mr. J. though he were a better Man, than he is, to follow, as he speaks, their
New Light.

Nay all these Reasons against Excluding the next Heir from the Succession, are
owned by the Three Estates of Scotland, and would (I am confident) be owned by
them, were they to meet again. I will set them down as I find them in an Act of
Parliament, Entitled,

An Act acknowledging, and asserting the Right of Succession to the Imperial
Crown of Scotland. August 13. 1681.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, That the Kings of this Realm deriving
their Royal Power from God Almighty Alone, do succeed lineally thereto
according to the known Degrees of Proximity in Blood, which cannot be
interrupted, suspended, or diverted, by any Act, or Statute whatsoever; and
that none can attempt to alter, or divert the said Succession, without
involving the Subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and Rebellion, and without
exposing them to all the fatal and dreadful Consequences of a Civil War: Do
therefore from an hearty and sincere Sense of their Duty, recognize,
acknowledge, and Declare, That the Right to the Imperial Crown of this Realm is
by Inherent Right, and the Nature of the Monarchy, as well as by the
Fundamental, and Unalterable Laws of this Realm transmitted, and devolved by a
Lineal Succession according to the Proximity of Blood, And that upon the death
of the King, or Queen, who actually Reigns, the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound by Law, Duty, and Allegiance, to obey the next, immediate, and Lawful
Heir, either Male, or Female, upon which the Right, and Administration of the
Government is immediately devolved. And that no Difference in Religion, nor no
Law, or Act of Parliament, made, or to be made, can alter, or divert the Right
of Succession, and Lineal Descent of the Crown to the Nearest, and Lawful
Heirs, according to the Degrees aforesaid; nor can stop, or hinder them in the
Full, Free, and Actual Administration of the Government according to the Laws
of this Kingdom, Like as our Sovereign Lord --

To this Declaration of the Three Estates in Scotland, I shall and the Judgment
of the Vice-Chancelor, Heads of Houses, Doctors, and other Learned, and Loyal
Members of the University of Cambridge, in their Gazett. n. 1653.
Address to His Majesty at New Market Sept. 18. 1681. wherein they declare,
That they will still believe and maintain that our Kings derive not their
Titles from the People, but from God, that to Him only they are Accountable;
that it belongs not to Subjects either to Create, or Censure, but to Honor and
Obey their Sovereign, who comes to be so by a Fundamental Hereditary Right of
Succession, which no Religion, no Law, no Fault, or Forfeiture can Alter or
Diminish. These Learned Men indeed have not so plainly given their Reasons for
their Opinion, but by the Hints, which they have given of them, we may
perceive, that they are the same, which I have insisted upon, and (I believe)
they will still own them, and never be ashamed thereof.

But Mr. J. it seems, has learnt another Lesson, since he left the University;
A Good Wit upon the Fret, and the great Advantage of having such a Conducter as
Mr. H. have made him do Wonders against the Succession, and bless the World
with a New Discovery, That Preface p. 12.
the Fathers would have been for a Bill of Exclusion, to the great Reproach of
all the Bishops, who it may be, had not preferred some Great Men in their own
Opinion, according to their fancied Deserts. But alas! All these Fathers
Sanctus Gregorius Nazianzenus Theologus, had but one Beard, and what they said
was not determining, as Casuists, but as Orators, declaiming against
Constantius for choosing, or making of Julian Caesar, which is nothing to a
Bill of Exclusion, or the Merits of Lineal Hereditary Succession, of which the
Father, or the Fathers had no more Notion than of Guns, and Printing, or of a
Senate consisting of 2 Houses, and 3 Estates.

But Mr. J. has shown how much of the Serpent he has in him, in Writing with
so much Guile and Venom, especially against the Succession, and Passive
Obedience, and in Winding, and Turning the Words of Good Authors from their
Genuine Sense, to his own Purposes, as that Famous Passage of Gregory 2 Invect.
p. 123. where the Father says, That they were destitute of all Humane Aid, and
had no other Armor, nor Wall, nor Defense left them, but their Hope in God.
This Place, as I have shown p. 152. Bishop Montague understood of Free, and
Voluntary Passive Obedience, and so did the learned Scutum Regium l. 3. p. 143.
Number ductoribus vobis opus est? at hab^tis Jovianum, Valentinianum, Valentem,
qui postea sunt Imperii gubernaculis potiti, and denique Artemium sub ipso
Constantino artis militaris peritia celebrem, vobis interea idem animus, eadem
men's, quae Gregorio Nazianzeno. De his Juliani temporibus loquens, Nobis quibus
nulla alia arma, nec muri, nec presidia, etc.
Dr. Hakewell, as every Man needs must, who understands the History of those
Times.

But Mr. J. with what Ingenuity let others judge, has P. 94.
cited the Words to signify forced Passive Obedience, such as that of the
Papists has been of late in England, who undoubtedly are Passive for no other
Reason, but because they want sufficient Numbers, and Strength.

But as all Sophistical Writers are apt to do, so Mr. J. has contradicted
himself as to this, and other Particulars: An in the 26th. page of his Preface,
where he shows out of Sozom. That Julians Army were Christians; and in the 8th.
page of his Book out of Nazianzen, That there were more than 7000 of them ( i.
e. an indefinite great Number) who did not bow the knee to Baal, but repulsed
Julian, as a brave strong Wall does a sorry Engine, that is played against it.
Now if Julians Army were Christians, and above 7000 of them repulsed Julian
with their Passive Valor as a strong Wall does a sorry Engine, was it not a
great Contradiction, and great Disingenuity in Mr. J. to represent them as Few,
and Defenseless, and their Passive Obedience, as performed by them upon mere
Necessity, and Force?

It is usual among the Ecclesiastical Writers to set forth the Constancy of the
Martyrs, and Confessors by the Metaphor of a Pillar or Wall. Thus the
Christians of Lions, and Vienna in their Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.
Epistle in which they give an Account of their Sufferings, say, That the Grace
of God did fight in them against the Devil, and fortify the Weak, and set up
(...), Firm Pillars among them, who by their Patience, and Constancy drew all
the Assaults of the Devil upon themselves. This I have observed for the sake of
the Common Readers of Julian, some of which, to my knowledge, understood that
Phrase of Repelling Julian, as a brave strong Wall, in the Sense, wherein Mr.
J. perhaps designed they should take it, for Active, and not for Passive
Resistance; which puts me in mind of Hugh Peter's, who preached up Rebellion on
those Words, Heb. 12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood.

But to Instance in another of his Contradictions, p. 21. he cites Eusebius for
saying, That Constantius Chlorus past over the Inheritance of the Empire, by
the Law of Nature to his Eldest Son Constantine; Where by that Phrase, past
over, he would have his Reader (or else it is nothing to the purpose)
understand Entailed: And yet p. 1. he cites the same Author again, for saying
that Constantine at his death gave to his Eldest Son (...), (which should be
rendered) his Grandfathers share, and not, that part which came by his
Ancestors, as our Author does. But now if Constantius Chlorus Entailed, or Past
over the Inheritance of the Empire by the Law of Nature to his Eldest Son
Constantine M. how could he give it at his death to his Eldest Son Constantine
the second? I desire to know of Mr. J. or Mr. H. who is Fitter to Resolve the
Question, If a Man can succeed to the same Estate both as Heir by Testament,
and Entail.

The Admirers of Julian, whereof some pretend to be great Masters of Reason,
might with half an Eye purged of Bad Humors, have discerned these, and all
other Inconsistencies, which I have observed in this following Answer, but by
some of them, who took so much Pains to Recommend, and Disperse the Book, we
find the Proverb true by Experience, That there is none so Blind; as those who
will not See.

I had almost forgot to tell the Reader, that when I declared in the
Introduction, That I was well satisfied with the Authors Comparison of Popery,
and Paganism, I had not observed, that he seems to deny the Truth of this
Proposition, That the Church of Rome is a True Church of Christ, only Corrupt.

This I thought necessary to observe, left I should be thought to side with Mr.
J. against the most Learned Reformers in the Particular, which I declare I do
not, believing the Church of Rome to be a True Church, as a Man that has the
Plague, or Leprosy is a True Man. If I were not of this Opinion, I should be
puzzled to tell, how the Church of England, which was once, as Antichristian, as
It, came to be a True Church; or how the Romish Church her self should come to
be true, if She did Reform.

I shall add no more, but only tell the Author of Julian, who Thraso-like has
Despised this Answer before he saw it, That I as much Despise his Great Boasts.
Confidence, and Hectoring I know, are sometimes Serviceable to a Coward in
Sword-quarrels, but what Influence they may have in Conflicts of the Pen, I am
such a Novice in writing Controversies, that, I profess, I cannot tell.
However, if he, or any other Person, will make a Fair, Close, and Substantial
Answer to what I have here written, they will Oblige me by the Performance, and
the World may reap Advantage from a Plain, and Solid Management of the Matters
of Controversy between us. But if instead of such an Answer, as I hope this of
mine is, they shall but shuffle, and prevaricate, and take Sanctuary in Cavil,
Satyr, and Scurrility, I shall think my self obliged to pass over such kind of
Replies in Silence, and Contempt.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction. p. 1. CHAP. 1. The Roman Empire not Hereditary. p. 5. CHAP.
II. Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian. p. 84. CHAP. III. Of the
Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in Words. p. 93. CHAP. IV. Of the
Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in their Actions. p. 115. CHAP. V.
Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in their Devotions, and first
of their Psalms. p. 126. CHAP. VI. Of their Prayers and Tears. p. 137. CHAP.
VII. Of Julians Death. p. 154. CHAP. VIII. Showing, That the Christian Subjects
of Julian practiced Passive Obedience, when they were in an Able Condition to
Resist. p. 164. CHAP. IX. Showing, That the Former Christians before the time
of Julian suffered as much, or more than Julians Subjects did, not only,
without, but Contrary to Law. p. 186. CHAP. X. Wherein is defended the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience against Law. p. 199. CHAP. XI. Wherein are further
considered the Reasons for Passive Obedience, or Non-Resistance; and wherein it
is shown, that Resistance would be a Greater Mischief, than Passive Obedience.
p. 239. CHAP. XII. Wherein is showed, That notwithstanding this Doctrine of
Non-resistance or Passive Obedience, we are Secure enough of our Lives,
Properties, and Religion. p. 263. The Conclusion. p. 282.
For the Readers Ease in Examining my Citations, I thought Good to give Him
this Account of the Editions I have made Use off.
Ignatius Oxon. 1644.47. Tertullianus. Paris. 1641. Cyprianus. Oxon. 1682.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. Paris. 1659. Socrates and per Hen. Paris. 1668. Sozomen
per Hen. Paris. 1668. Theodoretus, Valesium Paris. 1673. Philostorg. Valesium
Paris. 1673. Athanasius. Par. 1627. Hilarious. Par. 1631. Greg. Nazianz. Par.
1630. Epiphanius. Par. 1622. Lucifer Calarit. In Biblioth. Partrum. Gelasius
Cyzicen. Octavo. Paris. 1601. Lactantius. Lugd. Bat. 1660. -- De Moritibus
Persecutorum. Oxon. Zonaras. Basil. 1557. Cedrenus. Basil. 1563. Suidas. Col.
Allob. 1619. Bocharti Epistola. Octavo. 1650. Versio Gregor. Nazianz. citata p.
120.
Extat in Biblioth. Coll. Sion.
Plutarchus. Franc. 1620. Tacitus. Per Lipsium Antverp. 1668. Eutropius. Per
Sylburgium Franc. 1590. Xiphilinus. Per Sylburgium Franc. 1590 Herodianus. Per
Sylburgium Franc. 1590 Zosimus. Per Sylburgium Franc. 1590 Libanius. Par. 1627.
Theophilus Antecessor. Par. 1638. Ammianus Marcellinus. Par. 1681. Eumenius
inter XIV. Panegyricos. Paris. 1643. Pomponius Laetus inter Hist. Romans Script.
In Oct. Editos per H. Steph. 1568. Aurelius Victor. Lugd. Bat. Julius
Capitolinus. Inter Hist. Aug. Scriptores. Lug. Batav. Fl. Vopiscus. Inter Hist.
Aug. Scriptores. Lug. Batav. Trebell. Pollio. Inter Hist. Aug. Scriptores. Lug.
Batav. Lampridius. Inter Hist. Aug. Scriptores. Lug. Batav. Spartianus. Inter
Hist. Aug. Scriptores. Lug. Batav. Book of Homilies. London. 1623. Acts and
Monuments. London. 1610. The Trials of the Regicides. London. 1679.
The Reader is desired to Correct the following Mistakes of the Press.
P. 3. l. 23. read handing. p. 27. l. 21. r. successful against. p. 81. l. 14.
for two r. three. p. 88. l. 13. r. Legal Absolute. p. 89. l. 21. for. Zos. r.
Soz. p. 96. l. antepen. that they did. p. 119. l. 3. for that r. than. p. 021.
for credible r. possible. p. 201. l. 18. (...). p. 214. l. 33. (...) p. 241. l.
6. r. only Subject. ib. l. 31. controlling. p. 252. l. 13. dele not. p. 257. l.
11. r. yet let alone. p. 296. dele while he. p. 299. l. 4. for that r. which.
ib. l. 17. for safety r. duty.

Besides these there are many Faults in the Margent, especially in the Greek,
the most considerable are Collected and Subjoyned. The lesser Faults, I mean in
Spirits, Accents, and Letters of like Figure, particularly the Mistake of the
double Consonant for s, the Learned Reader will easily observe, and, I hope, as
easily pardon.

P. 7. l. 17.734. l. 21.736. p. 8. l. 1.736. p. 16. l. 13. consalutatur. p. 21.
l. 10. agere: triumphavit. l. 15. consulatibus. p. 22. l. 10. (...). p. 24. l.
16. (...). p. 42. l. 10. l. 1. c. 26. p. 75. l. 27. pro (...) lege (...) p. 76.
l. 5. Sozim. l. 4. p. 739. p. 87. l. 6. (...). p. 89. l. 12. Socr. l. 3. c. 3.
Sozom. l. 5. c. 7. p. 103. l. 14. (...) Ibid. Ex Joan. Antiocheno Excerpt. per
H. Vales. Ed. 1634. p. 845. p. 105. l. 10. lege c. 1 p. 137. Ibid. c. 1. p.
155. p. 108. l. 1. Gelas. Cyz. p. 148. l. 11 Socrat. l. 3. p. 167. l. 3. pro
(...) lege (...). p. 188. l. 21. largiter. p. 189. l. 2. hominem, p. 210. l. 8.
pro lex, lege Rex. p. 256. l. 14. antequam.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THe Apostasy of Julian the Emperor did not perhaps make a greater Noise in the
Cities of the Roman Empire, than the Short Account of his Life, called, Julian
the Apostate, did in the City of London at its First Publication. It started
from the Press, as Racers usually do from the Post, with a great and mighty
Shout, and was attended all along with loud Acclamations of men set on purpose
to cry it up in all Places, as indeed they apparently combine to disperse, and
cry up any thing, that is plausibly written against the Doctrine of
Non-Resistence, the Succession, or any of the Rights of Sovereignty, which keep
the Crown firm upon the Kings Head.

O! says Mr. Nelth. the very Morning, that Julian came out, to two or three
Gentlemen, Have you seen Julian? It is an Unanswerable Piece, it has quite
undone your Pleas for Succession, and your Passive Obedience; and it is written
by a Church-Divine, and we thank God, that there is one among them, who is not
for enslaving the People.

And says the worthy Son of as worthy a Peer who was a Spectator at that
Riotous Election of Sheriffs (when they justled my Lord Mayor, and cried, Take
away the Sword) God, here is a Company of Brave Fellows, O that Joh. were hereto
preach Julian unto them! And says Mr. P. to Mr. B. a Minister holding up
Julian in his Hand. Have you seen this Book? What Book, says he Julian the
Apostle replies Mr. P. it was this day presented to my Lord, and he says it is
an Admirable Piece. To be short, Julian was the Oracle of the Cause, the
Pocketbook of all the Party; it was carried to Change and Coffee-Houses in
Triumph, and at last called in Print by the ( 4. vol. n. 30.
, Courantier, the Plaguey Unanswerable Julian.

The Author of it has boasted to several that it had the Approbation of Sir W.
J. whom I suppose he means in his Preface by that great Assertor of Religion
and Laws now with God: Mr. H. has also owned that he perused it in the
Manuscript, and these Men's Breath conspiring in his Praises with the Breath of
the People, have blown him into such a Conceit of his Performance, that he has
challenged the World to Answer it, and expose him to open shame, if he have
done amiss.

Having heard of these, and many other things about Julian, I got the Book, and
at the first cursory perusal discerned, as I thought, many contradictions and
much fallacious Reasoning in it: upon this I took Heart and read it again more
observantly, and then plainly saw that it was not Unanswerable, though it was a
very cunning and malicious piece. The Author of it shows what Company he keeps
by his scurrilous and irreverent Phrases: I can never think of the following
Passages, the p. 89.
slavish Principle of Passive Obedience, the p. 78.
bloody Doctrine of Passive Obedience, the Preface.
Doctrine of the Bowstring, the slippery Trick in Persia, the p. 30.
Mountebank receipt of Prayers, and Tears, the old Lacrymist, p. 78.
the murdering piece of Passive Obedience, the p. 88.
wheedling of men out of their Lives, and p. 91.
the making the World for Banditi by it, and the many more Exceptions against
their Artillery of Prayers, and Tears, I say, I can never think of these and
many more of his Lampoons upon the Doctrine of the Cross, but they make me
think of the Appeal, and Fitz-harris his Libel, and that the Spirit of that
Author has passed into this.

These and such like scurrilous Expressions of his in Religious Matters, as p.
127.
the handling of Prayers like Brickhats out of a Cart determine my Thoughts to
Lambswooll, and such like Stories, and make me fear, that the Author has lost
the meek and serious Temper of a Divine in that sort of Company: Indeed he has
showed himself to be a man of great Parts and Contrivance from the beginning of
the Preface to the end of the Book, both of which are so Artificially and
Plausibly written, that they must needs deceive all persons that are either
unable, or unwilling to examine them, and it is for the Sake of such, especially
of the former, that I have taken the First Part of the Book to task: For as for
the Comparison of Popery and Paganism I do assure him that the Author of this
following Answer, and P. 93.
I believe all the rest that have so thundered of late with the Thebaean
Legion, bating some irreverent Phrases, are as well satisfied with it, as he
himself is.

(...)

It concerned him very much to impose this upon his Reader, for if the Empire
was not indeed Hereditary, then the Case of a Popish Successor in England, and
of the Pagan Successor to Constantius will prove so very different, that our
admired Author who builds upon that Principle, will himself I hope acknowledge,
that he has conjured up the Ghost of his Julian to no purpose, and wrote his
Plaguey Book in vain.

Therefore (in his own words) To proceed more faithfully and clearly in this
Matter, it will be necessary to consider how the Succession stood in the Roman
Empire, and in the frist place there is nothing more plain than the
Contradiction of his Assertion, that the Empire was not Hereditary, but that
the Succession to the Imperial Throne was Elective, Casual, Uncertain, and
Arbitrary; and this I will show by giving a brief Account of it from Julius to
Julian, wherein the impartial Reader shall see how much this unanswerable Man
did prevaricate, when he told his Reader, that there was nothing more plain
(not that two and two are four) than that the Empire was Hereditary.

Julius Caesar returning Victorious to Rome from the Conquest of the Pompees
was Florus l.4. c. 2. Ep. lib. 116. and Dio. l. 44.
received with all manner of Public Joy, and Respect. The Senate, as Ibidem.
Anthony the Consul told them, in his Funeral Oration, honored him as a
Father, and loved him as a Benefactor, and decreed him such Honors, as they
never did to any other Man, and thought all too little for him, They desired to
have him for the (...), ib.
Perpetual Prefect of the City and Empire, and for this reason they invested
him with the Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical Supremacy, for they (...), ib.
created him Consul, (...). Plutarch. p. 734.
perpetual Dictator, General, and Chief Pontif, and after all publicly
acknowledged him Pater Patriae, or Father of the Country, the more to endear
him to the People.

Besides all this, they decreed, That he should always wear the Triumphant
Stole, ride in the Triumphant Chariot, and that the Lictors should carry Crowns
of Laurel before him: Moreover they caused Money to be coined with his Image,
they set him up two Statues in the great Oratory, and one in all the Temples of
Rome, and made him () sole and perpetual Censor, (...).
and last of all decreed him a Golden Throne, and a Monument, and a Guard of
Senators and Gentlemen, as the Kings of old used to have. The Guards indeed he
refused, however these Royal Honors of the Senate, Plutarch. edit. Franc. p.
730.
together with some pretended Prophecies, made the People Salute him King,
which Title he privately affected, though he durst not openly admit it; for
when Florus. lib. 4. c. 2. Dio. lib. 44.
Anthony the Consul after this saluted him by the Title of King in the Name of
all the People, and tied the Royal Diadem about his Head, he showed no
displeasure (says Dio) at the Action, but any replied, That Jupiter was the
King of the Romans, to whom in Compliment he sent the Diadem to be hung up in
his Temple. But however he declined the Title of King, he began to treat the
Senate as their Sovereign; for when they came one day to him, as he was sitting
in the Temple of his Mother Venus, to tell him what Honors they had enacted
for him, he would not rise up, but received them, and their Message Plutarch.
p, 736. Dio l. 44.
upon his Breech, which very much offended the Senate, and others, and
gratified the Conspirators, who now thought it a seasonable time to put their
Bloody Design in Execution, and accordingly not long after they dispatched him
in the Senate as another Brutus and Cassius sic Caesarem quasi Tarquinium
depulisse regno videbantur, Flor. l. 4. c. 7.
Tarquin, before he could settle himself in the Throne.

The Fall of Caesar contrary to the Expectation of the Conspirators was much
lamented by the People, Sueton. c. 83.
who began to be enraged against them after his () Will was published, for he
named many of the Conspirators Tutors of his Children, if he should have had
any; Brutus in particular he had put in the second Order of his Heirs, and gave
to the People of Rome some Gardens upon the Banks of Tyber, and a Dole of 300
Sesterces a man. After the Funeral, which was was performed with all
Magnificence and Solemnity, the Plutarch. p. 740.
People run in have to fire the Houses of Brutus, and Cassius, and Octavius
taking this advantage of the People, and Armies Affection to his Father, and
obliging them to his Interest more firmly by Gifts, pursued Brutus and Cassius
the chief Conspirators, who Plutarch. 740, 741.
killed themselves because they would not fall alive into his Hands.

Octavius was then Ordinata magis ut poterat, quam ut debebat, in triumviros
republica, Flor. l.4. c. 7. vid. Dion. l. 46.
Triumvir, or one of the Three, who governed all, Lepidus and Marc Anthony were
the other two, but Lepidus being laid aside, Octavius, and Anthony ruled all,
till growing Jealous of one another, they fell out into open War, and Octavius
surviving Conqueror after the Victory at Actium, had now all in his own Power.

Being now absolute Lord without Competitor, he had some thoughts after his
Return to Rome of Dio. l. 52.
resigning his Power to the Senate and People, and restoring the Roman Liberty
again. Being uncertain what to resolve, he consults Agrippa, and Maecenas:
Agrippa speaks first and offers many plausible Reasons, why he should not
assume the Monarchy; But Maecenas spoke last, replies to the plausible Reasons
of Agrippa, and shows the way how he might easily govern the Roman Empire. The
same year he assumes the Title of Dio, l. 53.
Emperor, not in a Military Sense, as Dio observes, but as it signified the
plenitude of Civil Power, and Command, in which Sense it had been decreed unto
Julius and the Sons of his Body. Then he proceeds as Colleague of Agrippa the
Censor, to visit the Senate, wherein finding many bare Gentlemen and Plebei^ns,
who had crept into it, during the Civil Wars, he turned them out, and having
restored the Senate to its ancient Dignity, and so obliged the Fathers, he
applies himself to get them to make him Emperor; and to that end sets out an
Edict to dissolve the Power of the Triumvirat, which was so odious to the
People; and then being made the first time Consul, he comes into the Reformed
Senate, where after he had declared the greatness of his Power, and how easily
he could keep it, desires leave to Resign it all unto them, telling them, That
as it was the Glory of his Father Julius to refuse the Monarchical Power, which
they offered him: So it would be his, to part with it, even when he was in
possession thereof.

But the Fathers, some of them suspecting that he dissembled, others certainly
knowing that he did so, and others again being weary of the Commonwealth, and
all desiring Peace, to which they knew he was inclined, Dio. l. 53.
beseeched him to take the Government upon him, and when he refused, they urged
him to do so with many Arguments, and forced him as it were to be their Nomine
Principis sub Imperium accipit Tacit. An. l. 1.
Prince. The Provinces also, as Neque provinviae illum rerum siatum abnuchant
suspecto Senatus populique imperio ob certamina potentium, Annal. l. 2.
Tacitus tells us, consented, being grown weary of the Contests of the Great
Men under the Commonwealth. But Caesar that he might decline all envy, and
effectually gain the Good Will of the People, politickly refused to take upon
him the Government of the whole Empire, but chose the most Unpeaceable
Provinces, especially those upon the Borders, and left the more peaceable to
the Care of the Senate, and furthermore would take the Monarchy upon him but
for 10 Years. But he knew very well, that if he had the Administration of the
Troublesome Provinces, where the Legions were, he could command the rest when
he pleased, and that if he Reigned quietly the first ten Years, he could, as it
proved, reign his whole Life.

After he had accepted of the Government, the Senate among many other Honors,
would have decreed him the Title of Tractatum etiam in Senatu, an quia
condidisset Imperium, Romulus vocaretur, Florus l. 4. c. 17.
Romulus, as being the Founder of the Second Roman Monarchy, but he declining
the Envious Name of a King, chose the Venerable Title of Augustus.

Augustus being thus advanced to the Empire, began to contrive how he might
secure the Succession to his own Relations, among whom he had a great Love for
Caius and Lucius his Grandsons, and his Wives two Sons Tiberius and Drusus. To
the two former he gave the Titles of General, and to the two latter the Titles
of Princes of the Youth; and though they were not as yet 17 years old, he
designed to have them made Consuls. But Cains and Lucius, and Drusus dying not
long after, Tiberius was now the only Expectant of the Empire, and all men's
Eyes were turned upon him. Indeed there was yet remaining another Grandson of
Augustus, Brother to Caius, and Lucius, Agrippa Posthumus, but he being of a
stupid and brutish Disposition, the Empress in favor of her Son, easily
persuaded the old Emperor to banish him into the Island Planasia: There he
remained while Tiberius was Adopted by Augustus, made Partner with him in the
Empire, and in the Tribuneship, and showed openly unto the Legions, as one that
was designed for their Future Prince. A little before Augustus died it was
discoursed, that he intended to restore Agrippa, which made many fear that a
Civil War might arise between him and Tiberius after the Emperors death. But as
soon as Augustus died, he was upon private Orders dispatched by his Keeper, so
that Tiberius having no Rival, the Romae ruere in servitium Consules, Patres,
Eques, Tacit. An. l. 1.
Servile Romans of all sorts strove who should show themselves most readly to
obey him. The two Consuls first of all took an Oath of Allegiance unto him,
then they required it of the Captain of the Guards, and the Providor General,
then of the Senators, afterward of the Soldiers, and last of all of the
People.

After the Funeral of his Father Augustus was over, the Senate, as he very much
Dabat and famae ut vocatus clectusque potius a repub. videretur, quam per
uxorium ambitum and senili adoptione irreps^sse, ib.
desired, in a most Precantem Senatum and procumbentem sibi ad genua -- Suet.
24. Patres in questus lacrymas, vota effundi ad Deos, ad effigiem Augusti, ad
genua ipsies manus tendere, Tacit.
suppliant manner begged him to take the Government upon him; and the more he
seemed to refuse it, the more importunate they were with him, to accept it; so
that at last he seemed to take it upon him, as a man does a Tandem quasi
ceactus, -- Suet. 24.
Burden upon his Back, merely to comply with their Desires.

Filiorum neque naturalem Drusum, neque adoptivum Germanicum patria charitate
dilexit.
He had two Sons: One ^^^ural by his Wife Agrippina (...) Daughter of Vipsanius
A^^^^^^a, who was called Drusus, (...) ^ther by Adoption, the Gal^^^^ (...)
Germanicus his Germanicum Druso ortum adsciri per adoptionem a Tiberio jussit,
quanquam esset in domo Tiberii filius juvenis, Tacit. An. l.
Brother ^^^^^us his eldest Son. They (...) died and left Sons, Germa^^^^
three, Nero, Drusus, and ^^^^ula: Crebris cum lachrymis minorem en nepotibus
complexus truci alterius vultu occides hunc tu (inquit) and te alius, Tacit.
An. l. 6.46.
Drusus one, Tiberius ^^^^llus, taken off by Caligula, (...) he came to be
Emperor, as ^^^berius his foretold. () Nero (...) Drusus his two eldest
Grand^^^ ^^^^e recommended to the Se^^^^ but because the Favor of (...) ^enate
and People too came (...) ^^^st upon them, he after^^^^ Gnarum hoc principi,
eoque dibitavit de tradenda repub. primum inter nepotes, quorum Druso genitus
sanguine and charitate proprior, sed nondum pubertatem ingressus Germanici
filio robur juventae vulgi studia, eaque apud avum odii causa. Etiam de Claudio
agitanti, quod is composita aetate bonarum artium cupiens erat, imminuta men's
ejsis obstitit. Sin Extra domum Successor quereretur, ne memoria Augusti, ne,
nomen Cae^^^am in Ludibria, and contumelias vertcret, metuebat, Tac. An. 6.46.
Dso. l. 56.
procured their death. this time he was grown and Infirm, but could () resolve
who to No^^^^ ^^^^e and recommend for his ^^^^ssor: He hated Caligula (...)
^^^se he was so dear to the (...) ^^^^e and the Army for the (...) of his
Father Germanicus, (...) ^^^ived, and died their Dar^^^^ and especially because
the (...) Men began to make their (...) ^^^^t too soon unto him, which (...)
^^^e him tell Macro Occidentem ab eo deseri orientem spectari exprobravit.
That (...) ^orsook the setting to worship the Rising Sun. For this Reason he
sometimes thought to set up Tiberius his Grandson by Drusus (who was nearest to
him in Blood and Affection) to prevent Caligula, but could not well do it,
because he was not yet 14 years old. Sometimes he thought of his Nephew
Claudius brother to Germanicus, who was of full Age, and of a Studious
Disposition, but had not Parts sufficient for the Government of the Empire.
Sometimes again he thought of Nominating a Stranger for his Successor, but that
he was loath to do, because it would have been so great a Scandal and Reproach
to the Name, and Family of the Caesar's; and in this incertitude growing weaker
and weaker, he would name none, but left the matter to the Fates.

He died of a lingering Sickness, which gave Caligula, the Darling of the City
and Provinces upon the Account of his Father Germanicus, opportunity of
securing the Succession to himself, although he was (...), Dio. l. 58.
never named nor appointed his Successor by Tiberius, but only adorned by him
with some Honors, as if he had intended him for his Successor.

(...)etc. l. 59. In principio
Nay Dio tells us for certain that Tiberius in his last Will and Testament
bequeathed the Empire to his Young Grandson Tiberius; But Caligula his Interest
in the Consuls and other Senators, got it declared void in the Senate, as being
made by the Emperor, when he was not compos mentis, as it did appear by his
bequeathing the Empire to a Boy, who was not of age to be a Senator.

The Will of Tiberius being declared void, Caligula comes to Rome, where by the
Joint Ingressoque urbem, statim consensu Senatus, and irrumpentis in curiam
turbae, jus arbitriumque omnium rerum illi permissum est, Sueton. 14.
Consent of the Senate, and the People, who rushed into the Senate House, he
was declared Emperor. Never any Prince came with more Exoptatissimus princeps
maximae parti provincialium, quod infantem plerique cognoverant, sed and
universae plebi Urbanae ob memoriam Germanici Patris, Sueton. 13.
advantage to the Crown, but never Prince more disappointed the Expectation of
the People, being one of the greatest Monsters of Vice that ever the World saw.
He had not reigned quite 4 years before his destruction was designed and
effected by Cheraea, and Sabinus in the Palace, and after he was slain the
Consuls having placed Guards in all Parts of the City, convened the Senate into
the Capitol.

The Senate being set, some were for Dio. l. 60. In principio. Sueton. 60.
restoring the Commonwealth, and abolishing the Memory of the Caesar's; others
were for continuing the Monarchy, but differed in the Nomination of the
Persons, whom they would have succed unto it; and so spent all that day, and
the next night in Uncertain Debates.

In the mean while the Soldiers plundering, and ransacking the Palace, found
Claudius, the Brother of Germanicus, who had hid himself in that Distraction,
and as soon as they knew who it was, they, besides his Expectation, Saluted him
Emperor, and took him to the Camp, where he was made Emperor by the Choice of
the whole Army, because he was a Good Man, and of the Imperial House. The
Consuls hearing this, sent the Tribunes of the people to charge him not to take
the Empire upon him, but to remain under the Obedience of the Senate and the
People; but the Army standing firm to their New Emperor, they were forced to
consent, and to choose him Emperor too.

Claudius after the death of Messalina Tacit. l. 12.4, 5. Dio. l. 60.
marries his own Niece Agrippina Daughter to his Brother Germanicus, and
Mother to Nero; and she had the ascendent so much over him, as to make him
Adopt her Son, although he Cluadius Britannicus By Messalina, vid. Sueton. 27.
Dio. l. 60.
had a Son of his own. After his Adoption she prevailed with him to marry him
to his own Daughter Octavia, although she was betroathed to another Man.

After this she labored all she could to secure the Succession unto Nero; and
being Jealous of Britannicus, whose Interest the Emperors great Favorite, and
her Enemy Narcissus openly owned, she took Advantage of her Husbands first
Sickness to poison him; and concealing his Death for some time, ordered all
things in the interim for the Advantage of Nero, who going to the Guards with
Burrhus their Captain, was at his instance, received with great Acclamations,
though some of them discovering another Inclination, Dubitavisse quosdam ferunt
expectantes, rogitantesque, ubi Britannicus esset, Tac. An. 12.69.
asked where Britannicus was. From the Guards he was carried in a Chair to the
Illatusque, castris Nero Imperator consultatur, sententiam militum secuta
patrum consulta, nec dubitatum est apud Provincias, Tac. An. 12.60.
Camp, where having made a Speech and promised great Largesses to the Army, he
was chosen Emperor by them, and the Choice was confirmed by the Senate, neither
did any of the Provinces refuse him for their Prince.

But he proved a Plague to the Empire; and being for his Execrable Tyranny
Sueton. 40.42, 47.
deserted by all Mankind, and declared a public Enemy by the Senate, at lastin
despair he laid violent hands upon himself, after he had afflicted the World
about 14 years.

He was the (...), Eutrop. lip. 7. Progenies Caesarum in Nerone defeoit,
Sueton. in Galb. 1. Finita Juliorum Claudiorumque domo: Galba ad Pison, Tac.
Hist. l. 16.
last man and Emperor of the Family of the Caesar's; wherein it is plain from
matter of Fact, that the Emperors had Power to Name or Recommend their
Successors, Secondly, that they might name Strangers as well as those of their
own Family: And thirdly, that of their own Family they might prefer their
Adopted, before their Natural Sons, and the remoter before the nearer in Blood.

Secondly, It is plain that the Nominated Successors were chosen, First by the
Senate who gave the Army, Caesar's, and then by the Army, who afterward gave
Caesar's unto the Senate and People.

Thirdly, That the Senate might choose a Person, who was not nominated by the
deceased Emperor, and reject another who was nominated by him. Nay,

Fourthly, That as yet they had a (...), Dio. l. 60. in princ. ^^^atus in
asserenda libetate adso consen^it -- quidam vero abolendum Caesarum memorian,
censuerum, Sueton. in Calig. 60.
Right to resume the Empire (had they not been overpowred by the Army) and upon
the decease of an Emperor, to give it to a Stranger, as well as to one of
Caesar's House. And now was not this a brave Hereditary Empire, wherein the
Succession to the Crown was so Casual, Irregular, and Arbitrary? and may not a
man with as much reason call Black White, a Triangle Square, or any one Species
by the name of another, as to call this an Hereditary, which was an Irregular
Elective Empire, wherein not one of the Emperors, hitherto at least, came to
the Crown by virtue of a Lineal Hereditary descent?

I desire the Unanswerable Man to consult his Oracles of Law, and then to tell
me if the Succession be in the Royal House of the Stuarts, as it was in the
House of the Caesar's; or if the Julian and Claudian Princes were born, like
ours, unto the Crown? Indeed the 108 Years.
long continuance of the Empire in in the Family of the Caesar's made it look
something like their Inheritance, Sub Tiberio and Caio, and Claudio unius
familiae quasi haereditas fuimus. Tacit. Hist. l. 16.
quasi haereditas, as Galba told Piso, and so the long continuance of it in the
House of Austria makes it now look somewhat like an Inheritance, though it be
perfectly, The ^ive, but still at best it is but quasi haereditas, as the
French King understands very well.

But it may be, though it were Elective hitherto, it might afterward come to
be Hereditary? It might so, for any thing that nine parts of ten who cry up
Julian, know to the contrary; and therefore let us ^o on with Matter of Fact,
to see if it were so, or no?

Nero being dead, Old Galba was chosen to the Empire by the Eutrop. l. 7.
Gauls, and Spaniards, and then by the whole Army, according to the Prediction
of Sueton. in Galba, 4.
Augustus, who told him when he was a Boy that he should live to be Emperor. In
Ep. Xiphil.
Dio tells us, that Tiberius also foretold him, that he should live to taste of
the Empire; and indeed he did but taste, having reigned but 7 Months according
to Suetonius, whom Cedrenus follows; or according to Dio 9, before he was
murdered in the Forum by the Procurement of Otho, who secretly hated him,
because he Adopted Piso, when he expected that Honor himself.

Galba being slain, his Murderer Otho succeeded, being made Emperor not only by
the Consent of the Soldiery at Rome, but by the Dio. Xiphil. (...). Vocat
Senatum ^raetor Urbanus, accurrunt Patres, deternitur Othoni t^^bunitia
potestas, nomen Augusti^ and omnes Principum honores, Tacit. Hist. l. 1.47.
Election of the Senate. But about the same time the German Legions set up
Vitellius for Emperor, who marched straight into Italy, where near Verona he
gained a small Victory over Otho, who rather than try the Fortune of War the
Second time, in the 95th. day of his Reign, or as Dio says, in the 10th Month,
he killed himself to prevent the Effusion of Roman Blood.

Otho being dead, Sabinus the Prefect of Rome made all the Soldiers in the
City swear Allegiance to Vitellius, A flavio Sabim praefecto urbis, quod erat
in urbe militum sacramento Vitellii adactum, In Senatu cuncta longis aliorum
Principatibus composita statim decernuntur, Tacit. Hist. l. 2.55.
and the Senate also decreed him all the Power and Honors that any of the
Precedent Emperors enjoyed. In the mean time Sueton. in Vitell. 15. in Vespes.
6. Dio. Xiph.
Vespasian while he was making War in Judaea, was created Emperor first by the
Moesian Legions, then by Tiberius Alexander the Governor of Egypt, and the
Army there, and last of all by the Army in Judea, from whence he marched to
Alexandria, leaving his Son Titus to beseige Jerusalem.

Vid. Dion. in Xiphil. Eutrop. l. 7. c. 1. Oros. l. 7.
He stayed at Alexandria sometime, having sent Mucianus and Domitian with
Forces to Rome; but before Mucian arrived there, Vitellius falling into Despair
upon what was done by Sabinus and Domitian, hid himself in a Dog-Kennel,
thinking to escape by Night to his Brother at Tarracina, but being found by the
Soldiers, they brought him with his Hands bound behind him from the Palace to
the Forum, where after much contumelious usage they Barbarously put him to
death.

He being dead, Vespasian wa^ immediately Romae Senatus cuncta Principibus
solita Vespasiano decermt, Tac. Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
declared Emperor by the Senate; and his two Sons Titus, and Domitia^ voted
Caesar's. (...), Dio.


This Occulta^ lege sati, and ostentis ac responsis destinatum Vespasiano, ac
liberis ejus imperium post fortunam credimus, Tacit. Hist. l. 11.
Fortunate Prince the Favorite of God and Men, made his Son Titus Neque ex eo
destitit participem, atque tutorem imperii agere^triumphavit cum patre,
censuramque gessit und, eidem Collega and in Tribunitia potestate, and in
septem Consulibue fuit, receptaque ad se ommium officiorum curacirc; -- Sucton.
6. Vespasianus and Titus Imperatores -- Orosius l. 7. c. 9. Vid. Dium. Xiph. in
Vesp. and Tito.
Copartner with him in the Empire; he let him triumph with him in that Famous
Triumph over Jerusalem; he made him his Colleague in the Censorship and
Tribuneship, and in 7 Consulships successively; in a word, he had the whole
care of the Empire committed to him: He made Orations in the Senate, dictated
Epistles, and signed Edicts with his own Name and his Fathers, and was called
Emperor as well as his Father, having been proclaimed so by the Army at the
taking of Jerusalem. His Father reigned 10 years, and he survived him but two
years and two months.

This Occulta^ lege sati, and ostentis ac responsis destinatum Vespasiano, ac
liberis ejus imperium post fortunam credimus, Tacit. Hist. l. 11.
Fortunate Prince the Favorite of God and Men, made his Son Titus Neque ex eo
destitit participem, atque tutorem imperii agere^triumphavit cum patre,
censuramque gessit und, eidem Collega and in Tribunitia potestate, and in
septem Consulibue fuit, receptaque ad se ommium officiorum curacirc; -- Sueton.
6. Vespasianus and Titus Imperatores -- Orosius l. 7. c. 9. Vid. Dion. Xiph. in
Vesp. and Tito.
Copartner with him in the Empire; he let him triumph with him in that Famous
Triumph over Jerusalem; he made him his Colleague in the Censorship and
Tribuneship, and in 7 Consulships successively; in a word, he had the whole
care of the Empire committed to him: He made Orations in the Senate, dictated
Epistles, and signed Edicts with his own Name and his Fathers, and was called
Emperor as well as his Father, having been proclaimed so by the Army at the
taking of Jerusalem. His Father reigned 10 years, and he survived him but two
years and two months.

He was succeeded by the Second Nero, his Brother Domitian, who was murdered by
his own Lactantius de Mort. Persecut. Dio Xiph. Orosius l. 7. c. 10. Sueton. 17.
Domestics, the Empress her self being in the Conspiracy, when he had reigned
15 years. The Chief of the Conspirators, besides Domitia the Empress, were
Parthenius and Sigerus, Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and Entellus his
Secretary of State, who coming by a strange Accident to read their Names among
others whom the Emperor had destined to Destruction, were resolved to be
beforehand with him, but first sought out for a Successor to the Empire, and
after Nerva had promised to take the Government upon him, they put their Design
in execution, when he was asleep.

Domitian being dead Nerva by the Interest of Petronius Secundus the Praefectus
Praetorio, and the forementioned Parthenius, was declared Emperor by the Dio
Xiph. Oros. l. 7.11. Eutrop. l. 8.
Senate: He was old and infirm, and died after he had reigned 18 Months. Before
he died, he Dio Xiph.
publicly adopted Trajan in the Capitol (...) l. ^^
though he had Relations of his own; and afterward declared him Caesar in the
Senate, merely for his Virtues, though he was no (...), Dio Xiph.
Roman, but a Spaniard, and of obscure Original; and he was the first (...)
Stranger, that succeeded to the Imperial Cro^^,

Here we may see the Skill, or Ingenuity of our Author, who decla^^d this
Incertum and quasi vagum Imperium, as In Vesp. I.
Suetonius once called it, to be an Hereditary Empire, which was fixed to no
Family, but to which every Free Subject in it, Roman or not Roman, might
possibly succeed, as every Freeman in London, of what Family or Country soever,
may come to be Lord Mayor. Let him go to his great Mystae in poli^ics to help
him to reconcile the definition of an Hereditary Empire, to such a vagrant and
desilro^y Succession as I have shown this to be, if he can do it, I will no
longer believe that the Notions of things are fixed and immutable, but that the
same Number may be Even and Odd, and the same Element Fire and Water. The
Angels Horns in the Vision of his Mahomet, which were half Snow, and half Fire,
are not half so great a Contradiction as such an Hereditary Empire, for the
Fire and Snow were visionary, or if they were real, the Fire might be lambent
and not melt the Snow, but Electivemelts down the Notion of Hereditary with its
very looks, they are utterly inconsistent, and can no more belong to one common
Subject, than a Table can be round and square.

But to return to this strange Hereditary Succession; Trajan the best of the
Roman Emperors died after he had reigned 19 years. In his life time he would
Adopt none, not Adrian his Countryman and nearest Kinsman, who had been bred
under him, and married his Niece. But Dio Xiph.
after he was dead, Plotina the Empress, concealing his death, wrote Letters in
his Name to the Senate, wherein was declared, That he had Adopted Adrian; after
which she declared him Emperor, while he was at Antioch, of which he was
Governor: But before he stirred from thence, he wrote to the Senate to desire
them to confirm him in the Empire, which they did, and over and above O^osius
l. 7. c. 13. Spartian in Adrian.
gave him the ancient Title of Pater Patriae, and his Wife the Title of
Augusta. He first Adopted Dio. Xiph.
Lucius Commodus, or as Spartian calls him Qui and Aelius Verus appellatus est,
Spartian.
Ceionius Commodus Verus; but he dying, he sent for the Chief of the Senators
to his Palace, where he lay very sick, and most earnestly Dio. Xiph. Spart. in
Adriano.
recommended unto them Arrius, or Aurelius Antoninus, whom he Adopted, and the
Senate forthwith admitted him for theri Xiph. in Ant. Pio.
Emperor. Aurelius Antoninus being Adopted, and declared Emperor, his Father
Adrian commanded him presently to Adopt The Son of Ceionius Commodus, Dio.
Xiph. in Adriano. Spait. in Aelio Vero. Huic Pater C. Commodus, quem alii
Verum, alii Lucium Aurelium, multi Annium prodiderunt.
Annius Verus Antoninus, and Marcus Antoninus: Spartian says that Adrian
Adopted him upon that Sed ea demum lege, ut ille sibi duos adoptaret Annium
Verum, and Marcum Antoninum. In Adriano.
Condition, that he should Adopt them. However it was, shortly after these
Adoptions Adrian died, after he had reigned 20 years.

After he was dead, the Senate refused him the Compliment of Divine Honors,
but upon the Tears and Requests of Antoninus they at length decreed them, and
gave Antoninus, who Capitolinus calls the Second Numa, the Titles of Augustus
and Pius, which he very well deserved. He died at his Country House about 12
Miles off Rome, after he had reigned according to Eutropius 23, but according
to Xiphilin and Cedrenus 24 years, and after his death was Canonized by the
unanimous Vote of the Senate.

He was succeeded by his two Adopted Sons Marcus Antoninus, and Annius Verus
Antoninus, who married Lucilla the Daughter of Marcus Antoninus. These two
Ruled (...). Eutrop. Verus certe cum Mareo equale gessit imperium, nam ipsi
sunt, qui primo da^ Augusti appellati sunt, and quorum fastis consularibus sic
nomina praesaribuntur. Spart. in Aelio Vero.
together with equal Authority, being both called Augusti, and so Registered in
the Consular Kalenders. Verus died first of an Apoplexy in tHe 11 th Imperavit
cum fratre annus undecem. Capitol. in Vero.
year of their Reign, and was survived by Marcus 9 years, who died in the 20th
year of His.

I might here remind our Author of his Hereditary Empire, and ask him how it
could descend upon (...), Zosim. l. 1.
two Heirs at once, but I pass on to Commodus, Son and Successor to Marcus
Antoninus, who dying in the Camp, commended his Son to the Army a little before
his death. As soon as his Funeral Solemnities were over, Commodus gives mighty
Largesses to the Army, to bind them more firmly to his Interest, and presently
returns in have to Rome. When he came near the City, the whole Senate and
People went out to meet him with Laurels and Flowers in their Hands: For they
mightily loved him for his Father and and Grandfathers sake, and because he was
born and bred among them, and had so much Senatorian Blood in his Veins. For
his Father descended of one of the most Illustrious Families of the Senatorian
Order, and his Mother Faustina the Empress was Daughter to Antoninus Pius, and
Niece to Adrian; and his Extraction added to his Virtuous Education, and comely
Form, made them dote upon him, and receive him with Acclamations and all other
Signs of Joy, Herodian l. 1.
as strewing Crowns and Flowers upon the Ground as he entered into Rome. After
he came to the City he went in Procession to visit the Temples; after which
having given thanks to the Senators, and Gratuities to the Guards for their
Fidelity to him, he went unto the Palace. But the Romans were as much
disappointed in him, as their Ancestors had been in the Son of Germanicus, for
the proved a Second Caligula, and for his Cruelties was murdered by his
Concubine Marcia, after he had reigned 12 years.

Commodus being dispatched, Electus and Laetus who conspired his death with
Marcia, Eutrop. l. 8. Dio. Xiph. Herodian l. 2. Orosius l. 7. 16.
brought the news of it to Pertinax, who was then Prefect of Rome. After he had
certified himself of the Truth of the Matter, he goes to the Camp, and promises
large Donatives to the Soldiers, and having secured them, he was afterward
declared Emperor by the unanimous Consent of the Senate, who would also have
declared his Wife Augusta, and his Little Son Caesar, but he would let neither
be done. He had reigned but 66 days before he was killed in his Palace by the
Guards, who hated him for his severe Discipline.

The Soldiers having dispatched him, they immediately from the walls of Rome
published the Sale of the Empire to him that would give most. Two bid for it,
Sulpicianus Father-in-Law to Pertinax within the City, and Julianus without.
Sulpicianus offered A Dram is about the value of 7 d. ob. Sterling.
5000 Drachmas to every man of them, but Julianus being the Richer, Dio. Xiph.
He rodian l. 2.
offered 1250 more: And the Bargain being made, the Soldiers let down their
Ladders from the Walls, upon which he and his Friends mounted into the City.
After he was entered, the Soldiers declared him Emperor, and conducted him
straight into the Senate House, whither the Senators immediately repairing, for
fear, confirmed the Soldiers Choice.

But Severus, who had sworn Allegiance to Pertinax, hearing what was done,
marched from the Banks of Danubius with all expedition to Rome: He met with no
Opposition by the way, for Julianus durst not march out to encounter him.
Herodian l. 2. Dio. Xiph. Eutropius l. 8.
When he drew near Rome with his Forces, Julianus fell into great distraction,
and the Consul convocating the Senate, who knew in what a Consternation he was
they voted him to death, and Severus to the Empire. (...). Herod l. 2. Vid.
etiam Spart. in Didio Juliano.
After this they met Severus at the Gates of the City, and saluted him as their
Emperor, and the People received him with joyful Acclamations, although he was
an African born. He was a Virtuous Prince, and successful aganist; his Enemies,
and died at York after he had reigned 17 years.

He left two Sons Geta, and Bassianus surnamed Caracalla, both of which he
designed for his (...) Herod. in Severo.
Successors to rule the Empire with joint and equal Authority, as the two
Severum quam moriretur Laetatum quod duos Antonines pari imperio reip,
relinqueret exemplo Pii, qui Verum and Marcum Antoninous per adoptionem filios
repip, reliquit, hic per^se genitos Rectores Roman^e reip, daret Antininum
Bassianum, and Getam. Spart. in Severo. Vid. Cedrenum.
Antonines had done before. But their Father was no sooner dead, but they grew
Jealous one of another, and all along their Journey from Britain to Rome lay
in different Houses, neither Eating nor Drinking together all the way.

When they came near the City, the People and Senate went out to congratulate
their Arrival; and the Form of the Procession into the City was thus.

The two Princes in their Royal Purple went first, the Consuls followed after
them, carrying the Urn wherein were the Ashes of Severus, and then in order all
that came out to salute the New Emperors. They put the Urn in the Temple where
the Monuments of the former Princes were, and having performed all the
Customary Rites, the two Princes retire into different Apartments in the
Palace, and had different Guards.

After the Apotheosis of their Father, they sought one another Destruction,
each seeking to have the Empire alone. The greater part was inclined to Geta,
and their Mother being afraid of the Tragical Effects of their Discord, sought,
but all in vain, to make them Friends. At length they agree to divide the
Empire, and the Terms of the Agreement were these: Bassian was to have Europe
and the Western Parts of Africa; Herodian. in Caracalla.
and Geta was to have Asia, and the Eastern Parts of Africa; and of the
Senators as many as were Romans were to stay at Rome with the one, and the rest
were to go into Asia with the other. But their Mother asking them with Tears in
her Eyes how they could divide her, made them break off the Agreement, at which
she was glad, hoping at length she should reconcile them. But all her
Endeavors were vain, for now they conspire one another destruction: But
Bassian being the more fiery and impatient, was resolved to be beforehand with
his Brother Geta, and therefore coming suddenly upon him, he gave him his
deaths wound, of which he presently died in his Mothers Arms.

Upon this he presently flies out of the Palace to the Camp, where telling the
Soldiers what dangers he had escaped, and how he had killed his Brother in his
own defense; and promising every one of them two thousand and two hundred
Drachmas a man, and half as much more Provision as they used to have, and
likewise giving them leave to plunder the Treasuries and the Temples, they
presently proclaim him Emperor. He remained all that Night in the Camp, and the
next day marched in the Head of the Army to the Senate, and having Spart. in
Caracalla. Herod. in Caracalla.
placed the Soldiers between the Senators Seats, he mounts the Imperial
Throne, and excuses the Murder of his Brother in a Seech. After he had reigned
with much Cruelty six years, his death was conspired by his Praefectus
Praetoria Macrinus, who killed him by the hands of Martialis the Centurion in
Charrae a City of Mesopotamia, while he was at Stool. The Soldiers thinking
that Martialis had killed him merely to revenge his Brothers death, whom he had
slain, pursued him, and killed him without enquiring further into the
Conspiracy.

After the death of Caracalla, the Army deliberated two days about the Choice
of an Emperor, and at length agreed in the Choice of one Audentius; but he
refusing it, they chose Macrinus, who after he had concluded a Peace with
Artabanus King of Persia, marched to Antioch, Herodian in Macrino.
from whence he sent a Letter unto the Senate, wherein he apologized for the
meaness of his Extraction, and promised that his Government should look rather
like a Commonwealth, than a Kingdom; and highly reflected upon Commodus and
other Emperors who succeeded their Fathers, because looking upon the Empire
(...).
as their Due by Inheritance, they abused it, (...).
as their own Patrimony, whereas those who received it from the Senate were
their Debtors, and bound to requite their Kindness.

Upon the reading of this Respectful Letter, he was immediately declared
Emperor by the Senate, and had all the Imperial Such as the Title of Augustus,
the Consulship, the Proconsulship, the Tribuneship, the Censorship, and the
Office of Pontifex Maximus. Vid. Dion l, 53.
Honors and Offices conferred upon him. Before he sent this Letter, as soon as
he was Elected Emperor by the Soldiers, he declared his Son Capitol. in
Macrino. Herod, in Macrino.
Diadumenus, Caesar, and made him his Partner in the Empire. But his ill-gotten
Empire lasted not long, for the Legions coming to understand that he conspired
against the Life of the last Emperor, began to hate him; and the Fates, as
Profane Authors call Providence, made way for their Revolting from him. The
Story is in short this:

Moesa a Phaenician Lady, Sister to Julia the Wife of Severus, and Mother to
Caracalla, had lived a long time in the Court, and heaped up vast Riches. She
had two Grandsons by two Daughters, both Priests of the Sun, Bassianus surnamed
Or Heliogabalus.
Heloeagabalus, and Alexianus. Heliogabalus was a Youth of extraordinary Form
and Beauty, and much admired and commended by the Soldiers, who frequented the
Temple of the Sun. Moesa finding the young Priest so much in Favor with the
Soldiers, Capitolin in Macrino. Herol. in Macrino and Heliog. Dio Xiph. in
Macrino.
privately gave it out, that he was the Son of Caracalla, and at the same time
gave great Gifts among the Soldiers.

Uon this the Soldiers revolt from Macrinus, and receive Heliogabalus as the
Son of Caracalla, surname him Antoninus from Antoninus Caracalla.
his supposed Father, put the Royal Purple upon him, and declare him Emperor.

Macrinus hearing this, sends Julianus with another part of the Army against
the Revolters; but as soon as they drew near the City where the New Emperor
was, the Soldiers showed him unto them, crying out, The Son of Antoninus, the
Son of Antoninus; and also shaking Bags of Money in their Hands. Upon this the
Forces of Julianus cut off his Head, and join with the Revolters to
Heliogabalus. This ill News makes Macrinus march with all his Forces against
Heliogabalus, who met him in the Confines of Syria and Phaenicia, where a
little after the Battle was begun; the Soldiers of Macrinus joined in great
Numbers with the Army of this Pseudo-Antoninus; he perceiving the Treachery,
flies, and was taken and killed in Bithinia, after he had reigned about a year.

Macrinus, and his Son Diadumenus Caesar being killed, the whole Army proclaim
Heliogabalus Emperor, and when the Senate received the News of it, being forced
to make a Virtue of (...) Herod.
Necessity, they confirmed their Choice.

Heliogabalus being confirmed in the Empire, Adopts his Brother Alexanus, but
two years younger than himself, and declares him Caesar; and thereupon makes
him Consul with himself, and; then gets the Senate (...). Herodian.
most rediculously to confirm the Adoption of his Brother, against all Law,
which Adoptio enim naturam imitatur, debet itaque is qui filium sibi per
adoptionem facit plena pubertate, i.e. december and octo annis precedere. Inst. l.
1.11.
requires that the Adopter should be 18 years older than the person adopted.

After Alexianus, otherwise called Alexander, was adopted, the Soldiers and
Citizens beginning to hate Heliogabalus for his Cruelty, Effeminacy, and
Affectation of Foreign Fashions, In Alexandrum omnes. inclinantes, qui jam
Caesar erat a senatu dictus. Lomprid.
set their Affections and Expectations upon his Brother. Heliogab.
understanding all this, sought to destroy him, but not being able to compass
his death, he resolved to (...). Herodian. Misit ad milites literas quibus
jussit ut abrogaretur nomen Caesaris Alexandro. Lampred.
depose him from the Caesarship, and in order to it, would not let him stir
abroad. But the Soldiers mutining upon it, he was forced to bring him into the
Camp, where the Army thinking they had a fair Opportunity to secure Alexander,
and the Empire unto him, killed Heliogab., and forthwith declared Caesar
Emperor, and attended him unto the Palace.

Alexander being declared Emperor by the Army, had all Imperial Honors and
Offices conferred upon him by the Certatim denique omnia decreta sunt and
nomina generum, and potestatum. Lamprid. in Severo.
Senate, and after a peaceable and happy Reign in all things, excepting the
Persian Expedition, was at last killed by the procurement of Maximin, who
conspired against him, as he lay with the Army on the Frontiers of Germany, in
the 14th year of his Reign.

A fine Hereditary Empire this was, which by reason of its Elective Succession
became a Invadentibus multis remp. res Romana praedombus direptui fuit.
Lamprid. in Severo.
Prey to every base and villainous Usurper; For Maximin a Barbaro patre and
matre genitus. Capitolin.
Semibarbarian, as Herodian calls him, was at first but a Shepherd, and then a
common Soldier, and afterward a Commander, and yet so gained the Affections
of the Soldiery, that he was made Emperor first by a Legion of younger
Soldiers over whom he had the Command, and then by the whole (...) -- Herodian
in Alexand.
Army; to which he gave double Allowance of Provision, and promised mighty
Donatives, as the Candidates for the Empire used to do.

Being declared Sine decreto Senatus Augustus ab exercitu appellatus est, silio
sibimet in participatum dato. Capitolin. But he was he was afterward confirmed
by the Senate: According to Aurelius Victor, Potentiam cepit suffragi is
legionum, quod tamen etiam patres, dum periculosum existimant inermes armato
resistere, approbaverunt. (...) Cedrenus.
Augustus in the Camp, he made his Son Partner with him in the Empire, and War
with the Germans, against whom he was mighty Successful, and magnified his
Victories over them in very insolent Letters to the Senate. In the mean while
the Army in Africa hearing of his barbarous Pride and Cruelty, brought the
Purple to Gordianus the Proconsul, and made him Emperor against his Reclamantem
and terra se affligentem opertum purpura imperare coegerunt. Capitolin.
Will. He sends word to Rome of what the Soldiers had done to him, and the
Senate out of hatred to Maximin confirms the Choice of the African Soldiers,
and declares Gordianus and his Son Augusti, and denounces Maximin and his Son
Enemies to the Empire, Capitolin. and Herodian in Maximin. and Cap. in Gord.
and sent Letters to all the Provinces to defend themselves against them. At
the same time Capellianus in Africa rebels against Gordian, who losing his Son,
whom he sent to reduce him, in the first Battle, hanged himself. The Senate
hearing of the death of the two Gordians, immediately created Maximus Pupienus
Prefect of the City, and Clodius Balbinus Emperors, and the () Grandson of old
Gordian Caesar, Capitol in Maximin. in Gord. in Maximo and Galb.
at the desire of the Soldiers and People. Hereupon Maximin marches with all
his Forces into Italy, where he found the Country without Forage, and the
Cities fortified against him, particularly Aquileia, at the Seige whereof he
and his Son were killed by his own Soldiers, to the great Joy of Rome and all
the Provinces, who looked upon him as another Ut illum alii Cyclopem, alii
Busiridem, alii Phalarim, multi Typhonem vocarent. Capitolin, Maximus dicebat
se non contra hominem sed contra Cyclopem bellum gerere. Cap. in Maxim. and
Balb.
Cyclops or Busiris, and gave solemn thanks to the Gods for their deliverance
by his death.

A few Months after, the Army of Maximin, Dixisse fertur Maximus, vereor ne
militum odium sentiamus and mortem. ib.
as Maximus foresaw, disdaining the Emperors of the Senate, had a mind to have
one of their own choosing, and therefore watching a fit Opportunity they seized
the Palace, and slew the Emperors, and made Gordianus the young Gordianus
Caesar sublatus a militibus Imperator est appellatus, id est, Augustus, quia
non erat alius in present. ib.
Caesar, Emperor or Augustus in their steads.

Gordianus after he had reigned 6 years, was basely betrayed and murdered by
his ungrateful Praefectus Praetorio Philippus in the Frontiers of Persia, where
he was made Capitolin. in Gordiano Tertio. Eutrop. l. 9. Zosim. l. 2. Aurel.
Victor. Pompon. Laetus.
Emperor by the Army. He was surnamed Arabs from his Country, and made his Son
Partner with him in the Empire. But as he betrayed his Master in Persia, so
Decius betrayed him in Pannonia, where he was Zosim. ibid.
made Emperor by the Mutinous Legions, whom he was sent to reduce. Philip
hearing how Decius had put on the Purple, marches against him with his Son, and
in the first Battle was slain with his Son, after they had reigned about six
years. Decius and his Son both lost their Lives in the Scythian Expedition by
the Treachery of Gallus, before he had reigned quite two years.

Upon the death of Decius, Gallus was created Emperor by the Soldiers and the
Haec ubi patres comparere. Gallo Hostiliano Augusta Imperia, Volusianum Gallo
editum Caesarem decernunt. Pompon. Laetus.
Senate, and Volusianus his Son declared Caesar; but he had not reigned many
days before the Pannonian Legions, after their Victory over the Scythyans under
the Conduct of AEmilianus, chose him their Emperor: Upon which he marched into
Italy, and was met by Gallus and his Army at Interamnia, Eutrop. l. 9. Zosim.
l. 1. Aurel. Victor. Pomp. Laet.
But Gallus his Soldiers seeing themselves much inferior to the Enemy, slew
their Emperor and his Son, and revolted to Aemilianus, who was shortly after
declared Augustus by the Senate. But he had not reigned 3 Months, before
Valerianus was declared Emperor by the Celtic and German Legions, which the
Soldiers at Rome hearing, and not being willing to spend their Blood in the
defense of an Emperor of such ignoble Extraction, killed him in his Palace, and
likewise declared Valerian Emperor.

Valerian was received by the Senate, who created his Son Eutrop. l. 9. Aurel.
Victor.
Gallienus Caesar, whom he made Trebellius Pollio.
Partner with him in the Empire, leaving him the European forces to defend the
German Frontiers, while he marched into Persia against Sapores, Lactant. de
Mort. Persecut.
who took him Captive after he had reigned 6 years. Gallienus after his Fathers
death wholly addicted himself to Ease, Wine, and Wantonness, Triginta prope
tyrannos passus est. Trebell. Pollio in Gallien. Tumultuarios Imperatores ac
Regulos. Ib. in Claudio.
quietly suffering almost 30 several persons to usurp several Parts of the
Empire, and take upon them the Titles of Augusti, till at last some Officers of
the Army not being able to endure him any longer, killed him at Milan with his
Brother Valerian, who was also called Augustus.

He was succeeded by Eutrop. l. 9. Trebell. Poll. in Gallien.
Claudius the Second, who was chosen Emperor by the Army, and afterward
declared Augustus by the Senate. He had not reigned quite two years when he
died, to the great grief of the Senate, who chose his Brother Quintillus
Emperor, who was Trebell. Pollio. Eutrop. l. 9.
slain by the Soldiers in the 17th day of his Reign; Pompon Laetus. Zosimus.
Cedrenus.
others say he killed himself, after he heard that the Army had chosen Aurelian
Emperor, whom as Pompon Laetus says, Clodius recommended to the Senate, when
he first was taken sick.

My Trebell. Poll.
Author, speaking of Quintillus his succeeding of his Brother to the Empire,
says, Delatum sibi omnium judicio suscepit Imperium non Haereditarium, sed
merito virtutum, which I leave to the Author and Superviser of Julian to
construe, if they can, into this English; There is nothing more plain, than
that the Empire was Hereditary.

Aurelian his Successor did mighty things, but was slain by the Treachery of
his Secretary, Zosimus. l. 2. Eutrop. l. 9. Aurel. Victor. Pompon. Laetus.
who having been threatened by him for some Misdemeanors, counterfeited orders
in his Majesty's Name and Hand for killing of some Military Officers; which he
pretended out of Kindness privately to show some of them, exhorting them to
prevent their own death, by the Emperors. They believing this Sham to be true,
presently conspired against him, and killed him at Caenophrurion between
Heraclea and Byzantium, after he had reigned six years.

After the death of Aurelian, there was an Flavius Vopiscus in Tacito.
Interregnum (which is inconsistent with an Hereditary Empire) for six months,
which was spent in Compliments betwixt the Army, and the Senate, which of the
two should choose the new Emp. At length the Senate chose Flavius Vopiscus.
Eutropius l. 9. Aurell. Victor.
Tacitus a grave Senior of their own Body; but he scarce lived to do any thing
more, than to revenge the Murder of Aurelian, dying after he had reigned 6
Months.

After he was dead his Brother Florianus (says Post fratrem arripuit Imperium
non Senatus autoritate, sed suo motu, quasi haeredi^^rium esset Imperium.
Vopiscus) usurped the Empire, without the Authority of the Senate, as if it
had been an Hereditary Empire, which by the Favor of Unanswerable Mr. J.
implies plainly that it was not so. He reigned not above two months before he
was killed by the Soldiers at Tarsus, and (as some suspected) by the
contrivance of Probus, the Second Hannibal, who was chosen Emperor by the
universal Consent of the Army and Senate, Tantus autem Probus fuit in re
militari, ut illum Senatus optaret, miles eligerit, ipse populus Romanus
acclamationibus peteret. Vopiscus.
and after he had quelled many Rebellions, was slain in a Mutiny of the
Soldiers at Sirmium, Eutrop. l. 9. Aurel. Victor. Vopiscus.
after he had reigned six years.

The Senate and People mightily bewailed the death of Probus, who was succeeded
by Carus the Praefectus Praetorio, who as soon as he was made Emperor by the
Vopiscus. Pompon Laetus.
Army, declared his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus, Caesar's, and about a year
after he took the Empire upon him, he was killed by Lightning in his Camp upon
the Banks of Tigris. Presently after he was dead, Numerianus falling sick, was
killed by Arrius Aper his own Father-in-Law, who thought to succeed Probus in
the Empire.

But he was much disappointed in his Expectation, for the Army chose Dioclesian
a man of obscure Parentage; Vopiscus. Eutrop. l. 9. Pomp. Laet.
and he being declared Augustus, revenged the death of Numerianus upon Aper
with his own Hand. Aper being slain, he presently set himself against Carinus,
whom after many Battles he at last quite routed at the River Margus, where
Carinus was slain.

After the death of Carinus he was declared Pompon Laetus. Eutrop. l. 9.
Lactant. de Mort. Persecut.
Augustus by the Senate, and joyfully received by the People of Rome: But
finding the Empire infested with Rebellions, he declared Maximianus, surnamed
Herculeus, Caesar, and then Augustus, and made him his Brother and Partner in
the Empire, which they governed together in perfect Pompon. Laet. Eutrop. l. 9.
Lactant. de Mort. Pers. Eusebius. de Mart. Palaest. c. 3.
Concord, till they both resigned together in the 20th. year of their Reign.

They were succeeded by their own Adopted Sons and Caesar's, Constantius Chlorus
whom Maximian adopted, and Galerius Maximianus, Aurel. Victor. Pompon Laet.
Lactant. de Mort. Pers.
whom Dioclesian adopted; who being forced after their Adoption to put away
their former Wives, Constantius married Theodora, Daughter-in-Law to Maximian,
and Galerius, Valeria, the Daughter of Dioclesian.

When Dioclesian resigned to Galerius, he was forced by him much against his
Inclination to nominare Severus and Maximinus, who was Nephew to Galerius,
Caesar's, at which the Army was much surprised, expecting that he should have
nominated Constantinum omnes intuebantur. Nulla erat dubitatio, milites, qui
ad^rant, and priores militum electi, ac acciti ex regionibus in hune unum
intenti gaudebant, optabant, and vota fa^iebant, etc. -- Lactant. de Mort.
Persec. p. 38.
Constantinus Son to Constantius, who was now in Britain.

Constantine was then in the Court of Dioclesian, and continued after his
Retirement with Galerius but very uneasy, because another was set up Caesar
over his Head: Galerius hated him, and had ill Designs upon him, of which he
was very sensible, which made him beg leave of his Majesty to go into Britain
to his Father Constantius, which he obtained with much difficulty upon his
Fathers Letters; but leave being once obtained, away he posts, arriving at York
but a Pervenit ad patrem jam deficientem. Lact. de Mort. Pers.
little before his Father died.

His Father had declared him Caesar before his Arrival, as Pomp. Laet. says,
when he first fell sick; and at his death left his part of the Empire to him,
and commended him to the Army for their New Emperor. This vexed Galerius to the
Heart, who yet fearing the British Legions, durst not but send him the
Imperial Purple, which yet he stained Illud excogitavit, ut Severum, qui erat
aetate maturior Augustum nuncuparet, Constantinum vero non Imperatorem, sicut
erat factus, sed Caesarem cum Maximino appellari juberet, ut eum de secundo
loco rejiceret in quartum. Lact. ib.
by making Severus Emperor, and only giving him the Title of Caesar.

Not long after Maxentius, Son of Maximian was made Emperor at Rome by the
Soldiers: Galerius sends Severus with an Army against him, but as soon as he
arrived at the City, his Soldiers revolt from him to Maxentius; upon which he
slyes; and in his Flight was killed at Ravenna.

Upon these new Motions, old Maximian surnamed Herculeus, putting on his
Purple, goes to Dioclesian, and would have persuaded him that they might join,
and resume the Empire; but he refusing, he lays by his Purple, and goes to
Constantine, and persuades him for his own ends, to go against the Franconians,
who were then in Rebellion; and in his Absence sets up for Emperor again.
Constantine hearing of this, returns sooner than he could expect him, besieges
him in Marseilles, and takes him and severely rebuking him for his Treachery,
pulls off the Purple from him, Eusebius. Hist. l. 8.13. Lactant. de Mort. Persec.
and makes him a Private Man again. Being enraged at this, he attempts to kill
Constantine by Treachery, which being discovered by his Daughter Fausta, who
put an Eunuch in his stead, Maximian hanged himself in despair.

In the mean time Galerius fearing Maxentius at Rome, and being Jealous of
Constantine in Gaul; dedeclares Licinius, Augustus, and makes him his Partner
in the Empire: Lact. de Mort. Persec. 32. Ed. Oxon.
Upon this Maximin grew discontented, which forced him at last to declare him
Emperor and Constantine too.

After this he was stricken with a loathsome Disease, of which he died; and
about two years after him Maximinus dyed at Aurel. Victor. Lactant. says, he
poisoned himself, de Mort. Pers. 49.
Tarsus, whether he fled from Licinius, who pursued him after he had routed his
Forces in Illyrium.

In the mean while Constantine being Pomp. L. Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l. c. 26,
27.
invited by the Senate and People of Rome, provoked and encouraged by the
Eusebius. ibid. c. 28. Zonar. l. 3. in Constable. Cedren.
Heavenly Vision, goes against Maxentius, whom he overthrew near Rome in a
pitched Battle. Maxentius seeing his Forces routed, strived to escape, but as
he passed over the River Tyber on a Timber-bridge which Zosim. l. 2. Lactant.
says, that the Bridge was Pons Milvius, and that it was cut in two by
Treachery. de Mort. Pers. 44.
broke under him, he fell in, and was drowned.

There was now of all these Augustus'es (for Dioclesian died in his Retirement
in Dalmatia) only Constantine, and Licinius, to whom Constantine gave his
Sister Constantia in Marriage. But they continued not long in Friendship before
they fell into Civil War, in which after a Drawn Battle in Thrace, Peace was
made, and confirmed with Oaths on both sides, but soon after broken by the
Provocations of Licinius, who being brought to the last extremity, surrendered
himself and his Purple to Constantine, only upon condition of Life confirmed by
the Zosim. l. 2. Eutrop. l. 10.
Oath of Constantine to his Sister Constantia. But being sent to Thessalonica,
and not being able to abstain from Opinio fuit immorantem Thessalonicae
Licinium imisse consilium de resumendis armis, and ideo missos interfectores.
Pomp. Laet. (...) -- Credenus. Eusebius de Vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 43. Theod. l. 1.
c. 7.
new Attempts, Constantine ordered him to be put to death.

Now Constantine was sole Emperor, and made his Three Sons Caesar's, Constantine
in the Tenth, Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l 4. c. 40.
Constantius in the 20th, and Constans in the 30th year of his Reign; among
whom, not at his death, as Chapter 1. p. 5.
our Author fraudulently says, but (...) Eusebius. de vit. Constable. c. 60. Edit.
Vales.
sometime before, he divided the Empire, like [or as it were] a Paternal
Inheritance. After his Death and Funeral, The Tribunes of the Army dispatched
away men that had been remarkable for their Love and Fidelity to Constantine,
unto the Caesar's, to give them notice of what had happened, and the Armies
every where, as soon as they heard of the Emperors Death, did as it were by
Divine Inspiration as unanimously consent to acknowledge and admit none for
Emperors but his Three Sons, as if he had been living among them, and
accordingly not long after they saluted them all by the Name of Augusti, which
is the Ceremony of creating Emperors; and of this they gave notice to one
another by Letters; and their Harmonious Consent in the Choice of the New
Emperors was known every where at the same time.

This is, as near as I can render it, the sense of the 60. Chapter of Edit. Vales.
Eusebius in his 4. B, of the Life of Constantine; but a Leaf or two from the
former Citation which our P. 1.
Author took so much notice of, but this Chapter and the next unto it, which
mentions the Senate and Peoples (...) Eusebius. Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 69.
unanimous Confirmation of the Military Choice, he passed over, knowing very
well, that two such Harmonious and Solemn Elections of the (...) Vit. Constable. l.
1. Proaem.
Three Caesar's into the Augustusship was utterly inconsistent with an
Hereditary descent.

And so indeed was the Division of the Empire, whether it were by Constantines
Designation, as Eusebius. says; or by Agreement among the Three Coesars after his
death, as L. 2. (...). Quidam tradunt Constantinum orbem haeredibus testamento
divisisse, quidam filios sort fecisse. Pomp. Laet.
Zosimus relates it. For could His Majesty, for Example, if he had Three Sons
or Brothers, leave England to one, Scotland to another, and Ireland to a third;
or could they if they would, after his decease, legally parcel this Hereditary
Empire into Three Parts, like an Estate left in Common to three? I suppose if
our Author put these Questions to his Superviser, whom I take to be the better
Lawyer of the two, he will tell him No.

But to go on with a few more Questions, I desire these two Gentlemen to tell
me, whether Constantine might not have named Four, which Eutrop. l. 10. (...)
Pomp. Laet. Dalmatium Anavalliani fratris filium Caesarem fecit, and una cum
filiis haeredem statuit.
some write he did, as well as Three Caesar's and Successors, or two, or one? or
if he had pleased none, but left it, as some of his Predecessors did, to Fate,
or the Senate to choose his Successor? or whether he might not have preferred
his base Vid. Pomp. Laet. and Zosim. l. 2. (...).
Son Crispus Caesar, if he had lived, or his Nephew Dalmatius before his own
Children, or a Stranger before them all? If he might have done so, as according
to the Laws and Custom of the Empire he might, then let them tell me, where is
their Hereditary Empire, and the Lineal Succession of the House of Chlorus to
the Imperial Crown?

Lastly let me ask them, If the Three Caesar's designed by Constantine Feliciano
and Titiano Coss.
commenced Augusti like our Princes, His Coss. Constantinus Aug. ad Caelestia
Regna ablatus est xi. Call. Jun. Et ipso anno nuncupati sunt tres Augusti
Constantinus, and Constantius, and Constans v. id. September. Ida. Fast.
Consular. From whence it is evident that Constantinus M. died the 20th. of May,
but his Three sons were not declared Augusti till the 8th. of September
following; and in the mean time, as Candidates for the Empire, rather than
Emperors, they styled themselves Caesar's, as is evident from Constantine
Juniors Letter in favor of Athanasius dated the 25th. or the Calends of July
next after his Fathers death, wherein he styles himself Caesar. ib.
in the moment of their Fathers death? or whether they were not formally made
so by the Suffrage of the Legions? and whether the Suffrage of the Legions, and
the unanimous Consent of the Senate according to the Custom of the Empire,
would not have made any Strangers as rightful Emperors as they? When they have
considered of an Answer to these Questions, I hope they will find that there is
nothing more plain, than that the Empire was not Hereditary, which I undertook
to prove.

After the death of Constantine, the Empire remained not long Tripartite; for
Constantine his eldest Son being killed in a Battle with the Cedrenus. Pomp.
Laet. Zonaras.
Soldiers of Constans, it was reduced to the two surviving Brothers; whereof
Zosim. l. 2.
Constans the youngest being killed in a Battle agianst the Rebel Magnentius in
the 14th. year of his Reign, the whole devolved upon Constantius, who of his
(...). Nazianz. l. Invect. p. 62.
goodness made his Cozen-German Gallus, elder Brother to Julian, Caesar, and
not long after deposed him from the Edicto Gallum dignitate privavit. Pomp.
Laet.
Caesarship, (...). Julian. ad S. P. Q. Athen. p. 498, and 500. (...). Zon. l.
3. p. 18. Vid. Philostorg. Hist. Ecc. l. 3. p. 492.
and put him to death for his Disobedience, Vid. Amm. Marcell. l. 14. c. 2, 7,
9, 11. Onerosus bonis omnibus Caesar. -- Ausurus hostilia in auctorem suae
felicitatis -- Ferociens ut Leo cadaveribus pastus. -- Ablatis regiis
monumentis Caesarem tunica texit communi.
and Murder of Domitian and Montius.

After the death of Gallus, he made his Brother Julian, Caesar, and gave him
his Sister Helena to Wife. Having made him Caesar, he sent him into Gaul, where
he was very successful against the Enemies of the Empire; and having got the
hearts of the Army by Donatives and other Arts, they proclaimed him Zosim. l 3.
p. 711. Am. Marcell. l. 20. Zonar. l. 3. p. 08. Socrates, l. 2. c. 47. and l.
3. c. 1.
Imperator, Augustus, Zosom l. 5. 1.
and put the Diadem upon him, Amm. Marcell. l. 22.
and afterward swore Allegiance to him; upon which Contantius returns from the
Persian Expedition, and marches against him with his Army, designing to reduce
him, but dies in his March in Cilicia, Amm. Marcell. l. 21. says it was
reported, That Constantius at his death nominated Julian his Successor in the
Empire, and made him his Heir.
leaving him in the Possession of the Empire, in which after his Majesty's
death he was perpectly confirmed by the consent of (...) Zosim. l. 3. Vid.
Zonar. l. 3. p. 21.
his Army.

L. 3.
Zosimus tells us, That Constantius after the death of Gallus deliberated
whether he should create a new Caesar, or take a Partner to the Empire, after
the Example of former Emperors; but not knowing any whom he durst trust in the
Augustusship with himself, he was very uncertain what he should do, till
Eusebia the Empress persuaded him by many Arguments to constitute Julian Caesar.

After the Death of Gallus, Ammianus Marcellinus says, That many of the
Courtiers were Caveri debere Caesaris nomen replicantes gesta sub Gallo.
against his making of Julian Caesar, but that the Empress openly opposed them
all, saying, That the Emperor Ommibusque memerans anteponi debere ^ropinquum.
ought to prefer his Kinsman before a Stranger: And Julian was so sensible of
the Empresses Kindness, that he afterward wrote an Orat. 3. p. 217. (...). And
p. 218. (...). --
Oration in her praise to express his Gratitude unto her, in which he owns all
that he had to the Emperors free Bounty and Generosity; and accordingly Tom. 3.
p. 19. (...) --
Zonaras tells us, That Constantius sent this Message to him after he had
Usurped the Empire, that he ought to remember how much he was indebted to his
Kindness, Not only for making of him Caesar, but that he had bred him up from a
Child. From all which it is plain, First, That Constantius had the liberty
after the death of Gallus, whether he would choose any Caesar, or no. 2. That
he might by the Laws and Customs of the Empire have created any other man
Caesar, as well as Julian. 3. That after he had freely chosen him he might
freely have deposed him from the Caesarship as he did his Brother Gallus, as In
Syria Augusti vehiculum irascentis per spatium mill pass^um fere pedes
Antegressus est Galerius purpuratus. Am. Marc. l. 14. Vid. Bapt. Egn.
Galerius was afraid Dioclesian would have deposed him, and as Adrian designed
to depose Hic tamen valetudinis adeo ^^serae fuit, ut Adrianum statim
adoptionis paeniteret, potuer^to; eum amovere a familia Impera^oria, quum saepe
de aliis cogitaret, siforte vixisset. Spart. in Elio Vero.
Ceionius Commodus, otherwise called Aelius Verus, because he was a Weak and
Unhealthy man. Nay the Zonar. Loc, cit Zosim. l. 3. p. 711.
Historians agree, That Constantius commanded Julian after he rebelled to put
off the Habit of Caesar, and betake himself to a private condition. All which
things how agreeable they are with the Birthright of Julian, and the notion of
an Hereditary Empire, I leave to the meanest Capacity to judge.

This very Contradiction is plainly discernable in our Authors First and Second
Chapters, notwithstanding all the Art and Fallacies he has used to disguise
the Cheat from vulgar Readers. There we have: Made Julian Caesar; Would never
have made Julian Caesar; the making of Julian Caesar; He would not have made
Julian Caesar. The Nature of Julian's Elective Succession, and the Manner in
which Nazianzen has expressed himself about it obliged our Author so to speak.
For Naz. in the Invect. 1. p. 50.
Place which he cites, uses the most emphatical word (...), to express how
Constantius made or created Julian Caesar; for as (...) from (...)signifies to
make or ordain a Clergyman: so in Ecclesiastical Writers (...) from (...),
signifies to make, create, or constitute a King [as the Greeks called a Caesar]
and so it is used by the Septuagint for the making of Saul Ishbosheth Kings,
because they were Kings purely by 2 Samuel 8. 22.2 Sam. 2.9. Vid. 1 Samuel 12.1.
Is. 7.6. (...). Schol.
Election. And because Julian was made Caesar as they were made Kings purely by
Election, therefore Naz. ascribes it wholly to the p. 50. (...) -- Invect. p.
50. (...) -- p. 64. (...). p. 65.
Goodness and Bounty of his Elector, and last of all makes it as free an Act in
him to bestow the Caesarship upon Julian, as it was in p. 66.
Alexander the Great to give King Porus his Life and Kingdom, after he had
conquered him. If then Constantius made or created Julian Caesar, as our Author
is forced to confess, where was his Birthright? Therefore to prevent this cross
Question in the Mind of his Reader, he tells him in the P. 27.
Margent, That a Romaen Caesar was somewhat like the Prince of Wales, or the
King of the Romans: That he was more than somewhat like the King of the Romans
we will grant him, but this somewhat like will appear to be a very piteous
somewhat, if Caesar be compared with the Prince of Wales.

For First, The Caesarship only made a man a Spartianus in Celonio Commodo.
Maximianus atque Constantius Caesares dicti sunt, qaasi quidam Principum filii
viri, and designati Augustae Majestatis haeredes.
Candidate and Expectant of the Empire, or some part of it. 2. It was conferred
upon many, as well as upon one, (for Antoninus Pius left two, and Constantine
four Caesar's) and in this case they might be all equal Expectants of the Empire
either in common, Ca^sabon in locum. -- Ut essent Caesares velut Candidati
quidam Imperii and designati ejus Haeredes.
or in several Jurisdictions. 3. After the Emperor had freely conferred this
Honor upon any man, he might as freely, without any regard to Birth or
Birthright, divest him of again, as Constantius did Gallus, and as Misit ad
milites literas quibus jussit, ut abregaretur nomen Caesaris Alexandro.
Lamprid. Vid. Herod. l. 5.
Heliogabalus designed to do to his Brother Alexander, Probus to his Son Pater
si vixisset abregare saepius cogitavit filio Caesaris nomen and confer
Constantio. Pomp. Laet. in Carino.
Carinus, (...). Zosim. l. 3. p. 710. (...). p. 711. (...). Zonar. t. 3. p. 18.
and Constantius himself to Julian, a little before he usurped the Empire. 4.
The Emperor had free Power to confer this Dignity upon whom he would, and to
give it to Strangers, as Nerva did to Trajan, and Maximian Hercideus to
Constantius, Valentiniano Principi percunctanti quemnam ad Imperii consortium
assumeret? Dagalaiphus respondet fidentius: Si tuos amas (Imperator optime)
habes fratrem, ^si rempub. quaere quem vestigas. Amm. Marcell. l. 26.
postponing their own Blood. 5. It gave no proper Right or Title, but only a
bare Recommendation to the Augustusship; and it was in the Power of the Army
and Senate, whether or no they would choose the person recommended by that
Character, if there was but one, or how many of the Number, when there were
more.

These things being evident from Matter of Fact, I desire the Author, or rather
his Superviser the Lawyer to tell me, in which of these Particulars Caesar and
the Prince of Wales are alike? Can the King of England make any man (or any but
one man) Prince of Wales? can he confer that Dignity upon many at once? can he
divest the Prince of it after he has once invested him in it? Is it any thing
more, than a mere state of Honor and greater Liberty or Emancipation? Does it
give the Prince any new Right or Expectation to the Crown? or is he to be
chosen unto it by any Army or Senate after his Fathers death? I protest when I
consider these things, it almost tempts me to believe, That these Men, like
many others, are for an Elective and Republican sort of Monarchy, and that they
heartily wish that Caesar and the Prince of Wales, were not only somewhat, but
altogether alike.

I hope I have made it as clear to any Impartial Reader, that the Roman was an
Elective, as that the English is an Hereditary Monarchy fixed in one Family,
and Lineally descending in proximity of Blood; and yet as if the Right and
Title of Julian were of the same nature with that of his R. H. to the British
Throne: Says he, P. 22.
The Fathers (and yet he mentions but one) had the Conscienoe to set aside such
a Title as this, and 100 more such to secure their Religion. If they had not,
they had been very much to blame; and I dare boldly affirm, That all the
Fathers of our Church would set aside Ten Thousand such Titles to secure
theirs. I mean 10000 such Titles, as Julian or Constantine either, had by
Birth; for upon supposition that God interposed and declared them Emperors,
that Declaration must pass, as it did in Readiness Case, for an Elelection, and
proves that they were not Heirs of Hereditary Monarchies, for then it had been
needless for God to interpose. For what need God, for example, have declared
Constantine Emperor, if he must necessarily have succeeded his Father, as Sons
of Hereditary Monarchs do; it had been sufficient for him to let him survive
him, if he would have had him succeed.

As for that Passage in Eusebius l. 8. c. 13. where after he tells us, That
Constantine was declared Supreme Emperor and Augustus by the Army, then he
adds, (...); and long before this by God himself the Supreme Emperor of all.
This Expression if it be not purely Such as that in Pliny's Panegyric to
Trajan; Principem tamen nestrum liqueret divinitus constitutum -- A Jove ipso
coram, ac palam repertus -- Quem tandem exorata terris numina dedissent, etc.
And that of Eumen. to Constantine. Nobis praecipue te principem dii creaverunt.
Great. Act. Constable. Aug.
Panegyrical, then to expound Eusebius by himself, it relates to the special
Providence which presided over Constantine, and was visible in his
Preservation; and more particularly to some Divine Indications by which he was
miraculously delivered from the Snares of Dioclesian and Galerian: This
Eusebius takes notice of in the 20th Chapter of the First Book of his Life,
where he says, That the Emperors envying and fearing the Courage and Wisdom of
Constantine, waited for all opportunities to do him mischief, but that the
young Prince discovering their Treacherous Practices again, and again by (...)
secret Signs from God, saved himself like the Great Prophet Moses by flight;
and that God cooperated with him in all his Undertakings, forecasting that he
should be present to succeed his Father in the Empire. Accordingly Eum Pater
^antea Caesarem fecerat Coelesti Nuntio admonitus quum aegrotaret, ut primum
Constantinum successorem faceret, qui esset a Tyran^^^ Romanum Imperium liber
aturus, and militibus D^i opem laturu^.
Pomponius Laetus says, That Constantius by the Admonition of an Angel when he
first fell sick, made him Caesar before his Arrival, understanding that he was
the Man, whom God had designed for the Deliverer of the Empire. Now if God had
saved Julian by such miraculous Signs, and afterward sent an Angel to
Constantius to bid him choose him Caesar, because he had designed him for his
Successor; and Nazianzen had known so much, he would never have expostulated
with the Ghost of Constantius about the Choice, nor blamed him, as he did, for
leaving his Empire, and the Royal Priesthood of the Christians to an Enemy of
Christ.

Indeed Julian had the Vanity to pretend to a Divine Commission for usurping
the Empire, to justify his Rebellion against Constantius. For in his
Apologetical Epistle to the Senate and People of Athens he tells them, that
when the Soldiers first attempted to make him Emperor, He p. 521, 522. (...).
See also Julians Vision of the Public Genius. Amm. Marcell. l. 20.
prayed unto Jupiter to give him a Sign, if he would have him accept the
Empire; which the God presently did, admonishing him not to resist the Good
Will of the Army. And in his Ep. 13.(...)
Epist. to his wicked Uncle Julian, he says, That he assumed the Empire upon
the Command of the Gods, who charged him as he valued his own Safety to obey
them. He also pretended to have the Death of Constantius revealed unto him by a
Divine Zosim. l. 3. p. 711. Amm. Marcel. l. 22.
Vision; and it was also reported of him, that as he made his Entrance into a
City of Gaul, a Socrat. Hist. ^c. l. 2. c. 1.
Crown which was hung up between two Pillars fell exactly upon his Head, which
the Spectators looked upon as an Omen that he should be Emperor. And upon the
account of these and other signs to which he pretended, he looked upon himself,
as made Emperor by Jupiter, and therefore in all his Pictures which were drawn
for public places, he caused Jupiter to be Zosim. l. 5. p. 117. ed. Val.
drawn as appearing from Heaven, and reaching unto him the Imperial Crown and
Scepter; which explains the special meaning he had in that Passage cited by our
Author out of his Epist. to the Jews, wherein he tells them, That he had freed
them from Taxes and Troubles; that enjoying Peace and Quietness by his Favor,
they might pray for him, (...), To the best God, and Creator of all things, who
had vouchsafed to crown him with his unspotted Right Hand. For Julian
acknowledged one chief Eternal God, Maker of all Things, visible and invisible,
as he professes in his Panegyrical Oration in praise of his Admired God, the
Sun, which he owns to be the Creature of the invisible Sun, or Supreme Deity,
to whom in Platonical Terms he gives the Orat. 4. (...), etc. Sempiternum
numen. In orat. extrema ad Amicos, Amm. Marc. l. 25.
Attributes of the only true God.

This I take to be the Special Meaning of that Passage, if it have a Special
Emphatical Meaning; but I hope our Author would not have his Reader ascribe the
lying Signs which the Pagan Gods (who were Devils) showed unto this Magician
(if they showed any at all) unto the True God. Methinks it was very odd in a
Protestant Minister, after he had cited a Passage in Eusebius to show that God
had declared Constantine Emperor, to produce another out of Julian to show that
he had made him so too. I hope he makes a difference between the Miracles and
Miraculous Signs which God Eus^b. Vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 28. Zon. t. 3. p. 3.
Philostorg. H. Ecc. l. 1. c. 6.
wrought for Constantine (among which we may reckon that Vision of the Cross,)
and the Signs which Julian says Jupiter gave unto him: If he do not, he is but
like some of the Admirers of his Julian; but if he do, why did he cite the
Apostates Authority to prove that he was crowned by God? I am confident none of
those, who have so thundered of late with the Thebaean Legion, could be guilty
of such Prevarication, as this.

But then if that Saying of his Julian have no Special Meaning in it, it is to
be taken like many other Expressions which occur in Authors in a general and
metaphorical signification only for Julians coming to the Empire by the
Providence of God, by which he disposes of Crowns and Kingdoms, and thus that
most emphatical Recognition which Dionysius made of Valerianus and Galienus'es
Right to the Empire is to be understood, when he said in the Name of the
Christians, (...) Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11. Hi^t. Ecc.
We worship that one God the Creator of all things, who has given the Empire
to Valerianus and Galienus the Emperors most beloved of God. As also that of
Athanasius to Constantius, although in English it sounds thus; (...). Athan. in
Apol. ad Constable.
O Almighty Lord, Eternal King, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou by
thy Word have given the Empire to thy Servant Constantius. How would our Author
have triumphed if he had found but one fuch Passage as either of those about
Julian in any Christian Writer; and yet they amount to no more than solemn
acknowledgments of Gods Providence in disposing the Empire to the aforesaid
Emperors according to that of L. 5. c. 4.
Irenaeus, Cujus enim jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and reges
constituuntur; That Kings are made by his Appointment, by whose Appointment men
are born. And so indeed Julian came to be Emperor by Gods Providential
Appointment, and no otherwise; for it was merely by Gods Providential
Appointment that Constantius resolved to choose a Caesar; when he might have
taken unto him a Co-partner in the Empire, that Eusebia pressed him to make
Julian Caesar after he resolved to choose one, Vid. Jul. Ep. ad S. P. Q. Athen.
that he sent him into Gaul, that he had such Success there against the
Barbarians, that the Army declared him Augustus, that the Emperor died in his
March against him, and that after his death his Soldiers submitted unto him.
But yet our Fallacious Author represents the matter, as if he had been Emperor
by particular Designation from God, like David, or Constantine; and then cries
out, Yet the Fathers had the conscience to set aside such a Title as this.

But Julian was not made Caesar by particular Order from God, but by the free
Choice of Constantius, to whom he owned the Honor of the Caesarship. It was
he, that set him upon the next step to the Empire, when he might have set
another upon it; he by doing that, which he was free not to have done, was the
occasion of his coming so easily to the Empire: Julian had no antecedent Right
to the Caesarship or the Government of Gaul, but he owed both to the Generosity
of Constantius: And this is the true Ground of all the Rhetorical
Interrogatories of Gregory, and of Constantius his bewailing and repenting at
his death for doing what he had done for him, because he was free to have done
otherwise; indeed as free as Henry the 7th, or his eldest Son Prince Arthur had
he lived, would have been to have made his Brother Henry, who was designed for
a Churchman, Archbishop of Canterbury or York.

This our Author knew very well, and this the very Expressions which he brings
out of Nazianzen imply; but yet, lest the vulgar Reader should discern the
Fallacy, he keeps a great Jingling with Foreclosing, ande Excluding Julian;
which words, (as all terms of Privation connote the Habit) insensibly carry the
understanding of the unwary Reader to think of some antecedent Birthright which
Julian had to his Cosens Throne; whereas strictly speaking, he had no more
right unto it, than the Superviser of his Book to the Judges place in Ireland,
from which (in his abusive sense of the words) he was Excluded and Foreclosed.

And I would fain ask our Author, who has so artificially disguised the Nature
of the Imperial Succession, whether at the time of writing he was not conscious
to himself of this Fallacy, which he is guilty of, in calling the Non-Election
or Preterition of Julian by the name of Exclusion and if he were not, whether
he be not convinced of his Mistake now? If he be not, then I desire him to tell
me, whether Julian after the death of Constantius could [by virtue of
Birthright] have challenged the Roman Empire, as Henry of Lancaster did the
English [mutatis mutandis] in these words: Great point of succession. p. 15.
I Henry of Lancaster challenge this Realm of England with all the Members and
the Appurtenances, as I am descended by right line of the Blood coming from the
Good Lord King Henry the Third, and through that Right which God of his Grace
has sent me -- Or whether the Senate of Rome could have made such a
Recognition of Julians Right, as the Parliament made to King Great Point of
Succession. p. 23.
James at his first coming to the Crown. We being thereunto bound both by the
Laws of God and Man, do with unspeakable Joy recognize and acknowledge, that
immediately upon the decease of Elizabeth late Queen of England the Imperial
Crown of the Realm of England, etc. did by inherent Birthright, lawful, and
undoubted Succession descend and come to your Majesty, as being lineally,
justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm -- and
thereunto we do humbly submit and oblige our selves, our Heirs, and Successors
for ever --

If these things could not have been applied to Julian upon the death of his
Cosen Constantius, then I hope Mr. J. will grant me, that his Arguings from
the Authority of Nazianzen are fraudulent and inconclusive, and that for all he
can make of that single fathers Poetical Exclamations to the Ghost of
Constantius, the English Succession may be unalterable, there being so wide a
difference between the Roman and English Monarchy, That being Elective, and
This Hereditary; That being Casual, Arbitrary, Uncertain, and most Irregular in
its descent, and this being fixed to one House, in a lineal Descent, according
to Proximity of Blood.

But still after all this we are pressed with the Authority of Eusebius, who,
as our Author tells us, says, That the Empire was entailed by the Edict of
Nature, which (says he) I think is the most sure and Divine Settlement that
can be, But Eusebius neither has said, nor could say so, nor any thing
equivalent thereunto; for there was no such thing as Entail, nor any notion of
it among the Romans, neither as to the Empire, nor the Estates of Private Men;
the Emperors as well as their Subjects had always liberty to Inst. l. 2. Tit.
13.
disinherit their next Relations, and make who they would their Heirs; and if a
man chanced to die Inst. l. 3. Tit. 2.
Intestate, they had Rules whereby the Estate was divided among his Posterity;
or if he had none, the Ib. Tit. 3.
Collateral Kindred were his Heirs at Law. Let us therefore -- consider the
Passages of Eusebius, wherein our Author triumphs before the Victory; and first
it is true, That in his first De vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 9. edit. Val.(...)
Quotation, Eusebius, says, that the Throne of the Empire descended upon
Constantine from his Father, but then, agreeably to the report of all other
Authors, he implies but two Lines above his 2d. Quotation, De vit. Constable. l. 1.
21. (...). Dispositis deinde ex arbitrio rebus suis, as Val. renders it.
that it was by the Order and Disposal of his Father, which is inconsistent
with an Entail; and I would fain know of Mr. J. or Mr. H. how Constantius his
part of the Empire came to be entailed upon his eldest Son, when hehad many, by
the Edict and Law of Nature; and Maximians part of it was not so entailed upon
his only Son Maxentius. who was casually chosen to the Crown.

What hindered the Law of Nature to take place in the behalf of Maxentius the
Resignation or death of his Father? how came he not to have the benefit of it,
if the Law and Edict of Nature in his Quotations of Eusebius signify a
According to that Definition; Jus natural est dictatum rectae rationis
indicans actui alicui ex ejus convenientia, aut disconvenientia cum ipsa natura
rationali, inesse moralem turpitudinem aut necessitatem moralem, ac
consequenter ab auctore naturae Deo, talem actum aut vetari aut praecipi. Grot.
de Jure. l. 1.10.
Prime Indispensable Law of Nature, as he would have his Reader to believe:
What else does he mean by the P. 21.
most sure and divine Settlement that can be; and by his implying in the same
page, That God declared Constantine Emperor by this Law of Nature before he was
declared by the Army; and that the Choice of the Army was only in obedience to
this Law of God and Nature; by which Constantine, as the eldest Son of
Constantius had a Right unto the Crown. He has so artificially tacked the two
Texts of Eusebius together, as to tempt the unwary Reader to think so, and
supposing he will so understand them: Then he adds, if this will not do, I know
not what measure of Divine Right will serve their turn, unless they would have
a Crown to drop from the Clouds. Then he tells us, That Julian pretended to
such a Title and after triumphantly concludes, That the Fathers (as he calls
Nazianzen) had the conscience to set aside such a Title, as this. Had they so?
Then they were very much to blame, to deprive a man of a Right, which belonged
unto him by the Laws of God and Nature, or rather by the prime Indispensable
Law of Nature, which is the unwritten Law of God.

I say, they are to blamed, and not to be imitated for so doing, if the (...)
and (...) of Eusebius be to be taken in such a strict sense; but if they are
not (as indeed it is impossible they should be) then they are very
reconcilable with the Elective Nature of the Empire, and the Casual and
Elective Succession of Constantine and his three Sons, (who were all freely
nominated by their Fathers, and freely chosen by the Army) unto the Imperial
Crown.

I say it is impossible, that the (...) and (...) of Eusebius should be taken
for the Law of Nature in the strict and proper sense; and this is evident from
the two Quotations, in the 2d of which p. 21. Eusebius says, (...). de vit.
Constable. l. 1. c. 21. edit. Val.
That Constantius passed over the Inheritance of the Empire by the Law of
Nature to his eldest Son Constantine: But in the First, p. 19. -- (...).
he says that the Throne of the Empire descended upon Constantine from his
Father, and by the Law of Nature wss reserved for his Sons, and for their
Posterity, and propagated like a Patrimony for ever.

By his Sons here, he means his Three Sons, among whom De vit. Constable l. 4. c.
51.(...)
he tells us in another place, he divided the Empire, like a Paternal
Inheritance. Now if the Law of Nature be taken by Eusebius in the strict sense,
in which it always commands the same things, how could Constantius by the Law
of Nature leave the Empire only to his eldest Son, and Constantine by the same
Law divide it among Three? Can the Law of Nature be both for Primo-geniture,
and Gavel-kind too?

I would further ask our Author, upon supposition that the three Sons of
Constantine had every one of them had Three Sons, whether their respective
Parts of the Empire by the Law of Nature must have been divided into equal
shares among them, as the whole was divided among their Fathers; or whether by
the Law of Nature they must have been restrained to the Eldest Son, and the
Younger been laid aside? By that time he has considered of an Answer to these
Questions, he will be forced to grant, That by the Law of Nature, Eusebius
meant no more in his loose Panegyrical way of writing, than the dictates of
Reason grounded upon natural Kindness and Affection, by which a man is prompted
in the first place to make Provision for his Children, or if he have no
Children, for his next Relations; and these dictates of Reason grounded upon
natural Affection may be called the Law of Nature in a large and secondary
Sense. Thus we say a man is bound to provide for his Children, or Nature binds
man to provide for his Children, and to prefer them before Strangers, but then
these and such like Sayings are not absolutely, but only Hypothetically true,
upon such and such Suppositions: They are only general Rules of Natural Justice
and Equity, from which there may be a Thousand Exceptions. As for Example,
Nature, or Natural Justice and Equity binds me to study the Advancement of my
Children, but not to places for which they are not fit, or of which they are
not worthy, etc: But if I have Places of Honor and Trust at my disposal, of
which my Children, or next Relations are as capable, and worthy as other men,
then if no mischief will thereby arise to them, nor the Public, Natural
Justice requires, that I should prefer them; and upon this Supposition, that
Commodus, Son to Marcus Antoninus inherited all the Virtues of his Father, as
the World believed, Athenagoras in his Apology told his Majesty, that the
Christians prayed that his Son (...), as was most just, might succeed his
Father in the Throne. So Eumenius says, that Constantius Chlorus; ut decebat,
as it became him, nominated Constantine for his Successor; and these two last
Phrases have the full force of the (...), and (...) of Eusebius, by which he
meant no more, than the Dictates of natural Reason, and Affection, by which
Constantius was prompted to leave his Empire to his Eldest Son; other Reasons
concurring, why he should not divide it among them all, and Constantine to
divide it among his three Sons; other Reasons concurring to persuade him, why
he should not divide it among more (suppose Eusebius be in the Right) nor
wholly leave it unto one. He might if he had pleased have left his two Brothers
Constantius and Anaballianus, and his Naphew Dalmatius Caesar Sharers in the
Empire, or the Army, and Senate, if they pleased, might have chosen these
three, and rejected the others; but they did not only postpone them, but killed
them, which (by the way) is a violent Presumption, that the Empire was not
Entailed upon the House of Chlorus, to which the Vid. Zosim. l. 2. c. 11. Ep.
Jul. ad S. P. Q. Ath.
Army and Constantius were mighty injurious in taking away so many of its
Supports.

Thus have I fairly examined the Authorities of Eusebius, in which it is also
remarkable that he does not say, That the Empire was a Paternal Inheritance,
but only that it was left or divided, like a Paternal Inheritance; just as
Galba, speaking of the Empire which continued so long in the House of the
Caesar's said, Sub Tiberio, Caio, Claudio unius Familiae quasi haereditas
fuimus. We have been as it were the Inheritance of one House under Tiberius,
Caligula, and Claudius. And it is further to be taken for a Rule, that
wheresoever the words Heir, Patrimony, Inheritance, or such like words occur in
Authors that speak of the Descent, Succession, or Conveyance of the Empire or
private Estates among the Romans, they are never to be understood as we
understand them, when they are strictly used with reference to Entailed Estates.

For (as I said before) there was no such thing as Entail or Birthright among
the Romans, which our Author would make his Reader believe there was, by that
Complement of Eumenius in his Panegyric to Constantine, Imperium nascendo
meruisti, which signifies no more than that singular advantage and pretension
he had to the Empire by being the Son of so Good an Emperor, and is no more
than what a Panegyrist might say to the Son of an Excellent King of Poland, if
he were chosen to succeed his Father to the Crown. For Gratitude would oblige
the Electors of any Empire, to prefer the According to that of Eu^^n. to
Constantine; Imperatoris igitur filius, and tanti Imperatoris, and ipse ^ain
feliciter (...) Imperium --
Son of a good deceased Prince before all others that were his Equals in Merit;
and this was the ground of the following Passage in Commodus his Speech to the
Army, which, if our Author had known of it, would have founded far better for
his Purpose, than the foresaid Expression of Eumenius: (...) Herodian. l. 1. in
Commodo.
Fortune has made me your Emperor after my Father, not being a Stranger, or
Adopted Son as my Ancestors have been, nor glorying in an acquired Empire, but
I am the only Prince that has been born unto you in the Court; and not being
of private Extraction, I was received in the Royal Purple as soon as I was
born, and the same Sun, that first saw me a Man, saw me a Prince too. I pray
consider this, and then love me as your natural born Sovereign, and not as one
given unto you by Choice.

How would Mr. J. have spread his Feathers if he had known of this Passage! He
would have said, There is nothing more plain than that the Empire was
Hereditary; there are not words in the World to express it more plainly; if
this will not do, I do not know what Blood and Birthright means! And yet every
Scholar knows, that these Expressions are not to be understood in literal
strictness, but with allowance and latitude, as they are nothing but the
Rhetorical Amplification of Young Commodus, who prided himself in this, That he
was born the Son of an Emperor, which none of his Ancestors had been, and was
Swaithed, as it were, in the Royal Purple, as soon as he came from his Mothers
Womb.

And if these Rhetorical expressions in the Speech of Commodus be not to be
understood in literal strictness, much less is the foresaid Complement of
Eumenius literally true of Constantine, as we shall find if we consult the
whole Passage whereof our Author very fraudulently presents us but with as
much, as he thought would serve his own Design. But to the clear understanding
of it, I must here inform my Reader that Ventum est ad Principem Claudium, qui
nobis intuitu Constantii Caesaris cum cura in literis digerendus est -- De
Claudii genere and familia saltem pauca dicenda sunt, ne ea quae scienda sunt
praeteriisse videamur. Claudius, Quintillus, and Crispus fratres fuerunt.
Crispi filia Claudia: ex ea and Eutropio nobilissimo Gentis Dardanae viro
Constantius Caesar est genitus. Trebell. Pollio. in Divo Claudio.
Constantius, Father of Constantine, descended from Claudius the Second Emperor
of that Name, by his Niece Claudia, Daughter to his youngest Brother Crispus,
and not by his Daughter, as Eutropius says. This the Panegyrist refers unto:
First of all telling Constantine, That his Fathers Quinimo patrem tuum ipsum
ve^us illa Imperatoriae domus praerogativa provexit.
Royal Extraction was the occasion of his being promoted to the Crown; by which
means he Ut jam summo g^adu, and supra human^rum rerum fata consisteres post
dues familiae tuae tertius Imperator.
seemed to be raised to a pitch above the Fate of other men, in that he was the
Third Emperor of his own Family; and that he had this Inter omnes (inquam)
participes majestatis tuae hoc habes Constantine praecipuum, quod Imperator
natus es.
Special Glory among his Partners of the Imperial Majesty, that he was born
Emperor. Tantaque est nobilitas origin^s tuae, ut nihil tibi addi^erit ^^noris
Imperium.
And that the Nobility of his Birth was such, that the Empire added no honor
unto him: Nor Nec possit fortuna numini suo imputare quod tuum est, omisso
ambitu. and suffragatione.
could Fortune lay claim to any thing he had, who had never stood for the
Empire, nor been chosen by Suffrage thereunto. This very Expression supposes,
that ambitus, and suffragatio were the ordinary way of acquiring the Empire,
according to that Rule of Law, Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis. And
then it follows where our Author begins: Non fortuita hominum concensio, non
repentinus aliquis favoris eventus te Principem fecit Imperium nascendo
meruisti.
It was not the casual Consent of men, nor any sudden effect of Favor, that
made you Emperor [like other men] but you gained the Empire by the Merit of
your Birth: i.e. You were born unto all that preparatory Greatness to the
Empire, which other men attain unto by Labor and Toil: This, and no more is
the Sense of those Rhetorical Expressions, Imperator natus es, and Imperium
nascendo meruisti; as is plain from the next words, Quod quidem mihi Deorum
immortalium munus, et primum videtur, et maximum in lucem statim felicem
venire, et ea quae alli vix totius vitae laboribus consequuntur jam domi parta
suscipere.
Which seems to me the first and greatest Gift of the Gods for one to come
great into the World, and to find at home [an Empire] ready for him, which
others hardly attain with the Toil, and Labor of their whole Lives.

Nay so far was Eumenius from thinking, that Constantine came to the Crown by
virtue of such a Title as that of his R. H. that a little after the place which
our Author has cited, he expressly ascribes it to his Fathers Election of him;
Quinimo statim sententiam rogatus, cui Imperium discerneret, ut decebat, dixit
Constantinum, manifest enim Patris sententia electus est, He never canvassed
for the Empire, as others did, nor was formally chosen by the suffrage of the
Army, but by his Father Constantius, after whose death, the Soldiers
unanimously admitted him for their Emperor, as the same Panegyrist observes,
Purpuram statim tibi, cum primum copiam tui fecit egressus, milites injecere
lachrymanti. But besides the Interest of his Father, there was also the joint
interest of another great Man, which made the Army so readily embrace him, as
it appears from In Epitome.
Aurel. Victor. Constantio mortuo, cu^^^^is qui aderant annitentibus, sed
praecipue Eroco Alamannorum rege, auxilii gratia Constantium comitato, Imperium
capit. And if he was first Elected by his Father, then Admitted by the Army,
which had Power to reject him, and last of all Confirmed by De Mort, Pers.
Galerius, as Lact. tells us, where was his Hereditary Descent?

But in the 3d. place; so far is this passage of Eumenius from being a full and
pregnant Proof of the Hereditary Nature of the Empire, or that Constantine was
born unto it, as our Author P. 20.
speaks, that he was born 14 years before his Father Constantius was made
Caesar: For De vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 5. Ed. Val.
Eusebius says, That he reigned more than 30 years, and was above 60 years old
when he died; and by consequence he was at least 30 years old when he came to
the Crown in the year of our Lord 306. But his Father Constantius Chlorus was
made Caesar by Dioclesian, and Maximian in the Vid. Baluz. in Lact. de Mort.
Pers. p. 13. Ed. Oxon.
Year 293. by which Account Constantine must have been full 14 years old before
his Father was made Caesar, and about 29 before he was made Augustus, which was
about a year before he died.

Eumenius could not but know this, and therefore his Complement of Nascendo
Imperium meruisti, signifies no more than his getting the Empire by occasion of
being the Which was a mighty Advantage according to that of Nazar. in his
Paneg. to Constantin. Tuos Constantine maxim, tuos liberos, ac deinceps
nepotes tecum optat [Roma] ut tanto a pluribus petantur, quanto ad majora
nascuntur.
Son of an Emperor, Imperatoris filius and tanti Imperatoris, as he afterward
speaks. If our Author had pleased, he might as well have proved Constantius to
have been heir to the Empire, from that Passage to Constantine, Patrem tuum
ipsum vetus illa Imperatoriae domus praerogativa provexit; This Latin might
have been turned into plausible English for our Authors purpose, but he well
knew, that Claudius was succeeded by Four or Five elected Emperors of different
Families, before Constantius was chosen Emperor, and that the Posterity of a
Brother, most of all the youngest to an Emperor elected from a private man, can
derive no Title to the Crown. Yet Eumenius derives the Succession both of
Constantius, and Post duos familiae tuae tertius Imperatir.
Constantine from Claudius, but our Author cunningly took no notice of that,
because it proves that the Panegyrist had no design to give either of them any
proper Hereditary Title, but only to declare the Honor and Advantages they
both had by being descended of such high Blood.

But suppose Constantine had been born after his Father Constantius was made
Emperor, yet his Birth and Primo-geniture could Entitle him to no more, than
his Fathers Share of the Empire, which Eusebius. calls (...), and yet to qualify
him for this [for when this In which Constantius his taking of Massilia is the
last Exploit for which the Panegyrist commends him. Vid. Lactant. de Mort.
Pers. p. 57. Ed. Oxon.
Panegyric was made he had no more] Eumenius himself tells us, he was
Nominated and Recommended by his Father, chosen by the Army after his Fathers
death, and confirmed by the following Suffrage of the Senate, which would have
given any of his Brothers, nay any other man, as good a Right to the Empire, as
he himself had.

After the Authority of Eusebius he serves us with another out of Julian, but
to as little purpose. Julian, says he, in his Panegyric to the Empress
Eusebia says, That Constantius married her to have Heirs for his great
Lordship of almost all the World: And then he adds, He having none, Julian
himself was the sole, and undoubted Heir, for in him the Family was afterward
extinct. Our Author, I see, delights much in Panegyricks, but he was very
unlucky in citing this, which proves the Succession of Julian, although P. 20.
he was the Nephew of Constantine and had the same Royal Blood flowing in his
Veins, to have been purely Arbitrary and Elective. For (as I said before) Eadem
annitente, Caesar a Constantio dictus est, horum igitur in se beneficiorum
gratias hac oratione refert. Petavius in Orat. III. Jul. Vid. p. Orat. 218,
220, 224, 225, 229.
Julian wrote this Oration in praise of the Empress out of mere Gratitude to
her, because she had persuaded the Emperor against his Inclinations to create
him Caesar, and accordingly he often (...) p. 217. (...) p. 218. (...) p. 220.
To which agrees that of Zosim. l. 3. p. 711. (...) And of Zonaras t. 3. p. 19.
(...) -- Vid. P. 224, 225, 229.
acknowledges in it, That next under God he had received all he had from the
Free Choice and Generosity of his Majesty; which expression, with the rest in
the Margent, are very repugnant to the nature of an Hereditary Lineal
Succession, but very proper for an Elected Candidate to use.

Besides, in the words which he cites, Julian says not, That Orat. 3. p. 203.
(...).
Constantius married her to have Heirs for his great Lordship of almost all the
World, but that He being Lord of almost all the World, made choice of her to
bring him Sons [in the plural Number] who might be Heirs of Honor, and Power.
This is a general Expression, and it may be presumed, that Julian expressed
himself in general words on purpose, because the Sons succeeding their Fathers
in the Roman Empire was so Arbitrary and Uncertain, though in the general they
could not sail to be Heirs of Honor and Power. But had the Expression been as
particular, as our trusty Author has falsely rendered it, yet the word Heirs
is to be taken in the sense it then had for chosen, or constituted Heirs, or
Successors, and not for Heirs by Entail, in which case purely Elected Emperors,
as (...) Nazianz. 11. Invect. p. 118. l. 1.
Jovian the Successor of Julian, are called (...), Heirs of the Empire; and
accordingly (...), is rendered by the Latin Translator, Quos haeredes
relinqueret, whom he might make or create Heirs: So that the true Sense of
Julians Compliment is this, That Constantius being Lord of almost all the
World, married Eusebia to bring him Sons, whom he might make Heirs of Honor
(or if our Author please to have it so) of his Honor and Power.

Before I go farther, I cannot but observe, what a Trick he has used to
prevent his Readers from enquiring who succeeded Julian, or to forestall their
Objection against the Hereditary Succession, in case they should by chance, or
enquiry come to understand, That first Amm. Marcell. l. 25. c. 15. ed. ult.
Par. 1681.
Sallustius, and then Jovian, who were nothing related to the House of
Constantine, were chosen Emperors by the Army, after the death of Julian. To
obviate this Objection of choosing, and of choosing those, who had none of the
Royal Blood, (as he fallaciously speaks) flowing in their Veins, p. 20.
he tells us, That Constantius having no Sons, Julian himself was the sole and
undoubted Heir, for in him the Family was afterward extinct.

Little do his Admirers know how much he has imposed upon them in this
Particular, for whether he did not know it, or whether he dissembled it, I will
not stand guessing; Julian was not the last of the Blood, but left behind him
one of the Stirpis Imperatoriae. Amm. Marc. l. 6. c. 6. 11. Culminis summi
prosapia. c. 7.
Imperial Stock, descended of Procopio Constantianam praetendenti
necessitudinem.
Constantius and Constantine, (...) Cedren. and Zonar.
Nephew, or Cousen-German by the Fathers side to Julian, by name Procopius, who
was a Commander of great Note in the Army, whom he had privately made Ibi
moratus aliquot dies dicitur ante aras, nullo arbitrorum admisso, occulte
paludamentum purpureum propinquo suo tradidisse Procopio, mandasseque arripere
fidentius principatum, si se interisse didicerit apud Parthos -- Illica, ut
antea cogitaverat, triginta millia lectorum militum eidem commisit Procopio.
Am. Marc. l. 23. c. 3. (...) Zosim. l. 3. p. 733. (...) and l. 4. p. 736. (...)
-- Vid. and p. 738. and Amm. Marc. l. 26. c. 7. and Philostorg l. 9. p. 517.
Caesar, and commanded him briskly to assume the Empire, if he heard he was
killed in Persia. If Procopius had been an umbratic, obscure person, our Author
might have been in part excused for saying, that Julian was the last of the
Constantian Family, but seeing he made so great a Figure in the times of
Constantius, and Valentinian, as well as of Julian, I know not what his
Admirers will say in his Defense.

In the time of Constantius, Procopius was one of his Amm. Marc. l. 17. c. 14.
l. 18. c. 6. id. l. 26. c. 6.
Secretaries, and sent by him Ambassador to the King of Persia, and in the time
of Valentinian, and Valens, he rebelled upon this Occasion. It came to be known
that Julian had privately made him Caesar, and given him private Instructions
to invade the Empire, if he should dye in the Persian Expedition. It came also
to be reported, but very falsely, that Julian with his last Breath nominated
him his Successor, and these things made him jealous of the New Emperors,
because he feared these stories would make them jealous of him. Wherefore as
soon as he had buried Julian in the Suburbs of Tarsus, he Amm. Marcell. l. 25.
c. 9.
retired and could not be found, though diligent search and enquiry was made
after him. L. 4. 346.
Zosimus says, That after Jovian was chose Emperor he presently went to him in
all have, and delivered up his Purple unto him, telling him how he had received
it, and desired leave of him to leave his Service, and retire to Caesaraea in
Cappadocia, where he had great Possessions, and lived quietly all the time of
Jovian; but however growing suspected after his death to Valentinian, and
Valens, he absconded, and skulked about, till being wearied with want and
solitude, he grew desperate, and Rebelled, hoping to be assisted with the
Julian-Interest, but being deserted, and betrayed by his own Officers, he was
delivered bound to Valens, Amm. Marc. l. 26. c. 9. Zosim. l. 8. c. 8.
who presently ordered him to be put to death. This is the short Account of
Procopius, Julian's Nephew (as is more probable) or Cousen-German by the
Fathers side, who from the death of Constantius, as L. 25. c. 6. Post
Constantii obitum in rerum conversione velut Imperatoris cognatus altius
anhelabat, and apparebat eum, si unquam potuisset, fore quietis publicae
perturbatorem.
Marcell, tells us, had an eye upon the Empire, and seemed to be one, who would
dispute for it, if an Opportunity were offered, which made Julian, as it was
muttered about, give him the forementioned Instructions of assuming the
Government, when he was dead. And now let the World think what it will of our
Author for asserting, that the House of Constantius, or Constantine was extinct
in Julian, when so Famous a Man, who makes so great a part of the History of
his Time, was then surviving of it; and let all impartial men judge, whether
the Imperial Crown was entailed upon the Progeny of Constantius Chlorus, when
the Army of Constantius, and Julian his Grandsons in eight Months time chose
Salustius, who refused the Empire because of his Age and Weakness; Jovian, who
accepted it, and Valentinian his Successor.
Three Emperors without taking notice of Procopius [his Great Grandson if he
were Julians Nephew, but his Grandson if they were Brothers Children] or he of
the Injustice of their Choice. Furthermore, if he was Nephew to Julian, he must
have been second Cosen to Constantius, and Son to the Niece of Constantine the
Great; or if he were his Cosen by the Fathers side, then he was likewise
Cosen to Constantius, and Nephew to Constantine the Great; and besides all
this, he was a Man as well qualified, and educated for the Government, as any
of the three mentioned before; who, if the Empire was Hereditary, were all
Usurpers and illegally chosen over his Head.

But although we had wanted the Instance of Procopius, yet it would have been a
bold and precarious Assertion to say, that the House of Chlorus was extinct in
Julian, for there were many Branches of it, of whose Posterity Histories are
silent, and say nothing; but then it does not follow from thence, that they had
none. It does not follow, for Example, that Constantinus eldest Son to
Constantius Chlorus by Theodora, or Nepotianus his Grandson by Eutropia had no
Children, because we do not read of them; for as the Parents of Procopius, so
the Children of these and others Branches may not have been spoke of by
Historians; but men that will write against the Monarchy, or the Succession, or
the Rights of Sovereignty, may venture to say any thing, they may be as bold as
blind Bayard, they may contradict themselves, or common-sense, and yet shall
not want an Association to cry them up for Unanswerable, be they never so much
besides the Truth.

Having now showed how the Succession stood in the Roman Empire, and answered
all the Impertinent Citations, which our Author has fallaciously brought to
prove it to be Hereditary, I hope by this time his Admirers will acknowledge
that he is not Unanswerable, but that the Foundation upon which he argued,
being destroyed, the Superstructure of his Conclusions must fall to the Ground.
For his Industrious Attempt to prove the Roman Empire to have been Hereditary
does sufficiently declare it to be his own Sense, that there can be no Parallel
between the case of Julian and a Popish Successor, but upon that supposition;
and that otherwise, there can be no good arguing from Non-Election or
Preterition to Exclusion, and from no Right and Title to Birthright, or
Inheritance, which is the constitutive difference between an Elective and
Hereditary Crown.

The Nature of Birthright, and Inheritance, which is not founded on the
Statutes, but upon the Original Custom and Constitution of the English
Government, which is an Hereditary Monarchy, makes it debateable whether an Act
of Exclusion would be Valid or Invalid? And upon supposition that it would be
Valid, there are many Arguments which makes it disputable, whether it would be
safe or unsafe, expedient, or unexpedient; and whether the Mischiefs it would
bring upon us would not be as great, as those which it would prevent. But in
the case of Julian there was no such matters for debate; and therefore the
sense which Nazianzen had of his Succession is nothing to us, who are under
another sort of Government, and in other Circumstances; the Consideration of
which makes many Sincere and Honest Protestants, who dread Popery and a Popish
Successor, as much as our Author, zealous for the Lineal Succession; and this
distinction between the Succession, and a Popish Successor makes it no
Contradiction in the Addressers, and particularly in his and Shr. Beth's
Friends of Rippon to beseech his Majesty not to agree to the Bill of Exclusion,
and yet to be ready to hazard their Lives and Fortunes, and spend that last
Drop of their Blood in Defense of his Majesty, and the Religion established by
Law.

It is one thing to be for the Succession, and another to be for a Popish
Successor, as it is one thing to be for the Monarchy, and another thing to be
for a Popish Monarch; and there are many for the Former, who as heartily pray
to God to prevent the Latter, as for their daily Bread. But our Author, who is
an excellent Artist in Fallacies, so words it in the beginning of his Preface,
as to induce his Reader to think that those, who address to his Majesty to
preserve the Lineal Succession, do make it their humble Request to him, that
they may be sure of a Popish Successor, as if they had consulted Gadbury or the
Fates, and were sure that his R.H. whom he means by the Popish Successor,
without an Act of Exclusion, should certainly come to the Crown.

Nay so far are all those, who are so tender of the Succession, from having any
tenderness for a Popish Successor, that they dread him like the Plague, and
therefore would have had Provisional Laws made to bind up such an one, and put
him under very close legal Confinement, in case he should be King. But nothing
would serve the other Protestants but an Act of Exclusion backed with another
for an Association, to which, I am confident, that Nazianzen himself, had he
then sat on the Spiritual Bench, would never have said, Content.

And truly, to make the case of Julian, and his R. H. exactly parallel, we must
not only suppose, that the Succession to the Empire was Hereditary, but that
Constantine the Great had been murdered after a long Rebellion by the Aerians,
his Son Constantius miraculously preserved and restored, and the ruined Church
restored with him; that from the time of his Restoration the Aerians resumed
their old practices against the Church and the Monarchy, and underhand helped
Julian, after he had left the Communion of the Church, to get an Indulgence for
themselves and the Pagans; that the Church was almost ruined and the Empire
much weakened by this Indulgence, and other Contingences; and that however the
Aerians and Pagans were opposite in other things, yet they agreed in conspiring
against the Established Christian Religion, even in the Senate, where they
always voted alike.

We must also suppose, that the Aerians were generally Commonwealths-men, that
they were a very busy and dangerous interest of men against the Government,
that they took all Advantages against it, especially when the Peoples minds
were distracted by the discovery of a Pagan Plot upon Julians Apostasy, that
then they represented the Orthodox Christians, especially the Bishops, and the
Clergy for Pagans, and Half-Pagans; that the Emperor had promised the
discontented Senate (which now I must suppose like our Parliament) to pass any
Acts for the Security of the Christian Religion, which were consistent with the
Succession; that the Western Empire was satisfied with the Emperors
Declaration, and had made it Treason to call the Succession into Question; that
the Monarchy was weakly supported; (...)
that Julian was but two years younger than the Emperor, and not of so
healthful a Constitution; that the Empress might dye, and the Emperor marry
again; that Julians own Children the next Heirs after him were firm Christians;
that in case he should come to the Crown he would find an Empty Exchequer, and
a poor Revenue; that the Senate would never Supply him, but upon their own
Terms; that he could not persecute without almost insuperable Difficulties;
that an Act for Dis-inheriting of him would be a very dangerous Precedent, and
of dangerous Consequence, especially since the Western Empire had declared for
the Succession; that it would signify nothing without an Act for Association;
and that an Act for Association would legalize a standing Army, and entail War
upon the two Empires, and end in Arbitrary Government. These, and many more
things besides the Hereditary Succession to the Roman Empire, must be supposed
to make the Parallel exact between Julian, and his R. H. and to make a good
Consequence from Nazianzens sense about Julians Succession in that Scheme of
Affairs, to the sense he probably would have had of it in such a Scheme as
ours. I am sure there is no Consequence from one to the other, although his
Expostulations with the Soul of Constantius should not pass for mere Rhetoric,
and if they must not, I desire Mr. J. to say, if they will not prove the
Invocation of Saints? If they must be understood as Rhetoric, then they are
(as indeed they are) poor Sham Arguments to prove either the Invocation of
Saints, or That the Fathers would have set aside an 100 such Titles as that of
the Heir of England to secure their Religion; but if they must not be so
understood, then do they not equally prove both. Indeed were an Act of
Exclusion the only way of securing our Religion, were it certain that the
Popish Successor so presumed must if he were not excluded, succeed, or were the
exclusion of him not the most disputable way of securing our Religion, and very
hurtful to the Monarchy, or were it not, as the Excluders would back it with an
Act for Association, attended with as pernicious inconveniences, as it would
prevent, then indeed our Author might have better presumed to determine what
the Fathers would have done in such a case; but since it is not the only
Expedient, but such an one as is very disputable and dangerous too, he was,
methinks, too bold with their Beards in asserting, That they would have set
aside an Hundred such Titles, to secure their Religion, when other probable
Means more agreeable to the Constitution of the Government, were offered for
the Security thereof. In such a case the Fathers might have professed their
Zeal for the Christian Religion, and yet like our Loyal Addressers, have made
it their humble Request to the Emperor, not to have passed the Bill of
Exclusion, that is but one among other Expedients; and a man may be free in the
Choice of means, without being Guelph, and Gibeline at once.

I am sure there is no such Contrariety in such Addresses, as for a Minister of
our Church to write such a Book as Julian, to be Lamb without, and Wolf within;
to wear the Churches Livery, and yet in secret to list himself with her
Enemies; to pretend a mighty concern for Religion, and yet to slander the
Primitive Christians, and scoff at the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; this
indeed is to be contrary to his Profession, and to be Guelph, and Gibeline at
once.

CHAP. II. Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian.
HAving showed in the First Chapter the Falseness of his First Principle, That
the Roman Empire was Hereditary, I proceed in this to lay open all his other
Shams and Falsifications, by which, to use his own words, P. 68.
he has glossed away all his Duty, as a Christian Subject, and broken all the
measures by which all the Ancient Suffering Christians went in former
Persecutions.

For first, after he has most artificially aggravated the Behavior of the
Christians against Julian, and made it look like very Criminal and Barbarous;
then he undertakes to Apologize for them, telling us, That truly, P. 68.
their Case differed very much from that of the First Christians, and that they
were in quite other Circumstances; P. 71.
The sum of all which is this, That the first Christians suffered according to
the Law of their Country, whereas these under Julian were persecuted contrary
to Law, it being manifest that Julian oppressed them in a very illegal way. He
did not fairly Enact Sanguinary Laws, but he put them to death upon Shams, and
pretended Crimes of Treason and Sacrilege, etc. And this their Suffering
against Law he brings to justify their seeming Misbehaviour, and Barbarous
Usage of him; which after he had magnified to the height in Expressions not
becoming a Divine, p. 66. then he adds, But for the Name of Christians, he had
better have fallen among Barbarians.

I shall not examine the Merits of their Behavior toward Julian, till I have
proved that they were not illegally persecuted by him, because this being once
proved, it must needs follow, That if they broke the Primitive Measures of
Christian Subjection, and Obedience, they are to be blamed for it, and cannot
signify any thing as a Precedent for us to follow, in case (which God forbid)
we should be persecuted contrary to Law.

He tells us, That P. 66.
they so treated this Emperor, that one would have taken them to be the
Apostates, and most falsely and plainly P. 94, 95.
suggests, like a Jesuit, That they would have rebelled, but that they wanted
Strength: What (says he) would they have a few defenseless Christians do, when
they had lost their Strength? Have they never heard a West-Country-man say,
Chud eat Cheese and chad it? Nay he has done his best to make it probable,
that Julian was killed by a Christian. It is easy to guess whether all this
tends; His Reflections on the Behavior of these Christians, are to draw on his
Reader, and prepare his mind for what he has said upon Passive Obedience, and
therefore to spoil the Precedence of their Behavior in their Words, Actions,
and Devotions, and to show to what little purpose he has written 6 Chapters
about it, I shall here show that Julian did persecute them legally, because all
his Orders and Decrees, how unjust soever, were legal, and in particular that
Juventinus, and Maximus, who, he says, were put to death upon shams, were
notwithstanding legally put to death, because they were put to death by the
Sentence, and Command of the Emperor, who was an Absolute Sovereign, who
governed by Despotic or Regal Power, and whose very Pleasure was a Law. He may
as well say, That a Man who dies in England legislatively, by virtue of a Bill
of Attainder enacted into a Law, dies illegally, whereas by the English
Constitution, the King, and Parliament (or the King with the Consent of the
Parliament) are legal Masters of every man's Life, and Fortune, and can put to
death whom they please. In like manner what the King and Parliament, or, to
speak in the words of Learned Chancellor De laud. Leg. Angl. chapter 9.
Fortescue, what the Regal and Political Power can in conjunction do here, the
Regal, or Imperial Power could do alone in the Roman Empire, where, as Dan.
speaks of Nebuchad. For the Majesty that God gave the Emperor, all People,
Nations, and Languages trembled, and feared before him: Whom he would he slew,
and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would
he pulled down.

This is most amply and elegantly set down by L. 53.
Dio, who tells us. That all Power Civil and Ecclesiastical was in the Emperor;
the Consular, Proconsular, Censorian, Tribunitian, and Pontifical; and that he
had all this Power and Authority not by Force and Usurpation, but by Law, the
Senate and People consenting thereunto. That therefore all things were done
according to the Pleasure of the Emperors, as in Kingdoms, and that though they
were not called Kings, and Dictators, yet they had the Regal Dictatorian Power;
that by virtue of these Offices they had Power of raising Armies, and Money, of
making War and Peace; of making, deposing, and killing Senators; and in a word,
of (...).
putting any man to death as an expiratory Sacrifice without Trial; who they
thought injured them never so little in Word or Deed.

Furthermore he says, That they were (...).
above the Laws, and free from all Legal Necessity, and might do any thing,
having all things belonging to Absolute Regal Authority, but only the Name of
King.

This is the Sum of what Dio says of the Imperial Leviathan, to which the
Civil Law agrees; which tells us, That L. 1. T. 3. 31. and T. 4. Princeps
legibus solutus. 4, Quod Principi placuit legis habet vigorem, utp^te cum lege
Regia populus ei and in eum omne suum Imperium and potestatem cons^rat.
Quodcunque igitur Imperator, etc. Vid. I. L. 1, 2.
the Emperor was above Law, that whatsoever pleased him had the nature of a
Law, because by the Lex Regia, the People had surrendered unto him all their
Authority, and Power: Whatsoever therefore the Emperor appointed by Letters, or
knowingly decreed, or declared in his Interlocutories, or commanded by an
Edict, was a Law; and his Laws in distinction to the Senatus consul^^, etc.
were called Constitutions, and they were either General, or only Plane ex his
quaedam sunt personales, nec ad exemplum trahuntur, etc. ib. (...) Theophe.
Personal, which were not to be drawn into precedent or example, as his
Indulgences to his Favorites, his Acts of Grace to Criminals, or his (...)
Theoph.
Punishing as he pleased those that were in his Displeasure; all these were
personal Constitutions, for the (...) Theoph.
Emperor was absolute Lord of his Subjects Lives and Estates.

It was by this Plenitude of Absolute Legal Power that Constantine the Great
put to death his Father-in-Law Maximian, his Wife Fausta, his eldest Son
Crispus, and Licinius after he became his Subject, and Prison^^. By virtue of
the same Power it was, that Constantius put to death Dalmatius Caesar, and
Gallus, Julians eldest Brother; and therefore it is matter of Wonder to me,
that Mr. J. should lay down this groundless Assertion, That Julian the Emperor
persecuted the Christians, and put Juventinus and Maximus to death contrary to
Law. He might have been better instructed by the Apostate, in one of his Orat.
1. ad. Constant. -- (...) Theoph. l. 2.
Orations cited by himself, in which he tells Constantius, That he lived more
like a Subject than an Emperor, who had Power over the Laws. Methinks also his
Superviser, who should be well versed in the Fathers of our English Law, might
have taught him better out of Chancellor De Laud. Leg. Angl. c. 9.
Fortescue, who stating the Difference betwixt a purely Regal and Political
Government, explains the former from the Civil Law, which says. The Prince his
Pleasure has the Force of Law.

Wherefore he was also much by the Cushion in his First Chapter, where he
asserts, That all the Outrages, which the Heathens committed against the
Christians by the toleration and connivence of Julian, were not only without,
but against Law; for Julians Connivence, or Approbation of things against Law,
or secret Direction to do them was a sufficient declaration of his Pleasure,
and had the Force of Law. Therefore (...) l. 7. p. 504.
Philostorg. says that the Heathens in so doing fulfilled his Pleasure; who,
as (...) l. 5. c. 15.
Zos. observes, however he did blame them in words, [which was very Once the
Alexandrians. Soz. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 5. c. 9.
seldom] yet underhand, and indeed he exhorted them to do what they did; and
Theod. l. 3. c. 6.
made the most cruel and impious Heathens Officers both in the Army, and over
the Cities and Provinces, whom he left to their own Discretion to treat the
Christians as they pleased; and when the Christians sent their Representatives
to complain, Soz. l. 5. c. 3. Vid. l. 5. c. 9. Naz. 1. Invect. p. 92.
he refused to admit them, or if he admitted them he was only to tell them;
That Socr. l. 3. c. 14.
they were bound by their Religion to suffer Injuries. L. 7. 503.
Philostorgius says, He exceedingly rejoiced when he heard of the Christians
Sufferings; all which were sufficient significations of his Pleasure in this
Particular, that the Heathens should outrage the Christians, any former Law, or
Edict whatsoever notwithstanding. Accordingly Invect. l. p. 74.
Gregory calls his Will in this particular (...) an Unwritten Law; For (says
he) the Emperor dividing his Power into two Parts, Persuasion, and Force;
Persuasion, which is the Gentler Method, he took into his own Hands; and Force,
as being the more Inhumane, he left to the People, (...) Ib.
not by any Public Edict, but by Toleration and Connivence declaring his
Pleasure, which is an Unwritten Law. But our Author, as indeed he has an
excellent Talent that way, quite misrepresents the Case, P. 12.
The Heathens (says he) did not stay for Laws, and Edicts to warrant such
Proceedings, -- but as soon as they knew how Julian was affected, they took
that for their Cue to act these Tragedies upon the Christians; They knew it
would please the Emperor, and that was an Unwritten Law. How then did they act
against Law, if the Pleasure of the Emperor so directing, was an Unwritten Law?
They acted according to his Pleasure, which, as Gregory observes, was published
unto them by his Words, and Actions, as plainly as by any (...) Invect. l. p.
92.
Edict, and Ib.
the Pleasure of the Emperor (says the Father upon the cruel Reprimand which
Julian gave to the Governor of Gaza) is an Unwritten Law defended with Power,
and much stronger than Written Ones, not supported by Authority.

Such sayings as these to his Governors, Invect. p. 92.
What great matter is it if one Heathen kill ten Christians? were sufficient
Indications and Directions of his Royal Pleasure, to make it have the force of
Law, and give it the nature of a Personal Constitution by virtue of the Lex
Regia, otherwise called Lex Imperii solemnibus juris Imperatorem solvit. l. Ex
imperfecto C. de testamentis.
Lex Imperii, which exempted the Emperor from Formalities of Law, and Justice,
and gave him Authority above all written Laws.

I have now, I hope, sufficiently proved the falseness of our Authors Second
Principle, that his Julian persecuted contrary to Law. And I have taken so much
pains to confute it, not that it is necessary to do so, to defend the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience (which as I shall hereafter show would be best defended
upon this Assertion) but to let the Admirers of Julian see, how he has imposed
upon them in falsely representing the Christians like Barbarians in their
Behavior toward their Emperor, and then in justifying of it by this Sham,
That Julian persecuted contrary to Law. If any of them have taken the pains to
read this Answer thus far, I hope they will make a Pause to argue to this
purpose from what I have written in this Chapter: Either the Behavior of the
Christians was really as Barbarous and Exorbitant against Julian as Mr. J. has
represented it, or it was not; if it were, then they must bear the Blame of it,
having no such Warrant for it, as he told us they had; but if it really were
not, then he has done neither like a Scholar, nor a Christian, to exaggerate
and misrepresent it with a design to deceive the World.

I am afraid, The best Friends Mr. J. has, cannot keep him from being
Obnoxious to one of these two Consequences; and therefore in the next place let
us enquire, Whether the Christians did behave themselves so like Apostates, and
Barbarians against their Lawful Emperor, as he has endeavored to make the
World believe they did. Surely if the Passages be examined, which he has
produced, it will appear that some of them are Dubious, others False, some
Laudable, many of them Innocent, and those few that are Blameable, or that he
would have to be so, Excusable in a great measure, and having nothing Singular
in them, which have not been done to other Emperors before.

CHAP. III. Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in Words.
I Shall begin with their Behavior toward him in Words, as it is set down in
his Third Chapter, where all along he most unjustly charges what was said but
by one, or a few Christians upon the whole Number, although the Examples, which he
has brought are nothing in proportion to the whole Eastern Empire, much less
to the Western, in which perhaps not one Instance of that which he calls
Barbarous Behavior toward Julian, can be produced. At his rate of arguing
from one, or a few Examples to the whole Church, a man may prove out of the
Scriptures, that the Christians were a very untoward People, for there, as he
is pleased to phrase it, A man may almost lose himself in the great variety of
Instances, which may be given of their great, and manifold Miscarriages, if
what some particular Men or Churches did amiss, might be charged upon the whole
Body of Christians, and be called theirs.

Thus says he of the Christians in general; They sufficiently requited him for
calling them Galilaeans, for they named him Idolianus instead of Julianus, and
Pisaeus, and Adonaeus from his worshipping of Jupiter, and Adonis; and
Bull-burner from the great number of them, which he sacrificed. One would think
as he has represented the matter, that all the Christians used thus to
Nickname Julian, and yet if we consult that place of Nazianzen, which he cites
for it in the Margent, we shall find that it was not the general Practice of
the Christians so to call the Apostate in requital, but of some of one sort.
(...) Naz. 1. Invect. p. 87, 88.
For (says the Father) if the Christians had a mind to give new Names, they
might find many base ones very fit, and applicable to him; for what should
hinder us jearing of him as he does us, to call him Idolianus and Pisaeus, and
Adonaeus, and Bull-Burner, as some of the merry and facetious men among us have
taken the liberty to call him?

But yet, though they were but the Facetious, and some of the Facetious
Christians too, who called Julian by those Names; yet our trusty Author makes
no Bones of charging the matter upon them in General: They (says he) requited
him for calling them Galilaeans, for they named him Idolianus, etc.

But this is not the only Instance, where Mr. J. has played the Jesuit with
good Authors, and what sair dealing is to be expected from a man, who imposes
upon his Reader in the very P. 1.
first Citation, with which he begins his Book? Constantine the Great (says
he) Famous for being the first Christian Emperor, divided the whole Empire at
his death amongst his three Sons, as a Father does his Estate among his
Children; that part which came by his Ancestors, the West, he gave to the
eldest --. This indeed sounds somewhat like an Entailed Inheritance, whereas,
had he truly and entirely rendered the place, it would not have favored that
Design; For Eusebius says, That Constantius the Great (...) Eusebius. Vit. Constable.
l. 4. c. 52.
when he had gotten the whole World into his Power, he divided the whole
Empire, like a Patrimony, amongst his three Sons; as being the most Beloved of
his Heirs. That Part which came by his Father he gave to the Eldest --. There
is some difference betwixt saying, That Constantine divided the whole Empire
like a Patrimony, and as a Father divides his Estate, and very much betwixt
saying simply, That he divided it among his Sons, and that he divided it among
his Sons, as the best beloved of his Heirs. It was not for the Interest of a
man, that asserted the Roman Empire to be Hereditary, to let his Reader know,
that Constantine had other Heirs in View besides his Sons, this would have
given them to understand, That he might have passed by his Sons, and given the
Empire to them, or made these Copartners with those. So it was for his
Interest to render (...) that which came by his Ancestors, as if the West-part
of the Empire which Constantine received from his Father, had Lineally devolved
upon him through many Hereditary Descents.

But to return to the Nicknames, which the pleasanter sort of Christians gave
unto Julian, what Injury did they do him thereby? There was nothing more common
among the Pagan Emperors, than to surname themselves from their Gods.
Dioclesian assumed the Surname of Jovius, and Maximian of Herculeus; and if
some of the Wits among the Christians sportingly did the same thing for Julian,
that other Emperors did for themselves, what Precept of the Christian Religion
did they transgress thereby? But these were P. 32.
Instances of their Hatred and Contempt of Julian; perhaps they were so, but
not of the Man, nor of the Emperor, but of the Apostate and Idolater, whom the
Christian Religion would have allowed a Confessor to have called so to his very
face. And be it known unto Mr. J. that many of those who have thundered so much
of late with the Thebaean Legion, would think it rather their Duty, than any
Breach of it, to tell not only a Popish Prince, but a Popish King to his Face,
did he openly profess the Popish Religion, that he was an Idolater, a
Bread-worshipper, a Goddess-worshipper, a Creature-worshipper, an
Image-worshipper, a Wafer-worshipper, etc. which would be a far greater
contempt of him, than to Nickname him from his Popish-Idols, and mock him with
them behind his back.

But let us suppose that these merry Gentlemen did transgress the duty of
Christians in playing upon the Name of Julian, yet there was nothing of
tendency to Rebellion in it, nothing specific that can tempt a man to think,
that they did it because he persecuted the Christians contrary to Law. Our
blessed Lord called Herod Fox, and St. Paul called Nero Lion, and had Mr. J.
found these Names for his Julian in the Writings of the Christians, he would in
all probability have told us, that they looked upon him as a Wild Beast, whom
every man had a right to slay. St. Cyprian in his Exhortation to Martyrdom,
calls the Emperor Decius Antichrist; and in his Epist. to Antonianus, he calls
him Tyrant, and Raging Tyrant, and Lucianus the Presbyter in his Cyprian Epist.
Oxon. edit. p. 47.
Epist. to Celerinus calls him the Great Snake, and forerunner of Antichrist,
which are as ill Names, as any Mr. J. can show that Julian received from the
Christians of his Time. The Proconsul in the Roman Empire, was in every
Province the next in Authority under the Emperor, and yet Cyprian in the Reply,
which he sent unto Demetrianus Proconsul of Africa, calls him, Impious, Mad,
Raging, Blind, Deaf, and Brute, and he tells him in the very beginning of it,
That he had long despised him, who barked with his Sacrilegious Mouth, and
Impious Words against the one true God.

I do not justify the Father for this contumelious way of speaking, it seems
to me not strictly consistent with that respect, which he ought to an ordinary
Judge, or Subselliar Counselor, as the Learned Annotator in the Oxford
Edition, endeavors, against the common opinion, to make it probable
Demetrianus was; but notwithstanding his Conjectures, to which I refer my
Reader, the common opinion still remains as probable, and therefore may very
well be preferred.

But of that very small number of Ancient Christians, who were guilty of rude
and undutiful Language to Princes, none were comparable to Lucifer C^laritanus,
who in his Defense of Athanasius, and Tract of Apostate Princes, both written
to Constantius, calls his Majesty, Persecutor, Heretic, Saul, Ahab, Murderer,
Apostate, Impious, Antichrist, Liar, Executioner, Enemy and Despiser of God,
and Destroyer of Gods Religion, with many more most reproachful Names and
Passages, which I love not to recite.

What would Mr. J. have given to have found Julian treated at this contumelious
rate in any Christian Writer, especially in a Bishop of his time, he would
doubtless have gloried in the Discovery, and it must not have been charged upon
the peevish, and morose Temper, and monastic Manners of the Father; but it
must have been solved, like his other Phenomenon, by his new, but friendly
Hypothesis to Rebellion of reproaching, and ruffling of Julian, nay of pursuing
him like a Midnight Thief, or High-way-Robber, because he persecuted them
contrary to Law.

His next Instance which he produces of Julians reproachful usage among the
Christians, is the Antiochians; wherein he has not dealt fairly in
representing the matter so, as if the Christians of Antioch only were guilty of
those abuses, which provoked him to write his Misopogon against them. For first
it is plain, That there were yet a considerable number of Heathens in Antiock,
from the Anniversary Rites of Adonis, which happened to be kept on the same day,
Evenerat autem iisdem diebus annuo cursu completo Adonia veteri ritu celebrari
-- Et visum est triste, quod amplam urbem introcunti Imperatori, nunc primum,
ululabiles undique planctus, and lugubres sonitus audiebantur Marcell. l. 22.
Vid. Liban. Legate. ad Julianum. p. 162. Edit. Lut. 162.
when Julian made his Entrance into the City, and it seemed to many a sad Omen,
that the Emperor should then enter into it, when so much howling, and weeping,
and lamentation was heard. Indeed it is difficult to guess, what proportion the
Heathens had to the Christians, but if we may take measure from the City of
Sozom. de caede Georgii Alexandrini. l. 5. c. 9.
Alexandria at that time, they were enough to make head against them, though
it is certain they were the lesser part. Sozomen after he had said in general,
that the Antiochians reproached Julian, and that he wrote his Misopogon against
the Antiochians, he immediately adds (...), but the Christians that were there
he treated as usually, and studied to advance the Heathen Interest, and
Religion: But Mr. J. without taking notice of the Heathens, covertly lays the
whole blame of Julians evil treatment upon the Christians of Antioch, Socrat.
l. 3. c. 17. Sozom. l. 5. 18. Zosim. l. 3. p. 713. Amm. Mare. l. 22. Juliani
Misopog.
when all the Writers lay it upon the Antiochians in general, and assign the
common Causes thereof.

These common Causes were first the great Socrat. Sozom. Marcel. loc. cit.
Misopog. p. 90, 108. Liban. Legate. ad Jul. p. 155.
scarcity and want of Provisions caused by one of Julians Edicts, to lessen the
market Prices, which made the Victuallers and Heglars of all sorts keep up
their Provisions, which the Antiochians, being a luxurious People, were not
able to endure. Secondly, his Misopog. p. 59, 60, 75, 78, 90.
discountenancing of the Spectacula, and Plays in which they so much
delighted, and affecting an austere Garb and strict sort of Life, so
disagreeable to their Effeminate Humor.

These were the Common Causes, which set the Antiochians against him, who at
first Urbi propinquans, in speciem alicujus numinis votis excipitur publicas
miratus voces multitudinis magnae salutare sidus illuxisse Eois partibus
acclamantis. Marcell. l. 22.
received him with the highest demonstration of Affection, and Duty, as if he
had been some God. But (...) -- Zosim. l. 3: p: ^13.
being by nature Lovers of Theaters, and plentiful and delicious Fare, which he
despised, they soon began to hate him, and from hating of him, as soon
proceeded to lampoon him, being, as L. 3. c. 17.
Socrates describes them, (...), a most invective People, and given to
Libelling. This is the Matter of Fact, in which both the Heathen, and Christian
Historians agree, and from hence it is plain, that the Heathens, as well as
Christians at Antioch, were guilty of Burlesquing Julian, as appears out of his
Misopogon, where for the most part he speaks of them in general, but more
particularly (...). Lib. ib. p. 164.
p. 87. charges the whole City, and all the Citizens without distinction, for
loving to make, and hear Lampoons. Indeed there are some particular Passages in
it, which relate to the Christians, as that of chi, and kappa, which our Author
seems to cite on purpose to make his Reader think they were all Christians, but
then there are others which as certainly relate to the Heathens, as where he P.
97, 98, 99.
chides them for not providing at least an Ox to sacrifice on the Solemn
Festival of Apollo, and for P. 67.
flocking unto him in the Temples, and receiving of him in them with Theatrical
Applause. In another place he distinguishes betwixt the Pagan, and Christian
part of the People: I have (says he) offended most, I had almost said all of
you, the Senate, the Wealthy, and the People: P. 90. (...) --
For most of the People are grieved at me, but especially all those who deny
the Gods, because they see me addicted to the Rites of our Ancestors. And
unless there were a considerable Number of Heathens among them, it cannot be
imagined that Libanius would have written an Apologitical Oration for them unto
Julian, wherein P. 162.
he tells him, that when he was in Gaul, they prayed in private meetings for
him unto Jupiter, that he might be Emperor.

From these Passages it is plain, that the Heathens were exasperated against
Julian, and guilty of his ill usage at Antioch, as well as the Christians; and
that, the first occasion of their despightful carriage against him was upon a
General Account, although afterward he might become more particularly odous
unto the Christians for removing the Bones of Babylas, and shutting up the
Majorem Ecclesiam Autiochiae Claudi -- Marcell. l. 22.
Cathedral Church. But what if all Antioch had been Christians, or what if only
the Christians of Antioch had been the Libellers of Julian, or what if they had
Libelled him merely upon the account of his Apostasy, or Tyranny, what is that
to us? Must we follow the Example of such Luxurious, Dissolute, and Profane
Christians, who daily flocked to the Theaters, Cirques, and Hippodroms,
whither, the former, Christians, would have dyed, rather than have come. It was
against the very Letter of their Baptismal Vow, and was always aggravated by
the Tertul. de Spectaculis. Igitur si ex Idololatria universam spectaculorum
paraturam constare constiterit, indubitati praenuntiatum erit etiam ad
spectacula pertinere renuntiationis nostrae testimonium in lavacro -- Sed circo
quid Amarius, ubi ne principibus quidem, nec civibus suis parcent. Ignotus
author de Spectaculis in Cypriano. Nam quando id, quod in honor alicujus idoli
ab ethnicis agitur a fidelibus Christianis spectaculo frequentatur, and
Idololatria gentilis asseritur, and in contumeliam Dei -- ad scenae jam sales
inverecundos transitum faciam -- Salvian l. 6. In Baptismo salutari
Christianorum prima confessio ut renuntiare se diabolo, ac pompi^ ejus, atque
spectaculis, and operibus protestentur. -- Quomodo Christiani spectacula post
Baptismum sequeris -- Chrysostom. Homil. 15. de calamitate Antioch. de
paenitentia. Hom. 8. etc.
Christian Writers as Idolatrous, and as one of the most provoking and
dangerous Sins, which a Christian could commit.

Certainly their Scommatical and Burlesquing humor, was none of their Virtues;
They were censured for it by many Authors, and commended for it by none, no not
by P. 35. Theodor. l. 3. c. 28.
Theodoret, who only says, they abominated Julian, without commending their
Scurrility, for which Socr. l. 3. c. 17. Sozom. l. 5. c. 19.
Socrates and Socr. l. 3. c. 17. Sozom. l. 5. c. 19.
Sozomen justly condemn them, as an Herod. l. 4. (...) --
Heathen Writer, did the Alexandrians for Burlesquing the Emperor Caracalla:
But they paid dearly for it, and if the Antiochians, our Author brave
Antiochians, who followed their example, had been so requited, their Blood had
been upon their own Heads.

They were the only City of the Empire, and the only Body of Christians in it,
who thus abused the Emperor Julian; and had they done so for a sound Reason,
which would have justified their doing of it, and given satisfaction to other
Christian Cities, doubtless they would have done so too. But alas! it was the
Evil Humor of the Place; they were given to libelling in Songs, and Pasquills;
and to show that there was nothing peculiar in their abusive usage of Julian;
they treated his Successor Jovian, who was a Christian, and had been a
Christian (...). Suidas.
Confessor under Julian, as bad, or worse than they treated Julian, Lampooning
him in (...) i. e. Fam^sis Libellis. Excerpt. per Hen. Vales. Ed. 1634. p. 345.
Vid. Suid.
Ballads, and Libels, and Fragments of Poetry, for the Dishonorable Peace,
which he made with the Persians, and for Burning a Fine Temple erected by the
Emperor Adrian in Honor of Trajan, which Julian had converted into a Library
with all the Books. Some of their Libels against him they (...). Suidas.
cast about the Streets for any to take up, others they fixed upon the Walls,
and among many more, which may be seen in Suidas, they applied this following
Verse in Homer unto him.

(...).
We see thee Safe, but wish some Persian Dart
Had struck through thine, as well, as Julians Heart.
This is a great deal worse than calling of Julian Bull burner, and drolling
upon his Beard. Nay, so fashionable was Scurrility, and Impudence among them,
that an Old Woman beholding his Goodly Stature, took the confidence to say,
What a longitude, and profundity of a Fool is this! And another took the
boldness to Deride him openly in the Cirque, and Mischief had followed upon it,
if Sallustius had not appeased the Stir. Had Julian been treated thus by them,
we should have heard of it from Mr J. at both Ears, and then he would have
brought them off with saying, But it was Julian, and those who quietly
submitted to the Laws under Dioclesian, do nevertheless pursue an Apostate, as
if he were a Midnight-Thief.

As for the Story of the Berean Noble Man, there is nothing in it, but what
became a Valiant Christian; and as for that of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, it is
nothing to his Purpose, having nothing singular, or specific in it to serve
his Supposition about Julian, but is an ordinary Instance of that great Courge,
boldness, and liberty of speaking, and acting, which was common among
Confessors, by which they showed to the Enemies of God, the Greatness of their
Zeal to suffer for him, and how much they despised their Authority, and
Threatenings, when they stood in competition with their Duty to God.

The Jews called this the Spirit of Fortitude, and the Greeks by the name of
(...), which our Translation renders Acts 4.13, 21.
boldness, and Acts 28.31.
confidence: And from hence the Verb (...) is used in the New Testament to
signify that Acts 13.46.18.25, 26.1 Thessal. 2.2.
boldness, with which the Apostles preached the Gospel in danger of their
Lives; and from the New Testament both the Noun, and the Verb came to be used
in Ecclesiastical Writers for A (...). Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. p. 128.
Confession in the special signification, as it signifies to confess Christ
boldly among his Enemies in Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in. Ep. ad Phil. (...).
actual Torment, or in apparent danger of Torture, or Death. Now this Boldness
was always looked upon as the Effect of Divine Zeal and Fervent Love of God, as
in Apollos, Acts 18.25, 26. who being fervent in Spirit, began [(...)] to speak
boldly in the Synagogue, where he was in danger to be torn in pieces by the
Jews. So Eusebius speaking of Vettius Epagathus, who at the hazard of his Life
voluntarily undertook to plead for the Christians before the Tribunal, he
says, he had (...). Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. p. 126.
much Zeal for God, and was Fervent in Spirit. It was also looked upon in part
as the effect of supernatural courage, with which God was wont to inspire
those, whom he called to suffer for his Holy Name. And therefore St. Peter
prayed for it, Acts 4.29. Lord (says he) behold their Threatenings, and grant
unto thy Servants (...) that with all boldness we may speak thy Word. This
inspired Courage is most evident in very Young, and very Old People, as also in
Women, who have little Natural Courage, as L. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius observes in the Martyrdom of Young Blandina, and old Pothius, and
many others, as of Young De Mart. Palaest. c. 4.
Apphianus, and C. 7. ib.
Theodosia the Virgin, to whom I refer the Reader in his History of the
Palaestine Martyrs.

Now the Persons thus inspired with Zeal and Courage, used ordinarily to show
it in the Freedom of their Speech before Kings, and Governors, especially
before those whom they knew to be spiteful Enemies of their Religion, and
Blasphemers of God. Thus one of the Seven Brethren in the 2 Match. chapter 7.
Macchabees called Antiochus Fury, another told him He despised his Laws, a
third bid him remember, that though he was a King, yet he was Corruptible; a
fourth called him Godless Man, and of all other most Wicked; and the rest
threatened him with the Judgments of God. The three Jews in Daniel told King
Nebuchadnezzar very bluntly; that they cared not to answer him in the matter of
the Image, but if his Decree was so, God was able to deliver them, but if he
will not, (say they like true Confessors) be it known unto thee, we will not
serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image that thou have set up.

When Numerianus, or Decius (for my Philostorg. l. 7. p. 506.
Author knows not which of the two it was) would have entered into the Cathedral
Church of Antioch in time of Divine Worship, Babylas the Bishop standing in the
Church Porch, shut the Door against him, telling him that he would not suffer
him, who was a Wolf to enter into the Sheepfold of Christ. Domninus was Famous
among the Christians of Palaes;tine for this singular Freedom of Speech, and is
celebrated for it by Eusebius in the 7th Chapter of his History of the
Palaestine Martyrs; and in Justin the Martyr's first Apology we read of one
Lucius, who standing by at the condemnation of Ptolemaeus a Christian, boldly
spoke to the President thus: What reason have thou, O Vrbioius! to condemn a
man merely for the Name of Christian, who is neither Whoremonger, nor
Adulterer, nor Murderer, nor Thief, nor Robber, nor is guilty of any one Crime;
let me tell thee, thy Sentence is very unworthy of the Emperor, who is called
Pious, and of his Son surnamed Philosopher, and of the Senate, which is styled
the Holy.

It would be endless to enumerate all the Examples of the Confessorian
Parrhesia, or Liberty of Speech; there are Examples of it in most Persecutions,
but these may suffice to let Mr. J's Admirers see, how Fallaciously he has
dealt with them, in representing the Free Speeches of the Berean Nobleman, and
Maris the Bishop, unto Julian, as singular Instances of Contempt, whereas such
Freedom was of ordinary practice in former Persecutions among Christian
Cofessors, a sort of men, I fear, for whom he has but little Veneration, or
Respect.

But more particularly, as to Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, if there be any thing
singular, or unjustifiable in that Dialogue of his with Julian, it may fairly
be laid at his own Door, who was a most violent Arrian, guilty of many
blameworthy Practices, which are not to be put upon the general Account.

Gelas. (...) 2. c. 2. Acta Metroph. apud Phot. Cod. 256.
He was one of the 18 Bishops in the Nicene Council that defended Arrius, and
his Doctrine; Socrat. l. 1. c. c. 27, 31, 35.
he was one of Athanasius his most bitter Enemies; Socrat. l. 2. c. 12.
he is reckoned among the Arrianizers, that ordained Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople [after Eusebius died] in opposition to Paulus elected by the
Orthodox. Id. lib. c. 2. 41.
He is called an Acasian, and subscribed the Confession of the Council of
Arimini, in a Council of 50 Bishops at Constantinople, where they abrogated the
words (...) and (...) Sosom. l. 4. c. 24.
He was one that witnessed against Athanasius in the Council of Tire, attesting
the Charge against him of breaking the Chalice, etc. in a Parish Church of
Maraeotis, and afterward before Sosom. l. 2. c. 25.
the Emperor Constantine. Ib. c. 28.
He was one of the Bishops sent by the Council of Tire into Egypt to enquire
into the matter, where L. 2. c. 25.
Sozom. says, they managed the Enquiry partially; but Lib. 1. c. 30.
Theodoret plainly accuses him and his Companions, of framing a Lie against
him, forgeing false Acts, and reviving the old confuted Slanders against him.
Lastly the Theodor. l. 2. c. 8.
Fathers of the Council of Sardica in their Synodical Epistle, reckon him among
the False Accusers of Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas, though they do not
depose him with the rest of his Arrian Accomplices, all which show that he was
a Man of Heterodox Opinions and Irregular Practices, whose Example ought not to
be cited, as a Precedent to conclude any thing in general upon the Christians,
or Bishops of his Time.

In the Conclusion of the Chapter he tells us, That it would be endless to
reckon up the Sayings of Juventinus, and Maximus in their Anniversary Sermon of
St. Chrysostom, of those Soldiers that were trepanned into Sacrificing by
Julian, and of many others, who did not spare him in the least. One would
wonder how this man should come to be so learned in all that was said against
Julian, De Juliano Testimonia before Julians Works. -- Vituperationem autem
apud Gregorium Nazianz. Steletenticis 11. ac Cyrill. Meminit and Chrysostomus
contra Judaeos. Hom. 3. and in S.S. Juventinum and Maximum and in S. Babylani.
Item Hieron. in 3. cap. Habacuc. August. vide civitate Dei. cap. 25.
but that Petavius in 4 lines has directed him to all that ever was written
against him, out of which he has taken all that was for his purpose; and
notwithstanding he tells his Reader, that he must be satisfied with a Taste, yet
he has served him up with his whole Store. For the Sayings of Juvent. and Max.
and of those Soldiers, whom Julian had trepanned to sacrifice, are so far from
making for him, that they are very much against him, or else we may be sure,
had they been to his purpose, they had not been suppressed. As for the former,
they are such as they said at Table; such as they said when they were cast into
Prison for what they had said at Table; such as they said to those whom Julian
underhand sent to tempt them in Prison; or lastly, to give him the benefit of
Theodoret, such as they said to the Emperor himself.

That which they said at Table among other Soldiers by way of Discourse, was
this: They bewailed the Sadness of the Times they lived in, and blessed the
former days. They said it was not worth the while to live, to see the Holy Laws
trodden under foot, the Lord of all put to open shame, and to behold all places
so full of the Nidor and Smoke of profane Sacrifices, that a man could not
breath in pure Air. When they were in Prison, they exceedingly rejoiced and
said, They had no further need of Money, or Fine Clothes. To the Tempters,
whom Julian sent to tempt them with hopes of greater Honors, and the Example
of other Officers who had lapsed, they answered thus; We are resolved for this
Reason to stand out manfully, that we may offer up our selves as it were
Sacrifices to expiate for their Fall: For if we do not dye now, we shall dye
(we are certain) shortly after; and it is better to dye for the King of Angels,
than in the Service of such a Wicked Man; it is better to lay down our Lives
for an Heavenly Kingdom; than for an Earthly one, which we tread under foot.
for if a man dye in the Emperors Service, he can receive no Reward for his
Valor, nay perhaps he may not get a Grave, but be left to be devoured by Dogs;
but if we dye for the King of Angels, we shall be sure to receive Glorious
Bodies, and to have Crowns and Rewards greater than our Sufferings can deserve.
Wherefore let us take up Spiritual Weapons; we have no need of Darts and
Arrows, and other Bodily Armor, our Tongues [by which we are to confess
Christ] are sufficient Arms for us, and out of our Mouths shall we shoot Arrows
against the Devils Head. These are the Sayings of these two Captains in St.
Chrysostom. but they sounded so like the Speeches of Mauritius and Exuperius in
the Thebaean Legion, that our Author durst not recite them, lest his Readers
should find out such a Famous Instance of Passive Obedience among the
Commanders of Julians own Army, who were so willing to be put to death by him
contrary to Law.

What they said to the Tyrants Face was this: We have been educated in the True
Religion; we have always been Obedient to the Laws which were made by
Constantine and his Sons; and now we cannot but lament to see all things filled
with Abominations, and even Meat and Drink defiled with Impure Sacrifices: This
we have bewailed in private with Tears, and now lament in your presence. This
is all they said to Julians Face; and now all that our Author can get by it,
(to use his own petulant Phrase) he may put in his Eye. L. 3. c. 16. (...).
Theodoret commends their Zeal, and put this Confession wholly upon that Score.

As for the Soldiers who were trepanned to Sacrifice by Julian, this is the
short of the Story: Julian on a certain day called his Army unto him to receive
Donatives according to their Quality, and places. The Ceremony was ordered as
in the time of the Pagan Emperors: The Emperor sat in great State, there was
Gold set before him on one hand, and Frankincense on the other, and the
Soldiers were told, that according to Ancient Custom they were to cast a bit
of this into the Fire, Vid. Sozom lib. 5. c. 17.
before they received any of that. The (...) Nazianz. p. 85.
whole Army, were ensnared, some, it is likely, through love of the Gold, but
many of them as it afterward appeared, through mere Ignorance, and Simplicity,
and the specious pretense of Ancient Custom: For when the Solemnity was done,
the Soldiers went to their Quarters, where they eat together; and as some of
them (...) Ib.
looking up to Heaven, and signing themselves with the Sign of the Cross, gave
thanks unto Christ: One among the rest asked them, how they could call upon
Christ after they had denied him? How, replied they half-dead with the
Question, how have we denied Christ? Insomuch (replied the other) as you have
Sacrificed Frankincense, which is in effect to deny Christ. Upon this
immediately rising from the Table, they became like distracted Men; and being
heated with Zeal and Indignation, they ran about the Marketplace, crying, out,
and saying, We are Christians, we are Christians in our Hearts; we declare it
to all men, and before all men unto God, to whom we live, and for whom we will
dye. O Savior Christ we have not betrayed thee, we have not denied the Faith;
for however we have offended thee with our Hands, we are upright in our Hearts;
the Emperor deceived us, and we are not tainted with his Gold, we renounce this
ungodly Act, we will wash it off with our Blood. And then running to the
Emperor, and throwing down their Gold, cried out, Sir, we have not received
Gifts from you, but our own Death and Damnation; you called us, not to Honor
us by them, but to mark us with Disgrace; Now do us who are your Soldiers, the
Favor, as to kill us for Christ to whom alone we are Subject; as we are
polluted, so let us be purged by Fire; reduce us into Ashes, as we did the
Frankincense; cut off our Hands, which we stretched out in offering of it, and
our Feet, which carried us to the place; and give our Gold to others, who have
not repented of that, they have already received: Christ is sufficient for us,
whom we prefer above all things in the World. Having said this to the Emperor,
they informed others of the Cheat he had put upon them, and exhorted them to
make Satisfaction to their Saviors Honor with their Blood. The Emperor was
very mad at them, but would no kill them, because they should not be counted
Martyrs, but banished them.

If the Thebaean Legion was an Example of Passive Obedience, much more were
these Soldiers of Julian, who behaved themselves with such Exemplary Modesty,
and Submission toward an Apostate Emperor, who dealt so basely with his Army,
and persecuted the greater part of his Subjects (as Mr. J. says) not only
without, but against Law. One would think upon Mr. J's Principles, that they
should rather have mutined, and formed themselves into a Posture of Resistance
against such a Lawless Tyrant; but instead of that, they speak unto him like
Apostles, and desire to be killed for the Sake of Christ. Mr. J. knew this very
well, which made him only refer unto the Story, which he knew not one of an
hundred among his Readers would, nor one in ten could examine: I am confident
neither of his Supervisers, neither he, who is now with God, nor he, who is
still among Men, knew the Truth of these Stories; if they did, they were very
ill-advised not to blot out the Reference, which has caused me to bring them
upon the Stage: We thank them for it, and to requite them, we will Thunder no
more with the musty Thebaean Legion, but Juventinus, and Maximus, and the
Soldiers of Julian shall be our Thundering Legion for the time to come.

CHAP. IV. Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in their Actions.
OUr Author having showed us how the Christians behaved themselves toward
Julian in Words, proceeds in two Examples to give an Account of their Actions,
which, as he says, make manifest their Hatred to him, and how they held him in
the very lowest degree of Contempt. We may be sure these two Examples are the
best he could pick out; but as for the first, he has unluckily taken off from
it the Efficacy he intended it should have, by observing out of Theodoret and
St. August. that Valentinian did what he did to the Sacrist, as a Confessor of
the Christian Religion; which implies that he did it, not out of hatred to
Julian, or with a Design to affront his Majesty, but out of love to his
Savior, and to own his Religion, and to testify his Fidelity to him.

For in those streights, wherein he was surprised, he was either to receive the
Sprinklings of the Lustral Water quietly, as the Heathens did, and then he had
polluted himself, or else he was bound to show by some Sign, that he was no
Heathen, nor Apostate, but a true Christian; and having no time to deliberate,
which was the most decent, and inoffensive way, we need not wonder, that he
struck the Sacrist, or, as the (...). Theodor. l. c. 16.
Original may be rendered, that he pushed him with his Fist. If he had spit in
his Face, or in the Holy Water, or shaked it off his Clothes, it had been all
one; something was to be done on so public an Occasion to own his Religion;
and he could not do it more effectually, than by disowning the Heathen Rites.
Theodoret says, that he was not able to (...). Ib.
dissemble the Zeal which he had for the Christian Religion, and if his Master
Julian were offended at him for it, and looked upon himself as contemned by the
Action, it was an Accidental and not a Designed Offense.

His next Instance is in old Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum, in which he has
discovered much Partiality, and Dis-ingenuity in rendering that obscure Passage
of his Son so, as to make his Reader believe, that the good old man intended to
kick Julian: For first it is plain, that the Text is imperfect, which made him
confess, that he had more trouble with that Passage, than with all the rest in
the Book; (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 19. p. 308.
the (...) which goes before (...) has nothing answering unto it; the Particle
(...), seems to imply, that there is something wrong, and who can tell what
(...) is? and therefore methinks though (...) should signify Kicking, and seem
to refer unto the Emperor, as the words stand in the printed Copy, yet one
would think that a Protestant Divine in Charity should have presumed, that this
seeming Sense of that Imperfect Passage could not be the Real, because it is so
absurd to imagine, that so Pious a Bishop, for whom, his Son tells us, God
wrought as great a p. 304, 305.
Miracle, as for Hezekiah, should, contrary to the practice of all Christianity
before him, design to stretch forth hand, or foot against his Sovereign, whose
person (according to our Authors own P. 84.
Confession) was Sacred and Inviolable, and ought by no means to have had any
violence offered unto him. It was methinks a greater Solecism in Mr. J. than
any he could make in the Greek, to think old Gregory had less Conscience than
himself. If ye will believe him, he durst not offer Violence to the person of a
Popish King; and yet this old withered Lachrymist, would have made no Bones of
of Kicking Julian, no not when he was scarce able to creep. For in the next
words to those, which he cites out of Young Gregory about his Fathers Kicking,
he tells us of his (...).
old Mortified Body; and two or three pages after he says he was so (...).
broken with Age, and Sickness, that upon an Occasion when he had all his Zeal
about him, he was scarce able to go, and yet (...). p. 311.
this dody Body of an old Man, scarce able to breath, was resolved to kick
Julian in the head of a Troop; and what is yet stranger, Julian, who had fought
so many Battles in the Head of his Legions, having happily got Intelligence of
his Design, was so terrified at the danger, that he ran away. Besides, it is
not imaginable, that a Roman Emperor should put himself in the Head of a
Captain and his Company of Archers to lead them on to the storming of a Church;
it was very proper for him to command such a Captain, and his Company upon the
Service, but to lead them on himself, was not consistent with the Emperors
Majesty, who never marched any where, but attended with the Praetorian Guards.

These Considerations methinks might have made Mr. J. consider the Greek
better, and if he had, he would not have thought it any Solecism to understand
the Place of the Captain of the Archers, because he who led them on demanded
the Church (...), according to, or by virtue of his Orders, which could not
have been said of the Emperor, if he had demanded it himself.

But to make the whole Passage more easy, it is to be observed, That young
Gregory's Design in this place is to show, 1. First, How much his Father
despised and undervalued all the Mischief that Julian could design against him;
and 2dly. What means he used for his Destruction, and the Deliverance of the
Church. Of the First he says, That the Captain and his Archers, whom he led up
against their Church, was an Example; and of the Second, that he not fearing
the times, prayed (...).
Publicly among the people for Julians Destruction, and also in (...) --
Private, Fasting and Praying, and lying whole Nights upon the Ground. Who
(says he) can be found who more contemned Julian, or more endeavored his
Destruction that my Father? Of his Contempt of him, among many others, those
Archers, and their Captain are a Proof, whom he (the Captain) led on against
our Church, as one that would take it, or demolish it. For having assaulted
many others, he came hither also with the same Intention, and demanded the
Church (...)] according to his Orders, or as the special Sense of the Word
requires, according to the Emperors Orders.

This is the most natural sense of the place, and I find it accordingly
translated by Bilibaldus Perkheymerus, the greatest Grecian of his Time, who
was a great Collector of Greek Manuscripts, and who, if we may believe Erasmus
his great Correspondent, Et eximium illum Christianae Philosophiae praeconem
Greg. Nazianzenum sic Latin loquentem nobis docet, ut Graeci Sermonis fontes
nemo desideraturus fuerit. Erasm. in Ep. Illustriss. Principi Georgio Saxoniae
Duci.
turned Nazianzen into such Latin, that no man need desire the Greek.

His Words are these: Hunc quis magis, quam pater meus despexisse, aut
dissolvisse est repertus? Contemptus itaque praemultis aliis judex est
praefectus sagittariorum cum suis quos ducebat, ut sacras domos nostras
occuparet, aut subjugaret. Quum^nim multos alios agressus fuisset, huc quoque
cum eadem pervenit intention, ac templum petebat cum mandatis.

I hope we have now pretty well secured the Emperors Honor, and laid the
Kicking upon the Captain; but what then? Is it reasonable to think, that a
Bishop would kick an Officer, that came with the Emperors Orders? or that such
a Feeble old Soul, as this would undertake to kick a Captain in the Head of his
Company, or if he should be so mad, is it credible to believe, that the Captain
was afraid of his Toes? No truly, these are all very great Absurdities, and
therefore the Vid. Vitam Perkeymeri a Conrado Rittershusio scriptam, and
Wolfgangum Musculum in praefatione version. Greg. Naz. Excus. Basil. 1550.
Wonder of his Age, the Noble and Learned Perkheymerus saw nothing of kicking
in the Passage, but goes on thus.

But he so far failed of accomplishing what he intended, that he was in hazard
of being excluded by my Father, which when he understood either by himself, or
by some others that told him, he went away, although he had illness, or pain in
his Feet, seeing the Bishop did so burn with Zeal for the Temple, and with
Anger against him. Verum tantum abfuit ut quae vellet peragere, posset, ut
paruin defucrit, quin a patre meo excluderetur. Id quum per semetipsum
intelligeret, aut ab alio quodam consulente aud^visset, licet pedum dolor
laboraret, discessit, quum Sacerdos ira ac zelo contra eum templi causa
arderet.

It is not to be doubted, but that Perkheymerus had very good reason from his
own Manuscripts to translate this obscure passage, as he has done, and
particularly for his rendering of (...), although he had Illness in his Feet,
for the Phrase being Synecdochical (...), must be the Patient, and not the
Instrumental Agent [for then it must have been (...),] in reference to (...),
and may be properly rendered in English, Although he was bruised or battered
[with Marching] in his Feet. And this sense, which makes (...) the Patient unto
(...), is agreeable to Phavorinus, who renders (...) in the Passive voice by
(...) signifies to beat, but (...) to suffer, or be ill.

As for the Authority of his Metropolitan it signifies nothing, because the
Latin which he has cited is not (as he seems to think) the Original, but only
the Translation of his Comment upon Nazianzen, and there is violent presumption
to think that (...), where the merit of the Controversy lies, was in his
Comment, as well as in Gregory's Text.

But what if after all it should appear to be a kicking, and that this kicking
was intended for the Emperor, what would Mr. J. get by one Eccentrick Example
in 360 years from all Primitive Christianity, and particularly from all the
Bishops of the Church? By his own Principle he was bound to condemn him, and
not to propose him for an Example, because it was by no means lawful to offer
any Violence unto Julian. It had been more agreeable to his Hypothesis to let
it have been the kicking of the Captain, for though the persons of Princes are
Sacred and Inviolable P. 86.
yet (says he) the Lives of Subjects under an Apostate Prince are not to lie
at the Mercy of every Commission-Officer, or Janizary, no! illegal Force must
be repelled by Force.

I shall conclude this Chapter with a Remarque upon some of his petulant
Expressions, altogether unbecoming a Man, that professes Divinity, especially
one of his Robe. In the Story of Valentinian out of Theodoret he translates
(...) by Chaplain, where he would rather be guilty of a Solecism, than not to
be Sarcastical, for he might more properly have rendered it (...) to sweep,
hence Suidas renders it (...), the Cleaner of the Temple, and Hesy^h. (...), he
that adorns it.
Sexton, or (...), He that takes Care of the Temple.
Churchwarden; but he had learnt of his Ch^^nies of the Faction, to ridicule
the use of Chaplains in Great Families, because they are generally Loyal men,
who are able and willing to defend the King, and the Church.

In the Story of Old Gregory, upon whom he was resolved to fasten the kicking
of Julian, he scoptically calls him one of the Old Lachrymists, to please the
wretched Humor of the same sort of men, who love to droll upon the Doctrine of
the Cross. But however he has taken the liberty to abuse the Memory of that
Holy, and Zealous Father, he was no more then a Lachrymist, he never designed
any personal Violence to Julian, but only to keep his Church-Door against the
Captain of his Archers, who was sent to take it, or destroy it; and there was
nothing singular in that, which had been done by Babylas Bishop of Antioch
against Decius, and afterward by St. Theodor. l. 5. c. 18.
Ambrose against Theodosius, and might perhaps be innocently done in the like
circumstances by a Protestant Bishop, who will be a Confessor, against his own
Prince.

Last of all, as it were in triumph over the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, I
know no more than the Pope of Rome (says he) what to make of all this, what
they (Valentinian and Gregory) meant by it, or upon what Principles these men
proceeded, whether the Laws of their Country allowed them to offer Violence to
their Lawful Emperor? -- But now it appears they offered him no Violence, or if
they had, does he not know whether the Laws of their Country allowed them to do
so? If he did not, he was very ignorant, and if he did, he was very
dis-ingenuous to say so against his own Knowledge, and then he thinks he
concludes bravely with a Sarcasme upon the Excellent Primate, and Bishops of
Scotland, only this we may be assured of, that none of those Bishops (Maris nor
Old Gregory) had ever been in Scotland, nor had learnt to fawn upon an
Apostate, and a mortal Enemy to their Religion. His R. H. is much obliged to
him for his New Titles; His Majesty for the Honor he has done his only
Brother, and Viceroy in his other Kingdom; and the other half of the British
Bishops for being represented as a Company of Fawning Spanels upon and
Apostate, and the utter Enemy of their Religion.

This is a Doubty Hero to attack a King, and a Prince; nay his own natural King
and Prince, with Fourteen Bishops at a time: Every one knows he alludes to the
Letter, which the Bishops of Scotland sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to
let his Grace, and their Brethren in England know, how much they were beholden
to his R. H. for his Protection of them against the Churches sworn Enemies; and
I can see no ground for the Justice of his foul Reflection upon them for this
Action, unless Justice, and Gratitude be Crimes. If a Vizier should do very
kind Offices for the Christian Bishops, and Religion, in any one of his Masters
Provinces, would it be Fawning upon him for them to write to the Patriarch of
Constantinople to acquaint him with it, and desire him to give him Thanks? Or
to make the Parallel more exact; Suppose that in the Western Empire there had
been of old a Bloody Aerian Faction, who held Episcopacy to be an Antichristian
Usurpation, and who had bound themselves in a Solemn League and Covenant to
Extirpate the Apostolical Function, and in pursuance of that Design had
Rebelled against Constantine, and by the help of their Brethren in the Eastern
Empire had conquered him, and then put him to death: That 12 years after it
pleased God to Restore his Son Constantius; after which the Aerian Faction
began again to assemble in Armed Meetings, which ended in a formed Rebellion;
that after this Rebellion Constantius was persuaded to give them an Indulgence,
by the Benefit of which they grew strong, and insolent, till at length they
presumed to beat and murder the Orthodox Clergy, wheresoever they met them, and
more especially sought opportunity to Murder the Bishops, many of which for
Fear of them durst not live in their Diocesses; that they came to be so bold,
as to Face, and Skirmish the Emperors Soldiers in Parties; that they assaulted
the Patriarch of Rome in the midst of the City, and afterward murdered him on
the Road in a most Barbarous manner, and within 6 Weeks after his Murder
universally rebelled; that after this Rebellion was over, Constantius sent
Julian (a Prince who for his Excellencies had been the Darling of the People
before he was suspected of Paganism) to govern the Western Empire, where he
declared he would uphold the Church as it was established, both against
Paganism, and Aerianism; that accordingly he cheerfully procured a Law to
prevent both the Pagans, and Aerians from having any share in the Government,
Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical; that besides all this he was most Exemplary
Respectful to the Bishops, and Episcopal Clergy, and frequently renewed his
Promises to them of upholding the Established Religion: Last of all, that all
his Servants and Attendants were Orthodox Christians; that he kept two, or
three Orthodox, and learned Presbyters in his Family, to Catechize, Preach, and
and Administer the Holy Eucharist, and do all other Spiritual Offices among
them, as occasion did require. All this being supposed, let Mr. J. tell me, if
it would have been Fawning, or Justice, Gratitude, and Prudence in the Western
Bishops to send an Account of this most Generous and perhaps Surprising
Goodness of Julian to the Orthodox Church, and Clergy, notwithstanding the
general suspicions that went abroad of his being a Pagan, to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, to desire him, when Caesar returned to the Court, to give him
Humble thanks.

Nay, I would desire Mr. J. to tell me, whether upon this Supposition, it would
not have been great Impudence, and Malice in a Private Presbyter so to censure
the Western Bishops, and miscal the just Civility, which they showed to Julian,
Fawning upon an Apostate (although his Apostasy was never yet proved) and a
mortal Enemy to their Religion, to which he had been so great a Friend.

CHAP. V. Of the Behavior of the Christians toward Julian in their Devotions,
and first of their Psalms.
FRom the Behavior of the Christians in their Actions toward Julian, he
proceeds to their Devotions, and Prayers; where from one or two Examples he
still draws a General Conclusion, endeavoring to make what was done but by one
man, or once upon some special Occasion, so appear, as if it had been the
General Practice of the Christians of the Roman Empire, i. e. of almost the
whole Catholic Church. These Passages (says he) which we have hitherto related
were in common Conversation -- where the Christians might chance not to have
their Religion about them -- but when they go to Church and enter upon Holy
Ground, or whenever they make their Addresses to God in Prayers and Praises,
there one may expect to see the Flights of their Self-denying, and Suffering
Religion. There one may justly expect they should lay aside all their Animosity
against Julian, though he were their Enemy, and for that Reason pray the harder
for him; yes s^ they do the wrong way, they cannot sing a Psalm, but they make
his Confusion the Burden of it. One would think after such a General Charge he
should have brought at least an Hundred Instances to prove it, but in all his
Search, he has found but Two; and the First of them, which he sets off with so
much show, is nothing to his Purpose, because the Original words in the (...)
Hebrew, and (...).
Greek, which ours and all the Provincial Languages render by Confound from the
vulgar Latin, signify Confusion, as it is put for Shame, as we say in our
Language, Such a man was much confounded, that is, much Abashed, and Ashamed;
or as the French ordinarily say, Vous me donnez de la Confusion, you make me
Ashamed. So Psalm. 35.4, Let them be (...)
confounded and (...)
put to shame, that seek after my Soul, might be rendered, let them be put to
shame, and blushing, that seek after my Soul. So Psalm. 40.14. Let them be
ashamed and confounded together, that seek after my Soul to destroy it, might
be rendered, Let them be (...)
ashamed and (...)
blush, etc. The Words signify, that shame of Mind, and confusion of Face with
which a man is affected, who is, become sensible of his Error or Misdoing; and
so the Christians of Ant. in Praying after David's Example and in the sense of
his Words, for the Confusion of the Pagans, prayed not for their Destruction,
but for their Conversion; especially upon that Solemn Occasion, when the Bones
of the Martyrs had silenced Apollo, the God of Julian, (in the Praise of whose
Divinity he had written an Orat. 4. (...), Ad Sallustiu^.
Oration) they could never more aptly and seasonably apply that Charitable
Prayer of David; Confounded be all they that serve Graven Images, and that
boast themselves of Idols, worship him all ye Gods.

But that the Reader may perceive how apt our Author is to pick up, and
mis-apply all Passages in Good Historians to his own Design, I beg leave that I
may tell the Story after him, which in short is this: Julians Elder Brother
Gallus Caesar, while he was at Antioch, being very much grieved to see the
pleasant Place of Daphne so polluted with Idolatry, and Gentile Superstition,
was resolved to Cleanse it, and Hallow it in this manner; Sozom. l. 6. c. 19.
He thought if he built an Oratory over against Apollos Temple, and placed the
Body of Babylas the Martyr in it, it would bring the Christians from the Town
to Worship there, and so the Temple of Apollo would soon grow unfrequented.
Accordingly it happened, for from the time the Martyrs Bones were put there, the
Demon grew Dumb, and so continued till Julian came to Antioch, where he found
the Temple of his God neglected, and desolate; and when they told him that the
God had not spoke of a long time, he pretended it was because he had been so
neglected; and therefore to make him ample Amends, he offered him Sacrifices in
such excessive Numbers, that the Heathens called him Bull-burner as well as the
Christians, and Superstitiosus magis, quam Sacrorum legitimus observator,
innumeras sine parsimonia pecudes mactans, ut aestimaretur, si revertisset de
parthis boves jam defuturos. Marcell. l. 25.
censured him for his Extravagance and Superstition in that point. Yet for all
this Apollo stood mute, till Julian again, and again begging him to tell him
how he should succeed in his Persian Expedition, he at length answered, that he
was hindered from delivering Oracles by the dead Bodies, which were buried so
near unto him. Julian by this perceived, that he meant especially the Body of
Babylas, though some other Martyrs were buried there about him, and therefore
he forthwith made the Christians remove them all, as L. 3. c. 10.
Theodoret says; But L. 3. c. 18.
Socrates, L. 6. c. 19.
Sozom. and Homilia de Hiero martyr Babyla.
Chrysostom. say, that they only removed the Coffin of Babylas, and as they
carried it in solemn Procession into the City, the Praecentors sang Psalms, and
the Chorus made up of Men, Women, and Children at every Pause, sang the 7th
Verse of the 79th Psalm, Confounded, or ashamed be all they that serve Graven
Images, and boast themselves of Idols. Julian not bearing this Disgrace,
commanded the Leaders of the Procession to be apprehended; But Sallustius, his
Praefectus Praetorio, who was then an Heathen, endeavored to persuade him not
to gratify the Christians so far as to meddle with them, who were desirous of
the Glory of Martydom. But when he saw he could not persuade him, he
apprehended many Christians and put them in Prison, and tortured Theodorus, a
young Man, whom he first seized, in in the presence of all the People; and when
he was upon the Rack, he sung over the same Psalm, which they had sung the day
before in the Procession; and his wonderful Constancy in his Torments, made
Julian cease from punishing the rest.

And now let any impartial Man judge, whether this was to call for Vengeance
from Heaven upon the Pagan Emperor to sing Psalms upon such a triumphant
Occasion? certainly if these had held their peace, the Stones would have
immediately cried out; could they do less at the removal of a Body, by which
God was pleased to work such a Miracle, the Body of an Eminent Martyr, who had
been their own Bishop? And could they say any thing, that could likely make
deeper Impression upon Julian, and bring him to a sense of the Vanity of his
Idols, than to pray to God that he might be put to Shame and Confusion by the
Miracle, and especially to do it in those pungent words of the Psalmist, which
he had read a Thousand times in the Church of Nicomedia; Let them be confounded
that serve Graven Images --. The Apostle says, that the Word of God is quick,
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit; and in this Sense indeed, I believe, they
hoped that their Psalms, and the Burden of them, might by Gods Blessing have
proved Darts, and Swords, and Arrows to cut the Apostate to the Heart.
Otherwise they knew the worst of it would be to suffer for the Testimony they
gave of their Religion, but this they were so far from fearing, that as (...).
Sallustius told Julian, They were desirous and ambitious of it. But this
Passage our Author very prudently opmitted in his P. 47.
Translation of the Story out of Theodoret, because he was not willing to let
Readers understand, that the Christians had a mind to suffer under an Apostate,
who (according to his new Hypothesis) persecuted contrary to Law.

And to this great zeal, and desire of Suffering for Christ [which I shall
hereafter insist more upon] is to be ascribed that heroical Attempt of Publia
the Diaconess, his second Example of singing of Psalms. This Woman, resolving
to show how much the Rage, and Threatenings of Julian were to be despised by all
Christians, was resolved to be at least a Confessor, and therefore with a
Company of Professed Virgins (...). Theod. l. 3. c. 18.
Fortified with Divine Zeal, she was wont to sing Praises to God the Creator,
and Redemer; and when the Emperor passed by, they would be sure to sing their
Psalms the louder, accounting such a (...).
furious and destructive Enemy of the Christian Religion to be despised and
derided. Now at such times they used to sing those Psalms especially, which
Sarcastically set forth the weakness of Idols, saying after David, The Idols of
the Heathen, are Silver and Gold, the Work of Men's Hands: And after thus
showing the Senselesness of them, they added, Let them that make them be like
unto them, and all those that put their Trust in them. He hearing them sing
thus, was very much grieved, and commanded them to be silent at such times as
he passed by; but Publia not regarding his Command, filled her Quire of Virgins
with more Courage; and when he passed by the next time, commanded them to sing,
Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered Julian taking this very ill,
commanded Publia to be brought before him, and without any regard to her Age,
Sex, or Virtue, commanded one of the Soldiers to beat her on both sides of her
Face, till he had made it all Bloody with his Hands. But she [like a true
Confessor] receiving this contumelious Usage, as the Highest Honor, wentback
to her House, but after her usual manner, she still pelted him with her
Spiritual Songs.

Theodoret, who tells this Story of Publia and her Quire of Virgins, ascribes
it to their Divine Zeal, and afterward tells us, that she received her cruel
and disgraceful Beating, as the highest Honor, which is as much, as if he had
said in St. Lukes phrase, That she rejoiced, like the Apostles, that she was
counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ. This makes it plain that Suffering
is the thing, they would have been at; and if our Author had not been wilfully
blind, he might in these Psalms have seen the flights of their self-denying and
suffering Religion, who made themselves Confessors in that Exigence, and would
fain have been martyrs for Jesus Christ. For Julian out of Policy (as I shall
hereafter show) would not kill the Christians, because their Martyrdom made
them and their Religion more Illustrious; and therefore many of them, thought
they should do God good Service to provoke him to break his Measures in putting
them death; endeavoring, as Nazianzen said of his Soldiers above mentioned,
to make themselves Martyrs, (...) as much as lay in their own Power. Hence, as
that 1 Invect. p. 72, 73, 74.
Father tells us, it was more delightful to the Christians to suffer for their
Religion, than to see it undermined by new Arts; and therefore he complains of
the Politic Gentleness of Julian, as the greatest Cruelty, that ever the
Christians underwent. Hom. in Juvent. and Max.
St. Chrysostom. tells us, That Julian used to say, That the Christians flew to
Martyrdom as Bees to their Hive: And therefore the true Ground why the
Christians so provoked him, was not, that he Persecuted them Illegally, but
that he did not take the old way of Persecution, which was so honorable to the
Christians, and advantageous to the Church, of putting them to death: Or if
here and there he put them to death, that he put them not to death formally, as
Christians, but accused and condemned them for some other Crimes.

This indeed raised their Animosity against him, that he (...). Naz. 1. Inv. p.
72. (...). Sallust. ad Jul. Soz. l. 4. c. 20.
envied them the Glory, and the Church the mighty (...). Christ. Hom. in
juvent. and Max. Vid. Sozom. l. 5. c. 4.
Advantage of a downright Bloody Persecution; and if their extraordinary Zeal
in suffering Martyrdom, and watering the Church with their Blood did transport
any of them, beyond the bounds of decency, or strict Duty in their Behavior to
the Emperor, or those who were put in Authority under him, it transported
former Christians, as much.

In the Dioclesian Persecution, Passio Sancti Felicis, Edit Oxon. ad Calcem.
Lactant. de Mort. Persecu^.
Felix Bishop of Tubyza told the Governor of the City, That their Gods were
Stones, the Works of Men's Hands, which had Eyes but saw not, Ears but heard
not, Mouths but spoke not, etc. and then added, [in the words of Publia] They
that make them are like unto them, and so is every one that puts his Trust
in them. And when he was brought before Anulinus the Pro-consul, he asked him
his Name? to which he replied, I am a Christian: The Pro-consul replied, I did
not ask what Religion you were of, but what was your Name? To which he bluntly
replied, As I said before, so I say again, I am a Christian, and a Bishop;
which made the Pro-consul Angry. Might not a man here ask in our Authors words,
Where is the Reverence due to Authority? What dutifulness was there shown by
the Bishop in refusing to comply with so reasonable a Command as to tell his
Name? and had it been Julian, to whom the Bishop had been so uncomplyant, then
he would have triumphantly said, But it was Julian, and he did not owe him so
much Service.

In the Gallic Persecution in the time of the Antonines, St. Eu^eb. Hist. Ecc.
l. 5. c. 1.
Attalus would neither tell his Name, nor his Country, nor the City where he
was born, nor whether he was bound, or free? but to all these Questions only
answered in Latin, I am a Christian. And good old Ibid.
Pothinus Bishop of Lions, who was prosecuted by the Magistrates, and People of
the City, when the Pro-consul asked him who was the God of the Christians?
answered very uncomlaisantly, If thou were worthy, thou should know. Had
this been Maris, or Old Gregory, or any other Christian that had answered
Julian so, then it must have been brought for a Special Example of the
Christians Hatred to Julian, and how they had him in the lowest degree of
Contempt. I cannot (would he have said) find out any profound primitive
Obedience in this Behavior. Where is the Reverence due to Majesty? What
Dutifulness did they show in refusing to comply, with so Reasonable a Command
as to tell their Names, or who was the God of the Christians, But it was
Julian, and they did not owe him so much Service.

Methinks a Man, that could find so many Arguments to Justify his
Fellow Subjects for Petitioning their Sovereign against his express Command,
might have said something to Excuse Publia for her Noncompliance with Julian,
and not have charged her with Disobedience, and breach of Duty for doing of
that, which Theodoret, who has so much Credit with him, ascribed to the
Primitive Principle of Divine Zeal. He might have called to mind the
Uncomplyable behavior of Jesus before Pilate, of which Divines give this
Account: That seeing Pilate so willing to release him, he would not answer him,
as being afraid by his Compliance to prevent his Sufferings at the appointed
time. In like manner many of the Primitive Christians, having (...) Eusebius. de
Vettio Epagatho martyr, l. 5. c. 1.
very much Zeal for Christ, and fervency in Spirit to suffer for him, as
Proto-Martyrs of the several Persecutions, did designedly behave themselves in
that Stoical manner before the Tribunals, as being unwilling to prevent their
own sufferings, or at least afraid to be thought Timorous, or willing to
escape. More particularly in the Time of Julian, many to whom God gave the
Spirit of (...) Ibid.
Proto-Martyrs, did industriously provoke him to down right Bloodshed, for the
Reasons above mentioned, and yet were never charged with want of Reverence or
breach of their Duty to him, in the Particulars by which they did it, or with
doing any thing more against him upon that Account, than was done to other
Emperors, or their Ministers by Martyrs, and Confessors of former times.

CHAP. VI. Of their Prayers and Tears.
WE come now to their Prayers and Tears, which (says he) P. 46.
were the Arms of the Church indeed, for they were Darts, and Arrows, and
Firebrands, and Death. Cruel Christians! so to dart their Prayers against
Julian, and then to be so flippant as to express it by a Word which might more
properly be employed to describe, the throwing of the Javelin, which afterward
stuck in his Liver. Oh but it was Julian! and in that Age those were accounted
the best Prayers, and Tears, which did best Execution upon an Apostate Emperor,
and contributed most to his Destruction.

This is a very pretty Declamation, and would almost persuade a man to think,
that the Christians in Julians Time had Army-Chaplains among them, and that
they prayed to the Lord of Hosts for his Destruction in Field-Conventicles,
with Javelins in their Hands, and Swords by their Sides. The Nightly Squadrons,
and lying upon the Ground does much countenance this Notion; and if the unwary
Readers of Julian be carried into such Mistakes by the Authors
Artillery-Metaphors, as some I know have been, is he not to Answer to God for
it? Especially considering, that after so many false and groundless Charges
upon those Christians in general: At length he P. 95.
represents them; as Rebels in their Hearts, and says, That they made use of
other Ingredients besides Prayers, and Tears in their Composition against a
Persecutor.

I shall hereafter show the Falseness of that Charge, and now proceed to
examine the Justice of this. How does it appear that the Christians in Julians
Time prayed for his Destruction? The Charge is General, and like all other
general Charges ought to be proved from a great Number of Particulars,
especially since the Society so charged is little less than the Catholic
Church. Does any Author say in general, That the Christians prayed for the
death of Julian; or can he furnish us with so many particular Instances in
different places, as may, by the Laws of Induction serve to ground such a
General Charge upon? But instead of that he presents us but with two Instances,
which really are but one, even the Example of Old Gregory, and his Church at
Nazianzum, for the We in Young Invect. 1. p. 123.
Gregory relates to the Christians of that City, of whom he being one, speaks
in the Plural Number, We called for the Sword and the Plagues of Egypt; and We
besought him to judge his own Cause, etc. And then, speaking more particularly
of himself, These (says he) were my mental, and verbal Prayers unto God.

But what is the Practice of Old Gregory and his Church to all the Churches,
and Cities of the Empire? Is this, without more Examples, sufficient to prove
that the rest of the Churches in the Roman Empire did publicly strike the
Villain [for so he renders (...)] with their Joint Prayers and Supplications,
or that other Bishops generally, speaking privately, Fasted, and Watched, and
Prayed for his Destruction, and taught their People so to do? Would the
singular Practice of one English Bishop, and of his People following his
Example, be a sufficient Ground for a General Charge upon the whole Church of
England? If it would not, how much less can the Example of one Bishop or Church
in the Roman Empire, signify any thing to prove the General Practice of the
rest? But yet in our Authors Logic, one Instance is ground enough for a Lawful
Induction. It must be their Prayers, and their Tears, and they followed
Hezekiahs Example, and they darted these Prayers: But we need not wonder at his
making an Induction from one Particular, when he calls the few Months of
Julians Reign an Age, p. 55. In that Age (says he) the best Prayers, and
Tears, were those which did best Execution upon an Apostate Emperor.

I do not question but that the Christians generally prayed for the Deliverance
of the Church, but then it is reasonable to believe, that they generally prayed
for Julians Conversion at the same time: Of this we can produce one Example,
though our Author P. 96.
says, That he could not find so much as one single Wish among the Ancients
for Julians Conversion, but all for his downright Destruction. If he could not,
it was his own Fault, I fear the fault of his own willful Blindness; for in the
very next Chapter to that P. 59. Sozom. l. 6. c. 1.
which he has cited out of Sozom, to prove that a Christian killed Julian, he
might have read of Didymus, whom the Historian calls (...), that is, an Vid.
Suicceri Thesaur. in (...)
Orthodox Doctor of Alexandria, (...) Sozom. l. 6.
who being in great Sorrow for the Apostasy of Julian, Fasted, and Prayed for
his Repentance, and for the sad Estate of the Church.

Now from this Example, in our Authors way of arguing, I might prove that the
Christians prayed for Julians return from his Error, and for the Deliverance of
the Church by that way: I am sure it is very agreeable to their Charity, to
think, That all would pray for his Repentance, that believed him capable of
Repentance; and that none absolutely prayed for his Destruction, but such as
thought him utterly incapable of Repentance, and that he had sinned the Sin
unto death, for which it was in vain to pray.

And indeed there was very good Reasons to presume, that he was Irrecoverable,
and had the Malice of a Devil against Christ, and the Christian Religion, and
good grounds upon that presumption to pray for his Destruction, and after his
death in that unnatural Apostasy, to lodge him, as our Author observes, in Hell.

Now to make out this Hypothesis, let us consider the Nature of his Apostasy;
his Devotedness to the Devil, and his Spite to Christ, and the Christians.

As for his Apostasy, it was first occasioned by his Theod. l. 3. c. 3.
Ambitious Thirst after the Empire, which made him go about Greece to find out
Conjurers, and Fortune Tellers, of whom he might enquire, if he should obtain
his Desire. At length he met with a Magician, who promised him to tell him his
Fortune, and to that end led him into an Idoll-Temple, where in the Adytum, or
inner Recesses he conjured up the Devil, and there initiated him in the
Diabolical Mysteries, and made him eat of the Sacrifice, which was an
Abomination to Christ. This was after his Brother Gallus was made Caesar, when
Invect. 1. p. 61.
being left alone, he had greater opportunities to converse with Astrologers
and Magicians, whereof there was great plenty in Asia; and before this, as Ibid.
Gregory says, he was a concealed Pagan, using to dispute with his Brother
Gallus in Defense of Paganism, which he would own in company, where he was
safe. This is very agreeable to L. 22. Et quanquam a rudimentis pueritiae
primis inclinatior erat erga numinum cultum --
Marcellinus, who says, that he was addicted to Paganism from a Child; and yet
to cover the matter, he professed himself Sozom. l. 5. c. 2. Naz. 1 Invect. p.
59. Theod. l. 3. c. 2.
a Zealous Christian, going often to Church, and letting himself be ordained a
Reader, and joining with his Brother in building a Stately Church over the
Sepulcher of St. Mamas.

But, whatever his Inclinations were, we cannot date his Apostasy, but from his
going into the Idols Temple with the forementioned Magician, where he virtually
renounced Christ, although for many years after, till he was firm in the
Empire, he still professed himself a Christian, and sometimes went to Ammian.
Mar. l. 21. c. 2. Utque omnes, nullo impediente, ad sui favorem illiceret,
adhaerere cultui Christiano fingebat, a quo tam pridem occulte desciverat,
arcanorum particibus paucis aruspicinis auguritsque intentus, and caeteris quae
deorum semper fecere cultores -- Et ut haec interim celarentur, feriarum die,
quem celebrantes mense Januario christiani Epiphania dictitant, progressus in
little Ecclesiam, solemniter numine orato, decessit.
Church. Yet in all this interim he practiced Magic, and Demonolatry, for he
Id. l. 16. c. 5.
privately worshipped Mercury, and pretended to Revelations from Jupiter, and
Visions of the Genius Publicus, while he was in Gaul. While he lay with his
Forces in Illyricum, he spent much of his time in Gazing upon Entrals, and
making Augurial Observations, and had the Death of Constantius foretold unto
him by Aprunculus, from a Liver with a double Coat.

After he publicly owned Paganism, there was no end of his Sacrifices, and
performing of Magical Rites, and Ceremonies. Amm. Mar. l. 22. c. 12.
He would sometimes Sacrifice an Hundred Bulls and Flocks of several sorts of
Cattle at a time, and permitted every one, that would, to profess the Arts of
Divination, of which he was a great Admirer; and out of his extreme
Superstition, for which he is censured by Loc. Cit.
Marcellinus, he opened the Prophetic Castalian Fountain in the Suburbs of
Antioch, which Adrian had shut up. Before he marched into Persia, he (...)
Theod. l. 3. c. 10.
consulted all the Oracles of the Empire, and Theod. l. 3. c. 26.
after his death there were found in Antioch Chests full of men's Heads, and
pits full of dead men's Bodies, whom he had killed to inspect their Livers. And
at Ib. c. 27.
Charrae in Mesopotamia, where he quartered in his March to Persia, he went
into a Temple, with some of his Secretaries in Magic, where they stayed some
time; and when they came forth, he commanded the Door to be made fast, and
sealed it with his Seal, and set a Guard to keep it, commanding, that none
should go into it, till he returned. But after he was Slain, they entered into
it, and there found a Woman hung up by the Hair of her Head, with her Hands
stretched out, whose Belly they had ripped up, to Divine upon her Liver.

I have said thus much of the Apostasy of Julian, -- and his Idolatrous and
Magical Practices, to show how reasonable it was for the Christians, to look
upon him as irrecoverable out of the Snare of the Devil, and upon that
Supposition to pray for his Destruction. But then the Reasonableness of this
Presumption will better appear, if we consider, as L. 5. c. 2.
Sozomen observes, That he was born of most Religious Christian Parents, and
initiated from a Child in the Holy Scriptures, and educated under Bishops, and
Ecclesiastical Men. He was perfectly skilled in the Christian Religion, and yet
fell from it both into Daemonolatry and Magic; and what is yet worse, he
Apostatized at first, and afterward persevered in his Apostasy against the
evidence of Miracles, which makes it yet more reasonable to believe, That he
sinned against the Holy Ghost.

For when his Brother Sozom. l. 5. c. 2. Theod. l. 3. c. 2. Invect. 1. p. 59.
Gallus, and he went about to build the forementioned Oratory over the Tomb of
St. Mamas that part which Gallus undertook went up apace, but that of Julians
had the quite contrary Effect: For in some places, as often as they laid the
Foundation, so often the Earth threw up the Stones; and other parts of it,
which seemed well built up, would suddenly fall down again; and frequently when
the Workmen went to lay down a Stone, they would find a Resistance sensibly
thrust it back again. The first time that he went into an Idols Temple, as
above related, being frighted with the Apparition of the Devil, and the
terrible Noises, and filthy Odours Theod. l. 3. c. 3. 1. Invect. p. 71.
he met with there, he signed himself with the Sign of the Cross; upon which
the Spectre vanished, which caused the Priest to chide him, and tell him, that
the Demon was not afraid of the Cross, as he thought, but abominated it, and
so disappeared.

Sozom. loc. cit.
Another time, when he was viewing Entrails with some others of his Companions,
there appeared the Sign of the Cross upon them circled about with a Crown; upon
which they were very much afraid, conjecturing from the Crown, that the Cross
would be Victorious; and from the circular Figure of it, that it would last for
Ever, because a Circle had no End. But the Priest bid him to be of good
Courage, assuring him, That the circular Figure about the Cross did portend,
that the Christian Religion should be reduced within a little Compass, and not
spread every where, as it had done.

Another time he slighted the Evening Apparition of the Sozom. l. 5. c. 1.
Vines with Sour Grapes in the Confines of Illyrium, and the falling of the Dew
in Drops upon his Clothes, and the Clothes of all his Retinue in the Form of
a Cross.

He knew, that the Bones of Babylas the Martyr, had silenced his Apollo, and
that Theod. l. 3. c. 11. Sozom. l. 5. c. 20.
his Temple was burnt by Lightning, as soon as they were removed. Id. l. 3. c.
12, 13. Philostorg. l. 7. p. 507.
He knew that his Uncle Julian the Apostate was presently struck with a
Loathsome Disease in which his Bowels rotted, and he discharged his Excrements
at his Mouth, after he had robbed the Church of the Rich Vessels which
Constantine had given for Sacred Uses, and pissed upon the Altar: And that
Felix the Apostate also died as suddenly by Bleeding, Quibus ordinatis
terrebatur [Julianus] omino quodam praesentissimo. Felice enim L. G. pr^f^ vio
sanguinis repent extincto, e^mque Comite Juliano extincto, vulgus publicos
cont^ens titules, Felicem, Julianum, Augustumque pronunti^iat. Marcell l. 23.
c. 1.
after he had tauntingly said, In what Fine Vessels is the Son of Mary served?

Lastly, Theod. l. 5. c. 20. Invect 2. p 111, ^^^, 113. Socrat. l. 3 (...)
Sozom l 5 c. 22. H^^ lostorg. l. 7. 506. Vid. page 508. Ambros. Ep. 29 ad
The^^^. Chrysostom. Orat. 3. Adversus Judaeos. Rufinus l 1. c. 3^ ^^.
When the Jews went upon his Instigation, and Commission, under the Conduct of
Alypius, to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, he knew how they were hindered
after many successive Attempts, by Hurricanes, and Lightnings, and Earthquakes,
and Fire rising from the Foundations, which killed the Workmen; and were
attended with the Appearance of the Cross by Night in Heaven; and likewise with
the sudden appearance of black Crosses upon their Clothes; which things
converted great Numbers of those, that saw them, and enquired into the Matter
of Fact.

The Truth of this last Story is attested by L. 23. c. 1. -- Metuendi globi
flammarum prope fundamenta, crebris assultibus erumpentes faccre locum, exustis
aliquoties operantibus, inaccessum, hocque modo elemento destinatius
repellente, cessavit inceptum.
Marcellinus an Heathen Historian, who lived in those times; but all these, and
Sozom. l. 5. c. 21.
other Miracles of his Reign, together with the Heavenly Vision of his Uncle
Constantine, of which he could have no doubt, had no Effect upon his hard
Heart, which might tempt a very charitable Christian to believe, that he might
be one of those, whom it was impossible to renew unto Repentance, according to
that of the Apostle; For it is impossible for those, who were once enlightened,
and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to
come, if they shall fall away to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame.

This did Julian in a most eminent manner, having an implacable Spite at
Christ, and the Christian Religion, and deriding of them in a most blasphemous
manner. As for Christ, he used to call him the Galilaean God, and the
Carpenters Son, Theod. l. 3. c. 23.
and the Pagans followed his Example, insomuch, that when Libanius by way of
Scorn, asked an Eminent Schoolmaster of Antioch, What the Carpenters Son was a
doing? He replied, The Creator of the World, whom thou reproachfully call
the Carpenters Son, is making a Coffin, meaning for Julian; and accordingly not
many days after, his Body was brought in a Coffin to Antioch. And coming to
understand that there was a Famous Statue of Sozom. l. 5. c. 21.
Christ at Caesaraea in Palaestine, which had been set up in Honor of him by
the Woman in the Gospel, who had been healed of her Issue of Blood, he made it
be taken down, and his own set up instead of it; but it had not been long up,
before Fire from Heaven smot^ off the Head, and shattered all the Breast of it,
and tinged the rest of the Body with Sulphurous Smoke. He wrote an Ep. 51.
Epistle to the Alexandrians, and very likely to many other Christian Cities,
wherein he most scurrilously derides Christ, and the Christian Religion,
saying, he was ashamed, that there should be one Galilaean among them; and
tauntingly telling them, That they believed him, whom neither they, nor their
Fathers ever saw, to be God the Word. In his Caesar's, he represents the
Christian Religion to be nothing else but a Sanctuary for Rogues, and Villains;
and in his Epist. to the B^strens he represents the Christian Clergy, as
Tyrants, and Knaves. He (...) Theod. l. 3. c. 21.
called the Christians by way of Reproach Galilaeans, and 1 Invect. p. 81.
commanded them to be called by no other Name. And in short, he set himself by
all means imaginable to suppress Christianity, and advance Paganism; or as
Gregory speaks, to enslave the World to Demons again.

To this end he forbid the Theod. l. 3. c. 2. Socrat. l. 3. c. 12.
Children of Christians to be taught Poetry, Rhetoric, or Philosophy, which
was so cruel an Edict, that L. 22. c. 10. Illud autem inclemens, obruendum
perenni filentio, quod arcebat docere magistros rhetoricos, and grammaticos,
ritus christiani cultores.
Marcellinus blames him for it. He Socrat. l. 2. c. 1. Sozom. l. 5. c. 3.
caused all the Heathen Temples to be repaired, cleansed, and set open, and
caused many Christian Churches to be shut up. He Socr. l. 3. c. 13.
tempted the Christian Soldiers by all Arts possible to renounce their
Religion; and those that would not, he turned them out of Service; among whom
were Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens, great Officers, who were afterward made
Emperors, and the two former by the Choice of the Army. He hated Christian
Cities; whereof he Sozom. l. 5. c. 3.
subjected some unto the Jurisdiction of Pagan Cities: Others he disfranchised
of their Ancient Privileges, and Liberties, and Confiscated the Revenues of
their Churches to his own Exchequer. But as for the Cities where Paganism
prevailed, he Sozom. Loc. cit.
favored them, and would write to them to encourage them to ask new Privileges
of him. In some places he Socrat. l. 3. c. 13.
imposed severe Mulcts on those who would not sacrifice; in others Sozom. l. 5.
c. 18. Invect. 1. p. 94. (...).
he deprived them of their Freedom, and made them incapable of bearing Office
in any place of Magistracy, or Command, or of receiving any kind of Honors. He
deprived the Sozom. l. 5. c. 5.
Clergy of their Immunities, Honors, and Revenues, and abrogated all the Laws,
which Constantine, and Constantius had made in their Favor; Nay he Id. l. 5.
c. 15.
Banished them out of the Cities, on purpose that the Christian Religion should
not be taught in them; and in many places Sozom. l. 5. c. 5.
commanded them to rebuild the Heathen Temples, which had been destroyed in the
time of Constantine, and Constantius, which when they could not do, he tortured
them, and other Christians with them, and cast them into Prison. He put the
Theod. l. 3. c. 6.
Cruellest of Heathens into Civil, and Military Offices, on purpose, that they
might vex the Christians; and underhand encouraged the Heathens to Philostorg.
l. ^. p. 503. Naz. 2 Invect. p. 126. 1 Invect. p. 87, 88, 89. Theod. l. 3. c.
7. Socrat l. 3. c. 11.
outrage them in most barbarous manner, insomuch, that they dug up the Bones
of Saints and Martyrs, and mixing them with the Epiphan. Haeres. Anomaeorum 76.
In principto.
Bones of Beasts, burnt them together. Nay in some places they tasted the
Livers of murdered Christians, and sacrificed their Bodies upon their Altars;
and when Julian heard of these Barbarities, he very much rejoiced: And if at
any time the Christians sent to Complain unto him, he either would not Sozom.
l. 5. c. 3.
admit their Deputies, or if he did, it was only to Mock them, and tell them,
that they were bound by their Religion to Socrat. l. 3. c. 14. 1 Invect. p. 94.
suffer Injuries, and to do good to those, that did them hurt. And when he
pilled, and robbed the Christians, he jearingly said, That Ep. 43. ad Ecebolum.
he did it (...), That they might go with greater ease into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Lastly, he went about to reform Paganism according to the Excellent Rules and
Institutions of Christian Discipline, striving to bring it, as near, as he
could in resemblance to those Methods, and Constitutions of the Church, by
which he had observed Christianity had so prevailed in the World. For this
reason Gregory calls him the Christians 1 Invect. p. 102.
Ape, because he set up Ib. Vid. Jul. Fragm. Orationis. p. 528. and Ep. 49. ad
Arsac. and apud Soz. l. 5. c. 16. Vid. and Jacob. Gotofredi. Julianum Orat. 2.
Schools, and Liturgies, and Hospitals, and Monasteries, the use of
Commendatory Epistles, and Excommunication; and took special care for advancing
the Honor and Reputation, and reforming the Lives of the Pagan Clergy, as the
most effectual Means of drawing the People into the Temples.

Last of all, in the Persian Expedition, he wrote against the Christian
Religion in Seven Books, which Cyrill, of Alexandria has confuted in ten. And
these Generals, without descending to 1 Invect. p. 87, 88, 89.
Particular Instances are enough to make it a violent Presumption, That Julian
had a Diabolical Malice against Christ, and that he was one of those
irrecoverable Apostates, who had trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted
the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, and unholy Thing, and
who had done despite unto the Spirit of Grace. He had hardened his Heart
against Divine Miracles, like 2 Invect. p. 110.
Pharaoh, and therefore it is no wonder if some of them called for the Plagues
of Egypt upon him. He reproached the Living God like Senaccherib, and that made
some of them 2 Invect. p. 123.
like Hezekiah, Beseech God to bow down his Ear, and hear; and to open his
Eyes, and see, how Julian reproached the Son of God, and thereupon to say, O
Lord our God, we beseech thee to save us out of his hand, that all the Kingdoms
of the Earth may know, that thou art the Lord God, and that Jesus, whom Julian
does so reproach, is thy Son, and Christ.

1 Invect. p. 93.
Gregory says, That he designed worse things against the Christians, than
Dioclesian, Maximian, or Maximin ever did, and that he was 2 Invect. p. 100,
111.
Jeroboam, Pharaoh, Achab, and Nebuchadnezzar all in one; Jeroboam in Apostasy,
Pharaoh in hardness of Heart, Achab in Cruelty, and Nebuchadnezzar in
Sacrilege; and therefore it is not to be wondered, That the Christians, who had
such good reason to despair of the Conversion of such a Complicate Tyrant,
prayed for his Destruction, because there was no other apparent way of
delivering the Church. And if it should please God for our Sins to Plague the
Church with such a Spiteful Enemy of Christ, and suffer a Popish Julian indeed
to reign over us: I here declare, That I should believe him incapable of
Repentance, and upon that Supposition should be tempted to pray for his
Destruction, as the only means of delivering the Church. I hope this
Declaration is not P. 89.
calculated, or fitted on purpose for the Use, and Encouragement of a Popish
Successor; but on the other hand, I must also declare, that I would do nothing
but pray against him; I would draw forth no Squadrons against him, but such as
Old Gregory did against Julian, Squadrons of Prayers, and Tears; I would dye
rather than resist him, or those, that were put in Authority under him, and if
this make a Man P. 81.
a Parasite, Sycophant, and Murderer, the Christian Subjects of Julian were
such, and I must be so unto my Lives End.

For when their 2 Invect. p. 123, 124. Montague in locum. (...): Non quod non
possent, sed quod nollent, abunde enim vires suppetebant ad comprimendum
tyrannum, ut docet etiam Augustinus, and noster indicat, cum adeo diffusas, and
prop^gatas res Christianorum dicat, cum tam altas egisse radices, ut non nisi
subverso simul Imperio de medio tolli posse viderentur, sed patientiam
dedicerant illi Schola Christi cum verbo, tum exemplo commendatam, non Caelum
and Terras commiscere, etc.
Hope in God was their only Armor, Wall, and Defense, as being altogether
deprived, and cut short of Humane Assistance, then they betook themselves to
God, who hears Prayer, and is able to repel the Threats of Tyrants. This the
Father spoke, as shall hereafter be showed, not that they could not, but that
as Disciples of Christ, they were fettered, and manacled with the Slavish
Principle of Passive Obedience, and would not resist. But yet this Protestant-
Bellarmine had the Conscience P. 51, 94.
twice to wrest this Passage to the contrary sense, as if the Christian
Subjects of Julian, betook themselves unto their Prayers, because they could do
nothing else.

CHAP. VII. Of Julians Death.
IN this Jesuitical Masque he goes on to the next Chapter, where, in pursuance
of his Design, he has used his utmost Art to insinuate, that the Christians
conspired the Death of Julian, and that accordingly he was struck with a
Javelin, thrown by a Christian Soldiers Hand. What else can be his Meaning,
and Design in relating the Story, of the Schoolmaster of Antioch, who told
Libanius, when Julian was ready for his March to Persia (where he was Slain)
that the Carpenters Son was making a Coffin? And of his Deaths being revealed
on the same Day, and in the same Hour, to Julian the Syrian Monk, although he
was more than 20 days Journey off the Place.

Why did he not give us the Story of Sozom. l. 6. c. 2.
Julians intimate and familiar Acquaintance, to whom his Death was revealed a
day or two before it happened, in a very remarkable Vision? Why did he not also
tell us how Ibid.
it was proclaimed the very same Hour in which he died, by Caelestial Horsemen,
to Dydimus at Alexandria? and to a certain Judge at Zonar. L. 3. p. 24.
Antioch, an Heathen, who, as he was watching by Night about the Praetorium,
saw a Range of Stars in the Heavens, formed into these Words; (...).
This Day is Julian slain in Persia.


No, this would not serve his Design so well, for to have discovered the
Commonness of these Revelations to Pagans, as well as Christians, would have
left no room to insinuate a Christian Conspiracy; and besides, it would have
too much confirmed the Report of his falling by the stroke of a Theodor. l. 3.
c. 25.
good, or Callistus apud Socrat. l. 3. c. 21.
bad Angel, which yet is no more strange, than that the Angel of the Lord
should smite Herod, because he did not give Glory to God.

Indeed there are various Reports among the Historians, how he came by his
deaths-wound. L. 25. c. 3.
Amm. Marcellinus, who was at the Battle, says it was uncertain, who threw the
Javelin, but that the Ib. c. 26.
Persians shortly after did upbraid them for Traitors, and Regicides, having
heard by the Relation of some of their own Revolted Soldiers, upon an
uncertain report, That Julian was struck with a Roman Dart. But Eutrop. lib.
10. p. 133.
Eutropius, another Pagan Historian, who was then in the Field, says
positively, hostili manu interfectus est, That he was slain by the hand of the
Enemy; and Festus Rufus, and the Ab uno ex hostibus and quidem fugiente cento
perentitur.
Epitome of Victor report the very same. Lib. 3. c. 21.
Socrates tells us, That it is uncertain who killed him, for some said, that it
was a revolted Persian, but others, that it was a Roman Soldier, which was the
more common Report. But Callistus the Poet (says he, who was one of his
Guards, and who wrote his Exploits in Heroic Verse, says, that he was killed
by a Demon, which it may be (says he) is but a Poetical Fiction, but perhaps
it may be the real truth, for the Furies (by which he means the Destroying
Angels) have punished very many. Lib. 6. c. 1.
Sozomen says, that when he was killed, the Air was full of Mist, and Dust,
and Darkness, so that no body could tell who the Horseman was, who slew him;
but that some said that it was a Persian, others that it was a Saracen, others
again, that it was a Roman, who was offended at him, for bringing the whole
Army by his Rashness and Folly into such streights. Theodor. l. 3. c. 25. (...).
For instead of taking Care, or making Provision for so great a Body of men, he
led them into Desert places, where they wanted both Guides, and Meat, and
Drink, and they were lamenting, and sighing for the sad Fate of the Roman Army,
when he received the Fatal Stroke. Ibid
Theodoret says, That no Body knew who struck him; but whether it was Man; or
Angel, certain it is, that he was the Minister of the Divine Will. Lib. 8. p.
500.
Philostorgius leaves the Fact between a Saracen and Roman, and says, That
many inclined to believe, that it must be a Roman, because the stroke was so
sudden, that no Body saw when it was given.

I have been more particular in showing what all the Historians have said of
the Death of Julian, the better to set forth the Presumption, Malice, and
Partiality of Libanius the Sophist and Magician, who, as our Author tells us,
was resolved to find out the Man that killed Julian, and he does it thus: First
he proves, That it was no Persian, because the King of Persia proclaimed a
Reward to him, that killed him, but no body ever came to challenge the Reward:
From hence he concludes, they were to look for the Murderer among themselves,
but who among them could do it, but one of them, who did not live according to
his Laws, and had conspired formerly against Him, and then having an
Opportunity, put their Design in Execution.

It was apparently the Design of our Author, in setting down the Conjecture of
Libanius, to persuade his Reader, that he was a Christian, who killed Julian;
otherwise, why did he not tell us, That this was the Single Conjecture of
Libanius, who was the Master of Julian, and a Magician, and a most mortal and
spiteful Enemy of Christ, and the Christians. 2dly. That his Conjecture is
supported only upon his own Authority, who says, That the King of Persia
proclaimed a Reward to him that killed Julian. 3dly. That he asserts a
notorious Lie, viz. That the Christians had formerly (...) --
plotted his Destruction, etc.

But instead of this he brings in ^. 6. ^. ^.
Sozomen justifying the Murder of Julian, which indeed he does not absolutely,
but from the Greek, or Pagan Principles in answer to Libanius. It may be (says
he) it was true, that he who killed Julian, was a Christian; for it is not
improbable, that some one of the Soldiers might take into consideration, how
the Greeks, and all Men to this day, still praise the killers of Tyrants in
former times, as men that were willing to dye for the Common Liberty, and
delivered their Countrymen, Kindred, and Friends. And one then can scarce
blame him, who shows himself so brave for God, and for that Religion, which he
approves. These words of Sozomen are to be taken as an Answer to Libanius the
Greek, upon the Greek Principles; for if according to the Greeks, he deserved
Praise, who would hazard his life, to kill a Tyrant for the Common Liberty,
upon the same Principles, one would scarce blame a man, who does the same, for
God, and for the Religion which he approves.

But although the words were to be taken absolutely, and not as a Reply to
Libanius, yet they are no Justification, but only an Extenuation of the Fact.
The Phrase (...), one would scarce blame, does still imply in strictness, That
such an one was to be blamed, though the Provocation was very great.

But what if it had been certain, that a Christian, perverted with Greek
Principles, had killed Julian, what is that to the rest of the Christians of
that Age? There was a very great number of the Murderers of our late Blessed
Sovereign, who was put to death as a Tyrant, but yet it does not follow that
the Doctrine of Killing Lawful Kings, when they turn Tyrants, is generally
approved among the English Protestants, though it may likely be approved by
some, who, as Mr. Hobbes has observed, have sucked in Ill Principles about
Government from Greek, and Latin Authors, and, I pray God, our Author be not
such an one; else why should he so slily insinuate upon the bare Conjecture of
one Antichristian Villain and Magician, That he was a Christian, who killed
Julian, even there, where it was his professed Design, to show that they
treated him like Barbarians, that they had no Reverence for his Majesty, but
pursued him like a Midnight Thief, or a Robber. One would have expected such a
Junius-Brutus-way of writing from a Bellarmine or Mariana, a Knox or Buchanan,
rather than from a Minister of the Church of England, who in her Book of
Homilies, which is one of the P. 104.
best Books in the World next to the Bible, and to P. 101.
which the whole Clergy of England have subscribed, teaches her Children, 2
Part of the Sermon of Obedience.
That it is the Calling of Gods People to be patient and on the suffering side,
and to render Obedience to Governors although they be wicked, and wrong-doers,
and in no case to resist and stand against them.

But you will say in defense of our Author, That he called the Murder of Julian
a P. 60.
Traitorous Assassination, and in another place, Preface p. 26.
That he would rather have lost his own life, than have served him, such a
slippery Trick. I protest, I am willing to be on the charitable side with Mr.
J. and wish I could heartily believe, what he says: But if indeed he thought
it a Traitorous Assassination, and would have lost his own Life rather than
have been guilty of it, why does he so industriously endeavor to prove, that
he was a Christian, who did it, and that a Christian Writer justified the Fact,
and yet neither blame the one, nor censure the other, according as they
deserved? A man can hardly detest that himself, which he does not condemn, much
more which he likes in another; and besides, he has with great delight and
industry, most injuriously represented the Christian Subjects of Julian, as
Buchanan and Bellarmine represented the Christians before them, as men that did
not resist, not from any Christian Principle of Obedience, but because they
were not in a probable Capacity, wanting sufficient Numbers, and Strength.
Moreover, if he would rather have dyed, than murdered Julian, why does he speak
so slightly of the Fact, calling it only a Slippery Trick? The Learned Monsieur
Nicol in his Logique, commonly called, the Jansenists Logique, distinguishes
between the Principal, and Accessory signification of words. The Principal
signification he calls that which signifies the Thing, and the Accessory is
that which signifies the Love, or Hatred, the Honor or Contempt, the Delight
or Abhorrence of him, who speaks or writes of the Thing. As for Example, There
are some Words to express Fornication, which besides the Principal
signification, would plainly signify, that he who used them, loved, and
delighted, and was pleased with the thing. And others again there are, which
besides the Principal signification, would signify the Turpitude of the thing,
and the Abhorrence which the Speaker, or Writer had thereof. The great
difference in Words and Phrases comes from these Accessory Significations, and
therefore methinks if Mr. J. who is a Man of Art, and a Divine, would have had
his Readers, especially the Serious Part, really believe that he would have
lost his own Life, rather than have murdered Julian, he should have found out
fitting Words to have expressed the Horror of the Wickedness, and not have
called it a Slippery Trick. I should be loath to trust my self in the Company of
Fellows who counted Robbery, and Murder but Slippery Tricks, or commit my
Daughter to the Custody of a Man, who, though he protested he would rather dye,
than Deflower her, yet made no more of Fornication, than a Slippery Trick.

I think it not worth the while to give a particular Answer to the next
Chapter, wherein he shows, How the Christian Writers used his Memory; only I
shall observe that it was usual among the Ecclesiastical Writers, to call
Tyrants, and Persecutors after their deaths, by such Names, as served to set
forth their Cruel, and Bloody Nature. He may see if he pleases, what a
reproachful, and ignominious Character Consulite commentarios vestros, illic
reperietis primum Neron^m in han^ sectam Caesariano gladio ferocisse, sed tali
dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamur; qui enim s^it illum intellig^re
potest non nisi grande aliquot bonum a Nerone damnatum. Tentaverat and
Domi^^^nus portio Neronis de crudelitate tales semper nobis insecuteres
injusti, impii, turpes, --
Tertullian gives of Nero and Domitian, and in general of the Persecuting
Emperors before his time. He may see, if he pleases, what a lovely Monument
Lib. 8. c. 14. Eccles. Hist.
Eusebius has erected to the Memory of Maxentius, and Maximin, not much short
of that Stately One, which Gregory has erected for Julian, and if he will go
to Lactantius, in his Book of the Deaths of the Persecuting Emperors, there, to
use his own Phrase, He may bless himself, to see what Titles of Honor he has
bestowed upon them, although he wrote in Latin, which has not the happy
facility of compounding words, as the Greek has. He calls Nero Execrable, and
Mischievous Tyrant, and Harbinger of the Devil, coming to lay the Earth wast,
and destroy all Mankind, with many more such Titles and Characters, which he
may read at his leisure.

He calls Domitian as great a Tyrant, as Nero; Decius he calls Execrable
Animal; Valerian, Impious Madman; Aurelius, Furious and Praecipitant Tyrant;
and as for his Characters of Dioclesian, Maximian, Galerius, and Maximin, in
whose Reigns he had lived, he has set them forth as wild Beasts, as Monsters
of Rapin, and Cruelty, and Rebels against God.

Nay, so far are the Invectives of Nazianzen from being a just ground of such
singular Conclusions, and Observations about Julian, that Hilary Bishop of
Poictou, wrote as keen, and bitter an Invective against Constantius, shortly
after he died. There he calls him Antichrist, Deceitful, Persecutor, Flattering
Enemy, the Cruellest of all Cruelties, the most Wicked of Mortals, Ravening
Wolf, Enemy to Gods Religion, and the Memory of Saints, and Rebel to his
Fathers Piety, etc. and compares him to Judas for betraying the Priests of
Christ with a Kiss: Nay, he makes him worse than P. 289.
Nero, Decius, and Maximin, and wishes he had lived in their Reigns, rather
than in his. The Book is very little, if any thing, inferior to the
Invectives, in Sharp, Bitter, and Contumelious Language, but charges him home
with Tyranny and Malice, and pursues him, as if he had been a Midnight-Thief,
or a Robber: and loads him with the Anathema tibi trecenti and december octo --
Anathema tibi Pater tuus est, cui Nicaea Synodus curae fuit. p. 298.
Anathemas of his Father, and the Nicene Council, which is as bad, as Lodging
him in Hell.

CHAP. VIII. Showing, That the Christian Subjects of Julian practiced Passive
Obedience, when they were in an Able Condition to Resist.
HAving now showed, 1. That the Roman Empire was not Hereditary; 2. That Julian
did not persecute his Christian Subjects contrary to Law: and having in the
Third place shown, That there was nothing Singular, and Vnparallelled in the
Behavior of the Christians toward that Apostate Emperor; nor any thing so
Barbarous and unlike the Behavior of Former Christians, as our Author
represented it to be: I should now proceed to Examine his Ninth Chapter,
wherein he has endeavored to evacuate the Doctrine of Passive Obedience: But
as a Preparatory thereunto, I shall first take the Forfeiture of his Main
Assertion, That Julian persecuted his Christian Subjects contrary to Law; and
from thence show, That Passive Obedience is due, by the Gospel, to the
Sovereign Power, when the Sovereign persecutes contrary to Law. Our Author was
aware of this Consequence, and therefore to obviate the Objection of the
Non-resistance of Julians Christian Subjects, who was so Spiteful, Cruel, and
Crafty, and, according to him, so Illegal a Persecutor, he represents the case,
as if they were but a small and defenseless Number, stripped of all Humane
Assistance; and so makes them to have been Patient, and Passive out of mere
necessity; but however, that they had a hearty mind to Rebel, and wanted
nothing but Strength and Numbers, to bring them into the Field. P. 94
What (says he) would you have a few defenseless Christians do, when they had
lost all their Strength, and so many of their Numbers? Have they never heard a
West-Country-man say, Chud eat Cheese, and Chad it?

I thought to have shown, how much Mr. J. has played the part of a Jesuit in
ascribing the Passive Obedience of Julians Christian Subjects, unto their weak
and defenseless Condition; but I am prevented in that, by the Loyal, and
Ingenious Author of the Apostate Protestant, to whom I refer the Reader, and
shall content my self, to show the Falseness of his Jesuitical Evasion, which,
I am confident, though he had so little Conscience, as to assert, yet he could
not be so ignorant, as to believe.

For First, If we enquire into the State of Christianity in the time of
Paganism, we shall find, that in the Reign of Severus, when Tertullian wrote
his Apologetic for the Christians, that nothing but their Si non apud astam
disciplinam magis occidi liceret, quam occidere --
Religion kept them from resisting the Forces of the Empire, when they were Si
enim -- de^sset nobis vis num^r^r^^n and copiarum? Plures nimirum Mauri, and
Marcomanni, ips^que Parthi? --
more in Number, within the Bowels of it, than the Moors, and Germans, and
Parthians, and all its Enemies without. Nay, he appeals unto their Judges, if
all Vestra omnia implevimus urbes, insulas, cas^ella, municipia, conciliabula,
castra ipsa, tribus, decu^ias, palatium, senatum, forum, sola vobis relinquimus
templa.
Places were not full of Christians? and tells them, That without Rebelling
they were able Potuimus and inermes nec rebels, sed tantummodo discordes
solius divortii invidia adversus vos dimicasse. Si enim tanta vis hominum in
aliquem orbis remoti sinum abrupissemus a vobis, suffudissit utique
dominationem vestram tot qualium^unque amissio civium, imo etiam and ipsa
destitutione puniisset, Proculdubio expavissetis ad solitudinem vestram, ad
silentium rerum. --
to destroy the Empire, and lay is wast and solitary, by withdrawing into other
Parts of the World. And in his Address to Scapula Governor of Carthage, he
says, That they were the greater part of almost every City. Tanta hominum
multitudo pars pene major civitatis cujusque.


This was hundred and Sixty years before the time of Julian, and about Fifty
years after this Nemo nostrum, quando apprehenditur reluctatur, nec so adversus
injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit populus,
ulliscitur.
Cyprian, in his Book to Demetrianus, tells him, That they let themselves be
apprehended without Resistance, nor endeavored to revenge the Injuries they
suffered, although they were very copious in their Numbers, and more than
enough for the Heathens. About Fifty years after this again in the Reign of
Dioclesian, Christianity was become the General Religion of the Empire, (...)
Eusebius, l. 8. c. 1. and. c. 4.
when the Christians met every where in infinite numbers, and built large and
spacious Churches in all Cities, and still increased more and more, insomuch
that the (...) Id. de Mart. Palaest. c. 9.
Temples of the Idols were every where desolate, and the Emperor, being awed by
the greatness of their Numbers, durst scarce venture upon a Persecution.

This was the State of Christianity before the Dioclesian Persecution, to which
Constantine put an happy End, who, as Gregory says of his Son Constantius, Set
his Heart upon nothing so much as to see the Christians flourish, and to have
all the Advantages of Glory and Power. He reigned alone 30 years, and
Constantius 24, which make up 54 years, in which time Christianity became the
Religion both of the Emperors, and the Empire; the Cross was made the imperial
Standard, and Paganism lay every where languishing in the Cities, the Country,
and the Camp.

This very consideration made 1 Invect. p. 80.
Gregory deride the Design which Julian had to extirpate the Christian
Religion, as former Emperors had endeavored to do. The most wise, and best
Emperor (says he ironically) did not consider, that in former Persecutions,
the Confusion, and Disorder was but little, because the Christian Religion, was
not propagated among the Multitude, being professed but by a few, and not
having had the Luster it now has: But now, that it is diffused every where,
and Reigns so powerfully among us, (...).
to attempt to change and overthrow it, would be to shake, and hazard the Roman
Empire, and to suffer from our selves a worse Mischief, than our Enemies can
wish us.

Therefore if the Christians in the former times of Severus, Decius, and
Dioclesian, who yet were enough to resist the Forces of the Roman Empire, were
counted by Gregory, but a few, in comparison to the Christians who stood firm
in the time of Julian; and if Christianity had then so diffused and propagated
it self, that it could not be extirpated without the Subversion of the Roman
Empire, Let any man of common Reason, Judge, whether the Professors of
Christianity in Julians time, were a small, and defenseless Number, not able to
resist. This is so far wide of the real Truth, that the same Gregory tells us,
That (...) 1 Invect. p. 99. 80.
there were two things more especially, about which Julian was most
sollicitous, the Galilaeans, as he reproachfully called the Christians, and the
Persians, who stoutly persisted in War; but his Design against the Galilaeans
seemed so much the greater Undertaking, and did so much take up his Thoughts,
that he counted the War with the Persians, but a Trifle, and a Sport in
comparison to that. This was said of Julian, after he had done his worst to
tempt the Christians to Apostasy by Rewards, Honors, and Preferments, when he
made preparations against the Persians; and indeed he had reason to look upon
the Design of reducing the Christians, as abundantly more difficult, than
conquering the Persians, having in a few months time met with so many desperate
Experiments of Christian Sufferance, Fortitude, and Contempt of Perferments,
not only among the Churchmen, and Citizens, but even in the Camp. For when he
was made Emperor, the Roman Legions were in a manner all Christians, Theod. l.
3. c. 3.
Constantine having taken special care, to get them instructed in the Christian
Religion, and his Sons after him to confirm them in it; in particular
Constantius, called his whole Army together, before he gave Battle to
Magnentius, and told them, That the term of Life was uncertain, especially in
War, and therefore exhorted them all, to be forthwith Baptized; and moreover
told them, That no Unbaptized person should continue in his Service.

This is the Reason why Julian Amm. Mar. l. 21. c. 2. Zonar. Tom. 3. p. 19.
Theodor. l. 3. c. 3.
feigned himself to be a Christian, till after the death of Constantius,
fearing lest his own Army should revolt from him, and that of Constantius
refuse him for their Emperor, being both almost all Christians. But after he
was firm in the Throne, he tempted the Soldiers by all Arts, especially by
Rewards and Preferments, to quit their Religion, but in this he was not so
Successful, as he hoped to be. For when at the Solemn time of giving Donatives,
he ordered the Ceremony after the old Custom, that every one as he came to
receive his Donative should Sacrifice to the Gods, L. 5. c. 17.
Some (says Sozomen) showed their courage openly, and would neither Sacrifice,
nor receive any Gifts of the Emperor, others being deceived with the specious
pretense of old Custom, did not consider what they did; others again being
baited with the sight of the Gold, and surprised with Fear and Confusion at the
Sight of this New Scene, did not decline to Sacrifice, though they knew it was
a Pagan Rite; and of those, who ignorantly did so, some came back again to the
Emperor, when they knew what they had done, and begged him to take back his
Gold, and put them to death. But before he attempted the Army, he had "1
Invect. p. 75.
reformed his own Household, killing, or removing all those, who continued
Faithful to Christ; but after he had done all that he could, very near Ibid.
half the Army still remained Christians, of whom Greg. speaking by allusion,
says, That there remained above seven thousand, who would not bow their knees
to Baal, nor worship the Golden Image, among which there were many both of the
(...) Ib.
greatest Commanders, and of the Common Soldiers too.

From hence it is plain, that when Julian had done all that he could, still
almost half his Army, Officers and common Soldiers too, were Professed
Christians, which made St. Enarr. in Psalm 124.
Aug. who remembered the times of Julian, say of him, Julian was an Infidel
Emperor, nay, was he not an Apostate, and unjust, and an Idolater? and yet the
Christian Soldiers served under this Infidel Emperor. And as for the revolting
part of the Army, they were only Counterfeit Revolters, who waited for an
Opportunity to declare Christians again, as is plain from the Answer, which
they gave to Jovian, Theodor. l. 4. c. 1. Sozom. l. 6. c. 3. Socrat. l. 3. c.
22.
who telling them freely upon his Election, That he would not put on the Royal
Purple because he was a Christian, nor command such men, who were imbued with
Pagan Principles, they all cried out, We are Christians, and make no doubt, O
Emperor, to undertake the Conduct of us, for you shall be Emperor of
Christians, bred up in the Holy Faith, the oldest of us under Constantine, and
the rest, under Constantius, and the short Reign of him, who now lies dead, was
not sufficient to strike the Infection deep into the Minds of those that were
deceived.

This was the State of Julians Army, which consisted in a manner wholly of
professing Christians, and counterfeit Apostates from Christianity, of whose
Dissimulation the professing part could not be ignorant, if they had had a mind
to Rebel. But besides the open, and concealed Christians that were in Julians
Army, there were many Great and Popular Men among the Legions turned out of
their Employments, as Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens, who might have set up
the Holy Standard, which Julian had taken down, and soon have got an Army of
Christians, if Julians Christian Soldiers, or Subjects barbarously used as
they were, had thought it lawful to Rebel.

The two former especially, had such interest in Julians own Army, that they
were successively chosen Emperors by it within 8 Months after his death; and
considering how spitefully the whole Christian Clergy had been used by Julian,
the Christians outraged by the Heathens, the Christian Soldiers discontented,
so many Christian Cities disfranchised, and such brave and noble Commanders to
head the Numberless Sufferers of all sorts, it is most absurd to ascribe their
Peaceable and Suffering Behavior to want of Strength, Numbers, or Opportunity;
and difficult to imagine, had they thought Resistance Lawful, but that having
all these Advantages, they should at least have attempted to Rebel.

How easy had it been for Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens, and other disbanded
Commanders, to have filled all the corners of the Empire with Declarations, and
Remonstrances against Julian, and to have addressed themselves to their Fellow
Christian Subjects to this purpose:

To all the Suffering, and Oppressed Christians of the Roman Empire, Jovian,
Valentinian, and Valens, etc. Send Greeting.
WE having taken into Consideration the Sad and deplorable Condition of the
Christians throughout the Roman Empire under the Reign of this Tyrant, and
Apostate, and utter Enemy of Christ, do resolve, by Gods Assistance, to rise up
against him in Defense of our selves, and our Holy Religion; and send forth
this our Declaration to all the Provinces of both Empires, to invite our
Fellow Soldiers and Subjects to join with us, and to giye them satisfaction
why we have broken all the Measures by which the Ancient and Suffering
Christians have gone in former Persecutions.

The plain Truth of the matter is, P. 68, 69, 70, 71, etc.
their Case and ours differs very much, and we are in quite other
Circumstances, than the former Christians were. For when this Apostate came to
the Crown, he found us in full and quiet possession of our Religion, which we
and our Fathers had enjoyed for above Fifty years, and which is so inestimable
a Blessing, that we shall plainly undervalue it, if we do not our best to keep
it. But the former Christians were born to Persecution, they neither knew
better, nor expected it; they professed their Religion, as in some places they
propound new Laws, with Halters about their Necks; for the Laws of the Empire
were always in force against them, though not always put in Execution; and the
Edge of the Ax stood always toward them, though it were not at all times
stained with their Blood. They perpetually lay at the mercy of their Enemies;
their Religion at the best was in the World but upon sufferance, as Abraham was
in the Land of Canaan, where he had none Inheritance, not so much as to set his
Foot on.

But as his afflicted Posterity were afterward Lords of that Country, so after
another Egyptian Bondage, Christianity was advanced by Constantine of Blessed
Memory, to be the Religion of the Empire: Never any man in this World set his
Heart so much upon any thing, as he did to see the Christians flourish, and to
have all the Advantages of Glory and Power; and we hope that all men, who value
the Establishment of their Religion, at this rate will not easily part with it.
We hope they will not let Julian, who by his Baptism first, and by entering into
Orders after, and by his going to Church after that, sufficiently engaged
himself to maintain Christianity, dispossess them of their Freehold: No, it is
an unsupportable Injury. Consider, we beseech you, is there no difference
between being turned out as Sheep among Wolves, which was the Deplorable, but
unavoidable case of the first Christians, and being worried by one of their own
Flock? Has a man no more Right, nor Privilege, after he is Naturalized, than
when he was a Stranger, or Alien, or accounted an Enemy? Do not the same Laws,
which forbid men to invade other men's Rights, enable them to maintain, and
defend their own? These are the plain and palpable differences between the
State of the former Christians, and us; They suffered according to the Laws of
their Country, whereas we are persecuted contrary to Law: And the Gospel only
requires Passive Obedience from Christians when the Laws are against them, and
when the Laws of the Land make it death to profess Christianity, then, and then
only we are to lay down our Lives for Christ's sake.

Therefore we cannot but much wonder at such men, who trouble the World with
the unseasonable Prescription of Prayers and Tears, and the Passive Obedience
of the Thebaean Legion in the last Persecution, which were proper only at such
times, when the Laws of the Empire were armed against our Religion. But what
have we to do with the Thebaean Legion now? Blessed be God, who has made the
difference between us, and the former Christians: Poor men, they died as
Glorious Martyrs in respect of their Religion, yet they died as Criminals and
Malefactors in the Eye of the Law. But we shall plainly throw away our Lives,
if we practice any such Passive Obedience, who have the Laws on our side: Nay,
we justly deserve to be so used as the Thebaean Legion was, and moreover, to be
loaded with the Curses of all Posterity, if we suffer our selves to be brought
into that Condition. Away then with the old Artillery of Prayers and Tears, and
the unseasonable Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which makes the World for the
Cutthroats of Julian, and our Throats the Perquisites of their Places: It is
not now essential to the Gospel to be a Suffering Religion, that is an Evil
which only attends it in bad times, when the Laws are against it, as in the
Neronian, Decian, and Dioclesian Persecutions, when the Christians quietly
submitted to the Laws; but all this is nothing to us, who may pursue Julian
like a Midnight Thief, or Highway Robber.


Consider what he has done, and what he has suffered to be done, not only
without, but against Law. Remember what has been done at Ascalon and Gaza;
remember Georgius of Alexandria, and Marcus of 1 Invect. p. 91.
Arethusa; remember Theodorus at Antioch, and upon what Shams he put our
Fellow Soldiers Artemius, Juventinus, and Maximus to death. Remember his
Mockery, and Reproaches, and Blasphemies against Christ; all these things call
upon us to defend our selves and our Religion against him: And upon the
forementioned Considerations have we taken Arms, and are ready like Moses,
Othniel, and Gideon, to be Captains over those that will join with us; and we
hope that God, for whom we fight, will give Success to our Arms

But instead of Remonstrating at this rate upon the Principles of our Author,
or making the least attempt to resist, they, and the rest of the disbanded
Officers and Soldiers, together with all the Christians of the Empire,
followed the Example of the former Christians, in patiently suffering, as
Martyrs, and Confessors for Jesus Christ. There never was greater Examples of
Passive Obedience, than in the short Reign of Julian, whose Christian Subjects,
and Soldiers, tho far more numerous, than in any Age before them, not only
patiently endured many grievous Miseries, but, what was the most provoking and
grievous of all Miseries, they daily heard and saw themselves, their Religion,
and their Blessed Savior most blasphemously scorned and reviled. Though he was
an Apostate that was their Persecutor, and had their Religion like a Treasure
wrested out of their hands; by one that had been bred in the Bosom of the
Church; yet all the Armor they used against him, were the old Primitive Arms
of Prayers and Tears.

This was so evident to our Author, especially out of Gregory's Invectives,
that contrary to his own knowledge, he would rather put it upon the Score of
their Defenseless Condition, like the Writers among the Jesuits, than let it
pass for the genuine Effect of their Christian Faith, and Patience, as it
really was. Here (says 1 Invect. p. 52.
Gregory) my Oration exults for joy, and calls all Christians unto this
Spiritual Dance, both those who have addicted themselves to Fasting, Weeping,
and Prayers, begging day, and night for a Redress of our present grievous
Calamaties, and a seasonable Remedy to our Evils, being strengthened with Hope,
which makes not ashamed: And those, who having endured great Conflicts, and
Sufferings, and been wounded with many and grievous Outrages of these Times,
were made a Spectacle, as the Apostle says, to the World, to Angels, and to
Men; and who being broken, and made Cripples in their Bodies, kept their Souls
upright, and invincible, being able to endure all things through Christ that
strengthened them: As also those, who quitting all worldly greatness, and
occasion of Sin, and receiving the loss of their goods with Joy, or being
banished injuriously from their Country, or separated for a short time from
their Husbands, or Wives, or Parents, or Children, or other dear Relations,
bring forth the Fruit of sufferings for Christ by virtue of the Blood of
Christ, and may fitly say, or sing that of the Psalmist, Thou have caused men
to ride over our Heads, we went through Fire, and through Water, but thou have
brought us into a Wealthy Place.

If Mr. J. search all the Ecclesiastical Records, he will scarce find any one
Passage, which more emphatically sets forth the Prayers, and Tears, and
Sufferings of the former Christians, than this does those of the Christian
Subjects of Julian, though they were so strong, and numerous, and he the worst
of Tyrants, who persecuted contrary to Law. Nay, it was the Maxim of the
Christians then, as well as in former Ages, that Tears (which imply Prayers)
were the only remedy against persecuting Princes; for (says 1 Invect. p. 91.
Gregory) this thundering Gregory, speaking how Julian designed worse Evils
against the Christians, than ever Dioclesian, or Maximian thought of, But he
was restrained by the Mercy of God, and the Tears of the Christians, which many
of them shed in great abundance, (...) this only Remedy against the Persecutor.
And in Ib. p. 73.
another place, speaking of the Satisfaction, which the Christians then had in
their private Sufferings, when Julian envied them the Glory of a Formal
Martyrdom, It is more pleasant (says he) to the Christians to suffer for their
Religion, though no man should know of it, than it was for Aristaeus,
Empedocles, Trophonius, and such wretched Pagans, to acquire Glory by Impiety,
because we are not concerned to please men, but all our desire is to be
approved, and honored of God. Nay, does he not show at large in his 2d. p.
123, 124.
Invective, how the Christians betook themselves to Prayer against Julian,
their Hope in God being their only Weapons, and Wall, and every other Defense,
as being deprived and cut off from all Humane Assistance; not for want of
Strength and Numbers, [for as I have showed, almost all the People, and half of
the Army were professed Christians] but by the Principles of their Suffering
Religion, which allowed Subjects no other Remedy against Persecuting
Sovereigns, but Patience, Prayers, and Tears. Had they thought Resistance
Lawful, it had been very easy for the professed Christian part of the Army,
especially with the Assistance of the concealed Christians, to have delivered
the Church from the Execrable Tyrant; but instead of that, they only put up
Prayers against him, which Invert. ^8. (...).
Gregory told him, would stop his Blasphemous Mouth, although he might strut it
for a while, and be siffered with his Devils to act the Tragedy of his
Impieties; Instead of that, as St. Loc. supra Cit. -- Quando autem dicebat,
producite ac^em, ite en^ra illam gentem, statim obtemperabant, distingucbant
dominum aeternum a domino temporali, and tamen subditi erant propter dominum
aeternum etiam domino temporali. Et vero quam obsequiosos sese Juliano
Christiani milites praebuerint, elegantissimo Augustini testimonio docemur.
Jacob. Goto-fred. in Oratione 2. Julianus nuncupata.
Augustine observed, They marched at his Command against the Enemy, being
Subject to their Temporal, for the sake of their Eternal Lord. They were not
ignorant of his Spite and Malice against Christ, and the Christians, they knew
all the Evil he had done, and all that he intended to do against them, and yet
they were as Faithful and Obedient to him, as ever they had been to their old
Masters Constantine, and Constantius, although he was the first Apostate
Tyrant, and, as our Author will have it, persecuted contrary to Law. Preface p.
26.
Mr. J. has done all he could to put a Slur upon this eminent Instance of
Christian Subjection, and Obedience unto Julian: As for th^se Soldiers (says
he) fighting under Julian against the Persians, or other common Enemies of the
Empire, -- and obeying the Word of Command, when they received his pay, it is
such a low part of honesty, that any man may pretend unto it; if I had been
there a Soldier of Fortune, I should have done the same. But their fighting
under Julian against the Persians, and obeying the Word of Command, is not all
for which they were cited by Sermon p 15.
Dr. H. but that they did not resist the Tyrant, when they were in such a
Posture of Resistance, that they did not so much as draw their Swords against
him, under the Specious Pretense of defending their Religion, and preventing
the extirpation of it: And now their Example becomes yet more exemplary upon
Mr. J's Assertion, for which the Dr. is bound to thank him, That Julian
persecuted contrary to Law. It seems neither the Defense of their Laws, nor
Religion, nor Fellow Christians, nor the preventing the Effusion of Innocent
Blood, could make them resist the worst of Tyrants: And I appeal to all that
have read his Book, whether it is probable, that he, would have done the same,
he that has burlesqued the Doctrine of the Cross, He that has said that P. 88.
Passive Obedience is a Doctrine fit to turn a Nation into a Shambles, and
enough to invite Tyranny and Cruelty into the World. Lastly, he that has P. 87.
said in his own name, and the name of some Potential Legions, Through the
Grace of God, though we cannot hinder the Papists from being Idolaters, we will
endeavor to keep them from being Murderers, they shall not have that to Answer
for too. Does this sound like a man that would have been an Obedient Soldier
to Julian? It is more reasonable to believe he would have been the Soldier
that struck the Javelin into his Side.

Perhaps Mr. J. may think, that I am very fond of the Army of Julian; If I am,
he has made me so, by so undervaluing their Exemplary Patience, and Subjection
under the Tyrant, and shamming of it off, as he has done. And if the Behavior
of Juventinus and Maximus, and of the Soldiers, who ignorantly sacrificed, may
be a sufficient ground for conjecture, I must further tell him, we may well
presume, that the Christian Legions of Julian rather than resist, would have
died Martyrs, like the Thebaean Legion, with their Swords by their Sides.
Besides what I have said of the latter in the 3d. Chap. I must here tell him
again out of Lib. 3. c. 17.
Theodoret, That after they had brought back their Gold to Julian, and desired
him to purge them by Fire, he was so enraged at them, that he commanded them to
be beheaded; and as they were led out of the City to the place of Execution, a
great multitude followed them, admiring their Courage and Boldness in suffering
for their Religion. When they were come to the place of Execution, the Senior
of them desired the Hangman to behead the Youngest first, lest he seeing the
Execution of the others, should be frighted by it. But as he laid down his
Head, and the Hangman had drawn his Sword, one came with a Pardon, and forbid
the Execution, (for Julian envied them the Glory of Martyrdom) but the young
Soldier being sorry, that he was saved, said, I see Romanus is not worthy to
be a Martyr of Jesus Christ. What Fools were these to P. 75.
throw away their Lives, certainly they were weary of them to practice such
Passive Obedience, and with such Gallantry too, when the Laws were not against
them? Had they not b^^ter have gone to their Fellow Soldiers, and conjured
them by the Great Name of Constantine, and Constantius, to rise up against that
enormous Tyrant, and Apostate, who had broken all the Laws, laid aside the Holy
Standard, polluted all things and places with Idolatrous Nidor and Sprinklings,
and hated, and blasphemed the Name of Christ. I am confident, were our Author,
or his Admirers, to answer for them, they would say, they sold have done so,
Because their case, was quite different from the former Christians, whose
Religion at best was but upon Sufferance, but theirs was become the Established
Religion of the Empire. But poor men as they were, they had learnt no such
Distinctions, they practiced the Doctrine of the Cross, like other Doctrines of
the Gospel, in Gospel-Simplicity, and were content to dye as Martyrs for their
Religion, when they were not Criminals in the Eye of the Law. Nay, there is
nothing more evident in the Naz. 1 Invect. p. 74. Socr. l. 3. c. 12. Sozom. l.
5. c. 4. 15, 17, 20. Theod. l. 3. c. 11, 17. 1 Invect. p. 72, 82, 86. Chrysostom.
hom. in Juvent. and Max.
Ecclesiastical Writers, than that the main ground of the Christians
Displeasure against Julian was this, That he would not Formally persecute them,
nor put them to death enough. Had he but persecuted in the Decian and
Dioclesian Fashion, he would have pleased them better; but they were very angry
at him, that he was a Vid. Jac. Gotofredi Julianum p. 58, 59.
Tempter more than a Persecutor, and that, like some Hunters, he catched them
with Snares, and Nets, when he could not take them by Force. This (...).
Invect. 1 p. 74.
seeming Getleness of his, they hated worse than down right Cruelty, of which,
though he exercised enough, yet they would have had him exerise an hundred
times more. They hated him for stealing Persecutions upon them, and for envying
them the Glory, and the Church the Benefit of Martyrdom; and he knew the Temper
of his Christian Subjects so well, that (as it is cited before) he said, they
would fly to Martyrdom, like Bees unto an Hive. He knew they would rather dye,
than resist him; he knew that Passive Obedience was their Principle, and this
made him so secure of them, and so bold to abuse them, their Religion, and
their Savior, although they were so Numerous, That Sozom. l. 5. c. 15. (...)
--
the Magistrates in every City, were scarce able to take the Numbers of those
that refused to Sacrifice. I reserved this Authority till now, to show there
was no general defection among them, and to answer that Passage of Asterius,
which our unanswerable Author has cited out of his Sermon against
Convetousness; Quantus ab Ecclesia ad Altaria factus est concursus? quam multi
per honorum escas and illecebras una cum ips^ [Juliano] Apostasiae hamum devor
arunt: This the Father spoke not as an Historian, but as a Preacher, lamenting
the Fall of those few, who are tempted by Preferments and Money, to deny
Christ. I say of those few, who yet were too many, though they had no
proportion to the Numberless Numbers of those, who stood firm. This is plain
from the very next words of the good Father, Qui nunc quidam stigma^ici
civitatis oberrant, omnibus odio, ac ludibrio habiti, tanquam Christi domini
propter pauxillum argentum proditores, expuncti Christianorum albo sicut Judas
Apost^lorum, Apostatarum appellatione noti. It seems they were comparatively
but a few, when they were known like Stigmatized Persons in all Cities; but it
is not unusual for our Author to omit, or conceal such Passages in Authors, as
best serve to let the World see, how much he wrests them from their Genuine
Sense. This I showed before out of Eusebius, Eumenius, etc. And I desire him to
consider, what a worthy Prelate said of that, which he says is my Lord P. 51,
91.
Hollis his Book, That if he might use the Scriptures, as that Author has used
the Records, he could prove there was no God, for leave ou^ The Fool has said
in his Heart, and then it follows, ^^ere is no God.

And now let the Impartial Reader Judge, what Reason so many men had to cry up
Julian for an unanswerable Book, besides their Inclinations to have it so? Or
why that Noble Lord should carry it in his Pocket for a Jewel, and swear by his
Creator, That he would give the Author of it, the best Parsonage in his Gift?
It was sworn like the Son of such a Loyal Father; and if indeed his Lordships
best Parsonage must be the Reward of his Pains, much Good do'^ him, it is
better worth than Thirty Pieces of Silver, but I am confident none of those,
who have thundered so much of late with the Thebaean Legion, would have been
the Authors of Julian, for his Lordships whole Estate.

But see the Difference of men; Mr. J. notwithstanding is very fond of it, it
is his Firstborn, his Might, and his Strength, and so very like him, that he
has Reason to Dote upon it, and may be excused for taking of it ill from his
Bookseller, that he did not put his Name unto it. By the Bookseller I do not
mean Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill, who is the Honester Man of the two, but
him, That kept the Books in his Back-Shop, and of whom (I presume) Mr. J.
learnt (for he was best able to tell) That my Lord Hollis was the Author of the
Letter of a Gentleman to his Friend, showing, That the Bishops are not to be
Judges in Parliament in Capital Cases. This Book was privately Printed by the
same Man in 1679, just against the Parliament was to Meet, but it pleased God
they were Dissolved; and by that time another sat down, the Writers Candor,
and Veracity were effectually discovered by the most Learned, and Worthy Author
of the Grand Question, who has been a Blessing to the Age, and Obliged it by
his many Learned Works.

CHAP. IX. Showing, That the Former Christians before the time of Julian
Suffered as much, or more than Julians Subjects did, not only without, but
Contrary to Law.
HAving showed at large, how the Subjects of Julian, and more especially his
Soldiers, suffered with most Exemplary Patience, when they were in a very
probable Capacity to resist, I proceed to show, That there was no such
Difference betwixt the Sufferings of the Former Christians, and them, as our
Author pretends there was, p. 71. where he positively tells his Reader, That
the First Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Country, whereas
those under Julian were persecuted Contrary to Law.

It will very much enervate the Strength of his Book to discover the Falseness
of his Assertion, and therefore upon his own Supposition, That the Christian
Subjects of Julian were oppressed in a very Illegal way, I shall make it
appear, that the Former Christians were oppressed in the same manner, not only
without, but against Law. First then, Did Julian put the Christians to death
upon Shams, and pretended Crimes of Treason, etc. as our Author speaks? So did
the Former Persecutors too, as Agmen nunc claudat fictum, utque omnium
accusationum complementum, seditionis, tumultus, rebellionis, majestatisque
crimen, unicum and alias saepe crimen eorum, qui crimine vacant. Fuit haec
scilicet, ut anteriorum principum and persecutorum ita Juliani potissima^,
Christianos eorumque antistites in haec crimina convenir^. --
Gotofred observes in his Julianus. Tacit. Annal. l. 15. c. 44. Qui se^^am
mentiuntur ad S^^p. 4.
Nero, the first Persecutor of the Church, laid the Burning of Rome (of which
he himself was the Author) to the Charge of the Christians, and punished them
with most exquisite Torments, upon that Account. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7. Minut.
Felix. Tertull. Apol. 2. and 9.
The grievous Crimes of Incest, and Murder, and of being public Enemies of the
Empire, were laid to the charge of the whole Divina Secta. Tertul. Ap. 37.
Sect; and they were ordinarily put to death as certainly guilty of them,
without any further Process at Law. This Tertullian complains of in his time,
when they were so Numerous, as is showed in the last Chapter, and in a
Condition very able to resist; and afterward in the Dioclesian Persecution
when they were yet more Numerous. Lactant de Mort. persecut. c. 14.
Maximinus Caesar privately sired the Emperors Palace in Nicomedia, and accused
the Christians of the Household for doing of it, which so enraged the Emperor,
that he caused them all to be put to death. From hence it is plain, that
Julian, though he was a Fox, yet he was not the First who found out the way of
putting the Christians to death upon Shams; he was not the first, that dressed
up Accusations of Treason and Sacrilege against them; and therefore, as they
did not, so they had no reason, to break the Measures of Passive Obedience, by
which the mo^ Ancient, and Suffering Christians had gone in former times.

But 2dly, Did the Heathens outrage the Christians in Julians Reign, and did he
underhand direct and encourage them to act such Tragedies upon them? So they
did in former Ages, not only using great Cruelties unto the Living Christians,
by Stoning and Burning of them, but also by digging up their Dead Bodies, and
Tearing, and Mangling of them in Pieces, against the most Inst. l. 2. Tit. 1.
De rerum divisione 9.
Sacred Laws of the Roman Empire, when, as Apol. 37. Quoties etiam, praeteritis
vebis, suo jure nos inimic^m vulgus invadit lapidibus and incendiis? Ipsis
Bacchanalium furiis, nee mortuis parcunt Christianis, quin illos de requie
sepulture, de Asylo quodam mertis, jam alios, jam nec totos a vellant,
dissecent, distrahant. Quid tamen unquam denotastis de tam conspiratis, de tam
animatis ad mortem usque pro injuria repensatum, quando vel una no^ paucis
faculis largitur ultionis posset operari, si malum malo dispungi penes nos
liceret.
Tertullian says, they could have easily revenged themselves, if they would.
It was utter Impunity, and the Connivence of the Governors, that made the
Heathens in this Barbarous and Insolent manner insult it over the former
Christians, against the Laws of the Empire; and therefore the same sort of
Illegal Violence and Oppression, could be no special reason to the Christians
under Julian, to alter their Behavior, or break the Gospel-Measures of
Christian Patience, in which their Predecessors had possessed their Souls. No,
they followed their Example, as they followed Christ's; and practiced this
Slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience, even then, when they saw the Execrable
Heathens rip up their Fellow Christians, and taste their Livers, and stuff their
Bodies with Barley, and throw them to be devoured by Swine, or anoint them over
with Oil and Honey, to expose them to Bees, Wasps, and Hornets; nay Sacrifice
them upon their Altars, unto the Devils, whom they worshipped for Gods.

But in the 3d. place, Did Julian, as our Author says, persecute the
Christians contrary to Law? So did Former Emperors, and Governors much more,
for as Tertullian observes, If Christianity was a Crime, they were tortured not
like other Malefactors, to confess, but to deny it, contrary to the End, for
which Torture, not only in the Roman Empire, but in all other Governments, was
used. The common Reason why Torture was instituted was, to force Stubborn
Malefactors to confess the Crimes for which they were suspected, and accused;
but clean contrary to this end they tortured Christianum hominum omnium
scelerum reum deorum, Imperatorum, legum, morum, naturae totius inimicum
existimas, and cogis, negare ut absolvas, quem non p^t^ris absolvere nisi
negaverit. Praevaricaris in leges -- torquemur confitentes, and absolvimur
negantes. Hoc sum, quod quaeris an s^m? quid me torques? confite^r, and
torques, quid faceres, s^^negarem.
Christians to make them deny: And could there be any thing more absurd or
illegal, than to Rack those Criminals, who had already confessed the Charge,
and acquit those, who denied it? They accounted the Christians the worst of
Malefactors, public Enemies of the Gods, and the Emperor; and yet when they
had confessed the Crime, they would torture them, to retract their Confessions,
and then set them Free.

The Reason of these Partial, Absurd, and Unjust Proceedings against them, was,
the same Father observes, That they were punished for the Non scelus aliquod in
causa est, sed nomen.
Name of Christian, and therefore the Confessing, or Denying of themselves to
be Christians, made them Guilty or Innocent of Murder, and many other
presumptive Crimes. But if they persevered in their Confession, then in the
second place, they were condemned forthwith as Murderers, etc. against one of
the Laws of the 12 Tables, and one of the Fundamental Laws not only of the
Empire, but of all Civil Governments, Si certum est nos nocentissimos esse, cur
a vobis ipsis aliter tractamur, quam pares nostri, id est, caeteri nocentes,
cum ejusdem n^xietatis eadem tractatio debet intervenire. Quodcunque decimur,
cum alii dicuntur, and proprio ore, and mercenaria advocatione ad innocentiae
suae commendationem, respondendi, altercandi facultas patet, quando nec liceat
inoffensos, and inauditos damnari, sed Christianis solis nihil permittitur
loqui, quid causam purget, quod veritatem defendat, quod judicem non faciat
injustum. -- In omnibus nos aliter dispenitis, quam caeteros nocentes. --
without being heard.

All other Malefactors had the liberty of defending their Lives, and the
benefit of Counsel, but the Christians only were denied the privilege of their
Birthright, being condemned in a most Arbitrary and Tyrannical manner to death
for Praesumptis non probatis criminibus de sua sola confessione damnatur -- cum
praesumatis de secleribus nostris ex nominis confessione.
Presumed Crimes, of which there was made no Proof. This made the Father, who
himself was bred a Lawyer, expostulate with the Governors of the Empire, about
the Illegality of their Proceedings, and tell them, That if it was the same
thing to be guilty of Murder, and Incest, and to be a public Enemy of the
Empire, as to be a Christian, then they should Quid de tabella recitatis illum
Christianum cur non and homicidam? --
Indict every Christian of Murder, and Incest by his proper Name, and prove the
Indictment against him, and not presume that the Title of a Christian implies
all those Crimes. I say he expostulates with them very warmly about the
Suspecta sit vobis ista perversitas, ne qua vis lateat in occulto, quae vos
adversus formam, adversus naturam Judicandi, contra ipsas quoque leges
ministret. Nisi enim fallor, leges malos erui jubent, non abscondi, confessos
damnari praescribunt non absolvi, hoc senatus consulta, hoc principum mandata
definiunt. Hoc Imperium cujus ministri estis civilis non tyrannica dominatio
est.
Illegality of their Proceedings against the Christians, and I have put his
Expressions in the Margent, on purpose that our Author and his Admirers may
consider them, and thereby be convinced, that the Primitive Christians did
practice the Slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience in that Sense, wherein,
Preface p. 8.
he says, It is not Evangelical, but Mahumetan, and the very Turkish Doctrine
of the Bow-string, as it is taught, and prescribed both without, and against
Law.

For the Bow-String in Turkey is not more Unjust, Tyrannical, and Destructive,
than this way of proceeding against the Christians was, which the Apologist
tells the Judges, was against the Constitution of the Empire, the Acts of the
Senate, and the Mandates of the Emperors; and this plainly implies, That
Severus, who then was Emperor, had made no such Orders for their proceeding
against the Christians: For if they had proceeded so against them in Obedience
to his Pleasure, there had been no ground for such a particular, and smart
Charge upon them, nor indeed for writing his Apology to any but the Emperor
himself, to show him the Injustice of such Laws.

But the Father wrote his Apology to the Governors, and Judges of the Roman
Empire, to whose care the Emperor had left the Civil Administration, being
wholly taken up himself in Wars; and besides, he was a great Ad Scapulam. 4.
Ipse etiam Severus christianorum memor fuit, nam and proculum Christianum, qui
eum per oleum aliquando curaverat, requisivit, and in palatio suo habuit, usque
ad mortem ejus. -- and clarissimas faeminas, and clarissimos viros sciens hujus
sectae esse, non modo non laesit, verum et testimonio exornavit, and populo
furenti in nos palam restitit.
Favourer of the Christians, as the same Author tells us; and therefore the
Persecution under him, as it seems to me, ought rather to be ascribed to his
Governors, or perhaps to Plantianus, his great Favorite, who was an Enemy to
the Christians, and had the ascendent so much over him, that he durst accuse
the Empress before him; and as Xiph. lib. 21 p. 413, 414.
Dio observes, was more Emperor than He.

But what the Christians suffered now contrary to Law, was but a Flea-biting,
as it were, to what was done against them in the Reign of Galerius Maximianus,
who Tyrannized contrary to Law. For though, as I have showed in the Second
Chapter, the Emperor had absolute Power over his Subjects Lives, and Estates,
as to do what he pleased to particular Persons, or Parties of Men, yet he had
no Right to Enslave the whole People, by altering the Constitution of the Roman
Government, from a Hoc Imperium, cujus ministri estis, civilis non tyrannica
dominatio est. Tert. loc. cit.
Civil into a Tyrannical Dominion, or from a Government, wherein the People had
Liberty, and Property, into such a Government as the Persian was, and the
Turkish now is, where the Subjects are the Princes Family, and all that they
have is his by Law. In this sort of Government all the Subjects, or the whole
People, are formal Slaves by Law; and it differs almost as much from an
absolute Civil Monarchy, as an absolute Civil Monarchy does from a limited
Civil Monarchy, because the Subjects in such a Government, are born their
Princes Slaves, and not to Liberty and Freehold, as in Civil Governments they
are; where though the Prince be absolute, and have Power over the Lives, and
Fortunes of his Subjects, yet his personal Orders by which he touches this, or
that, or these or those men, are not Quae nec ad exemplum trahuntur. Inst. l.
1. Tit. 2.
drawn into precedent, nor affect his other Subjects, not Personam non
transgreditur. Ib.
going further than the person, or persons, about whom they are made. The
Exercise of this Power, which Absolute Princes have in Civil Monarchies is not
counted Ordinary, but Extraordinary, nor so much Legal, as Supra legal; but in
Tyrannical Governments, where the Subjects are the Princes Personal Estate,
this Despotick Power is the Ordinary Law, and the Subjects are Perfect, and
Actual Slaves.

Now Galerius, as De Mort. Persecut. 21. Adeptus igitur maximam potestatem ad
vexandum orbem animum intendit. Nam post devictas Persas, quorum hic ritus, hic
mos est, ut regibus suis in servitium se addicant, and reges populo suo,
tanquam familia utantur, hunc morem nefarius homo in Romanam terram voluit
inducere, quem ex illo tempore victoriae sine pudore laudabat. Et quia id
aperte jubere non poterat, sic agebat, ut and ipse libertatem hominibus
auferret. Vid. and Eusebius. l. 8. c. 14.
Lactantius tells us, after he had conquered the Persians, attempted to
introduce the Slavish Persian Government (which he used to commed) into the
Roman Empire, and because he had not Power to Enact such an Alteration, yet he
treated his Subjects in the Persian manner, as if they had been born his
Slaves. He tortured, and crucified the most Honorable and Gallant Men every
where like Malefactors and Slaves; he ravished the most Matres-familias
ingentes, ac nobiles in Gynaecaeum rapiebantur. Ibid.
Noble Matrons, and took them from their own Husbands to put them in his
Seraglio: His Ordinary Recreations were, to see Men devoured by huge Bears,
which he kept for the purpose, and to laugh at the tearing of their Limbs; and
he never Supped without Killing a Man. The Islands, Prisons, and the Quarries
he esteemed but light Punishments; nay Beheadding it self was accounted a
Favor; and Burning, Crucifying, and being devoured by Wild Beasts, were the
easiest deaths, which he did Inflict. As for his Domestics, the Lance, was
their ordinary Reprimand: In a word () he dissolved the Laws, Eloquentia
extincta, causidici sublati, Juris Consulti, aut relegati, aut necati. Literae
autem inter malas art^ habitae, and qui eas n^verant pro inimicis, hostibusque
protriti, and execrati. Licentia rerum omnium, solutis legibus, assump^^ and
judicibus dat^. Judices Militares humanitatis literarum rudes, sine
adsessoribus, in provincias immissi. Ib.
forbid all Pleading, banished, or killed the Lawyers, and instead of Learned
Men, made his rude Soldiers, who were utterly ignorant of Law, and Learning,
sole Judges over the Provinces, and gave them Power to do what they pleased.

To conclude, Ibd. c. 23.
He made all Men's Estates be surveyed, and the Number of their Cattle, Vines,
and Timber Trees be taken, and had all Cities, Villages, and Families numbered
by the Pole; nay for fear any man should conceal any thing he had, he most
illegally ordered Servants to be tortured against their Masters, and Wives
against their Husbands, and if no discovery came that way, he ordered all sorts
of men to be tortured in person to discover the utmost Penny they were worth.
And lest any man under the pretense of being a Beggar should escape Tax-free,
against all the Laws of the Empire, and of Humanity, he caused all the Beggars
every where to be seized, and to be put aboard on little Vessels, and sunk into
the Sea. In short, he filled the Provinces with Lamentation, and Mourning, and
used his Subjects, as if they had been his Captives in War; and had the Sultan
of Persia conquered the Empire, he could not have used them worse.

If ever Government was changed from Civil into Tyrannical, if ever Free People
were enslaved, Laws, and Lawyers suppressed, and Lust and the Sword tyrannized
against Law, it was in the Eastern Empire under the Reign of Galerius, but yet
the Christians [among whom were (...). Eusebius. l. 8. c. 4.
very many disbanded Officers, and Souldiers] though so highly provoked above
the rest of his Subjects, were so far from resisting, that, according to the
Writers, who describe the Tenth Persecution, they let themselves be led, like
Lambs to the Slaughter, and rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer
for the Name of Christ. Ib. c. 6.
Eusebius says, That both Men and Women leapt into the Fire, with a Divine
Alacrity, which cannot be expressed, and that no Ib. c. 10.
Eloquence was able to set forth their Courage, and Fortitude in their
Torments: And Hist. Sacr. l. 2. c. 47.
Sulp. Severus tells us, That the Christians were the more desirous of
Martyrdom, than the Ambitious Clergymen were of Bishoprics in his Time. And
truly so it did appear by the Thebaean Legion, with which some men of late have
so much disturbed the Christian Spirit of Mr. J. And, poor Man, I am afraid
this account of the Galerian, which was one of the most Bloody Acts of the
Dioclesian Persecution, may yet disturb him more. For then the Christians were
persecuted at a time, when they could not want the Help, nor likely the
Solicitations of their oppressed Heathen Fellow Subjects, then if ever they
might have taken up Arms under the Fine Pretense of defending their Liberties
and the Laws, but there was not one word of that among them: No, poor Wretches,
they were manacled and fettered with the Slavish Principle of Passive
Obedience, which Christ and his Apostles, had taught them: The Christian
prevailed above the Greek Principles in their Consciences: And the Tyrant knew,
he was secure in their Numbers, even from his Greek Subjects, among whom it was
not only an allowed Principle to kill a Tyrant, but also counted a Meritorious
Work. Had the Greeks been then the Prevailing Number, the Monster, had likely
been served like Nero; but the Empire was become Christian, and Passive, and
his Security consisted in that.

Wherefore, to conclude this Chapter, seeing the Former Christians, especially
those under Galerius, were Persecuted, Oppressed, and Enslaved, not only as
Christians, but as Subjects too, contrary to all Law. Illegal Persecution could
be no specific Reason for the Christian Subjects and Soldiers of Julian to
resist him; No! they were not so Jesuited, and Presbyterianized from the Gospel
Simplicity; as it appears, it was all one to them, as well, as to their
Predecessors, whether they were martyred Legally, or Illegally, or whether they
were worried by a Natural, or by an Apostate, by an Unbaptized, or Baptized
Wolf. When they could not have the Benefit of Law, they could contentedly
suffer against it; as yet their only Remedy was that Mountebank Receipt of
Prayers, and Tears; none of the Fathers, as yet was become an Antimonarchical
Author, they valued their Established Religion very much, but they would not
Fight for it; they knew no Medium between Flying, or Suffering, nor as yet had
invented and Distinctions to justify the resisting of Lawful Princes, but
followed the Passive Examples of Former Times, without making any Difference
betwixt dying for their Religion with, or without, according to, or contrary to
Law.

CHAP. X. Wherein is defended the Doctrine of Passive Obedience against Law.
HAving premised so much about the Sufferings of the Ancient Christians both
under Julian, and other Tyrants before him, It is time to proceed to the
Justification of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience in its full Latitude against
the Exceptions of our Author, who distinguishes (and in a very triumphant
manner) betwixt Suffering according to, and contrary to Law, and then upon the
ground of this Unanswerable Distinction (Dictator-like) he condemns the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience for Intolerable, as it has been taught, and
practiced contrary to Law, Preface p. 8.
There (says he, meaning in Dr. Hickes Sermon) it was I met with the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience, which, when it is taught without any regard to Laws, and
is prescribed without Law, and against Law, is not Evangelical, but Mahumetan,
and the very Turkish Doctrine of the Bow-String. And in his Ninth Chapter,
wherein he has endeavored to confute the Doctrine of Passive Obedience as it
is so taught, and practiced; all that he has said, is comprised in Prop. 3. p.
92. When the Laws of God (says he) and our Country interfere, and it is made
death by the Law of the Land to be a Good Christian, then we are to lay down
our Lives for Christ's Sake. This is the only Case wherein the Gospel requires
Passive Obedience, namely, when the Laws are against a Man, and this was the
case of the first Christians. And in p. 75. says he, Men throw away their
Lives, and are certainly weary of them, if they practice Passive Obedience
against the Laws, and the Truth of it is, we justly deserve to be so used as
the Thebaean Legion was, and moreover to be loaded with the Curses of all
Posterity, if we suffer our selves to be brought into their Condition, for that
can never happen, but by our own Treachery to our Religion, in parting with
those good Laws, that protect it, and in agreeing to such, as shall destroy it.

I am very well satisfied, that the Case of the Thebaean Legion, or any other
like it, can never happen in Great Britain, we of these Kingdoms having such
Security against Tyranny, as no People ever had; but upon supposition, that it
may happen, I am very well assured, that we ought patiently to suffer it, or
any other Condition like unto it, though our sufferings would be against Law.

But to state this matter clearly, and to the satisfaction of the Reader, I
must here beg leave to distinguish between the Laws in any Government, which
declare, and ascertain the Rights of the Sovereign, and those, which secure the
Rights of the Subject. By the Rights of the Sovereign, I understand those
Prerogatives, and Pre-Eminences of Power and Greatness, which are involved in
the formal Conception of Sovereignty, and are inseparably annexed to the
Sovereign, whether it be the People, as in Democracies; or a few of the Chief,
as in Aristocracies; or one single Person, as in Monarchies: For there are
certain Essential Rights of Sovereignty, or Supremacy, which equally belong to
Sovereigns of all Sorts, as to have Sense belongs to all Sorts of Animals, and
which without destroying the very Notion of a Sovereign, you cannot abstract
from him, no more than roundness from a Circle or Sphaere. For they Ad nullum
pertinent, nisi ad coronam and dignitatem regiam, nec a corona separari
poterunt cum faciant ipsam coronam. Bract. l. 2. c. 24.
constitute the Essential difference between Supremacy and Subjection, so that,
whosoever has them, is a Complete Sovereign, and whosoever wants them, or any
of them, is a Subject, or at least, an Incomplete Sovereign; and in all Perfect
and Regular Governments, these Essential Rights of Sovereignty equally belong
to the Supreme Power, whether Princes or States, by the Common, and Statute
Laws thereof.

Such as these, in the First place, is to be Sam. Bochart. Ep. p. 32.
(...) accountable to none except God: For if there be any Power to which
Princes, or States are accountable, within their Dominions, let their Names
sound never so big, they are not Sovereign, but Subject; Sovereignty, as the
very Notion implies, being such a Preheminent Jurisdiction, as makes all other
persons, within the Lines of it, accountable unto it, but it, or the person, or
persons invested with it, accountable to none.

Secondly, To have the Ibid. p. 90.
Sole Power, and Disposal of the Sword, for to suppose, that another has a
Right to bear the Sword besides the Sovereign, is to suppose, that the
Sovereign has an Equal; which is a Contradiction to the Notion of Sovereignty,
and that in the same Government there may be two Sovereign Powers.

Thirdly, To be free from all Coercive, and Vindicative Power; for if in any
Government there were a Power, which had Authority to compel, or punish the
Sovereign, for this Reason he would not be Sovereign, but a Subject to that
Power.

Fourthly, Not to Sam. Bochart Ep. p. 41, 87. Ib. 140, 141. Dr. Faulkners
Christ. Loyalty, v. 2. chapter 2.
be resisted or withstood by Force upon any pretense whatsoever; for otherwise
the Sovereign would be controulable by Force, which is inconsistent with the
Majesty, and Dignity of the Sovereign Power, and supposes that Subjects have a
Right to Judge when they may resist, or withstand their Sovereign, which is a
thousand times more inconvenient and pernicious to Humane Societies, than
patiently submitting to the Abuse of the Sovereign Power.

Lastly, To have the Legislative Power, or the Power that makes any form of
Words a Law. The Sovereign Power may indeed be limited as to the Exercise of
this Power, which may be confined to Bills, and Writings prepared by others,
but still it is the Sovereign Authority, who gives Life, and Soul to the dead
Letter of them; and all Princes, or States which want this Authority, let their
Names and Titles be never so great, are not complete Sovereigns, but Subjects,
because upon this supposition, they have not Power to make Laws to bind others,
but others have Power to make Laws to bind them.

Now the Laws by which these, and other Essentials of Sovereignty are
established, may be called the Imperial Laws, or the Common Laws of
Sovereignty, and Christianity, which our P. 92.
Author well observes, destroys no man's Natural, or Civil Rights, does not
destroy these Essential Rights of Sovereignty, but confirms them unto the Legal
Sovereign in every Government, commanding his Subjects to observe them, and
particularly the Imperial Law of of not resisting, not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake.

Wherefore in answer to his P. 81.
Question, By what Law we must dye in Illegal Persecution? I answer, By the
Imperial Laws in every Government, and by the Laws of the Gospel, which (as I
shall hereafter show) establish those Laws. In all perfect Governments, and
particularly in the English, all these Rights legally belong to the Sovereign,
who is the King, especially to be accountable to none but God, to have the sole
Power and Disposal of the Sword, and to be free from all Coercive, and
Vindicative Power, and from Resistance by Force, It is by these Common Laws of
Sovereignty, that the Gospel requires Passive Obedience, which is but another
name for Non-resistance; these Laws are in Eternal Force against the Subjects
in defense of the Sovereign, Sa. Boch, ep. p. 61.
be he good, or evil, just, or unjust, Christian, or Pagan; be what he will, no
Subject, or Ib. p. 54, 55.
number of Subjects can lift up his Hand against his Sovereign, and be
Guiltless by these Laws. P. 84.
Where there is no Law indeed, there is no Transgression; But for the Subjects
to bear the Sword against their Sovereign, or to defend themselves by Force
against him, or his Forces, is against the Common Laws of Sovereignty; and by
consequence Ib. p. 86, 87.
Passive Obedience even unto death, becomes a duty in Sovereign Governments by
virtue of those Laws.

By the help of this Distinction between the Imperial Laws, which ascertain the
Rights of the Sovereign, and the political, which are made to secure the Rights
of the Subject, the heedful Reader may easily solve all that Mr. J. has
written by the help of Mr. H. his Superviser, against Dr. Hickes. For he has,
as himself P. 92.
confesses, reduced all the Strength and Force of what he has written against
him in opposition to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience into 5 Propositions;
every one of which I shall here, I hope, effectually evacuate, by adding a few
Words, which may enable a common Capacity to see, how he has perplexed the
Truth.

The Propositions.
1. Christianity destroys no Man's Natural, or Civil Rights, but confirms them;
and by consequence it destroys not the forementioned Rights of the Sovereign,
but confirms them. 2. All Men have both a Natural, and Civil Right and property
in their Lives, till they have forfeited them by the Laws of their Country, i.
e. by the Political Laws, which are made to defend the Rights of the Subject,
but in case the Sovereign will tyrannically take away a Subjects Life against
the Political Laws, the Subject is bound by the Laws Imperial, or Common Laws
of Sovereignty, not to resist him, or defend his Life against him by Force. 3.
When the Laws of God, and our Country interfere, and it is made death by the
Law of the Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our Lives for
Christ's Sake. So far is very true, because every man is bound to submit to the
Penalties of the Government under which he lives: But then what follows is
false, This is the only case wherein the Gospel requires Passive Obedience,
namely, when the [Politica] Laws are against a Man; because the Gospel requires
our submission to the Imperial, as well as the Political Laws; but by the
Imperial Laws in every perfect Government, the Subjects are absolutely
forbidden to bear the Sword against the Sovereign, or to resist him upon any
pretense whatsoever, and therefore are bound to suffer death wrongfully, rather
than resist. 4. That the killing of a Man contrary to Law, is Murder; And if
the Sovereign kill a Man contrary to Law, he is guilty of Murder, but must
answer for it to God only. 5. That every Man is bound to prevent Murder, as far
as the Law allows; But the Imperial, or Prerogative Law, allows no Man to
prevent his own Murder, by rising up against, or resisting his Sovereign, and
therefore the last words are false, And ought not to submit to be murdered, if
he can help it; unless by help it, he means help it by Prayers, and Tears.
I hope I have already sufficiently enervated the Strength, and Force of our
Authors Arguments against Passive Obedience, or Non-resistance; and now after
his Example, I shall reduce the Strength and Force of what I have hitherto
said, into these following Propositions.

I. Every Man, but more especially a Christian, is bound to submit to the Laws
of the Government, under which he lives. II. The Government consists in the
Imperial, as well as the Political Laws. III. The Imperial Laws of every
Government forbid resisting the Sovereign, and by consequence require
Non-resistance. IV. Non-resistance is the same thing with Passive Obedience,
and by consequence Passive Obedience is required by the Imperial Laws of every
Government. V. Whatsoever the Imperial Laws of any Government require of its
Subjects, if it be not contrary to Gods Laws, they are bound to perform it. VI.
Passive Obedience, or patient Suffering of Injuries from the Sovereign, is not
forbid by Gods Laws, and therefore Subjects are bound to perform it, where it
is required by the Imperial Laws.
And now I shall desire these Men, who of late have thundered so much with
Julian against the Thebean Legion, to consider well, what I have said in
general about the Common Laws of Sovereignty; when they have digested it well,
they will be convinced, how fallaciously the Author of that Pamphlet has dealt
with them in suppressing this Notion, and making them believe, That there were
no Laws belonging to Government, but those, which I call Political Laws. But,
as I have showed, there are two Tables belonging to every perfect, and regular
Government, one which concerns the Majesty of the Sovereign, Gods Vicegerent,
which I may call the first Table; and another, which concerns the Good and
Safety of the People, which may be called the second Table; and these two
together are the Complete and Adequate Rule of Civil Obedience and Subjection,
and Passive Obedience, or the Patient bearing of the greatest Injuries, when it
is not a Duty by This, is very often so by That. When the Laws are against us,
then it is our Duty by the second Table; and when the Sovereign is against us
contrary to the Laws of the second Table, then it is our Duty by the Laws of
the first, which absolutely forbid us to bear the Sword against him, or to
repel his Forces by Force. Wherefore to answer our Authors P. 87.
Question, I am confident Dr. Hicks was very serious, and in earnest when he
taught, and preached up Passive Obedience for Evangelical in this case. It may
be seen by the Drs. Sermon, and other of his Pieces, that he does not write
rashly; and I have reason to presume that he asserted Passive Obedience upon
the same bottom, that I now defend it. He is far from having Men to prostitute
their Lives to Malice, and Violence, for he would rather have them to abscond,
or fly; but if they can, or will do neither in times of Illegal Persecution, he
thinks there remains nothing for them to do, but patiently to submit to
unavoidable Death. He had no reason to distinguish betwixt suffering according
to, and contrary to Law, because he knew that neither the Laws of God, nor Man
allow any Subject the Benefit of forcible defense against the illegal Violence
of his Sovereign, but that by the Laws Imperial he ought to dye rather than
resist: And if this P. 87.
was too light for the Pulpit, and just such another Piece of Drollery, as that
in the Dedication to Oliver Cromwell before Killing no Murder, I protest, I know
not what it is to be serious in the Pulpit, nor what Apostolical Divinity is.
The Gospel from one end to the other is full of this kind of Drollery; and for
my own I seriously protest, I had rather be Passive, were it possible, under a
Thousand deaths in an Illegal Persecution, than be guilty of such Scurrility,
not to say Blasphemy, against the Doctrine of the Cross.

Our Author in this, and such like Reflections, writes more like an Apostate
from the Christian Religion, than a Minister of it; and if any thing in this
Answer may contribute to make him sensible of his Sin, and bring him to the
Humiliation and Repentance of his Elder Brother Ecebolius, I shall think my
pains well spent.

But to bring this general Discourse about the Common Laws of Sovereignty to
our own Case, I shall now proceed to show, That the English Realm is a perfect
Sovereignty or Empire, and that the King of England, by the Imperial Laws of
it, is a Complete, Imperial, and Independent Sovereign, to whom the foresaid
Rights of Sovereignty do inseparably belong.

The English Realm is a perfect Sovereignty, and Sir Orl. Bridgmans Speech to
the Regicides, p. 12, 13.
Empire, and the King a Complete, and Imperial Sovereign. Cooks Instit. p. 4.
c. 74.
Thus by the whole Parliament 24 H. 8. c. 12. it was resolved, and so declared,
That by sundry Authentic Histories and Chronicles it is manifestly declared
and expressed, that his Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been
accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme Head, and King, having Dignity
and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same. So 25 H. 8. c. 21. the
Crown of this Kingdom is affirmed to be an Imperial Crown, in these words: In
great Derogation of your Imperial Crown and Authority Royal. So 27 H. 8. c. 24.
Most Ancient Prerogatives and Authorities appertaining to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm. So 1 Eliz. c. 2. Restoring and Uniting to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm the Ancient Jurisdictions, etc. So 1 Jacob. cap. 1. A more Famous,
and Greater Union of two Mighty, Famous, and Ancient Kingdoms under one
Imperial Crown. And before the Conquest King Rot. Parl. 1 E, 4. part. 6. at
large in Cokes Inst. part. 4, p. 359.
Edgar styled himself in his Charter Basileus, Imperator, and Dominus; and his
Son St. Edward in a Charter, which he made to the Abbot of Ramsey (which my
Lord Cook says he had) styled himself, Ego Edwardus totius Albionis Dei
moderante Gubernatione Basileus.

Thus much may serve to show, that the Realm of England is a Perfect
Sovereignty, or Empire, and the King a Complete Imperial Sovereign: Where, for
the Readers satisfaction, I must observe, That the Regal Estate is then
Imperial, when the King is Supreme in his Dominions next under God, and has
full, perfect, and entire Jurisdiction from God alone, and all others within
his Dominions, by emanation from him. Now this Perfection and Fullness of
Imperial Power which makes an Imperial Sovereign, is of two sorts, such as is
limited by the Laws of God and Nature only, or such as is limited by the Laws
of God, and Nature, and Civil Laws, and Pactions too. The Power in both sorts
of Sovereigns is Imperial, i. e. full, perfect, absolute, and entire, but the
Exercise of it is differently bounded, and regulated, one by the Laws of God
and Nature; and the other by Humane Positive Laws; and the latter Limitation
does no more destroy the Fullness, and Perfection, and Supremacy of the Power,
than the former; because the Sovereign, who is under Political Limitations, as
to the Exercise of his Power, has his Power nevertheless as absolutely, fully,
and entirely in himself, as he that is only under the limitation of Divine, and
Natural Laws.

Thus the Learned De laudibus Legum Angliae c. 9. Rex Angliae -- Principatu
nedum regali, sed and politico, suo populo dominatur. -- Regnum sic institui ut
lex non libere valeat populum tyrannide gubernare, quod solum fit dum potestas
regia lege politica cohibetur.
Chancellor Fortescue, grants the King of England to have Regal, or Imperial
Power, although it be under the Restraint and Regulation of the Power
Political, as to the Exercise thereof. And as a Fountain, which has Channels
or Pipes made for it, within which its Waters are bounded in their passage, and
through which they are to flow, is nevertheless as perfect a Fountain, and has
its Waters as fully, and entirely within it self, as any other Fountain whose
Waters flow from it at liberty without any such Regulation: So a King, whose
Imperial Power is limited by Humane Constitutions in the Exercise of it, is
nevertheless as Complete a Sovereign, and has the Sovereign Power as fully and
entirely within himself, as he who is at liberty to exercise his Authority, as
he will. To be Arbitrary is no more of the Essence of an Imperial Sovereign,
than to be free in the course of its Waters is of the Essence of a Fountain,
but as the Fountain of an Aqueduct, for Example, is as perfect in its Kind, and
generally more beneficial, and useful to Mankind, than a Free-flowing Spring:
So limited Sovereigns are as perfect and essential Sovereigns, as the purely
Arbitrary or Despotic, and generally more Beneficial, and Salutary to the World.

All that I have hitherto said, may be better understood by distinguishing
between the Being, and Essence of Imperial, or Sovereign Power, and the
Exercise and Emanation thereof. As to the Being and Essence of it, it is in as
full perfection in the Limited as in the Arbitrary Sovereign, though the Law
confines and limits him in the Exercise thereof; but to be confined in the
Exercise does not destroy the Being, nor diminish the perfection of Sovereign
Power, for then the Power of God himself could not be Sovereign, because there
are certain immutable Rules of Truth, and Justice, within which it is
necessarily limited, and confined. But God is nevertheless a perfect Imperial
Sovereign over the Universe, though the Exercise of his Government over his
Creatures be limited by the Eternal Laws of Truth and Equity. It is true, that
this Limitation of Almighty God is Intrinsecal, and proceeds from the
perfection of his Righteous and Holy Nature, but yet it shows, that the most
perfect and absolute Imperial Power may, without a Contradiction, be confined
within bounds, and limited in the actual Exercise thereof; and that such
moderation, and limitation of Power Absolute, and Imperial, does only qualify,
and temper, and not destroy the Essence thereof. And therefore Cook in Caudreys
Case says, That by the Ancient Laws of this Realm England is an Absolute
Empire, and Monarchy; and that the King is furnished with Plenary, and Entire
Power, Prerogative, and Jurisdiction, and is Supreme Governor over all Persons
within this Realm.

And if any man will but attend well to his own Thoughts, he will find no
Inconsistency between the Fullness of Sovereign, or Imperial Power in the Root
and Essence of it, and a legal limitation of the Use, and Exercise thereof. And
from hence it comes to pass, That the King of England, though he be limited in
the Use and Exercise of his Power, yet he is as much the Fountain of all Power,
and Jurisdiction within his Dominions, as if he were Arbitrary; He has none to
share with him in the Sovereignty, but all Power and Authority is derived from
him like Light from the Sun; in Him alone it is Radically and Originally
placed; He has no Sharers or Copartners in the Sovereignty; none Coordinate
with him in Government; no Equal, nor Superior, but only God, to whom alone he
is Subject. Hence says Lib. 1. c. 8.
Bracton, who wrote in the Reign of Henry the Third, Omnis quidem sub rege, and
ipse sub nullo, sed tantum sub Deo; non est inferior sibi subjectis, non parem
habet in regno suo. And afterward, Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub Homine,
sed sub Deo: And then, to show that he is a Sovereign doubly limited in the Use
of his Power, by the Laws of God, and the Civil Laws of his Kingdom, he adds,
Et sub Lege, quia Lex facit Reg^m. In the same place he calls him Vicarius Dei,
and says, Vices gerit Jesu Christi; and nothing greater could be said of
Caesar, or the most Despotic Sovereign, that ever was.

So the Statute of Praemunire 26 R. 2 c. 5. declares, That the Crown of England
has been so free at all times, that it has been in no Earthly Subjection, but
immediately Subject to God in all things touching the Regality of the same
Crown. And in 25 H. 8. c. 21 the Parliament directing their Declaration to the
King, enacted and declared, That this your Graces Realm recognizing no
Superior under God, but only your Grace, has been, and is free from
Subjection, etc. And in 24. H. 8. c. 12. after the words before cited it
follows, unto whom a Body Politic -- been bounden and owen to bear next unto
God a Natural, and Humble Obedience, He being instituted and furnished, with
plenary, whole, and entire Power, Pre-eminence, Authority, etc. So 2 Ed. 6. c.
2. -- Seeing that all Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is
derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty, as Supreme Head of these Churches
and Realms. -- So in the Oath of Supremacy 1 Eliz. I A. B. do utterly testify,
and declare in my Conscience; that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm.

To all this I may add, the common Style of both Houses in Parliament, Our
Gracious Sovereign, and our Dread Sovereign Lord the King: Which is also used
in the old Oath of Allegiance mentioned in Britton in cap. 29. De tournes de
Viscontes, You shall swear that from this day forward you shall be true and
faithful to our Sovereign Lord Edward --.Hence by Sheringham. Kings Suprem. c.
4.
Common Law many Prerogatives belong to the King by virtue of his Sovereignty.
He cannot give any Man the Style, or Title of Dominus, because he himself is
Omninium subditorum Supremus Dominus. He can hold Land of no Man, because he
can have no Superior; and if a Man formerly held Land of the King and of
another Lord, whereby his Heir became a Ward, the King had the Custody of the
Heir and Land, because, as Glanvil says, L. 7. c. 10. Dominus Rex nullum
habere potest parem, multo minus Superiorem. The reason is given by Bracton, l.
2. c. 37. And as C. 22.
Stanford shows in his Exposition of the Kings Prerogative, By the Common Law
there lies no Action, or Writ against the King, but when he seizes his
Subjects Lands, or Goods, having no Title by Order of his Laws so to do;
Petition is all the Remedy the Subject has, and this Petition is called, A
Petition of Right.

Having now showed, that the Realm of England is a perfect Sovereignty, or
Empire, and the King, a Complete, and Imperial Sovereign, Subject unto none but
God, it must needs follow, that he has all the Essential Rights of perfect
Sovereignty belonging unto him, as to be unaccountable to any Humane Power; to
have the sole Right and Disposal of the Sword; to be free from all Coercive and
Vindicative Power; to be irresistible, and unopposeable, or not to have his
Forces repelled by Force. A Stranger, that has read, what I have written to
show, that he is a Complete and Imperial Sovereign, must needs presume, that
these, and all other Essential Rights of Sovereignty belong to him by the
Common Laws of Sovereignty, or that by the Imperial Laws of his Realm he must
be invested with the foresaid Rights. It would be a Contradiction to call this
an Imperial Crown, to acknowledge the King for Supreme over all Persons, to say
he has no Superior but God, that he is Subject to him alone, and that he is
furnished with Plenary and entire Power, unless he have all those Rights, which
are involved in the very Notion of his Imperial Sovereignty, as I have
explained it from the Statutes and Customs of this Realm. For first, To say
that he is the only Supreme Governor within his Realm and Dominions and
Subject to none, but God, must needs imply, that he is (...), or unaccountable
for what he does amiss to any Tribunal but that of Heaven, whose Vicegerant he
is. If there were any Power in his Kingdoms, that could call him to account for
Maladministration, for that very Reason he would not be a Complete Sovereign,
but the Power to whom he was accountable would be Superior, and not he. It must
also follow from his being instituted and furnished with plenary, whole and
entire Power, and Jurisdiction, that he must be Unaccountable; for from whom
shall any person, or state of Men have Power and Authority to call his Majesty
to Account? All Power and Jurisdiction Spiritual, and Temporal is derived and
deducted from him, as Supreme Head of these Churches, and Realms; and from whom
then shall any Man, or state of Men derive Authority of Judging, or Trying him?
It can be from none but himself; But to imagine that he will subject himself to
any Superior Jurisdiction, is an apparent Absurdity in Hypothesi, and in Thesi
such an Act would be void by its own Nature, if that be true, which the Cokes
Inst. part 4. p. 14. Suprema Jurisdictio and potestas Regia, etsi Princeps
velit, se s^p^rari non possunt; sunt enim ipsa forma and substantialis essentia
Majestatis, ergo manente rege ab eo abdicari non possunt. Cavedo. Pract.
Observe. p. 2. Decis. 40. n. 8.
Lords and Commons declared in full Parliament in the time of Edw. the Third,
That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
Disinherison of the King, and his Crown. This Phrase of the Disinherison of the
King, and the Crown in other Statute of Praemunire, 16 R. 2. c. 5.
Acts of Parliament is called, The Destruction of the Kings Sovereignty, his
Crown, his Regality, and things that tend thereunto, things that are openly
against the Kings Crown in Derogation of his Regality. So that, if an
Improvident King should consent to an Act so Destructive of his Sovereignty, it
would be of no more Force, than an Act to make another King Co-partner with him
in the Supreme Power, or an Act to pass over the Realm to a Foreign Prince.

But 2dly, To say that the King is the only Supreme Governor, instituted, and
furnished with plenary, whole, and entire Power, and Jurisdiction, must needs
imply, that he alone has the Power of the Sword; for were the Power of the
Sword in any else, he could not be furnished with plenary, whole, and entire
Power. Besides, the Civil Power is insignificant without the Military, and
therefore if the Civil Power were seated in him, and the Military in any other
Person or State, the English Realm would have two Sovereigns, one Civil, and
another Military, which is most absurd to think. Therefore by the Common Laws
of Sovereignty, the Power of the Sword, like all other Temporal Power must be
derived, and deducted from him, as Supreme Head, and Governor of this Realm;
and indeed his Sovereignty would be an empty insignificant nothing, were the
Scepter in his Hand, and the Sword in any others. And therefore Glanvil in his
Prologue before his Tractat. de leg. and consuet. regni Anglae, supposes the
Power of the Sword primarily necessary for the King. Regiam majestatem non
solum armis oportet esse decoratam, sed and legibus; The Kings Majesty ought to
be fortified not only with Arms, but with Laws; with Arms in the first place,
without which his Laws would be little worth. So says Fletal. 1. c. 17. Habet
Rex in manu sua omnia Jura -- Et materialem gladium, qui pertinet ad regni
gubernaculum. So says Bracton in the beginning of his first Book, In rege qui
recte regit, necessaria sunt duo haec, Arma videlicet and Leges, etc. And if
the Sword be originally in the Kings Hand, and none can bear it without
Authority derived from him, it must needs follow from hence, that he must be
free from all Coercive, and Vindicative Power, and that no Man can lawfully
resist him, or his Forces, because no Man can lawfully bear the Sword [except
for private Defence] but by Commission from him. I would fain be resolved by
the Superviser of Julian, who can Array the People against their Sovereign and
his Armies, or who has Authority (for example) to make him a Captain, or as
much as a Drummer of a Company, if there should fall out an hopeful Occasion of
recovering some lost Bishops-Lands? All Commissions of that nature would be
unauthoritative; and therefore how a man can either give, or receive such
unauthoritative Commissions, or oppose, or resist the King and his Armies by
virtue of them, without sin, I desire Mr. H. as a Lawyer, and Mr. J. as a
Divine, to resolve.

It is true what he P. 84.
says, That a Popish Successor can have no Authority to exercise any illegal
Cruelty upon Protestants, but then the Question, which he puts to the Doctor
upon it, is Fallacious, in desiring him to resolve how far such Inauthoritative
Acts [in the Soveraign] which carry no Obligation at all, can oblige men to
Obedience? I answer for the Doctor, If by Obedience he means Active service and
obedience, no man is bound to serve the King in exercising any illegal Cruelty,
No! He ought rather to suffer himself; but if by Obedience he means Passive
Obedience, [or else his Question is nothing to the Purpose] I answer, That it
is the Christian, the English Subjects Duty to suffer patiently such
unauthoritative Cruelty from his Sovereign [till legal Remedy can be had]
because to oppose, or resist him, and his Forces by Force, is unauthoritative,
and against the Imperial Laws of this Realm.

But because we live in an Age, wherein there are great Numbers of Disaffected
and Deluded Persons, who are deaf to all Reason, and Common Law, which is
nothing but Common Reason, when it is urged in defense of the Crown, I will now
show, that these Essential Rights of Sovereignty, which I have been discoursing
of, are declared to belong to the person of the King by the express Statutes of
this Realm.

First then, He is declared to be not accountable to his Subjects, or obnoxious
to their Coercive Power, 12 Car. 2. c. 30. We your Majesty's said Dutyful, and
Loyal Subjects the Lords, and Commons in Parliament assembled, beseech your
most Excellent Majesty, that it may be declared, and be it hereby declared,
that by the Undoubted and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers
of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together, in Parliament, or out of
Parliament, nor the People Collectively, or Representatively, nor any other
Persons whatsoever, ever had, have, or ought to have any Coercive Power over
the Persons of the Kings of this Realm. By the 25 Ed. 3. c. 2. it is declared,
without excepting any manner of Cases, or Pretenses to the contrary, That to
levy War against our Lord the King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings
Enemies in his Realm, giving them Aid, or Comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere,
is Treason. And 3 Inst. p. 9.
Coke upon the place, says, That this was High Treason before by the Common
Law; for no Subject can levy War within the Realm without Authority from the
King. If any levy War (says he) to expulse Strangers, to deliver men out of
Prisons, to remove Counselors, or against any Statute, or to any other End,
pretending Reformation, of their own Heads without Warrant, this is Levying of
War against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority. Sheringhams
Kings Suprem. c. 3.
In the 7th. year of Edw. 1. a Statute was made, wherein the Kings Power over
the Militia is acknowledged, and force of Armor to belong to him: And says
Jenkinsius Redivivus, p. 19.
Judge Jenkins, All Jurisdictions do, and of right ought to belong to the King;
all Commissions to levy men for War are Awarded by the King; the Power of War
only belongs to the King; it belongs to the King to Defend his People, and to
provide Arms, and Force. 13 Car. 2.1.
Since his Majesty's Restoration it was also in General Terms declared Treason
To levy War against the King within this Realm, or without: And to cut off all
popular pretenses of Defensive War, it is declared by 13 Car. 2. c. 6. That the
sole Supreme Government, Command, and Disposition of the Militia, and of all
Forces by Sea, and Land, and of all Forts, and places of Strength, is, and by
the Laws of England ever was the Undoubted Right of his Majesty, and his Royal
Predecessors, and that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, cannot, or
ought to pretend to the same, nor can, nor lawfully may raise or levy any War
Offensive, or Defensive against his Majesty, his Heirs, and Lawful Successor.
Behold the Doctrine of Non-resistance in its full Amplitude, the very Doctrine
of the Bow-string declared by Act of Parliament. Were the two Houses serious
and in earnest when they made this Declaration? Would they really have Men
prostitute their Lives to Malice and Violence, when the Laws of God and the
Kingdom Protect them? Surely this is too Light for the Parliament, and is just
such another piece of Drollery, as that which was Dedicated to Oliver Cromwell
in the Book called Killing no Murder. Bating that Dedication, there was never
any thing like this Passive A^^ of Parliament, for wheedling the People out of
their Lives. Alas! Alas! This is an Act fit to turn the Nation into a Shambles,
and enough to tempt, and invite Cruelty into the World. For let a Prince be
either a Papist, or an Atheist, and his Subjects fettered and manacled with
this Slavish Act, and then what hinders, but the one of them may destroy
Millions for their Estates, and Heresy together, and the other, as many, to
see what Faces, and Grimmaces they will make. According to this Act, the Lives
of the best Men in the Kingdom shall be exposed to the Fiery, and Ambitious
Zeal of a Papist, or the Extravagant Unaccountable Humors of a Wretch, and
hang at their Girdles, as Souls do at the Popes.

Is it not a sad thing, to have the Murdering piece of Passive Obedience
planted against the people by an Act of Parliament, to leave us nothing to
defend our selves, but the old Artillery of Prayers and Tears? But yet, so Wise
as Legislators, so Religious as Christians, and so Loyal as Subjects was that
Parliament, that they made this Declaration the second time, as it may be seen
13, 14 Car. 2. cap. 3.

And by all these Statutes cited, it appears, That the King is Accountable to
none but God; That the Sword is solely his, and theirs to whom He commits it;
That he can be Subject to no Coercive or Vindicative Power, nor ought any way
to be resisted by Force.

Indeed our Author P. 84.
does freely acknowledge, that according to the known Laws of England, a Popish
Prince, when he is Lawfully possessed of the Crown, will be Inviolable and
Unaccountable, as to his own Person, and ought by no means to have any Violence
offered to him. This is something, but it is not all; it is the Truth, but not
the Whole Truth: For I have shown by the known Laws of this Land, that the
People can make no Military, or Forcible Resistance against the King; they must
not rise up against Him, and his Armies in their own Defense; the Laws have
fettered and manacled them with the Slavish Principle of Passive Obedience;
they must not lift up their Hands against their Sovereign to oppose him or his
Forces, for they have no Right to the Sword, but what he gives them (except for
private Defense) no body without his Authority can Array them, and by these
Laws there are no Cases excepted, no, not the Case of a Popish Successor, which
makes our Authors Heart ache, and for not excepting of which in his Bow-Sermon,
he is so angry at Dr. Hickes. But the Dr. as P. 90.
Ignorant as he has made him in the English Historians, was (it seems) better
versed in the English Antiquities, and Customs, and in the Old Lawyers, and
Common, and Statute-Laws of the Land, than to make any Exception, or
Distinction, where the Law makes none, according to that Old Maxim, Vbi lex non
distinguit, ibi non est distinguendum. And besides, the Dr. remembered what his
Uncharitable Brother Mr. J. had forgot, That according to the Act of
Uniformity, he had subscribed, declared, and acknowledged, That it is not
lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, and that
he did abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against
his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him. It was apparently
the Design of the Three Estates in this Act, to secure the Nation of such
Ministers, as would preach up the Doctrine of Non-resistance without
distinction; and whether the Doctor that has so preached it, or Mr. J. that
has so maliciously opposed it, is more Conformable to the Act, and True to his
Oath, let the World judge. He granted, as I observed before, that the Person of
the King is Inviolable, and free from Violence; but then, as if he had granted
too much, he seems to retract it in part again; For, P. 88.
says he with the Noble Peer, whom he calls a Worthy Person, one single Arm
unresisted may go a great way in Massacring a Nation. And p. 85. How far men
may endeavor notwithstanding [the Kings Person is Inviolable] to save
themselves, when Princes will be the Executioners of their own Cruelty,
without, breach of their Allegiance --, If they have a mind they may ask. Ask,
of whom? of Harry Nevil? or Mr. H. or of which of the Heretic Lawyers? Which
of the discontented Enemies of the Prerogative will oblige the World with this
New Discovery? Or if Mr. J. knew it, why did he hide his Talent, and put the
World to the trouble of Asking? But I am afraid, because he did not, it is
something he durst not tell, some State-Mystery that his Great Assertor of
Laws, and Religion now with God told him was not safe to speak, some
Plat^-Redivivus-Doctrine; likely something, that depended upon this
Atheistical, as well as Illegal Principle in England, That all Power is
Radically in the People, and that the King is their Minister, and not the
Minister of God.

Whatever it was, I will stand no longer guessing: But having showed that
Passive Obedience is required in all Perfect, and Regular Governments by the
Common Laws of Sovereignty, and more particular in this Realm by the Imperial
Laws thereof; I will proceed to enquire how far the Church, and Ancient
Churchmen have agreed with the Three Estates; for I find, that our Author makes
much use of Ecclesiastical Authority, particularly of our Reformers, and of the
Book of Homilies, when they favor him; but how far he will value them, when
they are against him, especially in this Controversy between him, and the
Doctor, about Passive Obedience, I will not undertake to tell.

I will begin with the Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christen Man,
set forth by King Henry the 8th. with the Advice of his Reforming Clergy, who
were the Compilers of it, such as Cramner, and other Martyrs, who on the Fifth
Commandment write thus: Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealty, Truth,
Love, and Obedience toward their Prince for any Cause whatsoever it be, ne for
any cause they may Conspire against his Person, ne do any thing toward the
Hinderance, or Hurt thereof, nor of his Estate. And afterward they prove this
out of Romans 13. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist the Ordinance of God shall get to themselves Damnation.
And upon the Sixth Commandment: No Subjects may draw their Swords against their
Prince for any cause whatsoever it be, nor against any other (saving for Lawful
Defense) without their Princes License -- And although Princes, which be the
Supreme Heads of their Realms, do otherwise than they ought to do; yet God has
assigned no Judges over them in this World, but will have the Judgment of them
reserved to himself, and will punish them, when he sees his time -- So much
for the Authority of Cramner, Ridley, Redman, etc. From whence I pass to the
Book of Homilies, which p. 104. he has recommended to every Bodies Reading, as
one of the best Books, that he know; in the World, next the Bible. In the
second part of the Sermon of Obedience; Subjects are bound to obey them as Gods
Ministers, although they be Evil, not only for Fear, but also for Conscience
sake; and here Good People, let us all mark diligently, That it is not lawful
for Inferiors, and Subjects, in any case to resist, and stand against the
Superior Powers: For St. Paul's words be plain, That whosoever withstandeth
shall get to themselves Damnation. -- Our Savior Christ himself, and his
Apostles received many, and diverse Injuries of the Unfaithful, and Wicked Men
in Authority; yet we never read that they, or any of them caused any Sedition
or Rebellion against Authority. We read often that they patiently suffered all
Troubles, Vexations, Slanders, Pangs, and Pains, and Death it self obediently
without Tumult, or Resistance -- Christ taught us plainly, that even the wicked
Rulers have their Power, and Authority from God; and therefore [mark the
Reason] it is not lawful for their Subjects to withstand them, although they
abuse their Power: And yet Mr. J. in contradiction to this Book, which he has
recommended, as the best Book next to the Bible, Preface p. 8.
says, That this Doctrine is Intolerable and contrary both to the Gospel, and
the Law of the Land. But this Homily further tells us, That the Vocation, and
Calling of Gods People is to be patient, and of the suffering Side, and that we
ought to obey Governors, although they be wicked, and wrong-doers. Afterward
it proves from the Example of David, The we may not withstand, nor in any wise
hurt an Sam. Bochart. Ep. ad D. Morley, p. 80.
Anointed King, [mark the Reason again] which is Gods Lieutenant, Vicegerent,
and Highest Minister, in that Country where he is King. -- He durst not once
lay Hands upon Gods High Officer the King, whom he did know to be a Person
reserved, and kept only to Gods Punishment. -- A General Rule and Lesson to all
Subjects in the World not to withstand their Liege Lord, and King, nor to take
a Sword by their private Authority against their King, Gods Anointed, who only
bears the Sword by Gods Authority, for the Maintenance, etc. -- Who only by
Gods Law has the Use of the Sword at his Command --. It is an intolerable
Madness, Ignorance, and Wickedness for Subjects to make any murmuring,
rebellion, resistance, or withstanding Commotion, or Insurrection against their
Sovereign Lord. We may not in any wise withstand violently, or rebel against
Rulers, or make any Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults either by force of Arms,
or otherwise against the Anointed of the Lord, or his Officers, but we must in
such case patiently suffer all Wrongs and Injuries, referring the Judgment of
our Cause only to God.

Here we have Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, for Passive Obedience:
Here we are taught, that we must suffer all sorts of Wrongs, and Injuries from
our Sovereign, without Resistance, and withstanding of him; and in this Realm,
I am sure the Sovereign cannot wrong or injure his Subjects, but contrary to
the Political Laws. But to go on with this next best Book to the Bible: In the
second part of the Homily against Disobedience, and wilful Rebellion. David was
fain to save his Life, not by Rebellion, or any Resistance, but by Flight, and
hiding himself from the Kings Sight. -- Shall not we, being good Men, as we
are, Rise and Rebel against a Prince hated of God, and Gods Enemy, and likely
to be Hurtful, and Pernicious to the Commonwealth? Shall we not Rise and Rebel
against so Unkind a Prince, nothing considering, or regarding our True,
Faithful, and Painful Service, or the Safeguard of our Posterity? Shall we not
Rise and Rebel, against our known, mortal, and deadly Enemy, that seeks our
Lives? No, says Godly David. What shall we do then to an Evil, to an Unkind
Prince, an Enemy to us, hated of God, hurtful to the Commonwealth, etc. Lay no
Violent hand upon him, says Good David, but let him live until God appoint,
and work his End. -- If King David would make these Answers, as by his Deeds,
and Words recorded in the Holy Scriptures indeed he does make unto all such
Demands concerning Rebelling against Evil Princes, Unkind Princes, Cruel
Princes, Princes that be to their good Subjects mortal Enemies, Princes that
are out of Gods Favor, and so Hurtful, or like to be Hurtful to the
Commonwealth, what Answer?

And now to use out Unanswerable Authors P. 111.
own words, I have been the more Copious in these Citations, to show, that this
is the stunding Doctrine of the Church of England, to which all Orders of the
Clergy have subscribed, and Mr. J. among the rest. The Church of England long
since P. 89.
calculated and fitted this Doctrine for the use of a Popish Successor: And if
the Doctor has been ill taught by his Mother, the Blame is to be laid upon
her, and he is to be excused. It is She that taught him to preach up Passive
Obedience like a P. 81.
Parasite, Sycophant, and Murderer, Poor Man! He sucked it in his Mothers Milk,
it was bred in his Bone, and I fear it will never go out of his Flesh. Nay, to
see what a sad Fate attends some Men, he had the Misfortune to be bred in
Oxford, where Passive Obedience has long been the Doctrine of the Malignant
place, as appears by Mr. In the Preface to a Sermon preached before the House
of Commons.
Gillespic, one of Mr. J.'s Old Masters, who called Preces, and Lachrymae, the
New Oxford Divinity, which however is somewhat less Offensive, than the
Mountebank Receipt of Prayers, and Tears. Nay, so determined was the Doctor by
his unhappy Stars to imbibe that Slavish Principle, that he was bred in the
very same College, where the Immortal Sanderson drew up the Universities
Unanswerable Reasons against the Covenant out of which Mr. J. has Preface p. 3.
taken the most witty Allusion in his Book, where speaking of Passive Obedience
without a Law to require it, he says, It is like one of the mavelous
Accidents of Transubstantiation, which makes a Shift to subsist when it has
lost its Subject; which is the very same Illustration that the Judicium Acad.
Oxon. de faedere, p. 66. Rex vel in propria sua persona coram, and corporaliter
adest, vel absens praesentiam suam supplet per delegatos quosdam [sive
commissionarios] suos magni sigilli autoritate ad hoc deputatos, quaevis alia
praesentia realis aenigmatis instar est, transubstantiationis monstro haud
absimilis, spectrum scilicet, and phantasma. --
University made use of to set forth the monstrous Absurdity of pretending the
Kings Authority and Presence, where he was neither in Person, nor by his
Commissioner. I think it not amiss to put Mr. J. in mind of his vain
Distinction, lest his Superviser, should teach him to reply, That the Imperial
Laws above cited, regard the Politic, and not the natural Person of the
Sovereign. But to prevent him from flying to this miserable shift, I must tell
him, That in the Coke in Calvin's Case, p. 439.
Reign of Edw. 2. the Spencers, the Father and the Son, to cover their Treason,
invented this damnable Opinion, That Homage, and Allegiance was due to the King
more upon the account of his Politic Capacity, than his Natural Person: Upon
which Opinion they inferred execrable and detestable Consequents; 1. That if
the King did not demean himself by Reason in the Right of his Crown, his Lieges
were bound by Oath to remove him. 2. That when the King could not be reformed
by Suit of Law, that ought to be done by the Sword. 3. That his Lieges be bound
to Govern in Aid of him, and in Default of him. And which were condemned by two
Parliaments, one in the Reign of Ed. 2. called Exilium Hugonis le Spencer, and
the other in Ann. 1. Edw. 3. cap. 1.

If I should produce no more Authorities, but these already cited, it were
enough to show the Concurrence of the Church, and Churchmen with the Three
Estates of this Realm as to the Doctrine of Non-resistance, or Passive
Obedience, but because I have undertaken the Doctors Vindication, I will show
what brave Men before him have defended this Bloody Doctrine, that so, if he
cannot be Justified, he may at least be Excused.

I begin with Bishop Bilson, as I find him speaking in his Book of the True
Difference between Christian Subjection, and Unchristian Rebellion, written
against the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and printed 1586. There p. 256.
Theoph. says, Our Savior foreteaching his Disciples, that they should be
brought before Kings, and Rulers, and put to death, and hated of all men for
his Names sake, adds not as you would have it, and he that first rebelleth,
but he that Endures to the End shall be saved; And again, Nor with Violence
restrain them, but in patience possess your Souls. p. 260. Deliverance if you
would have, obtain it by Prayer, and expect it in Peace, those be Weapons for
Christians. p. 262. The Subject has no refuge against his Sovereign, but only
to God, by Prayer, and Patience. p. 278. Your Spanish Inquisitions, and French
Massacres, where you murdered Men, Women, and Children by thousands and ten
thousands, against the very Grounds of all Equity, Piety, and Humanity, without
convicting, accusing, or calling them before any Judge to hear what was
misliked in them, are able to set Grave and Good Men at their Wits end, and to
make them justly doubt, since you refuse the course of all Divine, and Humane
Laws with them, whether by the Law of Nature they may not defend themselves
against such Barbarous Bloodsuckers, yet we stand not on that, if the Laws of
the Land, where they converse, do not permit them to Guard their Lives, when
they are assaulted against Law (or if they take Arms as you do, to Depose
Princes) we will never excuse them from Rebellion. p. 279. For my part I must
confess, except the Laws of those Realms do permit the People to stand on their
Right, if the Prince would offer that Wrong, I dare not allow their Arms.

This is his determination in case of a Massacre, which is the Extremity of
Tyranny, and it is agreeable not only to the Scripture, but to the Practice of
the Primitive Christians, who against Equity, Humanity, and the Common Law of
all Civil Governments, endured many Tyrannical Massacres, when they were able
to resist.

And Bishop Jewel, whom I should have set first, in his Defense of the Apology
p. 15. says unto Harding, We teach the people, at St. Paul does, to be Subject
to the Higher Powers, not only for Fear, but also for Conscience: We teach
them, that whos^ strikes with the Sword by private Authority, shall perish
with the Sword. If the Prince happen to be wicked, or cruel, or burdensome, we
teach them to say with St. Ambrose, Arma nostra sunt preces, and lachrymae;
Tears and Prayers be our Weapons. He reckons this Bishop among the Worthies p.
14. of Preface, but according to him he must have been, but a Quack in
Divinity, for he was for the old Mountebank Receipt of Prayers and Tears. The
Peole of England it seems were taught in his time, as the Doctor taught the
Citizens of London in his Bow-Sermon, and therefore Passive Obedience was
either Heterodox Divinity then, or else it is none now. Nay, it was taught by
the Martyrs themselves in Queen Mary's days; for Bradford in his Letter says,
-- Howbeit, never for any thing resist or rise up against the Magistrates. And
Bishop Latimer in King Edward the Sixths days, taught it very plainly in his
4th. Sermon before the King, in his Familiar Homespun Style; When I was
travailed in the Tower (says he) my Lord Darsy was telling me of the Faithful
Service, that he had done the Kings Majesty, that dead is. And had I seen my
Sovereign Lord in the Field (said he) and had I seen his Grace come against us,
I would have lighted from my Horse, and taken my Sword by the Point, and
yielded it into his Graces Hands. Mary (quod I) but in the mean season you
played not the part of a Faithful Subject, in holding with the People in a
Commotion, and Disturbance. It has been the Cast of all Traitors to pretend
nothing against the Kings Person, they never pretend the matter to the King,
but to others. Subjects may not resist any Magistrates; nor ought to do nothing
contrary to the Kings Laws.

I could produce much more to the same purpose, out of Archbishop Sandys his
Sermons, Dr. Willet upon Romans 13. Dr. Hakewels Scutum Regium, Dr. Boys his
Postils, Dean Nowell on the 5th. Com. Dr. Owen in his Antiparaeus, Mr. Perkins
on the 5th. Com. the Little Book called Deus and Rex, not to mention Bishop
Sanderson, and other latter Divines, but I have said enough to Justify Dr.
Hickes, or Condemn the Church of England, and her Reformers, and the most
Famous Divines that She has bred. Let Mr. J. look to it, either the Dr. has
done well, or else they are all in the same Condemnation with him. And that he
may know what a severe Censure he deserves for opposing this Evangelical
Principle, which the Dr. preached up, I refer him to Erasmus in Luc. 22.36.
especially to these words; Mihi nulla haeresis videtur perniciosior, nulla
blasphemia secleratior, quam si quis philistinorum exemplo Evangelici agri
puteos, qui a Christo venam habent aqua vivae scatentis in vitam aeternam,
terra oppleta and sensum spiritualem vertat in carnalem, doctrinam caelestem
depravet in terrenam, ac sacro-sancta Christi dogmata detorqueat, imo corumpat,
idque reclamantibus omnibus ejus praeceptis, reclamante tota ipsius vita,
reclamante doctrina Apostolica, refragantibus tot martyrum millibus,
repugnantibus vetustis interpretibus. I do not accuse him of Heresy,
Blasphemy, or perverting the Truths of the Gospel, but if Erasmus do it, I
cannot help it, he must get off, as well, as he can.

Having now, I hope, shown that Passive Obedience is required of all Subjects
by the Common Laws of Sovereignty, and in particular of the English by the Laws
Imperial belonging to this Crown, I might here conclude this Chapter, but that
having undertaken the Defense of the Doctor, I am obliged to answer some
particular Passages, which cannot well be answered but apart by themselves.

In the 80th. p. he cites this Passage out of the Doctors Sermon, Neither does
the Gospel prescribe any Remedy but Flight against the Persecutions of the
Lawful Magistrate, allowing of no other Mean, when we cannot escape, betwixt
denying, and dying for the Faith. To this he Replies, What the Gospel
Prescribes is one thing, what it Allows is another: There are ten ten thousand
things allowed by the Gospel, not one of which is prescribed by it. But what is
this to the purpose? the Doctor speaks there of the only Gospel-Expedient, or
Remedy against Persecution, which is Flight. He asserts, that the Gospel allows
of no other Mean against the Persecutions of the Lawful Magistrate; and if it
allow no other, then certainly it prescribes That. The Physician that allows
but of one only Medicine against the Plague, does certainly prescribe it to the
Patient: And to make no more words about the matter, Flight, by the Gospel, is
a prescription as necessary for a Christian Subject that would save his Life in
time of Persecution, as a Ship to a Man that would cross the Seas.

Afterward he says p. 89. That he is afraid, that the Doctor calculated, and
fitted the Doctrine of Passive Obedience for the use of a Popish Successor, and
to make us an easier Prey to the Bloody Papists. This is a very Uncharitable
Censure from a Brother; and I am verily persuaded, that if Mr. J. would speak
the Truth betwixt God and his own Conscience, he does not believe, that the
Doctor fitted that Doctrine on the 30th. of Jan. for the use of a Popish
Successor, but for the proper Design of the Day, To show (as he speaks in his
Sermon) the great Difference betwixt the Principles, and Practices of Christ
and the Primitive Christians, and the Principles and Practices of our New
Reformers. Had it been some New Notion never started before, had it not been
taught by all the Episcopal Divines of the English Reformation, nay, had it not
been a plain Gospel-Notion taught and practiced by Christ, and his Apostles,
who (to use our Authors Irreverent words in a Reverent manner) turned the
Church into a Shambles, then he might have said that it was Calculated, and
Fitted by the Doctor, but now I have made it appear, how it was calculated and
fitted to his Hands. It was calculated, and fitted by Bishop Latimer in the
time of King Edw. 6. against the time of his Popish Successor Queen Mary, and
he suffered at a Stake, to Exemplify his Doctrine in the following Popish
Persecution, and so (I am confident) would the Doctor, and the rest of his
Thebaean Brethren, (however My. J. may please to slander them) by the help of
Gods Assistance do so too.

But let us see his pretented Reasons for this Uncharitable Censure. Why else
(says he) is there all that Wrath against every little Pamphlet, which opposes
that Interest? The Pamphlets cited by the Doctor in p. 29. of his Sermon, are,
The Appeal from the City to the Country, Plate Redivivus, A Brief History of
the Succession, A Letter of a Gentleman to his Friend, showing that the Bishops
are not to be Judges, etc. Dialogue between Tutor and Pupil; And these
Pamphlets, which the Dr. has there showed to be Calculated, and fitted against
the True English Government, and to be Impious, and Treasonable Pieces, he
represents as written only in Opposition to the Popish Interest. How (says he)
comes the History of the Succession to be an Impious and Treasonable Book? Why,
I Will tell him in the words of Dr. True and Exact History of the Succession. p.
2.
Br. It is an Impious Book for falsifying such Ancient Historians as William of
Malmsbury, Henry of Huntington, Simeon Dunelm, Ailredus, Abbas Rivallensis, and
others, whose Words, if he had faithfully cited them, would have been of no use
to him; for often in the Middle of the Sentences, and of the Records which he
has cited, he has left out such Words, and Matters, as would have ruined the
Design of his History. He may see many Instances of this Charge in the Parallel
at the End of the Doctors Book, who concludes thus; These are some of his many
wilful mistakes, and indeed there is scarce one Instance in the Pamphlet, that
is not either fasly cited, or falsely applied. I think it is plain Knavery, and
Impiety thus to falsify and wrest good Authors, and that it is proper English
to call all those Impious Books, which so pervert the Truth. This Dr. Br. has
been a very Troublesome Man to Impious Falsifiers of Ancient Historians, and
Records; and as one upon reading the Title Page of his Book against Mr. Petit,
said, If this Charge be made good, Mr. Petit may be ashamed to walk the
Streets: So say I, if the words I have ciged out of his Answer to the Brief
History of the Succession be true, the Book is Impious, and the Author a Knave.
But it is Mr. J's Interest, that the Perverters and Wresters of Good Authors
may not incur such severe Censures, for however he has Preface p. 29.
declared, that he has been as Careful in his Citations, as ever he was in
telling Money, and that he is ready to make them Good: Yet I have made it
appear, That tho his Money is right, as to the Tale, yet it is deficient in the
Intrinsic, often wanting Purity, and Weight.

But secondly, It is a Treasonable Book, because it asserts, That the Descent
of the Crown does not purge all Defects whatsoever, p. 17. And because p. 6,
and 7. he manifestly Favors Popular Elections of Princes, and the Deposition
of them for the Breach of their Coronation Oaths, although he could not but
know, That a King has all the Rights of Sovereignty without Coronation,
Calvin's Case, Cokes Reports part 7.
and that it is not necessary, though it be expedient for his own Honor, and
the Peoples Satisfaction, that he should be Crowned. The Kings of England are
Completely and Absolutely Kings before Coronation; and many of them, as Henry
the 6th, have lived many years uncrowned; and others of them, as Henry the 3d.
and Richard the 1st. were twice Crowned; as we read of David, that he was twice
anointed by the People. But there are Heretics among Lawyers, as well as
Divines, and they will wrest the Laws, as the other do the Scriptures to their
own Damnation: And truly this Doctrine of Deposing Kings, makes the King of
England a Subject, and the Three Estates his Sovereign. And it is a Treasonable
Doctrine in the same sense that the Act of Uniformity declares the Position of
taking up Arms by the Kings, Authority against his Person, a Traitorous
Position, because it tends to Treason: And if a man should write a Book to
prove it, it would be a Treasonable or Traitorous Book.

For the same Reason the Book, of which he says my Lord Hollis is the Author,
is an Impious, and Treasonable Book; Impious, because it abounds with
Falsifications of Records, as the Authors of the Rights of the Bishops, and the
Grand Question have proved; and Treasonable, because it asserts this Traitorous
Position, that the King is one of the three Estates. The belief of this very
Position, made Mr. Baxter, (as he himself declares) a Rebel, and I question
not, but it made thousands more besides him; and never did man disgrace the
Memory of a Peer more, than Julian has done that of my Lord, in reporting him
to be the Author of the Book: For he being a man Learned in the Laws, could not
assert this Position but against his Conscience, and with an Ill Intent, which
makes Mr. J. answerable to the Heir, for the Scandal he has fixed upon his
dead Father, who is not able to Justify himself. The Dialogue between the
Tutor and Pupil, is also a Wicked and Treasonable Piece, because it
misrepresents the English Government, as if there were a Reciprocal Contract
betwixt the King, and the People, and as if the Parliament ought, whether or no
the King pleased, to sit, till all Grievances were redressed, and Petitions
answered, contrary to the standing Maximm of the English Government, Rex est
Principium, Caput, and finis, Parliamenti.

He also censures the Doctor for saying, That the Brief History of the
Succession was but a New Dress of Dolemans Title to the Crown; If (says he) he
had read the Ancient Historians of England instead of Dissenters Sayings, he
would likewise have found it possible to write an History of the Succession
without borrowing from Doleman. But the possibility of the Thing is another
matter; the Doctor asserted, that it was Doleman all over, Doleman in a New
Dress, and whether it is not true, he refers himself to the True and Exact
History of the Succession, and to the Apostate Protestant, where it is shown,
not only how much that Author, but Mr. H. too, if they be not the same Man,
have Trucked, and Traded with the Jesuit, as much as the Collection of
Speeches, etc. the Treatise of the Broken Succession, or Bradshaw himself ever
did.

I refer him also to the Apostat Protestant for an Answer to his childish
Reflection upon the Dr. about the Dissenters Sayings, there he may see how well
versed the Doctor is in the Fanatical Originals, how his Sermon was made before
the first of those Books was printed; and I will further assure him, that if he
please to come to the Doctors Study, he shall find set in an odd Corner many of
the Famous, both Ancient and Modern Fanatical Treatises: There he shall see
Junius Brutus, Lex Rex, Prynn^ Sovereign Power of Parliaments, Naphthali, Jus
Populi Vindicatum, Miltons Apology, Plato Redivious, with very many others, and
Julian the Apostate among the rest.

CHAP. XI. Wherein are further considered the Reasons for Passive Obedience, or
Non-Resistance; and wherein it is shown, that Resistance would be a Greater
Mischief, than Passive Obedience.
I Have showed in the Precedent Chapter, how the Common Laws of Sovereignty,
and more particularly the Laws Imperial of this Realm, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, do condemn all Resistance, and Force against the Sovereign;
and I think it will not be Superfluous to my Design in this Undertaking, to
weigh and consider a little further, the Reasons, which the Acts, and Authors
above cited assign for this Doctrine; and the most General, and that which
comprehends all the rest, is this, That the Sovereign has neither Superior,
nor Equal upon Earth, but is next unto God, whose Anointed and Vicegerent he is.

By the Sovergain must be always understood the Real, and Complete Sovereign,
because there are many seeming Sovereigns, which are not really Such. As for
Example, The Kings of Sparta exercised the Sovereign Power, but they were not
Real Sovereigns, because they were accountable for their Mis-government to the
Ephori, who were chosen for that purpose by the People. And therefore neither
the Kings, who were Subject to the Ephori, nor the Ephori, who were appointed
by the People, but the People themselves was the real Sovereign next under God:
The Kings had only the Exercise of the Sovereign Power, but not the Sovereign
Power it self, that was Radically, and Originally in the People, and
derivatively in the Kings, who were no more than Ministers, and Trustees of the
People, whom they could call to an Account by Judges of their own Appointment.

So in the Government of Venice, though there be but one Duke, yet because the
Supreme Power is not invested in him but in the Senate, that State is not
really Monarchical, but Aristocratical; and the Duke is not a Real, but only a
Titular, or Umbratical Sovereign, the very Creature of the Senate, which is his
Superior, and the true Sovereign next under God.

So in the Cantons of Suitzerland, though the Administration of the Government
be in the Magistrates, and so make it look like an Aristocracy, yet in reality
it is a Democracy, because they derive their Power from the People, and are to
give an Account of the Exercise of it to them, or those whom they appoint.

On the other hand, in the English Government, though the House of Commons
bears the Show of a Democracy, and the Peers look like an Aristocracy among us,
yet our Government is a perfect Monarchy, because the Supreme Power is, (as I
have proved) neither in the one, nor in the other, nor in both together, but
solely in the Person of the King.

I was the more willing to make this Observation, that when I speak of
Sovereign Princes, I may not be maliciously traduced, as if I spoke of them
exclusively of other Sovereigns, as if Monarchy were of Sole Divine Right. For
want of this Distinction other Writers have had this invidious Imputation laid
upon them; But this Reason of not Resisting the Sovereign, because he is Gods
Vicegerent, and only (...) Subject to him, is a Common Reason of Passive
Obedience to all Sovereigns, as well, as unto Kings, and unto Kings, as well as
unto any other Sovereigns.

The forecited Acts, and Authors, render no other Reason but this, which indeed
is vertually many other Reasons; for if the Government of Men, as well as of
Angels, be from God, then it must follow, First, That upon whomsoever God is
understood to bestow the Sovereign Authority, he must also be understood to
bestow upon him all the Jura Majestatis, or Essential Rights of Sovereignty,
according to that Maxim, Qui dat esse, dat and omnia pertinentia ad esse; He
that gives the Essense, gives also the Properties belonging to the Essense.
Wherefore as an Architect, who makes a Piece of Timber a Cube, or a Sphere,
gives it all the Properties of a Cube, or a Sphere: So God, when he makes any
Man a Sovereign, he gives him all the Essential Rights of Sovereignty, one of
which is to be free from Resistance, or Forcible Repulse; For if any man, or
number of men under him, had lawful Power to take up Defensive Arms, or use
Defensive Force against the Sovereign, and his Forces, he could not for this
Reason be Sovereign, because he would be Subject unto a Controllable Power. For
according to this Supposition, his Subjects would have a Power of Judging of
his Actions, whether they were Just, or Injurious, Lawful, or Unlawful, and
when they might make a War Defensive, and when not, which is in effect to
destroy Sovereignty, and make the Sovereign Inferior to the People: And
therefore to cut off all pretenses of Resistance in the English Government, the
Three Estates (as I have proved before) have declared against all Defensive, as
well as Offensive War, it being impossible for the Sovereignty to consist with
the Liberty of that Pretense: Just as among the Romans it was inconsistent with
the Sovereign Unaccountable Power, which the Masters by Law had over the
Slaves, for them to have a Liberty of Rising up against them, under the
pretense of Self-defence.

In all Sovereign Governments Subjects must be Slaves as to this particular;
they must trust their Lives, and Liberties with their Sovereign, and therefore
Quod dicitur subjectionem dominis deberi etiam duris, idem ad reges quoque
referendum, nam quod sequitur ei fundamento superstructum, non minus
subditorum, quam servorum officium est. De Jure, l. 1. c. 4, 6.
Grotius, after St. August. applies that place in 1 Pet. 2.19. which concerns
the Passive Behavior of Servants unto their Masters under the Roman
Government, unto all Subjects: Servants, be Subject to your Masters with all
Fear, not only to the Good, and Gentle, but also to the Froward; Quod autem
dixi de domino, hoc intelligite de potestatibus and regibus and ominibus
culminibus hujus seculi, aliquando enim potestates bonae sunt and timent Deum,
aliquando non timent Deum. Julianus extitit infidelis Imperator nonne extitit
Apostata, Iniquus, Idololatra, milites Christiani servierunt Imperatori
infideli, etc. In Ps 1^4. Vid. Sam. Bochart. Ep. ad D. Morley, p. 77, 78, 79.
for this is thankworthy, or acceptable to God: If a Man for Couscience-sake
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what Glory is it, if when
you are buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when you
do well, and suffer for it, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were
ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we
should follow his Steps. For Real and Complete Sovereigns, whether Arbitrary,
or Limited, can^^y under nothing but Moral Restraint, and Obligations not to
Injure their Subjects, for if they were under the Sir Orl. Bridgmans Speech to
the Regicides, p. 13, 14.
Coaction of another Power, or under Legal Perils, or Penalties, they could not
be Real, and Complete Sovereigns: And therefore our Old Lawyer Bracton, who so
often declares the King to be next unto God, does also declare, That when he
acts Illegally, not as Gods Minister, but as the Minister of the Devil, as our
P. 84.
Author well observes, yet he is not to be contravened, or resisted. Locus erit
supplicationi quod [Rex] factum suum corrigat, and emendet; quod quidem si non
fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam, quod Dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo
quidem de factis suis presumat disputare, multo fortius contra factum suum
venire, l. 2. c. 7. If the Reader please to consult that Chapter, he will find
by many Expressions, that the King has no other, but a Moral Obligation to
observe the Laws. Sic and beata Dei genitrix virgo Maria, quae singulari
privilegio supra Legem fuit, pro ostendendo tamen humilitatis exemplo legalibus
subdi non refugit institutis: But then if he will be a Tyrant, and act
Illegally, it is sufficient for his Punishment, that he has God for his
Avenger; for no Man must dispute against what he does, much less oppose, or
resist it. The King is bound in Justice, and Equity, and for Example sake to
observe his Laws; but if he will lay aside all Conscience, and the Fear of God
his only Superior, the Rights of Sovereignty secure the Nec praetereundum, quod
Samuel jussus Israelitis jus regium edisserere, 1 Samuel 8, 9. Hoc (inquit) est
juris regii, qui regnabit super vos. Filios vestros tollet, and imponet
curribus suis, etc. Ait haec esse juris regii, non quod coram Deo justa sint,
nec enim David Uriae uxorem, ne^ Achab Nabato vineam eripere potuerunt sine
crimine, sed quia hujusmodi scelera reges tam impune perpetrant, quam si essent
maxim licita, ideo additur populum, ita oppressum Deum imploraturum, quia
contra vim regis nulla sunt humana remedia. Sam. Bochart Ep. p. 87.
Tyrant as well, as the Good King, from Resistance. -- Si autem Princeps, vel
Rex, vel alius, qui superiorem non habue^it, nisi dominum, contra ipsum non
habebitur remedium per assisam, immo tantum locus ^rit supplicationi, u^ factum
suum corrigat, and emendet, quod si non fecerit, sufficient ei pro paena, quod
Dominum expectet ultorem. If it be the King, or any other [Duke, etc.] who has
no Superior, but God, that shall [Illegally disseize] there shall be (...)
Remedy against him by Assize, only there shall be place for Petition, that he
would correct, or amend, what he has done amiss; which if he refuse to do, it
is sufficient for his Punishment, that he may expect God for his Avenger.

This Moral Obligation, which the King has to observe the Laws, is further
increased by his Coronation Oath, as Bracton observes l. 3. de Action. c. 9.
But then, as in the Oath of Allegiance the People swear nothing to the King,
but what they are bound to perform unsworn: So the King in his Coronation Oath
promises nothing to the People, but what in Justice, and Equity he is bound to
perform unsworn. Ad hoc (says Bracton) electus, and creat^^ est, ut justitiam
faciet universis, etc. and Separare a^tem debet Rex, cum sit Dei Vicarius, jus
ab injuria aequum ab iniquo, etc. But then if he will perver^ the great End,
for which God made him King, if he will not Act, as it becomes Gods Vicar, if
he will obstruct, or pervert the Laws, and govern Tyrannically, yet still there
is left no Remedy to his Subjects By the Law, but Moral Persuasion, for the
Laws Imperial of this Realm have declared him to be a Sir Orl. Bridgmans
Speech, p. 12, 13, 14.
Free, Unconditional, and Independent Sovereign, and exempted him from all
Coaction, and Force. Nay, to show that the Kings of England were in this
respect as perfect Sovereigns, as the Caesar's, he applies unto them those
Memorable Sayings of Valentinian the Younger, and Alexander Severus; Majus
Imperio est submittere legibus principatum. Bract. l. 3. de Act. c. 9. and l.
4. c de Leg. and Constable.
It really is a greater thing than the Empire, for the Prince to submit to the
Laws. And Nihil tam proprium est Imperii, quam legibus vivere. Bract. ib. l. 3.
c. de Test.
There is nothing more proper for the Empire, than that the Emperor should live
according to Law. To which, ^f he pleased, he might have added that set down so
often in the Instit. quibus modis Testam. infirm. 8. Secundum hoc Divi Severus
and Antoninus saepissime rescripserunt, licet enim (inquiunt) legibus soluti
sumus, attamen legibus vivimus.
Rescripts of Severus, and Antoninus; Although we be loosed from the Laws, yet
we live by the Laws, Indeed our Kings differ from the Caesar's in this, th^^ (as
the same Lib. 1. c. 2. De Laud. Leg Ang. c. 9.
Bracton, and () Fortescue long since observed) That they are limited in the
Exercise of their Legislative Power, not being able to make, or repeal Laws
without the consent of the Three Estates. But still, if they will turn Tyrants,
neither fearing God, nor the Censures of Good Men, they are by the Law of the
English Empire, as free from Punishment, Compulsion, or Resistance, as the
Caesar's were.

But Secondly, The foresaid General Reason of not resisting the Sovereign
because he is Gods Vicegerent, does imply that he has all his Power from God.
This is very Ancient Divinity, as appears from what Daniel said unto
Nebuchadnezzar, c. 2.37. Thou O King, art a King of Kings, for the God of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory; and from what
he said to his Grandson Belshazzar, c. 5.18, 19. The Most High God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor, and
for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, Nations, and Languages trembled,
and feared before him: Whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive,
whom he would he set up, and whom he would he pulled down. Accordingly it is
written of Cyrus the Heathen Emperor, Isa. 45.1. Thus says the Lord to his
Anointed to Cyrus, whose Right Hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him.
And 2 Chronicles. 36.23. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the Kingdoms of the
Earth has the Lord God given me. So Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Justice; by me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth. And God declared by Jeremy, c. 27.5, 6. I have made the Earth, and
have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me; and now I have given all these
Lands into the hand of King Nebuchadnezzar my Servant.

Now, if according to these Express Texts the Sovereign have all his Power from
God, he must by consequence have the Power of the Sword from him, as St. Paul
particularly observes, He bears not the Sword in vain, for he is the Minister
of God. And if he have the Power of the Sword from him, it must needs follow,
Praeterea cum in regno gladii jus nulli competat, praeterquam ipsi regi, aut
iis, quibus a rege id concessum est; peto quo jure quis aude^t in summum
animadvertere, utrum jure concesso an usurpato? Si concesso dixerit, rursus
petam a quo concesso? Utrum a principe vel ab aliquo alio praeter principem? Si
a principe respondeat, hoc ipso ^rit ridiculus, quia non est credibile
principem ulli indulgere jus gladio in seipsum utendi -- Quantamcunque in alium
transferat princeps potestatem semper manet Superior. Sam Bochart. Ep, p. 90,
91.
That the People have no Right to bear it, neither for Offense, nor Defense or
Resistance, without Commission from him. He may indeed abuse this, as well as
any other Branch of his Power; he may bear the Sword not for the Defense, but
for the Offense and Destruction of his Subjects, but if he do, they have no
Authority to Resist him, they cannot without sinful Usurpation oppose their
Swords to his; as it was written by the Apostle in the time of a Jam nequis
haec dici putet de bonis duntaxat regibus, cogitandum est Petrum, and Paulum
vel sub Claudio, vel sub Nerone scripsisse, quorum ille vecors fuit, hic
monstrum hominis, quibus tamen Christianos jubent esse subditos, non solum metu
paenae, sed and ^b conscientiam, and propter Deum. Nec multo meliorem fuisse
Tiberium cui Christus reddi voluit ea, quae ^rant Caesaris. Ib. p ^2.
Wicked Tyrant, He that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to to themselves Damnation. And how can a
Man be guiltless that draws and uses his Sword, without Authority from him to
whom the jus gladii belongs? much more if he uses it against him, who only
has the Authority of the Sword. This very Consideration made Grotius condemn
all violent defense against unjust Force from Public Authority, Contra vim
injustissimam sed publico nomine illatam. De Imp. c. 3. n. 6.

Our Blessed Savior never intended to diminish, or destroy the Rights of
Sovereignty, but on the contrary was very tender of them, commanding his
Disciples to render unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's, and this was said
by him with respect to Tiberius, who was a Man excessive in Cruelty,
Drunkenness, and Lust. It was said indeed upon the account of paying Tribute,
but holds as well to all the Rights of Sovereignty, and particularly as to this
of being the Master of the Sword; and therefore when St. Peter drew his Sword
in his Masters Defense against the Officers of the Cruel Sanhedrim, he sharply
rebuked him, saying, Put up thy Sword, for he that uses the Sword, shall
perish by the Sword. This very Text was ever understood by the Primitive
Christians, as an absolute Prohibition to use any Violence against the
Sovereign, and was applied by Maunitius the Commander of the Thebaean Legion,
when he charged his Soldiers in Christ's Name, not to Resist under the Specious
Pretext of Self-Defence.

And truly, if the Christian Religion had given a Right to the Professors of it
to defend themselves, and it against the Illegal Violence of the Sovereign, it
had not been a taking up of the Cross, but of the Sword, not Evangelical, as
our Author speaks of Passive Obedience, but Mahumetan; and truly one who knew
no more of the Gospel, than what he might learn of it out of Julian, would
never imagine that Jesus had said, If any man will come after me let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. And whosoever shall lose his
Life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. And every one that
forsakes Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit Everlasting Life. Or that his Beloved Disciple the Prophet of the New
Testament had said of the Martyrs of the Dr. Mores Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, c.
13.10. c. 14.12, 13.
Protestant Religion, Here is the Patience, and Faith of the Saints; Here is
the Patience of the Saints; Blessed are the Dead, or the Martyrs, that die in
the Lord. But the Author of Julian, it seems, will show no Faith, nor Patience
but in a Legal Persecution, he will not die a Martyr, but when the Laws are
against him; but if his Sovereign attack him against Law, i. e. against the
Laws which are made for the Defense of the Subject, he will be even with him,
he will without Authority take up Defensive Arms against him contrary to the
Laws which are made for the Defense and Honor of the Sovereign, and so commit
as Damnable a Sin one way, as his Prince does the other.

This is plainly, as Max. Tyrius speaks of Private Revenge, (...), to do one
Injury for another. His Sovereign injures him against the second, and he will
therefore injure his Sovereign against the first Table of Civil Government. He
will sin against the Laws Imperial, because his Prince sins against the
Political. Well, let him do so at his Peril, (...) in both Senses, he may be
legally Hanged for it in this World, and (without Repentance) will be Damned
for it in that which is to come.

But in the third place, The General Reason assigned for Not-resisting the
Sovereign, because he is Gods Vicegerent, does imply, That to resist him, is to
resist God, who has made him Sovereign, and set him above all Coercion, and
Force. If the Nature of Sovereignty, and of a Crown Imperial did not require,
that he should not be violently resisted, yet the Honor of God, whose Image,
and Substitute he is, would require the Subject not to do so, lest he should
seem to resist God. The King (says C. 21.
Agapetus to Justinian the Emperor) in regard of the Nature of his Body is of
the same Mould with every Man, but in respect of the Eminency of his Dignity,
he is like unto God, who is Lord over all, whose Image he bears, and by whom
he holds that Power which he has over Men. And De re Mil. l. 2. c. 5.
Vegetius says, That next after God the Emperor is to be Honored and Loved,
because he is a Corporeal God.

I had made a small Collection of Testimonies to this purpose out Christian
Writers, to show how the King is the Minister, and Image of God, but I have
since found them all, with far many more in Archbishop Vshers Admirable Book Of
the Power communicated by God to the Prince, To which I refer the Reader.

Hence it is that the Common Law of England does also attribute unto the King
the Divine Perfections. Finch lib. 2. del Leg. c. 1. as cited by Mr.
Sheringham, Roy est le test del^bien public immediate desoubs deiu, etc. The
King is Head of the Commonwealth immediately under God, over all Persons, and
in all Causes: And therefore because he represents the Person of God, and bears
his Image, the Law attributes unto him a Similitudinary Manner, a Shadow of
Divine Excellencies, namely, Sovereignty -- Majesty -- Infiniteness --
Perpetuity -- Perfection -- Truth -- Justice --. Now to assert that Sovereign
Princes are the Vicegerents, and Images of God, is very agreeable to Holy
Scriptures, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People;
God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he judges among the Gods, I
have said ye are Gods, and all of you the Children of the most High;
Accordingly says Jesus, Joh. 10.34. Is it not written in your Law [of Princes]
I said ye are God: If he called them Gods, of whom the Word of God there
speaks, say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, thou Blasphemest,
because I said, I am the Son of God. These Earthly Addo haud dubie regibus
primario -- precipue convenire, quod Scriptura magistratibus indulget Deorum
nomen, ut Exodus 2.1.6.22.18. 1 Samuel 2.25. Ps. 82.6. proinde Solomon Ps. 45.
quod quidem ad Christum refert Apostolus, Solomonis typo adumbratum, sed sensus
typicus literalem non excludit, imo supponit. Itaque etiam Solomon suo modo
fuit Deus, nempe ut recte Diotogenes apud Stovaeum, Rex cum Imperium habeat
nulli obnoxium, and sit ipse viva lex Dei instar est inter homines, and
Eaphantus ejusdem sect^e. Quod Deo quidem inest, inest and regi, ut sibi ipse
imperet, unde vocatur (...), nulli autem subjiciatur, Proinde in suum regem
quisquis insurgit est Gigas (...), etc. Sam. Bochart. Ep. p. 84, 85.
Gods, these Vicegerents and Images of the Almighty Sovereign; these Anointed
of the Lord must not be resisted by those whom God has sujected unto them. If
they do wrong, if they tyrannize it over their Subjects, he will punish them,
and turn their Hearts, if he see fit. But their Subjects must not defend
themselves by Violence against him, they must not take up Defensive Arms
against them, because they are in Gods stead, for whosoever resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God. In that place: (...) is opposed to (...)
to signify, that Resistance is inconsistent with Subjection, or to show that a
Subject to a perfect Soverain ought not to resist.

Thus have I branched the General Reason for Non-resistance into three, and
every one of them is common to the Regulated or Limited, as well as the
Arbitrary Sovereign; and I know not what can be replied to them, but either to
deny, that the Sovereign is Gods Vicegerent, and does (...) derive his
Authority from him, or else to assert that Self-Defence is enjoined by the Law
of Nature. But to deny the Former will be to deny the Bible, and contradict the
Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Christians, the Acts or Parliament, Book
of Homilies, and the Liturgy, especially in the Thy chosen Servant -- Our King
and Governor, that he knowing, whose Minister he is -- And that we, and all
his Subjects duly considering, whose Authority he has --
Collect of the Communion-Service for the King, and therefore I will suppose,
that my Brother J. dare not do it; and before he asserts the Latter, I desire
him to consult Dr. Falkners Christian Loyalty, a Book, which ought to be read
by every English Subject.

I showed him before out of the Second Part of the Homily of Obedience, That
Subjects are not in any Case to Resist, or stand against the Sovereign,
although he be Wicked, or a Wrong-Doer; And now I will show that the Principle,
into which I have resolved it, is plainly taught in the First. There our Late
Sovereign King James is called the Gift of God, there the Authority of Kings,
their making of Laws, Judgment, and Offices are said to be Ordinances not of
Man, but of God. This is also asserted by Old De laudibus Legum Angliae c. 3.
Chancellor Fortescue, in these words; All Laws published by Men have also
their Authority from God, for as the Apostle says, All Power is from the Lord
God, wherefore the Laws that are made by Man, which thereunto have received
Power from the Lord, are also Ordained of God; And if all Laws of Men, be the
Laws, and Ordinances of God, then I suppose the Common, and Statute-Laws of
every Empire, which absolutely forbid the Subject to resist the Sovereign are
so too; and I desire to know, whether it can be safe for a Christian to be
guilty of the Breach of those Laws.

But to return to the Homily, it further teaches us, That the High Powers, are
set in Authority by God, that they are Gods Lieutenants, Gods Presidents, Gods
Judges ordained of God himself. And if these Presidents, and Lieutenants of God
will transgress the Bounds within which they ought to act, we must not forcibly
resist, or repulse them, but give place to their Wrath, and suffer according to
the Will of God, committing our Souls to him in well doing, as unto a Faithful
Creator, to him that judges righteously. Like the Masters under the Roman
Government, they are bound to do that which is Just, and Equal, and Legal unto
their Subjects, as knowing they have a Master in Heaven; but if they forget
their Duty to their Master to whom alone they are acconntable; their Subjects,
like the Servants, from whom the Law took all Power of violent Resistance, must
only withstand them with Supplications, and Tears. This is all the Gospel
allows, or could indeed in Reason allow, because there must somewhere be fixed,
and acknowledged such a Sovereign Authority, which none have Power to resist,
or against which none have Power of taking Arms; but had the Gospel allowed
Resistance against the Sovereign, it had unhinged all Government by putting the
Sword into private Men's Hands. This Praecept (says In Math. 26.52.
Grotius) of putting up the Sword belongs to all Christians, who are called
unto punishment upon the Account of Religion; for it is the Pleasure of God,
when that necessity lies upon us, that we should testify our Patience, and
commit our Souls unto our Creator; and what can be more just than that we
should lay down our Lives for his Honor from whom we received them? This St.
Pet. has taught us in his Masters Name Ep. 1. c. 4.16, 19. -- And if it be
once admitted (says he) that private men, when they are injured by the
Magistrate, may forcibly resist him, all places would be full of Tumults, and
there would be no Force, or Authority of Laws, and Judicatures, because all men
are apt to favor themselves. Wherefore Reason compels us to confess, that
Oppression is to be endured, lest too much Liberty follow upon the contrary,
and the Examples of the Ancient Christians teach us, That any Violence is to be
endured, which the Supreme Power lays upon us upon the account of our Religion^
For they are in a great Error, who think, that the Christians before the time
of Constantine abstained from Resistance, because they wanted sufficient
Strength. And if they did not abstain for that reason before the time of
Constantine, I appeal to our Author, Whether they did abstain for that reason
after his time; and what Account he will give to God, or Man, for slandering
the Christian Subjects of Ita sub Juliano licet impio Apostata merebant
Christiani milites nec quisquam illi vim fecit, quo nihil fuisset facilius, cum
fere totum exercitum ex Christianis constitisse in ejus morte apparuerit. Sam.
Bochart. Ep. p. 53.
Julian, in saying, What would you have a few defenseless Christians do,; have
you never heard a West-Country-Man say, Chud eat more Cheese if chad it.

But to return from this digression unto Vot. pro pace. ad Act 16. vid. Dr.
Falk. p. 373.
Grotius; In his Latter and Wiser years he approved of the University of
Oxfords Determination against Paraeus upon the Romans, Subditos nullo modo,
etc. That Subjects ought by no means to Quinta lex est, Prove. 30.31. (...) Rex
in quem nemo insurgit, i. e. in quem subditorum nemo debet insurgere. Alioquin
enim multi insurgunt, sed id faciunt praeter jus et fas, ut Rex hic vocatur
(...) Alkum, quia in eum nemo insurgit. Ita palladem alibi observo fuisse
vocatam a Phaenicibus Ela alkuma Deam in quam nemo insurgit, et Laeotiae urbem
illi sacram Gaeca flexione Alalcomenas quae parva cum esset et in plano
extructa, semper tamen (...) intacta et inviolata mansit, quia ob deae
reverentiam (...) ab omni v^ omnes abstinebant. Pausan. Eaeot. Strab. l. 9. Ib.
p. 41.
resist their Sovereign by force, nor ought they to take either Offensive or
Defensive Arms against him for the Cause of Religion, or any other whatsoever.
Here is the University of Oxon teaching the very Doctrine of the Bow-string,
and Grotius approving of it; and furthermore affirming, That if Paraeus, or Mr.
J's Exceptions were admitted against St. Paul, That no Government could be any
longer safe, than while those who have such Sentiments, want Strength.

It was upon this Principle, that the Prophets, and other Saints in great
numbers, patiently suffered under the Idolatrous Kings of Israel, who, as Mr.
J. might have remembered, persecuted against Law. And in like manner our blessed
Savior, who had so great a regard for Government, and for the Good of Mankind,
for which Government was ordained, absolutely forbids Subjects to resist their
Sovereign, and because he foresaw, that the pretense of Religion, would of all
others be the most Popular, and Specious, therefore took he such Care to have
himself proposed for an Example of Patience, and Suffering unto his Disciples,
and to assure them, that if they suffered with him, they should also Reign with
him. Indeed there is some inconvenience in the Doctrine of Passive Obedience,
or Non-resistance, but it is an Incovenience, which cannot be prevented, unless
we should remove the Center upon which Government is fixed; and admit the
Inconvenience of Resisting the Sovereign, which would be Cum probaverim
hactenus summum principem esse (...), and a solo Deo pendere, solum hoc addo
pro mantissa quod si liceret inragem ideo insurgere, quia malus est, et
potestate sua abutitur, Non tamen id expedire and populo esse consultius ut ab
iis remediis abstineat, quae plerumque morbo ipso pejora sunt, quibusque adeo
vulnus exasperatur, potius quam sanatur. Ea mala toleranda sunt, quae sine
magna pernicie non possunt emendari. -- praestat unius hominis scelera esse
impunita, quam innumeros insontes certo exitio exponere, quod ab illis fere
fit, qui in reges quid moliuntur. Neque enim expectandum est, ut citati judicio
se sistant, et plebeiorum instar unius aut alterius victoris Imperio se
submittant, quin copias conscribi oportet, et multorum saepe praeliorum aliae
subeundae, ant quam possint cogi in ordinem. Unde magna strages sequitur et
provinciarum devastatio, quod Britannia vestra vel me tacente clamat. Itaque
multo satius est Dei judicio rem committere, et converti ad preces, and
lachrymas, quae vera Christianorum arma sunt, quam ad ea remedia confugere quae
sunt violentiora. Sam. Bochart. 10.140, 141.
ten times worse than it. For if the Former make a Land obnoxious now, and then
unto a Tyrant; the Latter would make it perpetually obnoxious to the Rage, and
Fury of the deluded Rabble, who in Riots, Tumults, and Insurrections (for which
they would never want Pretenses, were Resistance in any case allowed) are able
to do more mischief in a Week, than ever any Tyrant yet did in a Year. Indeed
the Strokes of a Tyrant, like those of Thunder, make a great Noise, and all
places ring with it, and it puts the World in great affright; but yet alone,
and unresisted, a Tyrant cannot spill so much Blood, especially in a Limited
Empire, as would be shed by Resistance in a Defensive War; for the Rage of the
worst of Tyrants generally wrecks it self upon particular persons, or parties
of Men; but in Civil War, which is worse than any Tyranny, all must suffer
without distinction, and however it may be called Defensive, and at first be so
designed, yet it will certainly degenerate into Offensive; and Rapin,
Bloodshed, and Devastations will be the ordinary Concomitants thereof. The late
Rebellion among us was called by the Rais^rs of it, and I believe verily
intended by some of them, for a War merely Defensive, but it soon proved
Offensive, the Managers of it being forced in their own defense to seek
Advantages to set upon the King, as he did to set upon them. Indeed when the
Defensive Party is very much the stronger, then the War, if the Defenders
please, may be merely Defensive, but when the Party Offensive is as strong or
stronger than they, then they cannot defend themselves without taking the
Advantage of Offense. Besides, if we consider the Passions of Men set in
Military Opposition one against another, the Notion of a Defensive War, like
many Notions in Geometry, though it may be true in the Theory' yet it will be
impossible in the Practice; and therefore I cannot but admire the Wisdom, as
well, as the Goodness of God, in forbidding us to Resist, or Defend our selves
by Force against the Sovereign, and his Forces, because Defense does so
naturally degenerate into Offense.

These things considered, I desire Mr. J. the fierce, and almost blasphemous
Opposer of Passive Obedience, to consider, Whether (as he says) He Pref. p. 11.
has honestly pursued the End of our Saviors Coming into the World, which was
not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them. For had our Savior allowed
Subjects, under the pretense of defending themselves, and their Religion, to
resist their Sovereign, he had come indeed to destroy Men's Lives; and, as he
said in another sense, Not to send Peace on Earch, but a Sword: He had then
indeed set Subjects at variance against their Sovereign, and made the World for
Rebels, the worst of Banditi, by the Gospel, which had then been a Doctrine of
War, and not of Peace. But this was not consistent with his Infinite Wisdom,
and Goodness, and the Care which he had for Government, and the Peace, and
Welfare of Mankind. Though Tyranny be ill, yet he knew Resistance was worse,
and therefore he has commanded us to lay down our Lives for our Religion, but
not to take up the Sword in defense of it, contrary to the Imperial Law. For
all that draw, or use the Sword, without Authority from the Sovereign, whose
right it is to bear it, he has left obnoxious to the Sword of Justice, and to
incur the Punishment of death; Put up thy Sword into its place (says he to
Peter) for all that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Wherefore let
Mr. J. talk never so much against a Popish Successor, and let him have what
Characters men please to give him; nay let them suppose him to be a Complicate
Tyrant, and, as Gregory says of Julian, to be Pharaoh, Achab, Hieroboam, and
Nebuchadnezzar all in one; nay let the Spirit of Galerius, Maximin, and
Maxentius come upon him, yet I am sure it will cost fewer Lives, and less
Desolation, to let him alone, than to resist him; but if it would not, I had
rather die a Martyr, than a Rebel; this is my Resolution by the Grace of God; I
can be content to be barbarously murdered, I know to whom I must pay my Passive
Obedience, to my God, and to my King; the Laws of God, and the Imperial Laws of
the Land require it of me; For though P. 80.
God approves our Religion, and would have all the World to embrace it, and
hold it fast, yet he does not approve of Resistance, that is no part of
Christian Liberty, and he would have none embrace that. And though Ibid.
Protestancy is so far from being Criminal by the Laws of our Country, that it
is Death to turn Papist, as it was to turn Idolater among the Jews, yet Passive
Obedience is part of the Established Protestant Religion, as it was of the
Jewish, and the Laws of our Country (God be praised for it) make it Capital to
resist.

Therefore I resolve by Gods Assistance neither to turn Papist, nor Resist; But
if I cannot escape, I will suffer according to the Gospel and the Church of
England; and Mr. J. has the Liberty to despise the Gospel, and the Church, and
to resist his supposed Tyrant, if he will. He may preach and practice
Resistance, but I am resolved to preach, and practice Passive Obedience after
the Example of the Jewish Prophets and Martyrs, who suffered against Law; and
in my most Melancholy Prospect of things, I can comfort my self with the hopes
of a Reward for dying at a Stake, which he shall never have for dying in the
Field.

But for fear I should move the Indignation of Mr. J. too much, by showing the
utter Inconveniences of Resisting, and how it is a Remedy against Tyranny,
worse than the Disease, I will endeavor to temper him with a few Words out of
his next best Book to the Bible, in the First Part of the Homily against
Disobedience. What shall Subjects do then? Shall they obey Valiant, Stout,
Wise, and Good Princes, and Contemn, Disobey, and Rebel, against Children being
their Princes, or against Indiscreet, and Evil Governors? God forbid. For
first, What a Perilous thing were it to commit unto the Subjects the Judgment,
which Prince is Wise, and Godly, and his Government Good, and which is
otherwise, as though the Foot must judge of the Head; an Enterprise very
heinous, and must needs breed Rebellion: For who else be they, that are most
inclined to Rebellion, but such Haughty Spirits, from whom springs such foul
ruin of Realms? Is not Rebellion the greatest of all Mischiefs? And who are
most ready to the greatest Mischiefs, but the worst Men? -- What an unworthy
matter were it then to make the Naughtiest Subjects, and most inclined to
Rebellion, and all Evil, Judges over the Princes, over the Government, and over
their Counselors to determine, which of them be Good, and Tolerable, and which
be Evil, and so Intolerable, that they must needs be removed by Rebels, being
ever ready, as the Naughtiest Subjects soonest to Rebel -- But whereas indeed a
Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and Rebellion worse than the worst
Government of the worst Prince that hitherto has been, both Rebels are unmeet
Ministers, and Rebellion an unfit, and unwholesome Medicine to reform any small
Lacks in a Prince, or to cure any little Grief in a Government, such lewd
Remedies being far worse, than any other Maladies, and Disorders, that can be
in the Body of a Commonwealth.

I appeal to the Late Rebellion, which the Rebels called a Defensive War to
verify this Doctrine; for there was more Blood shed in it in one Battle, than
in all the Tyrannies and Persecutions of the Nation since the Conquest; and in
the two Kingdoms there has been more Christian Blood shed in Rebellions since
the Reformation by pretended Undertakers of Defensive War, than throughout the
whole Roman Empire in nine of the first ten Famous Persecutions. There is
scarce any other Kingdom in the World, wherein it may not be showed by woeful
example, how disadvantagious, and prejudicial it would be to the Commonwealth,
that it should be Lawful for the People to take up Arms for Defense of their
Liberties, and Religion: Civil Wars would be the constant Effect of such an
Exorbitant Power, because there would never want Turbulent and Ambitious
Spirits, to make the Populace Jealous of their Sovereign, and by consequence
ready upon the first Alarm to rise up in defense of their Rights.

Had the People of this, and the Neighboring Nation had such a Power of
Resistance granted unto them, this Island had been made a Theater of War almost
ever since his Majesty's Happy Restoration: nay, in all appearance, there had
been more Blood shed in the Land these 4 last years of our Fears and
Jealousies, than can without Resistance be shed in a Persecution of 20 years
long: Nay, let us imagine a Popish Prince as bigoted in Religion, and as
sanguinary in his Temper, as may be now Reigning over us, yet he could not
likely cause so much Ruin, Bloodshed, and Desolation in his whole Reign, as a
War between him and his Resisting Subjects would cause in one Year. Wherefore
it is plain, that it is the Interest even of the People themselves, that so
great a Power should be in the Sovereign, that none should withstand him, or
rise up against him, and that nothing can be more pernicious to the
Commonwealth in any Government, than that the Subjects should have a Power of
taking up Arms to defend their Liberties, and Religion.

Chap. XII. Wherein is showed, That notwithstanding this Doctrine of
Non-resistance or Passive Obedience, we are Secure enough of our Lives,
Properties, and Religion.
ALL that I have hitherto said of Passive Obedience, has been to satisfy the
Reasons of the Thinking, and Sober Part of Men, and now I proceed to propose
some Considerations, which may serve as a sufficient Answer to that Hasty
Question, which timourous and suspicious men are apt to make against this
Doctrine, saying, Where then is our Security? How can we be Safe from the
utmost Tyranny, and Oppression of our Sovereign, if we may not be allowed to
Resist?

To which I answer, That I have already shown, that the Remedy of Resistance is
as bad, or worse than the Disease of Tyranny and Persecution; and I furthermore
add, that upon supposition there were some Cases allowed, wherein we might take
up Defensive Arms against the Sovereign, what Security could the Sovereign have
upon desisting from Tyranny and Persecution, that this Defensive Army would lay
down their Arms? Might they not say, that he was not to be trusted, having once
broke his Coronation Oath, and that it was necessary for them to keep up in
Arms to prevent a second Persecution? Nay, might they not serve him, as the
Army served our Late Blessed Sovereign, and if they went about to do so, who
durst question them for what they did? Perhaps you will reply, that another
Army is to be raised to reduce this to their former Obedience: But how
difficult would it be for an Oppressed Prince, and People to raise an Army
against another Conquering Army; or if they did, what dismal Consequences, far
worse than any Tyranny, would follow thereupon? Besides the Ruins, and
Devastations during the War, Slavery, and Arbitrary Government would naturally
be the Event of it: For if the first Army prevailed, then the Injured Prince,
as well as the People, whom they pretended to defend, must be Subject to their
Discretion; but if the King, and his new Army raised to reduce them prevailed,
what then will become of our Liberties and Religion, which the first Army rose
up to defend?

But perhaps you will object, That you would have this Defensive Army under the
Conduct of sworn Trustees for the People; That they should be Disbanded, as
soon as they have reduced the Tyrannizing Prince. But who shall see that these
Trustees shall perform their Trust? How can you be Secure they will not break
their Oaths? Or if they be Faithful to their Trust, how can you be secure the
Defensive Army will be disbanded by them? Remember what happened between Cromwels
Army, and the House. But still you will object, that to prevent these
Inconveniences, you would have the Government in more Hands than one, you would
not have one man only entrusted with it? Well, let it be so: Let us suppose
that the Three Estates in Parliament were our Governors, yet I can object as
strongly against this: Either they will agree together, or disagree. If they
agree, how can you be secure they will not divide the Land among them, (...) in
a short time govern us as Arbitrarily as the S^^^ate of Venice, under which the
People really are what we call Slaves. But if they disagree, as is most
probable, having the Passions of Men, Ambition, Covetousness, and Emulations,
then their Government will become uncertain, and odious, and the most popular
amongst them will take an Opportunity to set up himself; and when he has
mastered his Companions, he must secure his Usurpation by Force, and then his
Pleasure must be our Law.

All these Inconveniences would apparently attend the new Model for the
Association to back the Exclusion of the next Heir. For either the Heads of it
would agree, or disagree. If they continued to agree, then the preposterous
Heir, after he was made King, and his People also, must be subject to their
Discretion. But if they should disagree, as most probably they would, then as
fast as they fell out among themselves, or grew discontented, their Security
would oblige them to revolt unto the Secluded Heir, and help him to get
possession of the Crown. And in what a Miserable Condition would this Nation be
during such a Civil War, no Tyranny in all probability could be so Destructive;
and whether the Popish Prince, or the Opposing Army at last prevailed, we must
be subject to their Sword.

In a word, there neither is, nor can be any absolute Security either for the
Sovereign against the Subjects, or for the Subjects against the Sovereign in
any Government: And therefore in the second place, it may be a sufficient
Answer to the Former Question, to show, That we have all the Security against
the King, that the King has against us, even all the Security, that any People
in the World ever had, have, or ought to have. an

For first, We have the Care and Providence (...) God for our Security, who is
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes: For as Daniel told
Nebuchadnezzar, the most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever, he will. The Welfare of the Public is much more the Object of his
Fatherly Care, than the Welfare of private persons, and he delights to see the
Nations of the Earth Happy, and will not let them be Afflicted and Oppressed
with Tyrants, but when Tyranny is necessary, for their Punishment, or Cure. But
much more is he concerned for his own Family, I mean, for any Nation, whose
People are part of his Household, which is the Catholic Church. He delights to
see them Happy, and were it not for their Sins, he would always set such
Princes over them, as would be Nursing Fathers to them, and the Church. But
when it is necessary for their Punishment, or Reformation, then he will suffer
their Kings to turn Tyrants; and when he does so, the People, like the People
of Israel, must patiently suffer them, as they do other Judgments, and not rise
up against them, lest they be found guilty of Rebellion against God.

On the other hand, when a sinful People turn from those Sins, by which they
provoke God, he will set Just, and Merciful, and Valiant Princes over them, who
shall Love them; and Protect them as their own Children; and this he can do
both ways, either by taking away Good, or Bad Princes, or by turning of their
Hearts, For the Hearts of Kings are in his Rule, and Governance, and he does
dispose, and turn them, as seems best to his Godly Wisdom: According to what
Solomon said, and perhaps upon his own Experience, That the Kings Heart is in
the Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he turns it whithersoever he
will.

Jealous, and Suspicious Men indeed may have a thousand Contrivances, and
Phancied Demonstrations to prevent or remove Evil Princes; but when God shall
see it fit to punish them that way, he will in a Moment baffle, and defeat them
all. And on the other side, Princes may have a thousand Devises how to oppress,
or enslave their People, but God, whose Instruments they are, can in a Moment
overturn them, and their Devices, he can resist the Strength of the Strongest
Leviathan, as he said unto Senaccherib; I know thy Abode, and thy going out,
and thy coming in, and thy Rage against me, and because thy Rage, and thy
Tumult is come into mine Ears, therefore I will put my Hook in thy Nose, and my
Bridle in thy Lips, and I will turn thee back by the way in which thou came.

Wherefore, as the Princes best Security against the People is the watchful
Providence of God: So the same watchful Providence is the Peoples best Security
against the Prince. The same God who stilleth the Noise of the Waves, and the
Tumult of the People in defense of the King, does likewise still the Thunder,
and assuage the Fury of the King in defense of the People, and neither could be
safe one from the other, unless God did Watch and Preside, and as it were pitch
his Tent between them both.

Wherefore as it is the securest way for a Prince to have Peaceable, and
Obedient Subjects to serve God, whose Vicegerent he is: So on the other hand,
the best Security the People can have for their Property, and Liberty against
the Prince, is to obey God, who sets up one King, and pulls down another,
and changes their Hearts as he sees fit. I hope Mr. J. will not think me
singular in this piece of Divinity, because it is taught by the Church in the
next best Book to the Bible, to which he, and the Doctor have both subscribed,
in The first part of the Sermon against Rebellion.

God (say the Holy Scriptures) makes a Wicked Man to Reign for the Sins of the
People. Again, God gives a Prince in his Anger, meaning an Evil One, and
takes away a Prince in his Displeasure, meaning especially when he takes away
a Good Prince for the Sins of the People -- God gives Wisdom unto Princes, and
makes a wise, and good King to Reign over that People, whom he loves, and who
loves him. -- If therefore we will have a good Prince either to be given us,
or to continue, let us by our Obedience to God, and to our Prince, move God
thereunto. If we will have an Evil Prince, when God shall send such an one,
taken away, and a Good in his place, Let us take away our Wickedness, which
provokes God to place such an one over us, and God will either displace him,
or of an Evil Prince make him a Good Prince, so that we first will change our
Evil into Good. For will you hear the Scriptures? The Heart of the Prince is in
Gods Hand, which way soever it shall please him he turns it. Thus say the
Scriptures, Wherefore let us turn from our Sins unto the Lord with all our
Hearts, and he will turn the Heart of the Prince unto our Quiet and Wealth.
Else for Subjects to deserve for their Sins to have an Evil Prince, and then to
Rebel against him, were double, and treble evil by provoking God more to plague
them. Nay, let us either deserve to have a good Prince, or let us patiently
suffer, and obey such as we deserve. Shall the Subjects both by their
Wickedness provoke God for their deserved punishment, to give them an
Indiscreet, and Evil Prince, and also Rebel against him, and withal against
God, who for the punishment of their Sins did give them such a Prince? I leave
Mr. J. to give the Church an Answer to this her Interrogatory, and so proceed
to the second thing, which we have for our Security, and that is the Conscience
of the Prince: For as the Princes Security against the Insurrection of his
Subjects consists very much in the Conscience that they have of the Duty, which
they owe unto him: So their Security against his tyrannical abuse of his Power
consists as much un the sense of that Duty, which he ows unto them. He has the
same Principles within him to check his Passions, that they have to check, and
bridle their; and has all the Moral Obligations, and the Fear of God, who
hates Tyrants, to keep him from oppressing them, that they have to keep them
from Rebelling against him.

The common Principles of Humanity, Justice, and Equity are engraven by the
Finger of God upon the Minds of Kings, as well as upon other Men's; and they
cannot do wrong to any particular person, much less to great numbers of their
Subjects without undergoing the same uneasy Remorse, that other Men do, when
they injure one another. This has been found by sad Experience in Pagan
Princes, as in Tiberius the Emperor, who was so tormented with the sense of his
own Sins, that he could not but discover his own Confusion unto the Senate in a
Remarkable Letter, which began thus: Quid scribam vobis P. C. aut quomodo
scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc tempore, dii me deaeque pejus perdant,
quam perire quotidie sentio, si scio. Adeo facinora atque flagitia sua ipsi
quoque in supplicium verterant neque frustra praestantissimus sapientiae
affirmari solitus est, si recludantur tyrannorum mentes posse aspici laniatus
et ictus, quando, ut corpora verberibus, ita savitia, libidine, malis consultis
animus dilaceretur. Quippe Teberium non fortuna, non solitudines protegebant,
quin tormenta pector is, suasque ipse paenas fateretur. Tacit. An. l. 6. c. 6.
My Lords, and Gentlemen; If I know what, or how to write, or not to write to
you at this time, let all the Gods and Goddesses confound me with a worse Death
than by which I feel my self perishing every day. In such a manner, says the
Historian, did the Gods turn his Wickednesses into his own Punishment, so that
what Socrates said is very true, That if the Breasts of Tyrants could be laid
open, we should see what slashes and gashes they suffer from their own
Consciences, and that the Body cannot suffer more from the Whip, than their
minds do from the sense of their Tyranny, and Lusts.

And if Conscience be a Restraining Principle in Heathen Princes, if they
cannot without such Soul-Torments pervert Justice, and violate their Oaths, and
the Laws, it must needs much more be a powerful Principle of Restraint to
Christian Kings, who are taught to know that they are Gods Ministers, and that
he will call them to a severe Account for oppressing his People, over whom he
set them; nay, that he most commonly sends remarkable Judgments upon them or
their Families for subverting the Laws, and persecuting the True Religion.
Shall the Fear of Gods Anger and Judgments more than any other thing keep so
many thousand Subjects from injuring their Sovereign, and shall not the Fear of
the same God, and his Judgments keep the Sovereign from injuring of them? Or
shall the People take warning by the Judgments of God which in all Ages have
remarkably fallen upon Rebels, and shall not the Sovereign make as much use of
the Remarkable Judgments, which have fallen upon Tyrants? This Principle gives
equal Security both ways, and therefore it may well pass for one Answer to the
former Question, That our Security consists in the Conscience of the Prince.

But in the third place, As we have the Princes Conscience, so we have his
Honor for our Security. For Princes (like other Men) are tender of their
Honor, and Good Name, and are powerfully restrained by shame from doing Evil
to their Subjects. They are as loath as other Men to be exposed to the censure
of Mankind, or be recorded for Tyrants in the Annals of Time. Though they may
be desirous for their Honor to have the Times computed from their Conquests,
yet the same Principle of Honor, will ordinarily make them ashamed to have
them computed from their Massacres, and Persecutions, which will but get them
the Surname of the Bloody, or the Tyrant unto the End of the World. Honor, as
Moralists observe, is a Secondary, or Civil Conscience, and if so many Subjects
will abstain from Rebellion merely to avoid the Odious Character of a Traitor,
why should we not presume, That a Prince will abstain from Illegal Violence,
especially against a great Number of his People to avoid the Odious Name of
Tyrant? How Black do Pharaoh, Achab, and Jeroboam look in the Scriptures, and
Nero, Domitian, Decius, Valerian, Maximian, Galerius, Maximin, and Julian, in
the Ecclesiastical Historians? And a Prince that knows any thing of History,
must naturally abhor to be reckoned among such, as these, whose very Names are
detested by all Mankind.

This is all the Security, that most other People have, or ever had for their
Rights and Properties against their Princes; but we, the Inhabitants of this
Fortunate Island, have (God be praised for it) a further Security from our
Laws, to which every Man, be he never so great, is obnoxious, besides the
Prince himself. For whosoever acts contrary to Law in this Realm to the
prejudice of any other person, must be subject to make Reparation by Law,
against which the King himself can protect no Man, as long as the Courts of
Justice are kept open; so that there can be no Tyranny in England, but the
utmost Tyranny, nor any Persecution, but a most Exorbitant and Illegal
Persecution, which must presuppose, that Justice is obstructed, the Laws and
Lawyers silenced, the Courts of Judicature shut up, and that the King governs
altogether by Arbitrary Power and the Sword. But to suppose this, is plainly to
suppose the utmost possibility, which is next to an impossibility, a
possibility indeed in Theory, but scarce to be reduced into Practice; for in
such a Violent Undertaking all Good Men would withdraw from the Service, and
Assistance of the King, and the Bad durst not serve him, because if he died, or
repented of his Undertaking, they must be answerable for all the Wrongs and
Illegalities they were guilty of in his Service.

Indeed were our Kings Immortal, or would they not (like other Men) grow weary,
and repent of their Unjust Practices, then Men, who had no Religion, but their
Interest, would willingly by Instruments of their Tyranny; but seeing they may
repent, and must die like other Men, no Man that would be safe, will venture to
serve them against the Law, no Rational Man will venture into such a Sea of
Troubles, where there is no Haven.

This Consideration would help very much to quiet the Minds of Men, would their
Fears but let their Reason have its perfect work. It would help them in a great
measure to see, that a Popish Successor, notwithstanding all the dismal
Characters of him, would not be able, especially on the sudden, to outrage his
Protestant Subjects; for as long as the Laws were open he could not hurt them,
and to shut them up, and obstruct, or pervert Justice, would for the former
Reasons, prove an exceeding difficult, and almost impracticable Undertaking,
because all his Good Subjects, and all the Bad too that tendered their own
safety, would desert him; nay, Foreiners upon this Account would make a
difficulty to serve him, because he could not protect them against his own Laws.

Wherefore a Popish Prince, though he were never so Blood-thirsty, and had
never so little regard to Humanity, and his Coronation Oath, would be
infinitely puzzled to persecute his Protestant Subjects. He must be supposed to
obstruct Justice, and govern Arbitrarily by the Sword; which (as I have showed)
would be almost an Impossibility, because it would be so exceeding difficult
for him to get sufficient Numbers of Men to assist him in such a dangerous
Attempt. But upon supposition, that he could find Means to maintain such a
Tyrannical State, I here assert from what I have written in the Doctors
Vindication in the 10th, and 11th Chapters, That we ought as Christian Subjects
patiently to endure such a Contralegal Persecution, being forbid by the
Imperial Laws of this Realm, and by the Gospel, which confirms the Imperial
Laws of all Governments to rise up in Arms against the King, or repel his
Military Forces, by Military Violence and Force.

Furthermore from this Consideration, that there can be no Illegal Persecution
in this Realm while the Law is kept open, It may appear to every Impartial
Reader, how maliciously the Author of Julian traduced Dr. Hickes and his
Sermon, as if he had taught the People, That they were to Suffer, when they
might be Protected by Laws. There are very many Fallacious Passages in his Book
to this purpose, as where he talks of Throwing away our Lives, and Prostituting
our Lives: and where he seems to assert this strongly against the Doctor, That
if a man be illegally assaulted, in the way of Violence, and Assassination, he
may use all Lawful Remedies to defend themselves. But how does the Doctors
Sermon, or the Notion of Passive Obedience any way contradict this? Contra
sicarium quilibet homo est miles; The Laws of all Governments allow every Man
to defend his Life against an Illegal Assassin, and he that does not so when he
can, dies not like a Martyr, but a Fool. He that does not use all Lawful Means,
and Remedies for his own Preservation is mightily to be blamed, as altogether
unworthy of such Protection, as blessed be God, we enjoy. But the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, as taught in general by the Doctor, is not justly chargeable
with any such odious Inferences as Mr. J. makes from it, as only forbidding
such Defense, as a man makes against the Laws of his Country, when he draws or
uses the Sword against such persons, or in such a manner to defend himself, as
the Law has not permitted him to do. In a word, the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience only condemns Illegal Resistance, such Resistance as the Laws of
every Sovereign Government forbid, against the King, his Army, or Officers;
such Resistance more especially, as is a Transgression of the Imperial Laws.
Those are the Laws, which require Passive Obedience; those are the Laws which
the Doctor had a regard to in teaching that Doctrine: And as Christianity does
not divest any People from their Rights and Privileges, so neither does it
divest the Sovereign of His.

And if the Doctrine of Passive Obedience be not inconsistent with that
Defense, which the Law allows every Man to make against an Illegal Assassin,
much less is it inconsistent, as he Preface p. 8.
maliciously asserts, with that Civil Defense, which every man is bound to make
for himself before the Magistrate. St. Paul (says he) was not for Passive
Obedience; even when the Lawful Magistrate persecuted him, if it were in an
Unlawful way, but he stood upon his Birthright. -- As he was a Roman; and
more-over, That he ought not to be scourged Uncondemned. But what is this Civil
pleading to Forcible and Military Resistance? What is the Defense, which a Man
makes with his Tongue before any Tribunal, to the Defense which he makes with
his Sword in the Field? I appeal to the Conscience of Mr. J. as he will answer
it to God, whether he thinks, That the Doctrine of Passive Obedience precludes
any man from pleading his Civil Rights, or whether the Doctor would contradict
his own Doctrine, if he should plead his Birthright, as an English man, or the
29th Chapter of Magna Charta before a Popish Prince, or Judge? If he thinks he
would not, then why would he show so little common Honesty, as to fasten such
Invidious Consequences, upon that Doctrine, and the Doctor, against his own
Conscience, and Belief?

To as little purpose has he told us the Story of the Pursuivant of the
High-Commission-Court, who was sent by the Commissioners to Arrest the Body of
a Man to bring him before them, and in the striving was killed. Whether this
was Murder, or not (says he out of Rep. 12. p. p. 49.
Coke) was doubted: And upon conference at the next Assizes, it was resolved,
that the Arrest was Tortius ( i. e. wrongful, or without Lawful Authority) and
by consequence, that it was no Murder. But then (with his wonted Integrity) he
conceals the main Circumstance from the Common Reader, which is employed by
Coke, and expressed by Rep. 2. part p. 15.
Brownlow, viz. That is was found Homicide, or Manslaughter, which is a breach
of the 6th Commandment, and Murder in the Eyes of God. For there are several
degrees of Murder, whereof some are more Grievous than others. There is Murder
Premeditate, and Murder Vnpremeditate; murdering of a Private Man, and
murdering of an Officer, as an Officer in the execution of his Office. The
Vnpremeditate Murder of a private Man, or of an Officer not in the Execution of
his Office is a less grievous sort of Murder, which our Law calls Manslaughter,
but the Premeditate Murder of a Private Man, or of an () Officer not doing his
Office, See Crooks Rep. in Cooks Case, Term Pasch. in Banc. reg. an. 15 Caroli
Regis.
as also the Vnpremeditate Murder of an Officer doing his Office as being more
grievous sorts of Murder, are in our Law especially called Murder, and so the
Difference between Manslaughter, and Murder is only Gradual, the Law allowing
the benefit of Clergy to that, but not to this. Now the Pursuivant was a proper
Officer of the High Commission, but because that Court could give no Power to
arrest any Man's Body, but only to cite him to appear before them as
Ecclesiastical Courts do, therefore the killing of their Pursuivant in making
the Arrest, was judged Manslaughter, because it was Unpremeditate, and he was
not doing his Office; but yet the Verdict for Manslaughter lays the Pursuivants
Blood not upon his own, but upon his Murderers Head. He that killed him was a
Murderer, and was to answer for his Blood to God, without Repentance, and to
the King with his own Life, had he not read his Neck Verse. And if Mr. J. think
otherwise, as he seems to do, that an Homicide is not guilty of the Blood,
which he sheds, then before the time of Henry the 8th, no killing could be
Murder, because till then there was no distinction betwixt Manslaughter and
Murder, but all Homicides whatsoever were equal in the Eye of the Law, and all
Homicides had equally the Benefit of Clergy.

I am confident Mr. J. by his learned Conversation with Mr. H. could not but
know all this, and if he did, why did he go about to wash the Guilty Man Clean
of the Pursuivants Blood, in saying only that the killing of him was not found
Murder, and that his Blood was upon his own Head? But the Reason is apparent,
for had he told the Story with that plainness, that it became an Honest Writer;
the Guilt of Manslaughter would have spoiled the Grace of the Story, as it is
told by him to justify Resistance, and the Resistance of a Pursuivant, and of
a Pursuivant unto Blood.

These Pursuivants it seems, are plaguey Officers, but let them look to it, if
any of them come to Arrest the Body of Mr. J. and do it not with all Exactness
of Law, at his own peril be it, he knows what to do, and he may safely trust to
his Neck Verse, and then the poor mistaken Pursuivants Blood shall be upon his
own head.

But suppose the Law gave a Man leave to kill an Officer in a False Arrest, to
defend his Liberty, would Mr. J. take the advantage of the Law? Will he do, or
omit the doing of every thing that the Law allows him? Will he make the Law the
complete, and adequate Rule to walk by? If so, he may do, or omit the doing of
many things, for which he shall be damned. He may abuse his Father, Mother,
Sister, Brother, Wife, Children, Neighbors, nay and his Prince too, to a
mighty degree, and yet be safe within the Limits of the Law. He may write
Seditious Books, burlesque the Doctrine of the Cross, slander the Ancient
Christians, falsify good Authors, and injure those that never did him hurt,
and yet transgress no Humane Law.

For the Law has the Civil, and not the Christian Capacity of the Man for its
Object, therefore it only Commands, or Forbids things, the not doing or doing
of which do visibly tend to the destruction of the Peace, Order, and Welfare of
the Common wealth; and he that is so little a Christian, as to teach the People
how far they may be troublesome and vexatious to their Superiors without
transgressing the Law, does teach them how to use their Liberty for a Cloack of
Maliciousness, and a sure, and easy way to Hell.

But Mr. J. says, That any man may see that his Discourse of the Pursuivant
does not descend to such Petty Matters, as False Arrests, though a man's Liberty
is not to be despised; To what then did that Story tend? Well, you may know his
Meaning by his Mumping, it is to let the People understand, how tender the
Laws, are of their Lives, and what a particular Care they have taken of all
those, who are put upon an inevitable necessity of defending themselves against
the Assaults of Violent, and Evil-disposed Persons. But the Laws are more
tender of our Sovereigns Honor, as he is Gods Minister, than of his Subjects
Lives, and therefore have forbid us to defend our selves in private Defense
against his Person, or in public Insurrections against his Forces, though he
be never so violent, or evil-disposed, because he is answerable to none, but
God. But if by Inevitable necessity of defending themselves he understands
sudden and private defense against an Assassin sent by the Kings Order, as his
Malice seems to suggest, then it is nothing to his purpose, because the Kings
Law, which is his most Authoritative Command, allows us (as I suppose) that
Benefit; and if it do, it does not in the least contradict the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, which allows a Man to Resist, or use the Sword to defend his
Life, when the Laws [from which I except all Laws Destructive of the Kings
Crown, and Regality] authorize him so to do.

But in truth this last is a Case, which, though Malicious Men may suggest, yet
ought not at all to be supposed, or taken into consideration; for a Popish
Prince, as I argued before, will either let the Law have its free Course, or
else he will obstruct it: If he let the Law have its Free Course, then the most
wicked Man will not dare to serve him in Private Assassinations against Law,
because he cannot protect them against it; but if he Obstruct it, then he must
Govern solely by an Army, and so public Violence will supersede this private
way of Assassination, and many other Cases, which Men do a great deal of hurt
to talk of, and suppose.

For as the talking of Spirits, and Goblins do mightily influence the
Imaginations of Children, and make them fancy them to be in the Room; So all
this Noise of a Popish Successor, and the presuming, and supposing of what
Cruelties he will do, makes the People take it for granted not only that his R.
Hs. is a Real Papist, but that he is bigoted into the worst Principles of
Popery, into a Bloody Persecuting Humor, so that he will do nothing but
assassinate his Protestant Subjects, were he once upon the Throne. But whoever
thus represent him, as they act contrary to all Rules of Candor, and Christian
Charity: So they contradict the Belief of many, as good Protestants, as
themselves, who have the Honor to know Him, and his Temper better than these
sort of Men do; and withal they do Infinite Disservice to the Protestant
Religion, whilst they dispose Well-meaning People to such Ill Practices, as
(were they agreeable to their Principles) would give his R. H. very Just
Occasion to entertain as bad Thoughts of Protestant Subjects, as They have of a
Popish Prince.

The CONCLUSION.
HAving discoursed of the Laws by which Passive Obedience is due from the
Subjects to the Sovereign, and also showed the Reasons, into which those Laws
are resolved; and having also shown for the further Satisfaction of the Reader,
That notwithstanding the Doctrine of Non-resistance, the People of this Nation
have all the Security against Tyranny, or Illegal Oppression, that Subjects
can, or ought to have: I think, I cannot more profitably entertain the Serious
Reader in this last Sheet, than in setting before his Eyes a True Landscape of
Persecution, which the Author of Julian, and many other Late Writers have
partially represented, with a Design to enrage the People, concealing from them
one main part, which ought to have been put in the Scene of Persecution, to
give them a True, and Just Idea thereof.

They have indeed most accurately painted the Jailes, and Fetters, and
Dungeons, and Gibbets, and Flames, and all other Instruments of Torment to
provoke them beyond the Measures of Christian Patience, but they have said
nothing of Faith, Hope, and the Love of God, and of the Special Assistances
which he gives in times of Persecution, because the Consideration of these
Things would at the same time have spoiled their Design by quieting the Minds
of their Readers, and qualifying their Fears, and letting them see that
Persecution really was not so Terrible, and Intolerable, as they represented it
to be.

Wherefore, as they have set forth the Tyranny of Persecution as Greeks, I
shall now set it forth as a Christian Writer, showing from the Scriptures, and
other Ecclesiastical Acts and Monuments of Persecution, that it is a Condition,
which Christians may endure with Comfort, and Satisfaction, nay, in which they
may delight, and rejoice, if they look unto Jesus the Author, and Finisher of
our Faith; who for the Joy, that was set before him endured the Cross, and
despised the shame of it, for which he is set down at the Right Hand of God.

When the Acts 5.
Apostles were beaten by Order of the Sanhedrim, they departed from the
presence of the Council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for
his Name: And when Acts 16.
Paul, and Silas had been whipped with many Stripes, and were hurried upon it
into the innermost Prison, and set in the Stocks there, they prayed and sang
Praises unto God, doubtless for enabling them by the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit to preach his word boldness, and suffer patiently in his Cause. How
often does St. Paul in his Epistles glory in his Infirmities, which is a
Scriptureterm for Sufferings; and with what pleasure does he 2 Cor. c. 6. c.
11. c 12.
speak of his Afflictions, Necessities, and Distresses, of his Stripes,
Imprisonments, Labors, Tumults, Watchings, Fastings, Shipwrach, and daily
danger of Death. Then the Christians suffered after the Example of their
Savior according to the Will of God, who called them unto Suffering,
committing their Souls unto him as unto a Faithful Creator, and for Romans 8.36.
his Sake were killed all the day long, and were accounted as Sheep for the
Slaughter; insomuch that in the time of Trajan, Tiberius the President of
Palastine gives this Account of their Passive Temper in his Usser. ap. Ign. p.
9.
Letter to the Emperor; I am weary with punishing, and destroying the
Galilaeans, who are called here Christians, according to your Majesty's
Command, and yet they cease not to discover themselves, that they may be slain.
I have labored both by Entreaties, and Menaces to make them conceal themselves
from being known to be Christians, but I cannot make them put an End to their
own Persecution.

And when Arrius, or Aurelius Antoninus Proconsul of Asia raised a severe
Persecution against the Christians; they presented themselves before him like
an Army, at which he being astonished, contented himself to execute some few,
and cried out unto the rest, O wretched men, if you have a mind to dye, have
you not Halters and Precipices enough, but must you come hither for an
Execution? This Story is told by Tertullian to Scapula President of Carthage,
who also tells him, That if he had a mind to go on with the Persecution, so
many thousands of Christian Men, and Women of all Ages, and Conditions would
offer themselves unto him, that he would be hard put to it to get Fires, and
Swords enougn to destroy them.

Hitherto, and much longer they were so far from declining Sufferings, or being
terrified into Tumultuous Combinations with those Miseries, which they foresaw,
that they freely offered themselves to the Fury of their Persecutors, and
strove, as Lib. 2. c. 47.
Sulpitius Severus observes of the Dioclesian Persecution, who should first
enter the Lists of those Glorious Conflicts, being more Ambitious of Martyrdom
in those days, than in after times of Bishoprics, and the Greatest Preferments
of the Church.

I have chosen these out of many more Instances to show the Passive Temper of
the Primitive Christians in Times of Persecution, and to take occasion to
enquire into the true Causes, which made them, and our own Ancestors after
their Example, so meek, and calm, cheerful in such sad Trials, and so ready to
lay down their Lives for Christ. Now in this Enquiry into the Causes of such
wonderful Patience, and Alacrity, we ought in the first place to assign a good
Life, or a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and toward Man. This is the
Cornerstone in the Foundation of True Christian Confidence and Courage against
the Fears of Death, for he, whose Heart does not condemn him has confidence
toward God, and need not fear him, that can kill the Body, but is not able to
kill the Soul, because he lived in the Fear of him, who is able to destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell. Who is he, that will harm you (says the Apostle) if ye
be followers of that which is good, but if ye suffer for Righteousness-sake,
happy are ye, and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be troubled. Hence
(says Justin Martyr) of Crescens the Stoic, who laid wait for his Life, as
Anytus, and Melitus did for that of Socrates, Crescens may kill me, but he
cannot hurt me. And speaking of the Occasion of his Convers^ion to
Christianity, Ap. I. p. 50.
When I saw the Christians (says he) embrace Death, and Torments without fear,
I thought with my self, that they could not live in Sin, and sensual Pleasure.
For what Epicure, or Incontinent person, that places his Happiness in pleasing
the Flesh, would so readily embrace death to deprive himself of his Felicity,
but rather strive to live here for ever.

The Second Cause of such wonderful Patience and Courage in the Confessors, and
Martyrs of the Christian Religion, was Faith, or their full and undoubted
Persuasion of receiving those great Rewards, which the Gospel promised them for
Suffering according to that Definition of the Apostle, which says, That Faith
consists in the Substance, or Confidence of things hoped for, and in the
Evidence of things not seen. It was through this Faith, that the Jewish, and
Primitive Christian Martyrs were tortured, not accepting of Deliverance, that
they might have a better Resurrection, i. e. the Resurrection of the Just; that
others of them had trial of cruel Mockings, and Scourgings, yea moreover of
Bonds, and Imprisonments, and that others also were Stoned, Sawn asunder,
Empaled, and slain with the Sword; and lastly, That others, who took the
allowed Benefit of Flight, wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goatskins, and in
Deserts, and Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of the Earth. It was this Faith,
which the Apostle compares to a Shield, and by which (he says) the Just did
live in times of Persecutions, and overcame the World, according to St. John,
who says, This is the Victory, that overcomes the World, even our Faith.
Hence says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Cast not away your Confidence which
has great Recompense of Reward; in the full persuasion of receiving whereof,
he also said in his 2d. Epist. to Timothy, I have fought a good Fight, I have
finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord will give me at that day. And for this
cause (says he) we faint not, for though our Outward Man Perishes, yet the
Inward Man is renewed day by day, for our light Affliction, which is but for a
Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, while
we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things which are not seen,
for the things, which are seen are Temporal, but the things, which are not seen
are Eternal.

From these places it is plain, that the Faith of the Primitive Christians was
one main Cause of their Courage, which the Pagan Atheist De Mort. Peregr. L. 2.
p. 763.
Lucian had learnt of them, as appears from these words; The Miserable Wretches
(says he) persuade those of their own Party, that they shall surely be
Immortal, and live for ever, upon which account they despise Death, and offer
themselves voluntarily to it. And in Minutius Felix, Cecilianus objects it
against the Christians as a piece of Arrogance, Quod Coelo and Stellis
interitum denunciant, sibi tamen ipsis aeternitatem repromittunt; That they
denounced Destruction to Heaven and the Stars, but assured themselves of
Eternal Life. And again, They despise Torments, that are present, and yet fear
those, that are Future, and Uncertain; and while they fear to dye after death,
in the mean time they are not afraid to dye. It was a great Truth which the
Ignorant Pagan objected; For in this Assurance of Faith, they let themselves be
led like Sheep to the Slaughter, quietly suffering all the Extremities of Death
and Torments, which Men, or Devils could bring upon them without desiring to
hurt, or seeking to revenge themselves upon those that Injured them, as Justin
Mart. often observes in in his P. 236, 323, 363.
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew. The Foresight and Joy of their Heavenly Reward
made them endure the Cross, and despise the Shame of it, because they knew,
that if they Suffered with him, they should also Reign with him.

The Dr. Caves Prim. Christ. p. 2. chapter 7.
40 Christian Soldiers, in the time of Licinius, which were starved to death
in a Pond of Water in Cold Frosty Weather, comforted one another, as they stood
together by Ballancing their Present Sufferings, with their Future Hopes. Is
the Weather Sharp (said they) Paradise is Comfortable, and Delightful. Is the
Frost Cold and Bitter? they rest that remains is Sweet, and Pleasant. Let us
but hold out a Little, and Abraham's Bosom will Refresh us; We shall change this
One Night for an Eternal Age of Happiness. And, Blessed be God says Bishop
Ridley, in his Letter to Master Bradford) with all our evil Reports, Grudgings,
and Restraints; we are Merry in God, of whom we look, and hope after these
Temporal and Momentary Miseries, to have Eternal Joy and Perpetual Felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

The Third Principle, into which the Meek, and Passive Behavior of former
Christians is to be resolved, is the Love of God by which Faith Gal. 5, 6. 1
These. 5, 3.
works, or is actuated to do or suffer any thing for the Sake of Christ. So
says the Apostle, Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ,
shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or
Peril, or Sword, (as it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day
long, we are counted, as Sheep for the Slaughter) nay in all these things we
are more than Conquerors through him, that loved us; for I am persuaded, that
neither [Fear of] Death, nor [Hope of] Life, nor Angels of Satan, nor Princes,
nor Potentates, nor Sufferings Present, nor Sufferings to come, nor Heights of
Preferment, nor Depth of Disgrace shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. So says St. John most excelcently to
the same purpose, 1 Ep. 4. We have known, and believed the Love, that God has
unto us, for God is Love, and he that dwells in the Love of God, dwells in
God, and God in him. Herein consists the Consumation, or Perfection of our
Love, that the we have (...) Boldness, or Courage to Confess Christ (...) in
the day of Trial, for there is no Fear in Love, but perfect Love casts out
Fear, because Fear is attended with Torment, and Anxiety, so that he, that
fears Dangers, or Death is not arrived to the Perfection of Love.

This great Love of Christ which enables us to suffer for him, is founded, as
the fame Apostle teaches upon the consideration of his Love in dying for us,
We love him (says he) i. e. we ought to love him, because he first loved us.
And God commends his Love toward us (says St. Paul) in that while we were
yet Sinners, Christ died for us. After the Apostles themselves there never was
a greater Example of this flagrant Love of Christ, than the Holy Martyr
Ignatius S^ John's Disciple and Bishop of ^^^och, who, though he rejoiced
heartily in the little Respit the Christians enjoyed from Persecution in the
time of Nerva upon the Churches account, yet he Dubitavit enim apud seipsum,
etc. Martyr. S. Ignat. p. 2.
doubted with himself, Whether he had arrived to the perfect Love of God, and
was a complete Disciple of Christ, because as yet he had not called him to
Martyrdom. And therefore shortly after, when Trajan the Emperor commanded the
Soldiers to bind him in Chains, and carry him bound to Rome to be devoured in
the Amphitheater, he Ib. p. 4.
received the Sentence with Joy, and said, O Lord, I thank thee that thou have
made me perfect in thy Love, and made me worthy with thy Apostle St. Paul to be
bound in Iron-Chains. Accordingly in his Eusebius. I. 3. c. 36.
Journey to Rome, and in his Ex ed. Usser. vel Vossian.
Epistle which he sent thither before his Arrival, he breathed nothing but the
Perfection of Divine Love. O, says he, that I might come to those Wild Beasts,
which are prepared for me, I will encourage them to devour me, if they are
afraid to touch me, as they have been to touch others; nay, I will provoke
them, if they will not set upon me. You must pardon me, I know what is for my
Advantage; I am now indeed Christ's Disciple; I am afraid of your Love, lest it
be a Hindrance to me, but let me be devoured by the Beasts. It is better for me
to dye for Jesus Christ, than to be Emperor of all the World. Let Fire, and the
Cross, and the Wild Beasts, let Dissections of my Flesh, pulling in Pieces, and
breaking of Bones, let Distortion of Members, and Bruising the whole Body, and
all the Torments, which the Devil can invent come upon me, so that I Enjoy
Jesus Christ.

The Fourth Reason into which the Meek, and Passive Temper of the Former
Christians is to be resolved, is Inspired Patience, and Courage, whereby God
enabled them to bear their Torments in such a Generous and Gallant Manner, as
without such Assistance they could not have done. You (says Octavius in
Minutius Felix) extol men of Passive Courage unto the Skies, as Mutius
Scaevola, who had died obscurely among his Enemies but for the Gallantry of his
Right Hand; but how many of ours have suffered not only the burning of their
Hands, but of their whole Bodies without a Shreek, when they might have been
set free. But I need not compare our men with Mutius, Aquilius, and Regulus,
our very Women and Children by Inspirata patientia illudunt.
Inspired Patience despise the Cross, the Rack, and the Wild Beasts, and all
manner of of Terrible Punishments. To the same purpose speaks L. 5. c. 13.
Neipsam patientiam sine Deo cruciatos tantos posse superare. -- Quia deest
illis inspirata patientia.
Lactantius; When the People see men torn into Pieces with such variety of
Torments, and tire out their Executioners with unconquerable Patience, they
guess what the real truth is, that the Consent and Perserverance of so many
dying Persons is not in vain, nor that any Patience, unless it were from God,
could overcome such great Torments. Robbers, and men of robust Bodies cannot
endure such Tortures without shreeking, and sighing, because they have not
Inspired Patience, but our Women and Children conquer their Torturers, nor can
the Fire so much as make them Sigh.

This is most exactly agreeable to what is taught in the Gospel, as in 1 John
4.4. You are of G^^ (says the Apostle) and have overcome them, because
stronger is he, that is in you, than he, that is in the World. This I take to
be the true meaning of that great Saying of Ad Smym.
St. Ignatius, (...). He that is near unto the Sword is near unto God, and he
that is among the Wild Beasts, is in the midst of God. So says St. Ep. 10. Ed.
Oxon.
Cyprian to the Martyrs and Confessors, That Christ Fights, and Conquers in his
Servants, That he is present at their Conflicts, and upholds, strengthens, and
supports them. This made St. Paul, speaking of his Sufferings, say, I can do
all things through Christ, who strengthens me. And when all Men forsook him,
at his first Hearing he said, That the Lord stood with him, and strengthened
him, 2. Tim. 4.16. So in Coloss. 1.11. He prays, That They might be strengthened
with all might according to his Glorious Power unto all Patience, and
Long-sufferance with Joyfulness. And in his Epistle to the Philippians says
he, To you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to Believe, but Suffer
for his sake.

Accordingly I find our Glorious Predecessors and Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days
making most grateful acknowledgment of the Divine Courage, and Assistance which
they received from Christ. Jesus Christ (says Bishop Ridley to the Dispersed
Brethren) has given unto you a Manly Courage, and has so strengthened you in
the Inner Man by the Power of his Spirit, that you can contemn all the
Flatteries of the World. And so in his Answer to Mr. Grindall, As the Weight of
his Cross has increased upon us, so he has not, nor does not cease to
multiply his Mercies to strengthen us. And to Mr. Bradford; Blessed be God, who
is the Giver of all Strength and Stomach in time of Adversity. And in another
Letter to him, The Spirit brings in him [Dr. Taylor] in you and in your
Company such blessed Fruits of Boldness, of Patience, and Constancy in the
Lords Cause. In another -- Thanksgiving unto God for his manifold Gifts of
Grace, whereby it is manifest that God did assist you mightily. And in his
Letter to Aug. Bernher. I trust to God it shall please him of his Goodness to
strengthen me to make up the Rogers, and Grindall were the other two.
Trinity out of Paul's Church to suffer for Christ. So Bishop Hooper to certain
of his beloved Friends; In the Name, and in the Strength, and Virtue, and Power
of his Holy Spirit, prepare your selves in any case to Adversity, and
Constancy. Much more to this purpose may be collected out of the Book of
Martyrs and the Martyrs Letters, to show how Powerful, and Visibly Christ
assists all those, whom he calls to Sufferings, as St. Peter most emphatically
sets it out in those words, If ye are reproached for the Name of Christ, Happy
are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; implying, That the
Spirit of God rested upon Martyrs, and Confessors, as the Glory used to do upon
the Temple, so that it might be seen by all the People, according to what
Eusebius says of the Martyrs in the Dioclesian Persecution, Then (says he) we
beheld the most admirable Forwardness, and (...) -- l. 8. c. 3.
Divine Power, and Alacrity of those, who professed Christ.

Hence he ordinarily ascribes their Courage, and Boldness, and Patience, and
Constancy to Divine Inspiration, as in the Martyrdom of Apphianus, of whom he
speaks, as of a Champion assisted with the (...). De Mart. Pal. c. 4.
Spirit of God, and acted by a Divine Power, without which it is impossible to
solve, or give any satisfactory Account of the Gallantry of many of our English
Martyrs in the time of Henry the Eighth, and Queen Mary, who were as Valiant
Soldiers of Christ, as ever suffered for his Holy Name. How could Nicholas
Peke, for Example, defy those who tempted him to Recant while he was burning
in the Fire, unless he had been specially assisted by God. How could Dr. Tailor
have leaped, and danced for Joy when he drew near the Place of Execution, and
kissed the Stake after he had Prayed, unless God had inspired him with Courage.
Or how could Archbishop Cranmer, without the special Assistance of God, endure
the burning of his Right Hand, which he held immovable in the Flame, before
his Body was touched: Or, which is yet more wonderful, how could Rose Allen a
poor Maidservant, without the wonderful Grace of God, endure the burning of
her hand until the Sinews shrank, without the least Complaint, thanking God for
it, and bidding the Tyrant who held her hand over the Candle, if he pleased, to
burn her Feet, and her Head also. Afterward this English Blandina sang for Joy
at her Execution: And in general so wonderful was the Courage, and Patience of
our martyred Ancestors, that the Papists ascribed it to the Devil, as Julian
the Apostate did that of the Primitive Christians to Evil Spirits, thereby
confessing that it was Supernatural, and above the ordinary Strength of Man.

And to this Divine Grace of Inspired Courage, and Patience, I may also add the
wonderful work of God, in rebating, or taking away the Sense of Pain from his
Holy Martyrs in the time of their Execution, according to what De Mart. Palest.
c. 2. (...).
Eusebius writes, who speaking of the Courage with which Romanus the Martyr
bore the cutting out of his Tongue; He declared (says he) by his Behavior,
that there is always a Divine Power present with those, who suffer Torments for
the True Religion, which lessens their Pains, and strengthens their Courage.
And so in the Martyrdom of Ec. Hist. l. 5. c. 1. (...).
Blandina he tells us she was plied with a Succession of fresh Torturers, and
Tortures from Morning to Night, to the Astonishment of her Tormenters, till her
whole Body was shattered, and mangled into pieces, and during the time of her
Execution she enjoyed sensible Intermissions of Refreshment, in which she was
not sensible of what was done unto her; and this happened as often as she
repeated the words of Confession, I am a Christian, and there is no Evil done
among us.

So when Theodor. l. 3. c. 16.
Theodorus was tortured from morning til night by fresh Tormenters, at the
command of Julian, he declared to those, who asked him if he were Sensible of
what was done unto him, That in the beginning he felt a little pain, but
afterward a Beautiful Youth appeared to him, who stood by him, and with a
soft, and cool Handkerchief wiped the Sweat off his Face, which so delighted
him, that he wished he had still continued under the hands of the Executioners.

Thus in our Martyrologies Foxes Acts and Monuments, An 1555. p. 1711.
Thom. Tomkins the English Scevola, whose hand was held by Bonner over a Wax
Candle with four We^ks, declared afterward to James Hinse, That his Spirit was
so wrapped up, while his Hand was burning, that he felt no Pain. And Mr. Farrar,
told a young Gentleman, Id. p. 1724.
who lamented the painfulness of the Death he was to suffer, that if he saw him
once stir in the Flames he should give no credit to his Doctrine; and as he
foretold (doubtless by Divine Impulse) so he patiently stood in the Fire, till
he was knocked down with a Staff. Thus likewise Id. p. 1767.
Thomas Hawks, who had promised to give his Friends a Sign in the midst of the
Fire, if the pains of burning were so tolerable that a man might patiently, and
quietly endure them; after a long and patient continuance in the Flames, when
his Skin was shrunk up, and his Fingers consumed with Fire, at last he reached
up his Hands burning on a light Fire, and with great appearance of Rejoicing,
clapped them thrice together. So Id. p. 1172.
James Baynham, while he while he was burning at the Stake, and his Arms and
Legs half consumed, he said, Behold, Oye Papists, ye look for Miracles, and
here now you may see one, for in this Fire I feel no more pain, than if I were
in a Bed of Down, but it is to me as Sweet as a Bed of Roses. We read of
others, who sang Psalms in the Flames, as of Mr. John Denly, at whom Story
commanded the Tormenter to throw a Faggot, which when he had done, he told him
scoffingly, that he had marred a good old Song. And of Thomas Spicer, John
Denny, and Edmond Pool, who praised God with such an Audible Voice in the Fire,
as astonished those that stood by.

Now all these things, as the Apostle says, happened unto them for our Example,
and were written for our Consolation, if ever we should be called to suffer, as
they were. We cannot likely meet with more Cruel usage from the merciless
Papists, than they found at their hands; and if we do, we shall be sure (if we
be not wanting to our selves) to receive the same Gracious Aids, and
Assistances from God in all our Spiritual Combats, that they, and the Primitive
Christians did. There can no Trial, or Temptation take us, but such as is
common to Christian Men, and has happened to them before us, and God is still
Faithful, and will not suffer us at any time to be tempted beyond what we can
endure, but will certainly with the Temptation (be it never so great) find out
a way for us that we may be able to bear it. And if God be for us, as the
Apostle speaks, who can be against us? And if he spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not together with him also truly give
us All these things? Mr. J. may laugh and scoff at this Passive Divinity as he
pleases, but for my own part, I am so fully persuaded, that God will Inspire
me with Supernatural Patience, and Courage, if he call me to suffer for him,
that the Dismal Scene which his, and other Unchristian Pencils have drawn of a
Popish Persecution, do not affright or discompose me, because I set the mighty
Advantages of a Good Conscience, a strong Faith in the promised Reward for
Suffering, a Zealous Love for God, and lastly, of his special Aids,
Assistances, and Consolations against all the Difficulties, and Torments with
which alone they have painted Persecution; and so tempering the terrible
Appearance of the One, with the comfortable, and delightful Prospect of the
Other, I am no more concerned for a Po;pish Persecution, than for other common
Calamities, which happen to Good Men: Nor shall the Fear of it (by Gods Grace)
ever transport me beyond the Bounds of Christian Decency, and Moderation; much
less make me write such a wicked Book as the Life of Julian, which indeed would
make me afraid to dye even for my Religion, before I had renounced it, and
begged the Pardon of God, and Man.

The Author of it had spent his time far better, and more like a Primitive
Christian, and a Minister of the Passive Church of England, if he had employed
his Parts in writing a Book upon the Principles, which I have here laid down,
to allay the Fears, and quiet the Minds of the Fearful, and Impatient
Multitude, by showing of them, That Persecution was not so Black as Sense would
paint it, nor so Terrible as it looked at a Distance, especially to a People,
that had lived long in Ease, Pleasure, and Plenty, but that God would assuredly
give us Suffering Spirits, if he called us to Suffering Times; and thereupon to
exhort them to possess their Souls in Patience, and endeavor to prevent it by
constant and hearty Prayer to God, and forsaking those sinful Courses, for
which perhaps the eye of Infinite Wisdom sees, that Persecution will be the
most Effectual Cure.

This is the Design, that I have had in drawing this new and complete Landscape
of Persecution, and I am so well satisfied with the truth and certainty of
these things, that I have added to Mr. J's Pourtraicture of it, That if it
please God to suffer a Popish Prince to Reign over us, rather than he should
prove a Julian indeed to Undermine our Religion by Crafty Arts, and tempt us
out of it by Worldly Honors and Rewards, I heartily wish for the Churches good
that he may rather prove a Maximin, or Dioclesian (I mean a down right Bloody
persecutor) though I were the Proto-Martyr of the Cause. I speak this not
relying on my own Strength, but on the Gracious Assistance of God, in whom I
trust, that he will Inspire me with the boldness of a Confessor, and the
Patience, Courage, and Constancy of a Martyr, whenever he shall please to
call me to Confess his Truths, and suffer for his Holy Name.

In the mean time, let the Event of things be what it will, I shall wait the
good Pleasure of God, and carefully endeavor (as my Safety obliges me) to
prepare my self for Persecution, according to the Principles which I have here
laid down, and the Godly Admonition of that Famous Martyr Mr. John Bradford,
which he wrote in the New Testament of one of his Friends.

This Book is called Sermo Crucis, the Word of the Cross, because the Cross
does always accompany it: So that if you will be a Student hereof, you must
needs prepare your self for the Cross, which you began to learn, before you
learned your Alphabet: And Christ requires it of every one, that will be his
Disciple, therein not swerving from the common Trade of Callings, and
Vocations; for no Profession, or kind of Life wants his Cross. So that they
are far overseen, which think, that the Profession of the Gospel, which the
Devil most Envieth, the World most Hates, and the Flesh most Repineth at, can
be without a Cross: Let us therefore pray, That God ^^^ld enable us to take up
our Cross by denying our selves: Amen.

E Carcere 18 Februarii 1555. JOHN BRADFORD.

THE END.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, and Rhilosophica, Fol. Three Vol. Dr. More's Reply
to the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry. With his Appendix. Octavo. --
Remarques on Judge Hales, of Fluid Bodies, etc. Octavo. -- Exposition on the
Apocalypse. Quarto. -- Exposition on Daniel. Quarto. -- Confutation of
Astrology, against Butler. Quarto. Dr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ. With his Defense. Octavo. -- Answer to Danson. Quarto. -- Account
of Ferguson's Common-place-Book. Quarto. Dr. Falkener's Libertas Ecclesiastica.
Octavo. -- Christian Loyalty. Octavo. -- Vindication of Liturgies. Octavo. Dr.
Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. Octavo. Mr. Scot's Christian Life. Octavo. Dr.
Worthington's great Duty of Self-Resignation. Octavo. Dr. Smith's Pourtraict of
Old Age. Octavo. Mr. Kidder's Discourse of Christian Fortitude. Oct. Mr.
Allen's Discourse of Divine Assistance. Oct. -- Christian Justification stated.
Oct. -- Against Fergusen, of Justification. Oct. -- Persuasive to Peace and
Unity. With a large Preface. Octavo. -- Preface to the Persuasive. Alone.
Octavo. -- Against the Quakers. Octavo. -- Mystery of Iniquity unfolded against
the Papists. Octavo. -- Serious and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists.
Octavo. -- Practical Discourse of Humility. Octavo. Mr. Lamb's stop to the
Course of Separation. Octavo. -- Fresh Suit against Independency. Octavo. Mr.
Hotchkis Discourse of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, and our
Sins to him. In two Parts. Octavo. Mr. Long's History of the Donatists. Octavo.
-- Character of a Separatist. Octavo. -- Against Hales, of Schism. With Mr.
Baxter's Arguments for Conformity. Octavo. -- Non-Conformists Plea for Peace,
Impleaded against Mr. Baxter. Octavo. Dr. Grove's Vindication of the Conforming
Clergy. Quarto. -- Defense of the Church, and Clergy of England. Quarto. --
Defensio suae Responsionis ad nuperum Libellum, qui Inscribitur Celeusma, etc.
Quarto. -- Responsio ad Celeusma, etc. Quarto. The Spirit of Popery speaking
out of the Mouths of Fanatical Protestants. Fol. Dr. Hicks's Sermon at the Act
at Oxford. Quarto. -- Before the Lord Mayor. Peculium Dei. Quarto. -- Notion of
Persecution. Quarto. Dr. Hicks's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30. at
Bow-Church. 1682. Dr. Sharp's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Quarto. -- Sermon
at the Spittle, and Yorkshire Feast. Quarto, -- Sermon before the House of
Commons. April 11, 1679. -- At the Election of the Lord Mayor. 1680. Dr.
William Smith's Unjust Man's Doom, and Discourse of Partial Conformity. Octavo.
-- Two Assize Sermons. Octavo. -- Two Sermons, on the 3d. of May, and 29th. of
May. -- Lent Sermon. Quarto. Dr. Thorp's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Quarto.
Dr. Woodrof's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Quarto. Mr. Williams's Sermon
before the Lord Mayor. Quarto. -- Christianity abused by the Church of Rome,
and Popery showed to be a Corruption of it: Being an Answer to a late Printed
Paper given about by Papists, In a Letter to a Gentleman. Quarto. Remarks on
the Growth and Progress of Nonconformity. In Quarto. Baxters Vindication of the
Church of England in her Rites and Ceremonies, Discipline and Church Orders.
Mr. Lynford's Sermon Quarto. Mr. Bryan Turner's Sermon. Testimonium Jesu.
Quarto. Mr. John Turner's Sermon of Transubstantiation. Quarto. Dr. Butler's
Sermon before the King at Windsor. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King at
Windsor. Mr. Browns Visitation Sermon. Quarto. Dr. Fowler's Sermon at the
Assizes at Gloucester. Quarto. Mr. Cutlove's two Assize Sermons at St.
Edmunds-Bury. Quarto. Mr. Inet's Sermon at the Assizes at Warwick. Quarto. Mr.
Edward Sermon's Sermon before the L. Mayor. Mr. Resbury's Sermon before the
Charter House Scholars. In Quarto. -- Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Allen
Broderick. Mr. Needham's six Sermons at Cambridge. Octavo. Dr. Eachard's
Dialogue against Hobbs. 2d. Part. Mr. Hallywel's Discourse of the Excellency of
Christianity. Octavo. -- True and Lively Representation of Popery: Showing that
Popery is only new-modelled Paganism. Quarto. -- Account of Familism against
the Quakers. -- Sacred Method of saving Humane Souls by Jesus Christ. --
Discourse of the Polity, and Kingdom of Darkness. Octavo. Dr. Goodall's
Vindication of the College of Physicians. Octavo. Mr. L'Emery's Course of
Chemistry, With the Appendix. Dr. Grew's Anatomy of Trunks. With nineteen
Copper Plates. Octavo. D. Sydenhami Observationes de Morbis Acutis. Octavo. --
Epistolae duae de Morbis Epidemicis, and de Lue Venerea. Octavo. -- Dissertatio
Epistolaris de Variolis, ne^non de Affectione Hysterica et de Hypochondriaca.
Octavo. Lossii Observationes Medicae. Octavo. Mayow Tractatus. 5 E. Med. de
Sal. nitro, etc. Octavo. Burnetii Telluris Theoria Sacra de Diluvio et
Paradiso, Quarto. Spenseri dissertat. de Urim, et Thummim. Octavo. Speed
Epigrammata Juvenilia. Encomia, Seria, Satyrae, et (...) ^^cosa. Octavo. Lord
Bacon's Essays. Octavo. Gage's Survey of the West Indies. Mr. Claget's Reply to
the Mischief of Impositions. In Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon. Quarto.
The True Englishman Humbly proposing something to rid us of the Plot in the
State, and Contentions in the Church. Quarto. A Persuasive to Reformation and
Union, as the best Security against the Designs of our Popish Enemies. Quarto.
The Roman Wonder: Being Truth confessed by Papists, etc. Being the Jesuits
Morals Condemned, Fol. Essex Freeholders Behavior, etc. Fol. Two Sheets. The
Country Club; A Poem. Quarto. Amyraldus Discourse of Divine Dreams. Octavo. Dr.
Arden's Directions about the Matter and Style of Sermons. Twelves. Protestant
Loyalty fairly drawn. In Answer to a Dialogue at Oxford, between a Tutor and
Pupil, etc. And an Impartial Account of the late Addresses, etc. Quarto. Mr.
Tho. Smith's Sermon concerning the Doctrine, Unity, and Profession of the
Christian Faith. Preached before the University of Oxford. With an Appendix
concerning the Apostles Creed. Quarto. 1682. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the Lord
Mayor, Feb. 5. 1682. Dr. Calamy's Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens of London, at Bow-Church on the 29. of May. 1682.
Prosecution no Persecution: Or, the Difference between Suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, In a Sermon upon Phil. 1.29. Preached at Bury St.
Edmunds in Susfolk, on the 22 of March, 1681 By Nath. Bisbie, D. D, The Modern
Pharise. By Nath. Bisby D. D. Moderation stated, In a Sermon preached before
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, at Guild Hall Chapel
October 22. 1682. By John Evans, M. A. Rector of of St. Ethelborough, London. A
Discourse to Prove that the Strongest Temptations are Conquerable by
Christians: In a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
Jan. 14. 1676, 1677. By George Hicks, D. D. Constantius the Apostate: Being a
Short Account of his Life, and the Sense of the Primitive Christians about his
Succession: Being a Full Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Julian the
Apostate. Octavo.
Also several other Books on various Subjects.


