READER,
THere is newly published a Volume of LXI. Sermons, Preached by the same
Author. Printed for Rich. Marriott; and Sold by most Booksellers in London.

THE Spirit of Enthusiasm EXORCISED. IN A SERMON PREACHED Before the UNIVERSITY
OF OXFORD, on ACT-SUNDAY, July 11. 1680.

By George Hickes D. D. Prebendary of Worcester, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Lauderdale.

Printed at the request of Mr. Vice Chancellor, and many others, who heard it
Preached.

Diserti sunt multi inter illos, magnae linguae, flumina linguarum, nunquid
Angelice loquuntur? -- omnia illa nihil iis prosunt, quia conscindunt unitatem
-- Paulus loquitur, si sciam omnia sacramenta, etc. Nemo ergo vobis fabulas
vendat, and Pontius fecit miraculum, and Donatus oravit, and Deus ei respondit
de Coelo. -- Crederem si non divisisset unitatem, nam and contra istos (ut sic
loquar) mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus meus dicens, in novissimis
temporibus. -- teneamus ergo unitatem fratres mei, prater unitatem, and qui
facit miracula nihil est. -- Proinde fratres mei nemo vos fallat. nemo vos
seducat, amate pacem Christi, etc.

August. exp. in Evang. Johan. tract. 13. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby,
at the Bishop's- Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXX.

To the Reverend Doctor TIMOTHY HALTON Provost of QVEENS-COLLEDGE, and
VICE CHANCELLOR Of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.
SIR,
THIS Discourse, which was so acceptable to You from the Pulpit, comes now in
all Humility from the Press to offer it self to your further Acceptance, and
Protection, and to the Perusal of all those Learned, and Orthodox men, who
desired me to Publish it, as containing some Sober, and wholesome doctrines,
which they judged seasonable for the age. I had a mind to satisfy my self in
this Subject, and having by Gods blessing upon my enquiries attained to
satisfaction in them, I framed my Observations on purpose into a Sermon, to see
if happily I could satisfy other men's reasons, by the same Arguments, by which
I had convinced my own. And because the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets, I chose to Preach it in that Audience, where are always so many
Competent and able Judges of Truth and Error, and what I said on that obscure
Subject (as Chrysostom calls it) having been approved therein, I am encouraged
to hope, that it will find the like Entertainment in other places, especially
among all ingenuous spirits, who are wont to read with unprejudiced minds. But
lest any should think, that the Scheme, by which I go in this Discourse, were
an Hypothesis of my own inventing, I have confirmed the passages in it, which I
thought would be most surprising, with good Authorities: because how plausible
soever any Notions in Divinity may be, yet they may reasonably pass for
suspected, unless they appear to be agreeable to the Sentiments of the Writers
of the Ecumenical Church. To write all things consonantly to Catholic
Antiquity is a safe and excellent rule, and it is for adhering to it in her
Doctrine and Discipline, that the Church of England, and Her Clergy have been
always persecuted by the Papists, those Pseudo-Catholicks on one hand, and
their Instruments, the Anti-Prelatical Sects on the other; and because under
God the Universities are the support of the Church, therefore have they been
decryed for want of Learning by those, and want of Virtue and Religion by
these, although they have been, and are as fruitful Seminaries of both, as any
Schools, or Universities that are, or ever were in the world. And now having
occasion to speak of the Universities, it would be real injustice to your
Merits, not to let the world know, how happy ours is in Your Government. I
might justly speak great things of Your Severity in punishing of Vice, of the
great encouragement you give to Virtue, and Learning, and of your Care and
Vigilance both over your own College, and the University, particularly in
giving life to the Public Exercises in the Schools, of which you are in all
Arts and Faculties so great a Judge. It is under such Governors as You, that
the Muses will flourish in Oxford, and that true Learning, and Sound Religion
will always be taught therein. And therefore that there may never want a
Succession of such Vice-Chancellours as You to Govern that Famous University,
nor of such Learned Masters, and Scholars, as now adorn it, is the hearty
prayer of,

SIR, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, GEORGE HICKES.

THE SPIRIT OF Enthusiasm EXORCISED.
1 COR. xii. 4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.


THE Discourse, which I intend to make upon this Verse, will oblige me to
explain the most obscure, and difficult passages of this Chapter; from the
misunderstanding of which, and most other places of the Gospel, which speak of
the Spirit, and Spiritual gifts, Impostors on one hand, and Enthusiasts on the
other have raised such absurd and exorbitant doctrines, as are utterly
inconsistent, not only with the use and Authority of the Scriptures, but the
Tradition of the Universal Church, the Orders of the Ministry, and the Study
of Divinity, and by consequence render the Christian Religion, which consists
of such Sober and Rational Doctrines, the most wild, uncertain, and
unintelligible institution that ever was in the world. But how groundless and
unwarrantable the Enthusiastical Interpretations of this, and other like places
of Scripture are, will appear from the process of this Discourse, in which I
intend to treat so particularly of the Gifts of the Spirit, as to leave out
nothing, which may be said in such a short Discourse, to illustrate such an
excellent Subject, the knowledge of which is a most Sovereign Antidote against
the poison of Enthusiasm, which is the Spiritual drunkenness, or Lunacy of this
Schismatical age, and so distempers the minds of men of the other Communions
with extravagant phancies, as to make them more or less affect the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and then conceit, like Poets in Religion,
that they have them, and are inspired.

Thus much I thought convenient to premise concerning the matter and design of
this Discourse, in which I shall proceed according to this familiar method.
First, I intend to speak of the several kinds of Spiritual gifts, and show
which sort is mentioned in my Text. Secondly, I shall treat of the number and
variety of them, and explain the nature of each particular gift. Thirdly, I
shall discourse of the true use of them, and show the reasons, why they were
given by God to the Primitive Church, and not to the Churches of latter times.
And Lastly, I shall make some Practical improvement of the whole discourse.

First then as to the kinds of these Spiritual gifts, I know my Text is often
misapplyed by way of accommodation to signify the natural, or acquired gifts
of man's mind, which in a Physical sense indeed may be called Spiritual, because
they transcend the Mechanical powers of matter, and proceed more or less from
the rational soul, which is a Spiritual substance, and as near akin in nature
to the Father of Spirits as the Angels, his eldest Sons can be. Such gifts and
endowments as these are Memory, Fancy, Wit, Eloquence, and all Organical
powers, which are commonly known by the name of Natural parts, but more
especially the pure intellectual powers of Apprehending and Judging, Comparing,
Ordering and Discoursing, many, or all of both which kinds some happy Souls
possess in such abundance, and perfection, as gives them, according to
Aristotle's observation, a natural kind of Superiority over their companions,
and fits them to govern, or instruct the world.

But then how much soever some men may transcend others in their intellectual
capacities, and improvements, we must not like the Poets, ascribe their
extraordinary gifts to an higher principle, than the nature of man. For the
tallest Trees are natural, as well as the lowest shrubs; and Gigantick Souls,
as well as bodies, how prodigious soever their stature may be, yet, like Saul
among his brethren, they are but men, though worthy to be Princes, and differ
as much from persons gifted by inspiration, as Goliath from Samson, Praxiteles
and Phidias from Bezaliel and Aholiab, or studied Linguists from the Apostles,
who were inspired with the gift of tongues.

Indeed all our parts and abilities are the gifts of God, who is the original
Author of our nature, and by consequence of all that belongs thereunto; but the
Gifts of which the Apostle speaks in this Chapter, are wholly Supernatural, and
immediately proceed from the Spirit of God. Gifts that were given to advance
humane nature above it self, to raise all its Springs above their Fountain, and
enable the blessed persons affected with them to speak, and write, and act such
things, and in such a peculiar manner, as was impossible for men not inspired
to do.

These are the Gifts, or Graces, which the Apostle treats of in this Chapter,
as may be proved from the first verse, which is an Introduction to his whole
discourse. Now Brethren (says he) (...), concerning Spiritual gifts I would
not have you ignorant. Spiritual gifts, not so called from the soul, or spirit
of man, wherein they were as in their subject (for if this had been his
meaning, he must not have said (...), but (...), or (...)) but the author from
whom they came (...), the Spirit of God, whom our Savior promised to send to
his Disciples after he ascended into Heaven; which he first of all did on the
day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost came down upon them in a mighty rushing
wind to signify the plentiful Inspiration of the Spirit, and sat upon them all
in the shape of fiery cloven tongues, as so many visible Symbols of the most
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in 1 ep. ad Cor. cap. 12.
wonderful act of Inspiration, which was the gift of tongues.

But then there being Two sorts of Spiritual gifts common, and special, we must
further proceed to enquire which kind of the Two is meant here.

By the common gifts of the Spirit, I mean all those, that all Christians are
bound to pray for, and expect, and that are given by God in common to all those
who sincerely desire them, and labor after them, and that are necessary for
the Salvation of the Soul.

By Special gifs I understand those, which men are not ordinarily bound to
expect, and which, unless it be in some few circumstances, that seldom happen,
would be vanity and presumption to beg of God, and which by consequence are not
necessary for the Salvation of the Soul.

Of the former sort are all the saving Gifts and Graces of the Spirit called in
the Schools, gratiae gratum facientes, which the Spirit helps to work in men's
hearts, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Purity, Humility, and all other gracious
habits of mind, which the Apostle calls the fruit of the Spirit, and wherein
the image of God, the Power of Godliness, and the Spirit of Christianity truly
do consist.

Of the latter sort are all the Miraculous Unctions of the Holy Ghost, called
by the Schoolmen, gratiae gratis datae, such as the gift of tongues, power of
working miracles, signs and wonders, the spirit of Prophecy, and the like,
which are not necessary for the Church, but in certain cases of special
exigence, and which, when they are necessary, are not given, like the other,
jointly to all, but severally to some. Such wonderful gifts and graces were
those, which Elias sent down with his Mantle upon Elisha, when he ascended into
Heaven, thereby prefiguring the liberal effusion of the Spirit from Christ upon
his Disciples after his Ascension; for as the Apostle writes in the 4th Chapter
of his Epistle to the Ephesians, When he ascended up on high, and led Captivity
(that is, Satan, Sin, and death) captive, he gave in like manner gifts unto men.

Both these sorts of gifts agree in this, that they are Supernatural, and
freely given by God to men, and therefore both of them are called gratiae in
the vulgar Latin, and Graces in all the modern tongues, though for distinction
sake the former are commonly called (...), and the latter (...) by Divines. But
though both proceed from the same Spirit, and spring from the same Fountain of
Grace, yet, as I have already hinted, they differ in their nature, extent, and
use.

First in their Nature: for the former are nothing, but moral virtues
insensibly wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, we our selves cooperating
therewith. And their proper effect is to sanctify our nature, and make us
like, and acceptable unto God. But the latter are not of a moral nature, nor
capable of moral consideration, as being either pure intellectual habits, as
the gift of Tongues, discerning of Spirits, etc. or else bodily virtues, and
powers, as the power of Curing diseases, etc. to which the affected person
contributed nothing himself, and by which though he were made a more eminent
man, or Minister, yet was he not made a Non omnes Christiani boni daemones
ejiciunt, omnium tamen nomina scripta sunt in Coelo. August. in Ps. 130.
better Christian than he was before. Therefore they did not sanctify the
nature of the person, on whom they were bestowed, nor render him in the least
more acceptable unto God, though they were (some of them more especially) often
given to sanctified persons, and so might declare, but not make a man good. I
say they were often, but not always given to sanctified persons: for at (...).
Theophyl. in 1 Cor. 12.1. (...), Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 8. Hom. 14.
first the Holy Ghost fell upon all that were Baptized, and Confirmed; the
Spirit of Prophecy was given to Balaam; the Power of working Signs and Wonders,
and of casting out Devils was given to Hieronym. in cap. 7. Matthew. Multi mihi
dicent, etc.
Judas, as well as the rest of the Apostles; and therefore says our Savior,
Matt. 7.23. to this purpose, Many will say unto me in that day (that is, the
day of judgment) Si sciam (inquit) omnia Sacramenta -- charitatem autem non
habeam, nihil sum. Nemo ergo vobis fabulas vendai: and Pontius fecit miraculum
and Donatus oravit, and respondit Deus ei de Coelo -- contra istos, ut sic
loquar, mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus meus dicens, In novissimis
temporibus, etc. Aug. tract. 13. in Evang. Johan. Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
Lord! Lord! have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have done many
wonderful works? and then will I profess unto you, I never knew you, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. From which place it is evident, that Miraculous
gifts are so far from transforming the sinful nature of man, that if they do
not find us, they cannot make us good, nor, like a single act of Faith and
Repentance, give us a Title to the Kingdom of God.

Then as for their extent, the latter are not useful for all Churches, nor for
the same Church in all conditions and states; and in the Churches where they
were useful, they were, as it appears from Ecclesiastical History, commonly
given to the Ministers more than the people, to children not at all, and
seldomer to women than to men. But the Saving graces of the Spirit are equally
useful for the Church in all conditions and states, and are given as much to
the people as to their Ministers, and to women and children, as much as to men,
and they are never taken from those, to whom they are once given unless they
neglect, or abuse them, and grieve the good Spirit from whom they come.

Lastly, As for their use, the Saving gifts are given to men for their own, but
the Miraculous gifts for the good of the Church. By Those we vanquish the
Devil, and destroy his kingdom of sin within us; by These the Apostles
destroyed his kingdom of darkness in the Idolatrous world: By Those we Glorify
God within the Pale of the Church; by These we publish his Almighty Power and
Glory to those without. Lastly, Those make us precious in the eyes of God,
These make us glorious in the eyes of men. Whereupon Gifted persons, as it
appears from the 4th chapter of this Epist. ver. 7. were often tempted by popular
applause to pride themselves in their gifts. For this reason it was, as the
Apostle suggests in the 11th ver. that God divided these Gifts to several men
in several measures and proportions, according as he knew their capacities
would bear. For such is the infirmity of humane nature, that the best of Gifted
men were apt to Vid. Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in 1 Ep. ad Cor. c. 12
glorify themselves in their Gifts, and despise the Un-gifted Ministers of the
Church. For which reason there was given a Ne extolleretur tanquam j^venis,
colaphizabatur tanquam puer -- si ergo Apostolus potuit extolli magnitudine
revelationum, nisi acciperet Angelum Satanae, qui se colathizaret -- vidit
Dominus quod tentaret cos superbias ex potentis miraculorum. August. in Psalm.
130.
thorn in the flesh to this blessed Apostle himself, and the messenger of Satan
to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations, which he received. And therefore knowing, that these miraculous
graces were valuable no further, than as they were serviceable to the Church,
he reproved the Corinthians in the last verse of this, and the beginning of the
next Chapter for their immoderate ambitious desiring of them, exhorting them
rather to covet, and pray earnestly for the saving graces of the Spirit, as the
more desirable gifts.

From which comparison, and likewise from the several distributions of these
gifts, of which he treats in this Chapter, it is most certain, that he
understood by them not the saving universal, but the special miraculous gifts
of the Holy Ghost. For as he speaks in the 8th and 9th verses, to one was given
one Gift, to another another, to a third a third; to every man severally to one
greater to another less, according as God in his wisdom saw fit. Which cannot
be truly said of the Saving Graces of the Spirit, because God must bestow them
jointly, or not at all. God cannot give Humility to one, Purity, or Chastness
to another, and Charity alone to a third, because there is such an inseparable
union and alliance among the Graces of the Spirit (as Philosophers have
observed of Moral virtues) that where one is really, there all the rest must
be. Which, as I conceive, is the reason why the Writers of the New Testament
express the whole body of Practical Divinity sometimes by Faith, sometimes by
Hope, sometimes by Repentance, and sometimes by Love, because the combination
of these Saving Graces is such, that the mentioning of one implies all the rest.

But if this be not sufficient to prove, especially against Enthusiasts, that
by Spiritual gifts in this place the miraculous sort of them is to be
understood, it will undeniably appear from considering the number and variety
of them, of which I proposed to speak in the second place. For there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.

A great diversity indeed, for the Apostle here presents us with a list of Nine
sorts. The Word of Wisdom; the Word of Knowledge; Faith; Gifts of Healing;
Working of Miracles; Prophecy; discerning of Spirits; diverse kinds of Tongues;
and the interpretation of those Tongues.

First, The Word of Wisdom, or the Revelation of the Gospel, which is called
the Wisdom of God in Christ. For as the Greeks and Romans called the Knowledge
of secret and excellent things by the name of Philosophy: So the Jews called it
by the name of Chochmah, or Wisdom, which so often occurs in Solomon's works.
And therefore St. Paul in his Hellenistical style, which consisted in writing
of Hebraisms, or Syriacisms, in Greek, Emphatically calls the knowledge of
(...), etc. Sermonem sapientiae vocat non eloquentiam sed veram doctrinam,
cujus ipse etiam divinus Apostolus gratiam acceperat, and divus Johan.
Evangelista, and divus Petrus Apostolorum summus. Neque enim potuiss^nt homines
piscatores, and manu sibi victum parantes, and literarum plane ignari conciones
habere, and scribere, and quae dicebant, and scriptis mandabant virtute maxima
implere, nisi a divino Spiritu veram sapientiam accepissent. Theodoret. in 2
ep. ad Corinth. cap. 12.
Evangelical doctrines and mysteries by the name of Wisdom, and distinguishes
it from the Wisdom, i. e. from the Philosophy of the world, in the 2d chapter of
this Epist. 6, and 7. verses, Howbeit (says he) we speak wisdom, yet not the
wisdom of this world, but the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom, the revelation of which, God ordained before the world was unto our,
that is, unto the glory of us the Apostles, who were the first discoverers
thereof. To them it was that the Spirit gave the First Understanding and
discovery of the Mysteries of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; in whom,
as our Apostle speaks, Col. 2. all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge were
hid. In him they were hidden, and wrapped up, before they were unfolded by the
Apostles, to whom in the 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of St. John's Gospel our
Savior promised his Spirit to comfort and assist them in his absence, to teach
them all the things that belonged to the Gospel, to lead them into all truth,
to bring to their remembrance, whatsoever he had formerly taught them, and bear
witness to the Truth of their Doctrine by his works. Therefore the first, and
most principal gift of the Spirit was this, (...), the Revelation of the
Gospel, or the discovery of all those excellent truths, the knowledge and
belief whereof is Essential on our parts to the New and better Covenant, which
God has made betwixt himself and man. This Supernatural knowledge of the whole
Counsel of God in the Redemption of the world through Christ, was first given
to the Apostles by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and Preached by them to
the whole world. Given I say, to the Apostles, for as we read of (...),
diversities of gifts in my Text: So in the next verse to it, we read of (...),
differences of Administrations, that is, of Ministeries, or Ministers, to whom
these Gifts belonged. And therefore as the Apostle has put the word of Wisdom
first in the Catalogue of gifts: So in the List of Ministers, which answers to
it in the 28th verse, he has put the Apostles first.

From whence I pass to the word of Knowledge, by which with Dr. Lightfoot, and
Menochius, I understand Prophecy properly so called, or the revealed knowledge
of secret, remote, and future things. Of secret things, as of the mind, or will
of God, or the thoughts of men; of remote things, as of what was done in other
places; or of future things, as of what would be done in times to come.
According to this Interpretation you will find, that Prophets, which holds the
Second place in the List of Ministers, exactly answers to the word of Knowledge
in the Catalogue of Gifts. In the Church (says he) God has set First
Apostles, Secondarily Prophets. The Spirit of Prophecy properly so called had
ceased a long time in the Jewish Church before the coming of Christ; but in the
last days, that is, in the conclusion of the Jewish, and beginning of the
Christian Church, God poured it out upon all flesh, and their young men saw
Visions, and their old men dreamed Dreams, according to the prediction of Joel
in the 2d chap. which St. Peter on the day of Pentecost, when the Spirit
descended with all his Gifts, declared was fulfilled to the Jews. By this
renewed Spirit of Prophecy it was, that the Acts 13 2.
Prophets in the Church of Antioch had it revealed to them by the Holy Ghost,
that Barnabas and Saul should be separated for the work, unto which he had
called them; that St. Peter Acts 5.3.
knew, that Ananias and Sapphira lied to the Holy Ghost; that Acts 11.28.21.10.
Agabus foretold the Farmi^ in the days of Claudius Caesar, and the
imprisonment of St. Paul at Jerusalem; that Acts 9.10.
Ananias knew of the Conversion of St. Paul; and that Acts 27.23, 24.
St. Paul told the Centurion before the Shipwreck that not a man in the ship
should be lost. Lastly, that St. John wrote the Revelation in the ancient
Prophetic style, and that many others, of whom we read in Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
lib. 5. cap. 7. and lib. 3. c. 37
Ecclesiastical History, foretold many strange events.

From whence I proceed to the Third Gift, which is called Faith, by which you
are not to understand (...), as Hom. 29. in Ep. ad Cor. cap. 12. Theophyl and
Oecum. and Theod. in id. cap.
Chrysostom. calls justifying, or saving Faith, (for that was a common gift to
which all Christians had an equal title and claim) but (...), the faith of
Miracles Emphatically so called, because it was a certain supernatural
confidence, and assurance wrought by the Spirit in the Soul of a man, by which
he was sure he could do such or such Miracles, before he attempted to do them.
By this supernatural confidence, and impulse it was, that men knew, as by a
sign, when they could work wonders, and when not, and the greatest Operator,
whether Prophet, or Apostle durst never undertake to do a Miracle, but when he
was assured by the Spirit he could do it. And indeed it was requisite for God
by some secret preceding impression to let the (...) or Teachers of the Gospel
know, when he would assist them, lest they should attempt to do Miracles when
they could not, and so discredit their own Doctrine, and Authority, and
dishonor the name of God. Of this sort of Enthusiastical confidence, with
which the Spirit filled the minds of men, is that place to be understood in the
As also that in Matthew. 17.20. Luke 17.5, 6. vid. Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in 1 cp. ad
Corinth. cap. 12. -- (...), etc. Theodor. in locum. (...) --
21. chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, ver. 21. where our Savior told his
Disciples, That if they had faith, and doubted not, they should not only do
what he had done to the fig tree, but if they should say to that mountain (upon
which they stood) Be thou removed, and cast into the sea, it should be done.
And therefore this sort of Faith is here put before the Gift of healing, and
working of Miracles, because it consisted in an antecedent impulse to do both.

Or else by Faith is here to be understood supernatural courage, and
confidence, with which God was wont to endow the minds of all those, whom he
set upon any design, that would find oppositions from Devils or men. This
fiducia, or undanted courage is called in the New Testament (...), which we
render boldness, Acts 4.13, 29, 31. But by the ingenious Translator of the
Mons-testament it is rendered Constance, fermete, Liberte, Hardiesse, and it
was an effect of that which the Jewish writers call the Spirit of might, and as
More Nevoch. p. 2. c. 38.
Maimonides observes, it was always conferred upon the person commissioned by
God after the promise of ittecha Any, or Ehieh Immach, Go, and I will be with
thee. Which promise as it was solemnly made by God to Exodus 3.12.
Moses, Jerem. 1 8.
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel. 3.9. Deuteronomy. 31.6, 8. Josh. 1.5.
others in the Old Testament: So was it as solemnly made to the Apostles by
Christ in the New. For after his Resurrection, when he gave them Commission and
Authority to Teach, and Baptize all Nations, He said, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
All power is given unto me both in Heaven and earth, Go ye therefore, and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. and lo! I am
with you to the end of the world. Accordingly we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, with what invincible resolution and courage those poor men appeared
before the Jewish and Heathen Tribunals, and with what astonishing presence
both of body and mind, they, and Acts 72.
other Teachers of the Gospel, bore the name of Jesus before the Kings, and
Princes, and people of the earth.

Under the Fourth miraculous Gift, which is the gift of Healing is comprehended
the power of Curing all diseases both of body, and Inde jam facultas datur
posse venenorum virus extinguere, animorum desipientium labes reddita sanitate
purgare, infestis jubere pacem, violentis quictem, ferocientibus lenitatem, --
Cyprian. Epist. ad Donat.
mind without the help of Physic through the alone name of Jesus Christ, as
also the more wonderful power of raising the dead. For as inflicting of death
is usually joined by the Ancients with the power of inflicting diseases: So the
power of Curing diseases, and raising the dead are usually joined together in
their Alii laborantes aliqua infirmitate per manus impositionem curant and
sanos restituunt, etiam and quemaedmodum diximus mortui resurrexerunt; and
perseverarant nobiscum annis multis. Irenaeus, lib. 2. c. 57. vid. Eusebius. lib.
^^ hist. c. 7.
writings as effects of the same miraculous gift. Although the latter also is
often reduced under the Fifth miraculous gift, (...), which we translate
working of Miracles: under which is comprehended the power of working signs and
wonders in the Heavens, of silencing, and casting Devils both out of Men, and
Oracles, of inflicting death, as the Prophet did on the Captains of Fifties,
and their Companies, and St. Peter upon Ananias and his wife. Lastly, the power
of inflicting Diseases on the bodies of incorrigible sinners, as Paul did upon
Elymas the Sorcerer, which in this, and the first of his Epistles to Timothy is
called the delivering up to Satan by Excommunication, and perhaps also the
power of filling the Souls of contumacious sinners, with supernatural horror,
and agonies, which when they are but natural are worse to be endured, than the
most intolerable bodily pains.

By Prophecy is not understood the gift of Prediction, or knowing remote, and
future events. But first, the gift of Preaching or expounding the Scriptures by
Inspiration, in which sense it is said in the 4th verse of the 11th chap. every
man Praying or Prophesying, that is, Praying and Preaching with his head
covered dishonors his head. In this sense Inspired Preachers are called
Prophets in the 14th chap. of this Epist. ver. 29. Let the Prophets (says he)
speak two, or three at a time, and let the rest hear, and judge. Accordingly
Nebia the Hebrew word for a Prophet is often rendered in the Chaldee Translation
by Targ. Jon. 1 Samuel 10.5.12.
Siphra, and Targ. Onk. Exodus 7.1.
Meturgeman which signifies Teacher, and Interpreter, in which sense the
Preachers in the Church of Corinth were very properly called Prophets, who
Preached, and expounded the Holy Scriptures by Inspiration from the Holy Ghost.

Or else Prophecy may be taken, as it often is in the Old, and New Testament,
for Praising of God by inspired Hymns and Psalms. For inspired persons did
usually spend their Enthusiasm in composing of Hymns, and Spiritual songs:
which is the reason we read of such a great number of Divine Poets, or
Psalmists among the Hebrews, as Moses, David, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and the
rest. Hence it is that we read 1 Samuel 10. of a company of Prophets, who came
down from an high place Prophesying, Singing (says the (...)
Paraphrast) with Psalteries, Tabrets, Pipes and Harps. And both in that, and
the 19th chap. where Saul is said to have Prophesied among the Prophets; the
Paraphrast plainly says he Sang, or Praised God. And according to both these
senses of the word Prophecy you find Psalms, and Doctrines among the gifts of
the Spirit in the 24th chap. of this Epist. and the 26 verse.

But thirdly, Prophecy is put here not only for Preaching, and Praising God by
Inspiration, but also for Praying unto him in public Assemblies by (...) --
Porro una cum his omnibus donis erat and precum donum, quod and ipsum spiritus
dicebatur, quo qui praeditus erat pro plebe universa preces sundebat.
Quandoquidem enim multa eorum, quae nobis conducunt, ignorcmus, and quae minime
conducunt postulemus, accessit donum precum ad unum aliquem little, qui quod
communiter universae Ecclesiae conducebat, id ipse pro omnibus stans
postularet, tum alios edoceret. Spiritum igitur hic vocat tum donum tale, tum
animam eam, quae donum id susciperet, quaeque apud Deum intercederet, ac
gemeret. Qui enim hujusmodi gratia dignatus est, is magna cum animi
compunctione stins, multisque cum gemitibus mente autem coram Deo prostratus
quae omnibus conducunt petit, cujus and nunc Symbolum est Minister pro populo
preces Deo offerens. Hoc igitur Paulus sentiens dixit, ipse spiritus intercedit
pro nobis gemitibus menarrabilibus. Chrysostom. in ep. ad Romans c 8. Hom. 14. To the
same purpose speaks Theoph. and Occumen. upon the place.
Inspired Prayers. For in the Apostles time there was a Miraculous gift of
Praying as well as Preaching, when the Spirit used to seize upon the Souls of
men in public, and affect them in such an extraordinary way as to make them
pray for such things, and in such a due manner, as in those times, when as yet
the Church had composed no Liturgies, persons not Inspired could not do.

In this sense it was, that the Apostle says that the Spirit (or gift of the
Spirit) helps our infirmities. And that the Spirit, or (...) -- nam magna cum
compunctione stabat spiritualis ille homo, and multis* gemitibus, cujus hodie
fignum est Diaconus stans intentas supplicationes pro populo effund^^^. Theoph.
in locum.
Inspired person, makes intercession for us (...), with unutterable sighs and
groans. Likewise (says he) the Spirit help-our infirmities, for Etiam scipsum
immiscuit ne sermo odiosus videatur. Oecumen. in locum.
we know not what we should pray for, [or in what manner] as we ought, but the
inspired man makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
expressed. Which groanings were the effect of those supernatural raptures, and
Enthusiasms, with which the Spirit filled the Souls of these Inspired Orators,
often moving them withal to Pray in unknown tongues. Which St. Paul
Emphatically calls praying by the spirit, in opposition to praying
intelligibly, or with the understanding, as you may see in the Chrysostom. and
Theoph. in loc.
14th chap. of this Epist. the 14 and 15 verses, which the Enthusiasts of this
age have so perverted, and abused. This Gift above all others was looked upon
as a singular pledge of Gods favor, and as a Seal by which he owned the
Christians to be his adopted Sons. And therefore in the 8th chap. of the
Epistle to the Romans, the Apostle calls it the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
they were moved to cry Abba Father. A name as St. In locum.
Chrysostom. and Theophyl. observe, by which the Jews were no where found to call
upon God in Prayer, although they called God Deuteronomy. 32.18. Mal. 2.10. 1 Chronicles
29.10. Is. 63.16.64.8. Joh. 8.41. So Joma c. 8. 9. dixit R. Akiba beati vos O
Israel coram quo purificamini; and quis purificat vos? ^ater vesler qui est in
Coelis, juxta dictum illud and spargam, etc. Ezekiel. 36.25. Sotta cap. 9. 15.
Postquam praedixit futuras calamitatos tempore visitationis templi sic erumpit:
Cui ergo nitemur nisi Patri nostio, qui est in Coelis? quae verba bis ibi
repetuntur.
Father, by way of acknowledgment and confession, and therefore the Spirit
moving the Christians to invoke God by the name of Father, as our Savior had
directed his Disciples to address themselves unto him before, did thereby bear
witness with their Spirits, that they were the Sons of God. I pray mark what I
say upon the Authority of St. Chrysostom. who asserts that the Jews were no where
found to invoke God by the name of Father, which must be For in their Offices
which are very ancient, we find God invoked by the name of Father, particularly
in that solemn Prayer, which is styled (because it contains Eighteen small
prayers) (...) and mention whereof is made in the Mishna [tractat. de
Benedictionibus (...) cap. 4. 3. Ramban Gamaliel dicit qualibet die orare debet
quisquam octodecem preces] one of those prayers begins (...) fac nos
revertere Pater noster ad legem tuam. Turn us our Father unto thy Law. Another
Prayer for the blessing of the season of the year, which particularly is cited
in the Misna in the same tract. cap. 5. 2. begins (...) Bless us, our
Father, in all the works of our hands. In the days appointed for penitence
which are 10 days, and to some 40 before the day of atonement, there are many
prayers, which begin (...) our Father, our King. But though this title of
Father be now found in the Prayers of the Jews, yet it is very probable that
they being under a servile dispensation very rarely presumed to address
themselves unto God by that familiar appellation, till they saw that the
Christians, who reproached them as bondmen to the law, came with such freedom
to the throne of Grace.
restrained to the Old Testament and the Apocrypha; where from Abraham to the
Mac^abeans we find none that calls upon him in Prayer by the name of Father,
which makes this Great man's notion very probable, that the Christians first
invoked God by that title, being thereunto moved by the Holy Ghost, who thereby
declared to the unbelieving Jews, that they were the Sons of God, and his
heirs, and coheirs through Jesus Christ. But then says he, as it were
correcting himself, if they did call God Father in their devotions, they did
it, (...), of their own proper motion, whereas the Gifted Christian Orators did
it, (...), by the Spiritual Energy of the Holy Ghost, and there was as sensible
a difference (says he) between calling God Father from those two principles,
as between speaking in acquired tongues, and tongues by Inspiration, or healing
by Physic, and the gift of the Holy Ghost; whereof the latter carried along
with them a visible divine impress, and therefore the Spirit which moved the
Christians to cry Paracletus ipse testimonium dicit dono quod datum est nobis:
non enim nos Abba sonimus sine test and a nobis ipsis, virum paracleti donum
est, and ipse docuit nos per spiritum, id est, donum sic loqui in orationibus.
Theophyl. Romans 8.16. See Gal. 4.6.
Abba Father in their devotions might well be called the Spirit of adoption,
which thereby bore witness with their Spirits that they were the sons of God.

From whence I pass to the discerning of Spirits, which was as useful a gift as
any of the rest. For as in Egypt Satan raised up Jannes and Jambres, and other
Magicians to contend with Moses in working of Miracles: So in the Primitive
times of Christianity he raised up several Conjurers, and Magicians, who as the
Apostle speaks in his first Epistle to Timothy, Came after the working of Satan
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, of whom our Savior prophesying
in the 24th chap. of St. Matthews Gospel said, that they should show great
signs, and wonders, and deceive if it were possible the very Compare Ex. 19.5,
6. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2. and 26.18. with 1 Pet. 2.9. Col. 1.13. Rev. 1.9. and
5.10. Matthew. 24.22.
Elect, that is, the Compare Ex. 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2. and 26.18. with
1 Pet. 2.9. Col. 1.13. Rev. 1.9. and 5.10. Matthew. 24.22.
Church it self. They had power from the Devil (as St. John plainly says, Rev.
13.14. and 16.14.) to work signs and wonders in the air; to speak diverse
Languages; to foretell Plagues and Storms; to tell what was done at a distance;
to make fire come down from Heaven; to vomit flames; to walk and fly in the
air, and cast out Devils by a compact with Beelzebub their Sovereign Prince.
And all these things they did to confront the Miracles and invalidate the
Authority of the Apostles, and confirm this Antichristian doctrine, which was
a contradiction to their Gospel, that Jesus was not Christ. For this reason
they are called in the forecited places Antichrist, and false Prophets, and
there were very many of them, both Jews and Gentiles, as Simon called Magus,
Elymas the Sorcerer, the seven sons of Sceva the Jew, and many more not
mentioned in the Scriptures, as Barchozbah, and Apollonius Thyanaeus, who aped
our Savior, as Pharaohs Sorcerers imitated Moses, in as many Miracles as he
could do, and was the Prince of all the Devils Apostles, and the greatest
Magician, that ever deceived the world.

God therefore in compassion to the state of the Primitive Church inspired the
Governments in all places with a supernatural Sagacity to discern these
Satanical spirits, and distinguish their works from those of the Spirit of God.
One of the principal rules, which the discerners of Spirits gave to the Church
whereby to try the Spirits, was this: that every Spirit, which wrought Miracles
to prove that Jesus was the Christ, was of God; but every Spirit, that wrought
wonders to prove, that he was not Christ, or that another was the Christ, was a
lying Spirit, that Spirit of Antichrist, which our Savior foretold his
Disciples should come, and which was in the world in the time of St. John, as
you may read in the place I cited before, as also in his 2 Epist. ver. 7.
Conformably to this St. Paul in the verse before my text, lays down the same
infallible rule that no man that calls Jesus Anathema, as many Infidels and
Apostates did, can speak by the Spirit of God. Another rule whereby to try the
Spirits was submission, and obedience to the Governors of the Church. We are
of God: (says St. John, 1 Ep. 4.6.) he that knows God hears us; he that is
not of God hears not us: hereby we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error. And If any man among you (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.37.) pretend to
be a Prophet or inspired by the Holy Ghost, as a sign that he is truly so, let
him acknowledge, that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of God.
I question not, but they had other tests besides these, by which to try the
spirits, as that every spirit which wrought signs to confirm any doctrine,
which was inconsistent with a pure and peaceable life, or the sober use, and
rules of moral reason, must needs be a diabolical Pseudo-prophetical spirit, as
I think I could demonstrate, if I had but time.

From whence I come to speak of the two last kinds, viz. of the (...).
Chrysostom. in 1 Ep. ad Cor. 12. c. Hom. 29.
Gift of Tongues, and which was as wonderful as that, the gift of Interpreting
thereof. To the understanding of which be pleased to take notice that the gift
of strange tongues was usually accompanied with such strong Enthusiasms, and
Raptures, that the affected person could not use his understanding in an
ordinary way, so as to (...). Chrysostom. ib.
interpret, and explain his inspirations in the audience to which he spoke;
which was the reason that the spirit did usually reveal to 1 Cor. 14.4, 28.
others, who stood by and understood not the inspired Languages, the matter,
which the gifted Oracles spoke, or else by a 1 Cor. 14.13. (...). Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. 12.10
new inspiration revealed unto them the things which they had spoken in the
unknown tongue, but through the violence of the Enthusiasm had forgot. Which
latter Gift, because it was more profitable for the Church, the Apostle in the
14th chap. prefers before the former, which the vain Corinthians did so much
affect.

These are the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, which as it appears from the
28. ver. of this chap. God gave to the difference of Ministeries, or Ministers,
i. e. to the Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Helps and Governments of the
Primitive Church. To the Teachers, i. e. to the more profound and solid sort of
Doctors, who answered to the Scribes in the Synagogue, and wholly devoted
themselves to Preach, and expound the Scriptures, which was an excellent Gift,
or Talent, and always esteemed the most useful way of instruction (especially
of the Luke 23.27. Acts 2. chapter 28.23.
Jews) in the Primitive Christian Church. To the Helps, i. e. to the helpers,
or assistants, such as the Evangelists were to the Apostles, as Silas to Paul,
Mark to Barnabas, or such as the Deacons were to the Bishops, and Presbyters,
and the whole Church. And they are called helps by an Hebraism in Greek, as the
Levites were called in the Jewish Church and Language, (...) helps to the
Priests. By Governments are to be understood Governors, for in the
Hellenistical style the abstract is often put for the concrete, according to
the custom of the Hebrew, and Syriack tongues, and by Governors are meant the
Apostles and So Rev. 2.2. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended. for
trying them, which say they are Apostles, and are not.
Bishops, to whom the Gift of discerning Spirits seems to have belonged in a
peculiar manner, because the word (...), which is here put for Government, is
used by the Septuagint to render the Hebrew word Tachbuloth, which signifies
discerning Wisdom, Prudence, or Counsel, wherein the spirit of Government does
consist. Thus in the first of Proverbs v. 5. where we say, a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsel, the Septuagint says, (...), a
man of understanding shall attain unto Government. The like may be seen Prove.
11.14. and 14.6.

There were other Miraculous gifts under the New Testament, which are not
mentioned in this Chapter, and which though properly speaking they did not
proceed from the Holy Ghost, yet in a large sense may be called spiritual
gifts. These were the voice from Heaven, which the Jews called Bath col, and
the appearance of Angels those holy messengers of God, and Ministering Spirits,
who sometimes acted as Gods Vicegerents, and Galat. 3.19. Hebr. 2.2.
assumed his person in speaking to men. But though the Apostle take no notice
of them here, because they were not intrinsecal, and inherent gifts, yet I
thought fit to mention them because they were extraordinary, and relate to some
passages in the following part of this discourse.

Thus having given you an account of the number, and diversities of these gifts
of the Holy Ghost, together with the difference of Ministeries to which they
belonged, I proceed in the Third place to show the reasons, why they were given
by God to the Primitive Churches, and not to the Churches of latter times.

Now this reason is to be taken from the wants and necessities of the Primitive
Church, whose infant-state required, that God should assist her with the
Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, till the Gospel was sufficiently Preached about
the Empire; the Scriptures of the New Testament completed; the Temple-worship
abolished among the Jews; Idolatry destroyed among the Gentiles, and both were
united together under Christ into one Communion, or Catholic Church. It had
been impossible for God to bring to pass all these stupendous things in a way
consistent with his own Wisdom, and the freedom of humane nature, without
making use of these, or other fitting means, as wonderful as these, to publish
the Gospel, and confirm the truth thereof. How should the Jewish and Gentile
world have believed without Apostles, and 2 Cor. 8.23. Phil. 2.25.
Apostolical Preachers, and how should the Apostles, and Evangelists have
preached, unless they had been inspired? for their Savior left them like
Orphans, or rather like Scholars of the third Class, before he had revealed
all the Gospel unto them, and therefore it was necessary for God to send his
Spirit the Comforter to supply his place among them, to build upon the
Foundation, which he had laid, and discover the word of Wisdom in as ample
manner unto them, as they were to Preach it about the world. And then because
they were illiterate men, that knew no Languages but their own, it was
requisite for him to give them, and their assistants the gift of strange
tongues, that they might freely converse with men of all countries, and
Provinces, and Preach the Gospel through all the world.

But then as the Spirit qualified them by infused Divinity and Languages to
preach: So was it requisite for him to confirm the Truth of their doctrine by
Signs, and Wonders, as by giving them Power to silence Oracles, and rebuke
Magical spirits, to cast out Devils, heal the Sick, raise the Dead, and
demonstrate his special Presence in Christian assemblies by sending his Spirit
upon private men, and Idiots, and in particular by enabling them to speak in
strange tongues, which by reason of the rapturous way in which they were
inspired, they could not interpret to the Congregations, in which they spoke.
This manner of speaking in unknown tongues is different from that, which I
mentioned a little before. For the former way of speaking was given to the
Apostles, and Evangelists, not so much for a sign, as to enable them to
instruct foreign nations in the Faith, and it was either a permanent gift, or if
it were not, it always came upon them in a calm and gentle manner, insomuch
that they were perfect masters of their own understandings, and could freely
converse with the people, to whom they spoke.

But the use of the latter was principally 1 Cor. 14.22.
Signal, or Testimonial, like other miracles, and came upon the people, as well
as the Ministers, and that in such a rapturous Enthusiastical manner, that
though they understood their 1 Cor. 14.4.
own inspirations, yet they were not able to interpret them to the Church, and
therefore to this gift was usually annexed the more useful gift of interpreting
tongues, of which I spoke before.

All these Miracles are called the Testimony of the Spirit, particularly, Heb.
2.4. God the sender of the Spirit is said to have born the Apostles witness,
with signs, and wonders and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Hither we may also refer the word of Knowledge, or the gift of Prophecy
properly so called, which of all the Unctions of the Holy Ghost was a
particular sign to the Jews, that the Christians were also the children of
promise, upon whom the Spirit of Prophecy came. But then it was requisite for
them upon other accounts, because the discovery of things secret, and remote,
and the prediction of future events was frequently necessary for the
preservation of the Christians, and preventing of imminent danger to the
Church. Thus Agabus signifying by the Spirit, that there should be a great
dearth throughout all the world, i. e. all Hum. on Matthew. 24.7.
Judaea, the Disciples at Antioch determined beforehand to send relief unto
their Brethren in Judaea by the hands of Barnabas and Paul. So an Angel was
sent to Paul to assure him, that he should be brought before Caesar, and that
God would save all the lives in the ship for his sake. By which Revelation he
was enabled both to encourage, and direct the Seamen, who had otherwise given
up all in despair. Hither I may also refer the prediction of our Lord, Matthew.
24.15, and 16. verses, which the believing Jews remembering, when Gallus so
providentially raised the siege of Jerusalem, immediately went out of it, and
fled to the Mountains, insomuch that when Titus some months after besieged the
City, there was not one Christian in the Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
place.

Furthermore the Spirit of Preaching, Praying, and Praising God by Inspiration,
or Prophecy improperly so called, was requisite for the state of the Primitive
Christian Church, for by this the Circumcision was also convinced, that God was
no respecter of persons, when they saw to their astonishment, that on the
Gentiles also were poured out the gifts of the Holy Ghost. This was the reason
why the Apostles did by Solemn Prayer, and Imposition of hands confer these,
and other gifts of the Holy Ghost upon Baptized Gentiles, to convince the Jews,
that the Christian Religion was to be Catholic, and that Christ was the
Savior of no less than the whole world. Furthermore they were necessary to
confirm the Faith, and warm the devotion of the Newly Converted Christians, who
were very apt through the delusion of Heretics, and Satanical spirits to
Apostatize, and renounce Christ, as likewise to convince the Jewish, and
Gentile unbelievers, whom curiosity brought to the Christian Assemblies, that
God was in them, and among them for a truth. Lastly, as St. (...), 43. vid. and
44.
Clement, who was St. Paul's fellow-work-man, assures us in his first Epistle
to these Corinthians, who were so rich in spiritual gifts, these and other
gifts were sent upon the people as divine indications to the Apostles, whom
they should Ordain Bishops, and Presbyters and Deacons in the Cities and
Countries which should be converted to the Faith. So the Apostles directed the
Disciples to look out among themselves Seven men of honest report, and full of
the Holy Ghost whom they might ordain Deacons. And S. Paul in his first Epist.
to Timothy 4.14. charged him not to neglect the Calvin Instit. l. 4.
gift of the Priesthood, which was given him by Prophecy, and the Imposition of
his hands. And accordingly Eusebius out of Clemens Alexandrinus reports of St.
John, Cap. 3. and in locum.
that he took men to ordain Bishops of the Asiatick Churches, (...), from among
those who were signalized with spiritual gifts. Agreeable to which Acts 20.28.
St. Paul told their Predecessors, that the Holy Ghost had set them over the
flock.

Lastly, Because it was impossible to govern the Church more than other
Societies and Bodies politic without sensible punishments, God endowed the
Apostles, and their Successors with a power of inflicting supernatural
diseases; and death upon incorrigible offenders, while for want of assistance
from the Secular arm, they had not power to make penal laws for themselves.
This supernatural power of inflicting corporal punishments, which usually
accompanied excommunication, made the Apostolical rod as terrible as the
pestilence that walks in darkness, and the destruction that wastes at noon
day. For by it offenders were delivered up to Satan to be tormented, possessed,
and killed by him, who is the Job 2.6. 1 Samuel 16.14.
ordinary executioner of Gods judgments. And it was so inherent at that time in
the Apostolical function for punishing of Scandals, and preserving the Unity
and Order of the Church, that God was pleased to second their dreadful Censures
in their absence, as well as their presence, as upon the incestuous Corinthian,
whom this Apostle delivered up to Satan in an 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5
Ecclesiastical meeting at Corinth, although he was not there. And such a
tender regard had God for the Order, and Discipline of the Church, that he
concurred with the Apostles in the execution of this power, not only against
those who continued obstinately in 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5
incest, 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 2.17.
blasphemy, heresies, and such like sins, but against those also, that were
prating malicious Schismatics, opposers of the Bishop, and disturbers of the
peace, and order of the Church. Such an one was Alexander the Copper-smith, and
Diotrephes in the Church of Ephesus, whom S. John assured the Church he 3 Epist.
would remember ( i. e. censure) when he came, for his evil deed. We cannot
imagine that our Lord, who came not to destroy men's lives but save them, would
have given the Apostles such a power over men's lives, but in order to such a
considerable end. It was necessary, that they, their assistants, and Successors
the Bishops (who are likewise called Apostles, 2 Cor. 8.23. Gal. 1.19. Phil.
2.25.) should be invested with this power to preserve their Authority as
Governors, and thereby secure the discipline and government of the Church:
which as such is a Spiritual body politic consisting of Magistrates, and
Subjects, and so ought to have its proper laws. Therefore God, who in his
infinite wisdom could not erect a Society without Governors, nor constitute
Governors without investing them with a sufficient power of casting
contumacious transgressors out of their Government, thought fit in the
Churches minority to execute judgment upon those, whom they ejected; in which
concurrence, I conceive, consisted their miraculous power of inslicting
supernatural diseases, and death. A power more than Imperial, and greater than
Caesar could show, which made their Ecclesiastical subjects reverence their
persons, and dread their displeasure, and by consequence shows, that it was put
into their hands in that exigence, as the Sword is put into the hand of the
Secular Magistrate, that they might be a terror to evil doers, and assert their
Spiritual government over the Church. This is plain from the story of Ananias
and Sapphira whose sudden miraculous death was a terror to the rest (for as the
text tells us, great fear came upon all the Church) and plainly shows that the
Church was not a mere voluntary Society nor the Apostolical authority
precarious, but the undoubted Ordinance of God.

From all which I hope it is plain that the necessities of the Primitive Church
were the reason, why God gave these gifts of the Holy Ghost to Her, and not to
the Churches of later times. And this is apparently asserted by the Apostle in
the 4th chap. of his Epist. to the Chrysostom. in ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4. Hom. 11.
Ephesians, where after he had spoken of the (...), Theophyl. upon the place.
gifts, which our Savior gave in different measures to the several Ministers
of the Church, to the Apostles, Prophets, (...). id.
Evangelists, (...). id.
Pastors, and Teachers, says, that it was for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ, till they
came in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. From
August. Quaest. ex Evang.
whence it is evident, that as the Gospel increased, and the Church grew up,
God, like a wise nurse, weaned her by degrees from these miraculous gifts, till
at last having arrived at her full stature in Christ, he left her, as Parents
leave their children, when they are grown to be men, to subsist without
extraordinary helps and supplies. And therefore as the Scriptures increased,
God ceased by degrees to discover the doctrines of the Gospel by Inspiration to
the Ministers of the Church, and by that time the writings of the New Testament
were made up, and the Scripture-canon as it were Sealed, the Successors of the
Apostles in the time of Clemens, Polycarp, and Papias, (the Disciples of S.
John) and of Justin Martyr pretended to no other way of revelation, or coming
to the knowledge of the Christian Religion, than by the Apostolorum Successores
and Discipulisacrorum Evangeliorum libros, iis qui fidei sermonem nondum
audivissent, tradebant.
word of God.

And then as the Gospel began to be Preached in Latin, and Greek, and native
Romans and Graecians were admitted to be Ministers of the Word, the Gift of
tongues, which was the first of the gifts of the Spirit, began to grow useless,
and cease. Till at last Churches being gathered in all Provinces of the Empire,
and every Nation having Ministers of its own, the Gospel was Preached without
Inspiration in all languages of the world.

The gift of Prophecy properly so called continued somewhat longer in the
Church, because in these times of danger, and persecution, it was necessary for
Christians (as I showed before) to be forewarned of future events. Lib. 3.
hist. c. 37.
Eusebius tells us, that Quadratus and Hist. lib. 5. c. 17.
Ammius Philadelphensis who lived in the beginning of the Second Century
together with the daughter of Philip (the Apostle) had the gift of foretelling
things to come, and cites a passage out of the dialogue of Justin Martyr with
Trypho the Jew, wherein he asserts that Prophecy was still to be seen in the
Church. Irenaeus also lib. 2. c. 57. reckons the Prophetical influx in Visions,
and predictions among the spiritual gifts, which he says the Disciples in that
age received in different measures for the good of the Church. Origin also in
his Seventh Book against Celsus mentions this among other miraculous gifts
which were then extant. But though at that time the Prophetical spirit was
still in being, yet it was very extraordinary, and soon after ceased altogether
in the Church.

We read of the power of raising the dead in the forecited passage of Irenaeus,
who speaking of his own time says, And now the dead are raised, and have lived
among us many years. But the gift of healing being so beneficial to mankind
continued longer in the Church, (as is evident out of Ep^ad Donatum.
Cyprian, and Lib. 1. contra Cells.
Origin, but little or no mention is made of it after, till the latter end of
the Fourth, and beginning of the Fifth Century, when God was pleased to work
that and many other Chrysostom. Hom. 37. in S. Jul. Hom. 43. in S. Match. de S. Bab.
contr. Gentiles. Aug. Ep. 137. ad elerum, and pleb. Hippon. Chrysostom. Hom. 69. En.
com. Mart.

Egypt. Aug. l. 22. de civ. d^i c. 8. lib. 1. ^etract. c. 23.


Miracles at the tombs, and by the Relics of Martyrs, which were the last
Miracles in the Church.

As for Miracles (specially so called) they also began to grow scarce about the
latter end of the Second Century, after God had sufficiently sealed the truth
of the Gospel by them, and in spite of the powers of hell brought the world to
embrace the Christian Faith. But yet because there still remained an Apollo
gave Oracles in Daphne the pleasant Suburbs of Antioch in the time of
Constantius, and Julian the Ap. Chrysostom. de S. Babyla Mart. contra Gentiles.
Oracle now and then to be silenced, a Pythonist to be exorcised, a Magical
spirit to be rebuked, or an insulting and blasphemous Demoniack to be
dispossessed, God continued them upon these; and As upon the building of the
Temple by the Jews in Julians time. Naz. 2. invect. contra Julian. Marcell.
lib. 22.
such like occasions longer in the Church, and yet they too Aug. contra Manich.
and de ver. relig. lib. 1. retract. c. 13.
ceased about the beginning of the Fifth Century when (...). Chrysostom. de S.
Babyla.
Idolatry was almost quite extinguished, and when the Church built Her Faith
not on present but past Miracles, and her Hieroms, Augustins, and Chrysostoms
like us were not inspired, but studied Divines.

As for the gift of Praying, and Preaching by the spirit, there is no mention
made of it in the Ecclesiastical Writers, even where they enumerate the rest of
the Spiritual gifts. Unless Lib. 1. cap. 57* Eusebius. hist. lib. ^. cap. 7.
Irenaeus comprehend it under the gift of strange tongues, with all sorts of
which, he says, many of the brethren spoke in his time by the Holy Ghost.
Neither need we wonder that there is no further account to be found of it out
of the Apostles writings, since the Christians might learn what to pray for,
and how out of the Scriptures, which are an excellent rule of devotion, as well
as Faith, and since that gift was also rendered useless by the Cassand. Liturg.
Dr. Ham. View of the new Directory.
early general use of Liturgies, wherein the Church made Offices for the
Sacraments, for the Ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, for the
Catechumeni, the Penitents, and Possessed persons, and Supplications and
Prayers, and Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all men, for Kings and all
that were in Authority in a good and acceptable manner through the name of the
only Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

Thus exspired these miraculous gifts of the Spirit, the actual communication
and exercise of which the Apostle in the 7. ver. of this chap. calls the
manifestation of the Spirit, and says, that they were given to every man
(...), for the benefit and advantage of the Church. But as the Church grew up
from an infant to her full stature in Christ, so they grew useless, till at
last some sooner, some later, they were quite taken away. This St. Paul, who
could do all Miracles, foretold in the 13th chap. of this Epist. wherein he
exhorts the Corinthians to covet the saving rather, than the miraculous Graces
of the Spirit, because these should, but those should never fail. Charity
(says he) is a gift that never fails, but other gifts shall, for whether
there be Si enim Prophetiae, and linguae sunt propter susceptionem fidei, side
undique explicata, tanquam superflua cessabunt in praesenti, maxim autem in
futuro. Theoph.
Prophecies they shall fail, or whether there be Si enim Prophetiae, and
linguae sunt propter susceptionem fidei, side undique explicata, tanquam
superflua cessabunt in praesenti, maxim autem in futuro. Theoph.
tongues they shall cease, or whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away.
For we know, what we know by Revelation, but in part, and we Prophecy by
inspiration but in part, but when the perfect knowledge of the Christian
Religion, or the perfect state of the Church is come, then that which is
imperfect and obscure shall be done away. Even as when I was a child I Dicit
(...) tanquam ad linguas referat. id.
spoke as a child, I Hoc ad prophetias refer videtur. id.
understood as a child, I thought and conceived things as a child, but when I
became a man, and to the full use of my reason, I put away childish conceptions
and things. For now we see Divine Revelations as the Prophets did of old, in a
dark Enigmatical manner, and by Symbolical representations of things upon the
fancy as in a glass, but then in the adult state of the Church, we shall see
them after the Mosaical manner in a more rational way and more accommodate to
humane nature, as it were face to face. Now I know them imperfectly, but then I
shall know them clearly, even as I am known. To conclude, there are three
permanent gifts, Faith, Hope, and Charity; but the most excellent of these is
Charity.

Having thus discoursed First of the kinds of Spiritual gifts, and Secondly of
the number, and variety of that miraculous sort, which is understood in my
text, and having in the Third place showed the reasons, which moved God to give
them to the Primitive Church, and not to the Churches of latter times, I
proceed in the last place to make some improvement of the whole discourse.

First then I desire you to reflect on the difference betwixt the Saving, and
Miraculous gifts of the Spirit, and then to consider how much more excellent,
and desirable the former are, than the latter, and how much rather you ought to
covet these than those, although they were extant yet in the Church. As for
these they neither supposed any saving Grace in the gifted person, nor brought
any along with them, nor drew any after them, but as 1. Cor. 12. Hom. 29.
S. Chrysostom. compares them to riches, so like riches they tempted men to Chrysostom.
in Ephesians. 4. Hom. 11.
Pride, Vanity, and contempt of their Governors, as also to Theoph. on 1 Cor.
12.1.
envy, and hate one another, so that this Apostle was fain to make use of the
same Apologue, to allay the envy of some and the grief of other Corinthians
(who had none, or not so many, or not such spiritual gifts, or not to such a
degree as others had) as Menenius Agrippa did to appease the Commons of Rome,
by comparing the body politic of the Church to the natural body; which cannot
be all head, hand, or eye, but has several members some more honorable than
the other, and all conspire to the good of the whole. Nay so inconsiderable are
these gifts in themselves, and so unprofitable to any Christian, as to his main
concern, that Ress ons ad quast. 5. ad Orthodox. in Justin Mart. August. de
Sermon. domini.
like the sun and rain they were given to good and bad, and when they were
given to a truly good Christian they could not secure him in a state of Grace,
for they could not restrain these Corinthians from many grievous sins, with
which the Apostle charge them, nor, as it appears from Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
verses, keep others from a final Apostasy from Christ. This, I suppose, was
the reason, why our Savior, when his Disciples returned with joy, saying,
Lord, even the devils are subject unto us in thy name, answered them thus: Luke
10.17, 18, 19, 20. Aug. in Psalm. 130.
Rejoice not in this that the devils are subject unto you, but rather rejoice
that your names are written in the book of life. To the same purpose speaks
this Apostle to the vain Corinthians, who valued themselves so much upon the
account of their spiritual gifts. Aug. tract. 13. in Evang. Joh. qui habet
sponsam sponsus est. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. Nam and prophetare and damonia
excludere, and virtutes magnas in terris facere, sublimis utique, atque
admirabilis res est, non tamen regnum coeleste consequitur quisquis in his
omnibus invenitur, si non, etc.
Though, says he, I could not only speak with all the tongues of men, but
express my thoughts like Angels, and have not Charity, I should be no better
than a musical instrument of brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I had the
gift of Prophesying, and understood all Mysteries, and had all knowledge
revealed unto me, and though I had the highest degree of miraculous Faith, so
that, as our Lord said, I could remove mountains, and yet had no Charity with
them, I should be good for nothing, nor become in the least more acceptable to
God. The tongues of men or Angels, to speak in the Apostles phrase, could have
said nothing more plain or emphatical to show how much more excellent the
saving graces of the Spirit are, than the miraculous gifts, which can neither
render us like God, nor qualify us for the enjoyment of him, and which gave no
intrinsecal worth to the persons, who formerly had them, nor made them more
useful for the Church, than acquired gifts, which are the ordinary means of
Faith, and Repentance, make us. Suppose thou know the Gospel, like the
Apostles, by Inspiration, what then? another Minister, who knows it by reading
and study is as capable to serve the Church as thee: and besides if thou art,
like a vain Corinthian, ambitious of Inspiration, know that it will add nothing
to the reputation of thy parts, for an inspired man is but the vessel to the
treasure, the very instrument and Machine of the Holy Ghost, who can ordain
strength out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, and make a child, or an
idiot, preach as well as thee.

Or suppose thou had the spirit of Prophecy, what then? The knowledge of
things past being as excellent in it self, and generally more useful to the
world, than the knowledge of things to come, the historian would have as much
to boast of as thee. Nay historical knowledge has the advantage above the
Prophetical, not only in this, that it is more clear and distinct, but that it
extends a great deal farther, for the greater face of Janus has long been set
behind, to signify unto us, that the world is grown old, and that many more
ages are gone than are to come. But it is an honor to be a Prophet of God? and
it is a greater honor to be a Minister of the Gospel, the servant of Jesus
Christ; but if thou know the burden and pangs of Dan. 10.8. Genesis 15.12.
Ezekiel. 3.14. Is. 21.3. Habak. 3.2. Jerem. 23.9.
Prophetical visions, and the terror of Prophetical dreams, thou would, like
some of the greatest Prophets of old, desire God to confer that honor on some
other man.

But thou would have the gift of healing, why so? Is it that thou would
take pleasure in doing good? for the same reason thou may wish, that all thy
Fishponds were pools of Bethesda, or that thou had all the riches of the
world: but if thou have but Christian Charity, and love thy neighbor, i. e.
mankind, as well as thy self, thou art as excellent a Christian, and as
acceptable to God, as if thou were an inspired Aesculapius, and had Cured all
the Hospitals in the world. Or what if thou had this wonderful beneficial
gift? Thou have contributed nothing to the having of it, for the bones of
Elisha, and of the Gervasius, and Protasius. Aug. lib. 2. de civ. dei c. 8.
retract. 1. c. 13.
Milan Martyrs had that, as well as thee.

But perhaps thou have a mind to the gift of tongues? What if thou had it? an
acquired linguist would do the Church as much service as thee, and would really
have more reason to boast of his learning, for God can make an Oracle of, an
Ass, and Timber and Stones speak Latin, Hebrew, and Greek.

But if thou could do Miracles: what if thou could? Heretics have done
them, and Judas did them, and yet was the worst of men, and many shall say unto
me in that day, Lord! Lord! have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? and then I will I profess unto them, I never knew
you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

But thou art a Minister, and would fain preach by inspiration, why so? not
out of Corinthian vanity, and ostentation; for then thou art a vainglorious
man; but because thou have a desire to convert more souls; but alas, thou art
not sure of that, for the words of this inspired Apostle were a stumbling block
unto the Jews, and a scandal to the Greeks, even the savor of death unto
many, who heard him. And the Souls of thousands, who heard inspired Sermons
from Christ, and his Apostles, and saw them also work Miracles, lie roaring now
in the flames of hell.

But to pray by the Spirit is a most desirable gift; so it would be indeed if
thou like the Novice-converts of old know not how, nor what to pray for as
thou ought. But thou can cry Abba, Father, without inspiration, and thou
may make prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of thanks
for all men without inspiration, which, if thou had it, would not make thy
prayers more excellent in themselves, or more acceptable in the sight of God.
For whosoever has a devout Soul, and approaches God with that reverence, which
is due to his infinite Majesty, and heartily asks, what he would obtain in the
name of Jesus Christ, his conceived, nay his book devotion shall prevail as
much at the Throne of Grace, as if it were inspired. But inspired prayers are a
Testimony of God's love? so generally speaking I believe they were, but so are
crosses, and afflictions (which immediately proceed not from our own sin and
folly) and yet thou art not desirous of them, although they are signs of
Adoption, or public testimonials by which God has declared to his Church,
(which he never did of inspired persons) that Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
afflicted men are not Bastards, but Sons. From all which it appears how much
more excellent, and desirable the saving Graces of the Spirit are, than all
these pompous miraculous gifts, in which there is really no intrinsecal
excellence, nothing why we should desire, or expect them further, than as they
may be useful for the Church, instruments of Religion, and motives to Faith and
Repentance in defect of ordinary means, and acquired gifts. All which I would
have those especially to consider, whose Enthusiastical tempers, or educations
incline them first to admire, and then to conceit these miraculous gifts, till
by insensible degrees they impose upon their own imaginations, and commence
within themselves illuminated men.

Secondly, I proceed to show what little reasons the Romish Doctors have to
make miracles a sign of the true Church. For Miracles were formerly wrought for
signs to confirm the Authority of the Apostles, and their Assistants and
Successors, and to seal the truth of that new doctrine, which they were to
preach about the world. Therefore to suppose that the Church stands always in
need of Miracles is to suppose her to be still in a state of Minority, and her
doctrine to be always a publishing to the world, or else to suppose, that
infinite wisdom may become impertinent, and seal the same truths, ten thousand
times over. Indeed, as they argue, in the Church of the Jews there were always
miracles to be found, because their Theocratical constitution of Church and
State was miraculous, God as their King being obliged to make known his
pleasure in Civil and Military, as well as in Ecclesiastical matters unto them
by Voices from heaven, Oracles, and Prophecies (as other Princes do by
Proclamations, and messages) and their Prophets were always to work signs and
wonders to prove the Truth of their mission, and sometimes the certainty of
what they foretold should come to pass. But then besides the miracles, which
belonged to the nature of their Theocratical Government, God wrought others for
them, and among them, to render himself, and that particular Church more
conspicuous in the eyes of the Gentile world. Hither we may refer their
miraculous victories by single men, or armies over their enemies, which God
wrought, to convince them by sensible experiments of his Omnipotence, that of
all the divinity of the Eastern world he alone was the true God. But had the
Law been published among all Nations, like the Gospel, and Judaism become the
Universal Religion of the world, Miracles at length would have grown out of
use, as indeed they grew very rare after the Jews were dispersed among the
Nations, and their Law was translated into Greek, which at the time of the
Translation was become the most general Language of the world.

Thirdly, I proceed to show you how unreasonably the Church of Rome has acted
in verifying the Fanatical pretensions of so many gross Impostors and
Enthusiasts as she has done to Inspiration; Prophecy; Visions; Dreams;
Familiar converses with God, and the glorified person of our Savior; working
of wonders; Communion with Saints, and Angels; Raptures, Impulses, and all
other sorts of Miraculous gifts, that we read of in the Primitive Church. Such
as these were Dominic, Francis of Assize, Francis of Pole, Francis Xaverius,
Ignatius the founder of the Jesuits, Genvieve, Tiresia, Catherin of Siena,
Brigit, and many more of both Sexes, whom she has not only Canonized for
Saints, but to the great scandal of the Christian Religion has incorporated
Religious Societies of men and women to live according to their pretended
inspired rules. For which not only the Common people, and the Brethren, and
Sisters of the Orders, but their Learned Doctors pretend to have as great,
(and, it may be, a greater) veneration, than for the Gospel it self.

Fourthly, I proceed to show you what a sandy foundation the Popes
Infallibility is grounded upon. For it must be resolved into this
Enthusiastical principle of immediate Inspiration, which according to the
doctrine I have now Preached, neither he, nor any other Bishop, or Presbyter of
the Church, has warrant from the Scriptures to pray for, or expect. I say it
is a most dangerous, and Fanatical pretension, which is so far from having any
ground in Scripture, that it makes it a most imperfect and useless rule of
Faith, destroys the certainty of the Christian belief, which was fixed above
Sixteen hundred years ago, and instead of being a means of ending
controversies, as Papists pretend, it introduces everlasting Skepticism into
all the parts of Divinity, by making truth, or falsehood, good, and evil, light,
and darkness, sweet, and bitter, nay what shall I say? by making right and
wrong, God and Belial, Christ and Antichrist depend upon the breath of a
single man.

In the Fifth place, let me show you what a dangerous, damnable, and precarious
principle that is, which George Reiths immediate Revelation. Printed 1676.
asserts, that immediate Revelation, or Inspiration is not ceased, but is a
standing, and perpetual gift in the Church of Christ, belonging to the very
substance of the Gospel Covenant, and of indispensable necessity to the whole
body, and every member thereof. And that this spirit of immediate Revelation or
Spiritual light, is not, like the Spirits in Primitive times, to be tried by
the Barclay 's Theses, or Apologia Theolog.
Scriptures, and reason, but that both of them are to be tried by it. This
doctrine differs from the preceding only in this, that, that makes only the
Bishop of Rome, but this makes every private Christian a Pope, and as it
utterly overthrows the Authority of the Scriptures, and makes them an useless
rule of Faith: So has it already cashiered the use of the Sacraments, and
annulled the Ministerial Orders, contrary to the Precepts and Precedents of the
Gospel, and the practice of Gods Universal Church. And when time shall serve,
it can as effectually convert the Professors of it into downright Popery
consistently with their own principles, for they have nothing more to do, than
to say that the Spirit has told them that the Church of Rome is the only true
Church, and that supra hanc Petram belongs to the Pope. As this doctrine was
first privately sowed among us by Foxes and Firebrarnds, page 15. etc. Printed,
1680.
Popish Emissaries, so has it been published in our and other countries by
those, who were Papists, as by Robert Barclay, who was bred in the Scottish
Covent at Paris, and Labbade a Jesuit defrooqued.

In the next place to montion will be sufficient to confute the
Pseudo-Prophetical Spirits of this age, such as Nayler, Venner, and Muggleton,
with his companion Reeve, who call themselves the Lords Two last Witnesses, and
Prophets, and have framed many tracts, and letters from Jesus, and the Holy
Spirit, a collection of which may be had in Print. I deny not, but that God is
free to send Prophets when he pleases, and that he may do so, when the exigence
of the Church does require it; but then whenever he sends them, he will, as
he has always done, send them with the power of working Signs and wonders, and
whenever they shall come, we shall have a right to try them by the
Scriptures, as a Test. But for these, and the German Prophets, who pretended to
Inspiration, and Prophecy without signs; to voices from Heaven, which none
heard; and strange Apparitions, which none saw but themselves; and who Preached
other doctrines, than what the Apostle has preached, they were Enthusiasts, or
Impostors, or a composition of both, and had they first appeared in the Church
of Rome, his Holiness had likely caressed them for great Saints and Prophets,
offered them the compliment of a new Order, and so have obliged them, as he
has done many more by the same arts, to devote themselves to his service, and
declare him to be Vice Deus, Vice Christus, a God upon earth, the Sovereign
both of Angels and men.

In the next place let me observe unto you, that among all the miraculous gifts
of the Spirit recited either in this Chapter, or any other place of the Gospel,
there is no mention made of Heroical impulse, by which men were sometimes
irresistably moved from the Spirit, under the Jewish Economy to execute
judgment in an extrajudicial manner upon the enemies of God. For God being the
Is 33.22. Ezekiel. 20.11. Numb. 31.28.37.40. 1 Chronicles. 29.11.
Political King, and Legislator of the Jews, did as other absolute Monarchs do,
in some special exigencies send men with extraordinary supra-legal commissions
to do present execution upon great and dangerous offenders without staying for
the ordinary process by Law. But our Savior, one end of whose coming was to
put an Ephesians. 2.14. Dan. 9.26, 27. Acts 10.34, 35.
end to the Jewish Economy, and who came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them, gave no such gifts unto men. No, there is to be no fire from Heaven,
nor no Phinehases under the Christian dispensation. Accordingly the first
Apostolical ages of wonder were utterly ignorant of killing impulse and zeal,
which I could not but observe to the utter detestation of Christian Assassins,
the Clements, and Ravilliacs on one hand, and the Knoxes history. Ravilliac
redivivus, and the history of the late Arch^bishop of S. Andrews his murder in
the spirit of Popery.
Melvils, and Mitchels on the other.

To proceed, Let us a little more particularly reflect upon that blasphemous
doctrine of the Quakers (now by the industry of the Emissaries no contemptible
Sect) concerning a Spiritual ministry, and spiritual worship, whereby they
pretend that the Holy Ghost now comes down upon their Assemblies, as it did in
the Apostles time, and moves them to preach and pray by inspiration without any
regard to condition, or Sex. Hence when they meet together they sit hanging
their heads in a silent dumb manner, till the Spirit, as they pretend, shall
move some body, it is indifferent be it man or woman, to preach or pray.
Accordingly they call their Preaching, Prophesying, and precariously say that
they have the Spirit of Adoption, by which they call God Father, and that the
spirit in the inspired Minister makes Intercession for them with unutterable
groans. That they groan sufficiently, we grant, for sometimes in their meetings
they do nothing else; but if their groaning, or vocal devotions be from the
Spirit, how comes it to pass, that the Spirit never moves them, as it did in
the Apostles days, to Pray and Prophecy in unknown tongues? When we shall see
in their Assemblies, as the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles did in the Primitive
Christian meetings, that they have the gift of tongues, and the gift of
interpreting thereof; when together with the gift of tongues, we shall see that
they have, as the Christians had, all the other miraculous gifts; when we shall
see that they show themselves to be Prophets, and Spiritual in receiving what
this Apostle has written (in particular, that a woman should not speak in the
Church) as the Commandments of God, and lastly, when with all this they shall
preach no other doctrine, than what the Apostle has preached, and the
Catholic Church received, then we will believe, if they be lawfully baptized,
that it is the spirit which is speaking in them, and that God is in them and
among them of a truth, but till then we must believe them all to be Impostors,
or Enthusiasts, and blasphemers of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore in the next place let us consider, what an horrible sin it is to
counterfeit any of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, in particular the spirit of
Praying and Preaching, which, with the gift of Faith as it is taken for
inspired courage and boldness, is most easy to be counterfeited of all the
spiritual gifts. But first let us make some reflection on the pretenders to the
spirit of praying and preaching, under whom I comprehend not only those whom I
mentioned above, but another sort of spiritual juglers, who when they are
ashamed to talk, like the lowest form of Enthusiasts, in a plain Fanatical
strain, and so apparently blaspheme the Holy Ghost, yet invent such uncouth
ambiguous terms in Divinity, and so artificially contrive the style and phrase
of their religious discourses, as to beget an opinion in their followers, that
they pray and preach by inspiration, and so besides the dishonor they reflect
on the Christian Religion, and the Holy Ghost, maintain the Schisms which they
have made, under the color of more spiritual ordinances and worship, and
sacrilegiously usurp that specific veneration to themselves, which was wont to
be given to inspired men. One equivocal phrase which is commonly in the mouths
and writings of these Sanctimonious men is the Spirit of preaching, and the
Spirit of prayer, which, though by an Hebraism in English, they ought now to
signify no more than the skill, or habit of praying, and preaching, yet these
Sophisters and usurpers (for so most of them are) of our Holy Profession so use
them, that the deluded people generally take them in a more obvious sense for
praying and preaching by immediate inspiration from the Holy Ghost. To this
purpose they talk much of the in-comeings, out-lettings, and in-dwellings of
the Spirit, and have taught their disciples to object, that to pray by a form
does stint the spirit, and by these, and other like phrases, whereof store may
be found in Rutherfords letters, and the writings of the Independents, not to
mention any more, they have made their followers take it for granted, that
extemporary prayers, especially as they are spoken, and acted by them, are the
effect of inspiration, and by consequence, that themselves are immediately
inspired. This error concerning the extemporary spirit of Prayer has been the
cause of much Council. Milev. 2. can. 12. Placuit, ut preces, quae probatae
fu^rint in concilio ab omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae omnino dicantur in
Ecclesia, ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel. per ignorantiam vel per minus
studium sit compositum. See also Con. Carth. 3. c. 23.
mischief to the Church, and of much dishonor to the name of God. It has
caused men to have a mean opinion of Forms, although our Savior not only
taught his Disciples to pray by a form, but prayed by a form when he hanged
upon the cross. It has made them reject all Liturgies, and Liturgical offices,
contrary to the practice of Gods Universal Church; nay it has made these
Spiritual Mountebanks not only dis-use the Lords Prayer it self, but forbid the
use of it as Superstitious, Idolatrous and See D. Owens life.
a Papistical charm. By this the people of these kingdoms have been led into
the most unnatural Schism and Rebellion that ever was, not to mention the later
Murders, Rebellions, and Covenants, which the Separatists from our Sister
Church have committed, raised and carried on by the help of this delusion; and
they may Preach, and Pray the people to what they please, as long as they hold
them captive under this error, which is not only inconsistent with what I have
now delivered concerning the gifts of the Holy Ghost, but contrary to the
practice of the Catholic Church, and it may be confuted, would people but
reflect, by the example of the Pharisees among the Jews; and the flagitious
lives of many Christians, as of Casaub. of Enthusiasm.
Basilides the bloody Tyrant of Mascovy, the late Usurper of these Three
Kingdoms, the Founder of the Jesuits, Labbade, Major In Ravil. rediv.
Weer, and Captain Venner, who of all Enthusiasts, or Impostors that ever
pretended to Pray by the Spirit, were in this sense the most powerful, and
eloquent, for they had words and tears, and sighs at command, and so bewitched
the people by their rapturous spiritual-like devotions, as to pass for men
extraordinarily inspired.

Which brings me to reflect on the arrogance and presumption of some sort of
Ministers, who warranting themselves from the promises, which God made of his
special presence to the Prophets and Apostles, and the spirit of supernatural
courage and confidence, which rested upon them by virtue thereof, have treated
Kings and Princes with a counterfeit sort of Prophetical boldness, as if God,
as he spoke to the Prophet Ezekiel, had hardened their foreheads like flint or
Adamant, or had made them, as he told Jeremiah he would make him, like an
Iron-pillar, and brazen wall against the whole land, both against King and
Priests, and Princes and people. Hence with incomparable rudeness, and
insolence, they have contrary to all rules of Christian Charity libelled and
upbraided instead of humbly reproving their King, and all under the pretense of
preaching the word with boldness, and as if God had sent them on purpose, as he
sent Nathan to David, Moses to Pharaoh, or Elijah to Ahab, etc. they have
called Protestant Princes Persecutors, Idolaters, and Jeroboams to their faces,
and told them that God would destroy them and their house. Nay they have
presumed in Gods name to lay civil injunctions, and prohibitions upon them and
their Courts of Justice, and when the Magistrate has commanded the people to
do one thing, they have charged them to do another. With the like counterfeit
spirit of Apostolical boldness, but of real unchristian impudence and railing,
they have spoken evil of Civil and Ecclesiastical dignities to the great
dishonor of God, and his Prophets, and Apostles; who never spoke nor acted any
thing by virtue of any special mission, and the spirit of courage which did
attend them in it, but what was consistent with gentleness, moderation,
humanity, duty, and love.

In the last place give me leave to show you, how much some Authors have
injured the Christian Religion, and abused the unlearned part of the world, who
writing the lives of some modern Enthusiastical Divines have represented them
as endowed with most of these wonderful Spiritual gifts. Those, who desire to
be satisfied in this particular, may consult the life of Dr. Samuel Winter In
the 9. p. of the praes. the Author says that he saw the sky open, and heard a
voice which said to him, that neither he, nor his should ever want: which
cannot be true, for his son went a begging, see p. 41. of the book. In the 10.
page God assured him that he should have a safe voyage into Ireland, and
convert many souls there, see p. 41. Once when he prayed for a sick person in
another land, he had an assurance of the parties recovery, by an audible voice,
and a glorious brightness which shined round about him, ib. When he was a
Schoolboy, God (he thought) assured him by a vocal answer that he heard his
prayer, p. 2. When he was very sick he assured his wife, that he should not die,
because God had not fulfilled a certain promise which he made to him. p. 4. He
conversed with Angels in a dream, and had showed unto him the exceeding weight
of glory, which is laid up in heaven for Gods chosen ones, p. 17. He lay a
whole day in an heavenly rapture, and desired his wife, a Minister, and other
friends to tell him, whether he were in the body, or out of the body, for he
could not tell, p. 24. Before he prayed with Coll. Jones his wife when she was
sick, he asked her whether she had faith to be healed? and when he had done
praying he assured her she should live, p. 44. His hearers could tell by his
prayers for sick persons, whether they should recover or not, p. 47, 48. he
knew the same himself, p. 50. When his wife lay under a temptation to turn
Anabaptist, God assured him by prayer, that he should be quickly satisfied from
heaven, p. 51. Mrs. Winters Sisters husband lying very sick at London, she sent
to the Dr. at Dublin to pray for him, but before he could be persuaded to pray,
he retired privately to know of God if he were yet alive, and after prayer
assured the company, that he should recover. p. 52, 53. Once praying in
imitation of Abraham's intercession for Sodom, as he kneeled against a post in
the room, he saw a great shining light about him, and perfectly heard a voice
saying, The Nations shall be spared for ten thousand righteous sake, p. 56. He
used to pray for things, and have his answer before he rose from his knees, and
immediately give thanks thereupon, p. 56. He often heard voices, when none
heard them but himself, according to Acts 22.9 p. 57.
Provost in the late times of Trin. Coll. by Dublin, and what is written of old
Mr. Whom that Author calls the man of God, and says that Mr. Rutherford called
him the heavenly Prophetical and Apostolical man of God. He struck a man dead
upon the place, as S. Peter did Ananias and Saphira with a word, p. 252. He
told one John Steward of Air, who came to visit him in prison, that the Plague
of God was broken out in that place, and bid him hasten home, and cause Heugh
Kennedy Provost of that town, to convene the people in the streets, and pray
together, and the Lord should hear Heugh Kennedy and remove that stroke. Which
(says he) fell out in every thing as the man of God had foretold, ib. At the
siege of St. Jane de Angeli he desired the Canonier to discharge such a piece
of Cannon, assuring him, that God should direct the shot, p. 254. He astonished
the King of France with a few words, and made him say, Surely, this is a man of
God, p. 255.
Welsh, and other Scottish Ministers, In the fulfilling of the Scripture,
printed 1669. From whence, not to mention other examples, it will appear, that
unless God in mercy rebuke that Spirit of Enthusiasm, which is gone out amongst
us in these Three Kingdoms, we may have as many Legends from some sort of
Protestants, as we have formerly had from the Church of Rome.

There are excellent uses, which might be made of what I have said upon this
subject. 1. Concerning the greatness of the Apostolical, or Episcopal power, as
we find it exercised by this Apostle over those, who were inspired. For by
virtue of that Ecclesiastical Authority, which he and the other Apostles
received from Christ, and derived upon their Successors the Bishops, he
silenced the Prophetesses, regulated the speaking of the Prophets, commanded
that not above two or three inspired linguists should speak at one meeting, and
that not all together, but every one in his turn. But if there happened to be
no Interpreter, then that they should all keep silence in the Congregation, and
only speak mentally to themselves. In a word he commanded that all things
should be done decently, regularly, and according to his appointment. He
reproved them for coveting the gift of tongues, and told them plainly, that if
any man thought himself a Prophet, or any other ways inspired, he should show
himself to be such in receiving his orders, as the commandments of God.

Secondly, Concerning the usefulness of humane learning, and the necessity of
erecting Schools, and Universities for the teaching thereof. For the Christian
Religion cannot be supported against its adversaries without humane learning
inspired or acquired. And therefore as the Apostles, and Apostolical preachers
died, God supplied their mortality, by calling Philosophers, and other Learned
men to the rational defense of the Gospel against Jews, Heathens and Heretics,
whom the former had redargued not so much by words of man's wisdom, as by the
demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Nay among the Jews themselves there
were These schools of Prophetical Education were at Naioth in Ramah, 1 Samuel
19.19, 20. at Jerusalem, 2 Kings 22.14. at Bethel and Jericho, 2 Kings 2.3, 4,
5. and at Gilgal, 2 Kings 4.38.
Schools of the Prophets, in which as the Jewish writers agree, the youth were
trained up by study and discipline for the reception of the Prophetical Spirit,
which according to Maimonides, whom the Jews call the second Moses, rarely came
but upon persons so qualified and prepared. And I dare boldly say were it not
for the two Schools of the Prophets in our Israel, that the Nation would soon
be overrun with ignorance, and Religion quite born down with Popery, and other
monstrous Sects among us, which have increased with the same proportion, that
humane learning has been decryed, and the Two Universities dis-used.

Thirdly, Concerning the goodness and wisdom of God: his goodness in sending
his Spirit with miraculous gifts to supply the necessities of his infant
Church, and his wisdom in taking away these extraordinary means, when ordinary
means were to be had. But I have been too tedious already. God grant that what
I have now delivered so plainly on this subject, may conduce to make us all
have right and worthy apprehensions of the Christian Religion, which however it
has suffered by some men's Enthusiastical Notions, and zeal, yet ingenuous and
teachable souls (and such there are among the most erroneous Sects) will easily
discern from the frame and tenor of this discourse, that, as it was designed
by its blessed founder, so it really is the most rational, sober, and regular
institution that he could have given to the sons of men.

FINIS.

