THE TRUE NOTION OF Persecution Stated.

IN A SERMON PREACHED At the Time of the Late CONTRIBUTION FOR THE French
Protestants.

By GEORGE HICKES, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, and
Vicar of Alhallows-Barkin, London.

Published at the earnest request of many that heard it Preached.

(...).

Ignat. ad Romans (...).

Clem. ad Cor. Ep. 11. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head
in S. Paul's Churchyard, M DC LXXXI.

2 COR. iv. 9. Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.
The precedent Verse is this:

We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not
in despair; Persecuted, but --


THESE words are spoken by S. Paul, not of the Christians in general, but of
the Apostles; who above all other Christians, were so obnoxious to sufferings,
because they preached the new Doctrine of the Gospel; which was the destruction
of all other Religions, throughout the Jewish and Gentile world.

But because the Disciples, or Lay-professors of Christianity have in all Ages
and Governments suffered in proportion with the Preachers of it, I shall
consider the words in general, as they regard the whole body of any Christian
Communion, that suffer in any common Persecution; The Pastors with their
Flocks, the Teachers with their Hearers, the Clergy with the Laity. For it
often so happens, that all that will live Godly shall suffer Persecution, and
that the professors of Christianity, be they Ministers, or People, must through
many Tribulations and Afflictions, enter into the Kingdom of God.

For Christianity is a suffering Religion, and above all others exposes its
professors to persecution, because when the Supreme Power happens to be
Infidel, Idolater, or Heretic, and so sets it self against the Gospel in
general, or any particular truth of it, it becomes the duty of all Christian
Subjects to suffer, if they will not fly. There Is no mean in the Gospel betwixt
these two extremes, denying the Faith, or Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 64. edit.
par. 1615. dial. cum Tryph. p. 236, 323, 363.
fighting in the defense of it, being equally damning sins; for as it is
written, Whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father
which is in Heaven: So it is as plainly written, Whosoever resists the Power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. And that we should in no exigence do the one, nor the
other, but (...) -- Just. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 323.
cheerfully suffer, or save our selves by flight, it is also written, That
every one, who shall forsake Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, or lose his Life for Christ's sake, and
the Gospels, shall receive an hundred fold, and inherit Everlasting Life; and
that they are blessed, who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of God.

Accordingly has it been the practice of all good Christians to suffer or fly;
for so we are used to speak, not that flight is not one sort of suffering (for
it implies forsaking of House, Relations, Lands, and Country) but that it is
the custom of all Languages, to speak of the lesser evil, as of a good, and so
flight is if it be compared with Death, Slavery, or bodily Torments, which are
more emphatically called sufferings; though really in it self it is also a
great degree of suffering, for which the person so flying from persecution
shall be rewarded with Everlasting Life.

I say it has been the inviolable practice of all good Christians to suffer,
or fly, and never to resist; so the Primitive Christians did under Pagan,
Arrian, and Apostate Emperors; the Waldenses under Pagano-Christian, or Popish
Powers, our own Ancestors in the days of Queen Mary; and now our poor Brethren
of the Reformed French Communion, who are fled hither in assurance of his
Majesty's protection, and his Protestant Subjects Charity, to whom he, as it
becomes so great a Patron of the Protestant Cause, has most affectionately
recommended them, commanding us to stir you up to so good a work, which I have
chosen to do in a Discourse upon these words, upon which I shall proceed in the
following method.

First, I shall show what Persecution is, or when Christians are truly said to
be Persecuted. Secondly, I shall show, that our Brethren of the French Church
are under a true Persecution, or truly Persecuted. Thirdly, I shall show you to
what a degree they are Persecuted. And Lastly, I shall show you, that it is our
indispensable duty to help, and assist them, that now they are Persecuted, they
may not be destitute; nor quite destroyed, though they be cast down.
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.
I. First, I shall show, what Persecution is, which is very necessary for me to
do, because the true notion of Persecution is generally mistaken, men often
miscalling that by the odious name of Persecution, which is nothing, but the
Execution of just, and sometimes of necessary, and wholesome Laws. Thus the
Modern Jews in their writings speak of themselves as of a People, that are
Persecuted by the seed of Esau throughout the whole world. The Papists, those
in the British Dominions especially, complain, that they are persecuted by the
Heretics; and besides them, there are yet many other sorts among us, who make
bitter outcries against Persecution, when their sufferings, if tried by the
true test of Persecution, would not, I am confident, appear to be such.

Therefore, that I may lay down the true notion of it, I must desire you to
observe, that the Original words in the Old and New Testament, as likewise the
Latin word for Persecution, and to Persecute properly signify to pursue, or
run after another to stop him, or get before him; and from this Agonistical
acceptance of the words, they are translated into a Tropical sense, to
signify to prosecute, pursue, or attach by Law. I confess sometimes they
signify to pursue after another to kill him, and so come to be taken in a
Military sense, to prosecute by the Sword; but because I am resolved to confine
my Discourse to Legal, or pretended Legal Persecution, I shall take no notice
of Sword-persecution further, than it happens to the Subjects from the
Magistrate, by virtue of the Law. To make this which is the first step of my
Discourse, as plain as I can, I tell you again, that the Scripture-words for to
Persecute, signify to prosecute, or pursue by Law; And by Law I here
understand, Law in the largest sense for the Will and Pleasure of the Supreme
Authority, whereby the People, that live under it, are commanded to do, or not
to do, otherwise to do, or forbear doing such and such things.

Now because in the several times wherein the several Books of the Old and New
Testament were written, as well as in the Ages since, good men were often
prosecuted and pursued by Authoritative orders, for doing of those things,
which God had some way Commanded, or for not doing of some things which he had
some way or other forbid; therefore the Law-terms for prosecution came in an
especial manner to signify Persecution; which indeed is very seldom any thing
else, but a Postremo legum obstruitur authoritas -- Tert. Apol.
Legal, or in case of usurpation, or wresting the Laws, a pretended Legal
prosecution under Authority, for not obeying where God prohibits; for doing of
any thing, which God has any way commanded, or not doing any thing, which he
has any way forbid: as Peter and John said unto the Sanhedrim, Tuis etiam
obtemperaremus praeceptis nisi instituti legibus Christianis daemonum cultus,
and aras semper pollutas sanguine vitaremus. Martyrs Thebaeae Leg. ex Eucher.
(...). Polycarp. ad Proconsul. in Smyrn. Eccles. Epist.
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto
him, judge ye.

I have a mind to make sure-work, as I go, and therefore I must repeat it once
more, and tell you, that Persecution Actively taken consists in Legally
prosecuting, and Passively taken in being Legally prosecuted for not obeying
Authority in those things which God prohibits: otherwise for prosecuting, or
being prosecuted unto any penalty for doing of those things, which he has any
way commanded; or forbearing, or refusing to do those things, which he has any
way forbid. I have put in the words any way, because there are two ways by
which God the King of Kings makes his pleasure known unto men, by right Reason,
or the light of Nature, and by Revelation, which we commonly call the light of
Grace.

Right Reason consists in the common principles, which God has implanted in
all men's understandings, and the conclusions which issue from them; for as
Solomon says, The Understanding of a man is the Candle of the Lord; and the
light of Natural Reason is his Light, who, as Cicero calls him in his First
Book of Laws, is infinita men's, and ratio, infinite Understanding and Reason;
or as the Platonists Allegorically style him, (...), Original Reason or Light.

As for the light of Grace, or Revelation, there are many sorts of it; for God,
as the Apostle speaks, who at sundry times, and diverse manners spoke in the
Patriarchal and Jewish times by Prophets, Oracular responses, and voices from
Heaven, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, who was the Antitype
of Moses, and by his Apostles, who were the Prophets of the New Testament; and
these two ways the light of Nature, and Scriptural Revelation are the general
and ordinary means, by which we come to know what is the will of God.

Persecution therefore ordinarily speaking consists with respect to the
Persecutors in Judicially prosecuting, and with respect to the Persecuted in
being Judicially prosecuted unto any penalty for doing those things which God
has commanded by the light of Nature, or Scriptural Revelation; or for not
doing of those things, which he has forbidden by either, or both of those two
ways. This is the true notion of Persecution, which consists not in the
greatness of any man's sufferings, which inconsiderate people chiefly look at,
but in the righteousness of the cause for which he suffers: For if he be
pursued for doing any thing against the Law, or Government, under which he
lives, that God has not commanded, or for not doing of those things, which God
has not forbid, he is not persecuted, but justly prosecuted for disobeying the
Powers, which God has bound him to obey.

This is most agreeable to our Saviors notion of Persecution, Matthew. 5.10.
Blessed are they, who are Persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. To the understanding of which words, I desire you to take
notice, that righteousness in the Scripture-stile, when it does not signify
just dealing, or (as it sometimes does by an Hebraism) Psalm. 112.9. Prove.
11.18. Psa. 37.21, 25. Matthew. 1.19.
mercifulness, it is taken for Virtue, or Religion in its full latitude, or
obedience unto God. In this sense righteousness, and the righteous man, are
opposed to wickedness, and the wicked man, Ezekiel. 3.19, 20. If thou warn the
wicked man (says God unto the Prophet) and he turn not from his wickedness --
Again, when a righteous man does not turn from his righteousness; etc. And in
this sense of righteousness says our Savior to his Disciples, Except your
righteousness, i. e. except your Religion and obedience to God exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. So says he, Matthew. 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of God, i. e. the
Gospel, and its righteousness, that is, the Religion, and Obedience, which the
Gospel prescribes, and all these things shall be added unto you. According to
this sense of the word righteousness S. Luke says of Zacharias and Elizabeth,
that they were righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless. And as righteousness signifies Obedience, and
Religion in general: so it signifies also any particular Divine Institution, or
the performance of any particular duty under any Divine Institution, as God is
pleased to order and command. Thus the righteousness of the Law, Phil. 3.6.
signifies the performance of all those Commands and Ordinances, which God
required of the Jews and Proselytes under the Old Testament; and the
righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.13. signifies the performance of all those
duties, which God requires of Christians under the New. The one signifies the
Jewish Religion, which consisted in obeying of Moses, the other the Christian,
which consists in obeying of Christ; that consisted in keeping the old Law, and
this in observing the Gospel, which the Primitive Neomenias vestras, and dies
festos -- haec ergo vacua fecit Nova Lex Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Epist.
Barnab. -- (...). Just. Mart. dial. cum Tryph.
writers in their Discourses with the Jews, usually called the New; nay, as
general words are frequently taken in particular significations: so this word
is taken for any particular act, or object of obedience to God, as Matthew. 3.15.
when John forbad Jesus to be baptized of him, Jesus who knew that God required
it of him, says unto John, Suffer it to be so, for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness, i. e. thus it is our duty for me to confirm, and
approve thy imperfect Ministry, and for thee to let it be so confirmed, because
it is the pleasure of God.

From all this it is plain, that to be Persecuted for righteousness-sake,
signifies to be persecuted for obedience unto God, and therefore it is neither
the person, nor the sufferings, but the cause which makes Persecution: so that
when men are prosecuted by Authority for any other cause, but for
righteousness, i. e. for Religion as Religion is taken for obedience to God's
Laws, let them complain, and pretend as much as they please, they are not
persecuted, but justly punished for disobedience to the Supreme Power. They
suffer not for God's sake, but their own; they suffer not as Martyrs, and
Confessors, but as Malefactors. This consideration made S. Peter in his First
Epistle general -- distinguish so carefully between suffering as a Malefactor,
and suffering as a Christian, Chap. 4. 14, 15. If ye be reproached for the name
of Christ, happy are you -- But let none of you suffer as Oraet Lucii Mart. ad
Vrbicium Prefect. Just. M. Apol. 1.
a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busie-body in things
that belong not unto him; yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf. In the 2d. Chap. 13. ver. he charged
them to submit themselves to every Ordinance of man, whether it were to the
Emperor, or his subordinate Magistrates for the Lords sake, as free indeed in a
spiritual sense from many yokes, but not to use their Christian freedom, as a
cloak for their malignity, but as the servants of God. Then from Subjects he
proceeds to the Servants or Slaves, who you may be sure suffered much from
Jewish, and Heathen Masters upon the account of the Christian Religion; and he
tells them that it was (...). Cod. Alex.
acceptable to God, if a man for conscience toward God endured grief suffering
wrongfully. And in the 3d. Chap. after he had charged all Christians, as being
the best way to avoid sufferings, to refrain their tongues, to eschew evil, to
do good, and seek peace, Who is he (says he) that will harm you, if you be
followers of that which is good; but if notwithstanding all this, you chance to
suffer for righteousness-sake happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror,
neither be troubled: and lastly, in the 4th. Chap. he resumes the argument
again, in the words which I cited above, concluding that they that so suffered
according to the will of God, should commit the keeping of their Souls unto
him, as unto a faithful Creator.

Accordingly, there is scarce any one place of the New Testament, where
sufferings or persecution are mentioned, but it is with respect to the
Christian Religion: as, Blessed are you, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil of you falsely for my sake: Whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake, and the Gospels, the same shall save it:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that there is no man that has left Houses, or
Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or, etc. for my sake and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time with persecutions, and in the
world to come Eternal Life.

From which places it is evident, that Persecution consists in suffering for
Christ's sake, or for the sake of the Christian Religion, or any truth of it,
or for obeying God in any particular of it, after the same manner that the
Prophets, or holy men of old used to suffer under the Law, or Jewish Economy;
as our Savior said, Blessed are you, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, etc. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven,
for so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you. Accordingly Acts
5.41. it is said, that the Apostles departed from the presence of the Counsel,
where they were beaten, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for
his Name.

To put all this together, Persecution from the Civil Magistrate (for to that I
chiefly restrain my Discourse) consists in inflicting, or suffering any sort of
evil, or to any degree, for righteousness-sake; for Religions sake; for
Christ's sake; for the Gospels sake; for Christ's Name sake; for Christianities
sake; in a word, to suffer as the Prophets and Apostles did of old, who in all
their sufferings were reduced to this sad necessity, of disobeying God, or the
Civil Authority, as Peter and the other Apostles answered, and said to the
Sanhedrim, the second time, when they commanded them to preach no more in the
Name of Jesus, We ought to obey God, rather than man.

The general notion of Persecution, and of Christian persecution withal being
thus stated, we may easily perceive, that a man can be persecuted but upon two
accounts, for matters of professed Faith, or principles, or matters of practice.

Upon the former account a man is truly Persecuted, when he is prosecuted for
teaching, or professing any Truth, or true Doctrine, which he is bound by God
to teach or profess; or for disowning or denying any Error, or false Doctrine,
which he is bound by God to disown or deny. I have made this distinction
between owning of true, and disowning of false Doctrines, with respect to the
several ways in which men are wont to express their minds in affirmative or
negative propositions; although both ways of speaking virtually and really are
the same thing: As he that asserts Jesus to be Christ, does virtually deny this
blasphemous proposition, Jesus is not Christ; and he that denies this
blasphemous proposition, Jesus is not Christ, does virtually assert that Jesus
is Christ. Thus in all things the affirming of Truth is a virtual denying of
the opposite Error, and the denying of the opposite Error, an affirming of the
contrary Truth; and great is the number of Martyrs, who have been truly
Persecuted upon these accounts.

So Socrates was persecuted to death by the Laws and Magistrates of Athens, for
asserting the true God, or denying the false. He asserted that there was but
one God and Father of all, who made Heaven and Earth; and that the Gods whom
the Athenians worshipped were dumb Idols, the work of men's hands. For this
reason Justin Martyr represents him in part as a Apol. 1. p. 48.
Christian, and among those whom Apol. 2. p. 55.
wicked men, by the instinct of the Devil, persecuted for righteousness-sake.

He died a Martyr for Natural Religion; in the defense of a Doctrine, which God
had taught him by the Light of Nature, was not only true, but such a truth as
was his duty to propagate and maintain.

So likewise the Primitive Christian professors were persecuted both by the
Jews and Gentiles, for teaching and professing the Doctrines of the Christian
Religion, and for denying the obligation or validity of the Law of Moses, and
the Pagan Idols to be true Gods.

So much for Persecution upon matters of Faith, or Principles; and Persecution
for matters of Practice is likewise twofold, for matters of Divine worship,
which concern the First Table, or for matters of Justice and Charity, which
concern the Second.

With respect to the former, a man is Persecuted either upon a negative
account, for not denying of God, or, secondly, for not worshipping a false God
in opposition to him; as the three Children in Daniel were persecuted for not
worshipping the Golden Image of Nebuchadnezzar; the Primitive Christians for
not Eccl. Smyrn. Epist. de Polycarp. Mart.
swearing by the Emperor, and his Genius, for not Omnes Dei cultores
sacrificare, vel mori cogebat. Martyrium Ignat.
sacrificing to Idols, and the Emperors Epist ad Trajan. l. 10. 97.
Statue; And the Albigenses for not worshipping of Saints and Angels, and the
Host, as the Papists call their Breaden God: or, thirdly, For worshipping of
him in an undue manner; whether it be positively so, as the Primitive
Christians were persecuted by the Jews, for not worshipping of God according to
their manner, after it was abrogated, or naturally so as the Protestants are
persecuted for not worshipping of him according to the corrupt manner of the
Papists, which is polluted with the worship of Creatures, and with many
Sacrilegious, Idolatrous, and truly superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, which
utterly deprave and defile the Religious offices to which they belong.

Or secondly, upon a positive account, for worshipping the true God, as Daniel
was persecuted for worshipping of God as afore-time, after the decree of Darius
was made, not to ask any petition of God or man for thirty days, except of the
King.

So likewise with respect to matters of Justice and Charity, a man is also
persecuted upon two accounts, either for not doing of something, which is
unjust or uncharitable, as the Egyptian Midwives were in danger of being
persecuted by Pharaoh, for not murdering the Hebrew Infants; and many of the
Primitive Clem. ad Cor. Epist. c. 54. p. 114 Edit. Oxon. 1677. Romans 16.4.
Christians for not betraying or delivering up their Brethren into the hands of
the persecutors, or for doing some just or charitable action, which ought to
have been done: as many of the Primitive Christians, and Protestants have been
persecuted for harboring and relieving their distressed Brethren, and many of
his Majesty's loyal Subjects for harboring, relieving, and assisting of him.

These are all the cases, for which a man ordinarily speaking can be
persecuted: it must be for matters of Faith, or matters of Practice, for
matters of Divine worship, which belong to the first, or matters of Justice and
Charity, which belong to the second Table of the Law. All righteousness, or
matters of Religion, for which a man can be truly persecuted, are reducible I
say to Faith or Practice; and all matters of Faith are either such as are
necessary to be known, that they are revealed, and they are but few, or that
are necessary to be believed when they are known, and they may be very many;
and all matters of practice in short are such, as God has made it either
absolutely necessary, or in such circumstances for man to do, or not to do. But
if men will believe things to be Articles of Faith, which God never made so;
and also make rules for matters of Christian practice, and Communion which God
never made; if they will believe false, or impious, or uncertain Doctrines to
be certain and true, and set up new notions, which Primitive and Virgin
Christianity never understood or professed, and revive old Errors and Heresies,
which were condemned by the Catholic Church: In a word, if they will impose
upon their own, and other men's Consciences, and teach for Doctrines of God the
Traditions or Inventions of private men, let them suffer never so much, or be
never so much persuaded in their own Consciences of the truth of them, yet they
cannot be persecuted for them, though when they are honestly minded with their
erroneous Consciences, and their errors do not tend to the public disturbance,
nor thwart the common fundamentals of Christianity, they may be too severely
used.

I say men that coin new Doctrines, and Rules, and Precepts for Christian
Practice and Communion which God never made, let them suffer never so much from
Authority in the defense of them, yet they are not persecuted, but rightfully
punished, and suffer not as Christians, but as Criminals; and though God will
be merciful to their mistakes, when they proceed not from an ill mind, and
pardon their ignorance, when it is not wilful and affected, yet they can
neither suffer as Confessors nor Martyrs, nor shall they receive the promised
reward for their sufferings in the world to come.

No! whosoever is truly persecuted must suffer for Doctrines and Laws, which
God has given us, for the common principles of Christianity, and not for
private fancies and inventions; and therefore when you hear men cry out of
persecution, consider for what Scriptural Truth, for what Article of the Creed,
for what Because I have here made mention of the common principles of
Christianity, which I call Catholic principles, I shall here explain my self
in the words of the most Learned Dr. Beverege, who has deserved so well of the
Church Catholic, in his Prooemium before his Codex Canonum Vindicatus. Si
praegrande hoc omnium cujusque seculi Christianorum corpus, quod Catholica sive
universa Ecclesia vulgo appellatur, ut ubique, and semper constitutum attenti
perlustremus, certa quaedam quasi communia in eo deprehendemus principia, quae
totum percurrunt, omnesque illius parts and sibi invicem, and capiti
connectunt. Equibus primum, illudque e quo catera oriuntur, est, Sacram
Scripturam sive vetus novumque Testamentum, Divinitus esse inspiratam -- Verum
enimvero haec sacra Scriptura, etiamsi in iis, quae ad cujusque salutem
absolute sunt necessaria, praeceptis clarissima sit and omnibus manifesta;
quantum tamen ad doctrinam spectat, and externam Ecclesiae disciplinam, ea pro
ipsa sua altitudine non uno codemque sensu ab omnibus accipitur -- ut
observavit olim Vincent. Lirinensis, and ex haereticis, and schismaticis satis
superque constat, qui nempe singuli pravas suas opiniones, praxesque e sacris
Scripturis suo modo interpretatis, cliciunt. In hujusmodi itaque rebus si non
errandi, nec offendendi certi esse velimus, imprimis procul omni dubio cavendum
est, ne privatis nostris aliorum opinionibus, aut conjecturis, pertinaces nimis
adhaereamus, sed nobiscum potius recolamus, quid universa Ecclesia, vel maxima
saltem pars Christianorum de istis senserint, and in ca acquiescamus sententia,
in quam Christiani per omnia secula consenserunt: quemadmodum enim omni in re
consensus omnium vox naeturae est, ut ait Cicero, sic etiam in hujusmodi rebus
consensus omnium Christianorum vox Evangelii merito habeatur. Multa autem sunt,
quae licet in sacris Scripturis express, ac definite non legantur, communi
tamen omnium Christianorum consensione ex iis eruantur. Ex. gr. Tres distinctas
in sacrosancta Trinitate Personas venerandas esse, Patrem, Filium and Spiritum
Sanctum, hosque singulos verum esse Deum, and tamen unum tantummodo esse Deum:
Christum (...) esse, vere Deum, ac vere hominem in una eademque persona. Hac
and similia, quamvis totidem verbis ac syllabis nec in veteri, nec in novo
instrumento tradantur, de iis tamen, ut utroque fundatis inter omnes semper
convenit Christianos, demptis tantummodo paucis quibusdam haereticis, quorum in
religione haud major habenda est ratio, quam monstrorum in natura. Sic etiam
Infantes sacro Baptismate abluendos esse, and sponsores ad illud Sacramentum
adhibendos: dominicum sive primam per singulas septimanas feriam religiose
observandam esse: Passionis, Resurrectionis and Ascensionis Domini ad Coelum,
nec non Spiritus Sancti adventus commemorationem per singulos annos peragendam:
Ecclesiam ubique per Episcopos a Presbyteris distinctos, iisque Praelatos
administrandam esse. Haec -- per mill and quadringentos ab Apostolis annos in
publicum Ecclesiae usum ubique recepta fuerunt, nec ullam intra illud tempus
invenire est Ecclesiam in ea non consentientem, adeo ut quasi communes sint
notiones omnium ab origin Christianorum animis insitae, non tam ex ullis
particularibus Scripturae locis, quam ex omnibus: ex generali totius Evangelii
scopo, and tenore, ex ipsa religionis in eo stabilitae natura and proposito,
atque ex constanti denique Apostolorum traditione, qui Ecclesiasticos hujusmodi
ritus, and generales, ut ita loquar, Evangelii interpretationes per universum
terrarum orbem una cum fide propagarunt. Alioquin enim non credibile, imo vero
impossible prorsus esset, ut tam unanimi consensione ubique and semper ab
omnibus reciperentur. Vid. etiam Cassandri defensionem officii pii viri,
adversus Calvinum.
Catholic principle, for what part of Christianity, for what Gospel Doctrine
they suffer, or in obedience to what Gospel Law; for it is no matter how much
they are persuaded in their own Consciences, and to what degree they suffer;
but do you enquire after their opinions, and then try if they are any part of
Christianity, and if upon trial they be not found to be so, their clamor and
noise about persecution must be unjust and vain. As for example, there is now a
loud cry among the Papists of the persecution of the Catholics (as they
mis-call themselves) and of the persecuting Laws against the Catholics in
England; but suppose all our Laws were executed against them, for what Article
of the Creed, for what Gospel-doctrine, or Precept, for what Catholic
principle, or for what part of Christianity would these Pseudocatholicks
suffer? are these Gospel Truths or Catholic principles, that the Bishop of
Rome is Christ's Vicar General, and that he is Supreme above all other Bishops
of the Catholic Church? Can they prove either by the Scriptures, or by
universal Tradition, that he is infallible either in the Chair or out of it,
and that there is no Salvation to be had without the Pale and Communion of his
Church? Are these, not to mention Transubstantiation, Image Worship, the
Invocation of Saints and Angels, Praying in an unknown Tongue, etc. any parts
of the Christian system; or did the Primitive Christians, or so much as one
Church of Primitive Christians know or profess these things? No! they are not
Articles of Faith, nor Gospel-doctrines, nor common notions of Christianity,
but contradictions to all these, and the Doctrines, and Traditions of men.

In like manner, not to mention the late Mitckel King, Kid, Hackston, etc.
Malefactors in Scotland, our dissenting Brethren here have made grievous cries
about Persecution, and their writings are full of reflections upon the
persecuting Laws, and of invectives against the makers of the Law for
Uniformity; but for what Gospel Truth or Precept? for what Catholic principle,
or for obedience to what Law of Jesus Christ did they ever yet suffer, or can
they suffer by those Laws? Is this a Gospel-doctrine, or Catholic principle,
that the original Government of the Church was Presbyterian, and that the
Government of it by Bishops above Presbyters, and distinct from them, is an
alteration of the original Government, and an usurpation over the Church of
God? If it be, let them show us when this disparity of Bishops from Presbyters
began? Let them assign the time of this universal Aberration and Apostasy from
the Primitive platform; whether it was done in the time of the Apostles, or in
the times next unto them. If it was done in their time, let them tell us
whether it was done with their consent, or without it; or if in the times next
unto them, let them tell us the names of those Diotrepheses, who did first
attempt or atchieve it; let them show us so much as one Record, that does make
mention of it; or let them tell us how so great an alteration was made both
over the Presbyters, and over the Church, and yet not one Church or Presbyter
assert its right? Or how it came to pass for example, that Ignatius an holy
Martyr, Presbyter of Antioch, should so early usurp the Ecclesiastical
Government of Ad Romans (...) --
Syria at a time when there were such vast multitudes of Christians in it, and
elsewhere, that Epist. ad Trajan. (...) --
Tyberianus President of Palestine told the Emperor Trajan, under whom he
suffered, that he was wearied with punishing, and killing the Galileans; and
Neque enim civitates tantum sed vicos atque etiam agros superstitionis istius
contagio porvagata est -- satis constat prope jam desolata templa --
Pliny Propraetor of Bithynia, told the same Emperor, that the Christian
Religion had so infected the Cities, Towns, and Villages in his Province, that
the Heathen Temples were become desolate, and unfrequented; or if Bishops then
had not many particular Congregations under their inspection, how should the
same holy Martyr in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna distinguish between
personal Communion with the Bishop, (...).
and with another Minister licensed by him, and disallow all other Communions
but such? In like manner is it a Gospel doctrine, or Catholic principle, that
Book-forms of prayer are unlawful; or that God cannot be so worthily worshipped
by them, or in so spiritual a manner, as by extemporary prayers? Is there one
place in the Bible that prefers extemporary before prescribed Forms of Prayer?
Does the practice of the Catholic Church prefer those before these? Or is
there any thing in Scripture or Antiquity to show, that it is a sin for a
Minister to wear a Linen garment, when he officiates in the Church. Are
National Churches unlawful, or inconsistent with the progress of the Christian
Religion, or the notion of Christian Union and Communion? Does either the
Gospel, or any thing in Christianity teach us, that the use of Ceremonies is
unlawful in Divine worship? or that the Sign of the Clem. Alex. Strom. l 2.
(...). Tertul. de resur. Caro abluitur -- caro signatur. De corona. Ad omnem --
frontem Crucis signaculo terimus.
Cross is now become unlawful in the Office of Baptism? Are these Christian
Doctrines or Precepts, that the People have a right to choose their own
Ministers; that no Power upon Earth, at least no Secular Power, can silence or
suspend a Minister; that Infant Baptism is unlawful; or that the Scripture is
the Adequate Rule of Conscience and Practice; or that nothing ought to be
instituted in the Service and Worship of God, which he has not commanded or
approved in his Word?

Are any of these, not to mention others, Articles of Faith, or
Gospel-doctrines, or Catholic principles? If they be, how came they to lie so
long undiscovered, and never to be found out, but by a few particular men among
us, some about an hundred, and some about thirty and forty years ago? What,
were all Christian Doctors before Popery, and all since the Reformation from
it, but a few Dissenters of these Countries, blind, that they could never yet
discern these Doctrines in the Scriptures, neither in express terms, nor in the
scope and tenor of them? these Doctrines which would make, the professors of
them now separate from all National establishments of the Protestant Religion,
as well as ours, and which must have obliged them, had they lived in the first
and best Ages of Christianity, to have separated from all the Churches in the
world?

For there were As Jaemes at Jerusalem, and S. John the Apostle at Ephesus,
both which as a sign of the High Priesthood (for S. Clemens compares the Bishop
to the High Priest, c. 40. ep. ad Cor.) wore the (...), the Pontifical Crown,
or Frontlet, wherein was written holiness to the Lord. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24.
Epiphan. in haer. Nazar. and in haer. 78. Marc at Alexandria, who also is said
to have wore the Pontifical Frontlet. Vales. not. ad b. 5. c. 24. Eus. not to
mention Clemens, Caius, Archippus, Onesimus, Euodias, Timothy, Titus, Ignatius,
etc. who were all such Bishops according to Catholic Antiquity.
Bishops over several Congregations superior to, and distinct from Presbyters
in the Apostles times; and the Christian writers of the next Age to them, upon
whose Authority we take the Books of the New Testament to be their writings,
did teach and believe the office of such a Bishop to be the Ordinance of God.
And in those pure and Virgin-times of Christianity, they worshipped God by
Forms of Prayer, used Ceremonies in his worship, united into Eusebius. l. 3. c.
23. Can Ap. 34. Conc. Antioch. c. 9.
Metropolitan, which answer to our National Churches, used the Sign of the
Cross at all sorts of Devotion, received their Ministers from their Bishops, at
whose Election, it is true, they used to signify their approbation, as the
People were wont to do at our King's Coronation: but they never poll'd at them,
nor properly speaking gave any vote. In those days also, in the pure and Virgin
Ages of Christianity, while the Disciples of the Apostles governed the Church,
the Bishops silenced and deposed Presbyters, who were not so much as to Ignat.
ad Smyrn. Philadelp. Trull Can. Apost. 39. Tert. de baptismo, c. 17. Council.
Ancyr. c. 13. Council. Laod. c. 56. Hier. advers. Lucifer.
preach, or administer any Sacrament, without their leave and consent. They
then also used and instituted many Ceremonies, of which we have no account,
neither Precept nor Example in the Word of God. Shall I mention some? They
always mixed Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Conc. sext. in Trull. c. 32. Conc. Carth.
Can. 40.
water with the Sacramental Wine, to signify, that the Blood of Christ had a
cleansing virtue in it, which mystery was also, as they believed, represented
by the water which flowed with the blood from our Savior's side. They sent
Just. Mart. loc. cit.
portions of the Sacramental Bread to the sick and absent, to signify, that
they were partakers of the same Sacrifice, and belonged to the same Altar; and
they worshipped God toward the Resp. ad quaest. 118. ad Orthodox.
East. They gave Tertull. Clemens Alexand. and forsan Barnab. Epist. p. 223.
Edit. Isaac. Voss.
Milk and Honey to drink unto Baptized persons, to signify, that they were like
newborn Babes, who ought to desire the sweet and sincere milk of the Word.
They sung Psalms Plin. cit. Epist.
alternately at the holy Eucharist: They stood up in all their Devotions from
Resp. ad quaest. ad Orthod. 115.
Easter till Whitsuntide, to signify, that Christ was risen from the dead.
They observed the four Apostolical Holidays, the Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension of our Lord, and the descent of the Holy Ghost. Nay, even in the
Apostles days they Romans 6.4.
dipped baptized persons over the head, and let them remain a little space under
water, to signify, that they were buried with Christ in Baptism. They also
then had 1 Cor. 11.
Love Feasts joined with the holy Eucharist; the 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 Thessalonians. 5.26.
Just. Mart. Apol. 11.
salutation of the holy Kiss; and observed the Jewish custom of saying the
Hebrew word 1 Cor. 14.16. Just. Mart. Apol. 11.
Amen at the conclusion of every Prayer.

These were the general, besides the particular Ceremonies of particular
Churches; and in one word, there was never any separation made or thought of in
any of the Primitive Ages of Christianity, upon the account of Ceremonies; and
therefore since the belief and practice of God's universal Church in the first
and best Ages, are contrary to the Doctrines and Precepts, by which our
dissenting Brethren in vain attempt to justify their separation, How can they
be Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel? How can they be Catholic principles,
or parts of Christianity? and how can they be persecuted in the defense
thereof? No! they are no parts of Christianity, no Laws nor Doctrines of the
Gospel, but mere humane inventions, mere humane fancies and opinions, and most
of them modern opinions too. Primitive Christianity never heard nor thought of
such things, and notions, but they have been invented and advanced to justify
the Schismatical practices of some Men, who have not brought their Works to the
Rule, but the Rule, I mean the Gospel, to their Works. In a word, they are all
Novelties, or renewed Errors; all Impious, False, or most uncertain Notions;
and those that Teach them, be who they will, Teach for Doctrines of God the
Traditions and Opinions of Men.

II. But this is not the case of our poor Brethren of the French Church; it is
not for these, nor any such Opinions as these, that they suffer, but for
professing such true, and denying such false Doctrines, as God has obliged
them to profess, and deny; and for disobeying their King, in doing or not doing
of those things which God has commanded them to do, or not to do. This is the
second part of my Discourse, wherein, after having stated the true Notion of
Persecution, I told you I would prove they are truly persecuted; which you may
perceive I can do no other way, but by showing, that they suffer for
Righteousness-sake, for Religions sake, for the Truths of the Gospel, and in
defense of the Gospel-Laws. The case is really with them, as it was with the
Apostles and Primitive Christians; they are under a necessity of disobeying the
Supreme Authority, in not conforming to the Gallican Church, because the
Doctrine and Worship of it are plainly inconsistent with the Doctrines of the
Gospel, and the Evangelical Worship of God. As for example, the Gospel has
commanded us not to worship Angels, as in Coloss. 2.18. Let no man (says the
Apostle) deceive you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping
of Angels: And Rev. 19.20. when S. John fell at the Angel's feet to worship
him, See (says the blessed Spirit) thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants. But the Gallican Church, like all the rest of the Papal
Communion, Teaches and Practices the worshipping of Angels, and makes solemn
Invocations, not only of the Angels and Archangels in general, but of this and
that Angel by their proper Names.

The Gospel plainly forbids praying in an unknown Tongue, because he that
speaks in a Tongue unknown to the People, speaks not unto man (as the
Apostle argues) but unto God and the Air; and he that so speaks is a
Barbarian unto the People, because they know not the meaning of his voice; yet
notwithstanding all that is so expressly written upon this matter, 1 Cor. 14.
the Gallican Church uses Latin-offices, and their public Worship is all in
Latin, which the People do not understand.

The Gospel teaches, that as there is but one God; so there is but one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man Christ Jesus, to whom alone we must pray
to make intercession for us to God: but the Gallican Church prays to Dom.
quinta post Epiph. ad poscenda suffragia Sanctorum. Oration in octava Sancti
Steph. ut pro nobis Intercessor existat.
Saints and Angels, and above all, to the De Sancta Maria oration in all their
Masses, -- ut qui vere eam genitricem Dei credimus, ejus apud te
intercessionibus adjuvemur. Oration in circumcisione Domini, -- ut ipsam pro
nobis intercedere sentiamus --
blessed Virgin to make intercession for them: So that if her prayers were in
the Mother Tongue, the People could not join in Her worship, without committing
Idolatry against God, and Blasphemy against Jesus Christ.

The Gospel assures us, that Jesus Christ ascended into Heaven, and there
sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for us, and that he was
once offered up for all, and by one offering of himself, perfected for ever,
them that are Sanctified: but the Gallican, like all other Popish Churches,
teaches, that he is bodily present, and bodily offered up in the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and that his real flesh and bones are eaten, when the consecrate
Wafer is eaten, and that the Hostie, as they call the great Wafer, which they
expose, and carry about, is the Urbanus VIII. in his Preface before the Missal,
begins thus. Si quid est in rebus humanis plane divinum, quod nobis superni
cives (si in eos invidia caderet) invidere possent, id certe est SS. Missae
Sacrificium, cujus beneficio sit, ut homines quadam anticipatione possideant in
terris coelum. dum ante oculos habent, and manibus contrectent coeli terraeque
conditorem.
very Christ. This they keep in a Box on purpose, and on Especially the two
Corpus Christi days, called by the Gallican Church, Festes de Dieu, the Feasts
of God.
solemn days carry it in Procession, as the Pagans did their Idols, to be
adored; and where ever it is met, there the People must fall down, and worship;
and wheresoever the Priest makes a stand, there must prayers be offered up unto
it, as unto the very Christ. The Heathens were never guilty of more gross, and
absurd Idolatry, than this. The worshipping of a Leek, or an Onion, or an head
of Garlic, as the Egyptians did, is not more against common Sense and Reason,
than the worshipping of a Wafer, the work of a Baker, or Confectioners hand.
And then as to the Elements to be received in the holy Eucharist, the Gospel
says expressly, that at the Institution of it our Lord took bread, and brake
it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is my body --
likewise that he took the Cup, saying, Drink ye all of this; for -- This is
related in the same manner by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. where he also says,
Whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself. Accordingly the Primitive universal Church administered it exactly
after Christ's Institution, as is evident out of Ad Philadelph. (...).
Ignatius, Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, etc. And all succeeding Ages followed this Primitive practice,
and still does follow it throughout the Cassand. do Sacra. Com.
universal Church, except the Church of Rome, which began above Five Hundred
years since to take away the Cup from the People, for fear (O superstitious
Souls!) that they should spill the Blood. Yet the Gallican Church, for all her
fine pretenses to Liberty, still continues so strictly Popish, that she
deprives her People of the Cup, although the Savior she pretends to worship,
Proleptically speaking of this holy Sacrament, says, Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has Eternal Life.

What shall I say of the abominable Doctrines of Supremacy, Infallibility, and
Purgatory, which she allows with all the practices that follow thereupon, and
of her Image Worship, and Cross-worship, and Crucifix worship? not to mention
her Ceremonies, which for their number are intolerable, and for their nature
such as vilify, pollute, and deprave the worship of God. These are the things
which make our French Brethren dissent from the public establishment. There is
a plain opposition betwixt the Doctrines and Worship set forth in the Gospel,
and the Doctrines and worship of the Gallican Church. They cannot conform unto
it, nor live in the Communion of it, and be true to the Gospel, nor obey their
Prince in this particular, because Obedience unto him would be Disobedience
unto God.

They have no quarrel at the Church, because it is Episcopal, but because it is
Popish; for Calv. ad Sadol. If the Bishops would so rule, as to submit
themselves to Christ, then if there shall be any that shall not submit
themselves to that Hierarchy, reverently, and with the greatest obedience that
may be, there is no kind of Anathema, whereof they are not worthy, id. instit.
l. 4. c. 4. ss 4. Beza de diverse. grad. contr. Sarav. c. 21. Melancthon ad
camer. an. 1530. Confess. Aug. de Eccles. potest. Apol. Confess. Aug. ad art.
14. Princeps Anbalt. in concion. super Matthew. 7. Bogerman. President of the
Synod of Dort. Nay Blondel himself in Conclus. Apol. pro Hieronymo, which by
the importunity of the Agents of the general Assembly he was prevailed with to
leave out, with great numbers more to be seen in Dr. Fern against Champney,
Bancrofts Survey, chapter 8. Mason's defense of the Ordination, etc. Dr. Durell of
the Reformed Churches -- and the posthumous piece of Bishop Morton published by
Sir Hen. Yelverton. Lastly, see Mr. de Langle, and Mr. Claude's Letters at the
end of the most worthy and most learned Dean of Paul's his Unreasonableness of
Separation, which the late Agent at Charenton did in vain endeavor to make
them retract.
though they have not Bishops, yet their and other Reformed Writers have
approved the Office, and protested that they would, if they could have retained
them, and desired that their rejecting of them might be imputed to necessity,
and not to their choice. They have generally declared, that they will submit to
their own Bishops, if they will Reform; and some of them for want of Episcopal
Government, which they believe to be of Apostolical Institution, have thought
their own Churches deficient, and in that respect not so perfect as ours. They
are formed into a National Church, and are for National Churches, and detest
Sovereign Independent Communions, and their Ministers officiate in a distinct
habit, and are so far from disliking or undervaluing Liturgies, that they Pray,
Baptize, and Administer the holy Communion in Liturgical Forms. They silence
and suspend Ministers in their Consistories and Synods: They would have had
Church-Musick, Organs I mean, if they might, and would condemn all those as
guilty of Schism, who only under the infinite pretense of purer Ordinances, and
purer Worship, would set up private Congregations, and erect private Altars in
opposition to the public, and then teach the People, that the Magistrate has
nothing to do in Ecclesiastical matters; but that they ought to repair to those
Congregations, where they find they can profit most. No! they dissent not upon
such thin and absurd pretenses as these, but for the same reasons, that their
noble Ancestors the Albigenses, and our Ancestors since them, dissented from
the Church of Rome. They do not only pretend Conscience, and say their
Consciences tell them, that such and such things are unlawful; but they produce
the Rules, and Precepts, and Doctrines of the Gospel, which those Doctrines,
which they cannot profess, and those things which they cannot practice, plainly
contradict. The reasons of their Nonconformity do not vary, as time serves,
but they are the same that they were from the beginning; and they are not such
as would overthrow all Communions, and destroy all the Churches that are, or
can be in the world. In a word, they dissent and disobey in the defense of the
Gospel, and of the plain and undoubted Gospel Truths. They are the most noble,
essential, and integral parts of Christianity, which they adhere to; and it is
not so much a Christian, as a Pagano-Christian, a most corrupt, tyrannical, and
Idolatrous Church, to which they refuse to conform. As Rome is mystical Babylon
the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth: So the
Gallican-Church is a Province belonging to the mystical Babylon, a Daughter of
that Mother of Harlots, full of Fornication, and also drunk with the blood of
the Saints. Her Kings have all committed Fornication with her; but these are
come out of her, that they might not be partaker of her Sins. This is their
hard case, they are reduced to a necessity of sinning or suffering; and
therefore their sufferings are truly, and properly Persecutions; for they
suffer for Righteousness-sake, and the Gospels-sake, and according to the will
of God. It Is for Conscience toward God, that they endure grief; for a good
Conscience, as the Apostle speaks, which is opposed to an evil Conscience
defiled with sinful principles and sin. A good Conscience in the Scriptures is
otherwise called a pure Conscience [1 Timothy 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.3.] and it is compared
to a body washed with water [ Hebr. 10.22. 1 Pet. 3.21.] because it is devoid
of all sinful prejudice and corrupt affections, which pervert men's
understandings, and render them indocile, and are able to make them call black
white, and white black. The same is called in the Parable of the Sower, an
honest and good heart, because it receives the Truth with all readiness, and
impartially searches the Scriptures, whether things be so or no; and in what
person soever this sort of Conscience is, he would be glad to obey his
Sovereign, and be of the established Communion, because he knows these are
indispensable duties, when they can be done without denying Gospel-doctrines,
or breaking Gospel-Laws.

Such ingenuous Souls will be ready to hear, and ready to give an answer to
every man that shall ask them a reason of their doings, with meekness, and
fear; and when they suffer for doing good, as our French Brethren, and
fellow members now do; they are made partakers of Christ's suffering in this
world, and shall be made partakers with him in everlasting Glory, among Martyrs
and Confessors, in the world to come.

III. Having now shown first what Persecution is, and secondly, That our French
Brethren are Persecuted; I proceed in the Third place to show, to what a degree
they are Persecuted, and how deplorable their sufferings are, and how uneasy
and dangerous it is for them to continue in their Native Country, where they
are treated more like Slaves than Subjects, and daily vexed with Julian Edicts
and Decrees.

For they are deprived of the ancient Liberties, which were granted unto them
by former Princes, the Father and Grandfather of this present King. Many of
their Sedan, the College of Roche-foucaut, and that of Chatilion.
Universities are dissolved, and more than half their Temples razed, contrary
to the Faith of Oaths and Edicts, and against the common right of Prescription
of Three and Fourscore years. They are not allowed to erect Free-Schools for
the Education of their own Children, nor Hospitals for the maintenance of their
own Poor, nor can they have the benefit of any already Erected, without turning
to the Popish Religion. The Lords of Manors among them, who formerly had right
to keep Ministers, and set up the Reformed Worship in their own Houses, and
call their Neighbors and Tenants unto it by the sound of a Bell, are now in a
most Arbitrary manner, deprived of that privilege: And in the Cities where
they are, most numerous Colleges of Jesuits, or Houses of Mission for
propagating the Faith are erected, into which undutiful Children or Servants,
under a pretense of turning Catholics, may retreat when they please; and in
the greatest of those Cities, where perhaps Ten Schoolmasters could hardly
teach all their Children, the late Laws allow them but one, and their unjust
Magistrates commonly none.

They are forbidden to set up the Fleurs de Luces in their Churches, because
they must not bear any marks of Royal favor; and as a further token of Royal
displeasure and contempt, their chief Seats, and more costly Pews are ordered
to be pulled down.

Formerly Papists were allowed solemnly to renounce their Religion in the
Protestant Temples; and scarce a Lord's Day passed in the places where they were
As at Charenton, La-Rochelle, Montpellier, Nismes.
numerous, but some Converts might be seen so to renounce; but now all Papists
are forbidden to turn Protestants under pain of death, or the penalty of an
infamous sort of Penance, called L' amando honorable, in which the recanting
person only in his Shirt, with a Torch in his hand, and a Rope about his neck,
and the Hangman standing behind him, begs pardon of God and man, for having
renounced the Catholic (as they mis-call the Romish) Religion, and is
afterward punished with Banishment, if not with confiscation of Goods.

On the contrary, Protestants have all imaginable encouragement to turn
Papists; Pensions, Honors, Offices, and Preferments; and to secure them after
they have once declared, the forementioned severity (as I have been informed)
is the punishment of a relapse.

The Magistrates of the place have Authority to go with the Priest, and what
other company they please, to visit sick Protestants, and turn their Friends
and Attendants out of the Room, and discourse with them about their Religion;
and if either hopes of reward, or a delirous condition, or impatience, or any
other cause make them speak any thing in favor of the Romish Religion, then
they presently take witness that they turned Papists: After which, if the sick
persons die, they are to be buried as Papists, and if they left Children behind
them, they also are to be bred Papists; but if they recover, they are obnoxious
to the Law against a relapse.

Their Ministers cannot without great danger and difficulty visit Protestants,
which lie sick in Popish Houses, but every pitiful Sacrificulus, every ignorant
busy Priest has Authority to go into Protestant Houses, and visit the sick as
often as they please; and when their Women are in travail, like the
Hebrew-women in the time of hardened Pharaoh, they must have Popish Egyptian
Midwives, which is a far greater terror to many of them, than the pains of
Childbirth it self.

Formerly they were capable of the Magistracy in Cities and Burghs, where they
lived, but now they are incapacitated: Formerly they were to sit in their
Courts of Justice, as the Chambers of the Edict, (so called from the Edict of
Nantes, by which they were erected in favor of Protestants) and the
Party-Chambers of the Provinces, where half the Judges are Protestants, and
half Papists; but now they are deprived of that privilege: So that for want of
Judges of their own Religion, they have little or no benefit of the Law, when a
Catholic is their Antagonist; but when both parties are Protestants, if one
change, or promise to change his Religion, he is usually sure to gain the Cause.

And as they are banished from the Bench; so are they banished from the Bar and
Faculties: For no Protestant can be Councellor, Attorney, Notary, Surgeon,
Apothecary, Midwife, etc. In one word, they are made utterly incapable of all
employments Civil or Military; and by that means are deprived of all Honors
and better conveniences of life, of all the comfortable means of subsistence
and well-being, which the Papists enjoy in their Offices at Court, and in the
Country; in Peace, and in War, and in the Armies, both by Sea and Land.

This is their miserable condition, and what is yet worse, their Children have
liberty at Seven years of Age to choose their own Religion; and if to prevent
the mischief that may follow upon this, they send them away, they must forfeit
a years revenue of their Estates, if they do not produce them within a year;
but if they do not produce them within two, then they must forfeit the whole.
But in case they have no visible Estates, then they are subject to Arbitrary
valuations, and to Arbitrary Fines imposed thereupon.

If their Children upon this liberty happen to change their Religion, as many
will do rather than endure wholesome Discipline, their Parents are bound to
maintain them, as they do their other Children, or else to allow them a Pension
for their maintenance, and their Daughters so changing, may leave their
Parents, and go into Nunneries when they please.

This is the complement of all their other miseries, and to avoid so great a
mischief, it is, that they fly in flocks to Protestant Countries, that they may
save the Souls of their own bowels, and not have them bred up in Popish
darkness, and the regions of the shadow of death. Some have slipped away by night
with their Families, and driven without intermission, till they have got out of
their imperious Princes Dominions; and others, as is credibly reported, have
shipped off their little Ones, packed up in Bales of Merchantable Goods.

As for their Ministers, they upon any pretended crimes are banished, fined, or
imprisoned, on purpose to make them forsake their Flocks, and discourage the
People from putting their Children to the study of Divinity: Nay, they are in
an especial manner obnoxious to the barbarous cruelties and insults of the
Soldiery, who have free Quarter upon the poor Protestants, whom they abuse to
what degree they please.

In some As Poictou, Xaintonge, and about Rochelle.
Provinces they trail them, like dogs, by the neck to Mass, torture them till
they renounce their Religion, and most inhumanely misuse, or murder those, whom
God enables to resist unto blood: and though these tyrannical and arbitrary
outrages be not done by open order, yet it may be presumed they are done upon
connivance, and according to the secret will of the Supreme Authority, since
those that do them are neither punished nor restrained, notwithstanding the
complaints which the sufferers daily make at Court. These barbarous insolences
added to the severity of the Royal Edicts, you may be sure adds wings to their
haste, and makes them fly in great hurry and confusion into foreign Countries;
and the providence of God has cast many of them, like ship-wracked men, on our
Coasts, and expects that we should show them no little kindness, but receive
them courteously, and do good unto them in an especial manner, as unto them
that are of the household of Faith. They are Persecuted, but we must not forsake
them, they are grievously cast down, but in such an exigence as this, we must
not let them be destroyed.

IV. And therefore I proceed in the last place to show, that it is our duty to
help and assist them, to encourage and support them in this time of calamity,
to refresh their bowels, and minister unto their pressing wants. For there are
but three ways by which the spirits of persecuted men can be supported; by the
testimony of a good Conscience; the comforts and joys of the Holy Ghost, and
the charitable assistance of their Brethren, when (as the Apostle speaks) the
members have the same care one for another; and if one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; and when from this diffusive spirit of charity which
actuates all the parts of the truly Catholic Church, those that have riches,
and live at ease, will contribute to those that are poor, and in distress.

The testimony of a good Conscience is a great cordial, because it results from
considering, that we suffer for Righteousness-sake, and so are conformed unto
Christ in his sufferings, and thereby have a comfortable title to all those
mighty promises, which he has made unto them, that forsake Father, and Mother,
and Wife, and Children, and Lands, and Country, nay, and lay down their lives
for his and the Gospels-sake. This consideration made the Apostle glory, and
rejoice, and take pleasure in his infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities,
in persecutions, and in distresses for Christ's sake. And I question not, but
our suffering Brethren, the Confessors of the French Communion, are supported
in their present miseries, by these comfortable reflections, and rejoice in
spirit, that they are counted worthy to suffer for his holy Name.

The comforts and joys of the Holy Spirit consist in those gracious
irradiations, by which God is wont in an extraordinary manner to affect the
Souls of true sufferers, in such measures, as their condition requires. From
this principle, I conceive, it was, that Paul and Silas, after they had
received many stripes, sang at midnight in the innermost Prison, with their
feet fast in the Stocks; and that so many Martyrs have smiled upon their
Tormentors, and broiled in the Flames, with little, or without any sense of
pain. In such cases it seems reasonable to conclude, that their natural is
strengthened with infused courage; and that they are also rendered more or less
senseless, because they are rendered Ecsttatick with the secret assurance of
Gods favor, which in 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. is called joy in the Holy Ghost. I cannot
say, that our suffering Brethren, generally speaking, are yet in such a
condition, as to stand in need of supernatural assistance; but when ever it
shall please God to call them, or us, to such a degree of Persecution, that we
shall be killed all the day long, and be counted as sheep for the slaughter; I
question not but he will assist us in it; and in all these things make us more
than conquerors, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

But besides the comforts, which the suffering members of Christ receive from
their own Consciences, and the Spirit of God, they are to receive support and
comfort from the Brotherhood, from their fellow members in Jesus Christ. Thus,
2 Cor. chap. 8, 9. we find the Apostle exhorting the Corinthians, after the
example of the Churches in Macedonia, to a liberal contribution for the poor
distressed Saints at Jerusalem. Thus also, Acts 11. the Disciples of Antioch,
as soon as they understood by the Prophet Agabus, that there would be a Dearth
throughout all the World (which is the Scripture Phrase for all Judaea) they
determined to send relief unto the Brethren of Judaea, by the hands of Barnabas
and Paul. For the Universal Church is but one Body, whereof Christ is the Head;
one Family, whereof he is the Master; one Temple, or Spiritual-building,
whereof he is the chief Cornerstone; and this strict relation we have to one
another, as members of the universal Church, is such, that if one member of it
suffer, all the members ought to suffer with it; and therefore a Soul void of
pity and compassion, a Soul that cannot sympathize with his suffering Brethren,
though, as to outward appearance, he may be a Christian, yet he has not the
Spirit of Christ, that Spirit of Love, which informs all his members, as the
Soul does all the parts of the Body, and makes them sensible of one another
harms. By this (says Christ) shall all men know, that you are my Disciples, if
ye love one another. And if we love one another (says S. John) God dwells in
us; and this Commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, love his
Brother also. Therefore (my Brethren) God by his Providence has now brought
you to the Test, to try every one of you, whether you are true member of
Christ, or no? It is Christ that has sent these his poor members to beg relief
of you, and in as much as you do it, or not do it, to one of these little ones,
remember, that you do it, or not do it to him.

But besides the obligation you have from Christian charity, Christian equity
also obliges you to do it; For whatsoever you would that men should do unto
you in any condition, that you are bound by the Gospel to do unto them; and
therefore as you would desire or expect to be dealt with in a time of
Persecution, so it is your duty now to deal with them. The times of performing
some Gospel-duties seldom occur, but when they happen (and they always happen
by God's special Providence) we ought to look upon such accidents as
providential calls to the vigorous and exemplary performance of them; and who
knows, whether God has brought this evil upon our Brethren, not only for the
trial of their Faith and Patience, but of our Love, Pity and Compassion, and of
our willingness to minister unto the Saints. Therefore let us now acquit our
selves like loving Brethren toward them, who are true Sons of that Mother
Church to which they belong, and from which they never yet departed, from the
beginning of the Reformation under the endless pretense of setting up purer
Congregations, and enjoying purer Ordinances, and purer Worship; but from the
beginning have kept the unity of Spirit in the bond of peace. Let us not be
backward to Good, and distribute among them, for with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased. Let your abundance, as the Apostle speaks, be a supply for their
want; and who knows, but that God seeing our readiness to relieve them in
Persecution, may be so well pleased, as to deliver us from Persecution, and all
the Judgments which we fear. If they have the benefit of our Money, our Church
shall have the benefit of their Prayers; they will be obliged by our Charity to
beseech God to make up our Breaches, and heal our Divisions; to unite us into
the Primitive Apostolical Government and Communion; that our Jerusalem may be
as a City that is compact together, and once more become, as she formerly has
been, the glory of all Reformed Churches, and terrible as an Army with Banners
to her Enemies of Rome.

Therefore let every one of you be merciful unto them after his power; if thou
have much, give plenteously; if thou have little, do thy diligence to give of
that little; for if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted by God,
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not. Only I
charge you, who are rich in this world, that you be ready to give, and glad to
distribute unto them, laying up in store for your selves a good foundation
against the time to come, that you may attain Eternal Life, which God of his
infinite mercy grant us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

