A PREPARATIVE to Study: OR, THE VIRTUE OF SACK.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

A PREPARATIVE to Study: OR, THE VERTVE OF Sack.
FEtch me Ben. Iohnsons Scull, and fill't with Sack,
Rich as the same he drank, when the whole pack
Of jolly Sisters pledged, and did agree,
It was no sin to be as drunk as he;
If there be any weakness in the wine,
There Is virtue in the Cup to mak't divine;
This muddy drench of Ale does taste too much
Of Earth, the Malt retains a scurvy touch
Of the dull Hynde that sowed it, and I fear
There Is heresy in hops; give Calvyn Beer,
And his precise Disciple, such as think
There Is Powder Treason in all Spanish drink,
Call Sack an Idol, we will kiss the cup,
For fear their Conventicle be blown up
With superstition; aw^y with Brew House Alms,
Whose best mirth is six-shilling Beer and Psalms.
Let me rejoice in sprightly Sack that can
Create a Brain even in an empty Pan,
Canary! it is thou that do inspire
And actuate the soul with heavenly fire.
Thou that sublim'st the Genius-making wit
Scorn earth, and such as love or live by it,
Thou make us Lords of Regions large and fair,
Whilst our conceits build Castles in the Air.
Since fire, earth, air, thus thy inferiors be,
Henceforth I Will know no Element but thee;
Thou precious Elixar of all Grapes
Welcome, by thee our Muse begins her scapes;
I would not leave thee Sack to be with Jove,
His Nectar is but faign'd, but I do prove
Thy more essential worth: I am (me thinks)
In the Exchequer now, hark how it chinks,
And do esteem my venerable self
As brave a fellow as if all that Pelf
Were sure mine own, and I have thought a way
Already how to spend it, I would pay
No debts, but fairly empty every Trunk
And change the Gold for Sack to keep me drunk,
And so by consequence till rich Spaines wine
Being in my Crown, the Indies too were mine,
And when my Brains are once aflote (Heaven bless us)
I think my self a better man then Croesus,
And now I do conceit my self a Judge,
And coughing, laugh, to see my Clyents trudge
After my Lordships Coach unto the Hall
For Justice, and am full of Law withal,
And do become the Bench as well as he
That fled of late for want of honesty,
But I Will be Judge no longer, though in jest,
For fear I should be talked with like the rest,
When I am sober: who can choose but think
Me wise, that am so wary in my drink?
Oh, admirable Sack! here is dainty sport,
I am come back from Westminster to Court,
And am grown young again, my Phtisick now
Has left me, and my Judges graver brow
Is smoothed, and I turned amorous as May,
When she invites young Lovers forth to play
Upon her flowery bosom: I could win
A Vestall now, or tempt a Saint to sin.
Oh, for a score of Queens! you would laugh to see
How they would strive, which first should ravish me.
Three Goddesses were nothing: Sack has tipped
My tongue with Charms like those which Paris sipt
From Venus when she taught him how to kiss
Fair Helen, and invite a farther bliss,
Mine is Canary-Rhetorique, that alone
Would turn Diana to a burning stone,
Stone with amazement burning with Loves fire,
Hard to the touch, but short in her desire,
Inestimable Sack! thou make us rich,
Wise, amorous, any thing; I have an itch
To the other Cup, and that perchance will make
Me valiant too, and quarrel for thy sake:
If I be once inflamed against thy Foes
That would preach down thy worth in small-beer-prose,
I shall do Miracles as bad or worse,
As he that gave the King an hundred horse:
I Am in the North already; Lasley's dead,
He that would rise, carry the King his head,
And tell him (if he ask, who killed the Scot)
I knocked his Brains out with a pottle pot.
Out ye Rebellious Vipers; J'me come back
From thence again, because there is no good Sack,
The Other odd Cup, and I shall be prepared
To snatch at Stars, and pluck down a reward
With mine own hands, from Jove upon their backs
That are, or Charles his Enemies or Sacks;
Let it be full, if I do chance to spill
Over my study by the way, I will,
Dipping in this diviner Incke my pen,
Write my self sober, and fall to it again.
FINIS.

