MYSTERIUM SIGILLORUM, Herbarum and Lapidum.

CONTAINING A Complete Cure of all Sicknesses and Diseases of Mind and Body, by
means of the Influences of the Seven Planets.

Adorned with Copper Plates and Figures, showing the Foundation of this
Astronomical and Caelestial Science.

Written Originally in Saxon by the Ingenious and Learned Israel Hibner, of
Sneburgh, Professor of the Mathematics in the Ancient University of Erffurd.
Now Translated into English for B. Clayton, A. M. Philo-Chym. Med.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, and are to be Sold by S. Smith, at the
Princes-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard; A. Roper, at the Black-Boy, and P.
Buck, near the Inner- Temple-Gate in Fleet Street; W. Battersby, at Thavis-Inn
over against Hatton-Garden; S. Herrick at Gray's Inn Gate in Holbourn; W.
Feltham, at the Parliament-Stairs; and by most Booksellers about London and
Westminster, School.

To the most Illustrious and High Born Prince and Lord, AUGUSTUS, Prince of
Anhalt, Earl of Ascania, Lord of Zerbst and Bernbergh, MY MOST Gracious Prince
and Lord, Is this most Humbly Dedicated by the AUTHOR,

Israel Hibner.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
THE Diseases incident to Humane Bodies (and which by Divine Providence are
inflicted on Mankind by the Influence of the Seven Planets) proceed chiefly
from our corrupt Nature, viz. from our Ignorance in discerning Good and Bad
Seasons, which Knowledge is so noble and precious, that it was given to Man as
a great Treasure; but by his own too greedy thirst after Pleasure, he has
altogether lost this Gift, which has lain buried in the Ruins of Time for
near Six Thousand Years, and now (God be praised) it is raked from under the
Rubbish again; so that there needs no other Care, than that wise and prudent
Men make it their Study to preserve it for the future; but if this Study can in
no wise be prosecuted, without the attendance of too much Voluptuousness, may
the Divine Trinity grant, That the Spirit of Darkness and Humane Pride may not
prevail over the Light of Nature, and its Virtue, now, as it has done
heretofore.

AMEN.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
TO appear in a Foreign Dress in a Strange Country, exposes a Person, either
to contempt or admiration. If the Dignity of his Character defends him from the
first, the oddness of his Habit will subject him to the other. In this
Translation, we have endeavored to make the Stranger appear as Modish as is
possible, for a Person Born so many Years ago, and now introducing an
Hypothesis which this Age is very little acquainted with.

There is not a Man that has Trod upon the Margin of Ancient Literature, but
knows the Egyptians and Phoenicians, (the Ancient Founders of Philosophy,)
covered their acquired knowledge under the Vmbrage of affected or appointed
Figures or Characters, such as Hieroglyphical representations, etc. Now, for a
Man to find out in these Times the secret Mythology of this abstruse Learning,
to people unaccustomed and unable to apprehend the reason of such Proceedings,
is to make himself a downright Conjurer, and engage all the Pretenders to a
less, though more gainful Art, in an Offensive War against him.

It is the Nature of little affected knowledge, to be very apprehensive of too
much light, least it should discover its too common defects; and those who have
gained the way of making Men fools upon trust, abhor the News of any who
undertake to undeceive them.

It is a great mistake, to think the Stars and we are strangers, and that they
were only made for sparkling Toys, to please Children when they are unquiet:
The Ancients were better acquainted with them, they familiarly knew their
Virtues and Influences, and could tell how readily to apply them to the
necessities of Mankind; Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris; They
are certainly without and within us, and whether we will or no, we must feel
their Effects. Nor are they less Causers of our Maladies, than they are
Promoters of our Felicity; Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. They have
an irresistible and unseen virtuality in all our Beings, and whether we will be
sensible of it or no, they work their own ends upon us, but how, and after what
manner their Operation is, is unknown to us: Yea, even they who rail against
their Power, labor under their Effects; and when Nature decays, are supported
by their Means, whose effective Virtue they will never understand.

However, I present you an Author in as plain English as a Countryman of his
own was able to make him speak: But if this prove not palatable, I will try to
give you a better Entertainment in the Second Part.

The Method observed by the Author, is very familiar and easy. For, first, he
gives you an Account of the Afflictions frail Nature is subject to, from the
malignant Influences of the Seven Planets, either singly, and by themselves, or
in Conjunction with one another. 2dly, He presents you with a Catalogue of the
Herbs, Trees, and other Vegetables, as they are subject to the Dominion of the
Seven Planets. 3. He tells you how, and after what manner, and by whom, the
Nature, Virtue, and Use of Herbs was first shown to Mankind; and to whom we are
Indebted for so signal a Benefit. 4. He points out to you the Day, Hour, and
Minute, in which you are to Gather or Dig up the Herbs and Roots, influenced by
their proper Planets throughout the Year; and the time when you are to apply
them, for the Cure of all the Sicknesses and Diseases occasioned by the
Malignant Influences of the Seven Planets. 5. You are taught so to prepare the
Seven Metals, as to make them fit to receive the Influences of their several
Planets, which then are called the Sigils or Seals of the Planets; and also,
how to Imprison their Influences in their proper Stones, for the removing of
all the Ills Mankind is Afflicted with by their Means. These Influences thus
Imprisoned, do likewise preserve the Bearers from any threatened or impending
Mischiefs. 6. You have a complete Method of curing all Sicknesses and Diseases
incident to humane Bodies, by conjoyning the Influences of the Seven Planets
with the Seven Metals, which is called by Paracelsus an Electrum,

AN INESTIMABLE JEWEL.

Lastly, He concludes with the Operation and Virtue of the Seven Sigils or
Seals in Metal or Stone, against all diseases of Body and Mind; all Accidents
and Contingencies, Enemies Public and Private; and directs you how you may
attain to the knowledge of all Sciences, to Riches, day by day; to the Love and
Friendship of every one, and to become Courageous and Fortunate.

That Diseases are occasioned by the Influences of the Planets, is a Doctrine
as Ancient as Astrology, taught by the Professors in every Age: That all
Vegetables are subject to the Starry Influences, has been maintained by diverse
Learned Men in all Ages, and of all Nations; and it has been observed, that
those Physicians who have stuck the closest to the Rules given for the
gathering and applying of the Herbs, have had wonderful Success, and have
performed Cures almost miraculous, as Bolton, Culpeper, Blagrave, and others,
who have many living Monuments to testify for them: But the best way to arrive
at a full Conviction, is to examine the Methods here prescribed; if you find
them answerable to a just Inquisition, applaud and commend them; if otherwise,
use your Pleasure. However, in my next, I promise to present to the World some
proofs of the Starry Influences, experimented by the ingenious Artists of the
Age they lived in, as well in the Vegetable as Animal Kingdom. What is told you
here, is only what a Man experienced before your Fathers were Born, and thought
he perfectly understood: If you know otherwise, pray be pleased to be as free
as he, Si non, his utere mecum.

To my Loving Friend B. Clayton, M. A. on his Mysterium Sigillorum, Herbarum,
and Lapidum.
HOw hapless is our Lot, when those pretend
To Cure our Ills, who never their own could mend;
Who only fraught with Impudence and Pride,
Mount a tall Stage, and over Mankind would ride;
From cutting Capers on a Rope commence
Licentiates, without Learning, Truth, or Sense?
When all the while the admiring Crowd below
Throw Handkerchiefs and Gloves, and humbly bow
To him, who no more than themselves does know,
But only gapes for what they will bestow.
But you, my Friend, have chose a Nobler way
Your Learning, Skill, and Judgment to display
In such just Terms, as do at once impart
Your condescending Goodness and your Art.
You, by deep Labor and industrious Toil,
With a new Guest have blessed our drooping Isle,
Who long obscured in too ungrateful Night,
Appears in England with redoubled Light.
Sure some great Blessing to that Land is near,
Whose Stars produce two Wonders in one Year,
An Emperor, and a Philosopher.
To Heaven and Stars no more we'll cast our Eyes,
This Art their Virtue to our Use applies;
Though they still keep their shining distance there,
This charms their Will, and brings their Influence near.
Unvulgar Mysteries, which lay concealed
To common Science, are at last revealed.
Thus in the dark the useless Chaos lay,
Yet formed a World when God produced the Day
Pardon, you Aesculapians, who confine
All Learning to your narrow College-Line:
Who fix Non Vltra to your College-Gate,
Where Dying Patients do unpitied wait;
Unpitied still by You, if they withold,
Or are unable to produce the Gold,
That charming Idol, whom you all adore;
For he is not worth regarding that is Poor.
Pardon, if we advent'ring charm the Skies
To give us cheap and better Remedies.
If we, by Art unknown to You, can show
A nearer way to Health and Pleasure too:
Excuse your selves, nor venture to Complain,
Till you a readier Method can obtain.
Proceed, my Friend, till the vast Work is done,
And bravely finish what is well begun.
Success upon your careful Toil attends,
For all the Stars in Heaven are your Friends.
The wandering Planets do approve your Course,
And to your Labors join their secret Force.
Assisted thus by Heaven, let no Despair
From the well-grounded Work your Resolution scare.
B. Bridgwater.

On this Excellent Treatise concerning the Secret Mystery of Sigils, Herbs,
Plants, Minerals, etc. Published by my good Friend B. Clayton. A. M.
OUr Author's come upon the Mundane Stage,
To Cure Diseases which do Vex this Age:
To show the Virtues of Herbs, Plants, and Seals,
What chosen Times their secret Force reveals:
How some obstruct Health: how some Sickness heals.
The World is governed by Stars Energy,
And Certain Help descends from on High.
Who hopes to conquer Humane Maladies
Must have a Warrant from the spangled Skies,
To search the Planets Powers! making them Friends
Unto his Christian Philosophic Ends.
One Reason why Physicians often miss
Of Honor from their Patients Cure, is,
All Heavenly Influence they throw aside,
Either through Ignorance, or delusive Pride;
Tho such act best, who have Heaven for their Guide.
Here Is Art revived in an Ungrateful Age:
The Power of Herbs, Plants, Gems! and every Page
Contains some Rarity, fit for the true
Adepti only. -- Such as humbly show
To 2 Samuel 5.
Sacred Writ due Reverence; and thence learn
What Power the Blind and Lame yield; and discern
The Mystic Vigor of the Golden Mice.
How for to banish Serpents, Snakes, and Flies,
And turn each Land into a Paradise.
All done by Holy Talismans! which bring
Relief to Men (some think) in every thing.
Few know the Interest of Sympathy,
How Heavenly Atoms and the Earth's agree:
How foetid Odours do disturb our Sense:
And, how by Pleasant, we find Recompense:
Then thank the learned Author, who imparts
Thus generously these choice Mysterious Arts,
By such just Tribute, you may him incline,
With more Rich Skill to Visit us again.
John Gadbury, (...).

To my Respected Friend Captain Richard Powel, the Preserver of this Curious
Work.
Sir,
I Know my Weakness, and I should excuse
This Task, too weighty for my stagring Muse,
Since Commendations cold, more hurt a Friend,
And such as Praise but meanly, discommend.
Yet this I Will say, this Work must needs acquire
Amazement from the vulgar, who admire
The most, what they know least: and thus the Sun,
When he is Eclipsed, is much gazed upon.
Hence may be learnt the Causes and Effects,
Not known as yet to Common Intellects,
How Stars, Instruments of Heaven's Influence,
Do dart their Glorious Beams from thence.
Here Is Rules how to Prevent, and to Recall,
By Power of Sigils, Talesmatical,
So much derided by one Canting Knave,
Whose Name will odious be when in his Grave.
Health, Beauty, Riches, you may hereby give,
And (almost) teach a Dying Man to Live.
Let Us call the Ghosts of all those Famous Men,
As Paracelsus, Gafferell, and then
The worthy Esquire Ashmole, Lily, and the rest,
To justify these Secrets thus depressed:
They are purely Natural, which is well known,
And by this Learned Author amply shown.
Though these my unpolished Lines cannot raise
His Name, nor give this Work deserved Praise:
Yet most Men like whoever does impart
Such Curious things in Nature, and in Art.
Let this suffice, I say it is Good, 'twill Sell,
The Publisher and Author has done well.
Ita dixit Henry Coley, (...).

To my Esteemed Friend, Captain Richard Powell, who in his Travels
providentially preserved this Book.
MOst generously to us you do impart
What was Van Hebner's called, now R. P's Art.
Betwixt you both is framed a Noble Piece,
Beyond the Price of Jason's Golden Fleece.
By Providence 'twas brought, saved from that Flame,
Surviving the Physicians Spite and Shame.
Next from Oblivion of some Ages past,
By its own Merits crept abroad at last.
From Planets, Stars, and Aspects Influence,
Herbs, Stones, and Seals, this Work it did commence,
By solid Judgment past, this Art profound
Will heal the Sick, keep Mind and Body sound.
This shows thy Genius can the World command;
Thou need'st no Heritage, or purchase Land:
But this, perhaps, cannot thy Wants suffice,
For we but merely see with vulgar Eyes.
Infinity of Worlds thou would descry,
And prove them true by thy Philosophy.
What-e'er Improvements of your Time you make,
Let us, like this, your Knowledge still partake.
This Second Birth of you shall never Die,
But with your Fame survive Posterity.
R. M.

To my Worthy Friend, B. Clayton, A. M. on his Mysterium Sigillorum, Herbarum,
and Lapidum.
LOng have the Starry Influences been
Denied by Learned, yet malicious Men:
But such a Truth that shines so clear and bright
Can never be buried in Eternal Night.
Clouds for a Season may obscure the Sun,
Yet he far brighter shines when they are gone.
No Age so fraught with Ignorance and Spite,
As to destroy all Glim'rings of the Light.
Some Sparks are still (even by their Foes) preserved,
Till unto real Friends they are preferred,
Who with profound Respect receive the Prize,
And double Joys exchange for Miseries.
Pardon me, Sir, if I can clearly prove
This Blessing to proceed from your kind Love.
No promised Gain corrupts your Noble Heart,
You acted freely this most Generous part,
Restoring to us Influential Art.
The blustering Storms that roar in the yielding Air,
Are influenced by some wandering Star.
The swelling Billows in the raging Main,
Thundering and Lightning, and loud Hurricane,
And welcome Calms after tempestu'us Rain,
Submit to the Force of the wrangling Stars,
Who court us with Peace at the end of their Wars.
They Wars beget in Kingdoms, Church, and State,
And civil Broils 'twixt real Friends create.
The little World does feel their cruel Rage,
Which favors neither Infants, Sex, nor Age.
At Birth the Stars do influence our Fate,
Reduces Rich, and makes the Poor Man Great.
Our Inclinations all follow their Wills,
Who give us Health, and subject us to Ills:
They speak one Prudent, another Raving Mad;
This Man Thrifty, yet always Retrograde;
He Bacchus Courts, and still his Coffers fill,
This Worships Gold, yet cannot keep a spill;
But you have Taught by Starry Influence,
To Health, to be Regenerate as well as Sense.
To be to Riches Born, to Pleasures, Wit,
To all that can our very Souls delight.
You may Old Time command, and when that is done,
With Hezekiah good, bring back the Sun.
To Sum up all, would you be Healthy, Great,
You must by Influ'nce be Regenerate.
Once more, my Friend, excuse my 'pplauding voice,
Though I but meanly can commend your choice.
The Good which we shall reap, will wrap your Name,
And Influential Art, in the Rolls of Fame.
Our Fathers in their Tombs may praise thy Skill;
Our Children after us (I am sure) will.
And whilst we live, we hope we may obtain
Our Wishes, that you will visit us again.
Bentivolio.

depiction of Mercury holding caduceus and keys
Matthew 10 verse 26. There is nothing covered, that Shall not be,

The Stars are not to be Blamed, because the


THE Secret Virtue OF Sigils, Herbs, and Stones: OR, A Complete Cure and
Medicine for all Diseases of the Body, as well as Mind, by outward Application
only.
The First Instruction. Of the Diseases after the Order of the Seven Planets.
I. Diseases of the Nature of Saturn.
BAldness. Scabs. Looseness of Teeth. Rottenness of the Gums. Distorted Teeth.
Toothache. The Right-Ear. Hindrance of Conception. Chilblains. Hard Knots or
Boiles in the Flesh. Noise in the Ears. Wens. Quartan Fever. Cancer. Scurvy.
Spleen and Bones.
Animals governed by Saturn.
The Ass. Hare. Mouse. Mole. Crow. Cuckoo. Skreitch Owl. Fox. Little Black
Flies.
II. Jovial Sicknesses are
Pleurisy and Swelling in the Sides. Convulsion and Cramp. Pains in the Back.
Stubbornness. Yearly Fever. Liver-grown. Lungs. Ribbs. Knee-Pan. Pulse. Sinews
and Grissels. Sperm.
Animals governed by Jupiter*
Sheep. Crane. Lark.
III. Martial Sicknesses, are,
A burning Dissentery in Children. Lice. Falling of the Hair. Pimples and red
Spots in the Face. The Left Ear. Spleen, as also under Saturn. All sorts of
Swellings. Intermitting Fevers. Quotidian Fevers. Tertian Fevers. Gall.
Kidneys. Veins. Secrets.
Animals governed by Mars.
Tiger. Panther. Dog. Wolf. Kite. Snailes. Moths. All Monstrous Productions.
Cat.
IV. Solar Sicknesses, are,
All Distempers of the Brain. Pimples and Sun-burning. Right Eye of a Man. The
Left Eye of a Woman. Navel. All sorts of Swellings. Catarrh. Red Face.
Palpitation of the Heart. Heart. Sight.
Animals governed by the Sun.
Lion. Horse. Eagle. Cock.
V. Venereal Diseases.
Chaps of the Lips. Left Breast. Loins. Secrets. Ruptures. Defect of Smelling.
Unnatural Sweat. The Mother. Kidneys, as also per Mars. Members of Generation.
Breast. Throat. Liver, as also per Jupiter. Sperm.
Animals governed by Venus.
Pigeons. Turtle Doves. Hoggs. Partridges. Sparrows. Jackdaws, Seafish.
VI Mercurial Sicknesses.
Lethargy. Epilepsie. Madness. Hoarseness. Apoplexy. Violent Vomiting.
Continual Watching. Brains, also per Sun. Spirit. Imagination. Memory. Tongue.
Hand and Finger.
Animals governed by Mercury.
Apes. Nightingale. Parrot. Goldfinch. Swallow. Batt. Kingsfisher. Beetle. Be.
Pismires. Grasshoppers. Crickets. Snakes.
VII. Lunar Sicknesses.
Ulcers. Measles and Spots of the Face. Cataracts and Spots in the Eyes. Left
Eye of a Man. Right Eye of a Woman. Sneezing. Right Breast. Drought. Stomach.
Intestines. Epilepsie. Dropsy. Dissenteria. Brains, also per Sun and Mercury.
Guts. Bladder, as also per Saturn. Taste.
Animals governed by the Moon.
Rabbits. Cuckoo. Geese. Ducks. Night-Owl. Monsters of the Nature of a Dog.
Muscles. Oysters. Snails. Frogs. Toads. Sea-Spider. Craw-Fish. Fish. Pikes.
Trouts.
VIII. Diseases occasioned by Saturn and Jupiter.
Headache proceeding from Cold. Consumption of the Lungs. Cold Liver. Stopping
of the Liver. Trembling. Cramp. Coldness and Lameness of the Veins. Gristles.
IX. Sicknesses occasioned by Saturn and Mars.
Ugly lank Hair. Growth of Grey-Hairs. Frightful Dreams. Black and Hollow
Teeth. Weak Ears. Noise in the Ears, and Pains. Imposthumations. Worms of the
Ears. Strangury. Stone and Gravel. Swellings and Ulcers in the Secrets. Old
Sores. Stinking Body. Fistula's, Swellings, and Ulcers. Spitting Blood.
Congealed Blood in the Body. Fractures. Splinters in the Flesh. Wounds of the
Head. Corns.
X. Diseases proceeding from Saturnal and Solar Influences.
Drunkenness. Scurff. Too much Hair on the Brows. Weakness. Swoonings. Rupture
of the Navel. Sinking of the Spirits. Biting of a Horse.
XI. Diseases proceeding from Saturn and Venus.
Scurvy in the Teeth and Gums. Quinsie. King's Evil. Falling of the Uvula.
Pains in the Loins occasioned by Stoppage. Strangury. Rupture in the Secrets.
Lasciviousness. Note, That the Influence of Venus is stronger here than the
Influence of Saturn. Witchcraft. Large Genitors. Abortion. Afterbirth.
XII. Diseases proceeding from Saturn and Mercury.
Convulsions of Children. Apoplexy and Swoonings. Lethargy. Stammering.
Phthisick. Chincough. Melancholy. Contraction of the Nerves in Hands and Feet.
Uneven Nails on Hands and Feet. Thickness of Hearing.
XIII. Diseases proceeding from Saturn and Luna.
Swoonings. Curdled Milk in the Breasts. Swellings in the Breast. Breast fallen
or shrunk. Distempers of the Nipples. Cold Stomach. Gnawing in the Stomach.
Vapors in the Stomach. Pains in the Stomach. Dropsy. Wind in the Bladder of
Women. Pains and gnawing of the Mother. Rising of the Mother. Bearings down.
Coldness of the Womb. Fluxes. Women's Fluxes in Childbed.
XIV. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Mars.
Red Hair. Headache proceeding from Heat. Cough and Catarrh. Spitting of Blood.
Pleurisy. Inflammation of the Liver. Swelling of the Liver. Jaundice.
Inflammation of the Kidneys. Ulcers of the Kidneys. Swellings of the Breast,
Occult and inward Fevers. Broken Arteries. Stopping of Blood in Wounds.
XV. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Sol.
Strengthening of the Brains. Strengthening of the Heart. Piles and Haemorrhoids.
XVI. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Venus.
The Overflowing of the Haemorrhoids. Impotency. Barrenness. Wasting of the
Flesh.
XVII. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Mercury.
Uncleanness of the Brains, which obstructs the Memory. Weakness of the Head
and Brains.
XVIII. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Luna.
Catarrhs. Breast swelled. Gonorrhaeas.
XIX. Diseases proceeding from Mars and Sol.
Red ugly Hair. Swellings of the Face. Blood-shot Eyes. Trembling of the Heart
occasioned by the overflowing of the Gall. Pissing of Blood. Smallpox. Tumors
by Inflammations. Carbuncles. St. Anthony's-Fire. Fiery Swellings and
Inflammations. Fiery Swellings in Wounds. Inflammation in Wounds.
XX. Diseases proceeding from Mars and Venus.
Sore Throat. Stinking Breath. Colic. Fundament swelled. Fistula's in Ano.
Warts. Wolf in the Fundament. Bearing down of the Fundament. Pain of the Loins
occasioned by Stoppage, Continual Pissing. Swellings and Holes in Pudendis.
Blisters burning in Pudendis. Pox. Inward Wounds. Ruptures.
XXI. Diseases proceeding from Mars and Mercury.
Lank Hair. Madness. Tongue furred. Costiveness. Claps. Crab-lice. Worms in the
Fingers. Palsy. Scab. Poison of Spiders. Scars.
XXII. Diseases proceeding from Mars and Luna.
Scald-Heads. Too much Hair on the Brows. Lice of the Eyebrows. Red and Sore
Eyes. Bleeding at the Nose. Cancer of the Nose. Big swelled Breasts. Ulcers in
the Breasts. Lost Appetite. Bad Digestion. Belchings. Heart-burning.
Overflowing of the Gall in the Stomach. Swellings, and Ulcers of the Stomach.
Stopping, and Hardness of the Mother. Stopping of the Flux. Longings. Itch.
Corns. Running hot Sores, and Ulcers. Ulcers occasioned by hot watery Humors.
Wounds in the Breasts, Guts, and Bladder. Rheumatism.
XXIII. Diseases proceeding from Sol. and Venus.
Ill shaped Face. Swellings of the Privities. Weak Brains.
XXIV. Diseases proceeding from Sol and Mercury.
Gripes in Children. Worms in the Belly. Pricking Pains in the Legs.
XXV. Diseases proceeding from Sol and Luna.
Sore Eyes. Pains in the Eyes. Wounds in the Eyes. Breasts voiding Milk.
Swelling of the Stomach. Ulcer in the Bladder. Swelling of the Matrix. Scars.
XXVI. Diseases proceeding from Venus and Mercury.
Barrenness. Diseases of the Kidneys.
XXVII. Diseases proceeding from Venus and Luna.
Curdled Milk. Fluxes. Bloody Flux. Colic occasioned by the Matrix.
Uncleanness of the Mother. Whites. Abortion. After-Births.
XXVIII. Diseases proceeding from Mercury and Luna.
Nits. Thrush. Unclean Brains. Knotted Breast. Stoppage in the Stomach.
Weariness.
XXIX. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars, and the
Sun.
Gangreens. Shingles. Plague. Burns and Scalds. All sorts of Poison.
XXX. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars, and Mercury.
Frenzy, and Melancholy. Leprosy. Biting of Serpents. Biting of Mad-Dogs.
Wound with poisoned Arms.
XXXI. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars, and Luna.
Total Apoplexy. Witchcraft and Apparitions.
XXXII. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Sol, and Luna.
Gout by cold Humidity.
XXXIII. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars, Sol, and Luna.
Gout by Heat. Swellings, and Bruises.
XXXIV. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars, Mercury, and Luna.
Gout in the Hands. Worms in old rotten Sores. Bites by Scorpions.
XXXV. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars, Sol, and
Luna.
Gout in Hands and Feet.
These aforementioned Sicknesses and Diseases are occasioned by one or other
of the Seven Planets in general; and then especially when the Body is out of
order; or by the Antipathetick Rays of one Planet to another; for then a Man is
presently sensible of it; as a Magnet, when the Iron comes too near.

Wherefore, next to the Use of the Seven Metals, there is no speedier Means of
Curing these Maladies, than by the Herbs, Roots, and Seeds, gathered at such
time as the Planet governing such Herbs, Roots, and Seeds, is well posited, or
strengthened by another Planet or Star Sympathetically; as hereafter more at
large is described.

The End of the First Instruction; how the Sicknesses are subject to the Seven
Planets.
The Second Instruction.
A Description of such Trees, Herbs, and other Vegetables, as they are subject
to the Seven Planets.

Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Saturn.
A Garick. A Garicum. Agrimony. Eupatorium Graecorum, Agrimonia. Alder-Tree.
Alnus. Angelica. Angelica. Aromatic Reed. Acorum verum. Arrach Stinking.
Atriplex Sylvestris. Sea Arrach. Atriplex Marina. Arrach. Atriplex. Bay Tree,
or Laurel. Laurus. Basil Wild. Orminium Sylvestre, Gallitricum. Bramble. Rubus.
White Bramble. Rhamnus. Buckthorn, or Waythorn. Spina Merula, seu Infectoria.
Burdock. Personatia, Lappa Major, Bardana. Capers. Capparis. Caroways. Carum,
vulgo Carui. Carob Cod. Siliqua. Wild Cherry. Chamaecerasus. Garden Clary.
Orminium Hortenfe. Clover-Grass. Lotus Sylvestris. Cork. Suber. Crabs. Mala
Agrestia. Cypress-Tree. Cupressus. Horse-Chestnut. Castanea Equina. Dodder or
Woodbine Cassutha, Coscuta. Dragon-wort. Serpentaria, Dracunculus. Elm. Vlmus.
Eben-Tree. Ebenus. Fern. Filix. Female Fern. Filix Foemina. Figs. Ficus. Flower
d' Lis. Iris Sylvestris. Fir Tree. Abies. Galls. Olea Boemica, sive Elagaenus.
Galls, or Oak-Apples. Gallae. Hart's-tongue. Scolopendrion, verum Asplenum.
Hemlock. Cicuta. Henbane. Hyosciamus, vulgo Jusquiamus. Hellebore. Helleborus.
Herb True-love Herba Paris. House-leek. Sempervivum majus. Hemp. Cannabis.
Ground Ivy. Chamaecissus, Hedera Terrestris. Lime-Tree. Tilia. Lovage.
Hipposelinum, vulgo Lote-Tree. Lotus. Mandrake. Mandragora mas and Levisticum.
Manna. Manna. Mallows. Malva, Major and minor. Foemina. Monks-Head. Caput
Monachi. Mose-Tree. Musa. Moss. Muscus. Ground Moss. Muscus Terrestris.
Mouse-Ear. Pilosella. Myrtle-Tree. Myrtillus. Mulberry-Tree. Morus. Melilote.
Melilotus, Sertula Campana. Night shade. Solanum Hortense. Dead Nettles.
Galliopsis, urtica mortua. Indian Nuts. Nuces Indicae. Olives. Olivae. Opium.
Opium. Parsnip. Pastinaca. Pine Tree. Pinus. Wild-Pine. Pinus Sylvestris.
Ground Pine, or Alehoof. Pinus Tarentina. Sea-Pine. Pinus Maritima. Pitch-Tree.
Picea. Plane-Tree. Platanus. Wild-Pear. Pyrum agreste. Polypody of the Oak.
Polypodium. Black Poplar. Populus nigra. Prick Madam. Sempervivum minus.
Privet. Ligustrum. Pouchweed. Bursa Pastoris. Wild Rose. Rosa Canina. Rue. Ruta
Sylvestris, and Hortensis. Sanicle. Diapensia, Sanicula. Savine. Sabina, vel
Savina. Sellery. Matrisalvia, Selarea. Setwall. Phili valeriana. Sharp pointed
Dock. Oxylapathum. Sorrel. Rumex. Sponge. Spongia. Sloe-Tree. Prunus
Sylvestris. Smallage. Apium Palustre. Scabious. Scabiosa major and minor.
Senna. Sena. Staves-Acre. Staphisagria. Saxifrage. Saxifragia. Starwort. Aster
Atticus, seu Bubonium, Inguinalis. Tamarisk. Myrica, sive Tamarix. Treyfoil.
Lotus Sylvestris. Tobacco. Aconitum Salutiferum. Willow. Salix. Weed growing
about Time. Epithimum. Wolf-bane. Aconitum Lycoctonon. Yew-Tree. Taxus.
Wallnuts. Nuces Juglandes.

Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Jupiter.
ALmond-Tree. AMygdalus. Ambergreese, or the Flower of the Sea. Ambarum. Anise.
Anisum. Arsmart. Persicaria. Asarabacca. Asarum. Sweet Apples. Mala Mustica.
Avens. Cariophyllata, herba benedicta. Barley. Hordeum. Berberries. Berberis.
Balm. Melisophylon, Melissa, Apiastrum. Birch-Tree. Betula. Blackberries. Ruba
Domestica. Betony. Betonica. Garden Basil. Ocimum. Box. Buxus. Bugloss.
Buglossum. Burrage. Borrago. Catmint, Nep. Calamentum Montanum, Cattaria.
Cedar. Cedrus. Celandine. Chelidonium majus. Century. Centaurium. Cherries.
Cerasus. Cloves. Cariophylli. Civet. Zibetum. Collumbines. Aquilegia. Comfry.
Symphitum, vel Consolida. Costmary. Balsamita. Garden Cresses. Nasturtium
Hortense. Cross-wort. Cruciofera. Cotton-weed or French Lavender Staechas
Citrinum. Date-Tree. Palma mas. Endive. Intybus sativus major, seu Endivia.
Damask Rose. Rosa alabandica. Flower d' Lis. Iris. Foenil. Foeniculum. Figs.
Ficus. Fumitory. Fumaria. Flixweed. Sophia. Flax. Linum. Frankincense. Thus.
Galangal. Galanga. Germander. Chamaedrys. Gooseberries. Ribes vulgaris.
Ground Ivy. Chamaecissus. Hearts Ease. Flamula Jovis. Heath. Erica. Hawthorn.
Acuta spina. Honey. Mel. House-leek. Sedum sempervivum. Hounds-Tongue.
Cynoglossum vulgar. Jessamine. Jasminum. Ivy. Chamaepetys, seu Iva. Jujubes.
Jujubae, Zizypha. Lavender. Spica domestica. Larch-Tree. Larix. Libbards-bane.
Cappes. Liquorish. Glycirrhiza. Liverwort. Lychen, Epatica. Loosestrife, or
Willow-Herb. Lysimachia. Lote-Tree. Lotus. Mint. Sysimbrium domesticum Barba
Jovis, Mentha. Mullein. Verbascum, Candela regia, Tapsus barbatus. Manna.
Manna. Musk. Moschus. Musk Pears. Pyrum Hordeaceum. Mulberry-Tree. Morus.
Myrtle. Myrtus exotica, Tarentina. Olives. Olivae. Orpine. Tucrinum. Origanum,
or Wild-Marjoram. Origanum vulgar. Peach. Malum Punicum. Primrose. Herba
Paralysis, Primula veris. Male Peony. Peonia mas. Raisons. Passulae majores,
uvae Zibebae. Rhubarb. Rhabarbarum. Rose. Rosa. Rose Campane. Lychnis
Coronaria. Self-Heal. Prunella. Spignel. Meon. Spicknard. Nardus Indica. Wood
Sorrel. Trifolium acetosum. Strawberries. Fragaria. Sugar-cane. Canna
saccharina, Calamus saccharinus. Thoroughwax. Perfoliata. Turnip. Rapum
rotundum, sessile. Toothwort. Dentaria. Turpentine-Tree. Pseudo-terebinthus.
Blue Violets. Viola purpurea. Wheat. Triticum. Willow. Vitex.

Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Mars.
BRamble. RVbus. Box-thorn. Lycium. Buck-thorn. Rhamnus. Bullace. Prunus
Sylvestris. Burnet. Pimpinella. Bastard Costus. Pseudo-Costus. Wild Chamomil.
Cotula foetida, Chamaemelum. Chestnut. Castanea. Cork-Tree. Suber. Cresses.
Nasturtium sativum. Crowfoot. Ranunculus. Daisie. Bellis. Dwarf-Elder. Ebulus.
Euphorbium. Euphorbium. Hogs-Fennel. Peucedanum. Garlic. Allium. Golden-Rod.
Virga aurea. Gooseberries. Vva spina. Hearts-Ease. Flamula Jovis. Haw-thorn.
Acuta spina. Holly. Agrifolium. Lignum vitae. Lignum Vitae. Mastick-Tree.
Lentiscus. Monks Rhubarb. Rhabarbarum Monachi. Country Mustard. Thlaspi. Great
Nettle. Vrtica major. Roman Nettle. Vrtica Romana. Lesser Nettle. Vrtica minor.
Oak. Ilex. Wild-Olives. Olea sylvestria. Onion. Caepa. Pepper-wort. Lepidium,
Peperitis. Periwinkle. Daphnoides, Laureola. Sea-Purslain. Halimnus. Peach.
Persica malus. Plantane. Plant ago major, media, longa, aquatica. Pepper.
Piper. Red Rose. Rosa milesia. Rocket. Eruca. Sweet Rush. Juncus odoratus.
Scammony. Scammonia. Sebestines. Sebestina. Servise-Tree. Sorbus sylvestris.
Sleepy Lettice. Caecilliana. Spleen-wort. Scolopendrion. Lesser Spurge. Esula,
Tithymallus. Prickly Sow-Thistle. Sonchus asper. Sycamore-Tree. Sycomorus.
Thorn. Spina. Chameleon Thistle. Chamaeleon. Turpentine-Tree. Terebinthus.
Vervein. Verbena. Wild-Vine. Viburnum. Wormwood. Absynthium. A kind of
Wolfs-bane. Napellus.

Herbs, Trees, Roots, etc. under the Sun.
ALder-Tree. FRangula. Apricock. Praecox pyrum. Aromatick-Reed. Acorum verum.
Ash-Tree. Fraxinus. Bay Tree. Laurus. Balm. Melissophyllon, Melissa, Apiastrum.
Sea Bind-weed. Soldanella. Burnet. Pimpinella. Butter-Bur. Petasites, falso
dicta. Cardamum. Cardamomum. Cassia. Cassia lignea, odorata. Celandine.
Chelidonium majus. Cloves. Caryophylli Indici. Crowfoot. Ranunculus. Dittany.
Dictamnus albus, sive vulgaris. Devils-bit. Morsus Diaboli. Enula-Campane.
Elenium, Enula. Gentian. Gentiana. Ginger. Zinziber. Haslewort. Asarina altera.
St. Johnswort. Hypericon, perforata, fuga Daemonum. Knot-grass. Polygonum
majus, sive mas, Corrigiola, Centumnodia. Lesser Knot-grass. Polygonum minus.
Female Knot-grass. Polygonum faemineum. Lavender. Lavendula. Limons. Mala
Citria. Myrrh. Myrrha. Nutmegs. Nux Myristica, Moschata. Sweat-Pear. Pyrum
Mustacium. Pepper. Piper vulgar. Pennyroyal. Pulegium. Quince-Tree. Malus
Cydonia. Rosemary. Rosmarinus. Saffron. Crocus. Wild-Saffron. Carthamus,
Enicus, Crocus Saracenicus. Servise-Tree. Sorbus Domestica mas. Spindle-Tree.
Euonymus. Sun-flower. Flos solis, sive Pseudopanax, Chironium. Time. Thymus.
Tormentile. Tormentilla. Tulip, or the Imperial Crown. Corona Imperialis.
Turnsole. Heliotropium majus. Vine. Vitis vivifera. Zedoary. Zedoaria.

Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Venus.
ALexander. HIpposelinum, vulgo Leusticum. Sweet Apples. Mala dulcia.
Apricocks. Praecox pyrum. Bladder Nut-Tree. Staphylodendron, seu Pistachia
Sylvestria. Camphire. Camphora. Cassia Purging. Cassia solutiva. Cherries.
Cerasa, austera, Aproniana. Daffodil. Narcissus. Dogs-Stones. Satyriorum genera
omnia. Hyacinth. Hyacinthus. Lignum Vitae. Lignum Vitae. Lily of the Valley.
Lilium Convallium. White Lilies. Lilia alba. Water Lilies. Nymphaea.
Maidenhair. Adianthum, Capillus Veneris. Female Palm. Palma Foemina. Pistachio
Nuts. Pistachia, sive Fistici. Rose. Rosa. Savory. Satureia. Servise-Tree.
Sorbus, Torminalis. Storax-Tree. Styrax. Tulip. Tulipa.

Herbs, Trees, Roots, etc. under Mercury.
ANise. ANisum. Beans. Fabae. Black Beet. Beta nigra. White Beet. Beta alba.
Red Beet. Beta Rubea. Birthwort. Aristolochia longa. Round Birthwort.
Aristolochia rotunda. Buck-Wheat. Panicum. Chamomile. Chamaemelum, Chamomilla.
Cinque-foil. Pentaphyllon, quinquefolium. Clivers, or Goos-grass Aparine.
Cubebs. Cubebae. Currants. Passulae Corinthiacae. Elder-Tree. Sambucus.
Filberts. Nuces Ponticoe, Proenestinoe, Avellanoe. Fenil. Foeniculum. Flower d'
Lis. Iris. Hasle-Tree. Corylus. Hyssop. Hysopus. Hore-hound. Marrhubium.
Italian Reed. Arundo Italica. Juniper. Juniperus. Liquorice. Glycirrhiza,
Liquiritia. Lungwort. Pulmonaria. Marjoram. Majorana. Medlar-Pear. Mespilaceum
Pyrum. Mercury. Mercurialis mas, and foemina. Money-wort, or Herb Twopence.
Nummularia. Parsley. Apium Hortense, sive petroselinum vulgar. Wild-Rhue. Ruta
Sylvestris. Sage. Salvia. Savory. Satureia. Snake-weed. Bistorta, sive
Colubrina, Serpentaria. Sorrel. Trifolium acetosum. Sour-Dock. Oxalis, seu
acetosella. Treacle Claver. Trifolium odoratum. Time. Thymus. Treyfoil.
Trifolium.

Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Luna.
ADams Apples. POma Adami. Adders-Tongue. Lingua Serpentis, Sagittalis. Beans.
Faboe. Brook-lime. Anagallis aquatica, seu Betula. Cabbage. Brassica Capitata.
Chick-weed. Alsine, Morsus Gallinoe. Colewort. Brassica loevis. Crumply
Colewort. Brassica Crispa. Colly-flower. Caulis capitatus. Coltsfoot.
Tussilago, farfara. Cucumbers. Cucumeres. Garlic. Allium. Gourd. Cucurbita.
Housleek. Sedum, semper-vivum majus, Barba Jovis. Hyssop. Hysopus. Leeks.
Porrum. Lentiles. Lens. Water Lentiles. Lens Palustris. Lettice. Lactuca
Crispa, Lactuca Florescens. Wild-Lettice. Lactuca Sylvestris. White Lily.
Nymphoea alba. Mandrake. Mandragora. Linden or Lime-Tree. Tilia foemina.
Moonwort. Lunaria Graeca, botryitis Melons. Melones. Onyons. Coepoe. Peony.
Poeonia. Parsnip. Siser, Pastinaca. Pellitory of the Wall. Parietaria.
Pompions. Pepones. Water-Plantane. Plantago aquatica. Wild Poppies. Papaver
erraticum, rubeum, fluidum. Garden Poppy. Papaver Hortense. Wild Prick Madam.
Sedum, semper-vivum, vermicularis, Crassula minor. White Poplar. Populus alba.
Plum-Tree. Prunus. Purslane. Portulaca Domestica. Wild Purslane. Portulaca
Sylvestris. Rape-root, or Navew. Rapum. White-Rose. Rosa alba. Servise-Tree.
Sorbus Domestica foemina. Tooth-wort, Clowns Lungwort. Dentaria. Toad-Stool.
Fungi, Boleti. Turnsole. Heliotropium minus. Watercresses. Nasturtium
aquaticum.

The Third Instruction. Of the Invention, Knowledge, and Demonstration, of the
Virtue of Herbs.
CHAP. I. Who were the first that found out the Use and Virtue of Herbs.
TO say something of the Virtue and Praise of Herbs, I think it not the least
Commendation, That the first Invention and Demonstration is ascribed to Idols,
or Oracles; as also to Mighty Kings and Lords, not only by Pagans, but by the
Hebrews and Christians.

Therefore, the more Illustrious the Inventor is, the more we ought to esteem
of the Invention.

Moly, is a Famous Herb, highly commended by the Poet Homer. The Idol, Mercury,
commended it first to Prince Ulysses that he might defend himself from the
Witchcraft of Circe: But not known in these Countries. It grows only in
Arcadia, having a round black Root, like an Onyon. It is very difficult and
troublesome to dig up. Next to this, is,

Panacea, called Holy, being a Medicine proper for all Sicknesses and Diseases.
This is ascribed to Chiron, Hercules, and Aesculapius.

To the same Hercules is also ascribed Hen-bane, and another, called Heracleon
Syderion, an excellent Wound-Herb, for all Wounds made by Iron or Knife, which
now bears the name of Mercury, because Mercury first showed the Use of it to
Mankind.

The Great Captain Achilles, has also some Herbs after his Name, Achillea and
Achilleon: And many of these Herbs are mentioned by Pliny.

There are also a great many of our own Herbs and Flowers ascribed to the
Saints, which, to this day, are called by their Names; as, Herba Trinitatis,
Rosa Virginis Mariae, Radix Spiritus Sancti, Flores Magdalenoe, Herba Sancti
Jacobi, Herba Sancti Christophori, Carduus Marioe, Herba Sancti Petri, Herba
Sancti Laurentii, Herba Sancti Johannis, and innumerable more of them, which by
us are much set by, and esteemed to be highly powerful, for no other Reason,
then that such Holy Men first found out the Use and Virtue of them, and called
them after their own Names, and blessed them.

It Is said, That our Savior Jesus Christ first planted Hyssop with his own
Hands; though it is indeed ridiculous, either to talk of, or believe it. However,
it adds to the Credit of Herbs, that our Forefathers have so highly esteemed
them, as to ascribe the Invention of the Virtue of them to the Gods and Saints;
for they dedicated Esculus, to Jupiter; Laurus, to Apollo; Oleaster, to
Minerva; Vitis, to Bacchus; Myrtus, to Venus; Vlmus, to Hercules; and such
like, etc.

CHAP. II. Who first found out the Use of Herbs.
HIstorians do not agree, who was the first among the Idols that found out the
use of Herbs. Diodorus Siculus, one of the most Ancient Historians, says, That
Mercury was the first; others again, that Arabus, the Son of Apollo and
Babylon; others, that Apollo himself, and after him Aesculapius; yet most
believe that the Egyptians were the first Inventors of this Art, from whom it
derived to the Groecians, and from them, a long time after, to the Romans, in
the Days of Marcus Cato the Censor.

Notwithstanding the Groecian Professors of Physic were not publicly admitted
into Rome, but were Banished several times, because they did often deceive the
Romans, and were by them accounted a Barbarous People.

True it is, that the Physicians in those days had no great Skill in applying
the Herbs aright; as Pliny in several places testifies, who calls them
Arch-Butchers and Murderers; yet (although they Killed their Patients) they had
a Grant from the Magistrates to be paid for it.

CHAP. III. Who first Methodized the Herbs.
HOW the Herbs were brought into Order, Pliny and Strabo have sufficiently
demonstrated, saying, That it was performed by Hippocrates, a Famous Man, Born
in the Island Co, where it was the Custom of the Inhabitants of that Island,
that all those who were cured of any Distemper, writ their Names, and the
Medicines by which they were healed, in the Temple of Aesculapius, who
collecting the same experimented Medicines in Writing, brought them into a
perfect Method: But because, after that time, the Herbs had not the same
Operations, there arose so many Opinions among the Professors, that, to this
day, there is such Uncertainty in Physic, that there is scarce an Art that
stands in more need of Assistance than this of Physic.

When the Babylonians were without a Physician, they carried their Sick into
the public Street, that so they might speak to, and ask every one's Advice,
and especially those who had been afflicted with the same Distemper, and been
cured by Medicine.

Thus Medicine came first to light; and having the special Influence of the
Heavens Calculated from the time of their Nativity, it did greatly help them;
and what is said of the Poets, may be truly ascribed to our Artists, Nascuntur,
non fiunt; because, being Born under a particular Influence, they are more
acute in the Art or Mystery, and discover many things without the assistance of
others; as we see at this very day in some, who have more Knowledge in Herbs,
and Natural Causes, than your high celebrated Physicians, etc. These things
Herodotus, Strabo, Brunfells, and Matthiolus mention.

CHAP. IV. Showing, that several Herbs were discovered by Dreams and Visions.
PLiny says, and it is also to be believed, That the true Knowledge of some
Herbs has been revealed by the Gods in Dreams; as we say of our Prophets, who
have foretold things to come by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost: And he cites
a Story of a Soldier, who being bit by a Mad-Dog, could find no Help, till his
Mother, in her Sleep, saw the Root of Wild-Roses, or Dog-Roses, which continued
so fixed in her Memory from the Vision she had the Night before, that she made
use of the said Root, giving it him to drink in Goats-Milk, by which means the
Soldier, her Son, was perfectly cured.

This is the approved Opinion, and, without doubt, it was the Spirit of God
that instructed Adam and Eve, (who had also the Knowledge of Animals and
Vegetables, that whatever they called them, that was their Name) and the
Patriarchs, who gave the same Instruction to their Children after them.

We read also of Solomon, that through the Spirit of God he had the true Knowledge
of the Creation of the World, which we call, Natural Philosophy; of the
Knowledge of the Heavens, and the Motion of the Stars; of Animals; of Winds,
and the Thoughts of Men; as also of Herbs and Roots; which is at large
described by him in the Book of Kings, viz. That he had the Knowledge of the
Nature and Virtue of all Vegetables, from the Cedar of Libanus, to the Hyssop
that grows upon the Wall.

CHAP. V. What sorts of Herbs were found out by Kings and Potentates.
THE Kings and Potentates, in times of Old, gave Names to Herbs, and showed the
Use of them to Mankind; and as Pliny reports, They esteemed it a more Princely
Act, than if they had gained a Battle over their Enemies.

Gentius, King of Illyria, first found out Gentian, the Use and Virtue of which
he showed to Mankind, which pleased him far better than if he had subdued an
Hundred Cities and Countries.

Clymenes and Lysimachia were also discovered by Kings.

Scordium, that Noble Herb, as also Euphorbium, were first discovered by
Mithridates, King of Pontus.

Artemisia was so called from a Queen of that Name, Wife to Mausolus.

Servilius Democritus named Hypericon; as also Avicena, Rhasis, Haly, Messiah,
Abraham, have Named others, who have had an equal Esteem with Kings and
Potentates.

CHAP. VI. How, in process of Time, the Knowledge of Herbs was Revealed to
Nations and Common People.
BY the Superiors is this Art delivered to the Meaner sort, who have also
discovered these wonderful Creatures of God.

First, the Scythians discovered the Virtue of the Root Scythica, or Liquorice,
growing in Scocia.

After them the Thracians found out the Virtue of Ichneumon, which is powerful
in stopping Blood, not only in a Bursten Artery, but also in Members defected.

The Vetones, in Spain, first discovered the Herb Betonica, which retains its
Name from that People to this very day: And the Illyrians discovered the Iris
Illyrica. Of all which you may read Pliny, Dioscorides, and Theophrastus.

CHAP. VI. Brutes have discovered many precious Herbs.
THE Brutes have also made way to the Discovery of several excellent Herbs, and
those not the least, which adds to their Reputation.

And hence the Power of the Almighty is the more to be admired and adored, who
has created Physic even for Brutes, who, by means of one Herb alone, cure
many Diseases incident to them.

It is also the Opinion of Ancient Physicians, That if we had not some
Instructions from Brutes in Physic, as also in Nursing, and other things, we
could never have discovered the same; as Helianus, Aristotle, and Pliny,
declare; to cite all which here would be too tedious.

CHAP. VIII. When the Knowledge of Herbs was committed to Writing.
THE Use and Virtue of Vegetables has been long known amongst Men; and Fathers
have always instructed their Children in it, before Characters were invented:
And some there are that, at this day, have no Skill in Letters, yet are very
skilful in the Use and Virtue of Herbs and Roots, which Knowledge they have
partly from their Ancestors, and partly by Natural Instinct, notwithstanding
they have read no Books: But since Writing has been invented, the Knowledge of
the Nature and Virtue of Herbs has been committed to Books; because the Memory
of Man could not retain them all; and because, the same should not in Time be
forgotten, but that Posterity should know the same.

In those Days Herbals were not common, nor the Knowledge of Herbs very
general; for one wrote upon one, and another upon another.

We read that King Juba was the first that writ of the Virtue of Euphorbium:
Mison, of Plantane: Musoeus and Hesiodus, of Polilim: Chrisippus, as also
Dieuches and Cato, of Brassica: Zeno the Stoic, of Cypress: Antinomachus, of
Cytisum: Marchio, of Radishes: Apuleius, of Betony: Virgil, of Ebony:
Erasistratus, of Lysimachia: Homer, of Saffron, Lotus, and Hyacinthum: Hesiod,
of Mallows: Archigenes, of Castor: Aristomachus, of the Vine: Asclepiades, of
Chamomil.

After these succeeded others; as Theophrastus, Bithimus, Asolas, Heraclides,
Tarantinus, Julius Bessus, Nisseratus, Petronius Niger, Ditotus, Cratatas
Andreas, and, at last, Dioscorides and Pliny, who writ Books, and collected the
Experiments made before their time.

Although something of these, by the length of Time, is lost, yet we see still
that they were more diligent in those days, than we are now, when few will be
persuaded to read the Books of the Ancients.

I will not mention the Professors of this Art, who refuse to study the
Experiments of the Ancients, for their better Instruction, because the Ancients
Skill was not enlarged through the whole Kingdom of Vegetables, but confined to
the Virtues of some few Herbs; so that one described one; and another, another:
Not that Virtue which was known in the time of Adam, Enoch, Methusalem, and
Solomon; but for several Hundred Years since, out of such Authors which they
found perfect.

I could say much here of Apollo, Perne, Aesculapius, Machaon, Podalirius, and
also of Hippocrates, if occasion would permit.

CHAP. IX. Of some Wonders, Signs, and Miracles, effected by Herbs.
BEcause many strange things are done here upon Earth, which are the Work of
God, but by Men are little set by; yet in nothing they show themselves more
plain, than in Herbs, of which there are innumerable sorts, endued with
innumerable Virtues: if they were but known, and studied, as the Ancients did,
we might, to this very day, also show many Miracles, as the Ancients did, not
by Witchcraft and Sorcery, but by the Property and Essence of the Creatures,
assisted by the Influence of the Stars.

Pliny tells us of many things which may be effected by Herbs, gathered under
their proper Influences, which we account impossible and ridiculous; but by the
Ancients this Art was called, Magia Naturalis, and so mightily esteemed by
them, that they hid it from vulgar People, and made it known only to
Philosophers, and Mighty Kings: But the Sacred Art was, at length, (like the
Holy Scripture) mightily abused, by the succeeding Idolatrous People, who
mingled the same with many Superstitious Operations, Sorceries, and Black Art:
Therefore the Jews, Christians, and Ancient Romans, condemned the same as a
Superstitious Art, and Diabolical; by which means the Knowledge of Nature, and
Natural things, is hardly, and with much more Labor and Difficulty attained to.

But that it may appear what the Ancients effected with Herbs, I will give the
Reader a Taste, that he may see, by a few Examples, what the whole Family of
Vegetables would do, if Men knew the Use and Virtue of them.

Lotus, is a Vegetable, growing in the Island Circe, as Homer says, endued
with such force, that he who tastes of it, forgets his Native Country,
Children, and all that is dear to him.

Xanthus, a Famous Historian in the days of Lot, mentions an Herb, called Boli,
by whose Virtue, those that were slain by Dragons, were brought to Life again,
and that not once, but often, as Pliny testifies.

Hence it is to be seen, that tho we do not credit the Word of God, yet it is
Natural, and no Fable, what is written in the Book of the Creation of the Tree
of Life; and no doubt, but at this very day, there are several Herbs and
Vegetables endued with the same Virtue, which, by reason of our Sins, we are
unworthy to know.

Theophrastus writes, and Democritus also believes it, that there is an Herb,
which, in former times, Josephus knew, by whose Virtue, a Wooden-pin drove into
a Tree was pulled out.

It Is said also of Betony, That if you make a Circle with it, and cast Serpents
into the Circle, they will not come out, but slay one another.

We find in History, That the Scythians knew an Herb called Scythice, or
Spartanaca, of which, if they did but chaw a little, they preserved themselves
from Hunger and Thirst twelve days.

Also, There have been Herbs that have dried up a whole Sea; and being thrown
into a violent Current, it has stemmed it; and whoever carried it with him,
wanted nothing. This Herb is called Aethyops.

CHAP. X. The Ancients used only Herbs, not Compositions.
NOW seeing these wonderful Virtues and Operations in Herbs, the Ancients used
them singly, excluding all great Compositions, as in these days, of which they
knew nothing in former time: These were Invented through covetousness and
ignorance of the Nature of Herbs, which is arrived to that pass, that the true
knowledge of Herbs is quite extinguished by reason of the Physicians, who, by
leaving the true knowledge, and ancient description of Herbs, and following
Avicenna and others, are fallen into such Darkness, that if it be not checked in
a few years, we shall know nothing of the ancient Practice of Physic.

Here I should show the abuse of the whole Profession, and quote several
Sayings out of Pliny, and other Ancients, in the behalf of simple Physic, made
of Herbs and Roots; but I fear it will hinder my purpose.

CHAP. XI. When the Composition of Herbs was first Invented.
THE Composition of Herbs, Roots, Seeds, and Gums, did first begin in the days
of King Mithridates and Andromachus, who first composed the Treacle, which, in
the time of Pliny, was very ridiculous, and he in several places ridicules the
same. This, in time, is grown more in Practice, till Galen; from Galen, to
Avicenna, Mesue, and other Arabians, till it is arrived to the highest pitch,
and followed by the most Learned Men; and he that could best mix hot and cold,
dry and moist, sweet and sour, was the best Man, and that not only of the
Production of our own Country, but of Arabia and India; for ours was of no
Value.

It is not against the Apothecaries and Doctors that we use common and
experimented Physic; but for the Benefit of the Sick; for, Why should not our
Herbs be as good as those brought out of Asia and Africa? How did we when they
were not brought over? and, How is it that those who use that Physic least,
live longest? and those who run to the Apothecary are commonly the sickest? Tho
the strange Herbs are endued with more powerful Names, they are not fit for our
Climate. Since God has given us proper Wines and Fruits, and other Necessaries
fit for Use, How is it that he gave us not Herbs agreeable to our Climate, that
we might use them? but the contrary is true, and the true and simple Physic is
easier to be had.

Several have that growing in their Gardens, and tread under foot, which might
preserve their Life; also, more Expenses are saved in the time of Sickness,
which gains the Love of the People, who were commonly addicted to Herbs and
Vegetables; and besides, the Compounds agree not with every Nature.

CHAP. XII. Herophilus's Opinion of Herbs.
THERE was a very Learned and Experienced Man among the Physicians, as may
appear by Cornelius Celsus and Pliny. This Man's Opinion was, That all Diseases
might be cured by Herbs, and many wonderful things effected; and those Herbs
which we account most Vile, are endued with most Virtue; as Experience
testifies.

For, a Nobleman, as often as he walked over a Plain where Esula grew, he was
always seized with a Looseness: what Effect then may other Herbs have?

The Magic of Albertus Magnus is not to be slighted, although he showed many
Untruths, contrary to his Knowledge and Experience.

CHAP. XIII. At what Seasons Herbs and Roots are to be gathered.
IT is not enough that we take and use Herbs as they are described in the
Herbals; but they must be gathered in their proper Season; for if this be
neglected, the Herb will have but little Virtue, and may prove Antipathetick to
the Distemper, and make the Disease worse.

The Apothecaries, above all, should observe this particular, if they would
rightly understand their Business.

The Herbs, ought to be gathered, not only when the Heaven is clear, and the
Weather fair; for in fair Weather there may happen a contrary Influence of Sol,
Mars, and Jupiter; as will happen in April, School. when Sol comes to a square of
Saturn, and Opposition of Jupiter, and Jupiter to a square of Saturn: And also
the time of the Year must be observed; for some are sooner, some later in
Perfection.

The Age of the Herbs is likewise to be observed; some are to be gathered
before they Blossom; some when in their Blossom; others when they begin to
seed. By reason this Observation of Age, and Time, is by many neglected, and
the true Time of the Influence not truly Calculated, they have committed great
Mistakes; yea, some have described several Herbs, without their Stalks and
Flowers, which, nevertheless, have both Stalks and Flowers, because they gave a
Description of them before they had Flowers.

The ancient Herbalists say, That whoever will gather Herbs and Roots, must
have a perfect Knowledge of the Influence of the Heavens and Stars; and also
know to what Planets the Herbs are subject, and under what Constellation they
should be gathered, even to an Hour and Minute.

These Observations (says Otto Brunefells, a learned and experienced
Physician, who lived 120 years since) the Ancients did punctually observe; and
therefore they did more with the Herbs then, than we can do now. Marcilius
Ficinus, above 150 years ago, in his third Book, has writ of this; as also a
very ancient Apothecary, in his Book called Nicholaus Proepositus's
Dispensatory; in the which may be seen, how every Herb in particular ought to
be gathered and prepared; and since these, many Eminent Physicians have written
of the Heavenly Influences upon Herbs, but very imperfectly, and nothing worth.

Flowers ought to be gathered before they begin to fall: Fruits, when they are
ripe, and before they begin to drop: The Seeds, when they are dry, but before
they begin to break.

The Juice is to be expressed, when the Herbs are green and juicie, and their
Stalk young; and also the Milk of Herbs, the sweating Drops and Gums.

CHAP. XIV. Where to keep your Herbs.
THE Herbs must be cleaned from all their Dirt, and dried in the Shade, before
they are put up: Some tie them in Bunches, and hang them by the Wall in their
Houses: Some pull the Leaves, and put them into Bags to dry them: and if this
be done, according to due Order and Knowledge, as well of the Season, Day, and
Hour, when they are gathered, as also their Names, it is a very useful thing.
You must take especial Care that your Chamber be very clean, that the Herbs lie
not upon the Floor, nor rot, or grow moldy, nor dirtied by Rats or Cats; but
be kept as a precious Jewel.

Flowers and sweet Herbs are to be kept in close Boxes, made of Lignum Tilioe,
but so that they may keep their Scent, and not be musted.

Seeds must be wrapped in Papers, to preserve them from Mould.

All sorts of Fruits, as also Gums and Juices, must be kept in Silver, Tin,
Glass, or Earthen Vessels. It is good to keep what belongs to the Eyes in
Earthen Vessels; Fat and Marrows should be kept in Tin. Roots should be cut
square, or round, washed clean, then string'd and dried. Wormwood, Hyssop,
Savory, Southern-wood, French Lavender, and the like, must be gathered with
their Seeds, and dried in the Shade.

CHAP. XV. How long Herbs will hold good.
HErbs usually hold good a Year, till they spring up afresh; some longer: Both
Hellebores will keep good many years, Chamoeleon 40 years, Centaury 12 years,
Hogs-Fenil 5 years, Birth-wort 6 years, Briony 1 year; but the most part lose
their Virtue in 3 years; and those that are gathered in due Season last
longest; Celandine keeps good 3 years, Enula 2 years.

CHAP. XVI. Where the best Herbs grow.
THE best Herbs grow on Mountains, and Wildernesses, in Plains, and places
whereon the Sun shines most; but those less useful, in Gardens, and Shadowy
places, and places Close; also in Moist Watery places, and Churchyards, etc.
therefore the Wild ones are accounted better, and more durable than the Garden
ones; some Herbs are esteemed according to their Country, as Iris of Illyria,
and Macedonia, Cyprus rotundus of Silicia and Syria, Saffron of Coriceum,
Lyceum and Cyrene; all these things are carefully noted by Dioscorides and
Pliny.

CHAP. XVII. With what Ceremonies, and in what Seasons, the Old Pagans gathered
their Herbs.
THE old Pagans took great care to gather their Herbs in due Season, calling
upon the Spirits and Idols all the while: These Herbs had great Virtue, not
from the Invocation of the Spirits and Idols, but the Devil had (by God
Almighty's Permission over the Pagans) such Power, as to lead them into these
Superstitious Ceremonies, which we Christians do not believe; for God, by his
ordinary Means, can do more than the Devil; for if we loved God, and firmly
Believed in him, there would be no occasion for Ceremonies and other things,
but, like Moses, we might Act, who, with a piece of Wood, made Bitter waters
Sweet; and as Elias and Elizaeus, who corrected poisonous Victuals with a
little Flour, and also made Iron swim upon the Water; and as the Apostles, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, with the Use of the Oil of Olives only, cured many
Diseases. Thus much might we do at this time with our Herbs and Roots.

When the Pagans dug the Root of Tapsum, they anointed their Bodies with Oil
of Olives; they chose calm Weather, otherwise their whole Body would swell.

When they gathered the Dog-Thistle, they turned off the Wind from the place,
least their Eyes should be damaged.

Some sorts of Roots they gathered before Sunrise: But Roots under the
Government of Sol, they gathered when the Sun was in the Ascendant, or
Mid-heaven; for then he has a stronger Influence on Natural things, than in
any other House.

When they dug Hellebore, they drew a Circle with a Naked Sword, and the Person
who dug it turned his Face to the Sunrising, and said a short Prayer, desiring
that some lucky Bird might appear to him. But when the Eagle appeared too near
to him, it fore-show'd his Death, (they frequenting those places where they dig
Hellebore:) but the said Digger must first have eaten Garlic, and drank Wine,
before he take out the Root.

Peony Root they dug by Night, for fear the Merula (the Guardian of that
Root) should pick out the Eyes of the Digger.

They also provided against the Hawk and Sparrow-Hawk, when they gathered the
Ague Herb.

The Root Panax, otherwise Asclepeia, could not be dug before they had made
an Offering of several Fruits, and flung them into the Earth; and after they
had made three Circles with a two-edged Sword, they dug it out.

Mandrake was also three times encircled with a Sword, the Digger turned
himself to the West, and danced round the Circles, and uttered several Words,
not fit here to be mentioned.

To dig Iris was a great Labor; for (for three Months before they dug it) they
sprinkled the Earth about it with Honey-water, as Priests do the Sepulchers in
Churchyards with Holy Water; for, by such Sprinkling, they thought they moved
the Earth to Peace; then they made several Circles about it with a Sword, and
took out the Root, and held it up to the Heavens; but in all this time the
Digger must keep himself chaste.

When they dug Polium, they built a shade about it, because it then yielded
more Power and Virtue to the Bearer.

They who burnt Pitch, while they were employed in Melting, offered, and prayed
that their Work might succeed well.

Scribonius Largus tells more wonderful things of Verbena; for when that Herb
is first found, they must make a Circle about it with their left Ear, and also
lay down some Fruits to it, and the next day, before Sunrise, they must take
the Herb away with their Left Hand.

The Herb Scolopendria, is esteemed very prevalent to Women in Labor,
especially if it be hung about the Neck with the Spleen of a Mule; but this
Herb must be dug in the Night, when the Moon is in the Mid-heaven. Of this you
may read more in Theophrastus, Pliny, Dioscorides, Apuleius, and others.

But such natural Seasons and Ceremonies as we Christians use, are at large
described in the Third Instruction, at the End of this Book.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Nature and Operation of the Herbs of Saturn.
PAstinaca, or Parsnip. If you take this Herb in an Antipathetick Influence of
Saturn, and bruise it with your Hands, and out of spite lay it to a Man's Face
when he sweats, it will presently cause the Leprosy; for that Saturnine Spirit
that goes out of the Herb, and passes into your Body with your Breath,
presently causes the Leprosy. I do not tell this to encourage Mischief; but
to show the Harmony of Heavenly and Earthly Bodies. Therefore I will not
describe the Antipathetick Influence of the Planets, by which much Mischief may
be done: but the Sympathetick and useful Influence of the Planets, which I have
Calculated with great Pains, Time, and Expenses; as you may find in my Fourth
Instruction following.

If this Saturnine Herb, Pastinaca, be cut up with a piece of Lead, sharp hard
Wood, piece of an Ox's Bone, or other Saturnine thing, according to the
Influence of Saturn, demonstr^ted in my Fourth Instruction, it is an infallible
Remedy against the Leprosy, and other Saturnine Diseases: Although some Herbs are
more esteemed than others, yet, by the Influences, they may be exalted to an
equal dignity, if they are gathered, as directed, in a strong Sympathetical
Influence.

Staphisagria, sive Consiligo, or Staves-Acre; with the Root of this Herb a Man
may catch Wolves and Foxes; and if you dig it according to direction, it
preserves those that wear it about their Neck from the Plague and Pestilence.

Saxifragia being carried about the Neck, preserves from the poisonous Plague:
It is also excellent against the Pains in the Privities, if it be gathered,
according to direction, in a Saturnine Influence.

Wolf-bane. This Herb is of so quick and poisonous a Nature, that it kills
Wolves. Those that use it fall into Swooning-fits; for the Saturnal Spirit
which is hid in the Herb, is an Enemy to the Heart, and (as a Solar Member)
does mightily disturb the same. If the Genitals of a Man be rubbed with it, it
will kill him; but if it be gathered in an Antipathetick Influence of Saturn
and Sol, and hanged about the Neck twice, when one is taken off, another hanged
on, it cures Poisons, and all Saturnine Diseases.

Filix, or Fern. In this Herb the Spirit of Saturn is very abundant, therefore
it is especially used in the Magical Art; it casts forth its Seed before it is
completely ripe, because of the great power of Saturn; and its Nature shows
Barrenness. If Men use it, it makes them Impotent. If it be hanged about a
Woman's Neck with the Spleen of an Ass, it makes her Barren; because Saturn and
Venus are Enemies; from whence proceeds Barrenness.

Hyosciamus, or Henbane. This Herb taken inwardly causes Sleep, and by its
occult, Saturnine, Poisonous Sulphur, it makes Men as if they were Possessed of
the Devil; and Quarrelsome, as if they were Drunk. Hence says Scribonius, He
who takes it is deprived of his Senses, and is always Quarrelsome; the Cause of
which, is the poisonous Antipathetick Constellation of Saturn.

Frangula, sive Arbor foetida, or Alder-Tree, delights to grow in shadowy
Woods, and moist Places, therefore it is subject to Saturn. If it be used in
the Influence of Saturn, it is excellent in all old Sores, and poisonous Ulcers.

Personatia, seu Lappa major, or Burdock, delights to grow in dark moist
Places, and is subject to Saturn. If this Root be gathered in the Influence of
Saturn, it is an excellent Remedy against the Toothache; for it has in its self
an excellent cooling Saturnal Salt, which takes away the Pain.

Muscus, or Moss. This delights in thick Woods and Trees, and Rocks, where the
Sun cannot come. It has a dry and slupifying Taste, and is subject to Saturn.
If it be gathered in the Influence of Saturn, and boiled in a Lee, it prevents
the falling off of the Hair, by washing the Head with it: It also fastens loose
Teeth, and by its Astringent and Stiptick nature often stops the Blood in
Wounds.

Helleborus niger, or Black Hellebore: This commonly uses to blossom about
Christmas; the best of it is dug in High Mountains, as Saturnine Places, in
the Influence of Saturn. Its Virtue is wonderful to Mankind, especially to
Persons betrothed, and those who carry it about their Neck live to grow very
old, as Saturn in a good Aspect with Jupiter gives long Life. It is also good
against external Saturnine, Poisonous Diseases.

Scolopendrion, or Spleen-wort. This represents the Spleen in Men; it grows
without Seed, in dark, woody Places, where the Sun cannot come; for all dark,
gloomy Places, are subject to Saturn, all Darkness being caused by Saturn and
his Stars; therefore, if it be gathered in the Influence of Saturn, it expells
cold, Saturnine Phlegm wonderfully.

Tamariscus, or Tamarisk, loves shadowy Places, not much exposed to the Sun: It
loses its Seed, like the Willow, before it is ripe, and is subject to Saturn,
appropriated to the Spleen, because of its Planet; therefore if it be gathered
in the Influence of Saturn, it is prevalent against the Spleen. Pliny says,
That the Wine, in which the Coals of Tamarisk are quenched, cures the Spleen.

Savine is found in thick dark Woods, and therefore is subject to Saturn; the
leaves poudered in the Influence of Saturn, and put into old Ulcers is
excellent good. The Sorcerers make much use of this Herb; for all Saturnine
Vegetables are of that Nature, that if they are gathered in an Antipathetical
Influence of Saturn, they bring all manner of mischief to Mankind.

Sena is subject to Saturn, it expells out of the Body all Saturnine Phlegm,
purifies the Blood, helps the sickly Spleen, and takes away the Quartan; it is
excellent for such as are troubled with a malignant Saturnine Spirit in the
Head.

Radix Capparis, or Capers, loves dry and Sandy places, and where Rubbish is;
it opens the Bladder, expells Urine, breaks the Stone in the Bladder, and
expells the same; it opens the stoppage of the Spleen, and pacifies all
Melancholy Swellings.

Ruta, or Rue. This, by its subtle Virtue which it has from the Stars, if it
be gathered in a good Influence of Saturn, resists all Poisons, and is an
excellent remedy in the time of the Plague, and because the Plague is not only
occasioned by Saturn, you must therefore use with it Martial and Solar herbs,
but not mixed with them; of which you may see more in the 20 and 21 Chapters.

Rue expells Melancholy, and refreshes the Heart oppressed with the same, and is
a useful Remedy in a Quartan, because the same is chiefly occasioned by Saturn,
and therefore people subject to Saturn are cured by it. Nature in this Herb
has conjoined the Sun and Saturn, for if Rue and Sage be pounded together with
Vinegar and bound upon the Pulse, it cures the Fever: you may further take
Notice, that this Herb resists all Witchcraft, occasioned by Saturn, for Saturn
is Lord of all Witchcraft, but Sol opposes this Virtue in this Herb, as its
Signature in its little knob shows.

Polypodium, or Polypody of the Oak, is found in desert and dark Places, as
also about the Rocks; it is subject to Saturn, and is good against the Black
Jaundice, Melancholy, and Quartan; it takes away heavy Dreams, occasioned by
the black Saturnal humidity.

Bursa Pastoris, or Pouch-weed. Its Substance and Signature shows it to be
subject to Saturn, for the hour of its springing up was when Saturn was in the
Sixth House, and is good for the swelling of the Yard, when the Antipathetick
Directions of Saturn and Venus begin; this Herb, as also another Venereal Herb,
gathered in good time, and hung about the Neck, is good against the same
Disease.

Salix, or Willow, is appropriated to Saturn and Venus, because of its
abounding Saturnine humidity which in time falls away, and therefore loses its
Seed before it is Ripe; here Nature gives to understand, that if this Seed be
used Antipathetically, it causes Barrenness. An Oil made of the same by
Chemical Art, in the Antipathetical Influence of Saturn and Venus, and anoint
the Secrets with it, it takes away all Venereal desire.

Solanum, or Nightshade, grows not only in shady and moist Places, but also in
the highest Mountains, and is subject to Saturn and Luna. It has a peculiar
Virtue to cause Sleep, the Leaves of it laid upon the Head, take away all Pains
proceeding from Heat, by reason of its cold nature: It is also good for all
inward and outward Inflammations.

Cassutha, sive Coscuta, Dodder, or Woodbine, loves to grow in fat Grounds, and
is subject to Saturn and Jupiter, as his Signature shows, and is good against
the Stoppage of the Muscles and Veins, and, by its penetrating Virtue, all
Diseases of the Liver, as also the Yellow-Jaundice and Dropsy.

Agnus Castus takes away all Venereal Appetites.

Angelica is subject to Saturn, and expells all Saturnine Diseases.

Salvia, or Sage, is subject to Saturn and Jupiter.

Oxylapathum, or sharp-pointed Dock, delights in shady and mountanous Places,
and therefore is subject to Saturn.

Atriplex, or Arrach, is also under Saturn, and grows in nasty Places; it makes
those that take it pale, and augments the Black Gall.

Apium, or Smallage, is also subject to Saturn; the Worms that are found in the
Stalks of Apium, who-ever eats of them are Barren.

Cupressus, or Cypress, is found in high Mountains. They blacken Hair by the
Saturnine Color.

Cannabis, or Hemp, is also a Saturnal Herb; he who uses much of this Seed
grows Barren, and at last Mad.

Coscuta, or Dodder, loves to grow in dark places, where the Sun does not come:
It makes Hair very long, and opens the hard Spleen.

Here you must take Notice, That all Saturnal Herbs must be gathered in those
Days and Hours when Saturn is strong. How it is to be done, you may see further
in the Fourth Instruction, of the First Cure of the Influences: But you may
always begin half or an hour before; but the Herb must always be gathered at
that time which I have directed.

CHAP. XIX. The Explanation of some Jovial Herbs, and their Influence in
general.
CLove-gilli-flowers are a Jovial Vegetable, and, according to their Nature,
love temperate Places; the Root of them drawn by the Oil of Sugar, strengthens
the Liver, cleanses and augments the Blood, and refreshes all Natural Spirits
because of its Jovial Spirit. It quenches the Heat in hot Fevers, and restores
lost Strength.

Cerasa, or Cherries, are also subject to the Influence of Jupiter. They
cleanse and augment the Blood; they are opening and cooling in the Inflammation
of the Liver; they are good for such as are troubled with the Yellow-Jaundice,
and an Extract made of the same in a due time of Jupiter, is good in hot
Fevers; for it not only cools the Blood, but pacifies inflamed Spirits.

Strawberries are also Jovial, and have the same Virtue with the Cherries: They
refresh the Blood, and are good in the Yellow-Jaundice.

Balsamita, or Costmary, loves to grow toward the East, the Jovial Spirits
being most copious in temperate Places: It cures all outward and inward
Diseases, if you can get it: Outwardly applied toward the Liver, it refreshes
the same wonderfully; and because the Liver, and also all Natural Spirits in
Men, are of a Jovial Nature, therefore by Jovial Herbs they are strengthened and
preserved.

Oleastrum, or Wild-Olive: This, with its whole Substance, is Jovial, because
all things that are of an Oily Substance are commonly subject to Jupiter.

Betonica, or Betony, loves to grow in Fat ground, and is of the Nature of
Jupiter, therefore it cleanses the Blood in Men, because the Blood is subject
to Jupiter, and consumes all its gross humidity; it strengthens the Liver, and
opens its obstructions; it cures the Yellow Jaundice and Dropsy; if you use
with it an Herb of the Sun or Moon, it resists Witchcraft, for the Jovial and
Solar Herbs have a peculiar Virtue against Witchcraft; it likewise heals all
Wounds and Ulcers.

Linum, or Flax, loves a temperate Soil, and is of a Fat and Oily substance,
subject to Saturn and Jupiter; its Seed is excellent for a Consumption, it
mollifies and ripens all hard swellings of the Liver, when it is used in the
time of Jupiter, and outwardly applied.

Centaurium, or Centaury, shows by its light colored Flower, that it is of a
Jovial and Martial Nature; it has by Nature a Sulphurous Salt, as the Gall
has in Men; therefore it is of a Bitterish Taste, and has a particular hidden
Virtue to cure the stop-page of the Gall, and expel out of the Stomach the
Yellow-Jaundice, Fever, and Gall; it is also an excellent Wound-Herb because of
its Jovial Nature.

Berberries are of a Red Color, and subject to Jupiter and Mars; for they grow
upon prickly Thorns, who, by their signature, represent Mars. Out of this Fruit
is prepared an Excellent Medicine for the Swelling of the Throat, cooling the
Inflammation of the Liver, and taking away the painful Heat of the Stomach.

Caryophyllata, sive Herba benedicta, or Avens, is as well a Solar as a Jovial
Vegetable; it has its yellow Flowers of the Sun, to which Jupiter of himself
can give no Color. It smells like Cloves, and is therefore called
Caryophyllata in Latin. It strengthens the Heart, opens the Liver, and
strengthens the Stomach, because it is Jovial.

Persicaria, or Arsmart, delights to grow in Ditches and moist Places, and is
of a Jovial and Lunar Nature: It expells the Podagra, if it be gathered in a
strong Influence, and applied with the Herbs of Saturn and Mars, to the Breast,
Arms, and Knees.

Lychnis Coronaria, seu Rosa mariana, or Campane Rose, is subject to Jupiter,
because of its light colored Flowers: It refreshes the Liver and Blood, and is
useful to those who labor under the Leprosy and Pox: It heals Wounds by
Virtue of its Jovial and Heavenly Influence.

Fumaria, or Fumitory, has a light, red Flower, but a bitter and unpleasant
Taste, is of a Jovial and Saturnine Nature, as its Taste shows: It has in it an
Earthy Sulphur, therefore it is bitter, and is good for the Liver, as it is
subject to Jupiter, and opens the same. It cures the Yellow-Jaundice and
Dropsy, and cleanses the Blood, which belongs to Jupiter, especially if it be
gathered on a Thursday, in the hour of Jupiter, and he well aspected, as you
may see in the Months.

Tucrinum, or Orpin, represents Jupiter, by its signature, has a bitter Taste,
proceeding from the Sulphureal Salt it has in it: It opens Obstructions of the
Liver, by its Jovial Nature; it cleanses the Blood, and expells all malignant
Humidity by Sweat.

Verbascum, or Mullein, is subject to Jupiter and Sol; for all the yellow
Colors in Vegetables come from Sol. It is the best Herb that can be found for
Healing of Wounds, because of its Jovial Nature, and is very useful to them who
spit Blood, by reason of a broken Vein in the Lungs. The Root, as also other
Jovial and Saturnal Herbs, gathered in a due Influence, (as is specified in the
Months) and every one put into a bag by themselves, of their own Color, and
hung about the Neck, cure the Cough and Consumption. It also helps those that
are troubled with Vapors of the Stomach, and Shortness of Breath. If a Man
holds this Root in his Hand, it stops Bleeding, and cures the Bites of
Scorpions; it resists all Poison, by the Virtue of Jupiter and Sol, who both
resist Poison.

Consolida, or Comfrey, loves a fat Soil, has a clammy Root, and is subject to
Jupiter, therefore it is prevalent in all Distempers of the Lungs, as also in
Spitting of Blood.

Origanum, or Wild-Marjoram, is subject to Jupiter; it smells like Galangal,
which is also of the Nature of Jupiter, and is an excellent Herb against Theft
and Witchcraft, if it be gathered when Jupiter is well aspected, and strong,
tho with this Caution, that the Spirits do not return to the Earth; if it be so
gathered, it preserves the Bearers from all Peril, and makes them fortunate. If
it be hung in a House, it preserves it from all Robberies and Witchcraft.

Betula, or Birch-Tree, is as well by Form, as Taste, subject to Jupiter,
therefore, by its Jovial Nature, it is excellent in all Obstructions of the
Liver, and Yellow-Jaundice; it is also good in the Consumption of the Liver. If
in the Influence of Jupiter you cut the Branches of Betula, growing Eastward,
where the Spirits of Jupiter are most powerful, being hung in Chambers, they
are very useful; for the Jovial Spirits exhaling out of the Betula, and
attracted by the Breath, penetrates presently, as all Jovials do, Jupiter
having a peculiar Virtue to open the same. Its power is also great in Mad and
Possessed People, because of the hidden Jovial Spirit, and such Effects have
their Original from these three, Saturn, Luna, and Mercury, and those who have
in their Nativity a Conjunction or Opposition of Saturn and Mercury, and Mars
coming to it with a Direction, such Persons, when the Direction falls, are of a
base and devilish Nature; therefore such Persons must be cured with Solar and
Jovial Herbs; but especially with such, as are subject to the Dominion of both
Planets.

Chamoepetys, seu Iva, or Ivy, is subject to Jupiter, and has a subtle Salt in
it, and also a Sulphur; therefore it is excellent against the Gout and
Sciatica, for both these Pains proceed from a Tartar that clings to the Veins
and Muscles.

Amygdalus, or Almond-Tree, delights in a fat Soil, and is subject to Jupiter
and Venus; the Fruit of it strengthens the Liver, makes a pure Blood, and gives
good Nutriment, according to the Nature of all Jovial things and Vegetables;
for all Creatures which have a delicious Taste, are of a Jovial and Venereal
Nature. They are good in a Consumption, for they bring the Body into good
Order, and refresh the Liver.

Ruba domestica, or Black-berries, are of a Jovial and Martial Nature, and are
used for all inward and outward Ruptures; for they disperse clotted Blood,
because Jupiter and Mars are joined in this Herb, all Ruptures being occasioned
by Mars; so that they who have in their Nativity a Conjunction of Mars and Luna
in the sixth or eighth House, ill aspected by Saturn, commonly are Bursten,
because the noxious Planet conjoins himself with the Planet of the Omentum and
Bowels.

Prunella, or Self-heal, is Jovial and Mercurial. It is good in all Boils, and
Sores in the Throat, and, by its Jovial Virtue, cures all inward Ruptures, and
outward Wounds.

Rhubarb is of a Jovial and Saturnine Nature; its Signature shows it to be
excellent against the stopping of the Liver, and Muscles leading to it, both
which are subject to Jupiter. It expells the Gall, and cures the
Yellow-Jaundice.

Lysimachia, or Loosestrife, if it be gathered in a strong Influence of
Jupiter, it causes the Bearer to be Beloved, and well accepted wherever he
comes; if it be flung among quarrelling Persons, it will make them Friends; for
by the subtle and hidden Jovial Spirit of this Herb, (which is directly
contrary to Mars) all Martial Effects are presently extinguished.

Bugloss and Burrage, are both subject to Jupiter in Aquary, the House of
Saturn. They clean the Blood from the Black Gall, and refresh the Mind.

Wheat loves a pleasant, temperate Soil, and because of its Jovial Nature,
nourishes and augments the Blood.

CHAP. XX. Of the Operation and Nature of Martial Herbs.
NEttles are subject to Mars, because of their hot and burning Nature; for all
that Prick and Burn are subject to this Planet, which is the hottest of all;
also all hot Creatures are subject to him. The Leaves of the Nettles mollify
and dissolve all Swellings, both of the Spleen, and other Members. The Seed
gathered in a good and strong Influence of Mars, keeps the Bearer from all
Wounds that come from Quarrels and Blows; but if they are gathered in an undue
Season, their Operation is contrary.

Thistles of all sorts, by their Prickles show that they are all Martial. Their
Seeds and Roots are useful in the Pleurisy. The Seeds of Thistles, gathered in
due Season, stop the Bloody Flux, and the Whites.

Resta bovis, or Rest-Harrow, is Martial and Jovial: It opens the Obstructions
of Liver and Gall, and cures the Yellow-Jaundice and Stone. If this be gathered
in two several Influences of Mars and Jupiter, and each severally hung about
the Neck, it preserves the Bearer from the Power of his Enemies and Murderers.

Esula, seu Tithymallus, or lesser Spurge, is subject to Saturn and Mars,
because of his burning and biting Nature and Virtue; (for all yellow Colors in
Vegetables have their Original from Sol) and is very powerful in all hard
Swellings of the Spleen.

Rhamnus, or Buckthorn, is in the Martial Row; for all things that are Rough,
Sharp, Prickly, and Burning, and do grow in dry Places, are subject to Mars, if
they are gathered in due Season, and hanged about the Neck, serve against all
Martial Sicknesses and Diseases.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Nature and Virtue of the Solar Herbs.
SAffron is a Solar Herb, and delights in Places where the Sun shines all day
long; out of the same may be extracted, in the Influence of the Sun, an
excellent Eye-Water; for the Eyes are subject to the Sun. He who in his
Nativity has an Opposition of Saturn and Sol, has but weak Eyes, and great
Pains in them, which are cured by Saturnal and Solar Medicines. When the
central Sol is strengthened by the Spiritual Influence of the Celestial, it
resists by its occult, Solar Virtue all Poisons, and together with Saturnal and
Martial Herbs, it is an excellent Remedy against the Plague.

Carthamus, or Wild-Saffron, grows upon Gold-bearing Mountains, from whence it
attracts such a strong Solar Spirit, that it colors Tin and Silver, as if they
were Gilded.

Mala citria, or Limons, are of a Solar Nature, and love to grow in a hot
Ground, and in Places where the Sun shines most: They have a particular
Inclination to the Heart, in which Sol has a particular Dominion; they
strengthen and refresh the same, augment also the Vital Spirits, and clear
them: These, with other Martial things, resist powerfully all Poison: They
preserve the Heart, which is the Fountain of Life; the Juice must be expressed in
the Influence of Sol, and the Seed put into a yellow Bag of Taffety, and dipped
into the Juice, and applied to the Breast.

Laurus, or Bay Tree, is subject to the Sun, therefore by its subtle Celestial
Virtue, together with Martial Vegetables, it resists Poison; its Signature
shows that it is an excellent Remedy against the Bites of all Poisonous
Animals. The Leaves of it put into unwholesome Water make it wholesome.

The Vine is subject to Sol, and delights to grow where the Sun shines most: It
augments the Solar, Vital Spirits, and refreshes them; strengthens the Heart,
and expells all Melancholy occasioned by Saturn.

Enula is of a Solar Nature, and delights in pleasant and Sun-shiny Places. The
Tincture of the Flower extracted with the Oil of Sugar, in the Influence of
Sol, is an excellent Remedy for the Eyes, it sharpens the Sight mightily: It is
also good for those that have a Cough; for it dissolves the Phlegm in the
Breast, and expells it by its Solar Virtue.

Hypericon, or St. John's Wort, is subject to the Sun and Jupiter, loves to grow
in pleasant places; it cleanses Wounds powerfully, and heals them, and is good
against inward bruises of the Veins; it stops spitting of Blood, occasioned by
a broken Artery; for all Jovial Herbs are of a healing Nature, therefore may be
applied to Wounds: If it be gathered in two several Influences, as of the Sun
and Jupiter, it expells all poisonous and putrefied Moisture, according to the
Nature of Jovial and Solar things: It resists all Putrefaction by its Solar
Virtue; therefore it expells all Worms, which have their Original from
Futrefaction.

Fraxinus, or Ash-Tree. It strengthens the Heart by its Solar Virtue, and with
Jovial and Saturnal things it resists Poison. The Juice of this Tree applied in
the Influence to the poisonous Bitings of Serpents cures them. Drinking Vessels
made of this Wood make those Merry who drink out of them. It expells all
Saturnal Spirits by Antipathy, and strengthens all Vital, Solar Spirits by
Sympathy. Hence it is excellent good for all Melancholy People.

Melissa, or Balm, belongs to the Sun and Jupiter. It hinders the Putrefaction
of the Lungs and Liver; it preserves Youth, and defends Old Age: It has also
many more Virtues, because of its Solar Influence.

Flos Solis, or Sun-Flower, is an excellent Herb for the Eyes; if the Flowers
be gathered in the Influence of Jupiter, they give the Bearer a special
Authority by their Solar, occult Virtue.

Rosemary is subject to Sol and Mercury, and by the Virtue of such
Constellation, it augments the Solar, Vital Spirits, as also the Animal Spirits
that are of a Mercurial Nature. It strengthens the Brain and Heart, and cures
all Colds in the Head, as also Apoplexy and Frenzy: It likewise resists all
Putrefaction.

Corona Imperialis, or Tulip, has all the Virtues of Rosemary.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Virtue and Force of Venereal Herbs.
SAtyrion Roots are subject to Venus, therefore by their Signature they
signify the Testicles, and other Venereal parts; they augment the Sperm, and
cause an inclination to Venereal Acts.

All sorts of Lilies are subject to Venus, but especially the white; for the
white color in Vegetables belongs to Venus; the other colored Lilies
participate of Venus's and other Planets influences; the Roots of white Lilies
gathered in the influence of the Moon and Venus, make the Bearer acceptable
among Women; the water of white Lilies clears the Face, and takes away all
spots of the Skin.

Lilium Convallium, or Lily of the Valley, loves moist places, and is subject to
Venus and Luna, being an excellent Remedy against the Epilepsie, Frenzy, and
Apoplexy, and other Diseases; for the Celestial Moon fortifies the Terrestrial
in Men by its Spiritual power and virtue; it strengthens the Brain, and cures
all Lunary Diseases.

Narcissus, or Daffodil, is subject to Venus; the Roots of it, together with
other proper things, augment the Sperm; the water of it clears the Skin and
Face; for Venus is Lady of all that is Beautiful, and all handsome Creatures
are subject to her, and receive their Beauty from her.

Flores Nymphoe, or Water Lilies, grow in Water, and therefore are subject to
Venus and Sol; they cure the Swellings of the Privities, and extinguish all
extravagant and lustful desires to Venus; if they be mixed with Saturnal Herbs,
they cool the Inflammation of the Liver; and if they be mixed with other proper
things, they cure the Hectic Fever and Pleurisy; they also clear the Face.

Rosa, or Rose, is for the most part of a Venereal Nature; it cures the
Swellings of the Yard, and is excellent in stopping the Red and White Fluxes of
Women, and makes them apt to Conceive.

Ficus, or Fig, is of a Venereal and Jovial Nature, therefore its Fruit is
Sweet and Delicious, which increases the Venereal Appetite.

Mala Mustica, or Sweet Apples, belong also to Venus, and have the same Effects
as the Figs.

Hyacinthus, or Hyacinth, is Venereal, but for the most part of a Solar Nature:
It makes the Bearer have an especial Love and Favor among Ladies of Quality;
for Ladies are subject to this Planet. The Juice of the Root rubbed on the Skin
prevents all growings of Hair.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Nature and Virtue of Mercurial Herbs.
CHamomilla, or Chamomil, is Mercurial, because of its manifold Colors; it
loves dry and sandy Places, and is good for many things. It disperses all Winds
and Swellings in the Body; it fortifies by the Mercurial Virtue the Animal
Spirits, especially if you make a Lee of them, and wash the Head with the same:
If it be mixed and used with other proper things, it opens all inward
Obstructions, and ripens the Sores of the Lungs.

Aquilegia, or Celandine, has Sky-colored and yellow Flowers, and is subject
to Mercury. It is good for all Swellings of the Lungs and Sides, as also for
all inward Hurts, for the Lungs and Sides are subject to Jupiter, therefore it
ripens all the Swellings of the same: It opens the Obstruction of the Liver,
and its Seed is good in the Yellow-Jaundice.

Faboe, or Beans, have Flowers of diverse Colors, are subject to Mercury and
Saturn. The use of them makes a thick and melancholy Blood subject to Saturnal
Diseases. They create great, windy Swellings, and by their gross Nature they
stupifie the Spirits, and obstruct the subtle Vital ones. The Smell of the
Flowers ascends into the Head, disquiets and dulls the Brains; therefore those
who are Born in an Antipathetick Conjunction of Saturn and Mercury, are
commonly sottish, and at last lose their Senses; but if the Conjunction or
Direction of Saturn be Sympathetical, those that are Born at that time have a
quick Wit, but a stammering Tongue, as has been proved by several Persons who
have had the same Direction.

Bellis, or Dasie, is subject to Mercury and Venus, because of its various
colored Flowers, which consist of a very humid Salt, ex libra and Mercuriali
humiditate aquea. It is good for those that are subject to Passion, because it
takes away the Gall without damaging the Liver. It is excellent in the Gout;
for by its subtle Salt it resolves and takes away the Tartar which causes this
Pain. The distilled Water takes away the Swellings of the Throat, and Blisters
of the Tongue, as being Mercurial parts.

Trifolium, or Trey-foil, is of a Mercurial Nature, therefore the Bees, which
are of a Mercurial and Solar Nature, love this Herb, and take most of their
Honey out of it.

All Friendship amongst Creatures proceeds from an Heavenly Harmony; for it
often happens, that Strangers, who have never seen each other before, love one
the other, because in their Nativity they have had the same Signs ascending.
Experience testifies, that Snakes do not love those Places where Trey-foil
grows: And History says, That in the Island Malta there are no Snakes, because
several sorts of Trey-foil grow there.

Trifolium Odoratum, or Treacle Claver, is subject to Mercury, therefore its
Scent is strongest, when Mercury has a strong Influence; and its strong Scent
often foretells Rainy Weather; so do almost all sorts of Trey-foil; for when it
begins to Rain, it declines its Head to the Ground, as if it were ready to
shrink up; it is good for the Brains and all Animal Spirits, for it strengthens
and augments the same by its Spiritual Mercurial Virtue, and is good against
the Epilepsie; it takes away the Colic, expells Urine, and resists all Poison.

Juniperus, or Juniper, is in its whole Nature subject to Mercury, and in him
is the whole Mercurial Monarchy: Out of it (by Chemical Art) is Extracted
excellent Remedies in the time of Mercury, against the Dropsy, Stone, Colic,
Poison, Plague, Coughing, Gout, and many other Diseases, as experience will
show; by its Scent and Shadow it makes Snakes fly.

Wallnuts are Mercurial, but a little subject to the Moon; they represent the
Brains by their Lunar Physiognomy, for the Brains are subject to Luna;
therefore the Nuts, if rightly used, fortify the Brain, and augment the Animal
Spirits. Out of the Root of this Tree is made a strong Vomit; the Juice of the
green Shells of the Nuts, is good against Inflammations and swellings of the
Throat.

Hasel-Nuts are also Mercurial; therefore the Squirrels (who are subject to
Mercury) love the Tree and its Fruit. The Misseltoe of it strengthens the
Brains.

Sambucus, or Elder-Tree, is wholly Mercurial, therefore out of it are prepared
many useful Medicines, especially for the Brain, and its Diseases, as also for
Dropsies and Fevers. Out of the Stones of the Berries, by Chemical Art, and
help of the Influence of Mercury, is prepared an excellent Oil against the
Gout. Elder cures as many Sicknesses as it has parts.

Bistorta, or Snake-weed, is excellent for the Lungs, because of its Mercurial
Nature. It is also excellent against the Cough.

Pulmonaria, or Lung-wort, is Mercurial; for it represents, by its Signature,
the Lungs. Saturn also claims a small share of it. It is excellent good for the
Distempers of the Lungs.

Anisum, or Anise, is also under the Influence of Mercury. It strengthens the
Brains, helps the Lungs, takes away the Cough and Phlegm from the Breast, and
is good for the Hectic, and opens the Obstructions of the Bowels.

Cubeboe, or Cubebs, are Mercurial and Lunar. They strengthen the Brain, which
belongs to Luna, and fortify and subtilize the Animal Spirits. They strengthen
the Memory, if they be used early in the Morning, else, by their superfluous
use, they bring damage to the Brains.

Marjorana, or Marjoram, is also Mercurial. It augments the Animal Spirits, and
is good in the Lethargy. Its Oil strengthens the Nerves, and is of excellent
use, as well inward as outward.

Note, That the most Mercurial Herbs are also subject to other Planets; for if
he joins with another Planet, he may be good or bad. He strengthens their
Influence; for Mercury is like Proteus, who makes use of all Shapes.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nature and Virtue of Lunar Herbs.
CAulis capitatus, or Colly-Flower, loves moist Places; it abounds with Juice;
is subject to Luna, and by its Signature it represents the Head. If eaten, it
causes Vapors in the Head, and makes it moist, because of Luna, who has
Dominion over it, especially if it be boiled with Onions, for it has a Lunar
Poison in it. It fills the whole Body with Moisture, as all Lunar Herbs do. It
is not very noxious to those who are plagued with the Gall, and have a very hot
Stomach. Those who are of a cold Nature ought not to use it, least, by its
Lunar Humidity, it should cause a Dropsy: But the inward parts taken with the
Seed in the Lunar Influence, cure the Dropsy, and other Lunar Sicknesses.

Brassica, or Cole-wort, is better than the Leaves. It is of a Lunar and Jovial
Nature: It makes a clear Blood, but the Herb of it makes no good Blood, but
occasions a watery Humidity, very good, or very bad, as the Moon is influenced:
It moistens the Liver, and prevents the Inflammations, as also the
Obstructions; therefore it is an excellent Diet for those that are troubled
with the Colic and Yellow-Jaundice, for it corrects the Gall, and takes away
its adust Phlegm, by gently Purging, and keeping the Body open. The distilled
Water is good in the Yellow-Jaundice.

Melons and Pompkins represent the Head of Men, and delight in moist Places,
(are subject to Luna) as all Lunars do. The distilled Water is good in hot
Fevers; it extinguisheth all Heat, and Inflammations; it quenches the Thirst
by its Lunar Humidity; it pacifieth the Headache, occasioned by the disorder of
the Brains, and is good for those who are troubled with a hot, burning Stomach.
If they are eaten in an undue Season, and too plentifully, they disturb the
Stomach, and occasion the Reds and Whites, as Lunar Sicknesses.

Garlic and Onions are subject to Luna and Mars, therefore if the Roots hang
in the Moonshine, they seem fiery. If they are taken in an undue Season, they
cause a Lethargy, trouble the Animal Spirits, and fill the Head with a subtle,
Lunar, poisonous Vapor; but if they are corrected, they strengthen the
Stomach, and the Seed of it gathered in two several Influences of Luna and
Mars, resists all Poison.

Mandrake is poisonous, loves humid and shady Places, is subject to Luna and
Saturn: It has a Narcotick and Anodyne Virtue, therefore when a Member is to
be cut off. the Physicians use it; for it takes away all Senses. The Fruit of
it taken and eaten in an undue Season causes Obstructions of the Spleen,
Leprosy, Headache, Melancholy, and Quartan, because of its Poison; but if it
be gathered in a due Influence of Saturn and Luna, it cures all Madness, and
Melancholy; for it takes away the malignant, Saturnal and Lunar Humidity, by
the Roots.

Papaver, or Poppy, is of a Lunar Nature; by its Signature it is subject to
Luna; if it be gathered in a due Influence of Luna, it is very good for the
Head; if it be taken in an undue Season, it cools the Head, and moistens it too
much. It is good for the Epilepsie, occasioned by hot Vapors, causes Sleep,
and is therefore mixed among the Narcotick Unguents.

Wild-Poppies are subject to Luna and Jupiter, because of their Lunar, cooling
Virtue, and their Jovial Spirit. They are good for the Inflammation of the
Liver, and Blood, and purify the same. The Water distilled in due Season, is
good in hot Fevers, and Pleurisy. The Water made in a good Influence of Luna
and Jupiter, if a Cloth be dipped in the same, and applied to the Forehead,
causes a gentle Sleep, and takes away the Headache occasioned by heat.

Lettuce loves moist places: It moistens the Body, because of Luna, causes
Sleep, and increases Milk in Women: It pacifies the Headache occasioned by
heat, and expells the Gall from the Stomach.

Rapum, or Rape-Root, is of a strong, Lunar Nature; therefore it fills the Body
with Moisture, and gathered in an undue Season is very noxious to the
Phlegmatic.

Lime-Tree is subject to Luna and Mars; its yellow Bark comes from Mars. It
opens the Obstructions of Women. The distilled Water is good for the Head,
cures the Phrenzy, takes away the Cold of the Body, and eases the Colic.

Peony-Root is subject to Luna and Jupiter, for the Flowers are Jovial. If they
are gathered in the Influence of Jupiter and Luna, they take away all
Obstructions of Women, and if they have them too much, they bring them into
order. This Virtue is also in the Seed. It is excellent for the Head; it cures
the Phrenzy, and takes away the heavy Dreams, and Incubus, if it be taken
inwardly, or hanged about the Neck.

All sorts of Mushrooms, are nothing but the Swellings of the Earth, occasioned
by a viscous Humidity of the Earth and Trees; for Luna is Lady of all Moisture.
Hence it is, that in wet Years they abound more than in dry. They give
(according to the Nature of all Lunars) a pale Color. If you eat too many, and
not well pickled, they fill the Body with a watery Phlegm, and create a Dropsy,
and all Lunar Distempers. He that delights to eat them must gather them in the
Influence of the Moon, then they are Healthful, otherwise they hurt, by reason
of their Lunar Moisture. Some think that the pale colored are the most
hurtful, because they have the more Lunar Poison in them; and the yellow
better, because they have more Sulphur.

Water-Lentils are also subject to Luna, are of a cooling Nature, and also
useful in all inward and outward Inflammations. They likewise cure the
Headache, occasioned by Heat.

The Fourth Instruction. Of the Influence of the Seven Planets, which daily
happen throughout the Year, from the Tenth of March, School, to the Tenth of
March, 1699.
EVery one must diligently observe the Influences the Stars have over the
Herbs, before taught, and over the Metals, as will be hereafter demonstrated,
that he may imprison the Influences of the Stars in the same; which is done
when the Herb or Root is planted, and gathered with a fit Instrument, made with
a Metal of the same nature with the Herb.

As for Example.

In Italy grow the Olive Trees, and are of a Jovial Nature; if these
Olive Trees are not cut with Sheers of their own Nature, they lose their innate
Virtue, and Influence, and wither away, as is well known to every curious
Person in Italy; therefore they are cut with Ivory Sheers, that they may grow
better, because Ivory is of the Nature of Jupiter. Sheers made of Copper, or
Tin, might do the same, etc.

The Smallpox is a Distemper subject to the Sun, therefore when the Sun is
afflicted by Mars, Children (as well as Aged People) whose Nativity agrees with
the malignant Influence at that time, catch the Distemper presently. Now, when
the Pox is at the height, take a sharp Instrument made of Gold, a Fingers
length, with which prick and take away the Blisters; and if he be a Male, bathe
the place with the Breast-Milk of a Woman, who gives suck to a Boy; but if a
Female, then with the Milk of a Woman, who suckles a Girl, and the Pox will
leave no Marks or Pits.

If simple Metals can in general do this, What would they do if they were
Corporally and Spiritually joined in a due Influence? Oh! what a shameful thing
is it, that Silver and Gold have been hitherto so abused?

Here follows a Diary, showing how strong and powerful every Herb, Mineral, and
Vegetable is (every Day in the Year) to be found.
MArch the 10th, School, about Two of the Clock in the Morning, the Sun enters
the first Scruple of Aries, at which time the Days and Nights are alike
throughout the whole World, and this is a very proper Season for Cutting the
Wound-wood of the Ash-Tree; but if you will consider the Influence of the Sun,
and how he is aspected, because the Ash-Tree is subject to the Sun, you may in
this Year School, find a more suitable time, as hereafter shall be shown.

The Moon at this Ingress has the most Dignities of all the Planets, and is
therefore accounted to be the Lady of the Year. This is an excellent time to
gather or dig up the Herbs, Roots, and Minerals, subject to the Moon, (as
before in the Second Instruction is shown) to be preserved against a time of
Need: The best Lunar Herbs, I say, are to be gathered this 10th of March School,
at 47 Minutes before 12 at Noon, when she will possess the Angle of Life with
36 Testimonies of Fortitude; therefore all Herbs gathered at that instant will
powerfully heal all Lunar Sicknesses, if hung about the Neck in a gray, white,
or pale colored Silk bag.

Here is also to be observed,

1. When the Influence of Saturn is found, then is a time to gather the Herbs
of Saturn, as in the Second Instruction, Numb. I. against the Saturnal
Diseases, in the First Instruction, Numb. I.

2. The Influences of Jupiter serve for the Herbs of Jupiter, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. II. against the Jovial Diseases, in the First Instruction,
Numb. II.

3. The Influences of Mars serve for the Herbs of Mars, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. III. against the Martial Diseases, in the First Instruction,
Numb. III.

4. The Influences of the Sun serve to the Herbs of the Sun, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. IV. against the Solar Diseases, in the First Instruction,
Numb. IV.

5. The Influences of Venus serve to the Herbs of Venus, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. V. against the Diseases of Venus, in the First Instruction,
Numb. V.

6. The Influence of Mercury serves to the Herbs of Mercury, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. VI. against the Diseases of Mercury, in the First
Instruction, Numb. VI.

7. The Moon's Influence serves for the Herbs of the Moon, in the Second
Instruction, Numb. VII. against the Diseases of the Moon, in the First
Instruction, Numb. VII.

8 and Influences serving for the Herbs, in the Second Instruction by Number, 1
and 2 Against the Diseases in the First Instruction of and Numb. 8 9 and 1 and
3 and Numb. 9 10 and 1 and 4 and Number. 10 11 and 1 and 5 and Number. 11 12 and 1
and 6 and Number. 12 13 and 1 and 7 and Number. 13 14 and 2 and 3 and Number. 14 15 and
2 and 4 and Number. 15 16 and 2 and 5 and Number. 16 17 and 2 and 6 and Number. 17 18
and 2 and 7 and Number. 18 19 and 3 and 4 and Number. 19 20 and 3 and 5 and Number. 20
21 and 3 and 6 and Number. 21 22 and 3 and 7 and Number. 22 23 and 4 and 5 and Number.
23 24 and 4 and 6 and Number. 24 25 and 4 and 7 and Number. 25 26 and 5 and 6 and
Number. 26 27 and 5 and 7 and Number. 27 28 and 6 and 7 and Number. 28 29,, and 1, 3,
and 4,, and Number. 29 30,, and 1, 3, and 6,, and Number. 30 31,, and 1, 3, and 7,,
and Number. 31 32,, and 1, 4, and 7,, and Number. 32 33,, and 3, 4, and 7,, and Number.
33 34,, and 3, 6, and 7,, and Number. 34 35,,, and 1, 3, 4, and 7,,, and Number. 35

MARCH, School.
10 AT 53 minutes past 11 in the Morning, the Moon is in Ascendant with 36
Testimonies.

The same Day at 31 minutes past 7 at Night, the Moon is in Mid-heaven with 31
Testimonies. At which time you must cut up or gather the Herbs and Roots of the
Moon; you may provide your self half an hour beforehand, but the Herb or Root
must be cut or gathered at 31 minutes past Seven, and put into a pale, white or
gray colored Silk bag, and kept till Occasion serves.

This time is also to be observed for the Sigil of the Moon; for the more
powerful the Influence is, the more powerful will the Operation be: But this is
taught more at large in the Third Cure.

12 At 27 minutes before 12 at Noon, is Venus in the Mid-heaven with 15 Test.

14 At 7 min. past 9 in the Morning is Saturn in the Mid-heaven with 24 Test.

15 At 4 in the Afternoon is Luna in the Ascendant with 23 Test.

16 At 49 min. past 8 in the Morning is Saturn in the Mid-heaven with 24 Test.

17 At 48 min. past 8 in the Morning is Saturn in the Mid-heaven with 31 Test.

This is a good time to gather the Simples under the Government of Saturn,
which must be put into a black Silk bag, till Occasion offers, and then must be
hanged about the Patients Neck.

19 At 30 min. past 8 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 31 Test.

28 At 16 min. past 8 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 26 Test.

29 About 30 min. before 6 in the Morn. is the Sun in the Ascendant with 21
Dignities. This is an excellent Influence for the gathering all Solar Herbs,
Roots, and Woods, among which is the aforementioned Ash-Tree to be taken
notice of. If it prove a clear Day, the Sun will be very powerful all that Day,
except from a quarter past 6 in the Morn. till 9, he loses 4 Dignities; but
from 9 till 12 he will enjoy 20 Dig.

The same Day at 12 min. past 8 in the morn. is Saturn in the M. H. with 26
Test.

31 At 5 min. past 8 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 26 Test.

APRIL, School.
1 AT 42 min. past 12 at Noon is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

2 At 9 min. past 5 in the Morn. is the Sun in the Ascend. with 21 Test.

The same Day at Noon is the Sun in the Mid-H. with 21 Test.

4 At 45 min. past 8 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 26 Test.

5, 6, 7 At 18 min. past 10 in the Morn. is the Moon in the Ascend. with 27
Test.

8 In the Ascend. and Mid-H. the Sun has 21 Test.

9 At 30 min. past 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

11 At 3 hours after Noon is the Moon in the Ascend. with 23 Test.

12 At 20 min. past 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

13 At 12 min. past 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 29 Test.

14 At 15 min. past 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

15 At 10 min. past 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

18 At 7 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

20 At 50 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 29 Test.

22 At 49 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

25 At 32 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

26 At 28 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

27 At 24 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

28 At 20 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

29 At 16 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

30 At 12 min. past 6 in the Morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

At 48 min. past 12 is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 31 Test.

MAY, School.
1 AT 38 min. past 4 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 19 Test.

At 24 minutes past 12 at noon is Venus in the Mid-H. with 19 Test.

2 At 34 min. past 4 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 19 Test.

At 15 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 31 Test.

At 29 min. past 12 at noon is Venus in the Mid-H. with 19 Test.

At 26 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 31 Test.

3 At 47 minutes past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

4 At 22 min. past 8 in the morn. is the Moon in the Asc. with 27 Test.

At 21 min. past 4 in the Afternoon is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 27 Test.

At 16 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 38 Test.

At 15 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 40 Test.

At 56 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

5 At 53 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

At 14 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 31 Test.

At 20 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 32 Test.

6 At 14 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 31 Test.

At 20 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 31 Test.

7 At 51 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 27 Test.

At 23 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 31 Test.

9 At 42 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 22 Dignities.

At 22 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 21 Test.

At 29 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

10 At 38 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 22 Test.

At 24 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 39 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

11 At 34 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 24 Test.

At 26 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 36 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 28 Test.

12 At 30 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 24 Test.

At 23 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 33 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

13 At 26 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 24 Test.

At 22 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 35 min. past 1 at noon is Mercury in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

14 At 22 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

At 22 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in Asc. with 28 Test.

16 At 13 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

17 At 11 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

18 At 9 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

19 At 5 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

20 At 1 min. past 5 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

21 At 56 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 26 Test.

23 At 48 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

24 At 43 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

25 At 39 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

26 At 35 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

27 At 31 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

28 At 27 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 26 Test.

30 At 17 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. strong.

At 5 min. past 1 at noon is the Moon in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

31 At 13 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. strong.

At 6 min. past 2 in the Evening is the Moon in Mid-H. with 27 Test.

At 48 min. past 5 in the morn. is the Moon in Asc. with 27 Test.

JUNE, School.
1 AT 9 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. strong.

2 At 5 min. past 4 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. strong.

3 At 58 min. past 4 in the morn. is Venus in Asc. with 19 Test.

4 At 47 min. past 10 in the morn. is the Moon in Asc. with 21 Test.

6 At 4 min. past 5 in the morn. is Venus in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 10 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

7 At 7 min. past 5 in the morn. is Venus in Asc. with 28 Test.

At 10 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in Mid-H. with 28 Test.

8 At 10 min. past 5 in the morn. is Venus in Asc. with 28 Test.

9 At 38 min. past 3 in the morn. is Saturn in Mid-H. with 21 Test.

10 At 13 min. past 5 in the morn. is Venus in Asc. strong.

At 18 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in Mid-H. strong.

11 At 38 min. past 4 in the Even. is Jupiter in Asc. with 11 Test.

13 At 17 min. past 3 in the morn. is Saturn in the Mid-H. with 21 Test.

16 At 22 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

17 At 30 min. past 4 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 25 Test.

18 At 22 min. past 1 in the morn. is Venus in the Mid-H. strong.

20 At 7 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 11 Test.

22 At 59 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 11 Test.

23 At 38 min. past 7 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 20 Test.

25 At 46 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 20 Test.

27 At 37 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 20 Test.

28 At 43 min. past 12 in the Even. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 24 Test.

The same Day at noon the Sun in the Mid-H. is strong.

30 At 33 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 20 Test.

At 31 min. past 2 in the Even. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 34 Test.

JULY, School.
1 AT 38 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 20 Test.

2 At 41 min. past 9 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 29 Test.

4 At 38 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 16 Test.

5 At 16 min. past 6 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 16 Test.

7 At 38 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 16 Test.

9 At 44 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 17 Test.

11 At 58 min. past 6 in the Even. is the Moon in the Asc. with 23 Test.

13 At noon the Influence of the Sun is strong.

14 The Influence of the Sun at his rising and at noonday is strong.

15 Ditto.

16 At 2 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 23 Test.

18 The Influence of the Sun at his Rising, and in the Mid-H. is strong.

At 49 min. past 6 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 19 Test.

19 The Influ. of the Sun is strong, as before.

20 At 37 min. past 5 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

21 At 39 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 21 Test.

22 The Sun's Influ. is strong at his Rising, and at Noonday.

23 At 14 min. past 7 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 23 Test.

24 The Sun's Influ. is strong at his Rising, and at Noon.

25 At 33 min. past 10 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 27 Test.

27 The Sun's Influ. is strong in the Mid-H.

29 At 50 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 30 Test.

At 46 min. past 4 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

30 At 57 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 23 Test.

AUGUST, School.
1 AT 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 25 Test.

2 At 41 min. past 4 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 32 Test.

4 The Infl. of the Sun is strong in the M. H.

6 At 56 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 24 Test.

At 37 min. past 5 in the Even. is the Moon in the Asc. with 26 Test.

At 30 min. past 12 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 28 Test.

8 The Influ. of the Sun is strong in the Asc. and M. H. to the 12th day of the
Month.

At 55 min. past 5 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 35 Test.

10 At 48 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 27 Test.

12 At 51 min. past 8 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 28 Test.

At 58 min. past 1 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 35 Test.

At 49 min. past 12 at noon is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 30 Test.

13 At 13 min. past 8 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 23 Test.

15 At 41 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in Asc. with 23 Test.

At 10 min. past 6 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 32 Test.

16 At 19 min. past 4 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 30 Test.

17 At 25 min. past 8 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 23 Test.

At 56 min. past 12 at noon is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 39 Test.

18 At 9 min. past 2 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 30 Test.

At 49 min. past 6 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 32 Test.

19 At 6 min. past 6 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 13 Test.

At 3 min. past 1 in the Even. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 32 Test.

20 At 37 min. past 7 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H. with 21 Test.

22 At 9 min. past 7 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 32 Test.

At 13 min. past 2 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

24 At 50 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 34 Test.

26 At 1 min. past 9 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 30 Test.

At noon the Moon is in the Mid-H. strong.

29 At 29 min. past 5 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 13 Test.

31 At 49 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 29 Test.

At 14 min. past 9 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 23 Test.

At 21 min. past 2 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 23 Test.

At 7 min. past 4 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 29 Test.

SEPTEMBER, School.
1 AT 18 min. past 5 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 13 Test.

2 At 18 min. past 9 in the morn. is Venus in the Asc. with 29 Test.

At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 27 Test.

At 20 min. past 2 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H. with 28 Test.

At 7 min. past 4 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 27 Test.

3 At 12 min. past 3 in the Even. is the Moon in the Asc. with 12 Test.

5 At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 28 Test.

7 At 52 min. past 4 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 13 Test.

9 At 44 min. past 4 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 13 Test.

At 48 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 22 Test.

12 At 33 min. past 4 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc. with 12 Test.

13 At 34 min. past 8 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 25 Test.

At 37 min. past 1 in the Even. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

15 At 34 min. past 8 in the morn. is Mercury in the Asc. with 25 Test.

At 36 min. past 1 in the Even. is Mercury in the Mid-H. with 25 Test.

At 57 min. past 10 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc. with 17 Test.

At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc. with 19 Test.

At 15 min. past 3 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H. with 18 Test.

At 57 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H. with 39 Test.

16 At 12 min. past 3 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

At 53 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H.

17 At 30 min. past 6 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H.

19 At 47 min. past 10 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 53 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

21 At 56 min. past 9 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H.

At 57 min. past 2 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

22 At 39 min. past 10 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 35 min. past 10 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H.

24 At 50 min. past 2 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

26 At 32 min. past 10 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 49 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

28 At 28 min. past 10 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 40 min. past 2 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

30 At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

At 44 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H.

OCTOBER, School.
1 AT 23 min. past 3 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

At 44 min. past 1 in the Even. is the Moon in the Asc.

3 At 16 min. past 3 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

At 37 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H.

6 At 4 min. past 3 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

8 At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

At 40 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-H.

At 57 min. past 2 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

11 At 52 min. past 11 in the morn. is Mars in the Asc.

13 At 2 in the Even. is Jupiter in the M.H.

15 At 30 min. past 12 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

18 At 2 min. past 8 in the morn. is the Moon in the Mid-H.

At 19 min. past 2 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

20 At 33 min. past 9 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 29 min. past 1 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

At 11 min. past 2 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

22 At 3 min. past 2 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

At 29 min. past 1 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

25 At 10 min. past 9 in the morn. is Jupiter in the Asc.

At 17 min. past 1 in the Even. is the Moon in the Mid-H.

26 At 46 min. past 10 in the morn. is Mercury in the Mid-H.

27 At 9 min. past 1 in the Even. is Jupiter in the Mid-H.

29 At 35 min. past 1 in the Even. is Saturn in the Asc.

NOVEMBER, School.
3 AT 49 Min. past 8 in the Morn. is Jupiter in the Ascend.

At 49 min. past 12 is Jupiter in the M. H.

At 15 min. past 1 in Even. is Saturn in As.

At 16 min. past 3 in Even. is Venus in M.H.

6 At 30 min. past 3 in the Even. is the Moon in the Ascend.

At 20 min. past 3 in the Even. are Mars and Venus in the Mid-H.

10 At 17 min. past 12 is Saturn in the As.

13 At Noon the Sun is strong in the

At 23 min. past 3 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-H.

15 At Sunrising the Influence of the Sun is strong.

At 26 min. past noon is Saturn in the Asc.

At 23 min. past 3 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-heaven.

18 The Influence of the Sun is strong at noon.

At 23 min. past 3 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-heaven.

At 13 min. past noon is Saturn in the Asc.

22 At 6 min. past 3 in the Even. is Mars in the Mid-heaven.

At 23 min. past 3 in the Even. is Venus in the Mid-heaven.

At Noon is Saturn strong in the Ascend.

24 At 27 min. past 1 in the Even. is the Moon in the Mid-heaven.

26 At 43 min. past 11 in the Morning is Saturn in the Ascendant.

The Suns influence is strong at Noon.

30 At 29 min. past 11 in the Morn. is Jupiter in the Mid-heaven.

At 26 min. past noon is the Moon in the As.

DECEMBER, School.
4 THe Sun influences at Noon in the M.H. Saturn influences in the Ascendant 6
min. past 11 in the Morn.

The Moon influences in the Ascend. 40 min. past 1 in the Even.

8 Jupiter influences in the Mid-heaven, at 55 min. past 10 in the morn.

The Sun influ. in the Mid-H. at Noon.

Saturn influ. in the Asc. 51 min. past 10 in the morn.

13 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 42 min. past 10 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 5 min. past 3 in the Even.

15 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 29 min. past 10 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Asc. 28 min. past 10 in the morn.

Saturn in the Mid-H. at 3 in the Even.

20 The Moon influ. with Jupiter in the Mid-H. at 10 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Asc. at 10 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 38 min. past 2 in the Even.

22 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. at 30 min. past 10 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Asc. 54 min. past 9 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 34 min. past 2 in the Even.

27 Saturn influ. in the Asc. 33 min. past 9 in the morn.

Mercury influ. in the Mid-H. 3 min. past 1 in the Even.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 13 min. past 2 in the Even.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 46 min. past 9 in the morn.

31 Saturn influ. in the Asc. 20 min. past 9 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 27 min. past 9 in the morn.

Mercury influ. in the Asc. 50 min. past 8 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Asc. 40 min. past 11 in the morn.

JANUARY, 1699.
1 THE Moon influences in the Asc. at noon.

5 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 15 min. past 9 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 33 min. past 1 in the Even.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 12 min. past 2 in the Even.

7 Saturn influ. in the Asc. 46 min. past 8 in the morn.

12 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 59 min. past 8 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 8 min. past 1 in the Even.

Mars influ. in the Asc. 55 min. past 8 in the morn.

17 Mars influ. in the Asc. 39 min. past 8 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 48 min. past noon.

19 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 31 min. past 8 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Asc. 46 min. past 8 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Mid-H. 37 min. past 10 in the morn.

24 Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 52 min. past 1 in the Even.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 16 min. past 8 in the morn.

28 Saturn influ. under Sol in the Asc. and Mid-H.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. at 8 in the morn.

FEBRUARY, 1699.
2 JVpiter influences in the Mid-heaven 48 min. past 7 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Ascendant at 8 in the morn.

7 Mars influ. in the Asc. 47 min. past 7 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 29 min. past 7 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 33 min. past 1 in the Even.

11 Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 22 min. past 11 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 24 min. past 7 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 31 min. past 1 in the Even.

15 Mercury influ. in the Mid-H. 15 min. past 10 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Mid-H. 35 min. past 9 in the morn.

18 Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 59 min. past 10 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 25 min. past 1 in the Even.

23 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 38 min. past 6 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Mid-H. 55 min. past 2 in the Even.

Mercury influ. in the Mid-H. 21 min. past 10 in the morn.

25 Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 47 min. past 10 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 30 min. past 6 in the morn.

Mercury in the Mid-H. with Saturn.

28 Mars influ. in the Asc. 54 min. past 6 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Asc. 19 min. past 11 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 19 min. past 6 in the morn.

Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 26 min. past 10 in the morn.

Mercury with Saturn, Mars in the Mid-H. 13 min. past 1 in the Even.

MARCH, 1699.
2 JVpiter influences in the Mid-heaven 25 min. past 6 in the morn.

Mercury influ. with Saturn in the Mid-H. 23 min. past 10 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 14 min. past 1 in the Even.

4 Saturn influ. in the Mid-H. 16 min. past 10 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Asc. 44 min. past 6 in the morn.

The Moon influ. in the Asc. 30 min. past 4 in the Even.

7 Mars influ. in the Asc. 38 min. past 6 in the morn.

Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 58 min. past 5 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 10 min. past 1 in the Even.

9 Jupiter influ. in the Mid-H. 50 min. past 5 in the morn.

Mars influ. in the Asc. 34 min. past 6.

Mars influ. in the Mid-H. 6 min. past 1 in the Even.

Here follows a Repetition of the Influences of the Seven Planets in their
order, from Harvest School, to March 1699.
I. Saturn Influences
September, School.
24 SAturday, 53 min. past 4 in the Asc.

25 Sunday, 49 min. past 3 in the Ascen.

26 Monday, 46 min. past 3 in the Ascen.

October, School.
9 Sunday, 57 min. past 2 in the Even. in Asc.

10 Monday, 53 min. past 2 in the Even. in the Ascendant.

11 Tuesday, 50 min. past 2 in the even. in Asc.

November, School.
25 Friday, 17 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Asc.

Item, 15 min. past 4 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

26 Saturday, 21 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 11 min. past 4 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

27 Sunday, 22 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 10 min. past 4 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

December, School.
Vacat.

January, 1699.
1 Sunday, 17 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 46 min. past 1 in the even in the Mid-heaven.

2 Monday, 2 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 42 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

3 Tuesday, 58 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 38 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

13 Friday, 21 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 4 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

14 Saturday, 17 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, at 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

February, 1699.
27 Monday, 30 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

28 Tuesday, 26 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

March, 1699.
Vacat.

II. Jupiter Influences
September, School.
25 Sunday, 36 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 47 min. past 2 in the even. in the M.H.

26 Monday, 32 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 43 min. past 2 in the even. in M. H.

27 Tuesday, 28 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 39 min. past 2 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

October, School.
Vacat.

November, School.
18 Friday, under the Sun in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven.

19 Saturday, under the Sun in the Ascend.

20, 21, 22 Ditto.

December, School.
12 Monday, 42 min. past 1 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

13 Tuesday, 38 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

14 Wednesday, 34 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

15 Thursday, 30 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

18 Sunday, 20 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

January, 1699.
4 Wednesday, 20 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

5 Thursday, 16 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

6 Friday, 12 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

11 Wednesday, 55 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

14 Saturday, 47 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

15 Sunday, 43 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

26 Thursday, 8 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

31 Tuesday, 52 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

February, 1699.
1 Wednesday, 48 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

2 Thursday, 44 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

8 Wednesday, 25 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

18 Saturday, 52 min. past 6 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

23 Thursday, 38 min. past 6 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

March, 1699.
1 Wednesday, 20 min. past 6 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

3 Friday, 12 min. past 6 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

8 Wednesday, 54 min. past 5 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

III. Mars Influences
September, School.
17 SAturday, 53 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 54 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

18 Sunday, 52 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 54 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

19 Monday, 52 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 52 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

27 Tuesday, 52 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 46 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

28 Wednesday, 53 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 46 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

29 Thursday, 52 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 46 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

October, School.
12 Wednesday, 53 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 42 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

November, School.
5 Saturday, 32 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 21 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

6 Sunday, 32 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 22 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

7 Monday, 30 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 22 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

10 Thursday, 27 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 18 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

December, School.
18 Sunday, 7 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 39 min. past 2 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

January, 1699.
Vacat.

February, 1699.
16 Thursday, 25 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

20 Monday, 11 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 21 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

21 Tuesday, 11 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 21 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

March, 1699.
2 Thursday, 14 min. past 2 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

IV. Sol Influences September, School.
18 Sunday, in the morn. in the Ascend.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

25 Sunday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

October, School.
Vacat.

November, School.
18 Friday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

19 Saturday, in the morn. in the Ascend.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

20 Sunday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

26 Saturday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

December, School.
Vacat.

January, 1699.
18 Wednesday, in the morn. in the Ascend.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

19 Thursday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

20 Friday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

31 Tuesday, in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, In the Mid-heaven.

February, 1699.
1 Wednesday, in the morn. in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven.

2 Thursday, in the morn. in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven.

March, 1699.
Vacat.

V. Venus Influences
September, School.
25 Sunday, 39 min. past 2 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

October, School.
Vacat.

November, School.
7 Monday, 22 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

9 Wednesday, 22 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

December, School.
13 Tuesday, 25 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

January, 1699.
Vacat.

February, 1699.
Vacat.

March, 1699.
Vacat.

VI. Mercury Influences
September, School.
Vacat.

October, School.
7 Friday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under Sol.

8 Saturday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under Sol.

9 Sunday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under Sol.

10 Monday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under Sol.

11 Tuesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-ven under Sol.

12 Wednesday, ditto.

17 Monday, 52 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

November, School.
9 Wednesday, 52 min. past noon in the Mid-heaven.

23 Wednesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

24 Thursday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

25 Friday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

26 Saturday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

27 Sunday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

28 Monday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

29 Tuesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

30 Wednesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

December, School.
1 Thursday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

2 Friday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun.

3 Saturday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven under the Sun. So on to the 11 day.

January, 1699.
8 Sunday, 13 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

11 Wednesday, 8 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

21 Saturday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven with the Sun.

22 Sunday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven with the Sun.

23 Monday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven with the Sun.

24 Tuesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-heaven with the Sun.

25 Wednesday, in the Ascendant and Mid-ven with the Sun.

February, 1699.
Vacat.

March, 1699.
1 Wednesday, 27 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

VII. The Moon Influences
September, School.
17 SAturday, 26 min. past 6 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

18 Sunday, 21 min. past 7 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

22 Thursday, 43 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

27 Tuesday, 48 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 35 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

October, School.
20 Thursday, 33 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

25 Tuesday, 13 min. past 1 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

28 Friday, 40 min. past 11 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 41 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

November, School.
6 Sunday, 35 min. past 3 in the even. in the Ascendant.

25 Friday, 20 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 15 min. past 2 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

26 Saturday, 53 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 2 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

December, School.
2 Friday, 2 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

3 Saturday, 23 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

4 Sunday, 39 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

5 Monday, 23 min. past 2 in the even. in the Ascendant.

27 Tuesday, 20 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 54 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

28 Wednesday, 33 min. past 10 in the morn. in the Mid-heaven.

Item, 34 min. past 4 in the even. in the Ascendant.

January, 1699.
2 Monday, 42 min. past 12 at noon in the Ascendant.

3 Tuesday, 31 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

16 Monday, 13 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

26 Thursday, 17 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 57 min. past 3 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

February, 1699.
1 Wednesday, 16 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

21 Tuesday, 7 min. past 9 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 17 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

22 Wednesday, 25 min. past 8 in the morn. in the Ascendant.

Item, 54 min. past 1 in the even. in the Mid-heaven.

March, 1699.
1 Wednesday, 26 min. past noon in the Ascendant.

2 Thursday, 40 min. past 1 in the even. in the Ascendant.

3 Friday, 4 min. past 3 in the even. in the Ascendant.

4 Saturday, 18 min. past 4 in the even. in the Ascendant.

THUS is Calculated, from the 10th day of March, in the Year of our Lord, School,
to the 9th day of March, 1699, the Influences of the Planets for every day, to
a minute; so that all ingenious Persons, who are solicitous for the Good of
themselves, Families, and Fellow Creatures, may always have their Physic, or
Medicine, by them, for their Convenience. And it was the Opinion of the
Ancients, and so it is mine, That if you Planted all such necessary Herbs under
their Influences, as directed, their Virtue and Power will be much stronger
than those in the Fields, in regard their growth is often disturbed by Persons
breaking the Earth: For, undoubtedly, God Almighty influenced all things at the
Creation; and where they have not been disturbed, or the Earth broken, they
retain the same Virtue, as they had when created, to this day. Therefore you
have an Ephemeris, or Direction, for every day, according to their Influences,
for gathering Herbs, with their Witnesses or Testimonies, viz.

1. By Calculating the Longitude of the Seven Planets, and the Moons Bounds. 2.
From the Longitude of the Seventy Seven Aspects that are in the Radix of the
Year. 3. From the Longitude of the 14 principal Fixed Stars. 4. From the
Latitude of the Seven Planets. 5. From the Latitude of the Seventy Seven
Aspects. 6. From the Latitude of the Fourteen principal Fixed Stars. 7. From
the Descension of the abovementioned Constellations. 8. From the right
Ascension of the said Constellations. 9. From the Distance of the Medium Coeli
to the Imum Coeli. 10. From under which Circle of Position the said
Constellations are to be found, being in number an Hundred. 11. From the
Diversity of Ascensions of the same. 12. From the Ascension and Descension of
all such Constellations. 13. From the exact place where every Constellation, to
an Hour and Minute of its Revolutions, imprints its Signs and Degrees. 14. From
the Twelve Celestial Houses, according to the Opinion of Campanus and
Gartalus. 15. From the Examination of the Planets in general, how strong and
weak they have been, from the Conjunction to the Opposition in the Spring. 16.
From the Examination of every Planet every day throughout the whole Year. 17.
From all Directions of the Planets belonging to the Revolution of the Year,
when one Degree makes a Day, and the same is Seven Hundred in number. 18. From
so many Transits as are in the Year. 19. From the Twelve Aspects of the Moon.
20. From the Twelve Aspects, and Configurations of the other Six Planets
throughout the whole Year. 21. When the Planet is in the Ascendant. 22. When in
the Medium Coeli. 23. From the Hour when it is in its Exaltation.
The Essential Dignities and Debilities, Accidental Fortitudes and Debilities,
I have not placed, in regard they are in most Books of Astrology; therefore I
hope that may suffice.

I shall now proceed to give you some few Examples, to make it plainer to your
view, being the first part of the Cure and Healing by Herbs.

Example I.

If any be troubled with a burning Fever, (because such Sicknesses are subject
to Mars) as is to be seen in page 4. therefore I look into the Second
Instruction, page 30, 31, 32, or in page 85, 86, for an Herb or Root for this
purpose, the first I can get; then I go further to the Influences of Mars, in
the Fourth Instruction, page 120, 121, 122, etc. exactly Calculated, which Hour
I observe very well, and a little before the time I go into the Field, or the
Place where such Herbs grow, and prepare to gather the Herb, or Root, which
Herb, or Root, I put into a red Silk bag, and hang the same about the Patients
Neck or Breast. He who exactly observes this little process, will find an
Infallible Cure.

Example II.

In time of Sickness, no better Remedy is to be had than this. In the First
Instruction, page 20, it is said, that the Plague, and all sorts of Poison, are
subject to Saturn, Mars, and Sol, therefore in the Second Instruction, among
Saturnal, Martial, and Solar Roots, page 23, 24, 25, 26, also 30, 31, 32, as
also 33, 34, as also in the Third Instruction, page 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74,
75, and 85, 86, and 87, 88, 89, 90; these three sorts of Herbs must be gathered
as before directed. The first must be Saturnal; the second, Martial; the third,
Solar; and in the Fourth Instruction, page 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122. These are the certain Days and Hours which
must be observed, in gathering the Herbs. The Saturnal Herbs must be put into a
black Silk bag; the Martial, into a red Silk bag; and the Solar, into a yellow
Silk bag. These being severally hanged about the Neck, will have a very great
Power over all Poisonous and Pestilential Diseases, far beyond all Medicines
collected in an undue Season.

The other Planets have also their several Colors; as Jupiter, blue,
honey-colour, and purple; Venus, green, blue, and liver-coloured; Mercury,
sprinkled with several Colors, and gray; the Moon, pale, white, and white-grey.

This serves to show you, that the Herbs must be kept in their own colored
Bags, when applied to the Patient.

How much the Time of Influence of all things, especially of Herbs, Roots, and
Metals, is to be esteemed, we have not only from the Wise King Solomon, who
says in his Writings, That all things gathered in an undue Season are
unprofitable; but also it is known to all Artists, and common Mechanics, that
all Herbs, Days, and Hours, are not alike.

The Goldsmiths Work in an Antipathetical Influence is brittle, and not
malleable; but if he stay a day or two, and use the same Flux, it will be
malleable.

The Mint-Masters, who are daily employed in Melting and testing Gold and
Silver, do also experiment the diversities of Times and Seasons.

The Dyers, as also the Shooe-makers, when they boil their Red-wood to make
Colors, the same not succeeding all times alike, they blame the Shopkeepers
for selling them bad Goods: and, Who is there that will take the pains to
discover the reasons of all these Mischiefs?

To Calculate and find out the Time, is not every one's Business, which to hit
exactly, has hitherto been impossible.

The Ancients have had many Opinions of the Entrance of the Sun into the first,
second, third and fourth degrees of Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and other Signs. These
opinionated Influences have been easily found; but they have had great Failings.

Here I have showed you, in a plain Method, how to preserve your Selves and
Families; and do also show you, what a Critical thing it is to be an Able
Physician.

All Doctors must confess that the Planets have a great Influence in Physic;
nevertheless, there are few who observe the Season, and calculate the Hour;
which is occasioned chiefly by these three Reasons.

First, The most part of them abhor Influences, therefore they will not apply
such Medicines.

Secondly, They are proud of their Degree, not willing to converse with mean
People.

Thirdly, They think it too much Pains to observe Times, when they know they
can get their Money without it, let the Patient live or die.

Now, if a Sympathy of Times be neglected, there follows an Antipathy, viz. an
Herb gathered in an undue Season makes bad worse, and often kills the Patient.

Note, That all Herbs and Roots are not described in this Part; but only some
few Examples, to give a light to it, which you must take notice of.

Here follows the Second Cure of all Sicknesses and Diseases, by the Heavenly
Influences, by means of the Seven Planets, and Precious Stones.
The Introduction.
WE need not dispute here of the Strength and Virtue of Metals in Physic, and
also for the Prolongation of Life, if they are found in due Season.

Although Theophrastus, in his Second Volume Fol. 545, 565, to 571, gives great
testimony, that the Characters taken from Nature have special Virtue: but where
he had them he does not tell us; without doubt the reason was, because all
Doctors of Physic were his Enemies, therefore he would not declare his
Secrets, and Foundation.

He knew also that the Soeculum Gratioe should begin an Hundred Years after his
Death, which Hundred Years are now almost gone, in which, all that is occult
should be revealed; of which the Prophet Daniel also testifies.

I, for my part, never studied so many and wonderful Characters and Figures;
but only meditated this one thing, how the Influences of Times (which are by
Almighty God ordained for the Benefit of Mankind, and also that Men should take
some Pains to find them, both in Herbs, Metals and Stones) have their wonderful
Virtue and Operation, then he that can make shift with a Spoon, has no
occasion for a Tub. Now, I say, that the abovenamed three Creatures, without
any supposition, are the usefullest and fittest for Men, as I have shown in
several parts of this Book, but especially in the latter end. I know also
sufficiently, That all Sicknesses and Diseases in Men, and other Creatures, are
occasioned by an Antipathetick Influence of the Heavens. Wherefore, when a
Disease is known by the Nativity, you preserve your self, or totally cure it by
an Herb, Metal, or Stone, gathered in due Season, and hanged about your Neck,
or carried about with you. Then,

1. The Influence of the Heavens and Times descend into the Creatures
Antipathetically, or Sympathetically; that is to say, for a good or bad purpose.

2. When one of the above named three Creatures is prepared in due Season, and
carried on the Breast, the Antipathetick, noxious Influence rather goes into
the Herb, or Metal, than Men, and Man is preserved from the threatening
Sickness; but when the Sickness is already in the Body, they extract it by
degrees; but it is better when a Man knows his Sickness beforehand, and resists
it. Hence is to be seen the good Intention that Mr. William Avianus, late
Professor at Leipzick, had in his Treatise of Nativities, namely, That as well
publicly in the Town-Houses, as privately in the Church-Books, together with
the Days of Christning, the Hours of the Nativity should be exactly Registered;
as may also be seen in the approbation of the University of Leipzick, which is
Printed with the Treatise of Nativities, where they approve of the public
Registring of Nativities; but how this is practiced by the Government,
experience testifies.

But to spare all this Trouble, there are found amongst the ancient Astrologers
and Philosophers several descriptions of three Looking-Glasses, which are
called Electrum, sive Speculum, sive Sphoeram Sapientioe Solomonis. One
prepares the same by a Magical method, with Cabbalistical Figures and
Characters; another, only by Astrological Influences; in which all things
present, past, and to come, may be seen.

If now such Glasses should come to light, (for it is certain that they have
been, and diverse Operations done by them, which have been kept secret, as a
great Mystery) there would be no occasion for so much Trouble, nor the public
Registring of Nativities; of which in the following part of this Work, I shall
say more.

What concerns the Influence of Herbs and Roots, they are not esteemed so
strong as the Metals, although they have almost equal Virtue with the same; yet
we cannot know exactly under what Planet they are subject wholly; but, on the
contrary, we are sure that Lead, belongs to Saturn,. Copper, to -- Jupiter,.
Iron, to -- Mars,. Gold, to -- Sol,. Tin, to -- Venus,. Quicksilver, to
Mercury,. Silver, to -- Luna,.


Though, according to the Opinion of several, Tin must be subject to Jupiter,
and Copper to Venus.

If now any Metal, in the time of its Influence, as is to be seen from page 109
to 150, with his Numbers and Natural Body, as he is to be seen in the Heaven at
certain Seasons, be stamped and hanged about the Neck, or carried, it will
attract all Antipathetick Influences, and preserve Men from approaching
Misfortunes, and clear them of all Sicknesses.

The Description of the Sigil of the first Metal, Lead, or Saturn, how it is to
be made and used against all Saturnal Sicknesses.

2 9 4 7 5 3 6 1 8

SATURNUS




Purgatio Saturni.
TAke the Oar of Lead, pound it, fifth it through a fine Seive, wash it, and dry
it, then put it in a Crucible on a gentle Fire, put to one part of this Oar, of
Tartar two parts, of Salt half a part, melt them in a strong Fire, and the Lead
will settle in the bottom. When all is cold, take it and melt it again, and
throw him into strong Vinegar, or cold Water, and he is purged.

This must be done in the Influence of Saturn, as may be seen in page 115, 116.

Aliud ex Theophrasto.
Melt Lead in an Iron ladle, fling into it a piece of Wax as big as a Bean, let
it burn away, then east it into cold Water.

Configuratio.
Of such cleaned Lead must be cast a Sigil of the bigness of Half-a-Crown, (as
may be seen in the Figure) upon the one side must be the monstrous Body of
Saturn, as he is observed through a Tellescope; in the middle of this must be
the Character, and round about the Body the Name SATURNUS; on the other side
must be these Numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, in a square; so set that
every way, by Addition, they may make 15, which is done here 8 times; on the
top of this the Hebrew Character Schin.

Impressio.
You must have two Stamps, like the Minters, on which both sides of the
aforementioned Figure of Saturn is to be cut; it must be made of good Steel.
When there is an Influence of Saturn you must take the round cast piece of Lead
and stamp it at that Instant.

The Use.
When this Sigil is prepared, and sowed up in a black Silk bag, and hanged on
in the Influence of Saturn, it cures all Saturnal Sicknesses, as may be seen
page 1. and 2.

Of the Gem of SATURN.
ALL black, wild and dark Stones, belong to Saturn; in such a Stone, in the
Influence of Saturn, cut the Body of Saturn, as is marked here. This may be
hung about the Neck, or carried in a Ring made of the abovementioned Lead; let
the cut part of the Stone be in the inward part of the Ring, so as to touch the
Skin.

The Description of the Second Metal of Copper or Tin, or the Sigil of Jupiter,
how it is to be prepared and used against all Jovial Sicknesses.
JUPITER



16 3 2 13 5 10 11 8 9 6 7 12 4 15 14 1



Purgatio Jovis.
TAke Tin and melt it, and when it is very hot fling in a piece of Rosin; this
do 9 times. When it is all burnt away, cast it into the Juice of Rue, or its
Water, and it is purged. This must be done in the Influence of Jupiter, as may
be seen from page 126, to 139.

A short Preparation of Copper, according to Theophrastus.
Copper must be laid in Vitriol-Water, or Camphire-Water, mixed with Vinegar,
for six or eight hours, take it out, wash it and dry it, and it is prepared.

Configuratio.
Cast of such Copper a Sigil, of the bigness of Half-a-Crown; upon one side
must be the Body of Jupiter, with the four Stars that are about him, as may be
seen in the Heavens with a Telliscope, in the middle must be the Character of
Jupiter, and round about the Body the Name JUPITER; on the other side must be
these Numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, in a
square, so set that by Addition, they may make every ways 34, on the top, this
Hebrew Character

Impressio.
The Stamp must be made as Saturn's, but upon both sides must be cut the Figure
and Number of Jupiter, then stamped in the Influence of Jupiter.

The Use.
When this Sigil is prepared in the Influence of Jupiter, and put in a blue
Silk bag, it cures all the Sicknesses of Jupiter, page 3.

Of the Gem of JUPITER.
TO Jupiter belong the Smaragdine, Sapphire, and Amethist: the Body of Jupiter,
as is here noted, must be cut in the Influence of Jupiter, in a Jovial Stone,
and carried about the Neck, or on the Breast, or in the inward part of a Copper
Ring, so as to touch the Skin.

The Description of the Third Metal, Iron, or the Sigil of Mars, how such is
prepared and used against all Martial Diseases.

14 10 1 22 18 20 11 7 3 24 21 17 13 9 5 2 23 19 15 6 8 4 25 16 12

MARS




Purgatio Martis.
WAsh the Filings of Mars very clean, then put them into Urine and Vinegar for
nine or ten hours, then put it out, and wash it clean, and put it into a Glass,
and pour on it water in which Tartar is dissolved for one hour, and it grows
red, like Copper, then wash it, and it is prepared. This must be done in a
Martial Influence, which see page, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126.

Aliud Theophrasti.
Take the Filings of Iron, wash the Dirt out, dry them, and make them red hot.

Configuratio.
Of this cleaned Iron must be cast a Sigil as big as a Half-Crown; upon one
side must be stamped the Body of Mars, in the middle the Character of Mars, and
round about the Name of MARS; on the other side must be these Numbers, from 1
to 25, in a square, so set that by Addition, every way may be produced 65. On
the top must be this Hebrew Character

Impressio.
The Stamp must be made as Saturn, and the Figure and Number of Mars must be
cut and stamped on each side, in the Influence of Mars.

The Use.
When this Sigil is prepared in the Influence of Mars, and put in a red bag of
Silk, it serves against all Martial Sicknesses, page. 4.

The Gem of MARS.
TO Mars belongs the Jasper and Diamond; the Body of Mars (as is to be seen
here) must be cut in a Martial Stone, in the Influence of Mars, and carried
about the Neck, or in the inward part of an Iron Ring, so as to touch the Skin.

A Description of the Fourth Metal, Gold, or the Sigil of SOL, how it is
prepared and used against all Solar Diseases.

6 32 3 34 35 1 7 11 27 28 8 30 19 14 16 15 23 24 18 20 22 21 17 13 25 29 10 9
26 12 36 5 33 4 2 31

SOL




Purgatio Auri.
MELT of Antimony three parts, put into it one part of Gold, let them melt
together seven or eight minutes, then cast it into an Iron Vessel, and the Gold
falls into a Regulus; do this three times, then test it with Saturn. Melt this
Gold with a little Borax in a clean Crucible, and it is prepared.

A shorter Preparation according to Theophrastus.
The Gold cast three times through Antimony, and tested with Saturn, needs no
further Preparation, only being beaten into a thin Plate, and laid into Salt
and Water 24 hours, then dried and kept till the Solar Influence.

Configuratio.
Cast a Sigil, as is here described, of this Gold; upon one side must be
stamped the Body of Sol, in the middle of it the Character of Sol, and round
about the Name of SOL; on the other side must be the Number, from 1 to 36, in a
square, so as by Addition they may every way produce 111; on the top of this
must be this Hebrew Character

Impressio.
The Stamp must be made like that of Saturn, and on each side must be stamped
the Figure and Number of Sol, in a good Solar Influence.

The Use.
This Solar Sigil made and prepared duly, and put in a golden colored, or
yellow Silk bag, and hung about the Neck, or on the Breast, preserves sound
People, and cures the Sick of all Solar Diseases described page 5.

The Gem of SOL.
TO the Sun belongs Hyascinthus, in which must be cut the Body of Sol,
according to the manner of the other Planets, carried about the Neck, and put
in a Ring, and worn on the Finger.

The Description of the Fifth Metal, Tin, or the Sigil of VENUS, how it is
prepared and used against all Venereal Diseases.

22 47 16 41 10 35 4 5 23 48 17 42 11 29 30 6 24 49 18 36 12 13 31 7 25 43 19
37 38 14 32 1 26 44 20 21 39 8 33 2 27 45 46 15 40 9 34 3 28

VENUS




Purgatio Veneris.
MElt Venus, and fling on it powdered Glass, let it stand melted for an hour,
then granulate it into distilled Vinegar. This must be done in the Influence of
Venus, and it is prepared.

A short way according to Theophrastus.
Melt Tin, fling upon it Fat, Wax, or Honey, let them burn away, then cast it
into Water, and it is prepared.

Configuratio.
Of this purged Tin is made a Sigil of this bigness; upon one side must be the
round Body of Venus, in the middle of the Body the Character of Venus, and
round about it the Name of VENUS; on the other side must be the Numbers, from 1
to 49, in a square, so set that by Addition, every way may be made 175; on the
top must be this Hebrew Character

Impressio.
This Sigil is to be stamped in the Influence of Venus, as the other Sigils are.

The Use.
If duly prepared, and put into a Grass-green Silk bag, it preserves from, and
cures all Venereal Diseases; page 6.

The Gems of VENUS.
TO Venus belongs Pearls, Carbuncles, and other Stones belonging to Ornament;
the Body of Venus cut in her Stone, according to this bigness, and hanged about
the Neck, or put into the inside of the Ring, so as to touch the Skin.

The Description of the Sixth Metal of Quicksilver, or the Sigil of MERCURY,
how it is prepared and used against all Mercurial Diseases.

8 58 59 5 4 62 63 1 49 15 14 52 53 11 10 56 41 23 22 44 45 19 18 48 32 34 35
29 28 38 39 25 40 26 27 37 36 30 31 33 17 47 46 20 21 43 42 24 9 55 54 12 13 57
50 16 64 2 3 61 60 6 7 57

MERCURIUS




Purgatio Mercurii.
PRess him twenty or thirty times through a Leather, then rub and wash him with
Vinegar, and he is purged. This Purgation must be done in the Influence of
Mercury.

The Preparation according to Theophrastus.
Press Mercury three times through a Leather into a clean, wooden bowl, and
what goes through is good, but what remains is not fit for this work.

Configuratio.
Of this purged and fixed Quicksilver, must be cast a Sigil of this bigness;
on one side must be the Body of Mercury, and in the middle the Character of
Mercury, and round about the Name MERCURIUS; on the other side must be the
Number, from 1 to 64, in a square, so set that every way, by Addition, may be
produced 260; on the top must be this Hebrew Character

Impressio.
The Sigil of Mercury is to be stamped as the others are, in the Influence of
Mercury.

The Use.
The Sigil of Mercury prepared in the Mercurial Influence, and put into a
purple, Silk bag, and hanged about the Neck, ours all Mercurial Diseases
mentioned page 7.

The Gem of MERCURY.
TO Mercury belongs Alectorius, in which must be cut the Body of Mercury,
according to this bigness, and hanged about the Neck, or put into the inward
part of the Ring made of fixed Quicksilver, so as to touch the Skin, and worn
on the Finger.

The Description of the Seventh Metal of Silver, or the Sigil of LUNA, how it
is prepared and used against all Lunar Diseases.

37 78 29 70 21 62 13 5^ 5 6 38 79 30 71 22 63 14 46 47 7 39 ^0 31 72 23 55 15
16 48 8 40 81 32 64 24 56 57 17 49 9 41 73 33 65 25 26 58 18 50 1 42 74 34 66
67 27 59 10 51 2 43 75 35 36 68 19 60 11 52 3 44 76 77 28 69 20 61 12 53 4 45

MOON


Purgatio Lunoe.
CLean it very well upon a test with Saturn, and when it is very clean melt it
again in a Crucible, and when it shines bright, put to it ten or twelve times
35 drops of Saturn or Lead. This Purgation must be in the Influence of Luna.

Theophrastus 's Opinion.
To purge Silver do thus, make it into thin lamens, and boil the same in Water,
in which is dissolved Tartar and Salt, for one hour, then wash it in clean
Water, dry it, and keep it for use.

Configuratio.
Of this clean Silver cast a Sigil according to this bigness; on the one side
must be the Body of the Moon, and round about it the Name of the MOON; on the
other side must be the Numbers, from 1 to 81, in a square, so set that by
Addition, every way may be produced 369; on the top must be stamped this Hebrew
Character

Impressio.
The Sigil of the Moon must be stamped as the others are, and in a Lunar
Influence.

The Use.
If it be prepared according to this method, and put into a white Silk bag, and
hanged about the Neck in the Influence of the Moon, it preserves from, and
cures all Lunar Sicknesses mentioned in page 8.

The Gem of LUNA.
TO the Moon belongs Crystal, in which the Body of the Moon is cut, after this
shape, and carried about the Neck, or put into the inward part of a Silver
Ring, and worn on the Finger.

HEre you must take Notice, First, He who will prepare the Seven Sigils, above
mentioned, must take exact notice of the hours, because Clocks and Watches are
subject to many alterations. Therefore, I have described in my other part
following, a certain Instrument, by which may be found the Hours, Quarters, and
Minutes, in Winter and Summer, by Day and by Night, if the Sun and Moon afford
but the least light through the Clouds, by the Magnet or without. I do not
mention those other Instruments which are used in Surveying; this thing, if
rightly prepared, is a Royal Instrument, it may be used in a double way, viz.
standing or lying, or any other way it proves it self, because one side
corresponds exactly with the other to a Minute; for that part which shows the
Minutes, if it be directed to the Pole, may be brought to the breadth of a
hair, which Instrument is easily Portable; but if it be required, that a Sigil
must be stamped when the Sun or Moon do not appear plainly, you must have en
exact Watch made, that shows the Hours, Quarters, and Minutes, as in the
division of the above mentioned Instrument is to be found; for the hour which
is found by the Sun, is far better than any other. Nevertheless, I direct this
my Mathematical Instrument so, that his Motion is finished in 24 hours, exactly
according to the Motion of the Sun. He that has such an Instrument, and a
little Triangle, and also my Annual Revolution, together with the hour of
Nativity, may account himself happy; for the aforesaid three Pieces, are a
preparation to the Golden Age, and he who has them may know what things are
past, and what are to come, and may also cure all Diseases.

Secondly, If now the Time be exactly observed, the Sigil must be stamped in a
Minute, because this Impression occasions the Power of the Heavenly Influences;
for the Heavenly Influences of the Stars are as quick and nimble, as an Arrow
out of a Bow, or a Bullet out of a Gun, so quick must this Impression be.

Thirdly, Though there is no doubt but such prepared Sigils, send out such
Virtues to Mankind in several Diseases, yet it is better if a Man observes,
together with the Sigils, the Ascendant of every ones Nativity, for the 12
Celestial Houses, together with the Planets that are evilly Posited, are also
corrected by the Dignities of the Sigils, therefore a Man becomes as it were
new Born.

Fourthly, Because such Sigils are stamped at such times when the Planets are
in their highest Dignities, therefore it is here to be noted, that he who uses
them, must not use them when he goes into the Bath, or lies with a Woman, or
into unclean Places; the Sigils may be so cut as that you may take their Mark
in a piece of Clay.

The Third and Summary Cure, by the Conjunction of the Seven Metals and Sigils.
TO this Summary Cure of all Sicknesses, there needs the Sigils of the Seven
Clean Metals, and when the influence of Saturn is; as also, when he is exactly
in Conjunction with Mercury: This especial time of Influence I will show (God
willing) in my Second Part; and also, before all things, you must have in
readiness a Fire, a Crucible, granulated Saturn, and Mercury.

When the Conjunction of Saturn and Mercury begins, let the Saturn melt gently,
then put in the Mercury that he may not fly out; for in the first Point, when
the Conjunction begins, take the Crucible from the Fire, fling in Mercury, and
let them cool.

After this, take notice of a Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, or Jupiter and
Mercury, then prepare all things, as before, and take notice, when the first
point of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, or Mercury and Jupiter, melt
English Tin, and put to it the Saturn joined with Mercury in a cold Flux, or
melt every one by themselves and put them together, and let them cool.

Thus are these fusible Metals exactly conjoined; after this, take notice of
another Conjunction of any one of the other Four Planets, viz. Sun, Moon, Venus
and Mars, with any one of the three Planets, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, or Mercury;
then prepare all things as before, then Melt each by its self in the point of
the Conjunction, and join them together; you must do thus till you have brought
all of them with their due Conjunction into one Metal: This Conjunction of
Metals, is called by Paracelsus, Electrum.

The more you conjoin of these Metals, the more Sigils you may make.

You may see also in the Scheme, how this Electrum is to be brought into an
Angular Body of the bigness of a Bullet, viz. make a Circle of the bigness of a
Crown, or bigger or lesser as you please; Cross the same through the middle, as a
b c d e, divide the Circle into 123456 Angular Parts, draw a blind Line from 2
to 4, when it cuts the Line in d. e. to the Figure 7, put one Foot of the
Compass in b, and the other Foot to 7, and strike a Circle. Contract two Points
into one, and you will have a Triangle after this manner, 7 and 3, 9 and 4, 9
and 5, 8 and 1.

The Scheme of the Inestimable Jewel.


Thus you have a description how the Body of Saturn or Jupiter, may be brought
into a Form, in which may be cast the Electrum, consisting of three
Quadrangles, and four Triangles, this melting must be done in their Influences,
but you must prepare 7 Stamps of the 7 Metals cut in Steel.

1. In the Influence of Saturn, stamp upon one division the Body of Saturn. 2.
In the Influence of Jupiter, stamp upon the second division the Body of
Jupiter. 3. In the Influence of Mars, stamp upon the third division the Body of
Mars. 4. In the Influence of the Sun, stamp upon the fourth division the Body
of the Sun. 5. In the Influence of Venus, stamp upon the fifth division the
Body of Venus. 6. In the Influence of Mercury, stamp upon the sixth division
the Body of Mercury. 7. In the Influence of Luna stamp upon the seventh
division the Body of Luna.
When this Sigil is prepared, on the plane side you must stamp 18 little
Stamps, viz. the Twelve Celestial Signs, with the Six First Stars.

Such Stamps are stamped exactly when such Sign or Stars are ascending in the
Horizon; then this Body is prepared, which is a Treasure of all Treasures; of
which I will speak more in my Second Part, because this will be too chargeable
for the Undertaker.

Interim sat Sapienti.
The Fourth Cure of all Diseases in General.
AMong the many Multitudes that live upon this Globe of the Earth, some are
Fortunate, some Unfortunate; some Poor, some Rich; some Hail, some Diseased;
for some come easily to high Dignities and Riches, without Pains; others, although
they take great Pains, are Poor and Miserable. Every one in his Nativity has
his Influences that show it.

Although many People are born Fortunate, and are Rich in Estates, Honor, Virtue,
and Credit, yet they must die; because, from the Fall of Adam, the Heavenly
Influences have not been so Powerful as they were at the Beginning of the
Creation; here it is plain, that the Earth, and the two lights of the Heaven
are corruptible.

If now the strongest Influence of the Planets in due time are observed, and
Imprisoned in the Metals, and applied to any Person at the time that his
Ascendant is ascending, then is it not impossible, nor against God and Nature,
that such Men may be Regenerated and long Lived, (for Adam lived 930, Seth 912,
Enoch 905, Cainan 910, Mahalaleel 895, Jared 962, Enoch 365 before his
Ascension into Heaven, Methusalem 969, Lamech 777; but after the Flood, and the
Confusion of Languages, these Mysteries were lost). I will forbear to mention
how these Sigils resist all Pride, Covetousness, and other Vices of Mankind, by
their Natural Impression. I could say much more of this Nature, if I did not
fear to make the first Book swell too big; but I will conclude with the
Operation and Virtue of the Seven Sigils and Metals against all Humane Diseases.

I. Of the Virtue and Operation of the Sigil Of Saturn.
IF the Sigil of Saturn be rightly prepared, as is directed above in the second
Cure; if it be Buried in the Ground where an Army is Encamped, they will have
no Success till they break up from that Camp; it is excellent for Childbearing
Women, for it facilitates the Birth; every thing that this Sigil is put to
increases; he who carries it upon his left Foot, his secret Enemies cannot hurt
him, and it defends him from a Horse, Dog, or any other four footed Animal;
it is excellent against all Witchcraft; he who carries it with him, and digs for
Enchanted Treasure, the Spirits have no Power over him; it Fortunates those who
belong to Mines, Agriculture, digging of Fountains, and making all other
Buildings; it discovers secret Stratagems; he who Drinks from it, is deprived
of all Venereal Appetites.

II. Of the Operation and Virtue of the Sigil of Jupiter.
HE who carries this Sigil with him, is acceptable to all Persons; it preserves
Health, and Old Age; it bring all Sciences Fortune, Riches, and Honor; it
occasions Ambassadors to have great and high Esteem, and finish their
Negotiations to satisfaction; and if one be taken Captive, it furthers his
Redemption; this Sigil being carried on the Breast, gives great knowledge in
Law and Divinity, and Fortunates all things that a Man takes in hand.

III. Of the Operation and Virtue of the Sigil of Mars.
THis Sigil of Mars has strange Operations, it gives Victory in all Battles;
it overthrows Enemies in Words and Deeds; it gives a Man a heart like a Lion;
it serves in all secret Councels of War; if it be Buried in a Fortress, it
becomes Invincible; it preserves the Bearer from all Iron and Gunshot; this
Sigil has great virtue in Horses, Dogs, and other fighting Animals, and he
that carries it about him, may with an indifferent Horse out-ride a good one;
if he puts into the Horses Mouth the constellated Root of Chamoelion, and if
the Bearer in the Constellation of Mars throws Bullets, he kills all things
that he sees; this Sigil of Mars preserves from all Fire; if it be bound on the
Shoulder it stops all Bleeding; he who will make a fine light Red-colour, must
observe the Influence of Mars, and then he will not be at so great Expense.

IV. Of the Operation and Virtue of the Sigil of the Sun.
THis precious Sigil brings Men to great Dignities, that they grow in Honor
and Riches day after day; it makes Men Invincible Strong, Courageous, and
Fortunate; it brings great Riches; it preserves against the Plague, and Lunacy;
a Golden yellow color made in the Sun's Influence, is fine and durable.

V. Of the Virtue and Operation of the Sigil of Venus.
THis Sigil causes great Love and Amity between Men and Women, young Men and
Maids; it takes away all Hatred and Hostilities, and if any one gives of it to
Drink to his Mortal Enemy, especially in Red Wine in the Influence, he will
begin to be his best Friend, and will endeavor him no more harm; it gives
great Power to learn all sorts of Music; it creates an infinite Spirit of Love
amongst Lovers; if the Christian Name of both Persons, be of the same number of
Letters and Numbers, and cut round about the edge of the Sigil, it preserves a
perpetual Amity: This may be proved amongst Married People, who live always at
variance; it augments the Sperm, strengthens the Body in Coition, and causes
that Men and Wom^n never part.

VI. Of the Virtue and Operation of the Sigil of Mercury.
THis Mercurial Sigil brings great luck and profit in Merchandising; it gives
Persons favor among Governors; it makes good Orators, strengthens the Memory,
and brings great knowledge in Natural Arts; if this Sigil be Bound under or
upon the Head at the time when you go to Sleep, he will see in his Sleep such
things as he stands in need of, that are honest and just, and in the fear of
God, especially if in the same Night the Moon transits the place of Mercury; it
resists all Plague, Poisons, and Infections; as also all Lice, and other
Insects; it cures the Poisonous Bites of Serpents; if it be hanged about the
Neck of Infants, it makes them quickly Speak. The Purple, Mixed, and
Grey-Colours, are made best in the Influence of Mercury.

VII. Of the Virtue and Operation of the Sigil of the Moon.
THis Sigil of Luna preserves against all Murderers and Robbers by Sea and
Land, brings Welfare in all things, as also Victory in War, especially at Sea,
as also in Trading on the Sea; it preserves the Ships upon the Sea from all
danger in Storms and Tempests; this Sigil strengthens the Fruit in the Womb; it
helps Women in Labor; it causes Love and Amity among Married People; they who
Drink of it, it makes an inseparable Love between them; it is good for
Fishermen; if they hang it in the Water it draws and gathers the Craw-Fish and
other Fish to the place where they may be most easily caught.

If you put a Wax-Candle in the middle of this Sigil, and carry it round about
the House and other Places, where the Candle suddenly goes out, there is hidden
Treasure. If there be now a Lunar or Saturnal Influence, as may be seen 135,
136, in 147, 148, 149, 150, then Dig with good courage, and you will find a
Treasure.

This Sigil is also good in digging of Fountains and Waterworks.

The above mentioned Figure of Luna cut in a Stone in due Season, is excellent
good for Women in Labor; and if they drink fresh Spring Water from the Stone,
it helps them wonderfully; Women being with Child, may at that time drink a
Glass of fair Water.

Finally, The Influences of the Moon, are good to make the Pale, the White, the
White-Grey, and Yellow Colors.

A short Supplement of the Signs, Planets, and Numbers, with the Reason why
they are Stamped on the Metals.
1. I Do not question, nor doubt at all, but God Almighty, to his own Honor,
in the time of the Creation, ordained, that every one should have at his
Conception and Birth, the Tokens of good or ill Fortune, and also length of
Days.

2. Nor can I find that the Planets and Stars of themselves should have any
Influence or Power, but only that God, by the Sign given to them, shows us the
diversity of good and bad Seasons, which may be found out, when Men being
without Sin, are employed and busied in Arithmetic, and also free from
Merchandising, or any other Worldly affairs.

3. Although I call these times (ordained by God) good or bad Influences of the
Stars and Planets, yet it does not at all lessen, but is suitable to the Style
of a Potentate, who has many Officers and Servants that have many Places, by
whom the Will of their Lord is understood.

4. As also, I do not ascribe any Virtue to the Characters of the Planets, but
only to the Impressions that it has the 1, 2, and 3d Sympathetical time: Thus
also are discerned the Virtues of the Metals, Stones, and Herbs.

5. The Twelve Heavenly Signs, and also the Sun, are but Characters which
correspond with Men, Animals, and other things upon Earth.

6. The Numbers of the highest Invisible Sphere is first. 2. The Fixed Stars.
3. Saturn, 4. Jupiter. 5. Mars. 6. The Sun. 7. Venus. 8. Mercury. 9. The Moon.

If now 2 by 2, 3 by 3, 4 by 4, 5 by 5, are Multiplied, you have the Compendium
of every ones Body according to their Rays, which extend themselves the longer
and the greater toward the Moon, and these you may not without good ground
apply to the Metals.

7. The word Azoth, is composed of the beginning and end of the Alphabet, A and
Z in Latin or German; Alpha and Omega in Greek; Aleph and Thau in Hebrew.

8. He to whom God gives the Grace to know these most hidden Mysteries, has
the greater reason to Magnify his Creator.

Soli Deo Gloria.
AN Alphabetical INDEX.
A
ABies. page 24 Abortion. 11, 19 Absynthium. 32 Aconitum Salutiferum. 26
Aconitum Lyeoctonon. 26 Acorum verum. 23, 32 Acatocella. 36 Acuta spina. 28, 31
Adam 's Apples. 37 Adders Tongue. 37 Adianthum. 35 After-births. 11, 19
Agarick, Agaricum. 23 Agrimony, Agrimonia. 23 Agrifolium. 31 Alder-Tree. 23, 32
Alexander. 34 Almond-Tree. 27 Alnus. 23 Allium. 31, 37 Alsine. 37 Ambarum,
Ambergrease. 27 Amygdalus. 27 Anagallis. 37 Angelica. 23 Anise, Anisum. 27, 35
St. Anthony's-fire. 15 Apium. 26 Aparine. 35 Apiastrum. 27 Apium hortense. 36
Ape. 7 Appetite lost. 17 Apparitions. 20 Apples. 34 Apoplexy. 7, 12, 20
Apricock. 32, 34 Aquilegia. 28 Arundo Italica. 36 Aristolochia longa. 35
Aristolochia rotunda. 35 Aromatick-reed. 23, 32 Arteries broken. 13 Arrach. 23
Arsmart. 27 Asarabacca. 27 Asarum. 27 Ash-Tree. 32 Asarina altera. 33 Atriplex.
23 Avellanoe. 36 Aster Atticus. 26 Avens. 27
B.
BAlm. 27, 32 Balsamita. 28 Baldness. 1 Bardana. 23 Barley. 27 Basil wild. 23
Basil Garden. 27 Bastard Costus. 30 Bay Tree. 23, 32 Bat. 7 Barba Jovis. 29
Barrenness. 14, 19 Be. 7 Beet White. 35 Beet Black. 35 Red. 35 Beans. 35, 37
Berberries, Berberis. 27 Bellis. 30 Beta nigra. 35 Beta alba. 35 Beta rubra. 35
Betony, Betonica. 27 Belchings. 17 Beetle. 7 Bearings down. 13 Betula. 27
Sea-bind weed. 32 Birth-worth. 35 Round Birth-wort. 35 Birch-Tree. 27 Bistorta.
36 Bitings of a Horse. 11 Bitings of Mad-Dogs. 20 Bitings of Serpents. 20 Bites
of Scorpions. 21 Black Flies. 2 Black-berries. 27 Bladdernut-Tree. 34 Bleeding
at the Nose. 17 Blisters burning in Pudendis. 16 Bladder. 8 Borrago. 27
Botrytis. 38 Boleti. 38 Box. 27 Box-thorn. 30 Brains. 7, 8 Distempers of the
Brains. 5 Strengthening of the Brains. 14 Uncleanness of the Brains, which
obstructs the Memory. 14, 19 Weakness of the Head and Brains. 14, 18 Bramble.
23, 30 White Bramble. 23 Brook-lime. 37 Breast. 6, 8. Brassica capitata. 37
Brassica loevis. 37 Brassica crispa. 37 Breast swelled, fallen, or shrunk. 12,
13, 15, 17 Breast ulcerated. 17 Breasts voiding Milk. 38 Breasts knotted. 19
Breath stinking. 16 Bruises. 21 Buck-thorn. 23, 30 Bubonium. 26 Buck-Wheat. 35
Bugloss, Buglossum. 27 Bullace. 30 Burdock. 23 Burns and Scalds. 20 Burnet. 30,
32 Burrage. 27 Bursa pastoris. 26 Butter-bur. 32 Buxus. 27
C
CAbbage. 37 Calamentum montanum. 27 Camphire, Camphora. 34 Capers, Capparis.
23 Cardamum, Cardamomum. 33 Carob Cod. 24 Calamus saccharinus. 30 Caroways. 24
Cassia, Cassia lignea. 33 Cat. 4 Catarrh. 5, 13, 15 Cat-mint. 27 Cannabis. 24
Candela regia. 29 Cappes. 29 Caput monach. 25 Carthamus. 34 Capillus Veneris.
35 Caryophylli. 27 Caryophyllata. 27 Carum, vulgo Carui. 24 Castanea equina. 24
Cassutha, sive Coscuta. 24 Cancer in the Nose. 17 Carbuncles. 15 Cataracts. 8
Cattaria. 27 Castanea. 30 Coepa. 31 Caulis Capitatus. 37 Cancer. 2 Coeciliana.
32 Caryophylli Indici. 33 Cedar, Cedrus. 27 Celandine, Chelidonium majus. 27
Century, Centaurium. 27 Chamaeleon Thistle. 32 Chamomile, Chamaemelum,
Camomilla. 35 Chamaecerasus. 24 Chaps in the Lips. 6 Chamoedris. 28
Chamoecissus. 24, 28 Chamoepetys. 28 Cherries, Cerasus. 27 34 Wild-Cherries. 24
Chestnut. 30 Chick-weed. 37 Chilblains. 2 Chincough. 12 Chironium. 34
Cinque-foil. 35 Civet. 27 Claps. 16 Garden-Clary. 24 Cicuta. 24 Clivers, or
Goose-grass. 35 Clover-grass. 24 Cloves. 27, 33 Cock. 5 Colewort. 37 Colic
occasioned by the Matrix. 19 Coldness and Lameness of the Veins. 9 Cold
Stomach. 12 Colic. 16 Collumbine. 28 Colly-flowers. 37 Coltsfoot. 37 Comfrey.
28 Congealed Blood. 10 Consolida. 28 Conception hindered. 2 Consumption. 9
Contraction of the Nerves in Hands and Feet. 12 Convulsions. 3, 12 Cork. 24, 30
Cotton-weed. 28 Corns. 10, 17 Colubrina. 36 Corona Imperialis. 34 Corrigiola.
33 Corylus. 36 Crabs. 24 Crab-lice. 16 Costmary. 28 Costiveness. 16 Cramp. 3, 9
Crane. 3 Craw-fish. 9 Cresses. 30 Garden Cresses. 28 Crickets. 7 Crow. 2
Crosswort. 28 Crow-foot. 30, 33 Crocus. 33 Crocus saracenicus. 34 Cubebs,
Cubebae. 36 Cuckoo. 2, 8 Cucumbers. 37 Crumply Cole-wort. 37 Cruciofera. 28
Cucurbita. 37 Cucumeres. 37 Currants. 36 Cypress-Tree, Cupressus. 24
Cynoglossum vulgar. 28
D
DAffodil. 34 Daisie. 30 Daphnoides, Laureola. 31 Damask Rose. 28 Date-Tree. 28
Dentaria. 30 Devils-bit. 31 Diapensia. 26 Dictamnus albus. 33 Dittany. 33 A
burning Dysentery in Children. 4, 8 Distempers in the Nipples. 12 Bad
Digestion. 17 Distorted Teeth. 1 Dog. 4 Dodder, or Wood-bine. 24 Dogs-stones.
35 Dragon-wort, Dracunculus. 24 Dreams frightful. 10 Dropsy. 8, 13 Drought. 8
Drunkenness. 11 Ducks. 8 Dwarf-Elder. 31
E
EAgle. 5 Ear right. 2 Ear left. 4 Eben-Tree, Ebenus. 24 Ebulus. 31 Eloeaguus.
24 Elenium. 33 Elder-Tree. 36 Elm. 24 Endive, Endivia. 28 Enicus. 34 Enula
Campane. 33 Epatica. 29 Epilepsie. 7, 8 Epithymum. 26 Erica. 28 Eruca. 31
Esula. 32 Euonimus. 34 Euphorbium. 31 Eupatorium Groecorum. 23 Left-Eye of a
Man. 5, 8 Right-Eye of a Man. 5, 8 Blood-shot Eyes. 15 Pains in the Eyes. 18
Red and sore Eyes. 17, 18 Wounds in the Eyes. 18
F
FAboe. 35, 37, 94 Face ill-shaped. 18 Swellings in the Face. 15 Falling of the
Hair. 4 Falling of the Uvula. 11 Farfara. 37 Female-Fern, Filix Faemina. 24
Fern, Filix. 24, 70 Quartan Fevers. 2 Yearly Fever. 3 Intermitting Fevers. 4
Quotidian Fevers. 4 Tertian Fevers. 4 Occult and inward Fevers. 13 Fiery
Swellings and Inflammations. 15 Fig, Ficus. 24, 28, 92 Finger. 7 Filberts. 36
Fir Tree. 24 Fish. 9 Fistula's. 10, 16 Fistici. 35 Flammula Jovis. 31 Flax. 28,
78 Flix-weed. 28 Flos Solis. 34, 90 Flower d' Lis. 24, 28, 36 Fluxes. 13, 19
Bloody Fluxes. 19 Stopping of the Fluxes. 17 Foenil, Foeniculum. 28, 36
Hogs-Foenil. 31 Fox. 2 Fractures. 10 Fragaria. 30, 77 Frangula. 32, 70
Frankincense. 28 Fraxinus. 32, 89 Frogs. 9 Fumitory, Fumaria. 28, 80 Fuga
Doemonum. 33 Fundament swelled. 16 Fundament bearing down. 16 Wolf in the
Fundament. 16 Fungi. 38
G
GAlangal, Galanga. 28 Galls. 24 Galls, or Oak-Apples. Gallae. 24 The Gall. 4
Gall in the Stomach. 17 Gallitricum. 23 Galliopsis. 25 Garlic. 31, 37, 100
Gangreens. 20 Geese. 8 Gentian, Gentiana. 33 Large Genitors. 11 Germander. 28
Gonorrhoea. 15 Ginger. 33 Glycirrhiza. 29, 36 Gold-finch. 7 Golden-rod. 31
Goose-berries. 28, 31 Gourd. 37 Gout. 21 Grass-hoppers. 7 Gripes in Children.
18 Gristles. 9 Ground Ivy. 24, 28 Gums rotten. 1 Guts. 8
H
HAlimnus. 31 Hart's-tongue. 24 Hare. 2 Hand. 7 Haemorrhoides overflowing. 14
Hasle-wort. 33 Hasle-Tree. 36, 97 Lank Hair. 10, 16 Too much Hair on the Brows.
11, 17 Red Hair. 13, 15 Haw-thorn. 28, 31 Headache. 9, 13 Hearts-ease. 28, 31
Heart. 5 Heart-burning. 17 Trembling of the Heart occasioned by the overflowing
of the Gall. 15 Strengthening of the Heart. 14 Heat. 28 Heliotropium majus. 34
Hellebore, Helleborus. 24, 71 Haedera terrestris. 24 Hemlock. 24 Hemp. 24, 76
Henbane. 24, 70 Herb Twopence. 36 Herb True-love, Herba Paris. 24 Herba
Paralysis. 29 Herba Benedicta. 27 Hipposelinum. 25, 34 Hogs. 6 Hoarsness. 7
Holly. 31 Honey. 28 Hore-hound. 36 Hordeum. 27 Horse. 5 Hounds-Tongue. 28
House-leek. 24, 28, 37 Hyacinth, Hyacinthus. 35, 93 Hyosci^mus. 24, 70 Hyssop,
Hysopus. 36, 37 Hypericon. 33, 89
I, J
JAck-daws. 6 Jasminum. 28 Jaundice. 13 Jessamine. 28 Ilex. 31 Impostumation.
10 Impotency. 14 Imagination. 7 Inguinalis. 26 Infectoria. 23 Intestines. 8
Intermitting Fevers. 4 Intybus sativus major. 28 Jovial Sicknesses. 3 Jovial
Herbs, Roots, etc. 27, 77 Jovial and Martial Sicknesses. 13 Jovial and Solar
Sicknesses. 14 Jovial and Venereal Sicknesses. 14 Jovial and Mercurial
Sicknesses. 14 Jovial and Lunar Sicknesses. 15 St. John's-wort. 33, 89 Iris
Sylvestris. 24 Iris. 28, 36 Itch. 17 Italian Reed. 36 Ivy, Iva. 28, 83
Jupiter's Sigil. 165 Jusquiamus. 24 Juncus odoratus. 31 Juniper, Juniperus. 36,
96 Jujubes, Jujubae. 29
K
Kidneys. 4, 6 Inflammation of the Kidneys. 13 Diseases of the Kidneys. 19
Kidneys ulcerated. 13 King's Evil. 11 Kings-fisher. 7 Knee-pan. 3 Knot-grass. 33
Kite. 4 Knots and Boiles in the flesh. 2 Lesser Knot-grass. 33 Female
Knot-grass. 33
L
LActuca Sylvestris 37, 102 Lactuca Crispa. 37, 102 Lactuca Florescens. ib.
Lark. 3 Lappa major. 23 Larch-Tree, Larix. 29 Lasciviousness. 11 Lavender,
Lavendula. 33 French Lavender. 28 Lavender. 29 Laurus. 32, 88 Leaves. 37
Lentiles, Lens. 37 Lentiscus. 31 Lapidium. 31 Leprosy. 20 Lettice. 37, 102
Wild-Lettice. 37, 102 Levisticum. 25 Water-Lentiles, Lens Palustris. 37, 103
Lethargy. 7, 12 Libbards-bane. 29 Lignum Vitoe. 31, 35 Lily of the Valley,
Lilium Convallium. 35, 91 Water-Lilies. 35, 92 White Lilies. 35, 37, 91
Ligustrum. 26 Lichen. 29 Lime-Tree. 24, 37, 102 Lice. 4 Lice in the Eyebrows.
17 Limons. 33, 87 Lion. 5 Liquorish, Liquoritia. 36 Lingua Serpentis. 37
Liver-grown. 3 Liver. 6, 9 Inflammation of the Liver. 13 Swelling of the Liver.
13 Lote-Tree. 25, 29 Loose-strife. 29, 84 Loins. 6 Longings. 17 Lotus. 25
Lunaria Groeca. 38 Lunar Sicknesses. 8 Lungs. 3 Herbs under Luna. 37 Lunar
Herbs. 99 Lycoctonon. 26 Lychnis Coronaria. 29 Lysimachia. 29, 84
M
MAdness. 7, 16 Maidenhair. 35 Mala agrestia. 24 Mala dulcia. 34 Manna. 29
Malum Punicum. 29 Mala mustica. 27, 92 Mallows, Malva major and minor. 2 Malus
Cydonia. 33 Mala Citria. 33 Mandrake, Mandragora. 25, 37, 101 Marjoram,
Majorana. 36, 98 Marrhubium. 36 Martial Sicknesses. 4 Animals governed by Mars.
4 Diseases proceeding from Mars and Sol. 15 Diseases proceeding from Mars and
Venus. 16 Diseases proceeding from Mars and Mercury. 16 Diseases proceeding
from Mars and Luna. 17 Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars,
Sol, and Luna. 21 Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars, Mercury,
and Luna. 21 Mars's Sigil. 167 Herbs under Mars. 30, 85 Mastick-Tree. 31
Matrisalvia. 26 Measles. 8 Mel. 28 Melilote, Melilotus. 25 Melancholy. 12, 20
Melisophyllon, Melissa. 27, 32, 90 Members of Generation. 6 Memory. 7 Medlar
Pear, Mespilaceum Pyrum. 36 Melons, Melones. 38 100 Mint, Mentha. 29 Meon. 29
Mercurial Sicknesses. 7 Mercury, Mercurialis mas, Foemina. 36 Animals governed
by Mercury. 7 Milk curdled in the Breasts. 12, 19 Mole. 2 Money-wort. 36 Monks
Rhubarb. 31 Monsters of the nature of a Dog. 8 Monstrous Productions. 4 The
Moon's Sigil. 176 Moon-wort. 38 Monks-head. 25 Morsus Diaboli. 33 Morsus
Gallinoe. 37 Morus. 25, 29 Mose-Tree, Musa. 25 Moss, Muscus. 25, 71
Ground-Moss, Muscus Terrestris. 25 Musk, Moschus. 29 Mother. 6 Pains and
Gnawing of the Mother. 13 Rising of the Mother. 13, 18 Stopping and Hardness of
the Mother. 17 Uncleanness of the Mother. 19 Diseases proceeding from Mercury
and Luna. 19 Mercury 's Sigil. 174 Moths. 4 Mouse. 2 Mouse-ear. 25
Mulberry-Tree. 25, 29 Mullein. 29, 81 Muscles. 9 Musk-Pears. 29 Country
Mustard. 31 Myrica. 26 Myrrh, Myrrha. 33 Myrtle, Myrtus exotica Tarentina. 29
Myrtle-Tree, Myrtillus. 25
N
NApellus. 32 Nardus Indica. 30 Narcissus. 34, 92 Nasturtium aquaticum. 38
Nasturtium Hortense. 28 Nasturtium Sativum. 30 Great Nettles 31, 85 Roman
Nettles 31, 85 Lesser Nettles 31, 85 Dead Nettles. 25 Navel. 5 Nails uneven in
Hands and Feet. 12 Nightingale. 7 Nightshade. 25, 75 Nits. 19 Noise in the
Ears. 2, 10 Nuces Juglandes. 26 Indian Nuts, Nuces Indicae. 25 Nutmegs, Nux
Myristica, Moschata. 33 Numularia. 36 Nuces Ponticoe. 36 Nymphoea. 35 Nymphaea
alba. 37
O
OAk. 31 Ocimum. 27 Wild-Olives, Olea Sylvestria. 31, 78 Olea Boemica. 24
Olives, Olivae. 25, 29 Old Sores. 10 Onion. 32, 38, 100 Opium. 25 Orminium
hortense. 24 Orminium sylvestre. 23 Orpine. 29, 80 Origanum, or Wild-Marjoram,
Origanum vulgar. 29, 81 Night-Owl. 8 Skreich-Owl. 2 Oxalis. 36 Oxylapathum.
26, 75 Oysters. 9
P
PAins in the Back. 3 Pricking Pains in the Legs. 18 Pains in the Loins
occasioned by Stoppage. 11, 16 Female Palm, Palma Foemina. 35 Palpitation of
the Heart. 5 Palsy. 16 Panicum. 35 Panther. 4 Papaver Erraticum. Papaver
Hortense. 38, 101 Parrots. 7 Parietaria. 38 Parsnips. 25, 38, 68 Parsley. 36
Partridges. 6 Pastinaca. 25, 38 Passuloe Corinthiacoe. 36 Passuloe majores. 29
Male-Peony, Peonia mas. 29, 38, 102 Peach. 29, 31 Sweet Pear. 33 Pellitory of
the Wall. 38 Wild-Pear. 25 Pennyroyal. 33 Pepones. 38, 100 Pepper,
Pepper-wort. 31, 33 Pentaphyllon. 35 Perfoliata. 30 Peperitis. 31 Petroselinum
vulgar. 36 Periwinkle. 31 Pigeons. 6 Pikes. 9 Picea. 25 Pine Tree, Pinus. 25
Wild-Pine, Pinus Sylvestris. 25 Ground Pine, Pinus Tarentina. 25 Sea-Pine,
Pinus Maritima. 25 Pimples. 4, 5 Phthisick. 12 Piles and Hoemorrhoides. 14
Pilosella. 24 Pimpinella. 30, 32 Piper. 31 Frenzy. 20 Pistacio-Nuts,
Pistachia. 35 Pismires. 7 Perfica malus. 31 Personatia. 23, 71 Perforata. 33
Pissing of Blood. 15 Continual Pissing. 16 Piper vulgar. 33 Pitch-Tree. 25
Plague. 20 Plane-Tree, Platanus. 25 Plantane, Plantago major, media, longa,
aquatica. 31, 38 Pleurisy. 3, 13 Plum-Tree, Prunus. 38 Pouch-weed. 26, 74
Polypody of the Oak, Polypodium. 25, 74 Polygonum majus, minus, foemineum. 33
Pompkins. 38, 100 White-Poplar, Populus alba. 38 Poisons of all sorts. 20 Poma
Adami. 37 Pox. 16 Venereal Pox. 15 Black Poplar, Populus nigra. 25 Porrum. 37
Prick-madam. 25, 38 Poppy. 38, 101 Primrose, Primula veris. 29 Privet. 26
Poison of Spiders. 16 Prunella. 29 Proenestinoe. 36 Proecox pyrum. 32
Pseudo-costus. 30 Pseudo-terebinthus. 30 Pulegium. 33 Pulse. 3 Pulmonaria. 36,
97 Purslane, Portulaca Domestica. 38 Sea-Purslane. 31 Wild-Purslane, Portulaca
Sylvestris. 38 Pyrum agreste. 25 Pyrum Hordeaceum. 29 Pyrum Mustaceum. 33
Q
QVinzy. 2 Quince. 33 Quinque-folium. 35
R
RAbbits. 8 Raisins. 29 Rape-Root, Rapum. 38, 102 Rapum rotundum. 30 Red-Face.
5 Red Spots in the Face. 4 Rhamnus. 30, 86 Rheumatism. 17 Rhabarbarum Monachi
31 Rhubarb, Rhabarbarum. 29, 84 Ruptures. 6, 11, 16 Ribs. 3 Ribes vulgaris. 28
Rocket. 31 Rose, Rosa. 29, 35, 92 Red-Rose, Rosa milesia. 31 White-Rose, Rosa
alba. 38 Wild-Rose, Rosa canina. 26 Rose Campane. 29, 80 Rosemary, Rosamarinus.
33, 90 Ruba domestica. 27 Rubus. 23 Rumex. 26 Sweet Rush. 31 Rue, Ruta
Hortensis. 26, 73 Wild-Rue, Ruta Sylvestris. 36
S
SAbina. 26 Saffron. 33, 87 Wild-Saffron. 34, 87 Sage, Salvia. 36, 75 Salix.
26, 74 Sambucus. 36, 97 Sanicle, Sanicula. 26 Saracenicus. 34 Saturnal
Diseases. 1, 2 Animals under Saturn. 2 Saturn 's Sigil. 162 Saturnal and Jovial
Diseases. 9 Saturnal and Martial Sicknesses. 10 Saturnal and Solar Sicknesses.
11 Saturnal and Venereal Sicknesses. 11 Saturnal and Mercurial Sicknesses. 12
Saturnal and Lunar Sicknesses. 12 Saturnal, Martial, and Solar Diseases. 20
Saturnal, Martial, and Mercurial Diseases. 20 Saturnal, Martial, and Lunar
Diseases. 20 Saturnal, Solar, and Lunar Diseases. 21 Saturnal, Martial, Solar
and Lunar Diseases. 21 Sativus major. 28 Savory, Satureia. 35, 36 Satyriorum
genera omnia. 35, 91 Savine, Savina. 26, 72 Saxifrage, Saxifragia. 26, 69
Scabi, 1, 16 Scabiosa major and minor. 26 Scald-Heads. 17 Scalds and Burns. 20
Scammony, Scammonia. 32 Scars. 16, 18 Scolopendrion. 32, 72 Scurff. 11 Scurvy.
2, 11 Seafish. 6 Sea-Spider. 9 Secrets. 4, 6 Sebestines, Sebestina. 32 Sedum.
28, 87 Sempervivum majus. 24 Sempervivum minus. 25 Sellery, Selarea. 26
Self-heal. 29, 84 Swellings and Ulcers in the Secrets. 10, 18 Serpentaria. 36
Sertula Campana. 25 Sheep. 3 Senna, Sena. 26, 72 Servise-Tree. 32, 34, 35, 38
Setwall. 26 Sight. 5 Siliqua. 24 Sinews and Gristles. 3 Sinking of the Spirits.
11 Siser. 38 Shingles. 20 Sisymbrium domesticum. 29 Sharp-pointed Dock. 26, 75
Sleepy-Lettuce. 32 Sloe-Tree. 26 Smallage. 26, 76 Defect of Smelling. 6 Snails.
4, 9 Snakes. 7 Snake-weed. 36, 97 Sneezing. 8 Solar Sicknesses. 5 Animals
governed by the Sun. 5 Diseases proceeding from Sol and Venus. 18 Diseases
proceeding from Sol and Mercury. 18 Diseases proceeding from Sol and Luna. 18
Solanum hortense. 25, 75 Sonchus asper. 32 Soldanella. 32 Sorbus Sylvestris. 32
Sorbus domestica mas. 34 Sorbus Torminalis. 35 Sorbus domestica foemina. 38
Sorrel. 26, 36 Wood Sorrel. 30 Sour-dock. 36 Sparrows. 6 Sperm. 3, 6 Spignel.
29 Spica domestica. 29 Spicknard. 30 Spina Acuta. 28 Spina Merula. 23 Spina. 32
Spindle-Tree. 34 Spirit. 7 Spleen and Bones. 2 Spleen. 4 Spitting Blood. 10, 13
Spleen-wort. 32, 72 Splinters in Flesh. 10 Sponge, Spongia. 26 Lesser Spurge.
32, 86 Stammering. 12 Stoechas Citrinum. 28 Star-wort. 26 Staves-Acre,
Staphisagria. 26, 69 Staphilodendron. 34 Stinking Body. 10 Stoppage in the
stomach. 19 Stomach. 8 Swellings and Ulcers in the stomach. 17, 18 Gnawing
Pains and Vapors in the stomach. 12 Stopping of Blood in Wounds. 13 Stone and
Gravel. 10 Storax-Tree. 35 Strangury. 10, 11 Strawberries. 30 Styrax. 35 Suber.
24, 30 Sugar-cane. 30 Sun-Flower. 34, 90 Sun-burning. 5 Sycamore-Tree,
Sycamorus. 32 The Sun 's Sigil. 169 Symphitum. 28 Prickly Sow-Thistle. 32, 85
Stubbornness. 3 Swallow. 7 Unnatural Sweat. 6 Swelling in the side. 3, 4, 5
Swellings and Bruises. 21 Swellings and Holes in Pudendis. 16 Swoonings. 11, 12
T
TApsus Barbatus. 29 Tamarisk, Tamarix. 26, 72 Taste. 8 Taxus. 26 Teeth loose. 1
Teeth distorted. 1 Black and Hollow Teeth. 10 Terebinthus. 32 Chamelaeon
Thistle. 32 Thickness of Hearing. 12 Thlaspi. 31 Thorn. 32 Thorough-wax. 30
Throat sore. 16 Throat. 6 Thrush. 19 Thus. 28 Tiger. 4 Time, Thymus. 34, 36
Tilia. 24 Tilia foemina. 37 Tithymallus. 32, 86 Tobacco. 26 Toads. 9
Toad-stool. 38 Tongue. 7 Tongue furred. 16 Toothache. 1 Tooth-wort. 30
Tormentile, Tormentilla. 34 Treacle Claver, Trisolium odoratum. 36, 95
Trey-foil, Trifolium. 26, 36, 95 Triticum. 30 Trembling. 9 Trouts. 9 Tucrinum,
29, 80 Tulip. 34, 90 Tulip, Tulipa. 35 Turpentine-Tree. 30, 32 Terebinthus. 32
Tumors by Inflammations. 15 Tussilago. 37 Turtle-Doves. 6 Turn-sole. 34, 38
V, U
VAleriana. 26 Veins. 4 Venereal Diseases. 6 Animals governed by Venus. 6 Venus
's Sigil. 172 Diseases proceeding from Venus and Mercury. 19 Diseases
proceeding from Venus and Luna. 19 Verbascum. 29 Vervane, Verbena. 32
Vermicularis. 38 Vine, Vitis Vivifera. 34, 88 Wild-Vine, Viburnum. 32 Blue
Violets, Violae purpureae. 30 Vitex. 30 Violent Vomiting. 7 Virga aurea. 31
Vlmus. 24 Vrtica major. 31 Vrtica Romana. 31 Vrtica minor. 31 Vrtica mortua. 25
Vva spina. 31 Vvoe Zibiboe. 29 Ulcers. 8, 10 Running hot Sores and Ulcers. 17
Ulcers occasioned by het, watery Humors. 17 Ulcers in the Bladder. 18
W
WAlnuts. 26, 96 Warts. 16 Wasting of the Flesh. 14 Watercresses. 38 Watching
continually. 7 Weak Ears. 10 Weakness. 11 Weariness. 19 Weed growing about
Time. 26 Wens. 2 Wheat. 30, 84 Whites. 19 Wind in the Bladder of Women. 13
Wild-Vine. 32 Willow. 26, 30, 74 Witchcraft. 11, 20 Wolf. 4 Wolf-bane. 26, 32,
69 A kind of Wolfs-bane. 32 Women's Fluxes in Childbed. 13 Coldness of the
Womb. 13 Worms in the Ears. 10 Worms in the Fingers. 16 Worms in the Belly. 18
Wormwood. 32 Worms in old rotten Sores. 21 Wounds in the Head. 10 Fiery
Swellings in Wounds. 15 Inflammations in Wounds. 15 Inward Wounds. 16 Wounds
with poisoned Arms. 20
Y
YEarly Fever. 3 Yew-Tree. 26
Z
ZEdoary, Zedoaria. 34 Zibetum. 27 Zinziber. 33 Zizypha. 29
An Universal INDEX of all the chief Matters contained in this Book.
I. DIseases of the Nature of Saturn. 1, 2 Animals governed by Saturn. 2
II. Jovial Sicknesses. 3 Animals governed by Jupiter. 3
III. Martial Sicknesses. 4 Animals governed by Mars. 4
IV. Solar Sicknesses. 5 Animals governed by the Sun. 5
V. Venereal Diseases. 6 Animals governed by Venus. 6
VI. Mercurial Sicknesses. 7 Animals governed by Mercury. 7
VII. Lunar Sicknesses. 8 Animals governed by the Moon. 8, 9
VIII. Diseases occasioned by Saturn and Jupiter. 9 IX. Sicknesses occasioned
by Saturn and Mars. 10 X. Diseases proceeding from Saturnal and Solar
Influences. 11 XI. Diseases proceeding from Saturn and Venus. 11 XII. Diseases
proceeding from Saturn and Mercury. 12 XIII. Diseases proceeding from Saturn
and Luna. 12 XIV. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Mars. 13 XV. Diseases
proceeding from Jupiter and Sol. 14 XVI. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and
Venus. 14 XVII. Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Mercury. 14 XVIII.
Diseases proceeding from Jupiter and Luna. 15 XIX. Diseases proceeding from
Mars and Sol. 15 XX. Diseases proceeding from Mars and Venus. 16 XXI. Diseases
proceeding from Mars and Mercury. 16 XXII. Diseases proceeding from Mars and
Luna. 17 XXIII. Diseases proceeding from Sol and Venus. 18 XXIV. Diseases
proceeding from Sol and Mercury. 18 XXV. Diseases proceeding from Sol and Luna.
18 XXVI. Diseases proceeding from Venus and Mercury. 19 XXVII. Diseases
proceeding from Venus and Luna. 19 XXVIII. Diseases proceeding from Mercury and
Luna. 19 XXIX. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars and
Sol. 20 XXX. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars, and
Mercury. 20 XXXI. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Mars,
and Luna. 20 XXXII. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Saturn, Sol,
and Luna. 21 XXXIII. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars, Sol,
and Luna. 21 XXXIV. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of Mars,
Mercury, and Luna. 21 XXXV. Diseases occasioned by the joint Influences of
Saturn, Mars, Sol, and Luna. 21
Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Saturn. 23, 24, 25, 26 Herbs, Roots, Trees,
etc. under Jupiter. 27, 28, 29, 30 Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Mars. 30,
31, 32 Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under the Sun. 32, 33 Herbs, Roots, Trees,
etc. under Venus. 34 Herbs, Roots, Trees, etc. under Mercury. 35, 36 Herbs,
Roots, Trees, etc. under the Moon. 37, 38 Of the Invention, Knowledge, and
Demonstration of the Virtue of Herbs. 39 Who were the first that found out the
Use and Virtue of Herbs. 39 Who first found out the Use of Herbs. 41 Who first
Methodized the Herbs, 43 Showing that several Herbs were discovered by Dreams
and Visions. 45 What sorts of Herbs were found out by Kings and Potentates. 46
How, in process of Time, the Knowledge of Herbs was revealed to Nations and
Common People, 47 Brutes have discovered many precious Herbs. 48 When the
Knowledge of Herbs was committed to Writing. 49 Of some Wonders, Signs and
Miracles effected by Herbs. 52 The Ancients used only Herbs, not Compositions.
55 When the Composition of Herbs was first invented. 56 Herophilus's Opinion of
Herbs. 58 At what Season Herbs and Roots are to be gathered. 59 Where to keep
your Herbs. 61 How long Herbs will hold good. 63 Where the best Herbs grow. 63
With what Ceremonies, and in what Seasons, the old Pagans gathered their Herbs.
64 Of the Nature and Operation of the Herbs of Saturn. 68 The Explanation of
some Jovial Herbs, and their Influences. 77 Of the Operation and Nature of
Martial Herbs. 85 Of the Nature and Virtue of Solar Herbs. 87 Of the Virtue and
Force of Venereal Herbs. 91 Of the Nature and Virtue of Mercurial Herbs. 93 Of
the Nature and Virtue of Lunar Herbs. 99 Of the Influences of the seven Planets
from the 10th of March, School, to the 10th of March, 1699. 104 A Diary showing
how strong every Herb, Mineral, and Vegetable, is (every day in the Year) to be
found. 106 The Influences of the Planets in March, School. 109 The Influences of
the Planets in April, School. 111 The Influences of the Planets in May, School. 113
The Influences of the Planets in June, School. 117 The Influences of the Planets
in July, School. 119 The Influences of the Planets in August, School. 120 The
Influences of the Planets in September, School. 123 The Influences of the Planets
in October, School. 125 The Influences of the Planets in November, School. 127 The
Influences of the Planets in December, School. 128 The Influences of the Planets
in January, 1699. 130 The Influences of the Planets in February, 1699. 132 The
Influences of the Planets in March, 1699. 133 A Repetition of the Influences of
the seven Planets in their order, from Harvest, School, to March, 1699. 135
Saturn influences from September, School, to March, 1699. 135, 136 Jupiter
influences from September, School, to March, 1699. 137, 138 Mars influences from
September, School, to March, 1699. 139, 140, 141 Sol influences from September,
School, to March, 1699. 142 Venus influences from September, School, to March,
1699. 143 Mercury influences from October, School, to March, 1699. 144, 145, 146
The Moon influences from September. School, to March, 1699. 147 to 150 An Example
in a burning Fever. 153 In the sickness Time, or Plague, the second Example.
154 The Second Cure and Healing of all Diseases by the Heavenly Influences, by
means of the Seven Planets and Precious Stones. 158 The Names of the Metals.
161 The Description of the Sigil of the first Metal Lead, or Saturn, how it is
to be made and used against all Saturnal Sicknesses 162 How to clean Lead. 162,
163 The Figure and Stamp. 163 The Use. 164 The Gem of Saturn. 164 The
Description of the second Metal, Copper, or Tin, or the Sigil of Jupiter, how
it is prepared and used against all Jovial Sicknesses. 165 How to clean Tin.
165 The Figure and Stamp. 166 The Use. 166 The Gem of Jupiter. 167 The
Description of the third Metal, Iron, or the Sigil of Mars, how such is
prepared and used against all Martial Diseases. 167 How to clean Iron. 167, 168
The Figure and Stamp. 168 The Use. 168 The Gem of Mars. 169 The Description of
the fourth Metal, Gold, or the Sigil of Sol, how it is prepared and used
against all Solar Diseases. 169 How to clean Gold, 169, 170 The Figure and
Stamp. 170 The Use of the Golden Sigil. 171 The Gem of Sol. 171 The Description
of the fifth Metal, Tin, or the Sigil of Venus, how it is prepared and used
against all Venereal Diseases. 172 To clean Tin. 172 The Figure and Stamp. 172,
173 The Use of the Sigil of Tin. 173 The Gem of Venus. 173 The Description of
the sixth Metal, Quicksilver, or the Sigil of Mercury, how it is to be
prepared and used against all Mercurial Diseases. 174 How to clean
Quicksilver. 174 The Use of the Sigil of Mercury. 175 The Gem of Mercury. 175
The Description of the seventh Metal, Silver, or the Sigil of Luna, how it is
prepared and used against all Lunar Diseases. 176 How to clean Silver. 176 The
Figure and Stamp of Luna. 177 The Use of the Sigil of Luna. 177 The Gem of
Luna. 177 The Third and Summary Cure by the Conjunctiun of the Seven Metals and
Sigils. 181 The Fourth Cure of all Diseases in General. 184, 185 I. Of the
Virtue and Operation of the Sigil of Saturn. 185, 186 II. Of the Operation and
Virtue of the Sigil of Jupiter. 186 III. Of the Operation and Virtue of the
Sigil of Mars. 187 IV. Of the Operation and Virtue of the Sigil of Sol. 188 V.
Of the Operation and Virtue of the Sigil of Venus. 188, 189 VI. Of the Virtue
and Operation of the Sigil of Mercury. 189 VII. Of the Virtue and Operation of
the Sigil of the Moon. 190, 191 A short Supplement of the Signs, Planets, and
Numbers, with the Reason why they are Stamped on the Metals. 191 to 193
Mantissa Euphemetica Encomiastica: Experientissimi and Famigeratissimi Domini
Autoris gratulans OPUS.
TAntaleas is opes capit: and putat iste cicadam
Correptam, ut tandem Sisyphium extet opus:
Cui volupe est Veneri, Bacchove insumere nervos:
Aut si quis stertit nocte dieque piger.
Illecebris nocet, and nocet empta dolor, libido:
Sed virtutis habet clara brabeia manus.
Laus manet Hiebnerum, noctesque diesque studentem,
Dum vitia exosus, percolit artis opus.
Aetheraeum modo docta manus recludit Olympum:
Et modo Germinibus sumina pandit humi.
Edit Ephemeridas, editque Machaonis artem:
Sidera qui prosint and Medicaminibus.
Cede superstitio: niteant arcana per orbem:
Vt probet usque levis cespes, and esse DEVM.
Quid juvet ergo Getas, Garamantes visere and Indos?
Quid pugnace juvet bella movere manu?
Ille capit, Pactolus opes quas fundit abundus:
Erigit hic FAMAE celsa Trophaea suae!
Cuncta cadunt: virtus manet intemerata. Diurnans
HIEBNERI ergo cati Fama per aeva cluat.
(...) f. gratulabund. 3 Calendar. VII.

A. (...): MDCLI.

M. Johan. Bolbracht, Physic. P. P. in alma Gerana, inclutae Facultat.
Philosoph. p. t. Decanus P. dirutor. vicor. Ilversgehofen and Marpach.

Ad Clarissim. and Doctiss. Dominum Israelem Hibnerum, Nivemontanum
Arithmeticum and Astronomum Excellentissimum.
MOntis, Hibnere, decus praeclaraque fama Nivosi,
Quem numeros site innumeros, quem immensa tenentem,
Astra animo stupet orbis, amat Patria, odit iniquus:
Coeleste ingenium, men's enthea, pectore cujus
Cura, Labor, Studium, Vigilantia, cujus in imo
Cord Fides, Pietas, Domini Timor acribus inten
Se vinclis connexa domum sibi figere gaudent.
Heu quantum moliris opus! quanto ingruis ausu
Tot contra errores seclorum ac fata pudenda
Fatidici coeli, quod turpis inertia amussi
Hactenus and demens metita ignavia curva est.
Tu juvenis clarum senibus praepandere lumen
Astra per incedis summa, informansque magistros
Discipulus potiora aperis fundamina very.
Multis in tenebris, densa in caligine semper
Men's hominum haeret humi: raro transcendere coelum
Audet, and instabili figit vestigia gressu.
Nec facile humanae misera haec angustia mentis
Immensi capit astra poli: rationis acumen
Luminis aetherei fulgore retunditur acri,
Non minus, ipsa acies oculorum ac lumine Solis.
Nec numeris perfecta suis Sapientia cuiquam
Terrigenum obtingit: plus hic, minus ille reportat.
Suntque vices rerum dubiae incertique fluores.
Nam velut astra modo roseo promergere ab ortu
Cernimus and laeto perfundere lumine terras:
Moesta latere modo piceae glomeramine nubis,
Aut cursu exacto prono decedere call:
Sic quicquid ratio, quicquid sapientia magnum
Sedulitate acri peperit, miratur, honorat:
Nunc floret, celsumque caput super aethera tollit:
Nunc senet, aegrotat, moritur: perfectio non est
His terris, nec perpetuum quid continet orbis.
Hoc tamen acceptum summo referamus Iovae,
Ingeniisque bonis, quod non moriantur in aevum
Aeternum studia, aut radicitus extirpentur
Arts ingenuae and varii sapientia census:
Sed velut astrorum pulsis decus omne tenebris
Clarius emergit, lucemque redonat in orbem:
Sic redeunt arts penitae de stirpe recisa
Barbary, expediuntque animos errore recepto.
Ille igitur vere felix, rerumque supremo
Proximus autori est, cujus Sapientia ductu
Aut primum caput e tumulo, quo tempore multo
Decubuit, profert: aut jam viva, augmina sentit.
Discipuli pueri est, jurare in verba magistri:
Qui sapit, ulterius Vir eat. Culpamne putemus,
Plus sapere, ac vulgus? coeco praesente, videre?
Quae videt, impostor reticet meliora: malignus
Errantes renuit meliori reddere calli.
Sive igitur videas, quae nondum viderat alter
Sive aliis conspecta procul propiore tueris
Lumine and inventum porro excolis, addis, adauges,
O Te felicem ingenii mentisque beatum,
Qui vis, qui potis es coelestibus addere lumen
Luminibus; qui terricolas super aetheris arces
Deducis, qui coelorum deducta supremorum
Ostentas terris convexa oculisque subinfers.
Hibnere, hanc mentem, hunc mentis cum laud vigorem
Indidit ipse tibi genitor Deus Israelis.
Quem sibi conservet porro, augeat atque coronet
Israeligenae genuino omnisque peroso
Fucificae fraudis. Si lumina summa peribunt
Solis, Hibnere, tuum decus and fama inclyta terris
Decedet, quae se spatiosum extendit in orbem.
Joh. Fidlerus Reichenbachensis Variscus P. Laur. Caes. verbi divini apud
Mugellanos minister, die 17 Aprilis, Anno 1651.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to mend these Slips with his Pen.
Page 24. l. 19. for Elagaenus, r. Elaeagnus. l. 20. for Mustacium, r.
Mustaceum. p. 109. l. 1. for 53 min. past 11. r. 53 min. before 12. l. 22. dele
7 min. past.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THese are to give Notice, That the Publisher is minded to prepare the Sigils
of the Seven Planets, when they shall have their strongest Influences,
according to the Method laid down in this Treatise, to oblige such Persons as
are Curious, and will make Experiment of them; which may be had at his House in
Fulwoods-Rents, near Gray's Inn in Holbourn.


