The Naked Truth. The Second Part.

In Several INQUIRIES Concerning the CANONS AND Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
Canonical Obedience, Convocations, Procurations, Synodals and Visitations: ALSO
OF THE Church of England, AND Churchwardens. AND The Oath of Churchwardens.
AND OF SACRILEGE.

The Second Edition Corrected and Amended.

Blanditur Cathedra? Speculaest. Inde denique superintendis,
Sonans tibi Episcopi nomine, non Dominum sed officium.
Alta sedens, non alta sapiens; sed humilia de te
Sentiens, humilibusque consentiens.
Praesis ut prosis, debtor non Dominator.
Bernard. lib. 2. de Consideratione. London, Printed for Francis Smith, and are
to be Sold at his Shop, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READERS.
Courteous Reader,
NO man does more Reverence Good Bishops than my self, nor does any man less
dread them with a slavish fear: I admire them at my distance, but I do not
Idolize them; I honor them, but I do not fall down and worship them; I can say
-- My Lord, and (yet not add) -- My God.

Nor will you find in this ensuing Inquiry, the least Tang of Bitterness or
yellow Choler; No, nor so much as one tart or harsh Expression, being so far
from justly disgusting any, that I shall not so much as set their Teeth on
Edge; so insipid and simple an humor have I cherisht all along through this
whole Discourse, (for fear of any Satirical mixtures) that I doubt you will
scarce find any Salt, Savor or Smacky Relish here, 'twill scarce bite the
Tongue of a Sinner.

Solomon says, Prove. 17.27.
That men of understanding are of excellent Spirits (To render the words
literally from the Original) Men of understanding are long-nos'd: (...) which
the Septuagint Translate (...), (that is) A man of understanding is
Long-breasted, (metaphorically put for) Patient; His heart is not near his
month, he is not easily Provoked; and therefore men will neither show their Wit
nor Grace, to be angry ( without a cause, without a good and honest cause) at
what is here Writ: Let us rather say, (with that good German Emperor) We ought
to be angry with our Sins, not with our Friends, that tell us of them.

Yet I cannot say, (in truth) that I have concealed my name because I have no
skill nor strength to bear good and evil report with Equanimity.

For I bless Almighty God, that as his Providence has exercised me, with both,
in no small measure; so I have found by long and large experience, His strength
in my weakness, that I can say without vain boasting, I walk (without much
concern) by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report.

Nor is it because I am afraid or ashamed at any thing here writ, that I thus
appear on the public Stage in Masquerade, in such Disguise to walk Incognito.

But, the Subject (of my Inquiries) leads me necessarily, to rake in a Nest of
Wasps and Hornetts, (peevish by nature, more enraged by Interest) thus to be
disturbed of a warm nest, and therefore would certainly buzze about my Ears, if
I were not thus muffled and Hooded up.

Yet I hope I have here disarmed them of their Weapons, by taking the Sting out
of their Tails, (at least) the Venom, that though they may yet make a Humming
Noise, yet they shall be as Stingless as Drones.

Besides, I am neither of the Race of the Decii, nor of the Curtii, to
sacrifice all my quiet to the Public good in this thankless Age, wherein many
men are of so currish a disposition, and so used to the Collar about their
Necks, that they are ready to snap at those Fingers that would pull it off.

But however, (in short) what wise man would be content to be a Butt, to be
shot at, though Armed Cap-a-pee with Armor of Proof?

The inconvenience (for it wants not some) of allowing to the Press this
Liberty, (so natural and agreeable to our English Complexion and Constitution,
and the Common-mother of the Naked Truth, which is usually begot betwixt this
bandying Pro and Con) cannot possibly equal that of making a Monopoly of the
Press; taking in the Common, and confining it to a certain set of men that
would seem to keep the Key of Knowledge and the Press, and they neither enter
in themselves, and they that would enter in, they hinder; like surly Porters,
that usually keep out better men than they let in.

Magistrates and good Bishops should say with St. Paul, We can do nothing
against the Truth, 2 Cor. 3.8.
but for the Truth: (...), (that is) We have no power (as the Original imports)
to do any thing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Nor have all the Bishops in England any power over us, (although they had as
lawful a Commission for their Spiritual Courts and Jurisdiction as once they
had) more than St. Paul had over those Corinthians, which he confesses in the
Tenth Verse, was for Edification, not for Destruction. 2 Cor. 13.10.


A good Magistrate may do a man good, so may a good Bishop, but neither of them
have power, any lawful Power, given them to do harm or wrong.

And if they chance to find me out notwithstanding my Disguise, I Will answer for
every tittle here declared; with the words of our Blessed Redeemer -- If I have
spoken Evil, bear witness of the Evil, but if Well, Why smitest thou me?

And I am sure, what is here pretended, has no design in the world, but purely,
(in all Humility and Love to Truth) the Publick-weal; And if in any thing I be
mistaken, my Errors shall never be Heresies, none shall (upon a rational
Conviction) more readily and willingly retract them than my self.

One would wonder a little at first at that Passage, 1 Timothy 6.17.
1 Timothy 6.17. where the Apostle gives the Charge to Rich men, that they be not
high-minded, since Poor and Proud is true to a Proverb.

The Latins by one and the same word express a man humble in mind, and
humbled with afflictions, they are so near a Kin; and the way, God usually
takes to make a man humble, is to humble him, (as he did Nebuchadnezzar) by
afflictions.

For Prosperity puffs up and swells a man naturally; and if through Grace a
Rich man be not high-minded, he had need keep a constant Watch and Ward over
his mind, for height will tempt his mind to be high-minded and proud, as
Lucifer.

Thus have I seen a man stretch and stand on tip-toe, and stalk in High Shoes
upon a Church-Steeple, and look with scorn on all below; and yet, if he had
stood on even ground and measured fair with those Inferiors he despised (as
Pigmies,) he would not be able to reach their heads.

In climbing (Masons and Carpenters well observe) whilst men look upwards, they
cannot be giddy crowned, vertiginous and turn-sick; but if they look down, it is
odds but their Brains turn round, till they fall.

It Is most true in Morals and in Divinity; whilst men though never so
high-mounted look upwards still to Heaven, they will say with King David, in all
humility -- I am a worm and no man --

The Contemplation of the Vastness and Glory of Heaven (as Cicero observes in
Somnio Scipionis) will make them best see what a pitiful Spot (in comparison)
the whole Globe of the Earth is, and the glory of it; and much more with humble
Eyes reflect upon their own pitiful punyships.

But if they are always looking downwards upon the many under them, their
Brains usually Crawl with scorn, pride and disdain, and turning Giddy they
forget themselves, till they catch a fall, if not their Ruin.

And though they may pride themselves and strut in their High Shoes, and take
delight in exposing their Inferiors (whom they ought to protect) to contempt
and scorn; or for sport suffer them to be baited by Dogs, and perhaps cry,
Hollou; It Is ten to one, but they meet at some time or other with so Rugged a
Repartee, as to make them sick of such Unchristian Games, and sometimes to
their shame, expose also the knotty side of their own gay Arras, and prove that
all is not Gold that glisters.

Popery and Mahometism were born both in one and the same Century, and had one
and the same Midwife, namely, Ignorance or Barbarism.

Truth and the Press would stifle them both, and the Turk knows it as well, and
therefore Politickly prohibits Printing: so also does the Pope prohibit (what
he can) all Printing, but what passes with his own Imprimatur's; and some
others also would have the Press at the same lock, and they alone to keep the
Key.

And thus whilst men hear but of one Ear, and from one Mouth, they are kept in
ignorance, and seldom grow wiser than the Pope and Conclave, that
Excommunicated Galileo (I think it was) for holding the Motion of the Earth.

For Errors and Superstition, Tyranny and Oppression (like Owls, and all other
works of darkness) hate the light, and cannot endure to be seen by daylight;
whereas the Naked Truth feeks no Corners, is bare indeed, but is not (nor needs
not to be) ashamed.

Lording over Gods Heritage, (...), Dominantes Cleris, 1 Pet. 5.3. Domineering
over Gods People, was never the mind of Christ, nor St. Peter; nor had ever any
Bishops any such lawful Commission, (even when the High-Commission-Courts were
up, whereby alone they had Authority and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical) to Lord
it over Gods Heritage.

No, no; It is the Relics of the Luciferian Pride of that Grand Impostor,
that ridiculously styles himself -- The Successor of St. Peter, yet imitates
him in nothing, but in denying his Master; that sets his insulting Toe upon the
Necks of Kings and Emperors, enslaves men's Bodies and Estates, as well as
Souls, wheresoever he can domineer: It Is this Prelatical Pride, this Exercising
Dominion, Luke 22.24.
like the Princes of the Gentiles, which is here condemned; and is but a Brat
of Popery, wherever the Changeling is found, and which our Blessed Savior
would banish from amongst his Clergy, Luke 22.25. It shall not be so amongst
you.

But say some, It shall be so though, let Christ and Laws, let God and Man say
what they will; at least, some men would practice it still, which is worse than
saying so; but Rome was not built (nor cannot be destroyed) in one day.

THE Naked Truth.
The Second Part.
THE Bishops and Convocation held at London Anno Dom. 1552. in the Reign of
King Edward VI. whereof many of them were Martyrs at their Death, as well as
(the first) Reformers in their lifetime, in their Articles (now usually
called, The Articles of the Church of England) the 19, 20, 21. I meet with very
remarkable Passages to begin this Discourse.

ARTICLE 19. ECclesia Christi visibilis est coetus fidelium, in quo verbum,
etc. The visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful men, in which
the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly Administered
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same. ( Where note by the way, that a Parish Church may be the
right Church of Christ by this Definition.)

As the Church of Jerusalem, of Alexandria, and of Antioch has Erred, so also
the Church of Rome has Erred; not only in their living, but also in matters of
Faith.

ARTICLE 20. IT is not Lawful for the Church to Ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one place of
Scripture, that it be repugnant to another; wherefore although the Church be a
Witness and Keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to Decree any thing
against the same, so beside the same ought not to enforce any thing to be
believed, for necessity of Salvation.

ARTICLE 21. GEneral Councils may not be gathered together without the
Commandment and Will of Princes, And when they be gathered (forasmuch as they
be an Assembly of men whereof all be not Governed with the Spirit and Word of
God) they may Err, and sometimes have Erred, not only in worldly matters, but
also in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore things Ordained by them as
necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor Authority, unless it may be
declared that they be taken out of the holy Scripture.

Whence it is evident, that by the Articles of the Church of England, men, the
best of them, are subject to Error; which if true, (and very few except the
Pope, and Papists do deny) Then with what Front can any Synod or Assembly of
men Anathematize, and Damn, and by Excommunication deliver to the Devil, all
that obey not their Canons and Decrees, except those Decrees be evident from
the plain and undisputed sense of Holy Scriptures?

For if it be acknowledged, that they may be in the wrong, then others that
they condemn may be in the right, and owned by God, though disowned by frail
men.

The Popes, (whereof their own Writers say) some have been Arrians, and denied
the Divinity of Christ, as Pope Liberius; some Idolaters, as Marcellinus; some
Atheists, as Alexander VI. and Leo X. that said Hem! quantum reddit nobis haec
fabula Christi? and Sextus IV. that built a Male Stew, for Sodomy: some
Conjurers and Socerers, Platina, etc vit. Pap.
as Martin II. Silvester II. John XIX. John XX. John XXI. Silvester III.
Benedict VIII. Sergius IV. Gregory VI. and many others, which see at large in
the lives of the Popes, writ by one of their own Secretaries, Platina.

But I love not to rake in this sink, nor had I mentioned it here, but as
necessary to my design in showing first, all men are Erroneous, none
Infallible: no, not the Pope himself, as the Test. Rhem. Annot. Mat. 23.2. a
Enchir. Cont. cap. 3. de Sum. Pont. b Stella in Lucae cap. 9.
Rhemists vainly vaunt and suppose. And so says a Costerus the Jesuit; and
also b Didacus Stella, Suarez, Stapleton, and many others, and indeed the whole
Fabric of their strange Religion is built on this rotten foundation. Whereas
the Church of Jerusalem, on whom the Holy Ghost descended, changed their
Opinions if not their Canons, concerning the observation of Circumcision, and
the Mosaical Ceremonies: for Acts 15. they required not those Ceremonies: but
Acts 21. they did require them; nay, St. Peter himself would not eat with an
uncircumcised Christian, Gal. 2. if a Jew was present; notwithstanding he was
one that made the Canon to the contrary, Acts 15. Gal. 2. Acts 21.
Acts 15. And St. Paul that reproved his inconstancy, Gal. 2. and would not
Circumcise Titus, yet had Timothy Circumcised, Acts 21.

If the Pillars of the Church warp, can we think any other Canon-makers of the
Church are infallible, so that we must believe all they Decree in spite of our
Teeth, or else by Excommunication -- Take him Devil; and forty days after --
Take him Jailer?

This is, like the Muscovites, that acknowledge no Christians but themselves,
and the Greek Church; or like the Donatists, that confined the Church of Christ
to themselves, at least within the bounds of Africa; which was a larger extent
than was afforded by the Family of Love, Gratian. Did. 16.
and many of our Sectarists: whose Opinions in this kind are derived from Rome,
like that of Pope Agatho l. That commanded that all the Popes Decrees should be
taken for the Oracles of God, and as true, as if pronounced by the Mouth of
God, though contrary to Holy Writ.

Thus the Council of Trent Decreed, Conc. Trident. Sect. 5. Can. 2.
that the Church (that is) themselves, had power to change the Sacraments. And
the Council of Constance did change the Institution of the Lord's Supper, by
Robbing the Laity of the Cup with a non obstante to Christ's command.

But now henceforth (this being premised) I Will keep to our own Canons and
Canon-makers; of which,

Query I. Whether Ecclesiastical Canons that want the Stamp of
Legislative-power (or Acts of Parliament) are necessarily binding and of force
to us English-Protestants?
And this Inquiry was occasioned by a late Discourse or Sermon, Mischief of
Separation.
Preached by the Reverend Doctor Stilling fleet, May 2. 1680. at Guild Hall,
upon that Text Phil. 3.16. Whence he exhorts (in the words of his Text) his
Auditory, to walk by the same Rule or Canon, (...), Mischief of Impositions.
yet Canon is not found in some Greek Copies, (as one has, in answer to the
Doctor, already very ingeniously observed.)

But the accurate Mr. Baxter very pertinently in a Letter to the Doctor, puts
him upon declaring, what is this same Rule or Canon, and who makes it? (which
one would think, should be very necessary, and one of the first things, as a
foundation, on which should be built any pertinent or rational Discourse:) For
if one certain Rule or Canon be not agreed upon, it is impossible to know when
we straggle, and walk disorderly, deviate and err.

And also if Preachers exhort (as they ought) to walk by the same Rule, and yet
do not declare what that same Rule is, and who is the Rule-maker, the
Canon-maker, or Lawmaker, they had as good say nothing at all.

But the wary Doctor waves the answer to Mr. Baxter, and either would not, or
could not, or durst not declare, what is the Canon, and the Rule; and Who are
the Rule, or Lawmakers; very wisely foreseeing that Mr. Baxter had got him upon
the Lock.

For it had been dangerous for a Protestant Doctor to deny the King and
Parliament to be the only Law makers, or Rule, and Canon-makers.

But on the other hand, if the Doctor had declared against the Pastoral-Head
and Synod (who styled themselves the representative-Church, and no man, in pain
of Excommunication, Can. 139, 140, 141. Anno 1603.
to dare to derogate from their Authority) possibly he might fear to come
within dunger and reach of the Bishops Canons, at least he might fear he had in
so doing arrived at the Pillars of Hercules, and the streights, the ne plus
ultra of his Preferments.

But no private-ends ought to bias any man, or stop his mouth from speaking
out and plain such a necessary Truth, for want of adjusting this Query, What is
truth? What is the Canon? the Rule, this same Law we ought all to walk by, that
we may all speak the same things?

For, if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, (an undistinct sound) who shall
prepare himself to the Battle? 1 Cor. 14.8.
1 Cor. 14.8.

If one Clergyman sounds a Retreat, whilst others sound -- Boots and Saddles
-- To Horse, To Horse; Into what confusions will the distracted-people run? and
no wonder,

For certainly this is the great cause of our Divisions, not to be remedied (at
least not till agreed among our selves and) till we walk after the same Rule.

For uniformity in Religion ought to be the endeavor as well as Prayer of all
true Christians, that all of us may, Romans 15.6.
with one mind and one mouth (too) glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6.

But how is this possible, or that Christians should speak the same things, and
walk by the same Rule, when this Rule is not agreed upon, no, not (as
aforesaid) among our selves?

For if the Acts of Parliament (the universally- confessed-Law of England, even
in Religion) be the Rule or Canon, and the King and Parliament the only
Lawmakers or Canon-makers (as who dare deny, (now that the Popes Hierarchical
Head is cut off) without Incurring a Praemunire) and that can, and (being the
only Representatives of the People of England) alone ought to make Acts of
uniformity in Religion, and of all other things especially to have a care of
Religion, and a watchful eye over Religious men; Then how comes the Convocation
to call themselves the Representative-Church of England? and thunder out
Excommunication, which (with them) is eternal Damnation, Can. 139, 140, 141.
An. 1603.
if men die before they recant and publicly repent their wicked Error, in
thinking to the contrary?

And ask any of the Convocation at this day, if they also do not look upon
themselves (and value themselves) as the Representative-Church of England, and
they will not surely deny it; For if they be not that, what are they?

But though those that made the Canons in 1603, might in some sense be called
the Representative-Church of England, and so also were that Synod of London
that made the Canons Anno Dom. 1640. which are commonly called the
Lambeth-Canons, and are Damned already, as I Will demonstrate beyond all
contradiction, if any dare deny so great and evident a Truth.

Yet the Synods and Convocation now adays, have not the Authority they had,
they are scarce the shadows of those Synods, and yet the Authority also of
those Synods in 1603 and 1640, and all they did is now abrogated and taken away
by Acts of Parliament, and their very beings annihilated, and made of no force,
power, strength, nor virtue; as I shall show hereafter; much more, the Synods
and Convocations at this day, who are so far from being the
Representative-Church of England, that the people of England have not the least
vote or suffrage in their Election; they have not any hand, (I had almost said
nor heart neither) in the choice, I am sure nor head in it; I mean, their
advice is not asked about it.

Nor indeed (as I shall prove hereafter) are these Synods fairly Elected by the
votes and suffrages of the Clergy, the Inferior Clergy; and so also are not so
much as the Representatives of the Clergy.

For though the Generality of the people heed them not so much; yet they look
upon the Inferior Clergy to be at their Beck, and still within their Clutches.

And to that purpose, to make them easy and gentle to be ridden, and to bear,
(like Issachar) all the burdens they impose, without daring to kick them off;
they mouth them, before they back them, with an etc. Oath (in the 6th. Can of
1640.) of Canonical obedience; which if they had not a good Swallow would choke
them in the going down.

But (finally my Babe of Grace) forbear,
etc. Cleveland's Poems.
will be to far to Swear;
For it is (to speak in a familiar Style)
A Yorkshire Wea-bit longer than a Mile.
This pretty etc. Oath of obedience Canonical, is in these words, Can. 6. of
1640:

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do approve the Doctrine, and Discipline, or
Government established in the Church of England, as concerning all things
necessary to Salvation: And that I will not endeavor by my self, or any other,
directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which
is so established: nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of
this Church; by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons, etc. as it
stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand, nor yet ever to
subject it to the Usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome: And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and Swear, according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I
do heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the Faith of a Christian. So help me
God in Jesus Christ.

And if any man Beneficed or Dignified in the Church of England, or any other
Ecclesiastical person shall refuse this (etc.) Oath, the Bishop shall give him
a Months time to inform himself; and at the Months end, if he refuse to take
it, he shall be suspended ab officio, and have a second Month granted, and if
then he refuse to take it, he shall be Suspended ab officio and beneficio, and
have a third Month granted him for his better Information; but if at the end of
that Month he refuse to take the Oath abovenamed, he shall be deprived of all
his Ecclesiastical Promotions whatsoever, and execution of his Function which
he holds in the Church of England.

Solomon says, The mercies of the wicked are cruel: Prove. 12.10.
but whether the Imprudence or the Impudence, the ignorance or the
audaciousness be greater, for men at this day to dare to put those Canons in
execution, and to Quote them, and give them in charge, as Rules, and Canons,
and Laws to the present Clergy, when they are condemned by 17 Car. 1.11. and
also by 13 Car. 2.12. Query, What Penalty they do incur that dare set up Laws
in Defiance of the Statutes of this Realm, to enthral the Kings Liege People?

For both Laity and Clergy are in a fine Dilemma at this wicked rate.

Since that whosoever denies the King and Parliament to be the only
Legislators, or affirms that the ancient Hierarchy of the Pope is yet in being,
or that any other have power to make Laws in this Realm, contrary and Repugnant
to the Kings Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, and Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, shall be punished etc. on the one hand. (For what skills it, to cut off
the Popes Prelatical, Hierarchical, or Pastoral head, and set up (with a
new-name) another in the Room of it, whether Presbyterian, Fifth-monarchy,
Prelatical, or any other Bigots? this is to cut off Hydra's head, when another
as bad and alike (as two Twins) starts up in the Room of it.)

But, on the other hand, if either Clergy or Laity derogate from Holy Synod,
and do not acknowledge it to be the Representative-Church of England, Can. 139,
140, 141. Anno 1603.
and that dare affirm, that the Government of the Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest, or etc. is Antichristian, or
contrary to the word of God, shall be Excommunicated, never to be absolved,
until they repent, and publicly revoke this wicked Error.

I know some that have as good a Swallow us the best Latitudinarian of them
all; Can. 7. 1603.
but of all cornute things, they most dread a Dilemma, for though you escape
one horn, you are caught and tossed upon the other.

To affirm the Pope or ( any thing like the Conclave) any other Pastoral head
to be the Supreme head and Governor of the Church, is to incur a Praemunire,
by denying the Kings Supremacy, as also by denying the King and Parliament to
be the only Legislators; (And there is not a Protestant in England (if a
Layman) that dares, or does deny the Kings Supremacy, and that the King and
Parliament are the only Legislators, Lawmakers, or Canon-makers:)

Nay, the Laymen are not much afraid to say, that the Government of the Church
by Archbishops etc. or and Reliquos, (whether Commissaries, Officials,
Archdeacons, Sumners or Apparitors, Surrogates, Registers, deputy Registers,
Canons, Petty canons, Prebends, Residentiaries, Non-Residentiaries, Chapters,
Chanters, Precenters, Rural-Deans, Sub-Deans, Vicar-Generals, Lay chancellors,
etc. (which last are a kind of Lay Elders, which we laugh at in the
Presbyterians) are not sound, nor (in the least) mentioned in the word of God,
although they are threatened with Excommunication; which (in their sense) is
eternal damnation, (until they recant) (publicly;) and within 40 days (after
Excommunication) the Gaol.

But the Clergy men (poor Souls) they are hampered with an etc. Oath of
Canonical obedience; dare not say any thing in defiance of that etc. Oath,
though it be condemned (which they honest men do not know, at least, very few
of them) by Act of Parliament: namely by the 13 Car. 2.12. as aforesaid.

The Statute 25 Hen. 8.19. condemns the Popes Supremacy, and all Hierarchy and
Canons which were prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative Royal, 25 H. 8.19.
and to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and gives Power and Authority to
the King ( Hen. 8.) to nominate and assign at his pleasure thirty two Persons
of his Subjects, whereof sixteen to be of the Clergy, and sixteen of the
Temporality ( Some Lay Elders then in those times) of the upper and nether
House of the Parliament, to view, search, and examine the Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial and Synodal heretofore made, and such
as they judged worthy to be continued, should from thenceforth be kept and
obeyed.

But I never heard that these Commissioners did ever do any thing to the
purpose.

Yet this Power of granting Commissions and Authority of this nature, was by 1
Eliz. 1. for ever united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and
upon this Statute and foundation was built the Star Chamber and
High-Commission-Court, and the Authority of all Canon-makers Synodical.

But down came the Fabric by repealing 1. Eliz. 1. in 17 Car. 1.11. and also
in and by 13 Car. 2.12.

By which last Statute that unreasonable Oath also ex Officio, (by virtue
whereof the Spiritual Courts if a man had lain with a Wench, or a Wife had
played foul play, if examined by every little Surrogate and Register, must
either be their own accusers, or by Perjury damn themselves) was abrogated also
and taken away, together with that same choking etc. Oath, and for company all
the Fraternity thereof, and Fellow canons of 1640 and Provision made by
striking at the foundation 1 Eliz. 1. (on which their High Commission Courts
were built) that no more Commissions be granted by his Majesty for the future;
but the Spiritual-Courts by that Statute of 13 Car. 2.12. just in statu quo,
wherein they were 1639.

Now, will it be worth the while to consider what State they were in 1639? no
great, I Will warrant, if their Basis on which their Star Chamber and High
Commission-Court were built, be taken away.

For the said Statute of 13 Car. 2.12. does not only provide against the Canons
made in the year 1640. but also against any other Ecclesiastical Laws not
formerly confirmed, allowed or Enacted by Parliament (which the Canons of 1603.
never were) or by the established Laws of the Land as they stood in the year of
our Lord 1639.

So that it is not so difficult to get out of this Labyrinth that does so
puzzle many men, as some do imagine.

For all Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions till the Statutes of Hen. 8. to the
contrary were derived from the Pope as Supreme Head of the Church: This Head
being beheaded, the Supremacy was vested in the Crown, and for Rules and Canons
to walk by, King Hen. 8. was empowered by the Statute aforesaid to nominate 32.
Commissioners, one Moiety Lay, and the other Clergy: yet they did nothing,
(perhaps for that reason.)

But 1 Ed. 6.2. This great Flower of the Crown is taken care for, and not for
ornament only, but for weightier reasons it is Enacted, that all Processes
Ecclesiastical, Summons, Citations, etc. be from the first day of July then
next following, made in the name and with the Style of the King as it in Writs
original or Judicial at the Common Law; and the Test thereof in the name of the
Archbishop, or Bishop, or other having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who has
the Commission and grant of the Authority Ecclesiastical immediately from the
Kings Highness, and that his Commissary, Official or Substitute exercising
Jurisdiction under him shall put his name in the Citation or Process after the
Test.

So that if there be any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, distinct from
his Majesty's Lay-Courts, they must be such as acknowledge his Majesty's
Supremacy above their Hierarchy, and as a Testimony thereof all their Processes
Ecclesiastical, Citations, Summons, etc. ought to be made in the name and with
the Style of the King, as it is in Writs original and judicial at the Common
law: and also the Kings Arms Engraven in the Seal of their Spirital Court.

Oh! but this would be to buckle and stoop, and thrust the Hierarchy and holy
Pastoral Head under a Lay-girdle (for though the Pope be exiled this Realm, it
is hard to exile the Hierarchical Spirit, witness the Fifth-Monarchy men,
Presbyterians, and you know who) they will keep no Courts at all first; no; will
they not? Then who cares? who are the Losers? If they go thereto, and be so
pettish.

And it is a proper Query, what penalty they have and do incur by keeping their
Spiritual Courts otherwise (which were first founded upon the Popes Title, and
since that determination) now vested in his Majesty, as all other Courts (good
reason and Law too) and all their original and judicial Processes ought to be
in his Majesty's name, and under the Seal of his Majesty, as a token of their
due Homage, by striking Sail, and lowering their old rotten, over-worn Top Sayls
to the Kings-Flag.

It Is true, the said Statute of 1 Edw. 1.2. is repealed by 1 Mar. 2. but I care
not for that, for it is revived again by Repealing 1 Mar. 2. in the Statute 1
Jac. 25.

And it is well worthy our observation what (1 Mar. 2.) The Bishops and Clergy
of the Province of Canterbury (in their Convocation assembled) do acknowledge
and confess in their Supplication to their Majesty's ( Philip and Mary) in
these very words: Insuper Majestatibus vestris supplicamus pro sua Pietate
efficere dignentur ut ea quae ad Jurisdictionem nostram and Libertatem
Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine quibus debitum nostri Pastoralis officii and
curae animarum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, nobis superiorum temporum
injuria ablata restituantur, and ea nobis, and Ecclesiae perpetuo illaesa and
salva permaneant; and ut omnes leges, quae hanc nostram Jurisdictionen and
libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quovis modo impediunt, abrogentur, etc.
(that is) Moreover we do in all humility Petition your Majesty's, That out of
your great Piety you would vouchsafe to make such Provision, That those things
which belong to our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Liberties (without which we
cannot duly discharge that Pastoral Office and cure of Souls committed to our
Care) and taken from us lately by the Iniquity of the Times, may be again
restored to us, so that they may for ever remain inviolate and safely secured,
and assured to us and the Church; And that all the Laws (which have taken away,
or do any ways hinder our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Liberties) may be
made null and void.

Here Is ado and a whining for their dear Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
Liberties, which (the Convocation themselves being Judges) were at that time
taken from them and abrogated; and if since that time they have not caught it
again, it is to be feared, it is desperate now, and never to be retrieved.

But Queen Elizabeth was enabled and empowered ('it is the words of the Statute)
to retrieve their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by granting them Commissions to
that purpose; of which large Power granted by Parliament, they made such large
use, as is complained in 17 Car. 1.11. (at large;) against Magna Carta, etc.
(which I am loath to repeat, but would willingly have it lie buried, and never
rise up in Judgment against any Successors as seem to be of the same sanguine
complexion,) that 13 Car. 2.12. damns all such Commissions for ever, and that
his Majesty nor his Successors shall never grant them any more; Repealing 1
Eliz. 1. their great Foundation. So that we are come at length to an easy
Resolution of the Query.

For if the Spiritual Courts be asked the question, By what Authority they do
these things, and who gave them this authority? Whether God or man?

Not God (for certain;) because there is not the least Specimen of Chancellors,
Registers, Sumners, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates, Notaries, Surrogates,
etc. or any ejusdem farinae in Holy Writ.

Nor from Man; because his Majesty has by Statute Enacted never to empower them
with any more Commissions to the worlds end.

But if they pretend they have it ab origin, (as was their original) from that
old Hierarchy of the Pope that founded them, they incur a Praemunire; (the
greatest of punishments on this side death) nay, any might kill a man attainted
in Praemunire without being prosecuted as an Homicide, till Eliz. 5.1. took
away that severity; but at this day they forfeit goods and liberty, but not
life.

So that if the Question (I say) be put to them concerning their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and Spiritual Courts (as in another case it was put by our Blessed
Savior to the Pharisees) Is it from Heaven or from men?

I fear all their Learned Doctors of their Canon Law must answer, as the
Pharisees did, We cannot tell.

And if so, I think, they have brought their Hogs to a fine Market; if after
all this Cry, there appear to be so little Wool: who will give five hundred
pounds for a Chancellors-place, and as much or more for a Registers-place?

And though the Clergy or others might (by the Kings Commission) make Laws and
Canons while 1 Eliz. 1. was in force, and which lasted all her (and King James
his) Reign, and till 17 Car. 1. yet then the branch of that Statute of 1 Eliz.
1. being taken away, and also Repealed by his present Majesty 13 Car. 2.12.
till which time the Canons in 1603 and 1640. were in force, but now that their
Basis is taken away, (that branch 1 Eliz. 1.) I cannot discern where their
Authority lies, (more than in the said days of Queen Mary, when they confessed
they had none.)

But this I do not peremptorily assert, but leave it to the consideration of
men of greater abilities, reading and leisure; than my necessary Diversions and
constant Employs will at present admit.

And I wish with all my heart (if wishes would do) that most of the Canons of
1603. and also some of 1640. were of more Authority than indeed they are.

And if the Reader knew me, he would also know it is my Interest (which can
never Lie) to have them and the Clergy and the Hierarchy too of greater and
more justifiable Authority, than they have at present.

Yet nevertheless, as I have Christened this my Discourse in the Title Page,
The Naked Truth, it shall never be said, (whatever be the Consequence) that it
derogates from the name.

I have no Picque, no Design, no Interest against Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
but on the contrary, I have one of my own; where my Predecessors have exercised
as much Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (though not so often, it being but a
little one) as any Bishop in England; and therefore if the Naked Truth did not
silence Interest, I would not enlarge one Syllable more.

And I will further add, that the first Reformers (whereof many of them were
Martyrs) do seem to be so divinely Inspired in composing the 39 Articles of the
Church of England (that is, of the Doctrine of the Church of England,) that
there is scarce one Fanatic in England so Foppish as to differ or deny; so
evenly have they cut a hair betwixt the Remonstrant and Anti-remonstrant, and
other diversity of opinions, that though they differ toto Coelo from one
another, yet they all concenter and agree in those 39 Articles of the Church of
England.

But when the said Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. gave power to the Queen and her
Successors to set up a High Commission Court, They made work, (I Will promise
you,) woeful work sometimes, and about trifles too.

So that I must say of them, and the Canons of 1603 and 1640. as is usually
said of a great Wit: viz. Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae.

And this will appear if we further consider, that even those men of the
Hierarchy that most vaunt those Canons and Impose them upon others, Though a
burden too heavy to be born, yet they themselves will not touch them with one
of their Fingers, when thwarting their Interest; of which, take a few
Instances, that first occur and come into my mind.

Who regards or observes Can. 2.4.5.7.9.11. and 14. of 1640?

For are all Socinian-Books, and also those of Brownists, Separatists,
Anabaptists, Familists, and other Sects burnt? Are none kept, bought nor sold,
as Can. 2. and 4. does enjoin?

Is the Communion Table every where placed Altar-wise, and Railed in, as
recommended Can. 7?

Indeed the 6th. Canon with the etc. Oath, is too much kept, and a shame it
should be suffered (indeed) to be Imposed upon the Consciences of the Clergy,
being disallowed by Act of Parliament, as aforesaid.

But pitiful is the case of young Clergymen especially if they be put to the
sad choice, either to swallow the Oath of Canonical obedience, with the etc.
to-boot and into the bargain, or else starve for want of Institution to a
Living.

Are all Conventiclers, Separatists, and members of gathered-Churches
Excommunicated, and every three Months declared to be such, to put the Zealots
in mind to take out a Writ de excommunicato capiendo against them, and put them
all in Gaol? And who will lay out money to build Gaols enough to hold them all?
Can. 9. and 11. and Can. 65. 1603? who reads Prayers upon the Inauguration-day
of King Charles 2. as enjoined Can. 2? who furnishes all the Parishes with two
Books of Common Prayers compiled for that purpose, as decreed Can. 2?

Who does upon every Eve of the Festivals, and Saints days in the year, as well
as upon all Holy Days read Prayers publicly; or if they do a little in some
places in the Morning, how few in the Afternoons, and yet enjoined Can. 14?

How many Spiritual Courts do take care to put into the Condition of the Bonds
of Security given by the Party to be Married by License,

That the Parties or one of them have or has been a Month commorant in the
said Jurisdiction, immediately before the said License granted? look the
Condition of their Printed Bonds, there is not a word of it; but catch, that
catch may; they know among themselves the weakness of their Canons, and
therefore every one makes his own Market and the best he can of them, yet this
is decreed Can. 16. 1640.

Who can make the States of Venice, Holland, Genoa, Switzerland, etc. believe
that the most High and Sacred order of Kings ( if taken in opposition to
Aristocracy, and other modes of Government) is of Divine-Right, being the
Ordinance of God himself, founded in the Prime Laws of Nature and clearly
established by express Text both of the Old and New Testament; as is asserted
Can. 1. of 1640?

Did ever any Protestant or Popish Divines assert any such thing, before this
Synod decreed it?

Was not the first Government by Moses the Priest changed by God's express
Command into an Aristocracy? Did not Moses complain to God for redress, Number.
11.11, 12.14.
as unable to bear the burden of Government himself alone? because it was too
heavy for him, and made him weary of his life.

Wherefore the Lord changed the Government into a kind of Aristocracy, or King
and Parliament (if you will) and took the Spirit (of Government) that was upon
Moses and gave it unto the seventy Elders. Verse. 16, 17.


That a mixt-Monarchy is the best Government, is the opinion of most: That the
English-Constitution of Monarchy is the best kind of Government (and one King)
and not seven Kings, (as of old) and Established upon the Divine positive Laws
of the Land on which it was first founded and on which it stands the most
steddily; and that it is not contrary to Holy Writ; is not only my opinion but
the opinion (I think) of all Englishmen; nay, almost of all the world, that
envy our happiness.

Every thing stands surest on its own bottom; but when men, to mount it higher,
will make it stand upon imaginary Crotches and weak props, it is the way to
ruin.

The Holy Scriptures say expressly, that there is no power but of God, whether
the Monarchy of Poland, or the Aristocracy of Venice, Genoa, etc. they are all
of God, and the Powers that be, are ordained of God, one as well as another and
as much as another.

It Is well the King and Parliament condemned these Canons as soon almost as
born; For if it once had been an allowed and an avowed Doctrine of the Church
of England, that Monarchy (in opposition to Aristocracy) is of Divine-Right,
founded in the Prime-Laws of nature, and by express Texts both of the Old and
New Testament; (and yet name not one such Text) Then all the States of Europe
must by our Doctrine be condemned as held jure Diabolico, contrary to Divine
Right, and the Prime-Laws of Nature, and contrary to express Texts both of the
Old and New Testaments: and if so, what assurance could they have in affiances
and Leagues with a People that in their public Doctrines condemn them in their
very Constitutions and Foundations, as contrary to God, Nature, and holy
Scripture?

But into what follies and extravagancies will not men run when blinded with
flattery and Sycophantry? and how dizzy-crown'd are some men when they are
climbing or have climbed too high, till their Brains are Turn-sick? This it is
to be (...), Busis in other men's Dioceses, and to meddle with things above our
understanding, at least above our Cognizance.

The wringing of the Nose brings forth blood, and straining the strings too
high, breaks them, at least, spoils the Music, and endangers all: such
Politicians as prefer Flattery before Truth, and things Pleasing before things
Profitable do never bring good to themselves nor others in Conclusion, for
magna est veritas and praevalebit. At long run, Truth is always strongest.

Thus you see how needful it is, not only to count Moneys (but opinions too and
Doctrines) after our Spiritual Fathers.

Then for the Canons of 1603.

Who does always bid the Prayers before Sermon as Can. 55?

How is the Canon of 88. observed, Prohibiting the profaning of Churches, when
I could instance that without molestation, some at this day are made Courts of
guard for Soldiers, some are made Shops of, many lie desolate?

Who mind Can. 109. that prohibits Common-Swearers, Common-Drunkards, notorious
Whoremasters and Whores, etc. from the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper?
Do not even Bishops hear men Swear a thousand Oaths in their hearing, and
either do not or dare not use any discipline against them; and yet they pretend
their great business is discipline, and if they be not good at that, what are
they good for more than the Inferior Clergy, that bear the burden and sweat of
the day?

The 112. enjoins Ministers and Churchwardens to present every one of their
Parish that took not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (being 17 years of age,
of either Sex) at Easter last; Is this done? or if it be, what comes of it?
more than to help the Registers to a little money sometimes, and in the Interim
brings all the Parish about the ears of the Minister and Churchwardens?

The 119. commands all Church Wardens to make a true Presentment of all and
every the Articles given them in charge, and to which they are Sworn, and not
perfunctorily, and for form sake only: But let but the Churchwardens give the
Registers their money, and subscribe omnia been; though all be amiss, yet all
is healed up with two or three shillings.

The 120th. Canon decrees that all Citations of quorum nomina should be sent
out subscribed by the Judge or Surrogate of the Court, and not only by the
Register, But who observes it?

The 135. and 136. enjoins a Table of Fees to be hung up in the place where the
Ecclesiastical Courts are kept, that every one may at his pleasure take a Copy,
but works of darkness hate the light.

The Statute enjoins upon great penalty, that they shall not take above 6 d.
for any Letters of Administration or Probate, where the Goods of the Deceased
amount not to 5 l. But they will have 17 s. 10 d. though the Goods come not to
40 s. and 18 s. 2 d. where the Goods amount to above 40 l. And for engrossing
the Inventory, and one Story or other, they will make the Administrator pay at
the least 17 s. or 18 s. (when the Goods come not to 40 s.) And when the Goods
come to above 40 l. they never take less than six and twenty shillings,
sometimes 30 s. sometimes 40 s. sometimes 50 s. sometimes more, as I can
instance in very many particulars.

And if a poor man Indict them upon the Statute, they have so many Holes to
ereep out as, and great friends (that go snips with them perhaps) that little
good is to be done upon them, as well as little good by them.

But I confess that the Canons of 1603. and 1640. stand upon weak Foundations,
for the reasons aforesaid, in comparison of those Canons made by the Four first
General Councils (wherein all consent) and also all other Canons Provincial and
Synodical made before 25 Hen. 8. are all by the 19. of 25 Hen. 8. confirmed, so
that they be not contrary and repugnant to the Laws of this Realm.

Yet in the 15th and 16th Canon of the first General Council of Nice, it is
provided, that no Bishop shall remove from one Bishopric to another that is
fatter and better; nor that any Presbyter remove from one Benefice to another,
because the great Tithes fill a greater Barn.

(By virtue whereof Eusebius Pamphilius (that writ the Ecclesiastical History)
refused to remove from the little Bishopric of Caesarea, to be the great
Bishop of Constantinople (proffered to him by the Emperor Constantine the
Great) (But Constantinople, in those days, no, nor yet Rome, had an Arch
Bishop, that name was not yet in Fashion.) And for this modesty of Eusebius,
(as one that was Proof against Pride and filthy lucre,) Constantine declared he
was fit to be Bishop of the whole world.)

But I must reclaim my Pen, for if I go on in instances of this nature and at
this rate, what will become of me, if some men happen to discover who I am, and
see through my Concealment? for it is a known adage of old, confirmed by every
man's daily experience, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit; I know, a Tiger
is not more enraged nor more revengeful, than a Proud and Covetous man when he
is told those plain Truths that gaul him; especially if he be a man of much
Power and little Grace.

Not a word more, therefore ( at present especially;) and the rather because
the subject of my Discourse will lead me to name some honest Canons hereafter
that will cut some men to the very heart, that are mightily for the Canon Law,
and yet practice it not in any thing that thwarts their Pride and avarice.

But I shall do it in hopes that those Canons may do some good upon them, for
really I believe, some of these imposers of Canons upon others, never heard of
some that I shall name by and by, for all their vaunting of Canons, Canons;
it is probable they have plied their Guns and such Canons, more than plied their
Books, or else they could not be so ignorant, as I perceive some of them are,
upon Discourse.

But I cannot fully handle this Argument of the Canons, except I enquire in the
second place,

What kind of Canons were in use in the Apostles days, and Primitive times,
and who the first Inventers or Founders of Canons?
GAnon is the Greek word for a Carpenters-Rule, it is a word of Architecture:
signifying the Rule, that directs men in building.

Canon: as in Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16. and in several other places: Canons
therefore are nothing else but Ecclesiastical Rules or Bylaws made by the
Church for its better edification.

The first Synod (say some) or rather private Conventicle of Christians after
our Blessed Saviors Resurrection, we read of Acts 1. Synod 1. Acts 1.
and they met about the choice of an Apostle to succeed Judas and take his
place, St. Peter being the Prolocutor, when the whole number of names was 120.

To these Brethren St. Peter makes a Speech, and (not he, but) they (...),
Statuerunt, made a Statute or a Canon, public and totius Collegii suffragiis,
the most Votes carried it.

The second was called Acts 9. to make new Officers in the Church, Synod 2.
called Overseers for the poor, or Deacons; which last word in the Original
only signifies Your humble Servant; or a ready and vigilant Minister.

Therefore sometimes the Magistrates are called Deacons, Romans 13.4.

Sometimes women are so called, Romans 16.1. Sometimes St. Paul is called a
Deacon, Col. 1.23.25. 2 Cor. 2.6. and so is Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.6. Sometimes all
Believers are called Deacons by Christ himself, John 12.26.

And at this meeting the Principal Electors that chose these seven Deacons,
were the People, the multitude of Disciples, Acts 6.2, 5. when they were
pleased, Then they (the multitude) chose Stephen.

The third was a Conventicle of the believers of Jerusalem: Synod. 3.
And from this of all other in Holy Writ all the Councils in after Ages derive
their Authority, as well as Platform.

For this was the first that made Canons or Decrees to bind the absent; but
what Burdens or obligations? only a very few and very easy, and under no
penalty upon those that disobeyed; yet in this Council where not only the holy
Apostles, but the Holy Ghost was present and president, yet for all that, those
few and harmless Canons there made, were not (like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians) unalterable and irrefragable.

For at the next Council held in the same Town, and by the same men, St. James
and the rest of the Presbyters, Acts 21.18. were of another opinion (as
aforesaid) concerning the observation of Mosaical Ceremonies, particularly
Circumcision.

But the Canons of the same third Synod, we find in Acts 15.28, 29. only two
verses; Acts 15.28, 29.
not a Book of Canons; and those Canons (or rather one single Canon,) short,
full, modest and charitable; namely, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to
us, to lay upon you no greater burden (they were not wanton in their
Impositions, but how tender, and loath to load men) than these necessary (not
trivial) things; That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood,
and from things strangled, and from Fornication; from which, if ye keep your
selves, ye shall do well; Fare ye well.

Ye shall do well, fare ye well; why? that is well said, and honestly, and
Christian like.

That Is a great deal better and more like good Christians than to conclude
their Canons with Curses and Anathema's, and take them Satan; but modestly and
piously, ( not the language of Hectors) but the language of the Holy Ghost; ye
shall do well, Fare ye well.

But that is not all the Remarks I make upon this Synod, and Canon; it begins,
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us --

In which Style run all the Canons and Decrees of Councils, ever since, but how
Apish? how mimical? how false many times? The Holy Ghost did indeed in the
Primitives times come frequently not only upon the Apostles, but upon every
Christian in the gifts of Miracles, Tongues, etc. that they might well say,
(and truly too) It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us.

But for men that are only Apes, nay, that cannot so much as show any signs of
the Holy Ghost, (than as it is brought from Rome, etc. in a Cloak-bag) for them
to Preface at the Primitive Rate -- It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us
-- Oh Confidence and Forehead!

This third Synod was Celebrated at Jerusalem about fourteen years after our
Saviors Resurrection, in the 4th Claudii Imp. Caesaris.

There (when St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Barnabas, and St. James had made their
Speeches) The people were very well pleased, Acts 15.22.

Had the Apostles the gifts of the Holy Ghost? so had the people; all the
Assembly, Acts 2.1, 2, 7, 8. Did the Holy Ghost descend upon the Apostles? so
did he upon all the people, Acts 2.38, 39. upon all that repented and were
Baptized: were the Apostles filled with the Holy Ghost? so was all the
Assembly, Acts 4.31. so was Stephen before he was chosen Deacon, Acts 6.5. so
at Samaria all believers received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.14, 15, 16, 17 nay,
the Holy Ghost fell upon the whole Auditory, Acts 10.44. And that there should
be no mistake, St. Peter (you must know it was before he was Pope) he confesses
there was no difference, nor Preference, nor Prelacy; for like Priest, like
People, The people have received the Holy Ghost as well as we.

The Disciples were filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.52. so also the
Gentiles, Acts 15.8. and the Holy Ghost made no difference, verse. 9. no, no,
It Is Pride and ambition that makes the difference, The Holy Ghost in his gifts
made none; in Temporal affairs there must be a difference, but to Spiritual
gifts the poor are entitled as much as the Rich.

A Deacon, a Presbyter or Priest are names wherewith the Apostles and Primitive
Christians were well acquainted; but Arch Deacon and Arch Priest, etc. are but
modern coin, and did not pass current in the Primitive times of Christianity.

Yet if the ambitions of men did not extend nor aim at any higher reach, than
to vye with, or out vye their equals, contemporaries, or betters, it is still
but humane ambition and pardonable.

But most of the Councils whether Ecumenical, Provincial, or Synodical since
the Primitive times have, (ever since the Gifts extraordinary of the Holy Ghost
left the Church) vy'd with the Apostles for the Infallible Spirit in their
Assemblies, not an ace less would they go.

Nay, (which is an ambition not less groundless than vain and ridiculous) they
would outvy the Apostles in Monopolizing the infallible Spirit to themselves
alone (the Clergy, forsooth.)

Whereas all the people, all the brethren (as aforesaid) received the Holy
Ghost as well as the Apostles; and they were consulted, and their advice asked
in framing Canons as aforesaid.

It being meet, that they that were obliged should have a hand, and a heart, a
vote and a consent (at least by their Representatives) in those Decrees that
obliged them to obedience.

But no such matter, no: for when the French or Spanish faction prevails in the
Conclave, when an Arrian Emper or makes an Arrian Council and consequently an
Arrian Creed as at Ariminum: and when an Homousian Emperor makes an Athanasian,
as in the first General Council of Nice; when an Idolatrous Empress makes
Canons for worshipping of Images, Harangu'd to it by some of her favorite
Priests, as in the second Council of Nice; when Simony, Flattery, Hypocrisy or
Sorcery creates a Pope, and a thousand Fopperies, Partialities and Interest of
Princes swayes in the Conclave of Cardinals; yet none of them all will bate a
Tittle of the old Preface to their Canons -- namely -- It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us.

Constantine (the great) was no Arrian, nor yet Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea
(before praised) whatever some men imagine, but without dispute he made the
greatest part of the Creed for the whole Council of Nice.

As may be seen at large in his Epistle to the people of his own Diocese;
Theod. lib. 1. c. 12.
which the great Constantine very well approved of.

But the Council of Nice had a hand in altering it a little, and made some
little addition of the word Homousios or Consubstantial (which neither Eusebius
nor any Orthodox man does gainsay) nevertheless that un scriptural word,
(though according to the sense of Scripture) made the greatest Schism in the
Church that ever was, and was (at last) the great cause of the Turks Conquests
and Triumphs over Christendom; The Arrians (which once was the Major part of
Christendom) choosing rather to turn Turks, (that owned, and to this day own the
Lord Jesus Christ to be the great Prophet of God, and with whom they met with
fairer quarters than amongst some of the Orthodox; so fatal has it been to
Christendom to impose unscriptural words upon men's Consciences under the Title
of the Infallible Spirit and Holy Ghost, in mere disputable points, that will
endure Contest to the worlds end.)

As if God and our Lord Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost, ( The Holy Trinity)
did condemn all men, as fast as one man condemns another; and merely too,
because they cannot see to split a hair (as few men of all mankind are so
quick-sighted) betwixt Homousion and Homoiousion; or, betwixt one substance
with the Father, and alike substance with the Father.

I Will only add the words of Eusebius, Theod. l. 1. c. 12.
namely, Therein (in the said first Council of Nice) It was Prohibited that any
man should make use of any Terms which the Custom of the Scriptures do not
allow; by which Phrases (or Terms) have happened all these Revels and Disorders
wherewith the Church is thus disturbed.

Observe how agreeable that Note of Eusebius is to that Divine 20th. Article of
the Church of England, set down at length in the beginning of this Discourse.

And how careful our first Reformers were, and tender of laying
Stumbling Blocks before the weak; not delighting to make them fall in hopes to
get a top of them, or get some booty from them, much less did they cram
unscriptural Articles, Canons, and Creeds down men's throats, and ram them down
with a Curse, an Anathema, or Excommunication; However no etc. Creeds and
Canons are so ramm'd down.

Again, by what Authority do they lay Injunctions and Burdens, Canons and
Decrees on all mankind that are Christians?

Whilst the Roman-Emperour had the universal Monarchy, there might be General
Councils, to whom he gave Command to sit, approved or disproved their Acts, and
gave life and vigor to their Canons when Enacted: But now it is next to
Impossible (now that both Emperor and Pope have such a Precarious sway) that
there should be an Ecumenical Council, the Old House is too much broken to
pieces and divided against it self.

Besides, if there were a General-Council, what Tokens are upon them of the
Holy Ghost, more than upon a Parliament, who pretend not to be Bigots, nor to
have the people Bigoted, but ruled by God, according to the Laws of the Land
they live in, in all quietness, godliness and honesty; and in Righteousness and
Holiness, according to the Divine Laws of the Land Men live in?

For if once Men come to dispute Authority, and the wisdom of the Laws and
Lawmakers, the next step is Confusion and Rebellion; nor did, or can any
Government under Heaven subsist, when they are not able to avow and execute
their Laws against all Gainsayers.

This, notwithstanding, does not urge that Governors, if wise, should be
wanton in Power, and lay unnecessary Burdens upon their people, ( though weak)
for they are the least able to bear; and if the Laws or Canons they impose be
nothing but some necessary things, (as did the said Synod of Jerusalem) there
are none but obstinate and querulous persons that will refuse Obedience; and
such must be made to know themselves, or else the Government sits very
unsteady, as being precarious, (the condition of Supplicants, not of such as
bear Sway and Authority.)

And one would wonder that those that have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (if now
there be any such thing) should desire to hold it, at this Precarious Rate they
do; (I say not this, that I grudge any Power they have, but wish them more.)

But Power (though fading) is so pleasant to some Men, that they are loath to
part with it, or, (like frank Gamesters) venture it for a better, and as much
more; rather like drowning Men, they lay hold of that that does but help to
sink, and drown them in conclusion.

And is it not worth the greatest care to give relief in this Extremity; or set
the Church, (that is) the Kingdom to rights, which has gone so long lame and
limping on the right side?

But how shall this be done, (there is the skill) or who shall do it? The Synod
sure, that call themselves the Representative Church of England, in pain of
Anathema to all that dare deny.

Ay, but the Laity, the Laity have got generally an odd opinion, to see with
their own Eyes, and not by Spectacles, especially not Spectacles of Clergy
make; which of old they were so long used to, they thought it spoiled their
eyesight; and so being kept blind, the Clergy led them by the nose, whilst the
ignorant Laity pinned their Faith upon the Clergy-mans sleeve; and Ignorance
was the Mother of their Devotion.

Besides, The naked Truth is uniform, but Canons and Decrees of Clergymen do so
differ and clash one with another, that it is impossible they should all be
truth; Truth which never yet was patcht and Pye-bal'd, or wore a Party-colored
Coat.

But how has one Council condemned and cursed another to the pit of Hell? How
usual for one Pope to dig up the Carcass of his immediate Predecessor, and
either hang him up ( in Effigy at least) or throw his dead Body (after it has
been sufficiently abused) (at farewell) into Tyber?

Again, why do Clergy men only Represent in Council, and not all the Brethren
(the Laity) as of old? How come Synod men to be so lickt, that all others
compared to them, are but an ugly shapeless Lump of deformity? Or, how come
they, the Clergy, to be the Representative Church of England, (when met in
Synod) though the Lay People never gave any Votes in their Election, nor so
much as any of their Advices consulted, about the choosing those Members of the
Convocation? And if not, how come they obliged to obey their Decrees and
Canons, when they never gave them their Suffrages and consent?

Though the Clergy choose some of them, (the Nether-house) for so they
distinguish ( Parliament like) yet the Upper house is made up of Bishops, and
the Richer Dignitaries, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. which make up by far the
major part; the Inferior Clergy of the Kingdom have no Vote in their Election,
and yet must be concluded by them, their Canons and Decrees, as if they really
had given their Suffrages to their Election, and the Constituting of the Synod,
for it is all but umbrage.

As for Example; In the Diocese of London, there are Five Arch-deaconries;
namely, the Arch-deaconries of London, Essex, Middlesex, Colchester, and
Hartford.

In each of these Arch-deaconries, Two of their Inferior Clergy are chosen
Procurators for the ensuing Synod, (Elected de novo as often as there is a new
Parliament chosen.)

And these Ten (one would think) should be a very fine balance to the
Hierarchy and Richer Dignitaries, (the Bishop, Dean, Five Archdeacons, the
Chapter, etc.) and almost, but not altogether able to turn the Scales.

But, (I thank you) when it comes to, there is no such matter; for it is five to
one that not one of those Synod men (which with such ado are Elected) shall sit.

For the Bishop, out of these Ten, chooses and culls out Two, and sends the rest
home again, as if they never had been chosen; And how then should these Synod
men be called properly (and in pain of Damnation so owned) for the
Representative Church of England, since they are not at all Elected by the
Laity, nor any of the Vpper-house chosen by the Clergy; and of the Nether
house, but Two of Ten (that are chosen) are suffered to sit?

Besides, that said Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. on which the Convocation did once
flourish, being now withered and made of no effect, what does a Convocation
signify (all these things considered together) toward a Representative Church
of England, and to lay Burdens and Impositions (necessary or unnecessary) upon
the Natives, without his Majesty's Commission?

Besides, since 1 Eliz. 1. is repealed, (whereby the High-Commission-Court had
so great Power, as (by virtue of that Statute) to dispense with the said
Statute of 1 Edw. 6.2.) after it was revived by 1 Jacob. 25. all the Reign of
King James, and part of Car. 1. so that they never did admit the King's Arms
into the Seal of the Court, nor yet vouchsafe to send Process and Citations,
etc. in any other Name, ( no not the Kings) but their own only, is to be
attributed to the dreadful awe in which Nobles, Lawyers, Gentry, and Commonalty
were kept, by the Terrors of a Star Chamber, and High Commission-Court.

Which being now Dissolved, Quere, whether they must not be accountable for the
neglect of that Statute of 1 Edw. 6.2. whenever Authority shall reckon with
them? (in good time.) But in other cases it is said, -- Forbearance is no
Acquittance.

These Ecumenical, Provincial, Synodical, Classical, etc. Assemblies and
Synods, with their Directories and Impositions, Canons, and Decrees, have made
a great deal of noise and bub-bub in the World: Theod. lib. 1. c. 6.
which brings to my mind that passage of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia (an
Arrian) to the Lord Paulinus Bishop of Tyrus, -- namely, -- Some approved one
Party, some another. The Actions of both parts looked not only like a Tragedy,
but also deserved much weeping and lamentation. The case was not now as in
former times; for they were not Foreign Enemies that took Arms against the
Church, but Men of one Household, of one Kindred; yea, and such as were Fellows
at one Table: instead of Lances, they whetted their Tongues one against
another. Nay, moreover, when they were Members compacted and united into one
body; yet for all that, they were armed to Battle within themselves.

Then since (as must be confessed) men whilst humane are subject to err, and
especially in their own cases, and for their own Interest, to be partial, cruel
and passionate; since one Canon contradicts another, one Synod another, one
Assembly another, and perhaps all of them repugnant to Truth, Holy Scripture,
and the Laws of this Realm: Until it please God to send us the Infallible
Spirit, God grant us the humble, meek and mild Spirit; not this bloody, cruel,
Horse-leach Spirit of imposing upon men, and making them believe in spite of
their teeth, and putting out their eyes because they are not so good and
clearly discerning, or more quicksighted than our own; calling one another
Heretic to the end of the Chapter; which has (as aforesaid) caused most of the
Miseries, Wars, Mutinies, Bloodshed and Calamities in the Christian World.

But shall men be left at Liberty then, to believe what they list?

rehearse the Articles of their Belief; but you are never the wiser: for none
but God, the searcher of hearts, knows whether they believe what they rehearse.
Nay, the heart of man is so deceitful, that few men know their own hearts, or
what they do believe with the heart; nay, you have many times a close Atheist
excommunicating and cursing Christians, that do not believe according to his
Canons; though in his sleeve he laugh at all Creeds and all Canons.

Shall men then have Liberty of Conscience?

etc. And how do we know that Almighty God is so much displeased with Variety
of Opinions also, as some men imagine? Though we have different Physiognomies
and different Eye-sights, yet we all continue to be men. And though we have
different Judgments, Minds, and Opinions, (some more clear, some more
purblind) yet we may all continue Christians.

But suppose other men do not (cannot for their lives) see so well as we, or so
well as the Synod, or the Magistrate, yet must we therefore pull out, or put
out their eyes; deliver them to the Devil first, and then to the Gaol, and
after all to the pit of Hell; And for expedition sake thither with the more
speed, (until the writ De Haeretico comburendo was Cancelled) Fire and Faggot.

These have been the Methods, this the Piety of bloody Synods and bloody
Bonners; and distinguishing themselves ( all the better) from all mankind, by
the name of Clergy, Clergy. The word ( Clergy) indeed is a Scripture
expression, but never but once found in Holy Writ, and then it signifies
Laymen, 1 Pet. 5.3. the Flock, not the Sheepherd that feeds the Flock. The
Presbyter Peter advising his Fellow Presbyters, or Priests, (...), neque ut
domminantes Cleris; Not Lording it over God's Lot, over the flock (there
called) Clergymen, (that is) Laymen.

Nay this I Will say for these Clergymen, some of them, shall knock a word out of
joint and do as feat things as any Layman of them all.

Notable was the first Canon that ever was made by a General Council, the first
at Nice; namely, 'Si quis a Medicis propter languorem defectus est, etc. If any
man be guelt by the Surgeons because of the Disease, ( you wot of) or
Eunuch'd by the Barbarians, we are content he shall remain a Clergyman. But if,
being wholesome and found, he make himself an Eunuch, ( as did the great
Origin) he, although he be a Clergyman, ought to be made a Layman again: And if
such a man be a Layman, he shall never be Ordained a Clergyman. As also we
Ordain the same therefore against those that are so audacious as to gueld
themselves: But if the Barbarians or their Masters gheld them, such, if they be
of good Conversation, are by this Canon admitted to become Clergymen.

These Holy Fathers in this General Council were three long years a sitting
before they brought forth those Canons, Theodoret. l. 1. c. 7.
and all the while plentifully maintained by the unparalled Munificence of
the Emperor Constantine. But one unlucky Accident had like to have spoiled all
at last, if their Wisdoms had not salv'd it up; 'twas this:

Two of those same Bishops (318. says Theodoret; 270. almost, says Eustathius
Bishop of Antioch, who made one; 270 just, faith Athanasius, who was also there
present;) it happened, I say, that two of them (called Chrysanthus and
Musonius) departed this Life, Priusquam Acta Synodi perficerentur, etc. faith
Nicephorus. This put the Reverend Fathers to a notable plunge, faith
Nicephorus. (For it seems it was not yet agreed, whether the Infallible Holy
Ghost swayed every Individual, or but some, or but the Major-part, or only
whilst in Cathedris; or went also home with them to their Lodgings: whether he
was totus in toto, or in qualibet part totius.)

But to make all sure, what do they, but away (no doubt upon serious
deliberation and consultation among themselves) they go to the Churchyard or
Sepulchers, and standing by the Graves of the two deceased Bishops, with the
said Nicene Canons in their hands, (as if they had been alive, and had had Ears
to hear) they made their address to them in these words, and with this
following Common prayer and Harangue. Holy Fathers! (said they) ye that with us
have fought (true enough) the good fight, and have finished your course, and
kept the Faith; if therefore ye, that are enlightened with the Beams of the
Trinity, and see things more cleverly, all Interpositions being done away; we
say, if ye approve of what we have done, it is fit (telling those glorified
Saints their duty) that you do also with us subscribe this little Book (of
Canons.)

And having made this Speech, they left the Book upon the Tomb sealed up, and
watched all night; but the next day returning to the Sepulcher, they found the
Seals untoucht; and opening the Book, they found their Hands (with which they
were very well acquainted) newly subscribed among the rest, viz. in these very
words, -- We Chrysanthus and Musonius, who sat with all the Fathers in the
first Holy Occumenical Council of Nice, though Translated from the Body, have
yet subscribed this Libel with our own hands.

And it was kindly and civilly done of them, I Will assure you, to leave their
Heavenly Stations, and visit the Tombs, at the request of Mortals praying to
Saints; nay, and to have learnt to write neither better nor worse, but the very
same old Characters their Writing masters had taught them, (for so Nicephorus
adds in the story) Subscriptiones illorum reliquis incertas cognovere recentes
adhuc in hac verba conceptas. The old Fathers knew their hands again, when they
saw them, very well, the Ink was scarce dry upon the Book. And a further
Miracle it was, that the Ink being scarce dry did not blot, the Book being
closed up and Sealed.

And the greatest wonder was, that one Town could hold so many Bishops three
years together, without venting their Malice and Spleen against one another,
more remarkably than when at their first Meeting, every one ( like fierce
Tigers) snarling, biting, assaulting, and flying in the face of each other, by
Articles and informations, endeavoring to make each other more black; (that
were black enough already) and by blemishing their Reputations with the
General, get them turned out of their Livings; Constantine had work enough
(says the Historian) to keep the Peace amongst them and to keep them quiet; and
as the best Expedient, he called them all before him, and every ones heart
leapt with joy and fear; with joy, that the Articles he had put in against his
adversary should be first read and considered; but yet in a trembling fear,
lest the black-lot should be his own; from which sears the Emperor forthwith
delivered them all, by making a Bonefire of all the Indictments, and charging
them thenceforth to keep the Peace. And blessed be God for this piety and
prudence of the Emperor, or else with what strange dismal features had these
Holy Fathers been deciphered to posterity, if their Pictures (as they had drawn
and pourtrayed one another in their Informations) had been transmitted to
after-Ages, instead of being committed to the fire.

Yet the Clergy, The Clergy, (what by the Piety of some Princes, and the
simplicity of others) got such Immunities and Privileges to sin and offend the
Laws, and yet be free from the Cognizance or Jurisdiction of the
Lay-Magistrate, that they begun to distinguish themselves in Habit from other
men, and color of their Clothes (as did the Pharisees of old) that a man
thought himself never so safe, as when he had got on a Cassock and Girdle, or
some such distinguishing weed.

I doubt not but St. Peter and St. Paul were as good Clergymen as the best of
them; and yet after they were Apostles, who could distinguish them for such, (
as the word Clergy is now taken) that had found St. Peter a fishing, with his
Fishers Coat tuckt about him; and St. Paul in his Loom a weaving?

But in process of time, the Presbyters or Priests begun to call themselves
alone, the Church; themselves alone, the Council, and Synod; and themselves
alone, God's Heritage, or God's Lot; or, (which is all one) his Clergy.

But since this word Clergy has so long obtained in the world (how properly I
have already discussed) and also is become part of-some Statutes in England, I
(that hate Innovation without great cause) will even let it go as it is, and
take it in its common acceptance hereafter. I only have said thus much, to
show, that neither the Name nor the Thing; neither the word Clergy, nor yet
God's Heritage, belongs any more to this Tribe of Levi, than to other
Christians, if so much; nor that they alone above all others; nor some of the
few and odd ones amongst them ( much less) are the Representative Church of
England, and must needs be acknowledged so to be, in pain of Excommunication,
the Gaol, and Damnation. And by the premises it seems to be evident, that there
is no Law, or Canon, at this day in force, or of force sufficient to make them
such a Representative.

One Head we all acknowledge, viz. Imperial; but the Pastoral Head was Beheaded
(as aforesaid) when the Popes Head was cut off. And where is that Hydra that
dare put his Prelatical, Fifth-Monarchy, or Presbyterian Head in his room?

Laymen cannot see so readily the Tokens of the Infallible Spirit amongst these
Clergy and Synod-men, that they boast of; but that they are faulty and frail
(at least) as much as other prudent Men: even in that first general Council,
(before praised) Arrius had some friends amongst them to the last, and such
that refused their Bishoprics ( no common Bigots I Will promise you) and
contemning the glorious Caresses and gifts of an Emperor (that seemed to be
enamoured and in love with those Reverend Fathers, even almost to sin) rather
than they would subscribe (to keep their High seats) the Nicene Creed.

And when after the death of Constantine, when the Arrian Creed and Religion
came to be uppermost, and the State-Religion, and the opinion countenanced,
preferred, and infashion at Court, (as it did in the days of his Son and
Successor Constantius) many of the Nicene-Creed-Bishops faced about, kept their
Bishoprics and their Livings, being not now neither Non-Conformists, like the
Vicar of Bray; only Athanasius alone stood it out to the last with great
constancy.

In the Seventeenth Canon of the said first Council of Nice, it is ordained,
that no Bishop shall ordain any that are not of his own Diocese, without the
consent of the Bishop of that Diocese to whom he appertains; or if he does, the
Ordination is null and void.

Whence note, how easy was the Remove from being a Clergyman back again ( as
you were) a Layman; where was the indelible Character in those days that the
Papists prate of?

The Eighteenth Canon is made against Clergymen that are Usurers, the penalty
was, loss of his Bishopric, or Living; and also the Clergyman for his Usury
was made a Layman again; so small was the leap from Clergy to Laity.

In the Twentieth Canon, (being the last) it is piously ordained, that no man
shall pray kneeling upon the Lord's Day, or in the days of Pentecost.

But enough of the Canons, and these first Canons and Canon-makers; I Will
conclude them as St. Bernard does, Homil. 4. super missus est.

Videas plerosque in Ecclesia de ignobilibus nobiles, de pauperibus divites
factos, subito intumescere, pristinae oblivisci abjectionis, genus quoque suum
erubescere, and infimos dedignare parents, etc.

Video and alios (quos non sine dolor videri debet) post aggressam Christi
Militiam, rursus saecularibus implicari negotiis, rursus cupiditatibus terrenis
immergi, cum magna cura exigere muros, and negligere mores, etc.

You may see ( quoth he) very many Churchmen of mean Parentage, now made equal
with Noblemen; of poor Fellows, now made Rich; and swell so suddenly, and look
big, that the Priest forgets that ever he was Clark; nay, he is ashamed of his
own Parents, and the stock he came on.

And some Money'd-men ( you may see) fly presently into high Ecclesiastical
Dignities, and then presently admire themselves for their worth and holiness;
when ( alas!) they have got indeed richer Copes, not richer Brains; thinking
themselves Men of Worth, and deserving that great Dignity, to which they
arrived through the assistance of great friends and flattery: And ( if I durst
say) which they purchased with their Money, not with their deserts. Not to speak
of those that are so hoodwink't with Ambition, that their places makes them
proud, and high, and unsociable, etc. coveting to involve themselves in Secular
Affairs, and Ambitious Designs, after they have listed themselves Soldiers in
the Camp of Christ, ( which I am very much troubled to see) they being more
careful to Erect stately Manors, than to correct their evil Manners, etc.

Query III. Of Procurations, Synodals, and Visitations.
take a Purse, or exact any Money but by Act of Parliament) Procurations,
Synodals, and Visitations, may be exacted of (and paid by) the Inferior
Clergy, to the richer Dignitaries?

Procurations are certain Impositions exacted from the Clergy, by the Bishops,
and his ( Eyes called) Archdeacons in their Visitations, claiming the same by
ancient Custom, but no Law.

The original of these Procurations is ( pretended to be) a Compact or
Agreement made betwixt the Incumbent and the Visitor, ( viz. the Bishop, or
Archdeacon) whereby each Incumbent charged himself or his Benefice with such a
yearly Rent to the Visitor, to defray his and their Charges at some great Town
fit for their reception, at a public Meeting or Visitation of the Clergy,
rather than be pestered with entertaining the Visitor and his Train (which grew
like a snow-ball the further it rolled) in their Ecclesiastic Visitations,
which of old were the only Visitations.

But he that has but a life-Estate (as no Parson or Vicar has any more) in his
Benefice, can never grant a Rent for ever out of such Benefice, and bind his
Successors; nil dat quod non habet; it is not so much as an Annuity or
Rent-seck, much less can the Incumbent or Termer grant a Rentcharge, no not
with the consent of the Patron; Spiritual Livings being surely incorporeal
things.

You see then, if some do but ( of any fashion) get in one foot, it is hard
getting them out again: perhaps they will say, ( as some have done) that no
Clergyman Beneficed, Rector not Vicar, has any Freehold in his Living, but all
is the Bishop's; and the Inferior Clergy that do the great Work, are but the
Bishops Curates and Journey-men. I Will assure you, some of them are so ignorant,
that they know no better, and dare not value themselves, nor behave themselves
in his presence at a higher rate.

And yet this Lording over the Clergy, this exercising Dominion one Clerg man
over another, as the Princes of the Gentiles, and usually called Prelacy, is
not only absolutely forbid by our Blessed Savior, as aforesaid; but as much
care and provision made against the Pride and Avarice of the greater sort of
Clergymen, (if such cob-web and network Laws or Canons could hold the mighty)
as heart can wish.

To instance in a few that first come to my mind at present, (for some men will
never take warning, until their Iniquities become to be hateful to all Mankind.)

Our Blessed Savior warns them, the Apostle Peter warns them not to play the
Bishop for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; the ancient Councils, Fathers,
Canons, Laws and Statutes warn them, and command to forbear this more than
bestial rapacity: but surdo fabulam, for (of all spoils) none are made with
more ease and safety, than when the Inferior Clergy become a Prey to the great
ones; yet no spoils are so unchristian, unhumane, nor so unnatural.

Tigers spare their own whelps; Eagles, Hawks, and Kites, use not their sharper
Talons against Birds of their own feather; Dogs indeed and Swine only ( of all
Brutes) have a stomach to feed upon, eat up, and devour their own kind.

Dictum est etiam quod in plerisque locis Archidiaconi super Fresbyteros
exerceant Dominatisnem, and ab eis censum exigant, Cabilonens. Synod. 2. cap.
15.
quod magis ad Tyrannidem quam ad Rectitudinis ordinem pertinet.

Si enim Episcopi, juxta Petri Apostoli sententiam, non debent esse dominantes
in clero, sed farma facti gregis ex animo, multo minus isti boc facere debent.
Sed contenti sint regularibus disciplinis, and teneant propriam mensuram, and
quod eis ab Episcopis jungitur, hoc per parochias suas exercere studeant, nihil
per cupiditatem aut avaritiam prasumentes. (that is)

It is reported, that in many places Archdeacons domineer over Parish Priests,
and will have Money of them; which exaction borders upon Tyranny, rather than
right Order and Justice.

For if Bishops, in the opinion of the Apostle Peter, ought not to Lord it over
the Clergy, but take the oversight of the flock, not by constraint, but
willingly; much less should these Fellows do the same: but be content with good
Discipline ( and the Corpse of their Arch-Deaconry) keeping within their own
bounds; and endeavor to put the Bishops Injunctions in execution all over the
Diocese, not daring to do any thing through Avarice or greediness.

There is a like Order made in Council. Lateran. sub Alexandro 3. Council. Lat.
par. 2. c. 3.
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, against Exactions of this nature; and the
Extortions of the Archdeacon of Coventry.



Anast. in vit. Sixth. Romans Episc.
and therefore could not abuse their Authority, till they had it to abuse?

I read indeed Anno Dom. 260. of St. Lawrence an Archdeacon, Martyred in that
year, says Anastasius.

But this Archdeacon had nothing of our Archdeacons but the Name; he was
indeed Archdeacon (in English) the Arch-servant, or Chief Deacon to the
Bishop, of all the Servants or Deacons about him.

He was Chief Turn-key, Prudent. de Coronis.
(says Prudentius) describing his Office; at best, but Chief Porter or Door
keeper, that kept the Keys of the poor man's Box, and the Church-doors;
Claustris sacrorum praeerat, (to use the words of Prudentius) coelestis arcanum
domus fidis gubernans clavibus, votasque dispensans opes: The Archdeacon was
chief Turn-key, or chief Steward among the Deacons, and chosen by themselves
from among themselves.

The next Archdeacon I read of, was one Stephen, Anno 255. Archdeacon to
Cornelius Pope of Rome; St. Ambrose had got one about the year 400.

Afterward the Name, by the favor of the Emperors of Constantinople, became a
Name of some repute; for till then, Mr. Archdeacon was not suffered to sit,
nor yet to be covered in presence of a Parish Priest.

But about this time, (as before Diocesans began to appropriate the Name of
Bishops to themselves alone, which in the Apostles days signified no more than
Presbyter; as appears by 1 Pet. 5.1. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. where the Presbyter in the
fifth verse, is called Bishop in the seventh verse: and Acts 20. the Elders or
Presbyters, verse seventeen, are called Bishops verse twenty eight: Take heed
therefore unto the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops) also
Archdeacons, and the Bishops-Dean or Deacon was chosen (though very
improperly) out of the Presbyters, who had lost that servile name in that of
Priest or Elder, than which the Church never knew a greater Title of honor;
but as Diocesses did increase, so did the profit also of being the Bishop's
Deacon or Dean; and what Priest or Rector, (that could) would not strive to be
the Favorite-Dean, or Arch-Dean?

Though (as we esteem in England) such Men are more properly called Arch
Priests: And these Archdeacons in the Diocese of London, are five as aforesaid.

For when Bishops had Diocesses so large and great as now they are, if they
were never so Eagle-sighted, it is impossible one Man could oversee them.

Therefore then they got for themselves these Spectacles, or rather Eyes (for
so the ArchDeacons are called oculi Episcoporum.) And in London Diocese there
are (as aforesaid) Five Auxiliary-eyes; Revel. 4.6.
in imitation (some think) of those Beasts in the Revelations, which had Eyes
before and behind: only there is some difference in the number, for there were
but Four beasts, here Five.

I hope no Man is so ignorant as to think this Similitude a Sarcasm to the Five
Archdeacons; for it is the greatest honor that ever was conferred upon them.

For two of the most Learned Interpreters of our Age, Grotius and Doctor
Hammond, agree that these four Beasts aforesaid, were four Apostles, Peter,
John, Paul, and Barnabas, says Doctor Hammond very probably; but Grotius
thinks those Four Beasts were Peter, James, (the Lords Brother, Bishop of
Jerusalem) Matthew, and St. Paul. But this by the by; only to avow and vouch
the Complement past upon the Archdeacons, those Bishops eyes before and
behind, to help him (...), to inspect or oversee his Diocese; and if he had as
many Eyes as Argus, he would not have one superfluous Eye in so great a Cure, a
Care and a Charge.

In the Apostle's days, the Office of a Bishop was a good thing; but now it is
also a great thing; a great trouble to be sure for one man, a trouble and a
charge too.

And truly at length, these Archdeacons also learnt to be some-bodies, and
would be known too in their places. Did the Bishop visit? so would they; Had he
any Procurations? so would they, 'till at last Visitations grew so comfortable
and pleasant to Mr. Archdeacon, and so profitable also, that they never
thought themselves in their Harvest, like as when they were at this work of
Visitations, what by Commutations of Penance, Money from Church wardens, Money
from Delinquents, Money from the Clergy, they had such Golden days on it by
Visitations, Procurations, etc. that they would always have been upon the spur
to be at it, till their eager vagaries were restrained, and they confined to
make but one Visitation in a year. Therefore we frequently meet with such
Canons as this, -- Archidiaconi suas Ecclesias semel tantum quotannis visitent;
and Archidiaconi non mulctent excessus pecunia, nec nisi Authoritate Episcopi
and confensu in alios sententiam promulgent: so that, though these Archdeacons
were the Bishop's Eyes, yet not his mouth; nor could they thunder out an
Excommunication without special License.

Thus of old only semel in anno by Visitations (but amongst us) his in anno
ridet Archidiaconus.

Nay, though the Bishop suspends the Archdeacons Jurisdiction three Months
before, and three Months after his own Visitation; and the Bishop gets the
Procurations of the Inferior Clergy in his Visitations, (which is every third
year) yet Mr. Archdeacon will demand them over again, and the Clergy (good
Men) are so wise and civil as to pay it; even any thing for a quiet life.

Yet in the said Maxim, it is added, (after semel tantum quotannis visitent) ne
tamen graves sint; Let the Archdeacon visit but once a year, but then also
without being (burdensome; or being) -- Such a grievous Man.

Yet Custom is his only pretense for these Exactions, which Apology here
aggravates his Crimes; as if one that is accustomed to take a Purse, Swear and
Curse, and pick Men's pockets, should say, I beg your pardon, Gentlemen, it is
but to keep my hand in ure; I am so accustomed to it, I cannot help it, indeed I
cannot. But custom in sin augments the Crime; like an old ulcer, (that the Leg
has long been used to) it is the harder to be cured, and the harder to be
endured.

It is a Maxim of the Common Law (which is especially made up of Customs,
landable and reasonable Customs, that) Pur ceo que cest prescription, est
encounter reason, ceo est void. Customs against reason, (especially against
Laws and Statutes to the contrary) are void, Ideoque malus usus abolendus est.

It is a custom time out of mind, for wicked men to take Purses upon
Salisbury-plain; will this plea save a Thief from the Gallows?

Consuetudo non prescribit abi per jus expressum reprobatur (Hostiensis.)
Hostiensis.
No Man can prescribe a Custom against a Positive Law.

And does not the Twenty Ninth Chapter of Magna Charta, Magna Charta confirmed
by Edw. 1. and by Edw. 3. four times, and Rich. 2, etc.
(that Sacred Law so often confirmed, and the breakers thereof so often Cursed by
Bell, Book, and Candle, and has withstood (and stood its ground against) all
Violence, Oppressions, Innovations, High-Commission-Courts; etc. in opposition
to it, and rising up against it; nay more, it has been proof against the length
of time, and looks as fresh and flourishing, as if it were in its prime, and it
is my Faith, my Hope, and my Prayers, that it may so continue to the worlds
end; sure it was made in a lucky hour) which Enacts That No Freeman shall be
taken or Imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, ( of which nature are all
Rectories and Vicaridges) or Liberties, or Free-customs, or be Out law'd, or
Exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor we will not pass upon him, nor Condemn
him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we will
sell to no Man, we will not defer to any Man Justice or Right.

Bishops are Right Reverend Men, and Archdeacons Reverend Men, but still they
are but Men; and if I were a Clergy man, if I could not hold my Freehold, nor
obtain it (my Benefice) but ad nutum Episcopi, I would never hold one whilst I
lived; for if so, then he that Marries his Chambermaid, or his Son, or his
Kinsman, or his Kinswoman's Husband, or his Kinswoman's Maid's Husband, ( if a
Clergy man) would find one hole or other in my Coat; or, make one (which is
more easy and more common) big enough to make me lose their Lordships good
opinion; who though good Men, and Right Reverend Men, yet whilst they are so,
they may err and be wrapped with Passion, Prejudice, or Interest, against which
(I know it experimentally) Innocence is no fence; and therefore I say, if I
were a Clergyman, (as perhaps I am, for ought any body shall know) I would
leave them all the Benefices to themselves, rather than hold them upon such
tickle terms, and not like a Freeman, and an Englishman, by the Laws of the
Land, my Birthright.

And does his Sacred Majesty and his Privy-Councel pretend any right to exact
Money, or to raise any, or take any man's Freehold from him, but by Law, and
Acts of Parliaments? and shall these Bishops and Archdeacons dare to continue
these Exactions against Law, against Christ's Law; ( not to Bishop it for filthy
lucre) against the Law of the Land, and Magna Charta; against Sacred Councels,
Fathers, and Canons; and all this, because it is easy to prey upon their own
poor gentle kind, though so unnatural as aforesaid?

I wonder they are not afraid of these Curses and Anathema's, (if they
themselves do believe the virtue of them) and Excommunications, thundered out
against the Impugners of Magna Charta, so often, by the Bishops of old, with
Bell, Book, and Candle? or do think all these Ceremonial Curses were only of
force against the Impugners of the first clause of Magna Charta, namely, that
Holy Church shall be free.

And do they keep two measures, one to buy by, and another to sell by.

But let Magna Charta and the Laws of the Land sleep at present, I Will only
henceforth play my Canons against these Exactions, turn their own Canons upon
them, their Canon Law, and the Civil Law; and sure their Lay-Chancellors will
herein stand by them to divert the shock: for they are either good (at skill)
in Civil and Canon Laws, (of which they are Professors) or else what are they
good for?

And can there be any fairer play than to fight a man with his own weapons,
that he is used to, and has skill in, if in any: It Is Argumentum ad hominem,
(which I Will make use of, and), which of all Arguments soonest stop the mouth;
out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, thou wicked Servant, says the
Parrable; and then it soons follows, He was speechless! The Apostle Paul used
such a stabbing Argument ad hominem, Romans 2. Thou that say (by thine own
Law) Romans 2.22.
a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou
commit Sacrilege?

I have instanced enough in the Canon Law already, but if those many already
recited will not do, I Will stop their mouths for ever, if Canons can do it: For
none are so frequently met with as Canons to this effect, that Censum a
Presbyteris Parochianis exigere, Tyrannicum est. Constitut. Apostol. l. 2. cap.
32. de Agapis. Presbyteris, ut qui laborant in verbo doctrina duplex seponatur,
pars in gratiam Apostolorum Domini, cujus locum sustinent, tanquam Conciliarii
Episcoporum, and Ecclesia corona.

Let the Presbyters that labor in the Word and Doctrine have double
maintenance, for the sake of the Apostles of our Lord, whose Successors they
are, ( mark that) being the Bishops Counselors, and the Churches Crown.

And those Canons and Constitutions Apostolical (in 8. Books) are numbered
amongst the Books of Canonical Scripture, by John Damascen; and by Eusebius, as
also Epiphanius, lib. 1. adversus Haereses: J. Damasc. de orthodoxa fide.
of the same opinion is Proclus Patriarch of Constantinople, and Oecumenius in
Comment. in Epist. 1. ad Timoth. so also in Can. Apostol. 84. Athanasius indeed
allows them to be of good and wholesome use in the Church, but not Canonical,
as composed by St. Clement, the disciple and companion of the Apostles.

But there are so many things foisted in amongst them by the Pope, (who long
had the keeping of them) that though many good things are amongst them, they
are none of my Creed; but good enough to show against the Canon Law men, and to
prove, that Presbyters or Priests are not (in the judgment of Antiquity) such
scums and pitiful fellows, to stand with cap in hand, like so many Schoolboys,
before the Bishop, whilst he schools them, catechises them, lectures them, and
calls them to account: from the beginning it was not so, as I will show anon;
they were his Fellows, and Counselors any where, even in the Church: The only
difference was, he sat uppermost, but all sat, (not stood bare-head, like so
many Boys.) And can there be any greater cause of the contempt of the Clergy,
and their neglect amongst the Laity, then when they see how the Bishop (one of
their own Cloth, that should best understand their worth) slights them? good
God! whither will not pride and oppression hurry frail man?

Jubemus Presbyterum tantum docere, Can. Apostol. l. 3. cap. 20.
baptizare, benedicere populo: Diaconum ministrare Episcopo and Presbyteris. We
ordain, That only the Priest or Presbyter shall preach, baptize and bless the
people; and the Deacon, ( although Archdeacon, (but that he was not then born
nor baptized in the Church) ought to wait upon the Bishop and the Priests, or
Presbyters.

Cavendum sane est, Cabil. Synod. 2. cap. 14.
ne cum Episcopi Parochias suas peragrant, quandam damnosam, etc. which I Will
faithfully English thus --

Special care should be taken, ( says that learned Council) lest the Bishops,
going to visit their Diocesses, should play the Tyrants over their Inferiors,
or over their Fellows and Comrades, not exacting money of them, by strict and
rigorous courses.

Then follows a Lecture to teach Bishops what they ought to do in their
Visitations, and what they ought not to do: 'They ought to spend their time, (
in inquirendis rebus emendatione dignis, in praedicatione verbi Dei, in lucris
animarum, potius quam depraedandis and spoliandis hominibus, and scandalizandis
fratribus, operam dent) in confirming men, in reforming what is amiss, in
preaching the Word, busying themselves in gaining Souls, and not in spoiling
and making a prey of men, and giving offense to their Brethren.

Et si quando eis ad peragrandum ministerium suum a fratribus aut subditis
aliquid accipiendum est, hoc summopere observare debent, ne quem scandalizent
aut gravent, Tanta ergo in hac re discretio tenenda est, ut and verbi Dei
praedicator sumptus, ubi proprli desunt, a fratribus accipiat, and item
fratres, illius potentia non graventur; exemplo Apostoli Pauli, qui, ne quem
gravaret, art and manibus victum quaerebat.

And if, for the work of the Ministry, somewhat be to be received, either of
their Brethren, or else of their Inferiors, yet let them look to it, that they
neither burden any man, nor give offense.

Such prudence therefore is to be used in this affair, that as on the one hand
a Preacher of God's Word may recieve somewhat of his Brethren, to bear his
charges, when he has ( mark that!) no proper maintenance and Revenue of his
own; so also his Brethren ought not to be burdened with his Mightiship: In
imitation of the Apostle Paul, who chose rather to get his living with his
hands and Trade, then to be burthensom (or chargeable) to any.

Get living with their hands! there is no need of that, blessed be God, for the
munificence and legal provision is enough, enough (if avarice can possibly have
enough) to glut men, without being burthensom to poor Priests and Vicars.

Indeed, if these Bishops and Archdeacons were as poor as St. Paul, and should
come a begging our charity as he did; hard-hearted would that man be, that
would not open his purse, for his relief, though his Family fasted for it a day
after.

But these are rich and mighty, and with Beaver cocked, make Speeches, and give
in charge, to pay Procurations to one another; ( that will not be forgotten
I Will warrant,) and not (as the holy Scripture says) Remember the Poor; but
Rememember the Rich Archdeacon, and the richer Bishop, with your Procurations,
Synodals, and Visitations; though the poor Vicar's Family pine and pinch for it
a Month after.

And if they may not thus go snips, and share in every Benefice throughout the
whole Diocese, then Woe be to you, with Suspensions, Anathema's,
Excommunications, and the Goal.

And yet some of these Archdeacons pay neither to Church nor Poor, neither to
Assessments, nor yet keeping Hospitality, or so much as keeping House: These
Undue-dues then thus coming into Mr. Archdeacons hands, (though he be alive,
and alive's like,) it is no contradiction to say they come in manus mortuas? Is
it not within the Statutes of Mortmain?

If they can show any License from the King, or any of his Predecessors, to vex
his Subjects thus against Law, Reason, and Equity: If they had orderly sued out
their Writ ad quod Damnum, out of Chancery, before they had established this
Ecclesiastical Revenue and Annuity, let them show it: But to plead only a
Custom of Sinning against Law, Reason and Conscience, is the absurdest of all
their Pleas.

And (in good earnest) if there were no Law against it, Is there any Conscience
that a poor, lean, bare-bone-Vicar should thus greaze a fat -- Archdeacon in
the -- Fist?

I know that when the Devil showed our blessed Savior all the Kingdoms of the
World in a moment of time; he said unto him, All this power will I give thee,
and the glory of them, Luke 4.5, 6.
for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. But that
was a Lie.

Yet the Pope says, that all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Power and the
Glory of them are his, and delivered unto him, and to whomsoever he will, he
gives them; but most especially, all Bishoprics and Benefices are his, in his
donation; And he gave them (conditionally) to go snips in them all; that as the
High Priest under the Law had the Tenth (of the Priest's Tithes) so he would
have the tenth part of every Bishopric and Benefice.

And though the Bishop is not the High Priest, as Aaron was, and also that His
Majesty has the Tenths, yet they would be known too in their places, and go
snips with all the Rectors and Vicars in the Diocese, by Procurations,
Synodals, and Visitations, etc. which amounts to as much as His Majesty's
Tenths in many Benefices, and in many also, much more.

Though Aaron's Law is exemplified in paying the Tenths in England, yet never
did Aaron exact two Tenths or three Tenths of the Tribe of Levi; let them even
take all for me, I hope, in time they will have enough.

Inventum est quod in quibusdam locis Presbyteri duo denos vel quatuor denos
denarios Episcopis in censum annis singulis darent, quod penitus abolendum esse
decrevinus; Syn. Cab. 2^ cap. 17.
(that is) We hear (says the Synod) that in some places the Elders or
Presbyters pay the Bishops every year twelve pence or fourteen pence, as a
Subsidy or Annuity, which we hereby Decree shall henceforth be utterly
abolished. (It is to be hoped the King and Parliament will be Petitioned to
make such a Decree too here in England.)

Twelve pence or fourteen pence yearly for Procurations! It would be well for
thousands of poor Beneficed Vicars in England, if they could put off the rich
Bishop, or his Great Eye (the Archdeacon) with ten times so much: no, they will
have it to a penny, or else -- suspend the profits of the Benefice, silence the
Minister ab officio, and not leave him and his Family a farthing to live upon,
till they be paid, and till the charges of the Sequestration and costs of Suit
be also paid; or else by Excommunication, his Soul is delivered to Satan, and
his Body to the Goal; from whence there is no deliverance, till the charges of
putting him also into Goal, and for his delivery thence be also paid; (which is
about seven pounds, for Spiritual-Court-Fees, and other consequents thereof; I
know it.)

So that want of Money delivers the poor Priest to Satan and the Goal; soul and
body: and ready Cash again delivers him from both.

The Pope, that has the Keys of Heaven-gates, (if he says true) pay the Porter
and he lets you in: And our Absolution-men pretend to have the Key of
Hell-gates; and to let men out, from the Devil, to whom they themselves had
delivered them for being poor, and un-able to pay: but upon condition though,
that if they have any credit to borrow money enough, or empty the Pewter-shelf
to Alchymize into money, to pay the Porter, they let you out; and you are (as
you were) rectus in Curia, as honest Christians as ever, and you and they as
good Friends as ever; Thus Orpheus (is said) to trade to Hell, by the Poets,
and also to redeem men thence by Music; These, by Money do the feat.

Oh Money! Money! oh the virtue of Money! the vice of wanting Money! our
blessed Savior says, It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but at this rate, quite contrary, It is hard for a poor Man, or a poor
Vicar to come there; if he do not pinch very hard to get money for these men,
whoever goes without; or in whose debt soever he dies, if he dies in their
debt, He had better no; he knows his doom: There wants nothing but A yellow
co^t painted with Devils and Hell fire, with which the Inquisition do array the
Jews and Heretics when they burn them, in Spain and Portugal.
Sambenitas, and a Faggot, with the Writ de Haeretico comburendo, to make him
the most Wretched.

This is a pretty thriving Trade, if it would but last; and for my part, I,
(that have as much power to Curse, Anathematize and Excommunicate, as any
Bishop or Archdeacon of them all, and to absolve them again) with all my
reading and experience, in their Spiritual Courts and Jurisdictions, (few men
have had more, or so much as I) I say, I here protest, (considering the
premises, and the repealing of 1 Eliz. 1.) that I know not by what Authority
we do these things; by what Authority we deliver the King's Subjects to the
Devil, and back again, at pleasure; what Rule, Canon, Law, or Authority we go
by, and who gave us this Authority and Commission; since His Majesty cannot
give any such Commission by 13 Car. 2.12.

Luther spoiled the Pope's Market for Indulgences to this day; and it is an even
lay but some honest Protestant or other will, by virtue of the Naked Truth,
spoil this Trade to Hell and back again.

But how the Devil should be so much at their devotion and beck, (as if he was
their Jailer) to take all that they deliver to him, or send to him by their
Mittimus of Excommunication; nay, and at their bidding to let men go free, as
soon as they are pleased, I mean, as soon as they are paid, together with their
Registers, and Sumners, transcends the apprehension of the Vulgar.

Dictum est quod in quibusdam locis, Syn. Cab. 2. cap. 18.
Episcopi and Comites ab Incestuosis, etc. (that is) We are told that the
Bishops and their Fellows take money of offenders, commuting Penance, and then
divide the spoil among themselves, which we decree shall utterly be abolished,
lest happily covetousnesness enter in, etc. And much more very excellently says
that honest Synod; (of every ten Procurators chosen by the Clergy to constitute
that Synod, Eight of them were not turned off, and not suffered to enter the
Convocation-house, I Will warrant.)

The 19. Chapter of the said Synod enjoins, that the Tithes should be there all
paid, where their Children are Baptized, and the Cure served.

The 20. Chapter is an Admonition to peace and concord. And the 21. Chapter
forbids all Bribes and Extortions, committed by Registers, Proctors,
Commissaries and Officials, and the rest of that Motley-Tribe, that like
Lay Elders, are (as Cleveland says) Most Divine-Tick-Tack in a Pye-bald crew,
To serve as Table-men of diverse hue:
She that conceived an Ethiopian Heir,
By Picture, when the Parents both were fair,
At sight of you had born a dappled Son,
You chequ'ring her Imagination.
Had Jacob' s Flock but seen you sit, the Dams
Had brought forth speckled, and ring-streaked Lambs:
Like Royston-Crows, who are (as I may say)
Friars of both the Orders, Black and Gray:
Like him that wore the Dialogue of Cloaks,
This shoulder John-a-Stiles, that John-a-Nokes.
Be sick and dream a little, you may then
Fancy these Linsie-wolsie Vestry-men.


But I shall tire my self, (as I have done already, and I fear also tired my
Reader) with transcribing old Canons, and old Verses.

In short, in all the Synods and sacred Councils, (that I can consult, and
there is none of them have escaped my Inquisition) and also in the Primitive
times, and first three Centuries, Presbyters and Priests have been so far
protected from proud and insolent Prelacy, that care has been taken of them,
even in Punctilio's, such, as keeping on the Hat, sitting, etc. in presence of
the richest and greatest Bishop of them all.

Constitutum est quod Episcopus quolibet loco sedens stare Presbyterum non
patiatur, Conc. Carth. cap. 34, 35.
in Ecclesia autem and consessu Presbyterorum, sublimior sedeat; intra domum
vero collegam se Presbyterorum esse cognoscat.

It is decreed, that the Bishop wheresoever he sit, shall not suffer a
Presbyter to stand before him; nevertheless in the Church, and at a meeting (or
Sessions) of Priests, he shall sit uppermost; but in a house, or at home, he
ought to know that he is a Fellow and Companion of the Presbyters.

Thus the Bishops call the Presbyter Elpidius, In Council. il. Theodoret, l. 4.
c. 8.
-- our Brother and fellow in Office Elpidius; which is the very same Title
that is given by the first Council of Nice, to old Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, and Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, two of the greatest Bishops and
Metropolitans in Christendom, in those days.

And are not good and stately Manors, large Fines, Rents and Incomes,
(pertaining to Bishops and Archdeacons) enough to satisfy their appetites, but
they must long also to pinch somewhat from every poor bare-bone Parish Priest?
who with great study and pains, and large expense of money and time, at School
and the University, at long-run may perhaps (especially if he or his Friends
can part with more money) get into a Benefice.

But by that time Money for Ordination, (the true sin of Simon Magus, and the
basest Symonie) Money for Institution, (to the Bishop, and his Secretary, his
Registers, Porters and Servants) Money for Induction, (to the Archdeacon, and
his Registers also) First Fruits, Arrears of Tenths, Dilapidations,
Procurations, Synodals and Visitations, etc. are paid, and many of these
payments without Law, some against Law, Conscience, Equity and Reason, no
wonder the Priest is a poor Priest all the days of his Life; whilst some surly
Dignitaries that oppress him, maintain their Foot-boys and Coach-horses in
better plight. Let such read a Letter of my Recommendation, it is from a Pope
(too) of Rome, (but before they grew so proud and high:) it is Epist. 3. Sancti
Clementis de officio Sacerdotum; they know where (sure) to find it in print:
whilst poor Priests lament with St. Bernard, Sermon. 77. Parum est nostris
vigilibus, si non servant, nisi and perdant: These big-Spiritual-men think it
too little to withdraw their favor and protection from us poor Laborers,
except they also do us a mischief.

Which will certainly be my reward from them, for this Naked Truth, if they can
discover me; but God's will be done, it is the usual portion and consequence of
speaking Truth, and plain-dealing; but, God's will be done, I say again.

Nay, they will not suffer the poor Presbyter to preach, and take pains in his
Parish, to which he is Instituted by them, and of which they have (as by Law
bound) given him the Cure, according to his Presentation, except he also pay
Ten Shillings more for a License to preach there; although he have had never so
many Licenses before, to preach in the same Diocese, and has already given them
so many ten shillings a piece for them.

The Great Turk is more merciful to the Grecian Slaves, he gives them free
leave to pray or preach Christianity, not demanding one penny for the License.

In Popish times and Countries, they used to say, -- No Penny, no Paternoster;
in our Country we must say, No Penny, no Preacher, no Licensed Preacher.

When a Deacon is ordained Priest or Presbyter, the Bible is given into his
hands by the Bishop that ordains him, saying, -- Take thou Authority to preach
the Word of God, and to Minister the Holy Sacraments in the Congregation where
thou shall be so Appointed.

Then (in Institution) the Bishop appoints him where: one would think, after
all this, the Priest so ordained might preach the Word of God in his own Cure,
whereto the Bishop has Instituted him, and whereof the Archdeacon has given him
Livery and seifin by Induction: But no such matter, he shall be silenced still,
for all this, except the other Ten Shillings be paid for a License, (though he
has three or four Licenses already, and all paid for:) And if the Bishop come
to Visit the week after, or the day after; so that he knows well enough that
the Minister has good Letters of Orders, and Institution; (for he himself gave
it him the other Day) yet he must pay for showing these things again at
Visitations, and though he showed them all three years before at the former
Visitation, and the Bishop has them all upon Record in his Books, yet he must
show them again, and never recover them, till he pay for them again.

In Portugal (I have known) in their Visitations, the Bishops make every
Parish Priest pay for a License to keep a Concubine; And if a Man be old, etc.
and have no Stomaeh to a Wench, yet still he must pay a Millroy or two for a
License.

So that now they proverbially say; Visitationes morum (are become)
Visitationes nummorum.

St. Paul indeed went to visit the Brethren, and to see how they do; but these
go to visit their Brethren, and to see how their Pockets do.

And all they have to say for themselves is, It used to be so in Popish times,
and formerly practiced by others that were no Papists.

But the Civil-laws also provide against such foppish Pleas. Error, Justinian.
Inst. l. 2. tit. 6.
falsae causae usucapionem non parit; nam usucapio non competit istis qui mala
fide possident. And many such Laws can I cite, if I list, and if I did not
think I have done their business already; If Statute Law, Common Law,
Civil-Law, or (their Masterpiece) the Canon Law, Reason, Equity, Justice or
Conscience, nay, humane Nature and Compassion to their own kind will work upon
them, in despite of their Interest; and Money -- Money. --

And I hope all these Laws of God and Man, Reason, Honesty and good Conscience
will over-vote their Interest and Money -- and Money -- and that they will ask
God forgiveness, and that every Offender of them, from the highest to the
lowest, will make restitution; or, at least, say with repenting Job; Behold I
am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my Mouth. Once have
I spoken, but I will not answer; Yea twice, but I will proceed no further.

Thus they will do; if this work kindly (as it is intended) upon their
Consciences; but, if instead thereof, being gawl'd) they do nothing but kick
and wince; and instead of thanking me for my great pains (here frankly bestowed
upon them for their cure, in much Charity) shall rather join their Heads
together, first to find who I am that thus is kindly liberal to them; and then
secondly, get a Club of Critics and cunning Lawyers to lie at catch for every
Expression here to improve it (that is, to mis-improve it) to Revenge, then I
shall be forry that I have vouchsaft so much pains and care toward them, to so
little Fruit and Reformation; and so little thanks from them, from whom it is
most especially due. That in their Visitations (at least) may cease that
Dialect, better becoming the Mouths of Hectors and Padders, than Registers and
Secretaries of Holy Bishops, namely -- Come -- Clergyman -- deliver your Purse
-- your Purse -- for Visitations, Synodals, showing of Holy-Orders, and
Procurations.

Archdeacons have all good fat Corpse, (so they call the Lands and Tenements, (a
kind of Glebe) annexed for ever to their Archdeaconries; they need not pinch
the poor Parson, that every body pinches.

Pharaoh's Lean-kine indeed, did eat up the Fat ones; but for the Fat ones to
devour the Lean, is a Prodigy not to be dreamt of, or imagined.

Visitations made by Bishops and Archdeacons, have for their Warrant (as some
allege) the Practice and Example of St. Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15.36, 42.
Acts 15. who went to visit the Brethren in every City, where they had Preached
the Word of the Lord, and to see how they do. And Paul went through Syria and
Silicia, confirming (mark that) the Churches.

So that the work of a Visitation was to confirm (or strengthen) the Converts,
by preaching again the Word of the Lord to them; Not, by a perfunctory-mumbling
over a few canting Words over Childrens heads, as Popish-Bishops do (mimically)
in pretense of imitating St. Paul, who went to confirm men to the Faith,
whereby no flesh alive can possibly be enlightened, instructed, or confirmed,
or strengthened in the Faith.

Nor did St. Paul send his Sumner before him, commanding the Disciples or
Brethren to come and meet him at such a great Town, where there is a great
Church and a great Tavern, and be sure to bring their Purses with them too; or
if they could not both come, that then of the two, they should be sure to send
their Purses however, by some Neighbor, though they could not come in person,
that so the Atonement and Peace might the better be made.

-- If Cross-grain will not come, then let him stay,
( Let him but send his Purse) still keep away.
It Is an unpardonable sin to come to a Visitation and forget your Purse; nay,
or to bring it empty: You may with empty Purse part with your Letters of
Ordination, Institution, Induction, etc. but there is no redeeming them without
Money; never Man yet in all my Intelligence found any other Redeemer -- of
them, save Money -- Money.

And yet the first Archbishop, Rog. Hoveden Annal pars post 807.
in his first Visitation after the Conquest, namely, Hubert, Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the Council of London, Anno 1200. did ordain that no
Procurations, or other Money, Toll, or Exactions, should be paid in
Visitations, in these very Words. Prohibemus ne subditos suos Talliis and
exactionibus Episcopi gravare presumant, Cum cnim dicit Apostolus, non debent
Filii Thesaurizare Parentibus sed Parents Filiis multo long a pietate paterna
videtur, si praepositi subditis suis graves existant, quos in cunctis
necessitatibus Pastoris more debent fovere.

Archidiaconi aut sui Decani, nullas exactiones vel Tallias in Presbyteros seu
Clericos exercere praesumant, etc. He that likes, may read more of these
Decrees two and twenty years after; namely, Spelman. Council. Tom. 2. p. 156,
220, 221, 265, 380, 381, 48, 489, 576.
1222. Council. Oxford, by Stephen Langeton Archbishop of Canterbury; and four
years after confirmed by Otho the Popes Legate. Concilio Londini. Anno 1226.
and by Othobon the Popes Legate, and the Council under him, Anno 1248. and
before that, by the Diocesan Synod held at Salisbury, Anno 1217.

Is it not strange, that a Bishop, and a poor Bishop too, should call a Synod
to cry down these oppressions! and yet it was done in the year aforesaid by
Robert Poor Bp. of Sarum. And An. 1287. by Peter Quivil Bp. of Exeter. And by
Walter Raynolds Archbp. of Canterbury, and Conc. Land. in the Reign of K.
Edward II. And by John Stratford Archbp. of Canterbury, An. 1342. De
visitatione and procuratione Archidiuconorum and aliorum ordinariorum.

But all the Visitations of old made by Bishops or Archdeacons were
Ecclesiastim, like that of St. Paul's and Barnabas.

For to send out Citations to Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sinners, and
little Children to come to be Confirmed, etc. at such a great Town; They rather
go to visit the Bishop, than the Bishop to visit his Brethren, as St. Paul did,
Ecclesiastim, from Church to Church.

Thus Topsy Turvy can Visitations now become; as if the Minister that is
enjoined to visit the Sick, (in the Common Prayer Book) should send out his
Apparitor, and command the Sick person to come and visit him; or at least, give
him a meeting at such a Church, and such a Tavern, and then he shall hear what
Prayers he will say over him.

St. James says, Jam. 1.27. pure Religion and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows, etc. What to do? To pill
them and poll them; No surely, that would not be a very pure Religion, except
of such a pure Religion as is made up of pure Money; the Fatherless (I suppose)
like not the visits of such kind of Fathers, they had rather they would keep
away; and not help to make them poorer, and add Affliction to the Afflicted; of
such Visiters better have their Room than their Company; Is this your Kindness
to your Friends when you come to visit them? Hah?

Indeed I find that Allowance is taken care for, (in Visitations of old) but
what? Not Money; but Food and Drink, such as the poor Vicar and his Family
makes shift with, but never, never any Money in ancient time. For which let him
that lists consult Will. Lindewood in his Provincial Constit. l. 3. de Censubus
and Procurationibus, f. 159, 160. Johannes de Aten in his Glosses on Otho's and
Othobon's Constitutions, f. 43, 89. Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica,
Tit. Visitatio. also Gratian. Distinct. 42. cap. non opertet. Also, Council
Lateran. sub Innocent 3 Pap. An. 1215. cap. 33, 34. Also Council. apud Castrum
Gunter. An. 1251. Council. Surius Con. Tom. 3. p. 746.
apud Salmar. An. 1253. Synod. Andegavensis, An. 1263. Council. Provincial. apud
Langres, An. 1264. Council. Burdegal. An. 1582, etc. collected by Laurentius
Bochellus, Decret. Eccles. Gallican. lib. 5. Tit. 15. Devisitatione,
Procuratione, and personis quibus commissa est potestas visitandi. Also Council.
Coloniens An. 1549. Council. Trident Sess. 24. de Reformatione, cap. 3. Thomas
Zerula in his Praxis Episcopal. par. 1. Tit. visitatio.

They all concur -- Vt nullus Procurationem recipiat nisi in Locis visitatis
duntaxat; and tum, Tantum victuallibus a locis quae visitantur; That Meat and
Drink, when the Visiters are athirst or hungry, shall be given them, but not
one Farthing of Money. For, says the said Council of London, Anno 1200. The
Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but Parents for their Children;
How far is it then from the Piety of Fathers, if rich Prelates, that ought,
like good Pastors to provide for the wants of their poor Flocks under them,
should be burthensom to their Inferiors?

And therefore the said John de Aton in his Gloss on that clause of Othobon's
Constitution, f. 89. has these Words; viz. Nos tam Ecclesiarum indemnitati
quam Praelatorum saluti consultius provedentes districtius inhibemus, ne quis
eorum Procurationem (quae ratione visitationis debeter) ab Ecclesia quacunque
recipiat, nisi cum eidem visitationis officium impendit, qui vero receperit
donec restituerit ab Ingressu Ecclesiae sit suspensus; (By this Law then the
Bishops and Archdeacons must make restitution, of all the Moneys they received
for Procurations, or else be Suspended, and not suffered to enter into the
Church, until they restore those ill-gotten Goods.) Et haec ratio forte movet
Episcopos hujus Regni, qui in Visitationibus suis Procurationes ab Ecclesia
communiter non exigunt; quia ad singulas Ecclesias ob causam Visitationis non
declinant, lecet plene personas visitent tam Clerum quam populum; ob hanc
causam nunc ad unum locum, nunc ad alium congruum convocando; cumtamen
Procurationem debeant recipere tantum modo de locis visitatis.

In short, Visitations of old were to a good end, like that of Paul and
Barnabas, by preaching the Word again to them, to confirm them, or strengthen
and corroborate them in the Faith.

Afterward, this Godly usage became a Trade, but never till there was Money to
be got by it: a nuisance, that Pride and Covetousness invented, and continues in
spite of the Laws and Canons of God and man.

For which cause the learned French Bishop Claudius Espencaeus complains in
these words: Comment. in Epist. ad Titum, c. 1.
-- Minores non tantum Episcopi sed ut Archidiaconi, eorumque male officiosit
(absit verbo invidia, nam de malis loquor) Officiales and Vicarii, dum
Diocaeses and Parochias obequitant, non tam facinorosos and criminum reos
poenis and correctionibus a vitiis deterrent, quo fine Peregrinationes
hujusmodi olim jam fucrint jure canonico ordinatae, quam pecunia praesenti and
numerata, titulo Procurationis, ne dicam fictitiae Jurisdictionis emungunt, and
exigunt tum Clericos, tum Laicos.

First, they bring their printed Articles for the Churchwardens of every
Parish to buy, (and though they have half a score of them) which the Parish has
bought ten years together, yet still they must buy a new Book every year, or
lay down the money for it, and then you may choose whether you will take it with
you or no: Then also the Churchwardens must swear to keep and observe those
Articles; And are not all that do so, forsworn? Then they must give money (a
grant) for being sworn; then they must swear to Present, and if they do not
make a Presentment, they are Excommunicated; if they do put in a Presentment,
(usually written in Court, and very brief, with an omnia been, for which they
pay a shilling) then also for putting in the Presentment a shilling more: For
three shillings and six pence, or three shillings and eight pence, a
Churchwarden may escape cleverly. But says the said French Bishop, the Minor
Bishops and Archdeacons, and their wickedly-officious (pardon the Word, for I
speak only of the wicked) Officials, and Vicar-generals in their Visitations,
do not so much deterr men from sin, by punishing the criminals, as to drain
their Purses by exacting ready moneys, of the Clergy and Laity, by the name of
Procurations, and I know not what feigned Jurisdiction: Thus the said good
Bishop Espencaeus.

And therefore in the greatest height of Popery in England, the Kings Judges
and Justices in his Temporal Courts have usually decreed, that Excommunicate
persons shall be absolved ( clave errante) when the Judges disallowed the cause
for which a man was Excommunicated: And many Actions of the Case have been
brought against the Archdeacons, etc. for Excommunicating men for things out
of their cognizance, and exceeding the limits of their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions; namely, when they meddle with the right of Patronage, exempt
Churches, (being Lay-Fees, etc.) and have made them pay sauce for being so
saucy and pragmatical.

I Will instance in one: Pat. 18 Edw. 1. m. 26. De libertatibus liberarum
Capellarum Regis.

Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Inspeximus literas celebri, memoriae Domini H.
Regis Angliae patris nostri patentes, in hec verba. Henricus Dei gratia Rex
Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae, Aquitaniae, and Comes Andegav.
Omnibus ad quos, etc. Cum plures in Anglia Capell as habeamus exemptas, quorum
libertates locorum Ordinarii infestant, etc. Rescriptum igitur Apostolicum de
verbo ad verbum sic duximus subscribendum. Innocentius Episcopus Servus
Servorum Dei, karissimo in Christo filio Regi Anglorum illustri, salutem and
Apostolicam benedictionem. Tanto libentius Celsitudinis tuae precibus benignum
impartimur assensum, quanto inter Reges and Principes Christianos te
specialiter reputamus dilectum filium and devotum: Tuis itaque supplicationibus
inclinati, districtius inhibemus, ne ullus Ordinarius, aut etiam Delegatus vel
Subdelegatus in Capellas Regias and Oratoria earundem Ecclesiae, Romanae
immediate subjecta, etc. Excommunicationis vel Interdicti sententiam audeat
promulgare, seu aliquod ipsis onus imponere, quod aliis exemptis Ecclesiis,
etc. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae inhibitionis
infringere, etc. Si quis autem hoc attemptare praesumpserit, Indignationem
omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus Noverit
incursurum. Dat. Lugduni, 12 Kal. Augusti, Pontificatus nostri anno 3.

What a do was here made? what care taken? what Interest made by a great King
at the Court of Rome? for what? for nothing in the world but to keep the King's
exempt Churches and Chapels free from the Bishops Impositions and burdens; the
Pope reserving them for his own Tooth: for so it follows in the said Bull, and
absque mandato sedis Apostolicae speciali. -- This in English sounds like that
of the Lawyer, to his brother Attorney: -- Loving Brother,
Pluck thou one Goose, and I Will pluck the other.


I am confident the Brethren all over Syria and Cilicia were mighty glad to see
Paul and Barnabas, when they went lovingly to visit the Brethren and see how
they did do: They did not make Friends, nor beg, -- saying, Let me be exempt,
and Let me be exempt, but certainly were very glad to see them; for those
Visitors came to do them good, not harm; to strengthen their Faith, not to
weaken their Estates; to enrich them with Graces, not impoverish them with
Extortions and Oppressions; with hand and heart to better them, not with hand
in Pocket to beggar them: Bern. Sermon. 77. super Cantica.
like those wretched Prelates St. Bernard complains of, Quem dabes mihi de
numero Praepositorum qui non plus invigilet subditorum evacuandis marsupiis
quam vitiis extirpandis? show me ever a Prelate of them all, that is not more
rare at emptying the Pockets of them that are subject to them, then in
extirpating profaneness? Non est custodire, sed perdere; non ornare sponsam, sed
spoliare; non est defendere, sed exponere; non est instituere, sed prostituere;
non est pascere gregem, sed mactare and devorare; dicente de illis Domino, Qui
devorant plebem meam ut cibum panis; and quia comederunt Jacob, and locum ejus
desolaverunt. Et in alio Propheta; peccato populi mei comedent; quasi decat,
peccatorum precia exigunt, and peccantibus debitum solicitudinem non impendunt.
This is not to defend, but to offend; not to adorn the Spouse of Christ, but to
make her forlorn; not to protect, but ruin; not to institute, but to
prostitute; not to feed the Flock, but to eat and devour it; as says the Lord
concerning them, Psa. 14.4. Hos. 4.8.
They eat up my people as they eat bread: they have devoured Jacob, made waste
his dewlling place. And in another Prophet, They eat up the sin of my people;
(that is to say) They exact Money of Offenders, and are more diligent to make
them pay for their Sins, than cure them of their Sins. So that as good store of
differences and dissensions (that makes other men break) makes the Lawyer sound
and whole; And as a sickly Autumn is the Physitian's Harvest; so a wicked
Diocese made the fattest Prelate, it seems (in St. Bernard's time, by commuting
Penance, Excommunicating, then Absolving, then presenting them again, and at
them again the next Visitation, Money -- more Money.

Successores omnes capiunt esse, Ibid.
Imitatores pauci. They would be accounted the Apostles Successors, but few
will follow the Apostles examples: Oh utinam tan vigiles reperirentur ad curam,
quam alacres currunt ad cathedram: Would they were as watchful in discharging
the Cure, as they are nimble to get into the Chair!

Sed and litteris forsitan mandentur istaquae dicimus, dedignabuntur legere:
aut si forte legerint, mihi indignabuntur, quamvis rectius sibi hoc facerent.

But if happily, (says St. Bernard) what I now say should be committed to
Writing, they would not vouchsafe to read the same; or if they did, they would
be raging mad at me, whereas by right and good reason they had more need be
enraged against themselves.

These Spiritual-Gluttons had need to go to School to the Heathen Poet, and
learn his Common Prayer.

Sit mihi quod nunc est, Hor. lib. 1. Ep. 18.
etiam minus, ut mihi vivam
Quod superest aevi, si quid superesse volent Dii.
Let me but keep the pittance that I have,
Nay, though 'twere less than it is, I no more crave;
'Twill serve to help me (jogg on) to my Grave.
Placita and Assisae capta apud Northampton in crastino natalis Sacti Johannis
Baptistae, Rot. 25. in alb. Tur. Land.
Anno Regni Regis Henrici silii Regis Johannis tricesimo primo; Coram Rogero de
Thurkelby, and sociis suis Justiciaris.

-- Essoniator Dragonis de Staunton, and Henricus filius Roberti Essoniator
Aliciae de Staunton obtulerant se quarto die versus Magist Nicholaum
Archidiaconum de Bathonia, de placito, quare tenuit placitum in Curia
Christianitatis de feodo ipsorum Dragoniis and Aliciae de Staunton, contra
Prohibitionem, etc. and versus Walterum Personum, etc. and versus Will.
Lenteneley de placito quare secutus est placitum in curia Christianitatis de
laico seodo, etc. contra eandem Prohibitionem, etc. Predictus Walterus
occasion praedict. districtionis fecit ipsos cituri coram officiali
Archidiaconi Bathoniae apud Bristol in Ecclesia S. Mariae de la Radeclyvae; Et
cum ipsi detulissent eidem Waltero Prohibitionem Domini Regis, ne predictus
Walterus Placitum illud amplius sequeretur, idem Walterus Spreta Prohibitione
Domini Regis, secutus est placitum illud in curia Christianitatis coram
Archidiaono Bathoniae de die in Diem and fecit ipsos Excommunicari, etc. unde
dicunt, quod deteriorati sunt and damonum habent ad valentiam 10 l. and inde
producant, etc.

Et Praeceptum est eidem Waltero quod interim Absolvi faciat Praedictos
Dragonem and Aliciam sectam, etc. Et postea per praeceptum Justiciar. de
nunciavit ipsos a sententia illa absolutos, etc.

This, (amongst many others, wherein I could instance) is but to show that the
King's Judges did control the inferior Jurisdictions, (called Ecclesiastical)
and Judge whether the cause or contempt deserved Excommunication, and
accordingly commanded Absolution, etc. as I have known the Lord Chief Baron,
(in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer) about seven years ago, command Doctor
Lake (Commissary of Lincoln, and then in Court) to absolve one King, etc. to
which the Doctor making some tergiversation, the Lord Chief Baron threatened to
lay him by the heels for his contempt.

For it is great insolency, for a Commissary, Official, or his Master, the
Archdeacon, to excommunicate in their Courts and Visitations the Kings
Subjects, except by Authority and Commission from God or the King.

From God, they have no power to excommunicate or to hear Causes, then has any
Parish Priest in his Parish, if so much: And if they have a Commission from the
King (let them show it) but when they have shown it, I dare say it will run,
with submission to His Majesty's Decrees in his superior Courts; Courts of
Record at Westminster; Courts of good and great use; Courts that have his
Majesty's Authority and Commission to show for what they do; Courts that do not
bear the Sword in vain; Courts that are not made up only of an empty noise of
Curses and Anathema's, thundering and cracking as if they came from Heaven, when
all is but -- vox and praeteria nihil, and not of little or no use, but to vex
and weary out the Supplicants, Suitors and Attendants, by enriching some few
(not of the best of mankind) with Money, -- Money.

And on the contrary; how careful have our Kings of England been rather to
encourage Parish-Ministers, that labor and look after the Flock, even in times
of Popery; as for instance in this Brief, sub privato sigillo Edwardi 1. anno
regni ejus 33. in these words.

Rex dilecto sibi Ricardo Oysel, Ballivo suo de Holdernesse, salutem. Mandamus
vobis, quod de exitibus Molendinorum nostrorum in Belliva vestra faciatis
Decimas dari Personis Ecclesiarum in quarum Parochiis Molendina ista existunt,
prout alii Magnates de regno nostro, ac hominis partium illarum Decimas dant de
exitibus Molendinorum suorum. Et nos vobis inde in compoto vestro ad Scaccarium
nostrum debitum allocationem fieri faciemus. T. R. apud Westminster. 20. die
Octobris. Per breve de privato sigillo.

And good reason (sure) had that valiant King to give all due encouragement to
the Inferior Clergy, if we consider how he was affronted, and defied and
braved by the Prelates, Polid. Virgil Angl. Hist. l. 17.
especially by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, so that the King was forced to
put all the Rebellious Prelates and Clergy out of his protection, seizing their
Goods and Revenues, until they (at long-run) submitted themselves, after a
tedious Bustle, (to which they were encouraged by Pope Boniface.)

I know that the King granted his Favor afterward and Protection to the said
stout Archbishop Robert and the rest, and suffered the said Archbishop to
stand by him and his Son upon a wooden Scaffold (erected before the Gates of
Westminster Hall for that purpose) when with many Tears the King asked Pardon
(with all Humility) not the Archbishop's Pardon, but that the People would
pardon him; Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 36.
but it was not for his humbling the proud Clergy as aforesaid, but for his
Arbitrary Government; Dicens, se minus been and tranquille quam Regem deceret
ipsos rexisse, etc. Rursum, ut libertates contentas in Magna Charta, Mat. West.
An. 1297. p. 409, 410. Ypodigmae Neustr. p. 84.
and de Foresta, in usu extunc efficacius haberentur, and voluntarias super his
exactiones inductas, de caetero quasi id irritum revocaret, petentibus
Comitibus and Baronibus; Rex Articulos in praedictis chartis contentos innovari
insuper and observari mandavit. Henry de Knyghton adds, Rogavitque Populum
accepta licentia, ut omnia condonarentur ei, and orarent pro eo; and orabant
quidam public, alii vero sic, alii vero occulte, pauci vero been.

Anno 32 Edw. 1. this King was again affronted by Thomas Corbridge, Archbishop
of York.

For when the King by his Letters Patents granted to Mr. John Bouhs the Prebend
of Styvelington in the Church of St. Peter in York, and commanded Thomas
Corbridge the new Archbishop to admit him, etc. after two successive Mandates,
he neglected to do it, to the King's damage 10000 l. (as in the Plea Rolls of
Trinity Term held at York, To be seen in the Receivers Office of the King's
Exchequer at Westminster.
32 Edw. 1. is at large expressed.)

Thereupon the Archbishop being summoned to answer this contempt before the
King's Justices, he appearing, answered; That he was always ready to obey the
Kings commands, so far as he could; but he could not admit the King's Clerk,
because the Pope had conferred the said Prebendary, and Chapel thereunto
belonging, on his own Clerks, of whom they were now full; and that he could not
make void the Act of the Pope, his Superior Lord, nor deprive or remove his
Clerks; And therefore prayed the King to hold him excused; refusing to give any
other answer.

Whereupon Judgment was solemnly given against him, That what he alleged was
no sufficient cause for him not to execute the Kings commands; and that all his
Temporalties should be seized into the Kings hands for this his contempt, etc.

By which we may see, that even in times of Popery, the Kings of England have
opposed the Popes Innovations and Usurpations, and the Kings Justices have
taken cognizance of these Ecclesiastical matters; and that no Foreign Mandates
or Bulls were pleadable in the Kings Courts, in bar of the Kings Writs; and
that long before the Reign of King Henry 8. obedience to the Pope before the
King, was adjudged a very high contempt in Law, and had a suitable punishment;
and that the Kings Temporal Courts had Sovereign Jurisdiction over the
Ecclesiastical Proceedings, which is also more evidenced by the several sorts
of Mandates dates and Writs, even in times of Popery, frequently issued out
against Archbishops, Bishops, Ecclesiastical Judges and Ordinaries, commanding
them to do this and that, and prohibiting them not to do this and that; witness
the Writs of Quare impedit, Quare incumbravit, Quare non admisit, de Clerico
admittendo, de copia libelli deliberanda, de permutatione Beneficiorum, de
revocatione Praesentationis, Bracton.
de Residentia facienda, de cautione admittenda; de Assisa ultima
Praesentationis, cessavit de Cantaria, de Nonresidentia pro Clericis Regis, de
Praesentatione ad Ecclesiam, Praebendam, Capellam, etc.

Nay, (it seems to me that) even in times of Popery, the Kings Judges would
take no notice of any Excommunications, Cook. Instit. 134.2.
but what were decreed by the Bishop himself, or one that has ordinary
Jurisdiction, and is immediate Officer to the Kings Courts.

Because only upon the Significavit's of Archbishops, and Bishops only, or
such as have ordinary Jurisdiction, shall be issued out the Writ, De
excommunicato capiendo.

For if a Bishop do not certify the same upon his own knowledge, Cook. Instic.
Sect. 201.
(but only by hearsay) or the Certificate of another Bishop, (and by parity of
reason, of any other man, as his Commissary, Archdeacon, etc.) such
Certificate is not sufficient.

And of these Ecclesiastical Proceedings the Kings Justices are the only
Judges. Much more are they Judges at this day whether these Procurations and
Visitations shall be paid, being so contrary to Magna Charta, as well as
against the Canon Law, Equity, Reason, and Conscience.

And also Judges whether the Seal to the Significavit be a legal Seal according
to Statute, and whether all the Processes have been made in the Name and Style
of the King, as well as Sealed with the King's Arms? For (all the reason in the
World that) if the Clergy will take in (to help them on with their
Ecclesiastical Ordinances and Jurisdiction ( The King's helping hand to conduct
all Men to the Goal whom they have delivered to the Devil; that their
proceedings also should be, as the Law enjoins, in the Name (style, and under
the Seal) of the King.

But strange also is the Practice at this day in their Spiritual-Courts in many
particulars; I Will Instance but in two at present, this discourse more properly
coming under another head. One is in the Case of Probate of Wills, the other is
in the Case of Excommunication.

The Practice at this day, as to Probate of Wills, (wherein Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments are given and granted) is for the Register to keep the
Original Wills, and give the Executor only a Copy of the Original-Will, to
which Copy they affix the Seal of the Court.

Estates disposed by Will are usually in Prejudice of the Heir at Law, and yet
if the Heir by Will have a Trial at Law with the Heir at Law, and show the Will
proved under the Seal of the Court, he will lose his Lands for all that; for
the Judges at this day will take no Notice of it; and if he goes to get the
Original out of the Register's Hands, sometimes it is lost, and cannot be found
for Love nor Money, then farewell Land, for that is also gone past all Recovery;
or, if the Registers do happen to stumble upon the Original, they will not part
with it except you give them a thousand pound Bond, and good Security to return
the same; and also 40 s. or 50 s. it usually costs over and above; I know it to
be true by woeful Experience; to the ruin of many a Man's Estate, to the
defeating the Will of the deceased, and in defiance of the Statute 21 Hen. 8.5.
21 H. 8.5.
which commands them to affix the Seal of the Court to the Original-Will, in
such cases where Lands and Hereditaments are bequeathed, and deliver it to be
kept by the Executor, or Party concerned; for who can safer keep a Man's Deeds
than himself? and for the Copy, they ought to take but one penny for every ten
lines thereof, whereof every line to contain ten Inches in length.

So that (if the Question be asked again, What are the Spiritual-Courts good
for?) Are they not good at acting in defiance of the Statutes of this Realm?
And have they not always been good at that, as in many Instances Appears in
this Discourse? I will not Advise (though) that to make them good and wholesome,
they should be dressed and be dressed, as the Doctor Advised his Patient to dress
Cucumbers, with which he had long been enamored, to the ruin of his health;
namely, To take the Cucumbers and slice them, and wash them in Vinegar, then in
Salt and Water, then again in Vinegar and Salt, and then in Vinegar and Pepper,
and then lastly (the only way to keep them from being mischievous is) to throw
them to the Dunghill.

But certainly Errors from the Rule, from the Rule of holy Scriptures, the
further they go, the further they go astray; and it can have no color of
charity, or pretense from God or Christ, or the holy Scriptures, to deliver
precious Souls to the Devil: for want of paying the Knave a Groat; if their
Excommunications were (as they pretend) a real delivery to Satan, a precious
Soul (for whom Christ dyed) is too cheap in all conscience to be fairly
delivered to the Devil for the value of a Shilling or two.

But (that the best on it is) they will redeem it again also for as cheap a Price;
a Man would wonder such mischiefs should be no more taken notice of, except the
Fellows are looked upon to be so contemptible, as that no wise Man heeds them
nor their Blunder, nor their Thunder.

Another miscarriage is, That whoever the Register with some little Surrogate,
(whom the Register leads by the Nose) for the blindest and the willingest to be
so led is the fittest Preperty) shall excommunicate, though but for want for
paying the Register his Fees, illegal and unjustifiable Fees; all
Parish-Ministers are bound to deliver their Flock so excommunicated to the
Devil, or declare the same ( so to be) publicly in the Church, though he knew
nothing of the merit of the Cause, nor of the due course of Proceedings.

But that is not all, a worse mischief is yet behind, namely, The Bishop: 5
Eliz. 23.
The Bishop (upon the Certificavit of the Arch-deacon's Register) grants his
Significavit, without hearing any thing of the Cause; so that, as Papists
believe, as the Bishop of Rome believes, so here quite otherwise (yet no
better) the Bishop believes as the Register of the Arch-deacon's Court
believes, and whatever he certifies to the Bishop, he signifies into the
High-Court of Chancery; so that is usually more safe to displease any Lord in
the Land, than a little, stingy, sneaking Register that bought his Place, and
must make his best on it.

And we may say of these pitiful Fellows as was said of Pope Alexander the
6th. his Symony, in selling so many Benefices, Cardinal-Caps, Indulgences, etc.
as he was Pope, having first by Bribes purchased the Popedom: -- Emerat ille
prius,
Why should not Chapmen sell their Ware, When aboveboard they bought it fair?


Synodals are certain yearly Exactions, paid by every beneficed-Priest to the
Archdeacon out of every Benefice in every Arch-deaconry yearly and every year,
throughout the whole Kingdom of England.

Originally, They were given to the Clergy voluntarily, for the maintenance of
their two Procurators, which were in every Arch-deaconry throughout England,
chosen by the inferior Clergy, to represent them and vote for them in the Synod.

In imitation of the Wages allowed to the Knights, (4 s. per diem) Citizens and
Burgesses (2 s. per diem) for every day they Sit actually in Parliament, for
which there are several Statutes of old time made, but seldom or never in these
days put in use and practice, except here and there by some needy man. But
however there is a Law for this, but Synodals are against Law, and therefore
they differ (only) as right and wrong.

Besides, They were Free Will Offerings; but now they are commanded and exacted
as a Tribute to Mr. Archdeacon in pain of Suspension, Excommunication,
silencing ab officio, (you shall not pray nor preach till you pay him, nor
administer the blessed Sacraments, you shall not serve God, nor so much as come
into the Church, till he be first served, (that is) paid) And also your
Benefice too shall be fleeced, he will go shares, or the Minister shall have no
share at all.

And yet originally this was conferred in kindness to the two Procurators, that
were chosen to be Representatives in the Convocation, and for their
encouragement to persuade them to accept the Place, in behalf of all the
beneficed Ministers of that Arch-deaconry.

But what do you tell Archdeacons of Originals, or whence the Procurations and
Synodals came originally? Very few of them know that, and if they do, they
desire not the knowledge of these ways, Rem, rem, quocunque modo rem.

If they be for Canons, why do not the Bishops suspend all the Archdeacons,
and excommunicate them at least with the lesser (for so they distinguish)
Excommunication, ab Ingressu Ecclesiae, till they repent of their Wickedness,
and till they make Restitution, as the Canons enjoins? John de Aton in Gloss.
in constit. Othon.
And why do not then also the Archbishops excommunicate the Bishops according
to that Canon, until they repent, and make Restitution, to the poor Clergy?
(They have made younger Brothers of them (to be sure) long enough.) Brothers,
quoth he? If this be the kindness of Brothers and Brotherly-kindness, we will even
disclaim the Kindred at this rate; I hate the Friendship that must be bought. I
know the Synod does not sit usually three days during a whole Sessions of
Parliament; no matter for that; Synodals, Synodals the Archdeacon will have,
right or wrong: Indeed the Parliaments now adays have got an opinion (as
aforesaid) to see with their own eyes, saving their presence, and therefore
though present in Synod, they sit long enough before they ask them a Question,
or send to them of late days; no matter still -- Archdeacons will make the
poor inferior Clergy pay notwithstanding they do not sit; strange People! what
will you take a man's money for nothing? So impossible it is for any man that
ever came in their fingers, to get out of their clutches. The Rich-man (in the
Parable) was tormented in the Flames of Hell? for what? for robbing poor
Lazarus? No, (he was not so vile) but for not relieving him according to his
ability, and yet he did relieve him with a niggardly Benevolence -- the Scraps
and Crumbs that fell from his Table, (some Crumbs of comfort in that.)

But our richer Dignitories, though they fare deliciously every day, and have
lusty Revenues, etc. yet that satisfies not, except also they grind the faces
of the poor Vicars, against all Conscience and Equity, as well as against
Reason and Law.

If it be a sin to drink Wine in Bowls, and not be affected with the
afflictions of Joseph; what is it to add affliction to the afflicted; and help
to load the Back that is already ready to break? Hard is his heart that can
find in his heart to rob the Spittle.

In the Primitive-times, (and long after) no Bishops were elected but by the
People, and beneficed Clergy of the Diocese; then by the Clergy; after that (in
Times of Popery) by the great Clergymen, the Dean and Chapter, to whom the
King sends the Conge de Estire, nominating ( though) therein who he will have
them elect, and it is well enough. But I name it for this, to wit, That the
Primitive Christians and Clergy, (by whose Suffrages) one of their Brethren
were advanced over their heads, it could not be expected in all gratitude and
ingenuity, but the new advanced Bishop should be kind and loving to his
Brethren of the Clergy, and do them all the good and grace he could, and
misimprove his power to do them all the mischief or disgrace he can; if his
Power be of the same Make, (and like the Apostles) that was for edification (as
aforesaid) and not for destruction.

Of Churchwardens.
Query III. Whether Churchwardens be Laymen or Clergymen?
BY what has been said, the Remove is very short and easy, from a Clergyman
to a Layman; and a way neither longer nor more difficult, than from a Layman
to a Clergyman; which certainly is not very far.

It would as much have puzzled our learned ones to know by what name to have
called St. Paul if they had caught him a Weaving (as aforesaid) Whether a
Clergyman or a Layman, as to answer this Quaere, What kind of Creature (as to
Ecclesiasticals,) is a Churchwarden? If we find him at Plow, we are apt to
think him a Layman; but if we find him (as he is made by Statute) a Bishop or
Overseer of the Poor and serving Tables, (the sole Office of a Deacon in the
Primitive-Times) why is he not as much a Clergyman as any Deacon, or as those
7. Deacons Chosen? Acts 6.

Like an Impropriator's Motley kind,
Whose Scarlet Coat is with a Cassock lined;
So mixed they are, Gleveland.
one knows not whether's thicker,
A Lair of Burgess, or a Lair of Vicar.
The Papists have 7. kind of Orders, And all of them, as well as Priests, are
examined, and their abilities approved by the Bishops, before their Graces
pass, namely, The Doorkeepers, Readers, Conjurers, Taper-bearers, Subdeacons,
Deacons, Priests.

The 3 last of these, namely, Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, are only
accounted Holy Orders.

Our Churchwarden's office, is much the same with the Subdeacons, (not the
Conjurer's;) Few of them are guilty of that; if they were, sure they would not
take the following Oath of Churchwardens usually given to them, in the
Spiritual-Court.

Our Churchwarden, indeed, does not read the Epistle, nor perform any Public
Sacred Office, as the Deacons, and Subdeacons do amongst the Papists; But his
chief use amongst us is to take care of the Poor, and Church, and to Repair
them both; to provide Bread and Wine for the Holy-Supper; And not only be the
Common-Informer for that Year, but also to present all Offenses upon Oath; so
that he is not only an Accuser, but a Witness; does not only present, but in
some sort also Convict, as being upon his Oath.

Which Oath is usually given to them in these words -- You shall Execute the
Office of Churchwarden in the Parish where you are chosen for this ensuing
Year, according to His Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, So help you God.

By what has been already here discussed, It may be evident: How difficult it
is, (even for a Doctor of both Laws) to decide which are those Laws
Ecclesiastical that are this day in force; and which are not so in force, but
void and of no effect.

Some of them swallow the Oath glib (poor Hearts) rather than venture to be
Excommunicated; then paying Three shillings and six pence, and (if they make a
Presentment) a shilling more for that; and fare-you-well, till the next
half-Year, (that is) the next Visitation.

But if they be stubborn, and will neither pay nor swear, (as the better half
usually do,) then they are delivered to Satan by Excommunication; and if they
do swear, how are their Souls hazarded by downright Perjury? Their case is a
Pitiful case, that is the truth on it; and deferves the wisest and greatest
consideration.

I never durst give that usual Oath, but this -- You shall Execute the Office
of Churchwarden in the Parish where you are chosen, according to your
discretion, and skill in His Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, So help you God.

But I am quite weari'd with pudling thus long in this Channel, or rather this
Kennel.

Of Sacrilege.
Query IV. Whether to keep and enjoy Abbey-lands, and Lands belonging formerly
to Nuns, Friars and such Faternities, be Sacrilege?
AS there is a Mystery of Godliness, so there is a Mystery of Iniquity. The
Mother of Harlots had Mystery writ in her forehead: nay the public devotions
and prostitutions to Bacchus and Venus wanted not their Arcana's. We read of
the depths of Satan, and Labyrinth's in the way to Hell, ( How easy soever the
descent be,) The style of servus servorum is the umbrage and prologue to the
greatest Pride: and Jure Divine the umbrage of the greatest Cheats and
Pick-pockets. And in Prosecutions of these Mysteries which Rome preserves as (
Arcana Imperii) the Relics and holy secrets to maintain their Grandeur and
Hierarchy, They usually fence all their Immunities, Privileges, Goods, Lands,
Tenements, and Emoluments; (as they do all their other Popish Relics and
Figments, when they begin to decay) (and which they have got by cheating
Tricks, as with a Safeguard, securing all) with a Jure Divino. And would make
the world believe that when with their cheats of Purgatory and Indulgences they
have picked men's Pockets and got a great deal of money, The Magistrate may not
search them, hands off; It Is now sacred, it is now divine and holy; what are you
mad, to break through a Jure Divino? will you rob God?

Thus when a handsome Whore had made use of her time and her beauty, (whilst it
lasted) which (some think) is but a very little while;) Playing them both away
for more durable Beauties, (good store of Gold;) The Crafty Friars and Monks
(like the Box-keepers: or Panders) were sure to march off with most of the
Gains; Picking the Ladi's Pocket of (at least) half her Winnings, with a Story
(told) of Purgatory and Indulgences; Thus Selling and Buying by a fair Bargain
and Sale (and fairly by Deed enrolled, Indented and delivered in the Presence
of Witnesses, as hereafter shown,) An Imaginary Heaven or a Fools Paradise.

Thus the Girl kill's 3 Birds with one stone, and in barter for a Little, very
little modesty, gets first pleasure. 2. Profit and store of Gold. 3. With one
Moity of it, (after all,) Heaven it self; ( in her simple opinion:) whilst the
Subtle Friars laugh in their Sleeves, to see how soon the Fools and their money
are parted, and by this Craft getting their Wealth, and their stately Abbeys
and Monasteries; Thus building a great many Thus Horn-Church near Rumford in
Essex was built by a Popish-Whore, and therefore had the name.
Horn-Churches and Horn-Chappels.

With these kind of Methods did the Fat Abbots and pretty Nuns subsist very
Plentifully and well; and kept themselves in very good Plight; and for Sinners,
very well on it, (at least) well to live; sending out their Emissaries and
Finders to Hay about and bring in more Game to net; namely, old Usurers, old
Whore-Masters, nay, Incestuous persons and Murderers; For Rome (like the Sea
and the Gallows) refuses none.

Thus having got the Fat of the Land, and every day making new Purchases, new
Prizes and New-Conquests; (for fear the State that Frighted them often with
their Statutes of Mortmayn, etc. should force them to Restitution of what they
thus Purloin'd for themselves and their own greedy Guts,) (though (in Pretense)
for God's sake; They therefore entrench't and garrisoned themselves and their
gettings with this same Outwork, (for their eternal guard and safeguard) Jure
Divino. And where is the man of mortals now so daring and Hardy as to venture
to storm this Outwork, and pass the Trench of Jure Divino, for fear of fighting
with God, and Robbing God? As if all their corrupt Conquests, (purchased by
Juggling and Slight) were Deodands, and God's Inheritance; which to touch with
a Lay-finger (forsooth) is to Rob God, and downright Sacrilege.

Sacrilege is a Term of Art, which joining forces with the said Jure Divine,
has done wonders (of this nature) though not one of a thousand does know what
Sacrilege is.

Sacrilege is (certainly) the worst of Robberies, for it robs God, by
Purloining, detaining or alienating what he has been pleased to appropriate to
himself. And this is the full definition or rather description of Sacrilege.

The Tithes and Offering's God had set a part for himself, his own Propriety,
and for his own immediate Service, under the Law. To defraud the Priests of
those Tithes and Offerings is called Mal. 3.8. Robbing of God. Mat. 3.8.


And by like reason and express Scripture, the maintenance of Gospel Ministers
is expressly commanded; namely, Daily bread, ( not Lands and Tenements settled
upon them for ever; If any such there be, It is a Free Will Offering and the
munifice and charity of the Law) For

Our blessed Savior says, The workman is worthy of his meat: (that is)
Sustenance; Mat. 10.10.
but Lands, Manors, and Tenements in Fee-Simple for ever, Christ that was
himself poor and Landless, also his Disciples, and Apostles, having neither
Silver nor Gold nor a purse nor scrip to put them in, did never labor for the
morrow, nor yet for the meat that perishes: but seeking first the Kingdom of
God, all other things were added unto them.

And if the wicked World did not maintain them, they were to cast off the dust
of their Shoes against them, and go to them that would entertain the Word and
them. But in what proportion their entertainment and maintenance is to be;
whether the Tenth, the Fifth, the Twentyeth, the Hundredth, or Thousandth part
of a man's Estate, is not decided by the Gospel.

And it is the Idlest of dreams to say, that because the Priests under the Law,
the Levites had the Tithes of the whole Land, that therefore by the same
Reason, Ministers of the Gospel should have the same Proportion and Allowance
out of all men's Estates, and that it is Sacrilege to detain the same:

For, is the Parson or Parish Priest the 12th part of the Parish he lives in,
though you also number with him his Family if he have any; or are the Clergy
and their Families the 22th part of England, as the Tribe of Levi were the 12th
part of Israel.

Except this be proved, a Parity of maintenance cannot hence be argued by
paying the Tenth or Tithes; unless a Parity of numbers of the Clergy of England
bore the like proportion to England, that the Tribe of Levi did to Israel: that
is, a 12th part.

And therefore it is an Idle Dream, and a Bugbear, to call detaining of
Tithes, Sacrilege, except it can be proved that God or Christ, or the Apostles
ever took (or commanded to be taken) the Tenth to Gospel Ministers (as God
expressly commanded the Tithes of all Israel to the Levites); That bear no
proportion in number to the Tribe of Levi, nor are the Tenth part, nor scarce
the hundredth part of most Parishes, and yet shall lick up the whole Tenth part
of the Parish.

But though detaining of Tithes from Ministers, is not Sacrilege, yet
detaining of Tithes from Ministers, is as great a Sin, as (and no greater sin
than) detaining Tithes from Impropriators, namely, (as other frauds and
wrongs.) A transgression of the Laws of the Land.

Which the wily Priests never cared to trust to, if they could help it; nor to
be beholden to; (though to the Law of the Land alone, and Acts of Parliament,
they are beholden for any Tithes or portion of Tithes that they do enjoy;) and
therefore they secure their Tithes with this same frightful word, Sacrilege;
and also Jure Divino. A Vicar has not the great Tithes; no; nor a poor man has
not the great Manors and Lordships that others have; but the poor and poor
Vicars have all that is their due, and allowed them as their Propriety; and let
them be thankful to God and the Laws for that; though not so great as other
men's, and perhaps neither do they deserve so much as other men; howsoever it
is their Lot, and therefore poor Vicar, Sort tua contentus abi; though I wish
thee well and more.

For it is not Sacrilege for a Gentleman to have the great Tithes or
Abbey-Lands; (disposed of by Acts of Parliament,) if he honestly purchased them
of the Crown: But it is Robbery (at least in heart) for thee (poor Vicar) thus
to covet thy Neighbors Goods, thy Neighbors great Tithes, that never, never
-- (no, not in the days of Popery) never were thine, nor thy Predecessors; but
belonged to the said Abbots and Nun's, from whom (by the Law of the Land) they
(as being got by a Cheat) Escheated to the King: and never were God's Propriety
or Gods Purchase: (for if this could be proved, All the Kings and Parliaments
in the World cannot take them away and Alienate them.)

But fair and softly; Though the said Whores, Extortioners, Usurers, and
Murderers; etc. being deluded and Cheated with an Imaginary Purgatory, and
Paradise (over the Gates whereof the Pope writes in Capital Letters, This House
is to be Let, Enquire of St. Peter's Successor for the Key) The silly
Purchasers (like those of old that bartred their Silver-Spoons; Bodkins, and
Tankards for the Publique-Faith) were Fob'd of their Moneys, Goods and Lands.

Nay, Deat. 23.18.
though the Moneys and Lands, be tendered to God, and by deed of Gift, (fairly
engros'd, Sealed and) delivered in the presence of Witnesses and super altar
too (as Bishop Andrews notably observes,) who can prove that God Accepts this
Tender, and strikes up the Bargain? because there ought to go always two Words
to a bargain, namely, as both buyer and seller can agree. And when and where
did God say that he Accepted these cheating Purchases, these fruits of Sin, for
Deodates?

Nay, I know that God has said to the contrary, that he will not accept of any
such Gift, Offering, Bargain or Sale: in Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall not bring the
Hire of a Whore, or the Price of a Dog, into the House of the Lord thy God,
for any vow, for even both these are an abomination unto the Lord thy God.

It was Politickly done though to fence in the Abbey-Lands with a Jure Divino;
and yet even in the days of Popery, The noise the wyly Priests made ( echoed
by the silly Priests) Sacrilege, Sacrilege, did not Affright our Kings and
Parliaments from making many Statutes of Mortmayn, to stop the Current of this
Cheating Deluge of Charity (to the Church) almost ready to drown the
Commonwealth. And yet (like Pharaoh's Lean-kine) the greedy-Priests that had
Eat up the Fat of the Land, looked as Hungry and Sharp, as if they had really
kept and observed their Vow of Poverty, (and yet were the richest Cormorants in
the Land:) which Vow notwithstanding some think they kept as well as their Vow
of Chastity: (And yet they were the Archest Fellows in nature at a Wench.)
Insomuch as one of their own Popes; (and the Learnedest of them all) Aeneas
Sylvius, used to say; that Marriage of Priests had Ruined many, But a Single
Life had Damned many more.

For which Causes (amongst other) the King and Parliament made those Nunneries
those Abbey-Lands, a just forfeiture to the Crown; And though the said old
Charm -- Jure Divino -- and Sacrilege, Sacrilege -- have lost their wonted
vigor, (as being now disoover'd to be mere Stalking-Horses under whose shadow
crafty Men catch their Prey) yet still it is in use amongst us Protestants on
many such Accounts: And does feats still amongst the simple and unwary.

Nay, some of the Learned (whether affectedly and colourably only, or no; or
that Interest (the great Solicitor and best Advocate, but the worst Judge)
bribes their Judgments, I cannot tell) but sure I am, many of them seem to pin
their Faith upon it.

Thus a Learned Bishop of our own, in his Book of the Collection of the Canons,
A.S. Bishop o Norwich.
quotes another Learned Bishop deceased, In his Title Page concerning the form
of Consecration of a Church or Chapel, etc. In these very words, namely;
Bishop Andrews Notes upon the Liturgy. It is not to be forgotten, though It be
forgotten, that whoever gave any Lands or Endowments to the Service of God,
gave it in a formal Writing, as now-adays betwixt Man and Man, Sealed and
Witnessed, and the Tender of the Gift was super altar by the Donor on his
Knees.

And why? And why? why a Deed in Writing, Sealed and Witnessed, and Delivered?
And why had not God the keeping of it then? So he had, as near as they could
come to him, super altar, where they supposed he stood Metamorphos'd from a
Wafer, and Transubst antiated, (Enclosed also) in the Pix.

Or else I guess the Bargain and Sale had been as effectual to all Intents and
Purposes, though the said formal Writing had been Sealed and delivered in the
Belfrey, the Body of the Church, or in the Churchyard or Moot-Hall.

But why (I wonder) is not all this Ceremony to be forgotten, now that the days
of Transubstantiation are at an End with English Bishops? And why must this
formal Story be filed up amongst the Memorandums of those odd Relics and
Canons? And together also with the form of Consecrating a Church or Chapel;
and of the place of Christian Burial? And all this exemplified by the R.R.
Father in God Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester.

But above all those Admirable Collections, the greatest wonder is, how any Man
durst Print and revive ( as he does) the Proclamation of King Charles I.
wherein the Proceedings of His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers
are Proclaimed to be according to the Laws of this Realm.

Indeed when that Proclamation was put out; They were so; The Star Chamber and
HighCommission Court being then in being, and 1 Eliz. 1. not repealed, but in
force.

But now the Case is altered, and these Courts and that Law that founded them
is taken away, sure the structure then built upon it, must follow the same
fate, and the Church left but with just the same Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
they had in the days of Queen Mary, (a little before the 1 Elizabeth 1.) which
by their own Confession was taken away from them; as aforesaid.

And therefore It is high time surely, That these Doubts were cleared and
resolved, that both the Bishop's Jurisdiction might not be so precarious as it
is: And also that the People might know (at length) How much of the Canon Law,
and How many Canons, or whether any Canons be in force at this Day; and when
and for what Ecclesiastical matters they are liable to be Excommunicated and
Goaled: or whether the Wisdom and Piety of the Realm does not think it most fit
to make the same use of this same two-edged Sword, as (the Ancient Jews did) of
Goliah's Sword; which was carefully preserved in the Temple and laid up behind
the Ephod, and never to be made use of but by David himself, (and not by every
Whipster that knows not how to wield it,) no, nor by David neither, but in
Cases of Urgent Necessity.

The Apostle Paul (that had the Gift of Discerning of Spirits, and therefore
never drew this Sword in a wrong cause, (as now adays) but against the Enemy of
Christ only) never drew it neither but Twice, and that against Horrible
Sinners; An Incestuous Person and Blafphemers.

And therefore though Excommunication was in use in the Church whilst the said
Gifts of Discerning of Spirits were frequent, and only against Notorious
Offenders and Offenses, yet Quaere, Whether every Commissary, and
Lay-Vicar-General (though he has a Priest by him sometimes for fashion-sake)
did ever wield this sharp-Weapon; or draw it upon every Occasion, as when the
Register's Fees and Sumner's Fees are not paid, especially in these Days, when
Men may justly scruple, whether they ought to obey their Processes as not being
in the King's Name, and under the King's Seal, as the Law enjoins.

It Is sad thus to send Men to Satan, because they do not pay the Knave a Groat;
especially, when the Sumner does not Cite Men according to Law, and to make
Appearance before a Court too that does not pretend to Sit by His Majesty's
Commission; nor by Virtue of their Original Constitution and ordinary
Jurisdiction from the Pope. This to Assert, would make them incurr a
Proemunire; what can they say for themselves?

The Apostle Paul did many things that we cannot do; our Blessed Savior did
many things which would be sin in us to Attempt to do: He walked upon the
Waters, he Fasted 40 Days and 40 Nights, he commanded his Servants to take away
a Man's Ass and Colt tied; we may not Attempt these things; they are above our
Skill. And so (I fear) it is beyond our Skill and Abilities to wield and draw,
sheath and unsheath that Goliah's Sword of Excommunication; Especially, when
Men offend only our Interests, and not the Law of the Land; and yet it is
often brandished against this sin of Sacrilege, Sacrilege; and by those, many
times, that do not, or will not know what Sacrilege is.

Nay, I have heard some Men speak great Words against the King and Parliament
in Hen. 8. time, and against all Parliaments ever since, that Alienated or
consent to Alienate these Abbey-Lands and Nunneries, as if they would smite
them with this Thunderbolt of Excommunication, (as guilty of Sacrilege) if
they durst.

It was as safe for Naboth and his Vineyard to lie conveniently and next Hedge
to Ahab's, as sometimes to have had Lands bordering upon St. Peter's Patrimony:
why so? what cannot St. Peter or his Pretended Successors do?

Oh! this Religion, this Engine of pretended Religion, this Dart of
Excommunication, when it is out of the Magistrates keeping, shall wound and mawl
them wonderfully: Ask the Excommunicated Venetians, (when Dandalus their
Ambassador came with a Rope about his Neck to beg their Peace) ask the poor
Duke of Ferrara, if this be true.

Let the King Command a Becket, or a Woolsey to his Allegiance, They will be
his Humble Servants with a Salvo honor Dei; And say others, in omnibus nisi
rebus Christi; so that these kind of Religious Bigots always keep in Reserve a
Starting-Hole, a Loop-Hole, a Sally-Port always ready and open (when their
Forces and occasion calls) to Attempt against the King's Supremacy, especially
when their Humors are cros't, or their Pride Affronted, or their Revenge
unappeas'd, or their Covetousness unglutted; And it is a hard matter to Glut it.

The Popish Religious Houses had once a third part of the Land, and were they
Glutted? Bishops and Archdeacons have enough to live on without sharing with
and pareing every Benefice in the Diocese; yet though they know not how they
came honestly and lawfully by their Procurations, Synodals and Visitations;
though it be against Law, Conscience and Compassion, for the Rich thus to pinch
the Poor; yet take it from them, And it is a hundred to one, if they do not
plead Jure Divino for the Tenure, and cry out Sacrilege, Sacrilege.

Of the Church of England.
Quaere, What it is?
There Is nothing more ordinary than for People to say, (in these days of
Part-taking and distinguishing who Men are for?) I am for the Church of England:

Whereas there is not one of a Thousand understands what he means, or who he
means, in saying so.

In the Days of Popish Prelacy, Men were Taught to believe as the Church
believes; (meaning) as the Clergy believes: So that, for Salvation, they needed
no further Knowledge or Insight than a blind Implicit Faith in the Church,
(that is) in the Clergy.

To see with Clergy-mens Eyes, to believe as they pleased to prescribe, to be
led thus by the Nose to Heaven, was the Divinity of Old; And so a Man did but
follow his Nose in the dark, no matter for Eyes: The Archdeacons, (those oculi
Episcoporum) together with the Bishops, they could see and (...) and Oversee
for us all; 'till at last, the Church had no other Members but Head and Eyes: a
monstrous Church, sure.

And though the Holy Apostles and Elders had as good Eyes, one would think, as
these Pretenders and pretended Successors, yet they never had the Forehead
(that those Men put on) who confine and Monopolize the Church of Christ to
themselves alone, and make Canons and Laws by themselves alone, as if they
alone were the Church.

Thus when Magna Charta says, That Holy Church should be free; They always
meant, and it is so construed at this Day. -- Let the Clergy be free -- (from
Taxes, Impositions, etc.) So that by the Church of England, is meant the Clergy
of England; A little Church then (surely) in so great a Realm, and a great pity
that so many Lay-Brethren should dye out of the Pale of the Church.

And yet the Dignitaries of the Church, (not content to be only amongst the
Crowd of other Clergymen the Church) streighten the Bounds, and take in the
Pale to more scanty Limits, making themselves when in Synod especially and
Convocation, (at least) the Representative-Church; and of power to see for all
the rest, and to bind them to what Decrees and Laws they list. Thus the
Articles of Religion, Regn. Eliz. Anno Domini 1562. Articuli de quibus
convenit, etc. Articles agreed upon in the Synod of London By and Between the
Archbishops and Bishops of Both Provinces, and all the Clergy. What little
share the Inferior Clergy have in making such Articles, I have shown already;
and also that 1 Eliz. 1. is repealed; on which those Articles seem to be
founded.

Which yet I say not, to weaken the force and virtue of them: they are so good,
so moderate, so charitable, so Christian-like in themselves, that they need no
voucher, no Statutes to vouch them, they are so honestly come by.

For, Pride and Passion, Prejudice and Peevishness, Malice and Revenge (the
wonted Inmates) were excluded the Convocation-House, when those 39. Articles of
the Church of England were composed, and nothing but the Naked-Truth permitted
entrance. It Is strange, you will say, and in a Synod too, composed of Clergymen;
and of the few too, (But I care not for that) once it happened to be so, it
seems.

But still I say, (under favor) The Holy Apostles never took so much upon them
to make Canons and Constitutions, but by assent and consent, (as well as joint
Promulgation in the names) of all the Lay-Brethren; or when the multitudes of
Disciples were increased, at least, they might, I hope, have a vote in choosing
who should represent them in this representative Church.

Which if true, (and It is before sufficiently proved) then surely, as the
Church of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. were the Christians of Corinth,
Ephesus, Galatia, etc. Clergy and Lay together, (though those distinctions were
not then known;) so really and truly, The Church of England are all the
Christian's of England; over them, under Christ, the King is the Visible Head
and Supreme Governor in the Executive power, and the King and Parliament in
the Legislative or Canon-making Power.

With what tolerable modesty then can the Clergy alone, (much less a few of
them) arrogate to themselves the Title, Privileges and Immunities of the
Church of England? Tell not me that it was so when the Pope usurped the
Supremacy, what is that to us now?

I know that when Magna Charta was made; by Holy Church being Free, (was meant)
Let the Clergy be free, from Taxes, etc. but how little did the Prelates value
that Law? for though the Clergy ( by that Statute) was free from Impositions
and Burdens, yet the Prelates did not so much regard it seems, but that they
notwithstanding would venture to Pill and Poll the Inferior Clergy, by
Procurations, Synodal's, Visitations, and many more vexations as if the Clergy
was free (for no body) to fleece but for themselves alone, and that too, arbi
trarily.

Better it is for them, much better, to be thrown up in Common (as of yore)
amongst the Laity again, and take Neighbour's-fare, by Acts of Parliament; than
by being an Enclosure and exempt, be made the peculiar of
arbitrary-Impositions, (though by the men of their own Cloth;) none were so
unkind to Joseph as his own Brethren, he had fairer Quarters from the Gypsees.

As the Clergy (all of them) have as much His Majesty's Protection as other
folk, and the benefit of the Laws, nay, and the benefit of the Clergy too (if
they need it) as much as any Laymen; good reason therefore they should
contribute equally with others to Taxes, and Arms, and to the Poor, etc. But
it is sad when this will not suffice; but for enjoying the name (and nothing but
the name) of the Church. They shall not only pay First Fruits, and Tenths to
His Majesty, as bound by Law; but to pay without end, and without Law, all the
Arbitrary Impositions that Rich and great Men of their own Cloth shall lay upon
them (for Letters of orders, Institution, Induction, Licenses to Preach,
Procurations, Synodals, Visitations; and then again for showing these Letters
of Orders, Institutions, etc.) it is that makes you so poor and beggarly
(generally) and consequently contemptible, world without end.

I cannot but with some complacency read the Statute of 16. Rich. 2.5. where
the King and Parliament (when Popery was in its Zenith) did not forget, that
they and the Clergy, the Inferior Clergy too, were Englishmen; namely. That,
Whereas the Commons of the Realm in this present Parliament have showed to our
redoubted Lord the King, grievously complaining, That whereas our said Lord the
King and all his Liege People ought of right, (mark that) and of Old time wont
(mark that too) to sue in the King's Court, to recover their Presentiments to
Churches, Prebends and other Benefices of Holy Church, to the which they had
right to Present; The cognizance of Plea of which Presentment belongs only
(mark that too) to the Kings Court of the old Right of his Crown, used and
approved in the time of all his Progenitors Kings of England;

And when Judgments shall be given in the same Court upon such a Plea and
Presentment, (mark that too) The Archbishops and Bishops, and other Spiritual
Persons which have Institution of such Benefices, within their Jurisdiction, be
bound (mark that too) and have made Execution of such Judgments, without
Interruption, (mark the Reason) for another Lay-Person cannot make such
Execution; And also be bound of right (mark that too) to make Execution of many
other the King's Commandments, etc. (too long here to insert) but concluding,
That against the offenders Process by Praemunire facias) should be made, and
not only against the offenders, but against their Procurators, Executors,
Maintainors, (mark that too) as in the Statute of Provisors, 27 Edw. 3.1. and
against All other which do sue in any other Court (mark that too) in derogation
of the Regality of our Lord the King.



Whence it appears, That even in those Popish times, Patrons, ( most whereof
were Lord of the Manors, and gave the Tithes and Glebe) should present (right
and good reason) and give their own; (may they not do what they will with their
own?) to what Clerk they please, giving him thereby Jus ad rem, and then the
Bishop and Archdeacons by Institution and Induction as Instruments in Law,
because a Lay-person (as the Sheriffs, etc.) cannot (as the Law then was, and
now is) make such Execution, and give the Clerks presented Jus in Re, or
possession.

And if a Bishop or Archdeacon (for they are but men) do refuse the same
wantonly or through prejudice, or design, for a Kingsman or a Friend of his own
when modestly requested by the Clerk presented, and will not admit him habilem;
then the Law has provided a Writ called Quare Impedit, to force him to show a
Lawful cause in the Kings-Courts, and by them approved, or otherwise to force
the Bishop to make Execution according to the Patrons Presentment.

Thus we see in Times of greatest Popery, our Ancestors did assert their own
Proprieties against Arbitrary Proceedings of Men that called themselves -- the
Church -- the Church.

I Will give but one Instance more, to show what little pretense the Clergy alone
have to entitle themselves alone the Church Representative of England,
(distinct from the Lay-Brethren) and that is in making a Canon to Cringe to the
East, and Bow at the Name of Jesus.

Jesus? We now know what you would be at; Phil. 2.10, 11.
for does not the Apostle say, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow,
etc. this might have been let alone.

I will not let it go so; yet must acknowledge readily and cheerfully, That
there is no other Name under Heaven by which we can be saved, nor any other
name (except that of God and Jehovah!) that deserves more signal Reverence.

And yet, notwithstanding, Bernardus non videt omnia, nor the Church, the
Church (I mean the Clergy) in her Placet's, always rational, much less,
Infallible.

The words in Phil. 2.10, 11. are -- That at the Name of Jesus every knee (not
every head) should how, of things in Heaven, (therefore not literally to be
understood, for there is no knees there to bow,) and things in Earth, and
things under the Earth; (there is no knees there neither, except those in
Graves, and they are too senceless, at least too stiff to bow.) And that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord; Therefore such as take the
words literally, ought at the same time that they bow the head or knee, to use
also their Tongues, and confess at the same time, that Jesus Christ is Lord.

But (I say) in obedience to this Holy Scripture, (or rather, some Clergy-men's
Comment thereon) Men, at this day, at the Name of Jesus, bow their heads, not
their knees; yet the Text speaks not one word of that; nay, in all discourse,
as well as in the Church, men that understand it in the litteral sense, ought
to bow the knee, ( and not dop the head) and also at the same time they ought
with their Tongues confess -- That Jesus Christ is Lord.

Thus when we hear a Common-Swearer 100 times in an hour swear -- by Jesus --
as is usual and often; we ought (by this Interpretation) to make a Leg every
time, and with our Tongues Echo to him and cry out -- Jesus Christ is Lord.

But such was the wisdom, for want of comparing the Words with the Context;
For by the Name of Jesus (there) is understood the Power and Sovereignty of
Jesus, to which God has highly Exalted him (not those 4. or 5. Letters, but a
Power) above every Name (that is, above every Creature, or above all created
Powers) whether in Heaven or in Earth, or under the Earth, that they might how
the knee to him, (that is,) adore him.

So Prove. 18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower; not the Letters
Jehovah, or Jah) is a strong Tower, or the found and noise of those words, but
-- The Power of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run unto it, and are
safe; not into the Letters or found of the Name.

Yet, notwithstanding, if any man will show Reverence at the Name of Jesus, I
am not offended, so he show as much Reverence at the Name of God, and at the
Name of the Holy Ghost.

It is a hard and harsh saying of some, and borders upon Blasphemy, to make
distinctions, in the Holy Trinity; as if we were more beholden to the Second
Person of the Holy Trinity, than to the First, or Third Person; This Grates --
to make a difference in Reverencing The Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity.

But in this Instance, I only show, that the Clergy, the Clergy, (much less --
a few of the Clergy because Higher and Taler,) have shown no Charter hitherto,
nor reason to have such a Charter granted to them to be (without the Laity) The
Church, The Churth of England.

The whole Ecumenical Council of Nice had erred shamefully but for one single
eyed man, Paphnutius. And it is pretty reading in the Council of Trent, to see
how at a loss the Fathers were for a Resolution, 'till Post-Night; till the
Packet returned from Rome (one said with their Holy Ghost in a Cloak-bagg); So
that the next day after the Post came in, People repaired to the Counsel-House
for News, and to know how squares would go; as men do now to a Country
Coffee-house on a Post-night to know how things go above.

But is it not strange Impudence, Atheism, and Effrontery thus to take Gods
holy Name and Spirit in vain, by making the Holy Ghost father all our Escapes
and By-blows, adulterately begotten by Self-Interest, Pride, Passion, Revenge,
crasty Fetches, covetons designs, (whether the French or the Spanish Interest
carry it, still The style is -- It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us --)
God forgive them.

And this is the Church -- The Church, (that is) the Clergy, the Clergy; or
rather the Few, the Few; the least in number (I will not say, I cannot say) the
worst of the number, nor the Idlest of the number.

But add to them Lay-Chancellors, or Vicar-Generals, Sumners, Registers, etc.
To make up this Church, the Church of England -- And you make them worse and
worse.

I look upon the Church of England as the greatest Bull-Work against Popery;
what? This latter sort of men? are they such a Bull-work? no, the Protestants
of England, The Protestant Laws of England embodied with the Fundamental-Laws
of the Realm; Ruin one, and you ruin the other; for they must live and die
together.

Thus have I evidenced, that the Laity (in the Apostles times) were the Church,
and as much Canon-makers and Rule-makers, and had the conduct of the infallible
Spirit and gifts of the Holy Ghost, as well as the Apostles; and therefore
certainly the Christian People (as well as the Clergy) of England, are the
Church of England.

Nay, In Hen. 3. time, when the Popish Prelates were most Rampant, and Othoben
the Pope's Nuncio had almost Beggared that King, keeping him poor, and doing
what he list with him; yet when they were to be excommunicated that Infringed
Magna Charta, The Clergy, (nor the Synod) did not make it, but the King, and
Parliament in these words.

Noverint universi Quod Dominus H. Rex Angliae illustris, Anno. 37. H. 3.
R. Comes Norff. and Marescallus Anglin, H. comes Hereford, and Essex, I comes
de Warewico, Petrus de Sabbaudia, Caeterique Magnaces Anglia, consenserunt in
sentiam Excommunicationis generaliter latam apud Westminster. Tertio decimo die Muii
Anno Regni Regis Pradicte, in hac forma, scilices Quod vinculo Praefacae
sententiae ligenter omnes venientes contra libertates contentas in chartis
communium libertatum Angliae, and de Foresta, etc. Dominus Rex and praedicti
Magnates omnes, and Communitas Populi protestantur publite, etc. by Communitus
Populi, there I understand the Honse of Commons, though it had not the form in
those days which now it puts on and decently wears.

By which it appears, that the King and his Lay People would not trust the
Clergy in those days with making Sentences of excommunication; nor with
declaring causes of Excommunication; much less without the Privity of King and
Parliament, as some have presumed. But matchless is the Malice of those men
that are angry with all Laymen that dare be so bold as to see their own way
with their own (and not with Clergy) eyes, and Prospectives.

The Conclusion.
THus have I stared these Quaries, so needful to be discussed, And proved, That
all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (like all other Jurisdictions) must be derived
from the King or the Pope; To assert the latter, Incurs a Praemunire, or to
pretend any old ordinary Jurisdiction originally granted them from the Pope in
their first creation: and his Majesty has obliged himself never to Empower them
by Commission any more.

By the Statutes of Hen. 8. all those ordinary Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical
were cut off, and they (left) without any in Queen Mary's time, as the Synod
did confess (as aforesaid:) But in King Edward's time their Ecclesiastical
Proceedings were revived, but with condition, that all Citations, Processes,
etc. should be in the Name of the King the Head of the Church, (as in Original
and Judicial Writs at the Common Law,) He being also Head of the State. And in
due acknowledgment also of this Supremacy, The Seals of their Spiritual-Courts
should have engraven in them, The Kings Arms.

Great, very great Reason there is (and there was) for such a Statute as that,
1 Edw. 6. But oh! this Hierarchy! this Power! how sweet? could the Bishops ever
be brought to this? I Will warrant some of them would keep no Courts at all
first: but who cares?

For, cui bono? cui fini? should be the question every man puts in all his
affairs; so here; cui bono? cui fini? what are the Spiritual Courts good for at
this day as they are managed?

I protest, I cannot tell, and yet no man in England has more reason to know
their virtue than I, nor scarce any has had more experience of them, and in
them, and still (as I said before) I have an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of
mine own.

For except a little money (I should say) a great deal of money, (ungedly money
wickedly got) by the Extortions of Registers, (I Will prove what I say) and
shamefully against Law; and money, money, from the poor Clergy, the Inferior
Clergy, and silly Churchwardens, against the Common Law, Statute Law,
Canon Law, Civil-Law, Equity, Conscience, Reason and Humane Compassion, all
condemning this unnatural and Unkind Rapaeity, Except these be good things, I
know not what they are good for; not by what Authority they dare send out
Citations without the King's Name, Title, and Seal, against the King's
Liege-People: or how a Writ de Excummunicato Capiendo can legally be awarded,
(the ground whereof being a Significavii under Seal, a legal Seal) unless the
Kings Arms be engraven in the Seal of the Significavit, and the Process, on
which it is founded, also run in the King's Name, etc.

Tell not me, (for I know it) That the opinion of the Judges was ask't about
this, as in the said Proclamation; But when was it? It was when the
High-Commission-Courts were in being; no man durst speak any thing in these
days against their Placet's, It would be his ruin if he did; But now since
that Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. is repealed; I for my part, know not by what
Authority we do these things: And I write this, as much for my own satisfaction
and more, than for any man's else.

And that too in a discourse here (such as it is) neither Polite nor neatly
dres't; I have neither Will nor Leisure to write it over again, and sleek it,
and polish it, and make it Fine, it is now most natural, most like my self,
(plain and blunt) not curious, nor affected, (like my Garb) not Rich, and yet,
I hope, not Slovenly. For I (am one of those that) love my Pleasure and Humor
so much, as not to take overmuch pains to please or displease any man alive.

However, what Prudent Man would barter his Ease, to purchase (in Exchange) the
Reputation of a Writer (not worth one farthing) in this Scribling-Age.

For New Books are like New-Plays, wherewith the Poets and Actors can scarce
please One in Ten; And though the Fops get there all the little Wit they have;
yet they will rail and disparage them, but cannot (notwithstanding) for bear
seeing them for their hearts.

I write (as I speak) right on, and the Naked Truth, and Home Truths; purposely
neglecting the wily circumspection of Flatterers and Dislemblers, Fellows of no
Soul.)

And as I have writ this off-hand, and what came next to hand, and occurred (at
present) without pumping; yet has not one word here slipped my Pen, without its
due weight and consiration; nothing is here presented Crude and Immature, but
well-digested, as (a few of those) things that my Head and Heart have long been
full of; though a late Occasion now gives them Birth; no Abortion, I hope.

For I am well assured that I have not only given Birth here to my own
Conceptions, but to the Conceptions also of almost the whole Nation, whose
Judgments are not blinden and bribed by Interest: (And these last shall Be mine
Enemies and they only:) But I hope also, Psalm. 62.3.
they shall be like a bowing Wall and a tottering Fence, whilst I say and Pray
the whose Psalm, 62.

I have no picque against any man in Particular, no private Interest, nor
Revenge to gratify, but wish for my own private-Interest, as well as for the
publique-Weal, That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction were of force, strength and
virtue, and not thus uncertain, disorderly and precarious.

I have (I confess) in this Search and Inquiry Anatomized and rip't up to the
Bottom some Secret parts, yet I have also at the same time cast a vail over
their Nakedness, and hid their shame; ( what I could, I mean.)

And in these Gentle Dissections, if some think that I have gone too deep, Let
them consider that Old Ulcers and Fistula's are incurable, except we search to
the Bottom; but in doing this also, I hope, I have retained the Property of a
good Surgeon; namely, a Ladies Hand, as well as a Lions Heart: And is there
any but Babies and Boobies that will be frighted out of their Wits with a
Scarecrow or Magotte-Pye?

FINIS.
I Hereby allow and authorize Francis Smith Bookseller: to Print my Book,
Entitled, The Naked Truth, the Second Part.

Colchester, November 2d. 1680 Edmund Hiceringill.


