AN Apologetical Vindication OF THE Church of England: IN ANSWER To Those who
reproach HER WITH THE ENGLISH HERESIES AND SCHISMS, Or suspect HER not to be a
Catholic Church, Upon their Account.

London: Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church
yard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE INTRODUCTION.
EVER since the Dissenters left the Church of England, and formed themselves
into Separate Churches, the Roman Catholics have not been wanting to take
advantage from her sad Misfortune, to expose her at home and abroad, as a
Church, that amidst so many monstrous Sects, and so many opposite and
irreconcilable Communions, can have no right to the glorious Title of
Catholic, nothing really answerable to the true Idaea of a Church, nor any
pretensions to the Promises of Christ, especially those two, of preserving his
Church against the Powers of Hell, and of sending his Spirit of Truth, which is
but one, to guide her into all Truth.

They endeavor to make the World believe, That a Church so overrun with
Heresies and Schisms, and so shattered and torn with intestine Divisions, as
ours is, cannot be a true, or good Church; nay, they will ask us by a figure of
Reproach, Where they shall find her, among such a Crowd of Dissenters? And thus
using all manner of Artifice, on the one hand in setting forth the many
Divisions in Religion among us, and on the other, the great Unity in Doctrine
and Worship among themselves, they hope to unsettle us yet more, and make our
People suspect, or believe, that ours is not a part of the One Catholic and
Apostolic Church.

It is now one of their Common Places to talk of our Schisms, and argue from
them upon all occasions, in diminution of the Church of England. They generally
begin there, when they first attack any of her Sons, or Daughters; and when
ever we engage with them, or they with us, in a Dispute about the Two Churches,
we must be content to hear of our Divisions at both Ears. Sometimes they seem
to lament them, sometimes to upbraid us with them, and sometimes to dispute
downright upon them; but be their Style and Method never so different, when
they speak or write of the English Heresies and Schisms, their common Aim and
Design is the same, viz. to bring us out of conceit with our Church, and
persuade us, that a Church so full of imbred Divisions in Religion, has not
the Characters of Christ's Spouse, no Marks of his Favor, nor any Similitude
with the Catholic Church, that heavenly Jerusalem, which is as a City, that
is at peace and unity in it self.

We are told, That it is a sad thing to consider, what a world of Heresies are
crept into this Nation, where every man thinks himself as competent a Judge of
the Scriptures, as the very Apostles themselves -- and that that part of the
Nation, which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true Arguments
against other Sects, for fear they should be turned against themselves. Your
Church (says another) has Unity, or not? if not, then she is not the Church
of Christ? If she has, why are there so many Sects and Schisms among you?
Says another, who not long since was one of her Priests, What would I have
once given to have found such an Union among Protestants, nay, to have found
one County in my own dear Country, or perhaps one single Family, so united a
Brotherhood. -- And in another place he professes, That he cannot tell, how the
Church of England is able to find her self, in an innumerable Huddle of ten
times more Dissenters, Dissemblers, (whereof he himself was many years one) and
Indifferents, than her number is able to make.

At this rate, and to this purpose, they are also apt to talk in their private
Conversation. For where I live, the Place rings with their Reflections on the
Church of England, upon the account of our English Separations; and having not
heard that any thing is yet published, to help the People to defend themselves,
and the Honor of our Church, against them, I thought I could not better spend
the Christmas Vacation, than to write a short Tract, on purpose to show, That
the English Heresies and Schisms are in reality no diminution to the Honor of
the Church of England, and that the Consideration of them, ought to scandalize
no man against her, or make us believe, that she is in any degree less
Catholic and Apostolic, than her greatest Admirers take her to be.

This is the main Design of my present Undertaking; and that I may omit nothing
of moment, which ought to be spoken of such a Subject in such a short Treatise,
I will proceed in the following Method.

I. I will show from Reason, and the History of the Christian Religion, that
all Churches are subject to the Misfortune of Schisms and Divisions. II. That
Schisms and Divisions, and the consummation of them, in opposite Communions,
are no good Argument against the Truth, or Goodness, or Reputation of a Church.
III. That bare Unity, or want of Schisms and Divisions in Religion, are no
sound Argument for the Truth, or Goodness, or Reputation of a Church.
After I have demonstrated these three Propositions, I will make enquiry into
the true Causes of Schisms and Divisions, and more particularly into the Causes
of these in England: Then I will say something of the Prevention and Cure of
them: And in the Conclusion, make such Addresses to the People of the Roman
Communion, to the People of the Church of England, and to the Dissenters from
it, as I hope may become a good Christian, and the Author of such a peaceful
and charitable Discourse, as I hope the Reader will find this to be.

AN Apologetical Vindication OF THE Church of England.
Chap. I. Showing from Reason, and the History of the Christian Religion, that
all Churches are subject to the Misfortune of Schisms and Divisions.
1. I Will show from Reason, and the History of the Christian Religion, that
all Churches are subject to the sad misfortune of Schisms and Divisions, and to
the consummation of them in opposite Communions. This, to argue first from
Reason, is as demonstrable of Ecclesiastical, as Civil, or Military Societies,
men being as subject by their own evil Passions, and the Temptations of the
Devil, to mutiny, and make Insurrections in Churches, as in Camps, or Cities,
or other Fraternities of men. Nay it being more for the Interest of Satan, and
also more easy to divide a Church, then a Kingdom, or a Camp, men are so much
the more in danger of being tempted to do the one, rather then the other: and
accordingly we find that Churches are more infected with intestine Divisions,
then States, and Kingdoms; and whereas formerly one Emperor was able to quell
many Mutinies and Rebellions, a succession of Christian Emperors sometimes were
not able to quell one Schism. Wherefore to pursue my Argument, as Christian
Armies are subject to Mutinies, because they consist of Soldiers, which may be
tempted to Mutiny, and Christian Cities and Kingdoms to Rebellion, because they
consist of Subjects, that may be tempted to rebel; so all Christian Churches
are subject to Schisms, and Heresies, because they consist of Members that may
be drawn in to begin, and carry on Heresy, and Schism.

The Catholic Church, notwithstanding its holiness, and all the particular
Churches in it, are Bodies politic, that like other Corporations consist of
peaceable and unpeaceable, dutiful and undutiful Members; and it is really no
stranger that a Diotrephes, Montanus, or Novatus, should prove a Schismatic,
then that Judas should prove a Thief, and a Traitor, or the lustful Corinthian
commit Incest in the Church of God. What hinders that this or that Member of a
Church may not become a Schismatic, as well as a Murderer, Drunkard, or
Adulterer? Is it not consistent with the wisdom of God, or the honor and
economy of the Catholic, or a Catholic Church, to leave the Members of it in
a capacity to commit Schism? Fieri vero haec dominus permittit, and patitur
manent: propriae libertatis arbitrio, ut probatorum sides integra manifesla
luce clarescat. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
Does the nature of a true Church require, or has God any where promised to
overruled the free wills of orthodox Christians, so that they shall not fall
into Schism, as well as other sins? Has he either made them impassible, as to
this single vice, or restrained the Devil from tempting them to it? If he has,
let those who upbraid us with our Divisions show it, and if he has not, then
it must follow, that the Clergy and Laity of all the Churches in the World,
being left as free to commit Schism, as Rebellion, or any other wickedness, all
Churches whatsoever must be subject to the sad misfortune of Heresy, and
Schism. The natural Body is not more subject to Diseases, then the Body
politic of the Church is subject to Divisions: though she have the honor to
have Christ for her Head, yet is she not exempted from having her Peace broken,
or her Unity divided. That is only the privilege of the Church triumphant,
where Charity is perfected; and therefore to pass from Reason to the History of
the Christian Religion, we find as many Cautions, and Exhortations in the
Scriptures, against Heresies, and Schisms, as against any other mortal sin.
What an excellent Admonition against Schism did St. Paul give the Bishops and
Presbyters of Ephesus, or rather all the Bishops of Asia Minor, assembled at
Miletus. Take heed (says he) unto your selves, and to all the flock over which
the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, -- For I know, that after my departure,
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them, therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased
not to warn every one night and day with tears.

The Apostle knew very well, that God in his wisdom thought it not fit to
prevent Heresies and Schisms in the most Apostolical Churches, by his Almighty
power, but to suffer them as well as other sins, for the manifestation of the
good from the bad, and that in such a mixture, as a Church must be, they were
necessary to sift the Wheat from the Tares, to separate the Gold from the
Dross, and distinguish those that are sincere, steadfast, and genuine Sons of
any Catholic Church, from those that are not. Thus in his 1. Ep. to the Church
of Corinth, which I suppose was a very Apostolical Church, he tells them, that
God thought fit to let Heresies and Divisions arise among them, that the faith
and constancy of some, and instability, vanity, and hypocrisy of others, might
be made more evident. I hear (says he) that when you come together into the
Church there are divisions among you, and I partly believe it, for there must
be also heresies [or dividing into Sects] among you, that they which are
Avolent quantum volent paleae levis fidei quocunque afflatu tentationum, co
purior Massa frumenti in horrea domini reponetur. Tertull. de praescript. Haer.
3.
approved, may be made manifest among you. So says St. John of the
Antichrists, which in his time arose in the Catholic Church: They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us, but they went out, that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us.

And our Blessed Lord, who was the Founder of the Church, and may be presumed
to have best understood the nature of it, had no other notion thereof, then as
of a Body Corporate, that was subject like other Societies, to the great
inconvenience of intestine Divisions, and falling into opposite Sects and
Schisms. It must needs be (says he, considering the nature and future estate
of the Church) that offenses come, but woe unto the man by whom the offense
comes. And in his Sermon on the Mount says he unto his Disciples, Beware of
false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves. And in the 24th. Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, Memores
simus tam dominicarum praenuntiationum, quam Apostolicarum literarum, quae
nobis and faturas haereses praenuntiarunt, and sugiendas praefinierunt.
Tertull. ibid.

Instruit dominus multos esse venturos sub pellibus ovium rapaces Lupos. ibid.


he foretold the sad condition of the primitive Church before the destruction
of Jerusalem, that about that period there should arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and should show great signs, and wonders, and deceive, if it
were possible, the very Elect. This prediction of the Blessed Jesus was
fulfilled in the time of the Apostles, who were all infallable Guides of the
Church: for St. Paul in his 2. Ep. to the Thessalonians says, That the mystery
of iniquity was then a working, and the wicked one to be revealed, whose coming
was after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,
and with all deceitfulness, to bring them that perish to commit
unrighteousness, because they receive not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. So St. Peter in his 2. Ep. general, to the Catholic Church,
tells the Christians, That as there were false Prophets in the Church of the
Jews, so there should be false Teachers among them, who should privily bring in
damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and that many should
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the truth should be evil spoken
of. Every one that is versed in Ecclesiastical Story, knows that these Apostles
mean Simon Magus, who was baptized by Philip, and the rest of the Ring leaders
of the Gnostical Heresies, who were all Magicians, as well as Heretics, and
wrought wonders to prove that Jesus was not the Christ. For this Reason they
are called Johannes in Ep. eos maxim Antichristos vocat qui Christum negarent
in carne venisse, and qui non putarent Jesum esse filium Dei. Tertull. de
praescript. Heret. 33.
Antichrists by St. John: Little children, (says he) it is the last time, and
as you have heard that Antichrist should come, even now there are many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time, of which our Lord spoke.
And least any should think, that these Monsters of Heresy and Sorcery, which
afflicted the primitive Church, were not Christians, it follows, They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us, but they went out, that they might be made manifest that
they were not all of us. And so in his 2. Ep. says he, Many deceivers are
entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
this is a deceiver, and an Antichrist; and then knowing in what danger the
faithful were, of being seduced by them, says he by way of Caution to them,
Look to your selves, that ye lose not those things which ye have wrought, but
that ye receive a full reward by enduring to the end. So to see the sad estate
of the primitive Church more fully out of St. Paul's Writings, he says in his
2. Ep. to Timothy, This know that in the last days perilous times shall come,
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, etc. having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away for of this sort
are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, etc. Now as
Jannes and Jambres [the Egyptian Sorcerers] withstood Moses, so these resist
the truth, men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith.

But besides the Simonians, or Gnostick Heretics, who divided the primitive
Church, and formed themselves into separate Sects, there are evident footsteps
in the New Testament of many other Divisions and Schisms. So in the Church of
Rome it self there were many schismatical Members, as we find by the words of
the Apostle: I beseech you Brethren (says he unto the Romans) mark them which
cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have received,
and avoid them, for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own
belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. So
in his 1. Ep. to the Corinthians, how often does he charge them with envying,
strife, and divisions while one said he was of Paul, another that he was of
Apollos, and a third that he was of Cephas, or St. Peter. So in the Text I
cited before, I hear (says he) that there be divisions among you; and truly
these Divisions, notwithstanding all his Authority and Doctrine to the
contrary, were come to such an height, that we find him in the 11th. Chapter
using the very same Apologue for substance to persuade the to peace, and unity,
and submission to their Superiors, that Menenius Agrippa used to appease the
seditious Commons of Rome, and persuade them to return to their obedience to
the Senate. As the Body (says he) is one, and has many members, and all the
members of that one Body being many, are by union made one Body, so also is the
Church of Christ, with much more to that purpose. At the same time also there
was many among them, that denied the Paulus in primd ad Corinthios not at
negatores, and dubitatores resurrectionis. Haec opinio propria Sadducaeorum,
partem ejus usurpat Marcion and Apelles, and Valentinus, Tertull. depraescript.
Haeret. 33.
Resurrection, or doubted of it, which the Roman Catholics, which are so ready
to note our Schisms and Heresies, will not deny to be downright Sadducism. Let
them hear the Apostle arguing against it: If Christ be preached that he rose
from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the
dead, for if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen,
and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith vain,
yea and we are found false witnesses of God. In his ad. Ep. to them we find him
telling them of false Apostles, and deceitful workers, that were then among
them, who transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ. These counterfeit
Apostles had got a mighty esteem, and interest among the people, for it was in
reference to them that he said, Ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage [to
the Jewish Ceremonies] if a man devour you, if a man take [money] of you, if a
man exalt himself over you, and smite you [as it were] on the face. And that
they should not think it strange that such fair pretenders to the Apostolical
Office should be false Apostles, Marvel not at this (says he) for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light, and therefore it is no great
thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness.
In his Ep. to the Galatians, we find they had those among them, whom the
Apostle wished out off, because they had perverted the Gospel with Et ad
Galatas scribens invehitur in observatores and defensores circumcifionis and
legis: Hebionis haeresis est. Tertul. ibid.
Judaism, and so bewitched the people with an opinion of the necessity of
Circumcision, and other legal Rites, that they had brought them from the Gospel
which the Apostle preached, into another Gospel, which gave him occasion to
say, If we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that
which we have preached, let him be accursed. In his Ep. to the Colossians, he
bids them beware least any man should spoil them through vain philosophy, after
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ;
and prays them to take care, that no man beguiled them in a voluntary humility,
and worshipping of Simonianae autem magiae discipiina Angelis serviens, utique
and ipsa inter Idololatrias deputabatur. Tertull. de praescrip. Haeret. 33.
Angles, intruding into those things which he had not seen, and vainly puffed by
his fleshly mind. In his 1st. Ep. to Timothy, he tells him, That the Spirit
says expressly, that in the latter time some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot iron, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know the truth. In that
Ep. he also charged him to hold the faith, and a good conscience, which, says
he, some having put away concerning the faith have made shipwreck, of whom is
Hymenaeus and Philetus, whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not
to blaspheme. And again, O Timothy, avoid profane and vain bablings, and
opposition of science falsely so called, which some professing have erred
concerning the faith. In his 2d. Ep. to Timothy, we find him complaining in the
1st. Chapter, That all they in Asia had turned away from him, especially
Phygellus and Hermogenes. In the 2d. Chapter he warns him against Hymenaeus and
Philetus, who had overthrown the faith of some, teaching that the resurrection
was past. And in the last we find him complaining of Demas, and Alexander the
Copper-smith, for resisting his Apostolical Authority, and doing of him much
mischief; and so dangerous a Schismatic he was, that he did Timothy beware of
him, and prayed God to reward him according to his works. When he wrote to
Titus, Heretics were so common in the Church, that he said unto him, An
Heretic after the first and second admonition reject. And in his Ep. to the
Hebrews, we find that there were many among the Primitive Christians, who fell
back into Judaism, and embraced Gnosticism, not only after they were
illuminated, or baptized, but after they were made partakers by Baptism of the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the Powers of the World to come. They
apostatized maliciously, and out of spite to Christ forsook the Church; for, as
the Apostle observed, they did despite unto Spirit of Grace, counting the blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing, whereby they put him that shed it to open
shame, and as it were crucified him afresh. I have already observed out of the
2d. Ep. of St. Peter, what dangerous and damnable Heresies there were in his
time. I refer the gentle R.C. Reader to the 2d. Chap. of his 2d. Ep. and to the
Ep. of St. Jude, for a full description of them, and then will entreat him to
tell me, if this Church of England, in the midst of all the Dissenters and
their widest Doctrines, be in any worse condition then the most primitive
Catholic Church. I desire him also to accompany me to the Johannes vero in
Apocalypsi Idolothyta edentes, and slupra committentes jubetur castigare.
Tertull. in praescript, Haeret. 33.
Revelation of St. John, and there I will show him a Synagogue of Satan, in the
apostolical Church of Smyrna, and in that of Sardis those who held the doctrine
of the Nicolaitans, and the doctrine of Balaam, teaching that it was lawful to
eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit fornication. The like there were
in the Church of Thyatira, whom the Spirit sets forth under the name of
Jezabel. And in the church of Ephesus, the Mother Church of them all, there
were numbers of counterfeit Apostles, which said they were Apostles, and were,
not but upon trial were found liars. These were all Apostolical Churches, and
therefore it is a wonder to me, that any man should think it fair and
reasonable to reproach the Church of England with the English Heresies and
Schisms, or to think it jusitisiable to forsake, or undervalue her Communion
upon that account.

The Church Catholic to this time, and all the Catholic Churches in it, were
governed by the apostles, who undoubtedly had the personal gift of
Infallibility, or by their Disciples, and immediate Successors, upon whom the
Spirit of God was visible in many Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 38.
miraculous gifts, and who were chosen to be Bishops by the particular Clement.
Epad Corinth. ed. Oxon. 42.
designation of the Holy Ghost. I say, the whole Church then, and every part of
it, was God's House, and God's Building, and God's Temple, which was built upon
the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner Stone; and yet we find that God's Husbandry abounded then with
Tares, and that his Building, in almost all the Apartments of it, was shaken
into pieces by Divisions, even whilst those Husbandmen and Architects were
alive, who were Laborers with God, and had the Spirit of God, without which no
man searches the deep things of God. The Church, with all the Powers which
Christ lest unto it, was not able to secure it self from Heresies and Schisms,
and an innumerable huddle of Dissenters; as is evident from St. John, who in
his general Ep. to the Church Catholic, bids the Faithful try the Spirits,
before they believed them, because many false Prophets were gone out into the
World. And if it were so in the green Tree, what must it be in the dry? If
Churches, watered and planted by the Apostles, and Apostolic men, who wrought
Miracles, were so infested with Divisions, can we expect that Churches planted
and governed by their Successors at this distance, should be exempted from them?

But let us go on to examine the Apostolic Age, and the Ages nearest unto it,
and then we shall find that the former Times were not better then these. For in
the Church of Jerusalem which was the Mother of all Churches and the Church
wherein St. Peter made his first Sermon, this primogenial Church, which for
Eusebius. E. H. l. 4. c. 5.
15 Successions was governed by the Eusebius. E. H. l. ^.^. c. 7.
(...), or Kindred of our Lord, continued no longer Eusebius. E. H. l. 4. c. 22.
undeflowred with Heresy and Schism, then she was under the inspection of
James, our Lord's, Brother, who was her first Bishop. For when he died, Simeon
the Son of Cleophas, was chosen to succeed him, because he was our Lord's
Cousingerman by the Mothers side. But Eusebius. H. E. l. 4. c. 22.
Thebuthis being offended because he was not chosen Bishop in this vacancy,
began to corrupt the Church, which hitherto had remained a pure Virgin, with
vain Doctrines, which he took from the seven Sects, of which that of Simon,
surnamed Magus, was one, who divided the Unity of the Church, says Hegesippus,
by strange adulterous Doctrines against God and Christ. No Bishop ever suffered
more by Sectaries, then this good old Simeon did in those Times, for without
any regard to his pray hairs, who was sixscore years old, Eusebius. E. H. l. 3. c.
33.
they accused him before Atticus, Proconsul of Syria under Trajan, for being a
Christian, and descended of the Royal Family of David, and so procured him,
after many Torments, to be put to death.

St. Ignatius, who was St. John's Scholar, and Bishop of the Church of Antioch,
wrote Epistles to several Churches, and in that to the Church of Smyrna; we
find that there were Heretics among them, who would not believe that Jesus
Christ had a true and real Body, and upon that account abstained from the holy
Eucharist, and the Prayers of the Church. This Sect, as unreasonable as it was,
was one of the first which the Devil sowed in the field of the Church. St. John
alluded to it in the beginning of his first Ep. general, where he says, That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our
eyes, and which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life, that which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. In his Epistle to
the Philadelphians, and Magnesians, he complains of the judaizing Christians,
who went back from Christ to Moses. And in his Ep. to the Trallesians and
Philadelphians, he prays them to abstain from the evil Herbs, which Christ did
not cultivate, because they were not of his heavenly Father's planting,
alluding to the words of our Lord, who said, Every plant which my heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted out. Furthermore to show what kind of
Heretics and Schismatics there were in those days, he calls them Ep. Ignat.
ed. Amst. p. 3.
Beasts in humane shape, P. 21.
Beasts and mad Dogs, which ought to be avoided, P. 26.
corrupters of the faith, who should go into unquenchable fire, and Ad
Philadelph.
(...), Wolves in sheeps clothing, Ad Trall.(...)
Wolves, that if it were possible, would deceive the very Elect.

About 10 years after the death of St. Paul, there happened a most (...) Clem.
ep. p. t.
ungodly and detestable Sedition, in the Church of Corinth, which occasioned
St. Clement, Bishop of Rome, to write that famous Epistle to them wherein he
tells them, that the Schism among them was (...), a shameful, a very shameful
thing, and unworthy of the name of Christians. And in the Pastor of Hermas,
there are also manifest indications of Faction and Schism among Christians when
he wrote. L. 1. Visio 3.
First, In his Vision of the building of the great Tower upon the Waters, where
by the Stones that had Clefts and Schisms in them, he understands contentious
and Qui autem scissuras habebant, hi sunt qui alius adversus alium in cordibus
discordiam habent, and non habent pacem inter se, etc.
quarrelsom Christians, who could not agree together, nor keep the peace of the
Church among themselves, but had heart-burnings one against another. Secondly,
By the Lapides quos vidisli long projectos a turni, and currentes in via, and
volvi de via in loca deserta, ii sunt qui crediderunt quidem, dubitatione autem
sua reliquerunt viam veram -- errant autem and miseri sunt ingredientes in
desertas vias.
Stones that were seen to roll up and down at a great distance from the Tower,
he understands the unstable sort of Christians, who having left the Church,
miserably wandered in bypath, and desert ways. So in his 8th. similitude of
the third Book, he sets forth four sorts of men in the Church. First, Those who
bring in strange and vain Doctrines into the Church, though they do not leave the
Communion of it. Secondly, Those who are of an unpeaceable and quarrelsom
disposition, and make Feuds in the Church, though they do not proceed as far as
Schism. Thirdly, Those who though they keep the right faith, yet through Envy and
Emulation, quarrel with one another about Bishoprics, and Places of Dignity in
the Church. And fourthly, Those who apostatize from the faith, and separate
from the Church. Lib 3. Sim. 8.. 6, 7.
The first sort were set forth by withered Rods, which were not rotten; the
second by half withered Rods, in which were clefts; the third by green Rods, in
which were clefts; and the last by Roads both withered and rotten: And though our
Adversaries could show of all these sorts that do, or did belong to the Church
of England, it is no new, nor extraordinary thing.

Justin Martyr Apol. 2. p. 69, 70, 71.
complains grievously of the blasphemous Heresies, which to the great prejudice
of the Church were taught in his Time. He recites the Names of some of the
Founders of them, as Ibid.
Simon, Menander, Marcion, Dial. cum Thyph. p. 253. edit. Paris. 1615.
Basilides, Saturninus; and tells the Emperors that they were but nominal
Christians, the name of Christian being as common to Sects in Christianity, as
that of Philosopher was to every absurd Sect in Philosophy. And in his Dialogue
with Trypho he says, That the being of Sects and Heresies confirmed their
faith the more, because they were foretold by our Savior in his Parable of the
Tares and Wheat; and where he said, False Christ's and false Prophets shall
arise; and beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps-cloathing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves.

Irenaeus, toward the latter end of the 2d. Century, wrote an Account of all
the Gnostical Heresies, such as that of Simon, Menander, Cerinthus,
Carpocrates, Saturninus, Marcius, Marcion, the Ebionites, Valentimans, and
Colarbasians, and others, which in his time infested the Church, seducing great
numbers with a show of Perfection, and false Miracles, especially multitudes of
Women, and particularly in his own Irenaeus, l.1. c.9.
Diocese; and yet notwithstanding all those that went out after those impute
Heresies, Irenaeus remained a Catholic and Apostolic Bishop, and the Gallican
Church, a pure, Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

Tertullian wrote against the Valentinians and Marcionites, and many other
Heresies, in the beginning of the third Century; and because they pretended to
Antiquity, he wrote a Di praescriptione ^licorum.
Book, on purpose to show, that the oldest Heresies were later than Truth. The
Church at that time was so infested with Heresies, that many Non opritue nos
mirari super haereses islas -- van^e, and in considerate plerique hoc ipso
scandali ^antur q^^^l tanti^n haereses valyant -- quare ille sidelssimi,
prudenti^^ni and usitatision in Ecclesia in iltam partem transierunt? Tertull.
ib. 1, 2, 3.
wondered, and were scandalized at the number and prevalence of them, and that
so many eminent men fell and relapsed into them. This gave occasion to the
Father, in the beginning of that Book, to tell the Faithful, that they were not
to take offense, nor wonder at the number, or quality of those that forsook the
Church. He bid them remember that Saul was an eminent person, before be fell
away from God, and that good David, and gracious and wise Solomon apostatized,
the one into Adultery, and the other into Idolatry, and that it was the
privilege only of the Son of God himself to be perfect, and impeccable, and by
consequence it was no Argument for the truth of any Heresy, though a Bishop, or
Deacon, or Doctor, or a holy Widow, or Virgin, or even a Confessor, fell into
it, because we were not to judge of the Faith by the persons of men, but of the
persons of men by the Faith. He bid them consider, That the Traitor Judas was
an Apostle; that many of Christ own Disciples forsook him; that Phygellus, and
Hermogenes, and Hymenaeus, and Philetus, forsook Paul; and that we should not
wonder to see the Church so deserted, and suffer after the example of Christ.
Says he, They went out from us, because they were not of us; and we should
remember the Predictions of Christ and his Apostles, who forewarned us of
Wolves in sheeps cloating, of false Apostles, false Prophets, and false
Teachers, and that Heresies and Offenses would come; and indeed (says he)
Heresies are as necessary as Persecutions, to prove the Faithful, and try who
will endure to the end. This Apology which the Father made for the sad estate
of the primitive Church, will, I hope, serve as well for ours. I commend it in
all humility to the consideration of the R. C.s. especially to the Minister of
Putney, who in his late Book seems to take so much pleasure, in twitting us,
and our Mother the Church of England, with the English Schisms.

But to proceed in the History of Heresy and Schism. Clemens Alexandrinus
makes the like Apology for the Heresies of the same Age. Sero^. (...) p. 753.
He says, They are to Truth, as Tares are to Wheat, that our Lord foretold
they must come, and that therefore they must be; and to show what variety there
was then in the Christian World, he reckons up in one Strom. l. 7. p. 765
Page about a dozen sorts: The Valentinians, Marcionites, Basilidiams,
P^ratics, Phrygians, Encratites, Dociles, Haematites, Caj^ists, Ophiants, and
Entychites, which I think sold as ill, as Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, and Quakers, with which, I remember, we were reproached not long
since, in the Colleges of Navarre and Rochell, in the former with more
Raillery, and in the latter with more Zeal.

Origin in his Book of.13.
Prayer, lately Printed at Oxford, mentions a sort of Heretics that rejected
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, who, I suppose, may pass muster with our
Quakers, and another sort that hold it.14.
superfluous and unprofitable to pray: And in his Answer to Celsus, he makes
occasional mention here and there of most of the Heresies his Time, and says,
That Lib 3. p. 119. (...) 5. p.
Celsus, who professed to despise and undervalue Christianity, because there
were so many Sects of Christians, must for the same Reason despise and
undervalue Philosophy and Medicine; for, says he, whatsoever is excellent and
profitable for men to know, they will apply themselves to the study of it, from
whence will naturally arise diverse Questions, and diverse Opinions, and by
consequence diverse Sects. For this Reason, says he, there are Sects among the
Greeks, and Sects among the Jews, some understanding the Writing of Mose and
the Prophets in one sense, and some in another, and so Christianity appearing
to be (...).
a great and venerable thing, not only to men of meaner Parts, but to the
greatest Wits among the Greeks, they set themselves to the study of it; and
from thence arose Sects, some understanding the Scriptures, which they all
believe, in one sense, and some in another: But yet (says he) no man of sense
will reject Christianity for that Reason, no more then he will reject Medicine
or Philosophy for it, or despise the holy Books of Moses and the Prophets for
the Heresies among the Jews. This (says he) I think, is a sufficient Apology
for the Christian Religion, concerning which I cannot but think of the
admirable Saying of St. Paul, There must be Heresies among you, that those that
are approved may be made manifest. And therefore (says he again) if the School
of Christ must be disgraced for the Sects that have come out of it, let the
School of Socrates be condemned too, because so many opposite Schools of
Philosophy arose out of it; and let the Philosophy of Plato also suffer the
like censure, because his Scholar Aristotle differed so much, and in so many
Opinions from him. This admirable Apology the Father made for the Church
Religion in his Time, and let those who urge Celsus his Argument against us,
consider if it is not as applicable to ours. Nay we find by the Respons. ad
quaest. 5.
Answers to certain Questions falsely ascribed to Justin Martyr, that God was
pleased to allow Heretics in the primitive Times, to do Miracles, which,
praised be his holy Name, he never suffered any Heretic or Schismatic since
the Reformation to do among us. But if he had, we could have made the same
defense, which that Author and St. Cyprian did viz. that Miracles alone, as
Prophetare, and daemonia excludere, and virtates magnas in terris facere,
sublimis utique resest, and admirabilis, non tamen -- Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
edit. Oxon T. p. 144.
splendid gifts as they are, are no demonstration of the Truth; for Christ has
declared, that many will say unto him in the day of Judgment, Lord, Lord, have
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? and then he will reply unto them, I know ye not,
depart from me ye that work iniquity. So says St. Paul, Though I speak with the
tongue of men and Angels, and though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand
all mysteries, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
have no charity, I am nothing. The like Apology St. Austin made against the
pretended Miracles of the Donatists: I hear (says he) that Pontius does
Miracles, and that when Donatus Magnus prayed, God answered him by a voice from
Heaven, but God has cautioned me against those Contra istos Mirabiliarios
cautum me fecit Deus -- Aug. Expos. in Evang. Joh. tract. 13.
Miracle-mongers, who make Divisions, saying, False Christ's and false Prophets
shall arise, and shall show signs and wonders, to deceive, if it were possible,
the very Elect, but take ye heed, behold I have foretold you all these things.
And when his Disciples told him with joy, that the Devils were subject to them
in his Name, says he, Rejoice not in this, that the Devils are subject unto
you, but that your Names are written in Heaven. Wherefore my Brethren, let no
man deceive you, he that works miracles, and does not keep unity, is nothing.
Toward the latter end of the 4th. Century, Epiphanius in three Books wrote an
Account of all the Heresies that had been in the Church till that time, and
they amount in number to Sancti Epiphanii respons. ad Epist. Acacii and Pauli.
fourscore, such a world of Tares grew up with the Wheat from the first sowing
of the Word. St. Augustine has given a compendious Account of all these
Heresies out of Epiphanius, and some more of his own Time, in a Discourse ad
Quod-vult-Deum. But setting aside all the rest, I shall only take notice of the
Montanists, Novatians, Donatists, and Arians, which did so much mischief to the
universal Church of God, and all the particular Members thereof.

The Montanists pretended to Prophecy, and divine Inspiration, and though they
were Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 15, 16, 18, 19.
resisted by many brave Bishops, and many learned men wrote against them, yet
they spread their Infection far and near, and Epiphan. vol. 1. p. 416.
perverted all Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Cilicia, and afterward their corrupt
Doctrine went Westward, as far as Constantinople it self.

The Novatian Schism began in Rome it self, and was so called from Novatus,
whom the Greek Writers confound with Novatianus, a Presbyter of that Church. He
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
taught, that it was not lawful to admit those who had fallen in the Decian
Persecution, upon their repentance, to communion with the Faithful, and getting
himself ordained Bishop in a sinister manner, he drove many under that pretense
from the Church, and then there was Bishop against Bishop, Church against
Church, and Altar against Altar, even at Rome it self. Neither Cartwright, nor
Travers, nor any other Presbyter of the Church of England, did ever do her so
much mischief, as Novatus did the Church of Rome. The Schism which he raised,
lasted 200 years, and had not Cornelius been well assisted by the Catholic
Bishops, not only in Italy, but over all the Christian World, this pestilent
Schism, under the pretense of greater Purity, would soon have driven him out of
Rome.

The Schism of the Donatists first began in Carthage, and they were so called
from Donatus Casensis, the Head of the Party, which first erected Altar against
Altar in that metropolitical City, setting up Majorinus against Cecilian, who
was rightfully ordained Bishop of that Church. Of all the Schisms upon record,
this was one of the most unreasonable, dishonorable, stubborn, impudent, and
bloody, as will appear from this short Account thereof.

First, It was very unreasonable, because it was made by a Party, which had
nothing to object against the Doctrine, Discipline, or Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of Carthage, but only against the Canonical Incapacity of Cecilian
to be Bishop of it, as one who was a traditor, and worshipper of Idols in the
Dioclesian Persecution, which notwithstanding appeared upon many Trials to have
been a malicious Accusation, nothing of this having been laid to his charge,
when he was elected and ordained.

Secondly, It was a most dishonorable and shameful Schism, as having been
begun and carried on by a rich proud and insolent Lucilla.
Woman, who was obnoxious to the Rod of Cecilian, and corrupted Secundus the
Primate of Numidia, and many other African Bishops, into a Faction against him,
together with those sacrilegious Presbyters, whom Cecilian had called to
account for the Plate, and other Goods of the Church, which had been committed
to their Trust in the time of the Persecution.

Thirdly, It was a most stubborn and prevalent Schism, which would not yield
nor submit to the Authority of the Emperor, the Sentence of two Romanun: and
Arelatense.
Councils, the Determination of the Proconsul of Africa, nor the Judgment of
the universal Church. On the contrary, the more it was condemned, it grew the
more insolent, and powerful, and oppressed not only the Church of Carthage,
where it first began, but made almost the whole Church of Africa revolt.

Fourthly, It was a most impudent Schism, the Schismatics esteeming themselves
as the only pure People of the World, and the Catholics as Pagans and
Idolaters, plundering their Churches, burning their Altars as polluted, and
treading their holy Sacraments, which they found upon them, under their feet.
They also denied them Christian Burial, and rebaptized and re-confirmed as
many of them as revolted to them, and truly so general was the Revolt in all
Parts of Africa, that the Catholic Communions looked more like Conventicles,
then the Catholic Church.

Lastly, It was a most bloody and cruel Schism, as appears by the Feats of the
So called, quod circum cellas vagantur. August. T. 7. p. 76. G. T. 8. p. 334.
M. T. 8.335. D. E.
Circellians, or Circumcellians, whom the Donatists called Agonistici, because
they fought for them, and destroyed the Catholics in a most barbarous manner.
For they were the Habebant Donatistae per omnes pene Ecclesias suas perditum
hominum genus perversum, ac violentum, velut sub professione continentium
ambulantes qui Circumcelliones dicebantur, and erant ingenti numero, a turba
per omnes fere Africanas regiones constituti, qui malis imbuti doctoribus,
audacia, superbia, and termeritate illicita, nec suis, nec alienis aliquando
parcebant, contra jus, fasque in causis interdicentes hominibus, and nisi
obedissent damnis gravissimis, and caedibus afficiebant, armati diversis telis,
bacchantes per agros villasque ad sanguinis effusionem accedere non metuentes
-- intoberabiles persecutiones unitati Ecclesie compacti faciebant, ipsisque
sacerdotibus Catholicis and ministris aggressiones nocturnas atque diurnas,
direptionesque rerum omnium vi inserebant. Nam and multos dei servos caedibus
debilitaverunt -- Possidonius in vit. August. Vid. August. Ep. 48. and 50. De
Haeresibus ad Quod-vult-deum? Ep. 68. Contra Crescon. l. 3. Enarrat. in Ps. 10.
Zealots of the Faction, who thought they did God good service in making havoc
of the Catholics, nay they were such furious Enthusiasts, that when they had
none to kill, as St. Aug. says, they would kill themselves. They laid wait for
the Catholics in the ways, and murdered both the Clergy and the People, they
took them out of their Houses by force, to kill them, they beat them to death
with Clubs, poured Lime and Vinegar into their Eyes, plundered and burnt their
Houses, and murdered Bishops and Priests at the very Altar, and marched about
day and night doing these horrible Exploits, under the conduct of Donatist
Bishops and Priests. Nay the whole Sect was all Cruelty and Pride, for a
Catholic no sooner turned Donatist, but he altered his temper, and became
impatient, furious, haughty and contentious, and indeed the many Massacres and
Devastations the whole Party committed, shows they delighted in Cruelty and
Blood. Such was the Schism of the Donatists, and it deserves to be well
considered by those, who are apt to make uncharitable Reflections upon the
Church of England, or have a mean opinion of her Communion upon the account of
the English Schisms.

The Arian Schism first began in Alexandria, and had its Name from Arius, a
Presbyter of that Church. At the first broaching of his Heresy, he was opposed
by Alexander his Bishop, and part of the Clergy and People adhering to the
Bishop, and part siding with Arius, from this small spark, says Lib. 1. c. 6.
Socrates, came such a fire, as made a Conflagration in the universal Church.
First, It enflamed the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, and the upper Thebais, and
from thence was blown into all the other Churches, when, as De vit. Constant.
l. 2. c. 62.
Eusebius writes, one might have seen not only Bishops contending with one
another, but the People rent into Factions, some inclining to this Party, and
some to that, and when the Pagans also took advantage from those Divisions of
the Christians, to expose Christianity in their Theaters, and turn it into
ridicule.

This sad estate of the Catholic Church, drew tears from the eyes of
Constantine, and moved him to call the Council of Nice to compose this
Difference, and another not much less, about a matter of far less moment, which
had risen between the Eastern and Western Churches, about no greater matter
then the observation of Easter. day.

The unanimous Decree of the Council against Arius, and his Doctrine backed
with the Authority of the Emperor, did for the present silence the Arian
Controversies; but his Son Constantius turning Arian, it broke out with more
fury then formerly, and caused so much Sedition and Bloodshed in Christian
Cities, especially about the Socrat. lib. 2. (...), 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 16, 28.
choice of Bishops, and so many Subdivisions in opinions among the Arians
themselves, that one may well wonder, how ever Christendom came to be at peace
and unity again. Then not only Bishops were divided against Bishops, but
Councils contradicted Councils. Then were made at several Times and Places, no
less than nine Forms of Confession, most of them differing from one another,
and all from the Nicene Creed. Nay then not only the Arians were divided among
themselves, but the Orthodox, about the manner of receiving the convert Arians
into Communion, Faustin. and Marcell. lib. precum ad imper. Val. Theodos. and
Arcad. Socrat. l. 3. c. 9.
Lucifer and his Party standing upon stricter terms then the rest. I have given
this short Account of the Arian Schism, to show how not onlyh this and that
Church, but the whole Catholic Church, may at one time labor under Schism.
And upon making particular enquiry into particular Churches, we shall find how
in many of them there was Bishop against Bishop, Altar against Altar, and
Communion against Communion, which made Julian the Emperor scoptically say,
That the Son of Mary had now verified his own Saying, that he came not to send
Peace upon the Earth, but a Sword.

At Alexandria there were two opposite Churches owning two opposite Bishops;
the Orthodox, who still adhered to Athanasius, present, or absent, and the
Arians, who received Gregory, and George, and the rest that were put in his
Place.

At Antioch there were at one time three opposite Churches; one of the Arians,
of which Euzoius was Bishop, one of converted Arians, of which Meletius was
Bishop, and one of those who never sell into Arianism, of which Paulinus was
Bishop, and yet the divided state of Christendom at this time, was no offense,
or wonder to a wise Pagan, I mean the Philosopher Themistius, who in a Socrat.
H E. l. 4. c. 32.
Speech which he spoke to the Emperor Valens, to persuade him to moderate his
cruel Persecution of the Orthodox, told his Majesty, That he ought not to
admire at the disagreement of Opinions among the Christians, which was but
small, if compared with the multitude and confusion of Opinions among the
Greeks, among whom there were above 300 different Sects. Nay he prayed him to
consider, that the most excellent and useful Arts had never arrived to such
perfection, but by difference of judgment, and strife among the Artists
themselves; nay that Philosophy, the Mother of all good Arts, had risen from
small beginnings, to such a height of perfection, by differences among learned
men.

At Constantinople, and in many other Cities, there were formed Churches of
Arians and Novatians, under their respective Bishops, opposite to one another,
and both in opposition to the true Catholic Church. From this toleration of
separate and opposite Churches, arose many Socrat. H. E. l. 6. c. 22.
Differences, Id. l. 5. c. 13.
Tumults, Quarrels, and Bloundshed, as when the Arians assembled in the Piazz's
of Constantinople by night, and from thence went through the Streets of the
City, singing alternative Hymns against those who believed three to be one
Power. Chrysostom, the Catholic Bishop, fearing lest the People might be drawn
from the Church by such Hymns, appoints some of the Catholics, in opposition
to the Arians, to go about singing nocturnal Hymns against their Opinions, upon
which the Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
two Parties meeting one another, and being more willing to fight then to sing,
they fell to violence, and in the Conflict many on both sides were wounded, and
some slain.

Nay in Rome it self, which now boasts so much of its Unity under one Head, in
Rome the pretended Center of Christendom, there have been as shameful, wide,
and violent Schisms, as any were ever in the Christian World, Schisms (...)
Socrat. E. H. l. 4. c. 29.
not upon the account of any pretended Heresy, or dislike of Ceremonies, nor
consisting in a separation of the Clergy and People from the Bishop, but
Schisms of a more dangerous and scandalous nature, betwixt Rival Popes and
their Parties, when there were several Pretenders to the Chair of St. Peter,
and some adhered to this Pope, and some to that. Thus in the Reign of
Valentinian, upon the death of Pope Liberius, the Clergy and People of Rome
were divided in the choice of a Bishop to succeed him. The holy part of the
People which adhered to Liberius in his Banishment, against the perjured and
usurping Pope Felix, being convened by Vrsinus, Amantius, and Lupus, chose
Alias Ursicinas.
Vrsinus, but the perjured part of the Clergy, which broke the solemn Oath they
had made, not to choose a Bishop during the Banishment of Liberius, and that
part of the People which adhered to them, chose Damasus Bishop, who was one of
those who broke his faith with Liberius. Ursinus was ordained Bishop by Paul of
Tibur, and Damasus was ordained by others in the Lateran Church, and part of
the Clergy and People adhered to one, and part or the other, with very great
Animosities on both sides. Where was the Unity of the Roman Communion, when the
Roman Church had two opposite Popes, and the People were divided into two
separate Chruches under them? Damasus indeed prevailed, not by the merits of
his Cause, or that he had the better claim, but by bribing the Courtiers, and
great men of Rome, and intrigueing with the He was called, Matronarum
Auriscalpius.
Matrons of the City, and so procuring the Banishment of Vrsinus, who was
chosen by the faithful and holy part of the People, which suffered their blood
to be shed for him, and the justice of his Cause, and after his Banishment
owned themselves to be his Flock, and refused communion with Damasus, believing
him to be the rightful Pope. Damasus from the first was so enraged against
them, that he hired the Rabble to outrage them; they made a great slaughter of
them for three days together at the Temple of Julius, then in the Church of
Sicininus, called also the Church of Liberius Vid Marcellini hist. l. 27. c. 3.
, where they killed an hundred and sixty, and wounded very many more, whereof a
great part died of their Wounds. But all this did not deter them from meeting
together, but three days after they assembled again, reciting against Damasus
those words of our Lord, Fear not those who can kill the body, but are not able
to kill the soul. Then they sang out of the Psalms, The dead bodies of they
servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of
thy saints unto the beasts of the field, their blond have they shed like water
on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury them. And often
meeting together in the Church of Liberius, they cried out, O Christian
Emperor! let all the Bishops meet at Rome, let them try the Cause between
Vrsinus and Damasus, and drive the Murderer from St. Peter's Chair. These
Complaints of the People coming to the ears of the Emperor, he called back
Ursinus from Banishment; the People met him with great joy, but Damasus by
bribing the Court gets him banished again. After this, he invited the Bishops
of Italy to a Feast upon his Birthday. Some of them came, whom he would have
persuaded both by good words and money to depose Vrsinus, but they desired to
be excused, telling him, that they came to celebrate his Birthday, and not to
condemn a man unheard.

This Account which I have given of the Schism between Damasus and Vrsinus, is
taken our of the Preface of Marcellinus, a Roman Presbyter, and Faustinus a
Roman Deacon, before the Libellus precum, or humble Supplication, which they
presented to the Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius. I refer the
Reader to it in the A. D. 1628
Oxford-Edition of Faustinus, and if he please to consult it there, he will
find all that I have written, and some more remarkable passages, which, for
brevity sake, I thought fit to omit. I know very well that Baronius has said
all he can to render this Account suspected, because it invalidates the Title
of Damasus, and interrupts the lawful Succession to St. Peter's Chair.

First, He pleads that Marcellinus and Faustinus were Heretics, and that their
testimony is no more to be believed, then the testimony of Thieves against
those they have robbed. But was the Luciferian Heresy, so called, an Heresy
indeed? August. de Here Is, ad Quodv. Luciferianos a Larcifero Caralitano
Episcopo exortos, and celeriter nominatos, nec Epiphanius, nec Philaster inter
hereticos posuiticredo tantummodo schisma, non haeresin eos condidisse,
credentes.
St. Augustine observes, that neither Epiphanius, nor Philastrius, put the
Luciferians in the number of Heretics, and is very willing to excuse them from
Heresy. Or if it were a Heresy, was it of such a nature as to deprave and
infatuate the Souls of men, and to deprive them at once both of truth and
common sense, in making of them write a heap of Lies to the Emperor, while
Damasus was alive, with many more eyewitnesses of the Schism, whom they might
conclude would have publicly exposed their Account, if it had been false? Was
not Lucifer himself a very holy and excellent Person, notwithstanding the
severity of his opinion, and a great Champion of the Church against the Arians,
and might not those who stood up with him for the strictness of
Church Discipline, and purity of Communion, out of hatred to Arianism,
notwithstanding their excusable error, be as holy men as he? I am confident no
unprejudiced man, that will observe what an excellent strain of Piety and Zeal
runs through their Works, can suspect them capable of writing such gross
Forgeries, as the Preface indeed contains, if it be not true.

But Baronius objects, that they assert Vrsinus to have been ordained Bishop
before Damasus, contrary to St. Hierom in his Chronicon, who says, that
Damasus was ordained first. But by his favor, their words in the Preface do
not necessarily import so much, as the learned Annotator in the Oxford Edition
has observed; but if they did, why is not their Testimony as good against St.
Hierom, as St. Hierom's is against theirs? and why may not he be supposed to
have strained a little in favor of his Master Damasus, who had so obliged him,
as well as they, to have prevaricated out of hatred to him?

secondly, He opposes the Authority of Ruffinus against them, who relates the
Story in favor of Damasus. But was not Ruffinus, as learned men observe, a
very careless and oscitant Historian? How many Mistakes does the learned
Valesius observe in his History, in his Annotations upon Socrates? and which is
it most reasonable to believe; an unaccurate man, that writes by hear say, and
at a distance, and in a general History: or men that with great accuracy write
of any Fact, which they had all the means of knowing exactly, and could not,
unless they would wilfully, mistake.

Thirdly, He most frigidly objects, that Vrsinus must needs have been the
schismatical Bishop, because he was ordained by the Bishop of Tibur, and not of
Ostia, to whom, he says, it did belong to ordain the Bishops of Rome. It is
true, it was the custom of the Metropolitans and Patriarchs, to be ordained by
some of their neighboring com-provincial Bishops, as St. Aug. observes, in
defense of Cecilian's Ordination against the Donatists,; and this he proves by
the example of the Bishop of Ostia, who usually ordained the Bishop of Rome.
But what though that Bishop did usually ordain the Roman Bishops, Non
expectaverit Cecilianus ut princeps a principe ordinaretur, cum aliud habeat
Ecclesiae Catholicae consuetudo, ut non Numidiae, sed propinquiores Episcopi
Episcoporum Ecclesiae Carthaginis ordinent: sicut nec Romanae Eccliesiae
ordinat aliquis Episcopus Metropolitanus, sed de proximo Ostiensis Episcopus,
Aug. in brev. collat. di^^ 32.^.3.
does it follow from thence, that he was Judge of their election, and that if
the Sea was vacant, or the Bishop of it sick, or absent, or superannuated, and
could not, or had no mind, and would not do that office, that another, for
example, the bishop of Tibur, might not do it as well? Some of these perhaps
might be the Case when Vrsinus was elected: for we do not read that the Bishop
of Ostia ordained Damasus; or if he had for certain ordained him, might not
Damasus have corrupted him, as well as the Courtiers and Magistrates of Rome,
or Preface says he would have engaged the Bishops of Italy to condemn Vrsinus?
and methinks if his had been the juster Cause, he should for his reputation
have committed the hearing of the whole Matter to a Council of Bishops, and got
him and his Party condemned, as Cornelius got Novatus and his: but this he
never did, which is no small presumption, that his Election was not so
justifiable, and his Right so clear, as Baronius would have it to be. But
whether it were or no, does not directly concern my present Design, which is
chiefly to show, what a violent, dangerous, and scandalous Schism this was,
which happened in the Roman Church. It was so violent, that according to
Vtreplerentur humano sanguine orationum loca.
Ruffinus, and the Greek Historians, out of whom I might have described it, it
caused a great deal of Bloodshed in Churches; so dangerous, that the Souls of
many on the one side or other must needs have miscarried in it; and so
scandalous, that it gave occasion to a M. Marcellinus in loco supra citat.
Pagan Historian to make such Reflections, as I wish, for the honor of the
Roman See, and the holy Episcopal Office, had never been made. It happened in
the year 366, and after the death of Pope Zosimus, there happened another
scandalous and horrible Schism, between Boniface and Eulalius, in the year 419,
which caused such great and dangerous Tumults in the City, that Honorius the
Emperor, who was then at Milan, was not without apprehensions what might be the
consequence of it, and therefore to prevent and all present danger, commanded
both of them to be put out of Rome. To pass over many intermediate Schisms in
after Ages, there happened many more of a very scandalous nature, between
contradictory Popes assisted by contradictory Parties and Councils, who could
not agree about the rightful Pope. Thus in the year 891, the Church of Rome was
miserably divided between Formosus and Sergius, who were both chosen in Rome by
different Parties; and though Formosus prevailed, yet Stephen the 6th. his next
Successor but one, abrogated and nulled all his Orders, and degraded all whom
he had ordained, and gave them new Orders. In the year 965. there happened a
great Schism after the death of John the 12th. betwixt Benedict the 5th. and
Leo the 8th. Platina could not determine which was the right Pope, but puts
them both in his Lives; but Onuphrius, in his Annotations upon the Life of
Benedict, and in his Ecclesiastical Chronology, faith expressly, that Benedict
was the Schismatic, and Leo the lawful Pope. In anno 965. Tom. 10.
Baronius is of the contrary opinion; he makes Leo the Antipope, and Benedict
the Pope; and In Chron. p. 827.
Genebrard confesses, that their Historians are not agreed which of the two was
the rightful Successor to St. Peter's Chair. In the year 1080, the whole Peace
of Christendom was disturbed by the Schism, which happened betwixt Clement the
3d. and Gregory the 7th. 8th. and Gelasius the 2d. and Gelasius dying, it
continued between Clement, and Calixtus the 2d. who was chosen in the room of
Gelasius. The Emperor was for Clement, but the Kings of England and France were
for Calixtus, though the English Clergy and People were much divided in their
opinions, some maintaining the one, and some the other, and some again that
neither Party was duly elected: but Calixtus having taken his Rival prisoner by
the help of a good Army put an end to that Schism. After the death of Adrian
the 4th. in the year 1159, happended a grievous Schism, betwixt Maximum
Ecclesiae Schisma oriri coepit quod xix annls miserabiliter duravis, Orton,
Frising. Chron. Lib. 7. Cap. ult.
Victor the 4th, and Alexander the 3d. which for 19. years mightily disturbed
the Christian World, some of the Cardinales in seditionem conversi gemina
electione scindunt Vnitatem. Radevic. Frisingensis. L. 2. C. 43.
Cardinals chose the one, and some the other, and after their respective
elections both were ordained, and sent out Id. I. 2. C. 50. 51.
Circular Letters with contradictory protestations and remonstrances, attesting
God to the truth of what they said. Alexander called God to witness in his
Letters, that he was chosen by all the Cardinals but three, and yet the
Cardinals of Victor's Party in a Radevic. Frising. L. 2. Cap. 51.
public declaration protest that he was chosen by nine Cardinals.

The Emperor, to put an end to this Schism, calls a Council at Pavia, and to
that end wrote to Alexander, and the Cardinals, and also to the Tramontan
Bishops to meet there. The Id. l. 2. c. 64, 65, 66, 67.
Council being met, the Emperor made a speech to them, to exhort them with
Fasting and Prayers to commend the Cause of the Church to God, and after seven
days discussion of the Controversy between the two Popes, they gave sentence in
behalf of Victor, and the Canons of St. Peter at Rome, in a Letter to the
Emperor and the Council, did assure them, that the incorrupt and better part of
the Cardinals were for him; whereupon the Emperor ratified and confirmed his
Election, and by his Edict commanded he should be received as Pope. He died
after he had sat four years, and was succeeded by Paschal the 3d. Callistus
the 3d. and Innocent the 3d. all opposite Popes to Alexander the 3d. whom the
Roman Writers affirm to have been the true Pope. But the most grievous Schism
of all the rest, was that which began in the year 1378. between Urban the 6th.
and Clement the 7th. Urban kept his Seat at Rome, but Clement at Avignion, and
the Germans, Hungarians, English, and part of Italy, stood for the former, and
the French and Spaniards for the latter: Urban created 54 Cardinals, and
Clement 36.

The Schism between these two Popes and their Successors, lasted about 50
years, or according to History of Popish, etc.
Mr. Foulis (who accounts the Schism of Felix against Eugenius as a part of it,
because it sprung from it) above 70 years, during all which time, excepting the
interval between Clement and Felix the 4th. there were two opposite Lines of
Succession to St. Peter's Chair, till Felix, whom the Council of Basil set up
against Clement, upon the earnest entreaty of the Emperor, resigned up all his
Interest to the Popedom, and left Nicolas the 5th. Successor in the Line of
Urban, sole sovereign Pontif in the Roman Throne. Nay during the time of this
Schism, there were sometimes three Popes; for the Cardinals thinking to end the
Schism, called a Council at Pisa, where they deposed Gregory the 12th. one of
Vrban's Successors, and Benedict the 11th. one of Clement's Successors, and
chose Alexander the 5th. who died before he had sat a year. Alexander was
succeeded by John the 23d. who created 16 Cardinals, and sat seven months,
till the Council of Constance persuaded him to recede, and become a private man
again. A man would think, that of all Christians in the World, a Roman
Catholic should be most backward to upbraid the Church of England with Schism,
considering what frequent and violent Schisms his own Church has labored
under in former Ages; Schisms that have rent the Union, and split, if not
interrupted the Line of Succession in the one Catholic Church, and brought it
to such a sad condition, that the secular Authority has been fain to determine
of two or three Popes, which was rightfully elected, and which not. Thus in the
Reign of 2, and 3 Rich. 2. c. 6. A.D. 1378.
Rich. the 2d. the Parliament of England did declare in an Act for that
purpose, that Urban the 6th. and not his Antagonist Clement, was duly chosen
Pope, and ought to be accepted and obeyed in this Realm. I never saw the
Original, but shall set down the Abridgment of it, out of Sir R. Cotton's Exact
Abridgment of the Records, in the following words.

An Act that Pope Urban was true and lawful Pope, and that the Livings of all
Cardinals, and other Rebels to the said Pope, shall be seized in the King's
hands, and the King to be answered by the Profits thereof, and that whosoever
within this Realm shall procure or obtain any Provision, or other Instrument,
from any other Pope then the said Urban, shall be out of the King's protection.

Sergeant Rastall has another Abridgment of this Act, somewhat different in
one passage, but in all the rest to the same effect.

An. 2 R. 2. c. 7. It was agreed, that Urban was duly elected Pope, and ought
to be obeyed as Head of the Church, and that all Benefices and Possessions of
Cardinals, and other the King's Enemies, should be seized. And it was enacted,
R^slal^'s Statutes, Tit. Provision and Praemunire. p. 356. 8.
that if any purchased by provision, any Benesice or Grace, by any other named
Pope then of Pope Urban, or be obedient to any other Person as Pope, he should
be out of the King's protection, and his Goods seized.

I should not have brought this Act upon the Stage, but that the Gentlemen of
the Roman Communion, are so apt to miscall our Church a Parliamentary Church,
and our Religion a Parliamentary Religion, only because our Laws confirm and
establish the Sanctions of the Church of England, as the Imperial Laws and
Edicts formerly did the Decrees of general Councils; particularly, as, The
external Bishop of the Church.
Constantine the Great, who sat in the Nicene Council, confirmed the Nicene
Creed, and all other things that were ordained by the Council of Nice, when he
was but a Catechumenus, or Learner of the Christian Religion. He said of
himself, that he was (...)'E (...), and after his death, the Fathers surnamed
him, (...); Equal to the Apostles.
and whosoever will take the pains to run over, but with a cursory eye, the
Novels of Justinian, the Nomocanons, and Basilicks, the Capitularia of the old
French, Spelm. council. vol. 1
and the Laws of our Ancient Saxon Kings, will find, that our religious
Princes, since the Reformation, have intermedled no more with the Affairs of
the Church, then Christian Princes formerly did.

But to return thither, where I broke off, I desire the Reader to take notice,
That of 29 or Onuphrius reckons so many.
30 Schisms in the Church of Rome, I have taken notice but of nine, and that if
it were requisite to say more of the Roman Schisms and Differences, I could add
another Account of Anti Cardinals, and Anti-Councils, to this short one of the
Anti-Popes.

CHAP. II. Showing, That Schisms and Divisions, and the consummation of them,
in opposite Communions, are no good Argument against the Truth, or Goodness, or
Reputation of a Church.
II. HAving in the former Chapter, I hope, clearly demonstrated, that the
universal Church, and all the particular Members of it, are subject to Heresies
and Schisms, I proceed in this to show, that they are no Argument against the
Trueness, or Goodness or Reputation of any Church, because what is incident to
the whole Church, and all the parts of it, cannot be a good Argument against
any one. If the Body may lose an Arm, it can be no disparagement to the Hand to
have a Finger drop off; or if a Tree, to which St. Cyprian compares the
Catholic Church, may have a Bough rent off from its Body, it can be no
disgrace to a Bough to lose a rotten Branch, or to a Branch to lose a rotten
Twig. If the Hand cannot in reason or prudence upbraid the Foot with the loss
of a Toe, because it may lose a Finger, then certainly nothing ought to be
concluded from a common Affection of all Churches, to the prejudice or
dishonor of this, or that particular Church.

When our Savior was told of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with
their Sacrifices, Suppose ye (says he unto those that told him of it) that
these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered
such things, I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish; or those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell, think ye that they
were sinners above all the men that dwelt in Jerusalem, I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Our blessed Redeemer teaches
us from these Examples, how unreasonable and uncharitable it is to censure
particular Persons, when the common Misfortunes of Mankind fall upon them. For
the Galileans, who were murdered by Herod at their Devotion, were no greater
Sinners then other men; and those upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell, were, it
seems, as good as their Neighbor, though the Jews were so apt to think and speak
hardly of them for their Misfortune, contrary to the Doctrine of their own
Scriptures, which taught them, that there is one Event unto all, and that no
man can know the Love or Hatred of God by all that is before him. All things
(says the Preacher) come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and
to the wicked, to the clean and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to
him that sacrifices not. And as it is with particular men, in reference to the
common Misfortunes of Mankind, so it is with particular Churches, in reference
to Divisions and Separations, which are common Accidents to all Churches, good,
or bad, true, or false, pure, or corrupt, Catholic, or un-Catholick, that are
called by the Name of Christ. They are all alike subject to Divisions, and sub
Divisions in Religion; and therefore those who argue against any Church upon
that score, treat her in the time of her Calamity, as Job's Friends treated
him, who turned his Misfortunes, which might have fallen upon themselves, into
Arguments against him, to prove that he was an Hypocrite, and not pure and
upright, as he pretended to be.

But in the primitive Times, men were not such miserable comforters of Churches
afflicted with Divisions. Then they were better Logicians, and better
Christians, than to think a Church was not Catholic, or in the favor of God,
because Heresies and Schisms arose in it; as appears from the Salutations which
St. Paul gave unto the Church of Corinth, when it abounded with Heresy,
Faction, and Dissentions, as I showed in the former Chapter. In the beginning
of both his Epistles, he salutes them in this manner: Paul, an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth. It was still the Church of
God, though there were Heretics, and factious Parties of men in it; nay so far
was he in his infallible judgment, from unchurching the Flock of Christ there
upon the account of Divisions, that he in effect apologized for them, and for
the goodness and wisdom of God that suffered them; for (says he) there must be
Ac si diceret; ob hoc haereseon non statim divinitus eradicantur authors, ut
probati manifesti siant, id est, unusquisque quam tenax and fidelis, and fixus
Catholicae fidei, sit amator, appareat. Vincent. Lirin.
heresies among you, that those who are approved may be made manifest.

So St. Clement begins his Epistle to the same Church, which was written upon
the occasion of a great Schism, in this manner, The Church of God at Rome, to
the Church of God at Corinth. It seems the Church at Corinth, rent and torn as
it was with intestine Divisions, was the Church of God as well as that of Rome,
in which there were then no Divisions at all. St. Peter's next and immediate
Successor bewailed the sad Misfortune of the Corinthians, but he did not
unchurch them for it; he told them, how it occasioned their venerable and
illustrious Name to be evil spoken of, but nevertheless he called them the. 1.
elect of God. And so Constantine the Great, in an Epistle which he wrote to
the Alexandrians, when they were very infamous, upon the account of the deadly
Feuds and Separations which divided their Communion, salutes them in these
words: Socrat. H. E. (...). 9.
Constantine the Emperor, to the Catholic Church of Alexandria. Not long
after, when the Arian Bishops L. 1. c. 27.
conspired against Athanasius, to get the Emperor to depose him, and his
Majesty upon hearing his Cause, found their Accusations to be false, he wrote a
Letter in his behalf to the Alexandrians, of which this is the Title: Athan
opera, vol. 1. p. 779.
Constantine, the great Emperor, to the People of the Catholic Church, which
is at Alexandria. When he wrote this Letter to the People of Alexandria, it
abounded with Melitians and Arians, who had formed themselves into opposite
Communions, and yet those schismatical opposite Communions, were in the
judgment of that learned Emperor, no Argument against the Alexandrian Church.
So Constantine junior, shortly after his Father's death, before he assumed the
Title of Augustus, directed Letters to the Church of Alexandria, in favor of
Athanasius, with this Superscription: Socrat. H. E. l. 2. c. 3.
Constantine Caesar, to the People of the Catholic Church of the Alexandrians.
Notwithstanding all the Sects and Sectaries of Alexandria, the Church still
remained Catholic, in the Communion of the Faithful, who retained the ancient
Apostolical Doctrine and Discipline. These wise Emperors considered, that the
Tares could not alter the property of the Wheat; and therefore though there were
a World of Heretics and Schismatics in Alexandria, and all the Regions round
about it, yet they called the Church a Catholic Church. It was every jot as
Catholic then, as it was before the Melitian and Arian Schisms, when the
People were of one mind, and one Communion; for it is not the great number of
Church members is any Diocese, Province, or Patriarchat, but the cause and
nature of the Communion, that makes a true Church. Otherwise, if Churches must
be no longer reputed truly Catholic and good, then all the Members which are,
or ought to be of it, are unanimous, and communicate together, then it must
follow, that both the Church universal, and every particular Member of it, long
since lost their Catholic nature, and were no true Churches in the eyes of
God. What, for instance, became of the Church Catholic, after the Council of
Ariminum, when almost the whole Christian World became Arian, except a very
Libellus precum, p. 8, 9, 10, 11. Vincent. Lirin. c. 6.
small number of Bishops, who stuck to the profession of the Catholic Faith?
More particularly, what became of the Church of Rome, when Pope Liberius
embraced the Arian Communion, and subscribed to the Sentence of the Arian
Bishops against Athanasius, as Eccles. Ann. T. 3. p. 761, 762, 763.
Baronius acknowledges, though he endeavors to prove, that he never subscribed
to the Arian Confession, or Heresy? Nay what became of it, especially upon
their Principle, when Pope Vid. Nili Archiepiscop. Thessalon. de primatu Papae,
lib. [qui est ad calcem Salmas. de primatu Papae,] p. 33, 34, 35, and p. 61.
Honorius the 1st. fell into the Heresy of the Monothelites, for which he was
condemned by the 6th. General Council, and anathematized for it after his death
by the 2d. Council of Nice, which they receive for the 7th. General Council?
Nay, if Heresies and Schisms are good Arguments, or just matter of Exception
against any Church, what shall we say to the Church of Rome, upon the account
of the Novatian, and all the other Antipapal Schisms mentioned in the former
Chapter? Or to go farther back into Antiquity, what Apology shall we make for
her, when Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 15.
Blastus, and Florinus, a degraded Roman Presbyter, raised a great Schism in
Rome, endeavoring to introduce new Doctrines, which C. 20.
Irenaeus confuted in Books written for that purpose? Their Doctrines were very
absurd, as well as inconsistent, with the Faith and Tradition of all Churches,
and yet they drew away many from the Church of Rome, and enticed them to
embrace their Opinions. Nay, what shall we do to defend her in the Time of Pope
Victor and Zephyrinus, when she was infested with the Heresy, Eusebius. H.E. l 5.
c 28.
which asserted our Lord to be a mere man? This damnable Heresy was first
taught at Rome, by Theodotus, no better a man then a Tanner, for which he was
excommunicated by Pope Victor; and afterward in the Time of his Successor
Zephyrinus, it came to a perfect Schism, when the Heretics made Natalis the
Confessor, a Bishop of the Heresy, and settled a Maintenance upon him. One of
the Scholars of Theodotus the Tanner, was another Theodotus a Banker, a great
promoter of the Schism; and therefore I cannot but wonder, that any Roman
Catholic, who understands Antiquity, should upbraid the Church of England,
with the Preaching of Mechanics and Tradesmen, when a Tanner and a Banker, in
the 2d. Century, were the Ringleaders of such a pestilent Heresy in the
Church of Rome, and as an Author of that Time reports, impudently took upon
them to adulterate the Scriptures, and reject the Canon of the primitive Faith.
Why should men, pretending to Sense and Learning, use and Argument that is so
easily retorted upon themselves, and when it is pursued into all its
Consequences, makes it impossible for them to defend either the Church
Universal, or any particular Member thereof? What will they say for the
primitive Church, by way of defense against the Gnostical Heresies, if they
argue against that, as they are wont to argue against the Church of England? Or
to pass over the Schisms, of which I have given some Account in the former
Chapter, how can they by their way of arguing, maintain the Church of Antioch
to have been Catholic, in the Time of Paulus Samosatensis, who revived the
Heresy of Theodotus, and taught, that Christ by nature was no more then a mere
man? For this Reason, he held Communion with the Followers of Artemon, the
Author of this damnable Heresy, teaching that Christ was from the Earth, and
damning the Hymns which used to be sung in Churches to his honor, as novel
Composures, and letting his Followers chant forth Hymns to his own praise in
the Church, and tell the People that he was an Angel sent from God. Was there
ever such an heretical and blasphemous Archbishop in the Church of England
since the Reformation, as this? But if there had been more then one such, the
Church of England nevertheless would have been a truly Catholic Church, as
this of Antioch then was in the judgment of the Council that deposed Paul. For
in that excellent Eusebius, H.E. l. 7. c 30.
Epistle, which the Council wrote to the Bishops and Presbyters of the whole
Catholic Church under Heaven, they tell them, after a long recital of Paul's
Impieties, that they were necessitated to depose him, and ordain another in his
stead over the Catholic Church.

I might also ask them, upon their way of treating the Church of England, upon
the score of the English Heresies and Schisms, what they can say for the Church
of Constantinople, in the Time of Macedonius and Nestorius, who were both
Patriarchs of that Church, and both fell into Heresy and Schism? When a Bishop
and much more a Patriarch, leads the Flock into bypath, the Schism is more
deplorable, but yet it is not the Apostasy and Secession of one, or two, or
more Bishops, if that should happen, that can destroy the Catholic and
Apostolic nature of any Provincial, Patriarchal, or National Church. For, as I
observed before, it is not the number of Communicants, but the cause or
soundness of Communion, that makes a true Church; and therefore were there both
for kind and number, ten times as many more opposite Sects and Communions, as
there are in this Nation, and Bishops at the Heads of them all, yet upon
supposition that the Church of England is sound and Apostolical in Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, that Vna est pars in qua sunt multi Episcopi, sed ubi
sunt multi, illic -- sacra fides Christi violata est, ubi vero paucissimi sunt,
fides Christi vindicatur, Libell. precum, p 9, 12, 13.
small number adhering to her Communion, must be the true Church. Nay if all
the Bishops of England, but one, should fall away from the Church of England,
that Non dubitandum est paucos Episcopos esle pretiosos merito consessionis,
and inviolabilis sidei, multos vero nullifieri merito haereseos -- in causa
religiouis, and sacrae fidei non numerus numero comparandus est, sed pura illa
Apostolica fides probata exiliis, probata cruciatibus licet unlus, Multorum
infidelitatibus praeponenda est. ibid.
one Bishop, and the Flock adhering to him, would be the true Church of
England, and as true and Catholic a Church, as if there were not one Dissenter
in the Land.

The learned Papists, know this very well, and therefore I wonder, that men
pretending to Letters and Ingenuity, should argue against the Church of
England, from the English Heresies and Schisms. Furthermore, if this be a good
way of arguing against Churches, then the Church of the Jews was twice involved
in the consequences of it; once by the Schism of Corah, and then by that of
Jeroboam, who set up a Priesthood and Altar a Bethel, in opposition to that of
Jerusalem, and by the separation out off ten Tribes in twelve from the true
Church of God. Nay if this modish way of arguing be true, then the separation
of th Church of England, and other National Churches, from that of Rome, are as
strong Arguments against it, as the Sects and Schisms among us are against the
Church of England. There is no difference in the Case, because they say, that
all the Protestant Churches are schismatical for falling off from them, as we
say the Congregational Churches are for falling off from ours; and if ours
indeed is not a Catholic Church, but apparently under God's displeasure,
because forsooth they can tell us of the Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, and Quakers, then we may by just consequence say as much of
theirs, because we can tell them of the Waldenses, Albigenses, and Wiccliffians
of old, and of late of the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Church of England-men,
who are all Separatists from the Communion of Rome. As those we repute
Schismatics, sprang out of our Church and Communion, so those whom they repute
Schismatics, sprang out of theirs; and therefore would not any man wonder,
that they should so far forget themselves, as to use such Arguments against the
Church of England, and make such Reflections upon it, as may be easily retorted
upon themselves, to overthrow their own Pretensions to Catholicism, and weaken
the Cause, and Reputation of their Church.

The Church of Rome (say they) is the Catholic Church, and the Church which
Christ left upon Earth, and the Church of England has separated from it; and
therefore, say we, in their loose way of discoursing, the separation of the
Church of England, is a good Argument against the Goodness and Reputation of
that Church, which Christ left upon Earth. Nay, say they, Christ can have but
one Church upon Earth, and we believe none can be that Church, but that which
is called the Roman Catholic Church; but then, say we, a world of Heresies and
Schisms have been bred in that one Church, the Catholic Church of Rome, and
therefore it is long since this one Church of Christ was one, or a true, and
good Church. Your Church (say the two late Converts to us) has Unity, or not?
if not, then she is not the Church of Christ; if she has, why are there so
many Sects and Schisms among you? Now, not to provoke such Gentlemen to A Net
for the Fishers of Men, p. 111.
paint, and rip up the Sores of Protestancy, your Church (may a Turk say to
them) has Unity, or not? if not, then she is not the Church of Christ; if she
has, why are there so many Sects among you? You say, you are the one Catholic
Church, but what shall we do to find it in such and buddle of Dissenters as are
in the Empire, France, Great Britain, Sweden, Denmark, and other Northern
Countries; and of Ex to ordine [scilicet Cardinalium] sunt quatuor, aut
quinque, quorum nomina possum proferre, si vellem, quibus revera probetur
nostra doctrina, saltem magna ex part, and Romana exosa sit. Sed vae illis cum
filius Dei enunciaverit fore ut is qui norit voluntatem Domini and non fec^it
vapulet pluribus, quam qui non noverit. Vae illis iterum, poeitentiam agant,
nec ament gloriam hominum magis quam gloriam Dei. P, Vergerius in Annot, in
Catalogum Haereticorum, p. 262.
Dissemblers and Indifferents in Italy, Spain and Portugal, and even in Rome it
self. If a Mahumetan, Pagan, or Jew, should argue thus against them, as they
argue against us, they must either renounce their own Consequences, or sink
under the weight of them; nay, if an Atheist, or Infidel, of any other kind,
should take that advantage against Christianity, from the Schisms and Divisions
of it, which they do against the best Church of Christendom, the Church of
England, I appeal to their own Consciences, whether they must not deny their
own Conclusions, or expose and betray the Cause of Christ. The Pagans argued so
against Christianity in the primitive Times, because so many Sects grew up with
it, and therefore the variety of Heresies and Schisms, which have sprung up in
England since the Reformation, can be no Argument against the Church. It is no
blemish to her to be in the same condition with the best and purest Churches,
in the best and purest Times; it was so when the Apostles governed the Church,
and the Spirit of God bid the Christians, Try all things, and hold fast that
which is good.

Hitherto I have proved, that Divisions and Separations can be no good
Argument, or matter of just reproach against any Church, because they are
incident to all Churches, as I have showed by a sufficient Enumeration of
Particulars; and this will farther appear, if we consider, that they may be
Arguments for, as well as against a Church, and a cause of just praise and
commendation of it, as well as of just reproach. When they are just and
reasonable, then indeed they are good Arguments against the Church where they
arise, and give men just cause to reproach it; but when they are not just and
reasonable, but proceed from mistake in those that make them, or from worse
Causes, they they are good Arguments against the dividing Parties, and just
matter of reproach to them, but none at all to the Church. Wherefore it argues
want of Ingenuity, or great weakness of Judgment in men, to exclaim against a
Church, upon the score of Divisions and Separations, before they have examined
whether the Church or the Separatists are in the fault. In Reason and Charity
this ought first to be done, before either the Church, or the Separators, or
both, be condemned; but our Adversaries of the Roman Church, without any regard
to the Case betwixt the Church of England and the Dissenters, loudly defame her
in all Places with the Dissentions and Separations, and object to our People
the great difficulty and uncertainty of finding out, among so many opposite
Churches and Religions, which is the right, if there be any such, and therefore
exhort them to take Sanctuary in that Church, which is at unity in it self, and
looks so like the one Catholic Church. But God be praised, the People of the
Church of England are generally better instructed, then to be imposed upon with
such loose Talk. They understand very well, that as Separations from corrupt
and impure Churches is a necessary duty, so as long as there are Devils to
tempt men, there will also be unjust Separations from found and Catholic
Churches, and that therefore Separations and Divisions in the general, can
neither make for, or against any Church. They know very well, that Churches,
like natural Bodies, are of different Tempers and Constitutions, and that when
any of them chances to undergo a separation of Parts, the particular nature and
constitution of it must be examined, before a man can safely conclude, whether
the blamable Parts went off, or remained with the Church. In the separation of
Gold from the drossie and spurious Parts; of Wine from the Lees; of Wheat from
the Chaff; and of the excrementitious Parts from the Chyle and Blood, the base
and impure, and unprofitable Parts go off, and the good, and pure, and
profitable, stay behind: but in the separation of Wheat from Tares, of Flower
from the Bran, and in all Chemical Separations, the good, the generous, and
spiritual Parts go off, and the refuse and feculent stay behind. I have made
use of this familiar Comparison, to show how Separations and Divisions in the
general, can be no rational Argument for or against any Church, until it be
known what king of Body that Church was before the Separation; sound or
corrupt; pure or impure; Catholic or not Catholic; Apostolical or un.
Apostolical: And when this is once stated, then it will appear, whether the
Divisions and Separations which were made from her, make for her or against
her. I say, when it is first known what kind of Church a divided Church was,
before the beginning of the Division, then it may be known, whether the
Division objected against it, be an Argument for or against the Trueness,
Soundness, and Purity of it; but to argue pro or con, from Separations, before
this is stated, is but to talk at Random, which it does not become men of
Learning and Ingenuity to do. According to this Rule, the Divines of England
first proved, that the Communion of the Roman Church was not pure and
Apostolical, and thence justified the Separation of the Church of England from
it as necessary; and on the contrary they have proved, that the Communion of
the Church of England is pure and Apostolical, and thence condemn the
Separation of the Dissenters from it as needless. They argue a priori against
both: on the one hand proving, that the Wheat went off from the Tares, and on
the other, that the Chaff went off from the Wheat. But to argue a posteriori,
and in general against a Church, merely upon the score of Divisions, before we
examine the Constitution of the divided Church, and state the Case between her
and the Dividers, does become no men especially no Churchmen, but such as
having a weak Cause, must make use of popular, for want of found Arguments, and
make the best they can of Sophistry, when Reason is not on their side.

CHAP. III. That bare Unity, or want of Schisms and Divisions in Religion, are
no sound Argument of the Truth, Goodness, or Reputation of a Church.
III. HAving showed in the second Chapter, That Divisions and Separations are
no Argument against the Trueness, or Reputation of any Church, I proceed to
show in this, That bare Unity, or want of Divisions, is no Argument for the
Trueness, or Reputation of a Church; and this I shall endeavor to demonstrate
three ways: First, By showing, That it is not the Unity, but the things in
which a Church is united, that truly recommend and justify a Church. Secondly,
That Church-Unity may be the effect of culpable Causes, And thirdly, That all
Churches, true or false, Catholic or not Catholic, are united in themselves,
and particularly, that the Church of England has more potential and actual
Union in it, then that of the Church of Rome.

First then, It is not bare Union, but the things in which a Church is united,
that must truly recommend and justify it to the Christian World, and prove it
to be the Church of God. This is a self-evident Proposition, which all the
Churches in the World will admit at first hearing, and the very Test, by which
when Disputes arise, they must be content to be tried. For as to this
Particular, it is just in Ecclesiastical, as it is in Civil Law and Government,
where it is not the Union, but the Things or Cause in which men are united,
that distinguish lawful from unlawful Societies and Meetings; otherwise if bare
Union and Agreement, how strict soever, were a Sign of, or a good Argument for
the true and Catholic Church, then Aaron the high Priest, at the Head of that
Congregation, which worshipped the golden Calf, was the true Church of the
Jews. He was their supreme and lawful Pastor, and they were very unanimous in
making the Calf after his direction, and in building an Altar before it, and in
oftering up Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings, to use the new phrase, in the
presence of it. They sat down to eat and drink before it, and said with one
unanimous Acclamation, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt. I believe there never was a more perfect Union and Agreement
in the Church of Rome, then among the Communicants of this sinful Congregation,
nevertheless it was no Schism to divide from them, because they united in a
sin. Their Union was their Crime, because the object of it was highly criminal,
and God was provoked to consume them, because they agreed in a thing that was
so abominable in his eyes.

So the Corahites were as firmly united under Corah, as the true Church was
under Moses and Aaron. Two hundred Princes of the Assembly, with a great number
of People, were firmly united together in a Cause, wherein they stuck together
to the death, even till the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and
they went down alive into Hell. So likewise the ten Tribes were as firmly
united at Bethel, as the two were at Jerusalem; they had number as well as
union to plead, but notwithstanding both their number and union, they were but
a great Schism, because they united in Innovations contrary to the will of God.
So to pass from the Jews to the Christians, there has been at several times as
strict an Union among Heretics and Schismatics, as among the Catholics. The
Novatians in particular were remarkable for their Concord, Unity, and
Unanimity. So were the Arians generally all of one Communion, and very
unanimous against the Homousian Doctrine, and yet they were but a great
prevailing Schism when they were at the highest, and had almost gained the
whole Christian World.

From these Examples it is plain, that in passing judgment upon Churches, we
are not to look at the Union, so much as the Cause in which they are united. We
are to consider if their Doctrine and Discipline be Apostolical, and their
terms of Communion truly Catholic, and if they be so, then their Union in them
is holy and laudable, and such as makes them true Churches of God. A
concurrence of these things, is the genuine badge of a Ad bane it aque for mam
probabuntur ab illis Ecclesiis quae licet nullum ex Apostolis, vet Apostolicis
Autorem suum proserant ut multo posteriores, quae denique quotidie
instituuntur: tamen in cadem fide conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae. Tertull. de praescript. Haeres.
truly Catholic and Apostolical Church, and if those of the Roman Communion,
would have us admire their Union, and be made Converts by it, they must first
make it appear to us that they are united in these things. Otherwise their
Unity, instead of being an Argument for their Church, is a strong Argument
against it, to prove that it is but a Conspiracy, and an overgrown Schism,
from the one Catholic and Apostolical Church.

But secondly, Church-unity may be the effect of culpable Causes; and by
culpable Causes, I mean, only such as in a great measure make the embracing of
any Religion, an inspontaneous, or unwilling action: and these are only two,
Ignorance and Compulsion, when men either are of a Religion, which they would
not be of, if they knew the faults of it, or when knowing the faults of it,
they would certainly forsake it, were they not under force, but left to their
own free choice.

First then, Church-unity may be the effect of Ignorance, which was one great
cause of the Unity and Agreement of almost all Mankind in Paganism: and
therefore their ignorance of the Gentiles, is called darkness in the New
Testament; as where our Lord is compared to the Dayspring, or Sunrising,
which gave light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death. So
the Apostle of the Gentiles told them, It was their duty to show forth the
Praises of him, who had called them out of darkness into his mavelous light;
and truly their spiritual darkness was so great, that God did in some measure
excuse their gross error, in thinking that the Godhead could be like unto Gold,
or Silver, or Stone, graven by Art, or man's device. Though men, who were worthy
and absurd Idaea's of him, yet, as the Apostle told the Athenians, The times of
their former ignorance God winked at, but then commanded all the Gentiles every
where at their utmost peril to repent.

There never was a more strict and general Union among the Jews, or Christians,
then there was among the Greeks. For Paganism was become the Catholic
Religion, or Superstition, (as Catholic signifies universal) and was spread
far and wide upon the Earth; and yet, as the Apologetical Writers replied to
the Greeks, when they argued from the extent of their Religion, and the consent
of Mankind in it, their great agreement in Idolatry was the effect of their
Ignorance; as plainly appeared from the preaching of the Gospel, upon which
they forsook those dumb Idols unto which they were carried, even as they were
led, and turned from their former Vanities and Superstition unto the living
God. They worshipped the Gods, and observed their impure Rites, because they
knew no better; but when their Understandings came to be well informed, then
they made a new and manly choice, such as proceeded from all the Principles of
humane Actions, and plainly showed, that Ignorance had hitherto been the Mother
of their Idol-devotion, and by consequence, that the choice of their former
Religion wanted a sufficient measure of knowledge, to make it a rational and
truly willing choice.

I wish those who pride themselves so much in the Unity of the Roman
Catholics, would consider, how far the Sons and Daughters of the Church of
England, may use this Plea in their own defense, against their so much
celebrated Union. It is certain, that upon the Preaching and Writing of the
Reformers, People came off in shoals from the Church of Rome, in all Places
where the Reformation was taught. Whole Kingdoms revolted as one man, to the
astonishment of the Beholders on both sides; and, I believe, no one man in the
World, St. Paul excepted, ever made so many Proselytes as Luther, the
Protevangelist of the Reformation in Germany, did; which is no small
presumption, that their former adhesion to the Roman Communion, was the effect
of involuntary Ignorance, which is not consistent with a truly free and
rational choice. I am the more confirmed in this opinion, when I consider, that
in Countries, where there is the free exercise of both Religions, the number of
Proselytes from the Roman Religion to the Reformed, is daily much greater, then
from the Reformed to the Roman; particularly in France, notwithstanding all the
progressive Discouragements, which came like Wave after Wave upon the
Protestants, for every Proselyte Popery got from the Reformed Church, it
perhaps gained ten from Popery, while it was lawful for it to receive Converts;
and I appeal to the Consciences of the R. Cs. whether in all likelihood there
would not soon be as many Protestants in Italy or Spain, as there were in
France, if there were allowed the like measure of Knowledge and Liberty in
those Kingdoms, as there was in this. Let the Spaniards and Italians have but
the free use of the Scriptures, which is their Christian Birthright; give them
but the Translations which Cyprian de Valera made of the Bible in one Language,
and He was Abbat of the Monastery of St. Michael de Lemo, of the Order of St.
Benedict, and his Translation of the Bible in Italian was Printed in the year
1477. when Sixtus Quartus was Pope.
Nicolaus de Malhermis, and He translated the New Testament from the Original
into Italian, and it was Printed at Antwerp in 1538. and dedicated to St.
Hercules Conzaga, Cardinal of Mantua, and the Dedication or Preface is almost
nothing else but a Panegyric of the Scriptures; but this and all his other
Works were prohibited in that Index of prohibited Books, which P. P. Vergerius
put forth with Annotations, and which was the first of that kind.
Antonio Brucioli, both their own men, made in the other, before the
Reformation; and if upon the free use of these Bibles, and the Preaching of
such men as Cyprian, and Savanorola, and allowance to their Bishops, to act
according to the Powers of their Apostolical Function, there do not arise a
sudden and mighty Episcopal Reformation in both those Kingdoms, then I would
acknowledge, that the Unity in the Roman Church is perfectly Apostolical, and
that the secession of ours from the Church of Rome, is an Apostasy from the
one Catholic Church.

It is very well known, what Sleidan. Commentar. l. 15 in An. 1543.
Herman, Archbishop of Cohen, Duditius, Bishop of Five Churches, and the two
Sleidan. Comment. l. 21. in An. 1548. Hist. Council of Trent, l. 2. Meum etiam
Germanum fratrem Baptistam Vergerium Polae Episcopum ob Paraphrafin in Psalmum
119. scriptum condemnant. P.P. Vergerius Annot. in Catal. Heret. p. 263.
119. seriptum condemnant. P. P. Vergerius Annot. in Catal. Heret. p. 263.
Vergerii, Brothers of immortal memory, not to mention other Bishops, did in the
Time of the Reformation; nay, Posterity knows very well, how far the Spanish
Bishops in the Council of Hist, Council of Trent, l. 7.
Trent, maintained the divine Right of Episcopacy, in spite of the Legates,
and that Bishops derived their Authority immediately from Jesus Christ, and not
from the Pope. And no man that is acquainted with History, can doubt, that if
the Bishops of the Roman Communion might maintain this Doctrine safely, they
would maintain it freely and openly, and so wrest the Keys out of the Pope's
hand. They would, if they durst, let his Holiness know, that they are his Non
est nostri Romani Papae, non est tanta majestas ut terrere debeat: ficta est
illa temporalis and sastuosa majestas, usurpata est, nulla est. Frater noster
ille est, Collega, and Comminister. Antonius de Dominis in Consilio
Profectionis.. 13.
Fellows, and Colleagues, and co-Boishops, as St. Cyprian called Pope Stephen;
but they are quiet and peaceable, because they are under Compulsion: By which I
understand, such a mighty degree of penal Force and Violence, as ordinarily
speaking, will compel men to comply with corrupt Churches, against the Dictates
of their own Understandings; as extremity of ill Weather will constrain a
Master of a Ship, with great reluctance, to cast his Cargo Overboard, to save
his own life, and the lives of his men. And when such great Exigences force men
to do any thing, which otherwise they would not do, they are said to do it
unwillingly, and to act against their Judgments, and Inclinations; and
particularly, when for fear of ruining and exterminating Penalties, which,
humanely speaking, are intolerable, men conform to any Religion, which
otherwise they would disown; though as to outward Conformity, and Communion, they
are of it, yet they are not for it in their hearts. I confess, me ought to
endure any thing, rather then conform to any Religion, which they believe to be
false, or subscribe to any Confession, which they believe not to be true; but
yet we see the frailty of humane Nature is such, that extreme Severity will
make them comply, against their wills, with a Religion they certainly know, and
firmly believe to be false. Thus Plato, for fear of the Fate of his Master
Socrates, continued in the profession of Polytheism, against the Dictates of
his own Conscience. He knew there was but one true God, the Creator of all
things, but he durst not stand up for him, but, sore against his will,
frequented the Temples of the false Gods. So though Cicero knew the Vanity of the
popular Gods, as he called them, in opposition to the one great God, yet he
went to their Temples with the People, and said, That their Ancestors Religion
was nevertheless to be had in Reverence, and retained, Reipublicae gratia that
is in effect to say, A man ought not to dissent from it, for fear he should
lose his Skin. So the Cum iram regis metuunt, cum non dignantur pro Christo
filio Dei exilium perpeti -- rescindunt quod pie vindicaverant, and suscipiunt
quod ut impium damnaverant. -- Episcopi plus iram regis terreni timuerunt, quam
Christum verum Deum, and sempiternum regem.
Catholic Bishops, in the Time of the Arian Controversy, for fear condemned
the Faith, against their own Consciences, which they had publicly asserted
before: Even good old Sed and ipse Osius accersitus ad Constantium regem,
minisque perterritus, and metuens ne senex and dives exilium pateretur, dat
manus impietati, and post tot annos praevaricatur in fidem. Libell precum.
Osius, who had so long stood Champion for the Catholic Faith, fearing the
Displeasure of the Emperor, did set his Hand to the Arian Confession; and in
the Reign of Valentinian, when the Socrat. H. E. l. 4. c. 15, 16, 17.
Catholics were so contumeliously used by the Arians, and were afflicted with
most insufferable Evils, they turned Arians apace, to avoid the violence of the
Persecution, though they ought to have endured it to the end. When Complaints
signified nothing, but to end in the ruin of the Complainers, and the most
eminent of the orthodox Clergy were burnt alive, for presenting a Petition to
the Emperor, then all the World almost became Arian on the sudden, and was
externally united in the Arian Faith. But as he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, so in
this forced Conformity, all were not Arians that seemed to be Arians, but many
were so in external Communion, who hated Arianism in their hearts. And the like
success that the Arians had against the Catholics, by methods of Severity,
have some Eo enim nostris temporibus redactares est ut Ecclesiasticae
controversiae, non Theologis amplius, non Conciliis sed tortoribus, sed
carnificibus sed sicariis, sed sanguinarris, sed parricidis defendendae Romae,
ant Roma committantur. Anton, de Dominis in Consilio.
severe Popes and Princes had against those, that have divided, or attempted to
divide the Roman Church, which made Cardinal Soderinus tell Adrian Hist Council
Trent, l. 1.
the 6th. That the best way of rooting out Heretics was by Crus^^^ and by
exciting Princes and People to root them out; and to that end he bid him
remember, that by these means Innocent the 3d. and his Successors, happily
subdued the Alhigenses of Languedoc, the Waldenses Picards, poor men of Lions,
Arnoldists, Speronists, and P^^vines; of whom there remained nothing but the
very Names. And it should seem that Pope P. P. Vergerius in Secret. Pont. Act.
2. Tamen scio cum Paulus III. anti paucos annos literas gravissimas (Breve
appellamus) ad Caesarem and Romans Regem dedisset in quibus erat scriptum, illos
consultius esse facturos, si bello contra Turcas omisso, bellum adornarent
contra Lutheranos, quippe qui essent Turcis ipsis lange perniciosiores, and
deteriores, etc.
Paul the 3d. was of that Cardinal's opinion, who in a Brief to the Emperor
Charles the 5th. and his Brother Ferdinand, King of the Romans, tells them,
That it were more advisedly done, if they would clap up a Peace with the Turks,
and bend all their Force against the Lutherans, who were far worse, and more
pernicious than the very Turks. Hist. Council Trent. l. 5.
So Paul the 4th. importuned the Kings of France, and Spain, to settle the
Inquisition in their Dominions, as the only means to extirpate Heresies; and at
his Death, he recommended nothing to the Cardinals, but the Office of the holy
Inquisition, which, he said, was the only Expedient to preserve the Church,
exhorting them to employ all their Endeavors to get it established in Italy,
and wheresoever else they could. He used to say, It was the principal Secret,
and Mystery of the Papacy; but whether it were so or no, it cannot be denied,
but that the Union of the Roman Church is in a great measure beholding to it,
where it is most entire. Id. l. 4.
After the Death of that Pope, Philip the 2d. King of Spain, rooted out
Lutheranism, which had taken happy Root in that Kingdom, by extreme Severity.
He no sooner arrived from Flanders at Sevill, Id. l. 5.
on the 24th. day of September, 1559. but he caused Johannes Pontius, Count of
Bayleno, with a Preacher, and some others of the College of St. Isidore, where
the Religion was entered, together, with some Ladies of Quality, in all 13
Persons, to be burnt for Lutherans; as also the Statue of Constantinus Pontius,
Confessor to his Father Charles, who served him in his Retirement, and held him
in his Arms when he expired. Afterward, at Valladolid, he caused 28 of the
prime Nobility of the Country to be burned in his presence. The Spaniards,
especially the Nobility, had at that time a great aversion to the Sea of Rome;
but this extreme Severity of Philip made them conceal their inward Resentments,
and every one, who knows that piece of History, must confess, that the Church
of Rome is obliged for its Unity in Spain to the memory of that Prince, and the
continuance of the Inquisition from his Time till now. The Heresy, as it is
mis-called, was rooted out of the Low Countries, by the destruction of 50000
Persons: And we know by what Methods it has been since extirpated in other
Places, where thousands of Souls, who would have counted Death a mercy, have
been brought to subscribe a Confession, contrary to their former Religion which
they still believe in their hearts. P. P. Vergerius says, That in that Age,
(the Age of the Reformation Quantus est numerus nostra aetate non mod^ ^orum,
qui mortis, carcerum, atque triremium, sed etiam qui exitiorum tulerunt, and
serunt etiamnum martyria? Qui jam migrarunt ad dominum deum nostrum per vestra,
inquam, martyria, sunt ferme millia centum. -- Cum his vero conjunguntur voces
circiter 15000 exulum, qui deserta patria, desertis parentibus, desertis
amicis, atque bonis alibi vivunt. P. P. Vergerius Annot, in Catalog. Haeret.
,) almost 100000 Souls had been put to death, for refusing Communion with the
Roman Church, besides those that were, condemned to Prisons, Galleys, and
Banishment. And these Instances are enough, without any more, to make it
appear, That the Unity of the Roman Church, is in great part the effect of
Force and Compulsion, which much diminishes the Reputation of it, and might
prevail with our Neighbors of the Roman Communion, if they considered it
aright, not to admire it, and talk of it so much, and ring us in the Ears with
it in all Places, as if it came not at all from Violence, but altogether by
Inspiration from the Spirit of God.

But in the last place, Bare Unity, or want of Divisions, is so far from being
an Argument for the Trueness, or Honor of any Church, that it is a common
Affection which belongs to all Churches, true or false, good or bad, Catholic
or un-Catholick, small or great, as they are Societies of men; and besides, the
Church of England has more Union, both potential and actual in it, then the
Church of Rome. To prove the first Part of this Assertion, we need but
remember, That it is Union and Agreement under certain Laws and Rules of
Government, which makes all Societies among Men and Angels, and wicked
Societies are many times as well formed, and as firmly united, as the pure, the
holy, and the good. Lucifer and his angels are a Guild, or College of Spirits,
as well as Michael and his, and are under a political economy of the same
nature; and he that understood it very well, said, That Satan was not divided
against Satan, because if he were, his kingdom could not stand. But it has
stood firm and undivided, ever since it was first formed, before the sensible
Creation, it was never yet shaken with intestine Divisions, there was never two
or three opposite Sovereigns at one time in that cursed Hierarchy, nor two or
three Pretenders to the Chair of Lucifer: And therefore, I hope, bare Unity, or
want of Divisions, will never hereafter pass among considering men, for a mark
of a truly Catholic Church. And as it is among Spirits, so it is among men: The
worst Fraternities have sometimes the firmest Union; as we of this Nation very
well remember the Time, when those of the great Rebellion boasted, that God had
united the Hearts of his People in his Cause as one Man; nevertheless those
pretended People of God, whose Hearts and Hands were so united, that we could
not break their Bonds of Union asunder, were no better then a Band of Rebels,
and their Cause downright Rebellion against God, and the best of Princes, though
they acted in it as if they had been all informed with one common Soul. The
like has often happened in Ecclesiastical Societies: The Samaritans, who had
neither Sadduces, nor Pharisees, nor Essenes, nor Herodians, nor Cabalists, nor
Carraites, among them, for that Reason had a firmer Union among themselves,
then the Church of the Jews had, and yet they were not the true Church. So
among the ancient Christians, the Novatians lived in perfect Peace and Unity
among themselves, when there were many Feuds and Contentions among the
Catholics: Which shows, that bare Unity is not a good Test whereby to try
Churches; or if it were, I am confident, the Church of England, upon a fair
trial, would carry the Garland from the Roman, and appear to be the more
Catholic Church.

Could there be found any fit and indifferent Judge between them, I durst, as
far as I am concerned, put the merit of the Controversy between us and the R.
Cs. upon this single point of Union, and would engage to render my self a
Proselyte, if their Church carried the Cause. Perhaps they may think his a very
bold Challenge, because of the great number of Sectaries that have gone out
from us; but then they are to consider, that as the Protestants, which in
several Parts of Europe, under several Denominations, have gone out from them,
are now nothing unto them, so neither are the Congregational Sects, which went
off from us, any thing, or of any account to us: But take our Church, and
theirs, as they are precisely in themselves, without any regard to their
respective Separations, and I am very confident, for all their boastings of
Union, that the Church of England will be found to have both more potential and
actual Union in it, then the Church of Rome. For first, as to potential Union,
however the Church of Rome is actually united, it has the seeds of Division in
its Bowels; and as Rebeckah once had different Nations, so has she different
Churches struggling in her Womb. The Principle of the Pope's Supremacy, is it
self sufficient, were there no more, to cause continual Feuds and Factions in
the Popedom; and In his excellent Tracts, De causis dissentionum in Ecclesiis,
and de primatu Papae ad calcem Salmasii de primatu Papae.
Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica, did most judiciously assign it, for the cause of
all the Divisions that then tore the Catholic Church into pieces, the Bishops
of Christendom not being able to endure the Usurpation, nor other Churches,
contrary to their fundamental Liberty, to be Subjects to the Roman Church. The
exercise of this usurped Power of the Pope's, being the supreme ordinary of the
Universal Church, is that, which makes the Roman Bishops themselves sigh and
murmur in private, and say with Spalatensis, where they can say it safely,
Frater noster ille est, Collega, and Coepiscopus nobiscum; and however they
conceal their Resentments, as the Spanish Prelates did before the Council of
Trent, yet they are willing, upon the first opportunity, to assert their
Apostolical Equality, and like the English Prelates, at the time of the
Reformation, will be glad when they can do it with a prospect of success, to
cast off the Yoke, which makes Christendom groan, and which neither they nor
their Predecessor were able to bear. Let but Christian Princes say the word,
and then we shall see what the Bishops will do; or let there be but a free and
general Council indeed, and then let us see if the Pope shall not be told in
both ears, That the Church Universal is a great College, and the Government of
it Aristocratical; that the Episcopat is one, but that it is divided among all
Bishops, whereof every one has his share; that the Apostles received equal
Power and Authority from the same Masters; that the Bishops were their
Successors, and that the other Bishops receive their Authority no more from the
Successor of St. Peter, then he does from them, but that all receive it alike
from Jesus Christ. When it shall be safe, the Bishops of the Roman Church will
talk and write as much to this purpose, as ever the English Divines did, who in
asserting this Doctrine, follow the Example of their Ancestors before the
Reformation; I mean, the Saxon Bishops, one of whom in his Advice to his
Clergy, speaks thus: Ge sceolon eac itan that eore hades syndan tha aesteran
hadar aester urum hadum. and us tha nystan. gelice tha biscopas syndan
ongerixle thara Apostola on thaere haligtha gesomnunge. sa syndan tha maesse
preostas on tham geprixle ^pister thegna. tha B^sc^opas Aapones. and tha maesse
preostas one had his suna. Spelm. Council. uol. 1. p. 586.
Ye ought to know, that your Order is next after, and next to ours; for as the
Bishops are in the place and stead of the Apostles, over the holy Church, so
are the Priests in the place of the Disciples. The Bishops are of the Order of
Aaron, and the Priests have the Order of his Sons.

This Doctrine, in all likelihood, will one day revive against the Sovereign
Pontif; for the Spirit of the Archbishop of Granata will for ever be upon the
learned Prelates, who like Elastick Bodies under pressure, are under a constant
inclination to recover their liberty, and will recover it, as soon as they can.

The next dividing Principle in the Church of Rome is, The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is a Doctrine more full of Contradictions, then
perhaps any other, which Men or Angles can invent. It is contrary to all the
Senses and Reason of Man; to the plain and obvious sense of those very words
upon which it is grounded; to the Belief of the ancient Catholic Church; to
the Principles of almost all Sciences: It multiplies the hypostatical Union; it
makes Christ to have offered up himself a propitiatory sacrifice, before he was
offered upon the Cross: In a word, the Contradictions involved in it, are
almost innumerable, by which it equally choaks the learned and unlearned; and
as it has made, so it will for ever make Dissenters in great abundance, and no
man, nor any Church, can ever want a just pretense of dividing from the Church
of Rome, as long as it is an Article of her Faith. These two Principles,
without naming any more, naturally tend to making of Divisions after Divisions
among them, notwithstanding all the actual Union of which they boast. But the
Church of England has no such dividing Principles, theoretical or practical,
in her Constitution; nothing is required to Communion with her, but what is
primitive and Apostolical, and how much soever she has been, or is broken, and
divided, yet her Communion is truly Catholic, and tends to Peace and
Coalescence, and even now her Wounds are closing apace, and ready to heal of
themselves.

And as the Church of England has more potential Union in her, then that of
Rome, so has she more actual Union too; for her Clergy and People have no such
fierce and bitter Contentions among them, as there are betwixt the Irish
Remonstrants and Anti-Remonstrants, the Molinists and Jansenists, as well as
Thomists, and Scotists, and Jesuits, some of which opposite Parties will not
communicate with one another. And as for the Difference among them, concerning
the Judge of Controversies, and whether the Pope be subject or superior to a
general Council, it tends naturally, and by due rational consequence, to the
dissolution of their Communion; and who knows but we may live to see the Comedy
of Basil acted over again, and one part of the Roman Church declaring for a
general Council, and the other for the Pope.

Nay I may say, that at this present the Clergy of the Church of England have
been, and are united, to Admiration and Envy, and better then the Clergy often
happened to be in the ancient Catholic Church. Had our Bishops ever such
Broils among them, as happened betwixt the Bishops of the Eastern and Western
Churches, about no greater a Matter, then the keeping of Easter? And between
Cpyrian, and Dionysius, and Firmilian, three Metropolitans, and their Adherents
on the on side, and the Bishop of Rome, and his, on the other, about
re-Baptization, when they made no bones of Vid. ^^. Firmiliani contra Ep.
Stephani in cyprian. edit. Rigalt. p. 143.
taxing the Pope with Inhumanity, Insolence and Folly? Or had we ever reason to
take up that Complaint against them, which H. E. l. 3.^.1.
Eusebius made against the Bishops of the Catholic Church, before the
Dioclesian Persecution, That they were, as it were, at War among themselves,
and wounded one another with words, as with Darts and Spears, nay, that they
dashed and split like capital Vessels one upon another, striving for
pre-eminence, and enlarging the bounds of their Diocesses, which causes great
Factions among the People? Or, to descend to more particular Instances, Was
there ever such a tragical Quarrel between any of our Archbishops, or Bishops,
since the Reformation, as happened between Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria,
and John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople? Epiphanius, who sided with
Theophilus, and Chrysostom, Socrat. l. 6. c..14.
cursed one another, Socrat. l. 16. c. 17.
much Blood was s;head on both sides, and the Cathedral Church of
Constantinople, with the Senate House, were burnt in the Quarrel down to the
ground. Sozom. l. 8. c. 21.
Sozomen protests, he was ashamed to tell many things which happened in this
Quarrel, lest Infidels should come to the knowledge of them; and says An. 400.
n. 31.
Baronius, going to tell the Story of it: I shall now describe a cursed
Persecution, not of Pagans against Christians, or of Heretics against
Catholics, or of wicked against good men, but, what is monstrous and
prodigious, of Saints and holy men, one against another.

to proceed, Did the Bishops of England, since the Reformation, ever accuse one
another in written Libels before the King, as the Sozom. l. 1. c. 17.
Bishop in the Nicene Council did before the Emperor? Or is there now any
occasion of using against them the words, which Vit. Nazianz. ^^ae^ixa operibus
Nazianz. G^ae^e ^tis Paris. 1630.
Nazianzen spoke in a Council of Constantinople, which went about to depose
him: It is a shame, my fellow-Pastors of Christ's Flock, and not befitting you,
to fall to war among your selves, while you are to teach others peace, and
persuade them to live in unity. To conclude, How many such sharp Contentions
have happened among our Bishops, as we read happened between Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 15. 39. and between Paul and Peter, Gal. 2.11. where we read, that because
Peter was to be blamed, he withstood him to his very face. Had the Clergy, and
People of our Communion, been long or often exercised by such Broils as these,
the R. Cs. would have had a fair pretense to reproach us with want of Unity;
but the God of Union be praised for it, we have no such Feuds and Contentions
among us, but quite contrary, are as fast cemented among our selves in Love and
Union, as I believe any Church of the like extent ever was in the World.

CHAP. IV. An Enquiry into the True Causes of Schisms and Divisions.
HAving showed from several Arguments in the foregoing Chapter, That bare
Unity, or want of Divisions, is no Argument for the Trueness or Reputation of a
Church, I shall, for the farther advantage of my Plea, proceed in this, to make
enquiry into the Causes of Divisions and Schisms, and more particularly, into
the Causes of these in England, with which the Christians Roman Communion are
pleased so to upbraid our Church.

Now in this enquiry into the Causes of Divisions and Schisms, I should very
much forget both the ancient Jewish and Christian Theology, if I did not in the
first place name the Devil, by whom we are not to understand any single evil
Spirit, but the whole society of apostate Angels, who are most malicious and
implacable Enemies of God, and of Man for God's sake, and of the Church, above
all other Societies of Men. This Doctrine we have not only from the Scriptures
of the Old and New. Testament, but from the most ancient primitive Christian
Writers, who, as it were, with one voice, ascribe unto the Devil, Idolatry,
Persecution, Heresy and Schism. He is meant by the Enemy in our Savior's
Parable, who took his opportunity while men slept, to sow Tares in the Field
of the Church: And accordingly St. Paul, who was not ignorant of his devices,
calls Heresies the doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. says he, The Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter days some shall depart from the truth,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils: And in Ephesians. 6.12.
says he, Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses, or wicked spirits in high places. All these are
several expressions for that society of apostate Spirits, which make up the
kingdom of darkness; as is plain from the 1 st. and 2d. Verses of the 11 th.
Chapter of the same Epistle, where he says, Ye were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein you walked according to the course of this world, according to
the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children
of disobedience, who cannot be persuaded to believe the Gospel. Wherefore the
Combats, for which Christians are to fortify themselves, are not only against
humane Enemies, but the powers of darkness, the whole society of Devils, who
were the Gods of the Gentile World. They are always plotting and contriving,
against the Church, and when they cannot hurt it with Idolatry, Polytheism, or
Persecutions, then they strive to get Altar set up against Altar in it, and
distract it with Heresy and Schism. Accordingly St. Ignatius in his Ep. to the
Ephesians, calls Heresies and false Doctrines, Herbs, or Plants of the Devil's
planting; and tells them in the same Epistle, That to meet often together, and
receive the holy Eucharist in peace and concord, was the only way to weaken the
powers of Satan, and prevent the ruin and destruction he would otherwise bring
upon them by Division; and to convince them how malicious and vigilant an enemy
he is to the Church, he tells them, That there were three Mysteries of the
Christian Religion which were kept from his knowledge, The Virginity of Mary,
her bringing forth, (or the Nativity of her Son) and the Death of our Lord. Had
Satan come to the knowledge of these Mysteries, unless God had chained him and
his evil angels up, they would have made ill use of them against the great
design of man's Redemption; and accordingly many learned men have given his for
one Reason of the obscurity of the Prophecies, and why God was pleased so
artificially to conceal many things in them, lest Satan coming to the knowledge
of them, should endeavor to prevent or obstruct the fulfilling of them, or
enervate the certainty and demonstration of them, after they were fulfilled.
Thus Justin Martyr in his first, commonly called the second Apology, observes,
That he did beforehand to the best of his skill, teach and institute many
things among the Pagans, which had some semblance with the future Mysteries of
the Christian Religion, that so when they came to pass, they might not seem
such divine and wonderful Mysteries, as indeed they are. The like is observed
by Tert^ll dep^^^ script. Haeres, (...) 40.
Tertullian after him, and made out by many particular Instances, to which I
remit the curious Reader, which shows, That he has a great and active spite
against the Church of God, more especially against such parts of it as are pure
in Doctrine or Worship, to sow Heresies and Schisms among them and divide the
unity of their Communion: And therefore the same St. Ignatius, in his Ep. to
the Trallesians, bids them beware of Separations and Divisions, as of the
Snares of the Devil; and in his Ep. to the Philadelphians, he prays them in his
wonted phrase, to abstain from the evil Herbs, which Christ never cultivated,
because they were not of his heavenly Father's planting, meaning the Weeds of
false Doctrines, which Satan had sowed among them, and which, he says, did not
only cause different Parties among them, but a perfect separation of many from
the Church. So Justin P. 403.
Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho, ascribes all the impious and blasphemous
Doctrines, which were then taught in the Name of Christ, to the Inspirations of
the unclean spirit of the Devil; and accordingly when St. Polycarp met Marcion
the Heretic, he told him, He knew him to be the eldest Son of the Devil, as
being a man who was acted with diabolical Impulse and Inspirations; and
Tertullian, in the Book above cited, says expressly, That the Devil is the
Author of Heresy as well as Idolatry. The like is observed by St. Cyprian and
Theodoret, who ascribe all Heresies to the invention and artifice of the Devil;
and all the Histories of Heresies and Schisms in Ecclesiastical Writers, are
still ushered in with prefatory Complaints of the (...), and (...), the envious
and wicked Devil, whose business has been from the beginning to deceive, and
molest the Church of God. Nay, the purer any Church is in Doctrine and Worship,
the more, we may be sure, he will stickle against it, and endeavor to weaken
and disgrace it by intestine Divisions, and persuade the dividing Parties to
form themselves into opposite Schisms.

Indeed where Churches are already corrupted in Doctrine and Worship, and
firmly adhere to those Corruptions, it is his interest to let them alone, and
not to hazard the Reformation of them, by stirring up Contentions and Divisions
in them; but in Churches, where the Doctrine and Worship are kept pure and
Apostolical, by the care and vigilance of the Pastors; in Churches, where the
Scriptures are openly taught and read, and the whole Worship of God, but more
especially the holy Sacraments, are duly administered by lawful Ministers, and
the Communion of Saints carefully maintained: In such pure and Apostolical
Churches as these, he has no other game to play, but to get them, as far as he
can, extirpated by Persecutions; or where that fails, to make Mutinies, and
Divisions, and Schisms in them, and so to weaken the common Interest of the
whole, by dividing it into parts. Where he cannot unite the Members of a Church
in pernicious Doctrines and Practices, he will labor hard to dissolve them by
pernicious Schisms; where he cannot unite them against Truth, he will strive to
divide them against Charity; and where they will not agree, he will make them,
if he can, differ to their own destruction: And therefore considering him as
the principal Cause of Divisions, all that can be concluded, upon that
Consideration, against any particular Church, is only this, That the Members of
it are subject, like the Members of all other Churches, to be deceived and
drawn away by the Devil; and if upon special enquiry, it be found, that she is
pure and Apostolical in her Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, all that can
then be concluded, is no more then this, That the Devil is become her
particular Enemy, and has a particular spite against her, upon the account of
her Excellence and Worth. This is the worst Consequence that can be drawn from
Divisions and Separations, against such a Church as ours, and we are willing to
admit it, we are willing to acknowledge, that the Devil hates the Church of
England more then many Churches, and, if those that object our Divisions to us
please, very much more then the Church of Rome. We are willing to look upon the
many Heresies and Schisms among us, as the effects of his Revenge against her,
for the damage he has sustained by her; as Videns ille idola derelicta and per
nimium credentium populum seeds suas as templa deserta, excogitaverit novam
fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat incautos: hereses invenit
and schismata, quibus subverteret sidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet
unitatem. Cyprian de Unit Eccles.
St. Cyprian thought the Heresies and Schisms of his Time, were purposely
invented by him, to be revenged of the Christian Religion, for destroying his
Worship among the Gentiles. All this we are willing to admit upon the Theory
that arises, from considering the first Cause of Divisions and Separations,
and let those who love to reproach the Church of England with the English
Divisions Religion, make the best of it they can.

But then to proceed farther in this Enquiry: After we have found out the
principal, we must look after the instrumental Causes of Divisions and
Separations, and they, according to the Ancients, who spoke what they knew to
be true by long Experience and Observation, were ignorant, overcurious,
ambitious, covetous, and contentious men. These are the proper Instruments by
which the Devil acts, in broaching false Doctrines, and making Divisions and
Separations. He is a sagacious Spirit, and can find out the weak and blind side
of every man, where he will be sure to ply him with Darts of Temptation, as a
skilful General will be sure to attack the weakest part of the Wall, or that
part of it which is least defended, when he storms a Town.

The first Instrument then by which Satan works, in making Schisms and
Divisions, are ignorant men, or men ignorant in the Scriptures, whose Ignorance
makes them confident, and think they understand the Scriptures, when for want
of knowing the received sense of them, they do not. This St. Chrysostom
complains of in one of his Sermons: Hom. 37 T. 5. p. 245.
Says he, The ignorance of the Scriptures is a dangerous Precipice, and a deep
Gulf of destruction, and a great betrayer of men's Salvation. It is that which
has brought forth Heresies, and which turns all things upside down. So in his
T. 3. p. 1.
Preface to St. Paul's Ep. to the Romans, says he, A thousand Evils come from
ignorance of the Scriptures, and the manifold sorts of Heresies have sprung
from thence. To this purpose speaks a more ancient Author in Answer to this
Query, Why God, if he was able to do it, did not root out all Errors and
Heresies. Author. respons. ad Orthodoxos in resp. ad 1. Quaest.
Says he, When God abrogated Judaism, he introduced the New instead of the Old
Testament, and if all those who embrace Christianity, do not agree in their
Opinions, but some believe right, and some otherwise, this is not the fault of
God, nor to be ascribed to any defect of care, or power in him, but the fault
of their own carelessness and negligence, nor ought any man to be offended at
the small number of orthodox Christians, because it is written, That many are
called, but few chosen; and that straight and narrow is the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. It is observable, that these ancient
Fathers did not lay the blame of Heresies and Schisms, upon the free and common
use of the Scriptures, but upon the careless and negligent reading of them, and
to ignorant men's presuming they understood them, when they did not: The fault
was not in the Scriptures, but in those who through ignorance abused them; the
Scriptures were always common in all Churches and Languages, and I dare say
boldly, says De praescript. Heret. 39.
Tertullian, That the Scriptures are so contrived by the will of God, that they
should afford occasion for Heresies, because I read that there must be
Heresies, and Heresies cannot be without the Scriptures. What I have observed
out of these ancient Fathers, is no more in effect then what St. Peter observed
of the Epistles of St. Paul, which are one great part of the Scriptures. Says
he, Account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, even as our
beloved Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him, has written unto
you, as also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these things, in which are
some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable
wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. The
Scriptures, it seems, suffered very much by unlearned men in the Time of St.
Peter, and yet he did not order them to be kept from the People, neither in the
Church of Rome, nor any other Churches. He knew that they were holy, true,
just, and good, and were designed by God for public use and benefit, and if
ignorant men, by the instigation of the Devil, and their own natural
Enthusiasm, did misuse them, and draw false Doctrines from them, it was at
their own peril, and the fault was in their own giddiness and presumption, and
not in the Word of God. They should have only meddled with the plain Passages
of them, which contain all things necessary to Salvation, and not with those
which are hard to be understood. No! if they had had a mind to understand the
difficult Places of them, they should have consulted the Apostles, or those
whom the Apostles set over them, about the Apostolical Doctrine or Tradition;
and if they did not, but, as ignorant men are apt to do, would precipitate
themselves into Errors, and make Doctrines to themselves, which the Church
never taught, that was their own fault, and could not without very much harm to
Christianity, supersede the use of the Word of God. God in his great wisdom
intended it for the common Rule, or Canon of the ancient Catholic Faith; and
if unlearned men will be so head strong, and Enthusiastical, as not to try
their Conceptions by it, but it by their private Conceptions, it nevertheless
remains a Standard and Rule, and no less then their Souls must be the price for
their Heresies and Schisms. The Devil understands this very well, and therefore
being a subtle and cunning Spirit, he is never wanting to tempt Sciolists, and
men that want true Learning, especially those who are by nature powerfully
inclined to Enthusiasm, to wrest the Scriptures, Sequamur universitatem,
antiquitatem consentionem. Vincent. Lirin. adversus Haeres. c. 3.
against the consent of universal Antiquity, to their own admired Notions; and
that being done, it is no difficult matter to persuade them to set up for
Teachers, although they have really need, that one teach them again, which be the
first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are such as have need of Milk, and
not of strong Meat.

The second sort of Instruments by which Satan works, are overcurious, and
over-inquisitive men, who trusting too much to their own Understanding, love,
as the Apostle speaks, to intrude into things which they have not seen, and are
vainly puffed up with their fleshly Mind. De praescript. Haeres. 14.
Tertullian, in his Tract against the Heresies of his Time, complains
grievously of these men, who were always moving nice and curious Questions,
about things which it was better to be ignorant of then to know, and who, as
his phrase imports, loved to exercise the Quantumlibet quaer as, and tractes,
and omnem libidinem curiositatis essundas.
whole lust of their Curiosity about doubtful and obscure things. Their
Curiosity, as he complains, was above their Faith, and their vainglorious
affectation of being counted learned and witty, above the care of their Souls;
and therefore they must search the Scriptures, to find out new Doctrines and
Opinions, and if they cannot find them there, they will be sure to bring them
thither, though never heard of before, and never so contrary to the unanimous
Tradition of all the Apostolical Churches. These men he complains of, for the
great Adulterators of Scripture; and of such as they were, the Apostle is to be
understood, 1 Timothy 1.4. I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, that thou
might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine, neither give heed to
Fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister Questions, rather then godly
Edifying which is in the Faith. So in Chap. 6.3; 4. If any man teach otherwise,
and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is conceited, knowing
nothing, but doting about questions, and disputes about words, whereof comes
envy, strife, railings and surmisings. So in his 2d. Ep. 2.23. says he unto
him, Avoid foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they gender strife.
And so in his Ep. to Titus, Chap. 2.9. Avoid foolish questions, and
Genealogies, and contentions, for these are unprofitable, and vain, and a man
that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition reject. These
overcurious and too inquisitive Wits, who hunt after new Discoveries, and rack
their Inventions, as well as the Scriptures, to publish some new thing, are
well disposed by temper for Heresy. They think indeed they know something, but
really they know nothing as they ought to know, when they begin to despise the
Simplicity of the Christian Religion, and the Doctrine and Tradition of the
Elders, and by the wantonness of their Wits and Understandings, give occasion
to Satan, who observes all men's Tempers, to tempt them into Heresy and Schism
-- Longum est universa ipsus opera commemorare, quibus profecto summis
Aedificatoribus Ecclestae par esse potuisset, nisi profana illa haereticae
curlositatis libidine novum nescio quid invenisset, quo and cunctos labores
suos velut cujusdam Leprae admixtione soedaret. -- cap. 16.
Vincentius Lirinensis observes, that Apollinaris fell into Heresy through
this lust of Curiosity; and that Tantus, ac talis dum gratia dei insolentius
abatitur, dum ingenio suo nimium indulger, sibique satis credit cum parvi
pendit antiquam Christian religionis simplicitatem, dum se plus cunctis sapere
praesumit, dum Ecclesiaticas traditiones, and verterum magisteria contemnens
quaedam Scripturarum capitula novo more interpretatur, meruit ut de se quoque
Ecclesia dei diceret. Si surrexerit in medio tui propbeta. --
Origin also, through too great a confidence in his own Parts, and too much
fondness and indulgence for his own Notions, of the greatest Doctor the Church
ever had, became plainly such a one, to whom one might justly apply those words
of Moses, Si surrexerit in medio tui propheta, If there arise among you a
Prophet -- saying. let us go after other Gods, thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you
love the Lord your God with all your heart and soul.

The next sort of Instruments which the Devil makes use of, in inventing and
propagating Hercsie and Schism, are ambitious and aspiring men, who would fain
be Governors in the Church, and sit in the Thrones of the Apostles; and when
they cannot compass their Designs, then out of Envy and Revenge they strive to
turn all things topsie-turvy, and bring confusion upon the Church. Such as
these was Diotrephes, who loved to have the preeminence: He would fain have had
St. John's Chair, and to that end raised Sedition against him, prating against
him with malicious words, and persuading the Church not to receive him. Such
also was Thebuthis, the first Heretic and Schismatic in the Church of
Jerusalem, as I have showed in the first Chapter. Such also were Montanus,
Novatus, Arius, Natalis the Confessor, and almost all the famous Heresiarchs in
the ancient Church. Such also was Melitius, a Bishop of Egypt, who being
deposed from his Bishopric, for denying the Faith, and sacrificing unto
Demons, in the Dioclesian Persecution, became the Head of that, which from him
took the Name of the Melitian Heresy and Schism. He loaded Achilles his
Superior, who deposed him, with all manner of Calumnies and Reproaches; as also
his Successors, Peter and Alexander, who ratified the Deprivation of him, and
conspired with Arius against the latter, that he might be revenged on the
Church. For Pride and Ambition is the Mother of Envy, Revenge and Discontent;
it was the original Sin of the Devil, and when he meets with proud men after
his own image, his work is half done, and it will cost him but little trouble
to tempt them to break the Peace, and divide the Unity of Churches, whereof
they are Members. So an ancient Respons^ad orthodox, quaest. (...)
Author, in Answer to this Question, Whether it is just to damn Heretics, who
do their best Endeavors to know the Truth, and cannot: Says he, It is
manifest that all Heresies arise from a vain affectation of Glory, and study of
opposition in the Authors and Ring leaders of them; and therefore the Apostle
calls them, grievous Wolves: And says St. Chrysostom, in his first Homily upon
the first Epistle to Timothy, Because they do not love their Brethren, they
envy those that have a good Report, and from this Envy proceeds a desire to be
above them, and to rule, and from this desire to rule come Heresies. So says
Theophylact on Galat. 5. The desire of Ruling is the Mother of all Heresies:
And says another Isidorus Pelusiota, p. 441.
ancient Writer, From affectation of Government, and getting above others,
which are two domineering Passions, I think most Heresies arise, for those who
do not love to be in the rank of Subjects, sow new Doctrines, that they may be
Chief of a new Sect. And indeed this was the temper of Simon Magus, the first
Heretic, and false Apostle; he affected to be a great man, and to have the
People from the least to the greatest give heed unto him, as the great power of
God: Though he renounced the Devil at his Baptism, yet he kept fast hold of his
Soul by this evil Affection, which was the gall of bitterness, that poisoned
his mind, the bond of iniquity whereby Satan held him, when he made him the
first of his Apostles, the first of those very Antichrists, who in that Age of
Miracles came after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect.

The fourth sort of Instruments which Satan employs, in making Divisions and
Schisms, are covetous men, who love to be at the Head of a Sect, or Party,
because it is the ready way to get a good Maintenance, and become rich. There
were such as these in the Apostles days; as is plain from that notable passage,
1 Timothy 6.5. where he mentions perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is Godliness, and from such (says
he) withdraw thy self, for we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out. There were such men as these in the Church of
Corinth, who made Parties among the People for their own ends, which gave the
Apostle occasion to rebuke them in words to this effect: 2. ep. cap. II. ver.
19, 20
As wise as you think your selves to be, you do with pleasure, bear with fools,
nay ye suffer worse then fools, for you love men that bring you into bondage,
you love men that devour you, and take Presents of you, nay you love them, best
that insult over you, and as it were smite you on the face. So St. Jude tells
us, That the Gnostical Heretics ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for
reward: And in the Apostle's Epistle to Titus, we find him forewarning him of
certain unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers whose mouths (says he) must be
stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not for
filthy lucres sake. So 2 Mand. 12.2.
St. Hermas, who was St. Paul's Scholar, and wrote not long after him, speaks
of false Spirits in his Time, who received Reward for their Divination, and if
they do not receive, (says he) they do not continue long to prophecy. So
Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 18.
Montanus the Heretic, and false Prophet, after he had gathered a great
concourse of People together, at the Place which he called the New Jerusalem,
he appointed Collectors of Money, who under the Name of Offerings took Gifts
and Presents of the People, and his pretended Prophetesses took not only Gold
and Silver, but fine Clothes, by way of Present; nay, says Apollonius, those
who are called Prophets among the Montanists, take Money not only of the rich,
but of the poor, and Orphans, and Widows; and therefore (says he) either let
them deny that their Prophets take Money, which we will prove by an hundred
Testimonies, or else let them deny that they are true Prophets, because they
take Gifts. So I showed in the first Chapter, that Natalis the Confessor was
hired with Money to be a Bishop of that schism in Rome, which taught, that
Christ was a mere man; says the Historian of him, Being tempted with the Bait
of Primacy among those of that Sect, and of filthy Lucre which is the
destruction of many men, he was scourged all night long by the holy Angels, and
rose betimes in the morning, and having put on Sackcloath and Ashes, he went in
great have, and with tears in his eyes cast himself down before Zephyrinus the
Bishop, and fell down not only before the feet of the Clergy, but of the Laity
also, and after much entreaty, and showing the Stripes which he had received
when he was a Confessor, he was admitted into the Communion of the Church.
Before he was beaten by the Angels, our Lord frequently admonished him of his
Sin by Visions in his Sleep, being unwilling that a Confessor for Christianity
should perish in Heresy and Schism; but the love of Pre-eminence and Money so
bewitched him, that he was fain to use severer Methods with him, and give him a
Thorn in the Flesh, before he would repent. He was constrained to lash him out
of the Circle in which he stood enchanted by the Devil, and as it were by force
and violence break the double Chain of Ambition and Convetousness, with which
he had bound himself to Satan, and save him by a Miracle, as great as his Sin.

The last sort of men by which the Devil propagates and promotes Divisions and
Schisms, are contentious and litigious men; as it is written by the Apostle, If
any man be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. I
confess there is a contentious Disposition, which is the effect of Ambition,
and so is co-incident with the third particular Cause, which I assigned of
Heresy and Schism; but then there is a contentious Disposition of another
sort, which proceeds from a sophistical disputatious Humor, and a little sort
of pride in men, that makes them love to oppose and contradict every thing for
contradictions sake. This contentious Humor is most visible in men who are hot
and choleric, and it naturally puts them upon Controversies and Disputes, and
maintaining Paradoxes, and calling received Doctrines into question, and
opposing things that are established, and rather then sit down and be quiet, it
will be opposite to it self, and be against that for which it was before. This
restless, unquiet sort of Spirit, has bred much mischief in all Societies, but
especially in the Church of God. It seems to me to have been the Temper of the
Elder Arius, who as the Socrat. l. I. c. 5.
Historian tells us, was expert in Logical Subtilties and Ex(...)
out of a contentious humor opposed his Bishop, discoursing a little too
curiously about the mystery of the holy Trinity. If this litigious humor at
any time happen to be for the Truth, it is not out of love to Truth, but with a
design to oppose others; as we read of some who preached the Gospel, not out of
good intent, but merely to oppose the Apostle: Some indeed (says he) preach
Christ of mere envy and strife, and some also of good will; the one preach
Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds,
but the other of love, knowing I am set for the defense of the Gospel. To
conclude, this litigious Humor is expressed in Greek by a word, which
signifies the love of Contention, because it is the delight and pleasure of
contentious men, to be of a Party, and live in the dust of Controversy; they
are no longer easy and happy, than they are engaged in some Quarrel: And
therefore says they are engaged in some Quarrel: And therefore says
Theophylact on Galat. 5.20. (...) etc. All Heresy proceeds from the love of
Contention, and the contentious person striving to have his own will and
humor, does thereby form a Schism.

Thus have I showed the instrumental Causes which the devil uses, in sowing
Differences and Divisions, and making Separations and Schisms in Churches: And
perhaps of such men, acted and inspired by the Devil, as much as of the Devils
themselves, St. Peter is to be understood, 1 Ep. 5.8. where he exhorted the
Christians to be sober, and vigilant, because their adversary the devil as a
roaring lion walked about, seeking whom he might devour, whom (says he)
resist, steadfast in the faith. If the Devil had so many Instruments of
dividing the Catholic Church then, methinks it should not seem strange, that
he has so many now. Nay methinks the Gentlemen of the Roman Communion, out of
the particular Veneration they have for St. Peter, whom the whole Christian
World ought to honor, should not so delight to upbraid the Church of England
with the English Heresies and Schisms, it being evident from this and other
Passages in his Catholic Epistle, cited in the first Chapter, that there were
almost as many, and altogether as great Division, while he governed in the
Church, as there are now in England, and most other Parts of the Christian
World.

Wherefore all that can justly be concluded upon the Church of England, from
the English Heresies and Schisms, if we consider the instrumental Causes of
them, is no more then this, That there are, and have been, many ignorant, over
curious, ambitious, convetous, and contentious men among us, which, as I showed
before, has been the common Calamity of all Churches, and what is common to
all Churches, at least according to our Logic, can be no just matter of
reproach against any one. I am so confident, that there is no Inconsequence in
this way of Apologizing for the Church of England, that I believe our
Adversaries cannot find a better way of Apologizing for the Divisions that have
formerly risen, or may hereafter arise in the Church of Rome. If they were
reproached by others, as they reproach us, they could not but say, that the
Causes of Divisions are common to all Churches; and therefore craving leave to
set the Church of England in the midst of all other Churches, I desire that
Church may cast the first Stone at her, which has remained from the beginning
a pure Virgin without Heresy or Schism. If there be a Church in any corner of
the Earth, which is exempted from the common Causes of Divisions, or of so
happy a Constitution, as not to be capable of suffering by them, let that
Church come forth, and reproach the Church of England with the English Heresies
and Schisms; but let not the Church of Rome do it, which has so many old Scars
to show, and so many and great Rents yet visible in many parts of her Coat, as
none of her most curious Workmen, with all their art and skill, will probably
ever be able to make up.

I have said thus much by way of Apology for the Church of England, from
considering the general Causes of Church Divisions and Separations, and shall
find yet more to plead for her, upon making a more particular Enquiry into the
Causes of our English Heresies and Schisms. Now in this Enquiry, no man that
knows the state of Great Britain, betwixt the beginning of the great Rebellion,
and his late Majesty's happy Restoration, but must needs look upon the ruin
of the Church and State, to have been such a Cause of Heresies and Schisms, as
perhaps never happened before to any Church in the World. Was it any wonder to
see Errors, and Heresies, and Blasphemies, abound among us, in a Time of such
strange Disorder and Confusion, when there was no King, nor Priest in Israel?
Can we imagine the Devil should be idle in such an Opportunity? Or can our
Adversaries imagine, that the like would not happen in any other Church or
Kingdom of the Roman Religion, should God in judgment dissolve the Government
of them, as he did that of ours? I refer the candid Roman Catholic Reader, to
Mr Edwards his Gangraena, for an Account of the Errors. Heresies, Blasphemies,
Sects, and Opinions, that sprung up in the British Isle, In a few years after
the Church of England was pulled down, and her Liturgy cast out of the
Churches, and Liberty of Conscience, as they called it, was set up in its
stead. He was a Minister of the Presbyterian Party, and a mighty Bigot for the
Cause, and yet he could not but acknowledge, that there came in a Deluge of
Heresies and Impieties after the removal of the Prelates; and I appeal to any
man of Ingenuity, if it be Reasonable, or Christian, or Gentile, to reproach
our Church with Sects that arose among us, when she was fast bound in misery,
and the Iron entered into her Soul. Were not her Pastors driven from their
Flocks, when the Wolves entered in? and all the time she was in the House of
Bondage, was it not a time of Liberty for every man to do what was good in his
own Eyes? Nay, I desire those that are most petulant in upbraiding us with our
Divisions, to tell me truly, if they do not think, that as many, and as
monstrous Swarms of Errors and Heresies would breed in Spain or Italy, as
there did in the late Times of Confusion in England, if the Divine Providence,
(which God prevent) should suffer the same Tragedy to be acted in those
Countries, that was acted in ours. How would Sects verminate any where in
Twenty Years of such Confusion? Methinks our Adversaries should have the
Ingenuity to consider this; but since they seem not to do it, I hope they
cannot find fault with us, for putting them in mind of it by way of Apology for
our Church.

There are many other special Causes of our English Divisions, which might fall
under consideration, but for brevity sake, I shall mention but one, which is
this; That we have reason to suspect that our Divisions, both in the beginning
and progress of them, may have been influenced from abroad. I do not know
whether this will pass for mis-representing, but some Observations have been
made to this purpose. And if the Gentlemen of the R. Communion know or believe
it to be true, I beseech them by our Common Savior Jesus Christ, they would no
longer upbraid the Church of England with the English Heresies and Schisms. In
Foxis and Firebrands, in Ravialac Redivinus, p 72. of the 2d. Edition, fol.
1682. And in several Letters which passed between the Archbishop of Armagh and
other eminent persons, which may be seen in a late printed Collection of
Letters.
If the Tares which were sown in the Field of our Church were indeed brought
from other Places, then I hope they will grant, that it is not ingenuous for
them of all other Christians to reproach us with them; but rather to blame
those who sowed them, and who transplanted those strange Plants, which are not
of our heavenly Father's planting, into the Vineyard of our Church. I confess
it is very good Policy to divide us, that they may weaken us; but then it
should be remembered, that no Humane Policy, nor the greatest Advantage that can
follow upon it, can justify the Dividing of any Church, though never so
Heretical, by inventing new Doctrines. The Catholics formerly durst take no
such course to divide the Arians, they remembered that Anathema which St. Paul
laid upon the Apostles themselves, and the very Angels of Heaven if they should
teach any other Doctrine; and I wish for the Honor of Christianity others
would do so too.

CHAP. V. Of the Cure of Schisms and Divisions.
AFter this Enquiry into the Causes of Schisms and Divisions, and more
particularly into those of our own Country, I proceed to say something
concerning the Prevention and Cure of them; where, to keep close to the design
of my Apology for the Church, I must declare upon a serious reflection of what
I have hitherto written, that I know no sure and infallible way that is lawful,
of preventing them, where they are not, or of curing them, where they are.
First then, I know no sure way that is lawful of preventing of them, but some
unlawful ways I confess there are, which are inconsistent with the Design of
the Gospel, and the Rules of Christian Charity: but then the Remedy in such
cases is worse than the Disease; and accordingly we see that the state of
Christianity is much more deplorable in some Countries, where Divisions are
prevented by such methods, than in England, where no such methods have been
taken to prevent them: but of lawful and justifiable means, which are
consistent with the reputation and well-being of Christianity, I believe there
are none that will absolutely prevent Divisions and Schisms: I confess Humane
Foresight and Diligence may, by God's blessing, prevent them in a great
measure, but it will not always, nor altogether do so. But as Diseases will
happen to the Natural Body, notwithstanding all the care and endeavors to
prevent them: So Divisions and Schisms will happen to the Body Politic of
Christ, and all the Parts and Members of it, notwithstanding all that man can
lawfully do to prevent them; as is evident from the state of the Church, while
it was governed by the Apostles. For they were most holy, most wise, and most
vigilant Pastors, and therefore the greatest holiness and wisdom of the most
vigilant and diligent Pastors, are not sufficient to preserve Unity, and
prevent Schism. Nor are Miracles joined with the Sanctity and Endeavors of the
most vigilant Pastors able to prevent it; for the Apostles and their Assistants
wrought Miracles, and yet in the miraculous age of the Apostles, there were
Heresies and Schisms, even in Churches where God bore them witness with Signs
and Wonders, and diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Nay, Miracles are
so far from having a Sovereign Virtue to prevent Schisms, that in the Church of
Corinth, which abounded with miraculous Gifts, there were Envyings, Strifes,
Contentions, and Divisions: Nay, as I showed in the First Chapter, many of
those who had he gift of Miracles in the Apostles time, wilfully fell away from
Christianity, to which they had born witness, and did thereby despite unto the
Spirit of Grace.

And, as Miracles joined with the utmost Sanctity, Wisdom, and Diligence of
Pastors, are not sufficient to prevent Divisions; so neither is Infallibility
added to all the rest: for the most holy, the most wise, and most vigilant
Apostles, were all infallible Judges certainly endowed by God with the personal
Gift of Infallibility; and yet in their time there were as many, and as great
Heresies and Schisms, as perhaps have been since in any age of the Church. To
use some of the emphatical words of another Author, every one of them was such
a Judge of Matters Spiritual, from which there needed no Appeal; every one of
them had Authority and Ability to Interpret the Scriptures, and decide in
Matters of Conscience, and yet there were as many Controversies and Differences
about Matters of Conscience and Religion then, as are now to be seen in
England, or herhaps any other Country of the Christian World. Do what the
Apostles of the Circumcision or Uncircumcision could, they could not prevent
the Enemy from sowing of Tares, nor the Tares from growing up, to the great
prejudice and detriment of the Wheat: Heresies and Offenses would come,
notwithstanding the Infallibility of S. John, who lay in our Lord's Bosom, and
of S. James who was his Brother, and of S. Paul who was rapt into the third
Heaven, and of St. Peter, to whom Christ said, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church. The R. Cs. may see from this little which I have
said, that if they had an infallible Judge, his Infallibility would be no
certain Remedy against Heresies and Schisms, if they had no other ways that
would not hinder but that Divisions might multiply among them as much as in the
days of the Apostles, or as much as they are now multiplied in England, where
the Church professes to have no infallible Judge. I say, if they had an
infallible Judge, his Infallibility would not be able to secure them against
Divisions but alas! they have no infallible Judge, for though they are all
agreed, that their Church is infallible, yet they differ about the Seat of the
Infallibility; they cannot tell us for certain where it is lodged: and truly to
have an Infallible Judge, and not to know who, or where he is, is in effect to
have none at all. What then, is there no certain way of preventing Heresies and
Schisms? Certainly there is no lawful way certain; which Consideration alone
methinks might be Apology enough for the Church of England, against the
reproach which she now suffers upon the account of the English Heresies and
Schisms.

And as there is no certain way of preventing Heresies and Schisms where they
are not: so there is no certain way of curing them where they are. Provincial
and General Councils, where all emergent Differences may be freely and fairly
debated, have by experience been found to be the best means which God has been
pleased to bless with success; but though they are very good means, and have
often proved very successful, yet as we learn from the History of Councils,
they are not always infallible Remedies, as is evident from the first General
Council, in which the Apostles and Elders, and Brethren met at Jerusalem, to
determine whether or no it was needful for the Gentile Christians to be
Circumcised and keep the Law of Moses. St. Peter after much Dispute on both
sides, first stood up, and declared, That to oblige the Gentile Disciples to
the Mosaical Observances, was to put a Yoke upon their Necks, which neither the
Jews nor their Fathers were able to bear; then James having first heard
Barnabas and Paul, declared it was his sentence, that the Gentile Christians
should be troubled with no more Jewish Observances, but to abstain from
Pollutions of Idols, from fornications, from things strangled, and from blood.
To him the Apostles, and Elders, and the whole Church consented, and said, it
seems good to the holy Ghost, and to us, and yet the Authority of this
infallible and unanimous Council, did not quite put an end to the Controversy:
for, as it appears out of several of St. Paul's Epistles, and more especially
out of that to the Galatians, and some Ad Magnesios, ad Philadelph.
Epistles of St Ignatius, there were those afterward who taught the Gentile
Christians Judaism, and commanded them to be circumcised, and keep the Jewish
Law. So I need not relate, how the ecumenical Council of Nice, though backed
with the Authority of the Emperor, was not able to extinguish the Arian Schism,
nor make the Arians acquiesce in its Determinations: And, to multiply no more
Instances, the learned R. Cs. know very well, how far the Christian World was
from submitting to the second Nicene Council, which they call the seventh
general Council, in its Determinations for Image Worship. Quite contrary the
Northern and Western Bishops unanimously opposed that Council, and its
Doctrine; and in another Concilium Franco surtes A. D. 79^.
Council, wherein about 300 of them met together, they condemned it and its
Decree for Image Worship, and proscribed it out of the number of general
Councils, and the Church of England at the Time was so far from acquiescing in
its Determinations, that her Pastors received that Decree for worshipping of
Images, with great indignation and contempt.

But then, though it appears from these Examples, that general Councils are not
infallible Remedies for Heresies and Schisms, yet it must be acknowledged, that
they are very good ones, and the best that can be had, when they are truly Cum
dicunt Concilium: Catholicum, aut universale, hoc intelligunt ut in eo debeant
adesse viri pii, docti, and prudentes ex omnibus nationibus. P. P. Vergerius in
secretar. pontific. Act. prima.
general and Cum dicunt Liberum, volunt ut liceat tum publicis, tum privatis
personis, sub fide publici salvi conductus praesliti venire, stare, and
discedere, quoties illis libitum fuerit, and ante omnia, ut libere sine ullo
metu, aut impedimento loqui liceat, suamque sententiam dicere in ipso Concilio.
ibid.
free. And therefore as Nilus of Thessalonica proposed a free and general
Council, as the best Expedient for ending all Differences between the Greek and
Latin Church above 300 years ago, so I hope I may without offense, propose it
now, as the most hopeful Remedy to heal all Differences between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome. It would be an Enterprise worthy of the
Greatness, and holy Character of the Pope, dispensing with the Pontifical
Oaths, to use his Interest among Christian Princes, for the procuring of a free
and general Council, wherein Statuerunt etiam quod amnes definitiones, and
conclusiones articulorum, de quibus suerit disputatum, sierie debeant ex
divina, and sacra Scriptura, doctrinaque antiquorum patrum, and. ibid.
Scripturae eloquia aliter atque aliter, alius atque alius interpretatur, aliter
nameque illam Novatianus, aliter Photinus, aliter Sabellius, aliter Donatus
exponit, aliter Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, aliter Apollinaris, Priscillianus,
aliter Jovinianus, Pelagius, Caelestinus, aliter postremo Nestorius, atque
idcirco multum necesse est propter tantos tam varii erroris ansractus, ut
Prophetice. and Apostolicae interpretationis linea secundum Ecclesiastici and
Catholici sensus normam dirigatur. Vincent Lirinens. adversus haeres. cap. 2.
the holy Scriptures, and the Writings of the ancient Fathers, should be laid
open, and the Differences of the two Churches fairly tried by them, as the
Difference between Nestorius and his Antagonists, was tried in the third
general Council. The Differences happened in the following manner. Nestorius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, openly taught, that it was not lawful to call the
Virgin Mary(...), or the Mother of God. This alarmed Cyrill of Alexandria, and
many other Bishops, who suspected that Nestorius had a design, under the covert
of that Assertion, to bring into the Church the Doctrine of Paulus
Samosatensis, and Photinus, who asserted, that Christ was a mere man. Upon
these Suspicions they stoutly opposed Nestorius, and his Adherents, for their
new Opinion, and the Contention grew so high, that the Emperor was fain to call
a Council at Ephesus to compose it; and the Bishops being met together, after
some previous Altercation, at last thought it the most Catholic, blessed, and
desirable way of determining the Controversy, to produce the Opinions of the
holy Fathers, who had been Martyrs, or Confessors for the Faith, or at least
had continued in the true profession of it unto the end of their lives. Upon
this were brought into the Council the Writings of St. Peter Patriarch of
Alexandria, St. Athanasius, St. Theophilus, St. Basil, St. Gregory of
Nazianzum, Gregorius Nyssenus, St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, and St. Foelix, and
St. Julius, Bishops of the Imperial City of Rome, with the Writings of other
Fathers; all which being examined, it did appear that Nestorius was an
Innovator, and that Cyril was in the right, who said, that the ancient Fathers
used to call the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God. I have taken this short
account of the manner in which the Council of Ephesus proceeded against
Nestorius, because it is proposed by Quod ne praesumptione magis nostra quam,
autoritate Ecclesiastica promere videremur, exemplum adhibuimus Sancti
Concilii, quod ante triennium ferme in Asia apud Ephesum celebratum est, Viris
clarissemis Basso Antiochoque consulibus. Vbi cum sanciendis sidei regulis
disceptaretur ne qua illic forsitan prophana novitas in modum perfidiae
Ariminiensis obreperet, universis Sacerdotibus, qui illo ducenti sere numero
convenerant hoc Cacholicissimum, faelicissimum atque optimum factu visum est,
ut in medium sanctorum patrum sententiae proferrentur, etc. Vincent. Lirin.
adversus. haeres. cap. 42.
Vincentius Lirinensis, as the best method of ending Controversies in Religion;
and I am persuaded, if the same Apostolical course was taken in a General
Council now, the Differences between the Church of Rome, and the Churches that
dissent from it, would come to an happy Conclusion, and by God's Blessing, make
them all unite into one Communion, and become one Catholic and Apostolical
Church. I know very well that the Gentlemen of the Roman Communion are apt to
tell us, that the Council of Trent was a Free and General Council, but we know
the contrary, that it was neither Free nor General, or if it were, why may not
the Church be represented anew in another Free and General Council, as She was
represented in the Council of Chalcedon, shortly after the second Council of
Ephesus, and in the second Council of Nice, within thirty years after the
seventh General Council of Constantinople, which expressly condemned the Worship
of Images? But they say the second Council of Ephesus, and the This Council did
not err in condemning the worship of Images.
seventh General Council Constantinople erred, and decreed false Doctrine: so
say we of the Council of Trent, and therefore let another Free and General
Council be called to umpire the Controversy between the Church of England and
the Council of Trent; and if upon a fair trial by the Scriptures, Fathers and
Councils, such a Council shall condemn the Church of England, then I will leave
her Communion, and own I have been guilty of Heresy and Schism. I think no Son
of the Church of England need scruple of say as much, nor fear to promise to
stand to the Determinations of such a Council, as will freely and impartially
try all Controversies by the ancient Touchstone of In Ipsa catholica Ecclesia
magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod ubique quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditum est. -- Hoc ita demum fit si sequamur Vnisversitatem,
Antiquitatem, Consentionem. Vincent. Lirin. Cap. 3. Vide etiam Cap. 38.
Universality, Antiquity, and Consent. This was the Catholic Test of old, and
ought to be so still, and to show how indifferent I am between the two
Churches: I heartily beseech Almighty God that She may flourish and prevail,
which is most willing to undergo, and best able to abide this Test.

The Conclusion.
HAving now finished the Apology, which I undertook to make for the Church of
England, against those who love to ridicule Her with the English Divisions in
Religion, and lay an heavy Charge of undue Consequences upon her, merely upon
their score: I think I cannot answer the Design of my Undertaking better, than
in concluding with a practical and friendly Address to the Candid READER, of
what Persuasion soever, whether he be a Roman Catholic, or Church of England
Catholic, or a Dissenter from them both.

I shall first begin with the Roman Catholics, who have been the occasion of
writing this Discourse; and I humbly beg them to consider, That it is not for
their Honor to use such Arguments against the Church of England, now, as the
Heathens of old used against Christianity; nor for their Advantage to put us
upon defending Her in the very same manner, as they must be forced to defend
the Christian Religion against the Mahumetans, who are mightily prepossessed by
the multitude of Sects among the Christians, against the Truth and Goodness of
Christianity it self, Nay, it is their Interest as much as ours, to leave off
this way of Arguing against the Church of England, because the Atheists and
Scepticks, and irreligious persons of both Churches argue the very same way
against the Truth of the Christian Religion; they take advantages from the
great number and variety of Sects in Christendom, whereof every on a pretends
to be the true Church, to think that really there is no Religion; and therefore
methinks all serious and piously disposed persons among the R. Cs. into whose
hands this Apology shall fall, should so far become my Proselytes, as hereafter
to forbear this way of Arguing, which gratifies. the common Enemies of
Christianity, and concludes as severely against the Universal Church, as they
would have it do against ours. Secondly, I desire them to consider, whether it
be prudently done of them to reproach us with our Divisions, when they do not
know how soon we may have occasion to turn their own Reproaches upon them, and
do unto them, if Christian Charity should not restrain us, as they now do unto
us. They do not know how soon their Unity, of which they boast so much, may be
broken into Divisions, and the Peace, which they pretend to have among
themselves, be turned into a spiritual War. The Spirit of Strife and
Contention, and of setting up Altar against Altar, may, for all their present
assurance, come upon them, as sorrow upon a Woman in travail; and then whether
the Sects, which shall arise among them, be real, or only reputed Heresies and
Schisms, they will be taken in their own Snare, and the full weight of their
own Arguments against us, will fall upon their own heads. Let him that thinks
the stands (says the Apostle) take heed lest the fall; and let the Church of
Rome, which perhaps the R. Cs. may think so secure in her Politics of Union,
take heed she fall not into pieces, and be broken in shivers like a Potters
Vessel, by him that rules with an Iron Rod. They should consider that God can
send the Spirit of Luther upon their Monks, the Spirit of Savanarola upon their
Friars, the Spirit of Herman and Cranmer upon their Prelates; the Spirit of
Vergerius and Contarenus upon their Nuncio's and Legates; the Spirit of
Cardinal Vid. Vergerii Annotat, in Catal, Heret. 261, 262.
Fregosius upon the Conclave; the Spirit of Of Brandenburg.
Albert and Of Saxony.
Frederic upon Sovereign Catholic Princes; and the Spirit of Marcellus
secundus upon the Pope himself. They should remember, especially the Learned
among them, from what a slight accidental occasion, the Arian Schism began; and
God who was pleased to suffer an universal Conflagration to arise from such a
small Spark, can in a moment raise up many Arius's Rome, and make the Princess
of the Provinces sit solitary, and all her Friends become her Enemies. Nay, he
is able, as it were, by a Voice from Heaven, to say unto her people, Come out
of her, lest ye be partakers of her sins. Saltem Petrarchae parcerent,
Praesertim cum fuerit ex praelatorum numero parumque absuerit, ut a Benedicto
XII. fuerit Cardinalis creatus -- Homo Italus atque idem ex praecipuis
Praelatis unus, summa Eruditione, and sapientia vir, quem Papa, quem tota
Apostolica Seeds, quem tota Italia maximi facit atque colit. PP. Vergerius
Annot. in Catal. Haer. fol. 259, 260.
Petrarch one of her most Eminent Writers in Prose and Verse, who was the Pride
and Glory of Italy, and the Delight of Rome, where he received the Laurel;
Petrarch one of her Celebrated Churchmen, who narrowly missed a Cardinal's
Cap; the Learned, the Eloquent, the Charming Petrarch applied this, and many
more such Texts unto Her in an Part of which Epistle is translated and cited by
Vergerius. Ibid. fol. 259, 260.
Epistle, wherein he Paraphrased the 17th. Chapter of the Revelations; and how
do they know, but God may make the people hear, and obey the Voice of Petrarch,
and come out of her in as great numbers beyond the Alps and Apennines, as they
have done on this side of them. The Pectilent Northern Heresy, as one called
it, may soon scale the Mountains, and invade the Southern Climates, and they
themselves do not know how suddenly God may make Province after Province, and
Nation after Nation, fall off and separate from the Church of Rome. What has
been done, may be done again; and upon supposition this should happen, I would
fain know of from the Roman Communion, would be a good Argument against the
Trueness or Goodness of the Church of Rome. Wherefore methinks is point of
Prudence, they should not take up Arguments against us, which they do not know
how soon we may have occasion to retort upon themselves. They should remember
that they cannot secure their Church against Contigencies, that are common to
all Churches, and that to flesh should glory in the presence of God, who
sometimes chooses the weak things of the World, to confound the mighty; and
things that are not, to bring to naught things that are. It is his Prerogative
to do whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and Earth; and who knows his Counsels?
who knows what secrets of Providence are in the Wombs of their Causes ready for
the birth?

In the next place, I address my self to our dissenting Brethren, whose
Divisions and Separations from the Church of England, and from one another, are
now become popular and plausible Arguments in the mouths of the R. Cs. to
unsettle weaker judgments among us, and bring them over to theirs, which they
call the one Catholic Church. I beseech them therefore by the Sacred Names of
Unity and Charity, to consider ho'w different the Church of England, and her
Children now appear, from what they mis-apprehended them to be. Great numbers
of them took up an Aversion to the Church, because they thought her Popish in
her Constitution, and her Children, especially the Clergy, Popish in their
Affections: but now seeing by Experience how much they were mistaken, methinks
they should be willing to make Reparation; methinks the sense of their former
mistake, should help to overcome their present prejudice, and make them willing
to be better informed, and bring their old Scruples, with Minds desirous of
satisfaction, to the Test; to see if indeed they are such as will justify
their separation from a Church, which they acknowledge to be Orthodox in her
Doctrine, and which they could never yet prove enjoined any one thing in her
Worship, which God and forbidden, or to have forbidden any thing in it, which
he had enjoined, Is not this the time for them to peruse the Books that have
been lately written with the greatest Candor and meekness for their better
Information? And does not the Zeal, which they have always professed against
Popery, oblige them to have a good opinion of her Divines, who have all along
been contending earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints?
Does not God by the Voice of his Providence call upon them, as plainly as if it
were by a Voice from Heaven, to consider whither their Divisions tend, and
should not the serious consideration of the dismal Effects that may follow upon
them, if they continue in them, make them doubly afraid of the sinfulness of
Schism? What a dreadful account will they have to make at the Day of Judgment,
if it should then appear, that the Church gave them no just occasion to
separate from her? They must then answer to God for all the direful
Consequences of their Separation; and therefore it concerns them all to look
upon her whom they have pierced; it concerns them all, as they would not die in
so fatal a Mistake, and be responsable for the downfall of the Church, to
examine impartially, if the Communion of the Church of England be not truly
Catholic, and whether she is not such a Church, as has fellowship with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

If she be such a Church, as the Divines of all reformed Churches abroad will
tell them she is, then they must be guilty of Schism, which is a separation
without a just cause from the Church, as a Church, without any regard unto the
State. For Schism or Separation, without a just cause, is a pure spiritual
Crime, and was reckoned a damnable Sin, before the Church Christian was united
to the Empire, as also in those unhappy Intervals of Persecution, when the
Church and Empire were dis-united again. For example, it was a damnable Sin,
when St. Paul charged the Ephesians to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, because there was but one God, and one Lord and one Faith, and one
Baptism, and one Body of Christ. It was a damnable Sin, when he told the
Corinthians, That we were all baptized by one Spirit into one body, and that as
the natural body was made one by the union of many members in it, so also was
the body, meaning the Body politic of Christ. It was a damnable Sin, when St.
Ignatius taught the Churches, That nothing should be done without the leave of
the Bishop, or in opposition to him, and that, that was only a valid Eucharist
which was administered by him, or by one licensed and appointed by him, and that
makers of Schism could not inherit the Kingdom of God. It was a damnable Sin,
when St. Cyprian called private Meetings, in opposition to the public,
Conventicles of the Devil; and said, that private Altars were no Altars; and
that if a Schismatic should die for Christ, he could be no Martyr, nor have
any right to the Crown of Martyrdom; for which he alleges the words of the
Apostle, Though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it prositeth
nothing. Dionysius Alexandrinus in his Ep. to the Arch-Schismatick Novatus,
writes unto him in this manner. If thou wast constraind, as thou say, against
thy will, to separate from the Church, thou ought to declare the same, by
returning willingly to it again. Thou should have suffered any thing rather
then rend the Church of God, neither is that Martyrdom, which a man shall
suffer for refusing to rend the Church, less glorious, then that which
Christians daily suffer for denying to sacrifice unto Devils. Yea, in my
judgment, it is a more glorious sort of Martyrdom, for in the one a man
suffers Martyrdom only for his own Soul, but in the other for the Universal
Church. Wherefore persuade the Brethren, or constrain them to return to Union,
such a meritorious act would be greater then the crime of seducing them, and
thou would be more commended for that, then ever thou were censured for
this. However if thou can not persuade the rebellious and disobedient to
return to the Church, at least save thine own soul, by embracing Peace and
Unity thy self.

So great a Sin did the ancient Fathers account Schism, before the happy union
of the Church and Empire, when the Meetings of the Schismatics were as much
tolerated by the State, as the Meeting of the Catholics; and upon the same
Principle, Donatism and Arianism were counted as damnable Schism every jot,
under the Reigns of those Emperors, who granted toleration to them, as under
the Reigns of those who made Laws against them. Nay, all the Laws which
Constantius and Valens made in favor of Arianism, and for the establishment of
it, did not alter its damnable nature in the judgment of the Catholics;
neither indeed is the obliquity of Schism alterable by humane Laws and
Constitutions, as being a transgression of a divine positive Law, which God
has made for the preservation of the Body politic of his Church, to which
Schism is as destructive in its nature, as Rebellion is to the State.

The being and well-being of the Church are incompatible with it, and it is not
only evil because God has forbid it, but God has forbid it because he knew it
was evil, and pernicious in its nature to his one Catholic Church. The Roman
Catholics themselves will join with us in this Principle, and acknowledge this
Doctrine to be true, and if our Dissenters are either afraid, or convinced of
the truth of it, it concerns them, as they tender their own Salvation, to
enquire into the nature of their respective Separations, whether they the
Schisms, or no? They all profess great tenderness of Conscience, and they will
but act according to their pretensions, to be very scrupulous in embracing
those Communions; which, if they be not, yet look so like Schism. Methinks they
should be as much afraid of sinning one way as another; methinks their
Consciences should boggle as much at a suspected Communion, as at a suspected
Ceremony, and be very much afraid of making damnable Separations, as they will
assuredly do, if the Church of England, from which they do, or shall separate,
be a true and sound Member of Christ I entreat them for the sake of their own
Souls, to set the Terror of this Consequence before their eyes; especially I
desire those among them to consider it, who by their occasional Communion (as
they call it) with the Church of England, have declared to all the World, that
they think if such a Church, to which men may join themselves without sin.
Shall the expectation of a little temporary Preferment, or the fear of a little
temporal Punishment, bring them to Church, and perhaps to the highest act of
Communion in it, and shall not the fear of Damnation, and the foresight of the
dismal Events, which are like to happen upon their Separations, not make them
do the same? If it be sinful to communicate with the Church of England in her
Ordinances, why did they ever do it? And if it be not, why do they not do it
always, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, who beseeched the Corinthians
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they should all speak the same
thing, and be perfectly joined together in the same mind and judgment, that
there should be no Schisms nor Divisions among them. I beseech our dissenting
Brethren, by the same saving Name, and for the sake of the Gospel, for which
they pretend to have so much zeal, not to divide Christ any longer among us,
nor grieve the holy Spirit of Union by their causless Separations, but to
return to the Fold from which they have wandered as lost Sheep, that so we may
become one Fold under one Shepherd, and one Building framed together into an
holy Temple unto the Lord. They know there is nothing wanting to any Christian
man's Salvation in the Church of England; they may be as holy and unblamable in
the Communion of it, as the most holy Saint, or Martyr, if it be not their own
fault; and certainly Jacob would rejoice, and Israel would be glad, may I dare
say, there would be joy among the very Angels in Heaven, to see them return to
their Mother, whom they have forsaken, and compass her Altars in Sincerity and
Truth. This would be the way for them to atone for their former Mascarriages,
and undo all the Injuries they have formerly done the Church, which upon their
Return would be beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,, and terrible as an
Army with Banners, and provoke her Adversaries, who now insuit over her
Divisions, to confess, that she is the very Beauty of Holiness, and that God
was in us and among us of a truth.

In the last place I address my self to my Brethren of the Church of England,
for whose Satisfaction I have written this Apology, That seeing how Heresies,
Divisions, and Schisms, have been incident to the best Churches, in the best
and purest Ages, the Age of the Apostles, and the Age next unto them, they
should neither be offended nor discouraged, to see so many Altars erected in
this little Isle, all opposite to one another, and to the Church. I have showed
them, that her condition is neither new, nor singular, and that as many and
great Divisions have been made from the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch,
Alexandria, Constantinople, Rome, Carthage, and all the famous Churches in the
World. Nay, I have showed more particularly of the Church of Rome, that very
shameful and scandalous Schisms have formerly arisen in her, and that not
withstanding her pretended present Union, the Church of England, in the midst
of all the English Divisions, has more potential and actual Union then she, I
have had good success in private, with a shorter Discourse of this nature, in
confirming of some, who began to have mean and despicable thoughts of the
Church of England, upon the score of our English Schisms, and to suspect
whether or no the were a true and good Church. They were made believe, of all
Churches she was most deserted by God, and that he seemed to have very little
savor for her; and then while they were casting about for Reasons, why God
should seem, as they were taught, to have so little care of her, it was easily
suggested, that he was displeased at her, and left her to her self, because she
had left the Church of Rome. And as I have known some, so I have heard of
others, who have been just so affected; and it is for curing such Fears and
Suspicions where they are, and preventing them where they are not, that I have
made this Apology, which I hope my Brethren will accept, as a Work well
intended, with all its imperfections and defects. I know it is but a very
indifferent Performance, in comparison to what others have done, and are a
doing; but such as it is, I offer it with all submission to the whole Household
of God, in the Church of England, which as it now stands without any farther
emendation, is, I verily) believe, as sound and pure a Church, both for
Doctrine and Worship, as ever was established in any Province, or Nation of the
World, I heartily thank Almighty God, by whose good providence I have been bred
up in her Communion, and am called to the great Honor of being one of her
Priests; and I beseech him of his infinite goodness, to give all her Clergy,
and People, Grace, to live up strictly to her Principles; to her Principles of
Piety toward God, of Loyalty to the King, of Justice and Charity to others,
and of Temperance and Sobriety toward themselves. I am sure it must be ours,
and not her fault, if we be not the best Christians, the best Subjects, and the
best Friends and Neighbors in the Worlds; and I shall confirm my own Opinion
of her, with the Testimony which a late S. L. J.
great, and good, and learned Man, gave of her in his last Will and Testament,
says he, I do declare, That by the grace of God, I die a Christian in the
Communion of the Church of England, as it is now established by God's
Providence, and the Laws in force; I do believe this Church to be a true and
sound Member of Christ's Catholic Church, which he has purchased with his
Blood. Cloth her, O Lord, with a strict and examplary Holiness in her Priests
and People, and maintain her in her Truths, Peace, and Patrimony, unto the
Worlds end. Amen.

FINIS.

