Christian Reader,
I Have perused the greatest part of this Body of Divinity, and find that the
Learned and Reverend Author has so mingled Utile and Dulce together, that it
cannot but in many respects minister much benefit and delight to the Readers of
it. The Variety of the Matters, the Brevity of each Particular, the Holiness
and Orthodoxy of Doctrine, the Delicacy of Choice and Curious Notions, the many
accurate Collections out of learned Writers, Philosophical, Historical,
Theological, are such, as rendered it to me like a large Botanick garden,
wherein there are Fruits for the Palate, Simples for the Health, Flowers for
the Eye, Rarities for the Curious, Walks for Recreation, Arbors for
Refreshment; something or other to please and entertain every comer. Or like a
Jewel made up of many Diamonds, where each little stone contributeth to the
beauty and sparkling of the whole. There is scarce any subject of Divinity or
Morality, concerning which we may not here find some elegant Strictures. The
whole composure of the Work being not intended for a large, full and close
Tractation of the Subjects therein contained, but for a Collection of sundry
wholesome and delightful Observations, gathered together like Pearls in a
Bracelet, or Suckets in a Banquet, to adorn the Argument, and delight the
Reader. I shall say of it, what the Scripture says of the Land of Canaan, that
it is full of Milk and Honey, and has in it many Beds of Spices, which with
their fragrancy and sweetness cannot but refresh and recreate the minds of the
Readers. So variously has the Lord distributed his Gifts for the service of
his Tabernacle; that some bring Wood and Skins, some Silver and Gold, some Blue
and Purple, some Scarlet and fine Linen, some Onyx and Precious stones; some
of which Materials are compacted into one Body and Frame, others serve for
Embroidery and Beauty, All for the sanctity and glory of the whole. So Christ
divides the spoils of Men, as David did those of the Nations, and consecrateth
them to the uses of his Temple; making one man's Judgment and Reason, another
Wit and Fancy, another Memory and Reading, another Oratory and Eloquence to
be variously useful to the Edification of his Church, and Glory of his Name.
Whereunto let all of us endeavor sincerely to consecrate both our selves and
all that measure of Talents and enjoyments wherewith the Lord has entrusted us.

Thine in our Common Savior, EDW. NORWICH.

SYNTAGMA THEOLOGICVM: OR, A TREATISE, Wherein is concisely comprehended THE
Body of Divinity, AND THE FVNDAMENTALS of RELIGION, Orderly Discussed.
Prologos. The Prologue.
DIVINITY, or inspired Philosophy, Theologia est scientia vel sapientia rerum
divinarum divinitus revelata, ad Dei gloriam and ration^lium creaturarum
Salutem. Walaeus in l^^. Commun.
is as the Haven or Sabbath of all man's contemplations.

It differs from all other sciences: for although they be busied about man;
as physic, for the health of his body; Ethics, for his civil conversation,
etc. Yet none of them leads him to the consideration of his Maker.

Besides, Divinity passes for the most part from the material and formal
cause, and thinks upon the efficient and final, the first and the last cause:
And so while other sciences are either plunged in the baseness of the matter,
or curiously search into the forms of things (which can hardly be known) the
Divine is carried back to the contemplation of the first cause, to eternity,
and to the last cause in eternity, which are the only comfortable meditations.

Divinity, is the book of Gods Word, Philosophy the book of Gods Works. For
Natural Theology is that knowledge, or rudiment of knowledge concerning God,
which may be obtained by the contemplation of his Creatures, which knowledge
may be termed truly Divine, in respect of the object; and natural, in respect
of the light. The bounds of this knowledge are, that it suffi^eth to convince
Atheism, but not to inform Religion. Hence there was never miracle wrought to
convince an Atheist, because the light of nature might have led him to confess
a God; But the Idolaters and Superstitious had need of miracles, because no
light of nature extends to declare the Will and true Worship of God. Gods
works show his wisdom and power, not his image; and therefore never honored
with the title of Gods image, but only the work of his hands.

The contemplations of man, do either penetrate to God, or are circumfer'd to
nature, or are reflected or reverted upon himself* Out of which several
inquiries there do arise three knowledges. 1. Divine Philosophy. 2. Natural
Philosophy. 3. And Humane Philosophy, or Humanity: for all things are marked
and stamped with this triple character. 1. The power of God. 2. The difference
of nature. 3. And the use of man.

Now out of the contemplation of nature, or ground of humane knowledge, to
induce any verity or persuasion concerning the points of faith, is not safe; Da
fidei quae fidei sunt* For the Heathens themselves conclude as much, in that
excellent and divine Fable of the Golden Chain, That mea and gods were not able
to draw Jupiter down to the earth, but contrariwise Jupiter was able to draw
them up to heaven: So as we ought not to attempt to draw down or submit the
mysteries of God to our reason, but contrariwise to raise and advance our
reason to the divine Truth. Cullen Div.


It is most apparent that Aristotle (though styled Natures chief Secretary, and
(by those Divines who set forth a Book concerning his Salvation) Christ's
forerunner in Naturals, Metaphys. l. 1. and 12.
as John Baptist had been in Super-naturals, yet) writes many things most
absurdly concerning God, which I list not to recite. And I greatly fear (for
what have I to do to judge?) that is too true which a clear head has said
concerning him and others of his Tribe, Quanto doctiores, tanto nequiores.
viz. The wiser they were, the vainer they were; and the further from God and
his Kingdom: their learning hung in their light, Eth. l. 7. c. 3, 4.
and served but to light them into utter darkness. Yea, Aristotle confesses
the disability of moral knowledge to rectify the intemperance of nature; which
he also confirmed in his own practice.

I guess this to be one reason, why Tertullian says, That the Philosophers
were the Patriarchs of the Heretics. Not but that there is an excellent and
necessary use of Philosophy, which is a gift of God, and a great help to
Divinity (called by some her Handmaid.) But captious subtilties and Sophismes,
or the measuring of Heavenly mysteries by natural reason; these are to be
avoided, as vain deceits, idle speculations, and aerie nothings.

Hence the Apostle says, Romans 1.21, 22, 23.
They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools: And changed the glory of
the uncorruptible God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted
beasts, and creeping things. For the natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, Col. 2.8.
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: Therefore beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of
the world, and not after Christ.

It is concluded then, that to seek Divinity in Philosophy, is to seek the
living amongst the dead: even as to seek Philosophy amongst Divinity, is to
seek the dead amongst the living.

For certainly it is not a natural knowledge, either by the notions imprinted
in man's mind, whereby the conscience is convinced; or by the consideration of
the creatures, that is sufficient unto salvation, (though enough to leave us
without exuse:) But it must be the revealed knowledge, that which is attained
by the Word of God; wherein God (though he dwell in the light, which none can
attain unto, yet) has revealed himself, so far as he saw sit son us to
understand.

We shall therefore make the written Word of God, the man of our counsel in
this present undertaking. And seeing the Globe of Divinity parts it self into
two hemispheres; 1. Credenda. and 2. Agenda.


The things we are to know and believe, Joh. 13.17. Objectum Theologia religio,
religion is Deus. Armin. in disp. theol. These. 1. parag. 4.
and the things we are to do and perform; (so said the Doctor of the Chair, If
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.) We shall have respect unto
both.

Seeing also that the prime and chief place of Divinity is concerning God, I
shall begin with him who is without either beginning of days, or end of life.

Heb. 11.6.
For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him.

Joh. 17.3.
And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

De Deo.
THere is no Nation under Heaven so barbarous, but yields that there is a God.
It is much ado for Atheism to find a perfect and continual assent in man's
heart. Some ruins of this truth, do still remain in him since the fall. And
although he may deny all by day, his conscience will make him startle by night.

Protagoras doubted whether there was a God, therefore was banished by the
Athenians. And Diagoras denied flatly that there was a God.

But leave we such persons, to the consure of the Scripture; The fool has said
in his heart, There is no God.

The Philosophers (I except not the Epicures) did with one consent affirm there
is a God. They called him, Nomine Deum; Natura Spiritum; Psalm. 14.1.
Ordine causam primam; Perfectione ens divinissimum; Motione motorem primum;
But knew him not. Hence Atheniensium Altaris inscripto, Deo ignoto.

Arguments to prove there is a God, viz. 1. Consent of the Heathen, and
confession of all Nations. 2. Instinct of nature, and natural propensity to
worship a God. 3. Confession of Atheists themselves. 4. Difference and
conscience of good and evil, received of all. 5. The Creation of the World,
great and little. 6. His Providence, and the order of things. 7. His judgments
over some particular men, Quid est totus m^ndus nisi Deus explicatus?
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, especially the four Monarchies.


Quiequid vides and quicquid non vides, Deus est; Whatsoever thou see, and
whatsoever thou see not, is God; That is, all things visible and invisible do
express unto thee a Deity, and lead thee as by the hand, to contemplate
heavenly, spiritual and eternal things.

God is known Ex postico tergo, lices non ex ^^tiea ^a^is; By his effects
adextra, though not his Essence ad intra. Seculum est speculum, Ramus.
the creation of the world is a glass, Romans 1.20.
wherein (says St. Paul) we may behold his eternal power and Godhead. Which
the Divine Poet Paraphrastically, Du Bart.
The World's a School, where in a general Story
God always reads dumb Lectures of his Glory.


Every simple man that cannot read, may notwithstanding spell that there is a
God.

St. Austin having gone through all creatures, Solil^quiis.
and seeing in them the Characters of the Godhead imprinted, and seriously
inquiring of them for God; Not one or two, but all made him this answer, with
an audible voice; Non sum ego, sed per ipsum sum ego quem quaris in me, I am
not he, but by him I am whom thou seek in me.

It was a good Speech of him, who being asked, What God was? answered, Si
scirem, Deus essem, If I knew that, I should be a God. It far exceeds the
reach of reason, and is above created capacity; we may stand at gaze, and be
aghast, and that is the nearest that we poor finite foolish creatures can
approach toward the comprehension of so infinite a Being.

Dei nomen mirabile nomen, Dionysius. Omnium supremus, altissimorum altissimus.
Isa. 57.17.
super omne nomen; sed sine nomine.

Deus est circulus cujus centrum est ubique, circumferentia vero nusquam. As
God is without quality, so without quantity; Altior est coelo, profundior
inferno, latior terra, mari diffusior; Nusquam est, and ubique est.

Deus magnus est, sed sine quantitate; bonus, sed sine qualitate; at vero a
nobis, magnum sine quantitate, bonum sine qualitate; direct and plene concipi
est impossible. Contine^ omnia, tamen non continetur ab aliquo.

Three ways the Schools mention of knowing of God, or rather something of God;
Per viam 1. Causalitatis, The prime, supreme and universal cause of all good
whatsoever. 2. Eminentiae, Attributing to God, whatsoever perfection or worth
is in any or all the creatures: And that as being in him after a more eminent
manner. 3. Remotionis, When denying of him whatever imperfection and defect, is
observable in the creature.


A taste of all these the Apostle gives us, 1 John 1.5.
This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

It is subtly observed by Picus Mirandula, That in the Creation of the world,
God gave the water to the fishes, the earth to the beasts, the air to the
fowls, heaven to the Angels; And after all these were bestowed, he made man
according to his own likeness, and image; That he might say with the Prophet,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

Aug. Tract. in Johan.
Si esuris, panis tibi est; si sitis, aqua tibi est; si in tenebris es, lumen
est, etc. Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia.

1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
For though there be that are called, whether in heaven or in earth (as there
be gods many, and lords many:) But to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, Romans 1.25. Isa. 57.15. 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 6.15, 16.
and we in him. Who is blessed for ever. The high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity, whose Name is holy. The King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wise God. The blessed, and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords: Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and power
everlasting. Amen.

Psa. 89.6.
Who in the Heaven can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the sons of the
mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

Psa. 48.14.
This God is our God for ever and ever.

Psa. 144.15.
Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea, happy is that people whose
God is the Lord.

Of God, his Attributes and Properties.
THOU can not see my face (said God to Moses) for there shall no man see me,
and live. Man could not behold this Vision, but be oppressed, Exodus 33.20.
and swallowed up with Majesty; as the sight of the eye is dazzled with the Su^,
or a Crystal Glass broken with the fire.

The High Priest entering into the Holiest of all, darkened it with the smoke of
the incense when he went in. Pompey (who was one that presumed to enter within
the Holiest of all, not being Priest) when he came out, being asked, What he
saw? answered, That the House was full of a Cloud: To which the Psalmist, Psalm.
18.17.
He made darkness his secret Place; his Pavilion round about him, were dark
Waters, and thick Clouds of the Skies.

As we cannot see the Sun in Rota, in the Circle, but in the Beams; so neither
God, otherwise than in his Words and Works: Only if we in borrowed speech for
our understanding, call him a Spirit (though in proper speech so God is not, no
more than he is an Angel or a Soul, which is determined, finite, and
comprehended in some one place, as every Angel, and every man's Soul is) and add
unto this Spirit such Attributes as may fully difference him, not only from all
spirits, Humane or Angelical, but from all Creatures; then we are come as near
him as we can; and in this, Mortality can approach no nearer.

Of his Eternity.
God only is properly Eternal; that is, without beginning or ending, without
all measure of time.

Aeternitas est quae nihil habet mutabile, Aug. in
ibi nihil est praeteritum quasi jam non sit, nihil futurum quasi nondum sit,
quia non est ibi nisi est.

Man's days, are but days of time, God is fixed in Eternity; man's days are
moveable, the days of God move not.

Some distinguish thus between these three: Tempus est mensura hominum,
Eternity, Ev^ternity, and Time.
habens principium and finem; Aeviternitas est Angelorum, principium habens,
sed non finem; Eternitas est propria Deo, nec principium habens, nec finem.
Eternity is that which is peculiar unto God, his are the days of Eternity;
Eviternity is proper to Angels and Spirits, which have a beginning, but shall
have no end; Time is the portion and lot of man, who has had a beginning, and
shall have an end. Time is the measure of those things which actually corrupt
and change; Aeternitas, est duratio semper praesens, est unum perpetuum hodie,
quod non transit in praeteritum aut futurum. Drexel.
Eviternity is the measure of things incorruptible and unchangeable, not in
themselves, but by the appointment of God; Eternity is peculiar to God, in whom
it is absolutely impossible any change should be. Time has continual
successions, Eternity a constant permanency; all the days of God are but a
day: Man's day was, is, and shall be; Gods day always is.

True it is, other Spirits are Eternal, there is an everlastingness of the
Spirits of Men and Angels; for having had beginning, they shall never have end;
but that is a gift, and of grace, and a part post (as the Schoolmen say) in
respect of future: But God is a Spirit, absolutely Eternal in his Essence, and
in his Nature; and a part post and ante, before everlasting, without
beginning, without succession, innovation, or termination; in regard of which
Eternity, as being a vast Ocean, the little drop, which we call time, vanishing
into nothing; and so far is the Eternal Spirit beyond all Spirits of men and
Angels.

Where is a beginning, there is time; but in God there is a beginning, for the
Son and Holy Ghost have their beginning from the Father*

1. Ordinis, Of Order. 2. Temporis, Of Time.


They had no beginning in respect of time; for that should have excluded
Eternity, but only a beginning of order; which stands in Eternity, the Son
being in time as Eternal as the Father.

Hence is concluded, That clear distinction of this uncreated and creating
Spirit, from all created Spirits of Men and Angels: As also, that we should not
insist, or content our selves with such things as time can only afford us; but
fasten upon him that is Eternity, and upon that Eternal happiness with him.

1 Samuel 15.29. Psalm. 90.2. Isa. 57.15. Hebr. 9.14.
The Eternity of Israel: Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the Earth and the World; even from Everlasting to Everlasting,
thou art God; the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity; the Eternal
Spirit. Of his Infiniteness.
In God there is such infiniteness and unmeasurable greatness, Spiritus
insinitus, non corpore; non inquam quant tate, magnitudine, mole; s^d
qualitate, virtute, bonitate, and si quid praestantius ab homine de Deo dici
vel cogitari potest. Comarus.
that to him nothing can be added; neither may any bounds, measure or limits be
admitted: All other Creatures are finite in holiness, wisdom, life, glory, etc.
But he is infinite in all.

That is infinite, 1. Which is without end. 2. Which is without bound.


In both God is infinite; as he had no beginning, so he shall have no end or
period of his Being; he is infinite in reference to duration or time; and he is
infinite in reference to place or extent.

This is a good Argument to prove there is but one God; for there is nothing
infinite but God, and it is altogether impossible that there should be two
Infinites: The Heavens cannot hold two Suns, much less can the World hold two
Infinites.

Infinity runs through all the Titles of God; He is infinite in Power,
infinite in Wisdom, Justice, Righteousness, and Mercy.

Hence it is gathered, That God is incomprehensible, and passes all bounds of
created minds and understandings; and so cannot fully be conceived of us, nor
of any, but of himself. And surely if he be above all the mind can conceive,
much more beyond all that any Picture can express; foolish Creatures, that
confine him within the narrow lines of any Image!

1 Kings 8.27. 2 Chronicles. 2.6. Isa. 66.1. Jer. 23.24.
Behold, the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. The Heaven, and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is
my Footsto^l: Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Of Gods
Omnipotency.
Such is Gods Omnipotency and Infiniteness of power, as that to him nothing is
impossible. Psalm. 103.20.
Other Spirits are Potent (Angels excel in strength) but he is Omnipotent. The
Almighty power of this Spirit, distinguishes him from all other spirits:
Dicitur omnitotens, quia omnium tenet potestatem, Isidor.
Thus, 1. In that it is Essential; for whatsoever God does, is in and by his
own Essence; but there is a quality. 2. In him it is Original, in them derived;
for this is that beginning of all power in the Creature. 3. In him it is
Absolute, whereby he can do whatsoever he will; in them it is limited, that
they can do but what he will. 4. In him it is Infinite; not only in regard of
his infinite Being, nor only in regard of infinite Objects, which he has done,
and can do; but also in regard of the powerful manner of effecting things; for
he never did any thing so powerfully, but he could have done it more
powerfully; he never made any thing so good, but he could have made it better.

In the Creatures there is an Essence and a Paculty whereby they work; as in
fire, the substance and the quality of heat; between these God can sunder, Dr.
Preston.
and so hinder their working, as in the Babylonish fire. In the Angels there is
an Essence, and an executive power; God comes between these often, and hinders
them for doing what they would: But now its otherwise in God; he is most simple
and entire, without mixture or composition. Hence his Almightiness is his
Essence, and his whole Essence is Almighty; He is not mighty in respect of some
part or faculty, as the Creature is; but all in God is Mighty.

There is the 1. Absolute Power of God. And, 2. Actual Power of God.


By the former, he can do whatsoever he pleases; make Iron swim, Rocks stream
forth water, stones to yield children unto Abraham.

Of this when I have spoken my utmost, I must entreat the Reader, as one the
Orator did his (when he spoke of Socrates and Lucius Crassus;) Cicer. 3. ^s
Oratore.
Vt magis quiddam de ^is, quam quae scripta sunt, suspicarentur. That they
should imagine some greater matter, than here they find written: For well did
Gratianus the Emperor observe, in his Epistle to Ambrose, Loquimur de Deo non
quantum debemus, sed quantum possumus. In speaking of God (also of his power)
we speak not what we ought, but what we are able.

But it is his actual power that men must look to, and in this he has tied the
end and the means together; in which respect there are things he cannot (say
Divines) because he will not; that is, he will not bring man to the end,
without their using those means which tend thereunto.

In a word, He can do all things possible and honorable; he cannot lie, dye,
deny himself; for that implies impotency. He can do more than he will, but
whatsoever he will; that he does in Heaven and Earth, and none can say, What
do thou?

Let us therefore tremble before this Mighty God, who can with as much ease (as
Caesar once threatened Metellus in a Bravado) and in as little time undo us, as
bid it be done. If the breath of God blow man to destruction (and we are but
Dust-heaps) if he can frown us to death with the rebuke of his countenance;
What is the weight of his hand (that Mighty hand, as James calls it) wherewith
he spans the Heavens, and weighs the Earth in a Balance.

Trust we also in his power for performing his promises; Deo confisi, nunquam
confusi: He that believes, shall not be ashamed; he need no more but stand and
see the salvation of the Lord.

And let Gods people be comforted in consideration of his power. Contemno
minutos istos Deos, modo Jovem habeam propitium, said that Heathen, If God be
for us, What need we fear what Man or Devil can do unto us?

Yea, let us commit our selves unto him, who is able to do for us above all we
can ask or think, and to keep for us what we commit unto him; for howsoever the
power of all Creatures may be let by impediments from doing us good, yet
nothing can be an impediment to hinder his power for our good.

Genesis 17.1. Cap. 18.14. Dan. 4.37. Luke 1.37. Rev. 4.8. (...).
I am the Almighty God. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Those that walk in
pride, he is able to abase: With God nothing shall be unpossible. Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Almighty. Of Gods Omnipresence.
God is a Spirit everywhere included, Deus ubique and semper est.
nowhere excluded. He is purely and simply by his Essence and Presence
everywhere: A God within all things, but contained of nothing; a God without
all things, but sustained of nothing; a Spirit dwelling everywhere, but without
sense or motion.

In respect of his Essence he is everywhere, but in regard of the bright
manifestation of his grace and glory, he is said to dwell in Heaven: Thus also
he is said to be far from the wicked; not in respect of Essence, but the
manifestation of his favor and grace.

Again, when God is said to depart and return, we must not understand it by
motion of Essence, but of effect; nor by change of place, but by change of his
action, and declaration of some mercy where he is said to return, and of his
justice where he is said to depart.

A man in a Boat, thinks the Bank moves, though that be unmovable, and all
the motions in the Boat; so God moves in regard of his effect in us, himself
abiding unmovable; he moves and changes all things, without any motion or
change in himself.

Empedocles could say, that God is a Circle, whose Center is everywhere, whose
circumference is nowhere. Other Heathens, that God is the Soul of the World;
and that as the Soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, so is he;
that his eye is in every Corner, etc. To which purpose they so pourtraied their
Goddess Minerva, that which way soever one cast his eye, she always beheld him.

Let us therefore in every place fear his presence, and avoid sin; the Judge is
present even to the thoughts; Sub Jove s^mper er^s, etc. Jovis omnia plena.
set thy self ever in his sight, as David; walk with God, as Enoch; and be
sincere in all thy course, he fills all places, either to comfort or confound.

God (says a late Writer) is not so far from us, as the Bark is from the Tree,
the skin from the flesh, or the flesh from the bones. Deus intimior nobis
intimo nostro: He is nearer to us, than we are to our selves, though we see him
not.

Genesis 28.16. 1 Kings 20 28.
Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. The Lord is God of the
Hills, and of the Valleys. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God
afar off? Jer. 23.23.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell, Psalm.
139.7, 8, 9, 10.
thou art there; if I take the wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me. Acts 17.27.
He is not far from every one of us. Of Gods Immutability.
God is only unchangeable, by Reason his Essence is every way infinite, and can
no way move or change, but is what he is, always the same.

If he were any way changed, it were for better or worse; but not to be worse;
for then he should pass from perfect to imperfect, and cease to be God; nor to
be better, for then formerly he was less perfect, and so not God.

Men are mutable, and there is little hold to be taken of what they say; of many
it may be said, as Tertullian of the Peacock, All in changeable Colors: As
Aeneas Sylvius said of Italy, Novitate quadam nihil habet stabile; there is no
taking their words.

But God, and all that is in God, is unchangeable; for this is an Attribute,
that like a silken string through a Chain of Pearl, runs through all the
rest; his mercy is unchangeable, it endures for ever; so his counsel, mutat
sententiam, sed non decretum; he may change his sentence, the outward
threatening or promise, but not his inward Decree; he may will a Change, but not
change his Will.

And whereas God is said to repent, it is after another manner than man
repents. Repentance with man, is the changing of his Will: Repentance with God,
Aliud est mutare voluntatem, aliud v^lle mutationem. Aquinas.
is the willing of a change. It is mutatio rei non Dei, effectus non affectus,
facti non consilii. Gods Repentance is not a change of his will, but of his
work. It notes only (says Mr. Perkins) the alteration of things, and actions
done by him, and no change of his Purpose, and secret Decree, which is
immutable. What he has written, he has written (as Pilate said peremptorily)
there is no removing of him.

So his love is immutable, his heart is the same to us in the diversity of
outward conditions; we are changed in estate and opinion, but God he is not
changed.

It Is true, Job says, Thou art turned to be cruel; Job 30.21. Brentius.
but he speaks only according to his own feeling and apprehension. Mutatus es
mihi in tyrannum, Thou art turned Tyrant toward me, so Brentius renders it:
But this was out of the vehemence of his pain, and the sense of his flesh,
which should have been silenced, and faith exalted; which would have told him,
Psalm. 119.75.
That in very faithfulness God afflicted him, that he might be true to his soul.

Hence we may plainly perceive, the more mutable we are, the less we are like
God. God is immutably holy, but we have an heart that loves to wander: He is
always the same, but we are soon removed, soon shaken in mind, whirried about
with every blast, blown down with every temptation; which should make us loath
our selves, for our own fickle purposes, and changeable resolutions: But the
more we do continue in the good we have learned, and been assured of; the more
we do resemble the divine perfection.

Let us go to him also, to establish and settle our spirits; God, that is
unchangeable in himself, can bring us into an immutable estate of grace,
against which all the gates of Hell cannot prevail; There be not quiet, till
you have gotten such gifts from him as are without Repentance, the fruits of
Eternal grace, and the pledges of Eternal glory.

And carry we our selves to him, as unto an immutable good; in the greatest
change of things see him always the same; when there is little in the
Creature, there is as much in God as ever.

Yea, and let us grow up in the Image of God here, and get good evidences from
Heaven, where we shall by God be made immutable too (though by grace only, and
dependency of gift) and have the Image of God perfectly restored unto us, and
be unchangeable in body and soul.

And let us hasten our selves hence in holy desires, being in the midst of so
many changes in this life, wherein we are subject to so many alterations.

I am that I am; I am has sent me unto you. Exodus 3.14.
The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not a man that he
should repent. 1 Samuel 15.29. Psalm. 89.34. Ps. 102.26, 27. Mal. 3.6.
My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
-- They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old,
like a Garment: As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. I am the Lord, Jam.
1.17.
I change not. The Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. (...).
Of the Goodness of God. B^nitas Dei est, qua Deus in se maxim perfectus and
appetibilis, omniumque extra se appetibilium and bonorum causa est. Psalm.
119.68.

Goodness referred to God, is that property in God, whereby he is in himself
most good, and communicates his good things to others.

God and wicked men, are like unto true and counterfeit money; the one seem to
be good, but are not; the other both seems, and is good. Phocian was sirnam'd
Bonus, but what was his goodness more than a silver sin.

God is good Originally, others are good by participation only.

There is none good but one, Matthew. 19.17. Psalm. 119.68. Psalm. 34.8. Romans 11.22.
that is God. Thou art good, and do good. O taste and see that the Lord is
good.

Here let it be noted, that both goodness and severity are attributed to God;
yet there are not two things (much less two opposite things) in God, who is a
simple Essence. They are the same in God opposed not formally, but in regard of
the effect; as is the same heat of the Sun, which hardens the clay, and softens
the wax.

God has revealed himself to be both merciful and just: Separate not these
things which God has joined, but jointly consider of them, and it will help
against two dangerous temptations, viz. 1. Despair; and, 2. Presumption; which
are the two Arms of the Devil, whereby he gathers up souls for himself.

For the first, Manasses, Magdalen, Paul, etc.

For the latter, David, for the matter of Vriah; with Moses, for striking the
Rock, when he should only have spoken to it, etc. For as the act of seeing is
hindered, both by no light, and by too much; so the light and comfort of
conscience is hindered, either by not seeing of mercy, or by seeing nothing
else but mercy, which causes presumption.

Here is to be refuted the wicked opinion of the Manichees and Marcionites, who
held that there were two Beginnings, or (to speak plainly) two Gods; one good,
full of gentleness and mercy; the other, severe and cruel; this they made the
Author of the Old Testament, and the other of the New.

But the answer is, 1. That Scripture makes one and the same God, both
bountiful, and full of goodness, and the same also severe. 2. And though
severity and mercy seem to be contrary, yet, that is not in respect of the
Subject; for the Divine Nature is not capable of contrary and repugnant
qualities: But in regard of the contrary effects, which are produced in
contrary Subjects. Like as the Magistrate is not contrary to himself, if he
show mercy unto those that are willing to be reformed, and be severe in
punishing obstinate offenders. Or as the Sun by the same heat works contrary
effects, in subjects of a diverse and contrary disposition and quality.

To conclude then, Who have goodness? and who have severity? If thou repentest
and obeyest the Gospel, thou art an happy man; the sweetness of God and his
goodness is to thee. But if thou be a profane, unbelieving, impenitent
wretch, and dyest in this estate; the most just God will in his great severity
cast thee into Hell, 1 Samuel 25.29.
as out of the middle of a sling.

The Lord God, Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children, unto the third,
Ezra 8.22. Psalm. 18.25, 26.
and to the fourth generation. The hand of our God is upon all them for good
that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake
him. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful; Psalm. 34.15, 16.
-- And with the froward thou will show thy self froward. The eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry. The face of the
Lord is against them that do evil, Psalm. 101.1.
to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. I will sing of mercy and
judgment; unto thee, O Lord, Romans 11.22.
will I sing. Behold the goodness and severity of God. Of the Mercy of God.
Mercy, as it is referred to God, Movet enim pium judicem, fragilitas
considerata peccantium. Cassied. Exodus 34.
is the Divine Essence inclining it self to pity and relieve the miseries of
all his Creatures; but more peculiarly of his Elect Children, without respect
of merit.

God is most glorious in mercy. Show me thy Glory (says Moses.) It follows
what it was, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc. In this he is
superlative, and outstrips.

Mercy is, 1. General, 1. In helping his Elect, and comforting. 2. In
scattering and confounding their Enemies.
2. More particular, 1. In promising. 2. In performing.



And these are the Flagons of wine to comfort distressed souls.

Mercy is an Attribute, in the manifestation of which, as all our happiness
consists; so God takes greatest complacency, and delights in it above all his
other works. He punishes to the third and fourth Generation, but shows mercy
unto thousands. Exodus 20.5, 6.
Therefore the Jews have a saying, That Michael flies with one wing, and
Gabriel with two; meaning, that the pacifying Angel, the Minister of Mercy,
flies swift; but the exterminating Angel, the Messenger of wrath, is slow.

The more mercy we receive, the more humble we ought to be, 1. Because we are
thereby more indebted. 2. In danger to be more sinful; worms crawle after Rain.
3. We have more to account for.


But alas! even as the glorious Sun, darting out his illustrious beams, shines
upon the stinking Carrion, but still it remains a Carrion, when the beams are
gone; so the mercy of God shines (as I may say) upon the wicked, but still he
remains wicked.

For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting. The Lord is good to all, Psalm.
100.5. Psalm. 145.9. Micah 7.18.
and his tender mercies are over all his works. He delights in mercy. I
proceed no further in these, only add, That for a Creature to believe the
infinite Attributes of God, he is never able to do it thoroughly, without
supernatural grace.

Of the Sacred Trinity.
De Trinitate.
THat God should be Three in one, and One in three, this is a Divine Truth,
Impossible est per rationem naturalem ad Trinitat is Divinarum p^rsonarum
cognitionem pervenice. Aquin. Du Bartas ex Lombard. Sens. lib. 1. did. 2.
more certainly to be received by Faith, than to be conceived by Reason; for it
is the most mysterious of all the Mysteries contained in the Bible; which our
Divine Poet sings thus: In Sacred Sheets of either Testament,
It Is hard to find an higher Argument,
More deep to sound, more busy to discuss;
More useful known, unknown more dangerous.


Some damnable Heretics, especially the Jews at this day, hold an indistinct
Essence in the Deity, without distinction of persons: We assert, a real
distinction there is, but there can be no separation.

If any stumble at the word [Trinity] and say, it cannot be found in the
Scriptures. I answer, yet the Doctrine is, if not according to the letter, yet
according to the sense. Besides, there is expressly the word [Three] 1 John 5.7.
from whence Trinity comes.

The Hebrews of old, Si^recte dicuntur tres Eloh^m, etiam recte dici possit
tres Dii: nam Elobim Latin sonat Dii vel Deus. Drus. (...) Genesis 1.1.
were no strangers to this Mystery, though their posterity understood it not.
Moses, Genesis 1.1. Dii creavit. Elihu, Job 35.10. God my Makers. Solomon, Eccl.
12.1. Remember thy Creators. Isa. 42.5. Thus says God the Lord, he that
created the Heavens, and they that stretched them out. The Psalmist, Ps. 33.6.
By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the
breath of his mouth. That is, God the Father, by the Son, through the Holy
Ghost, created all, Psalm. 67.6, 7. Some observe, God is thrice named here, to
note the Trinity of persons. When Moses begins to rehearse the Law, and to
explain it, the first thing that he teaches them, is the Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity. Deutr. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One.
Three words answering the three Persons; Galatinus.
and the middle word, Our God, deciphering fitly the second, who assumed our
nature; Jarchi.
as is well observed by Galatinus. R. Solomon Jarchi writing on that, Cant.
1.11. We will make, etc. interprets it, I and my Judgment-hall, Now a
Judgement-hall in Israel, consisted of three at least, which in their close
manner of speech, they applied to God. John 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day; and he saw it, Austin.
and was glad. Abraham in these words, acknowledges the Mystery of the
Trinity, says Austin.

Add unto these, Cottons 7. Vial. p. 5.
what Mr. Cotton has out of Brightman, on Rev. 4.3. God is here resembled
(says he) by three precious stones, holding forth the three Persons in
Trinity. A Jasper having (as they say) a white Circle round about it,
representing the Eternity of the Father. A Sardine stone of a fleshly color,
representing Jesus Christ, who took our flesh upon him. An Emrald, being of a
green color, refreshing the eyes of them that look upon it, representing the
Spirit, who is (as the Rainbow) a token of fair weather, and is a comfortable
refresher, wheresoever he comes.

There was Concilium augustissimum (as one terms it) a most Majestical meeting
of the three Persons in Trinity, about the work of man's Creation, Genesis 1.26.
And afterward about his Redemption, Mat. 3.16, 17. So likewise in the matter
of man's Sanctification, remarkable is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6,
7. where the diversities of gifts are said to be of the Spirit: The diversities
of Ministeries (whereby those gifts are administered) of the Lord; that is, of
Christ: And the diversities of operations (effected by the gifts and
Ministeries) to be of God; that is, the Father.

When Jesus was baptized, prayed, the Heavens were opened, and the Air
clarified by a new and glorious light; and the Holy Ghost in the manner of a
Dove, alighted upon his Sacred Head; and God the Father gave a voice from
Heaven, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. This was the
greatest meeting that ever was upon Earth, where the whole Cabinet of the
mysterious Trinity was opened and shown, as much as the capacities of our
present imperfections will permit. The second Person in the vail of Humanity;
the third, in the shape, or with the motion of a Dove: But the first kept his
primitive state; and as to the Israelites, He gave notice by way of Caution, Ye
saw no shape, but ye heard a voice: So now also, God the Father gave testimony
to his holy Son, and appeared only in a voice, without any visible
representment.

Also in the transfiguration of Christ, the Son stands, the Father by his
voice witnesses, and the Holy Ghost overshadows him in a Cloud, as before by a
Dove.

Now the pur-blind Progeny of Adam, being able to discern no clearer of the
Godhead, than he in the Gospel, which saw men walking like Trees; (O blindness
more than gross, not to see, or seeing, not to discern, when the Sun it self
lodges in his Zenith!) Therefore many have ransack't Nature, for Mediums to
persuade the Doctrine of the Trinity.

One tells us, That a Spring begets a River, and that from both are derived
smaller Brooks, all which make but one water. Another shows a Root, from which
rises a Body, and from thence Branches, yet all but one Tree.

Another, Dyonis. de divin. nomin 5.2.
the Trinity may be shadowed forth (though but darkly) by light; the Father
being as the body of light, the Son as the beams, and the Holy Ghost as the
splendor of both. Dionysius illustrateth it by the similitude of three
Candles, Dam^s^^ de fid. l. 1. c. 4.
enlightening one and the same Room. And Damascen of the Parelii, when there
appear as it were three, and yet it is but one Sun.

And thus as difficult as the thing is, Divines both Ancient and Modern, Vid.
Zanch. de tribus Elohim l. 8 c. 6.
have in their Writings brought many similitudes, and resemblances to express
it by. Amongst them all, this is one of the clearest, viz. The light of the
Sun, the light of the Moon, and the light of the Air; all which are for nature
and substance, one and the same light; and yet are they notwithstanding three
distinct lights too; Mr. Perkins on the Creed.
for the light of the Sun is of it self, and from no other; the light of the
Moon is from the Sun, and the light of the Air is from them both. So the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are all one simple, and undivided Godhead,
but yet three distinct Persons; the Father having the foundation of Personal
subsistence from himself, and from no other; the Son from the Father, of whom
he is eternally begotten; and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, from
both which he eternally proceeds.

And God said, let us make man in our Image, after our likeness. Holy, Holy,
Holy, Genesis 1.26. Isa. 6.3.
is the Lord of Hosts. Jesus went up straight way out of the water, the Spirit
of God descending like a Dove, lighted upon him; And lo, a voice from Heaven,
Mat. 3.16, 17.
saying, This is my Beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased. Jesus was
transfigured, Matthew. 17.2, 5.
a bright Cloud overshadowed them; and behold a voice out of the Cloud, etc.
Go, Matthew. 28.19.
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For he received from God the Father, honor and
glory, 2 Pet. 1.17.
when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory. 1 John 5.7.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the word, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one. De Christo.
THE second person in the glorious Trinity, is God the Son, Jesus Christ.

The Name Jesus, signifies a Savior, so he was called, before, at, Nomen Jesu
salutis ben ficium quod ab illo expectandum denotat.
and after his birth. A Savior, considering his Potency, able to save;
considering his Habit, proclaimed by the Angel at his Conception, he shall
save; or regard his Act, hence called Jesus at his Circumsion. Or look into his
Passion, where he was Victus and Victor, unloosing others, himself being bound;
giving life to others, losing his own; being crucified, slew Satan on the
Cross, and through death destroyed the Devil, the Author of destruction.



Abraham became righteous, and the Patriarchs, Apostles and Prophets entered
Heaven.















The Devils ordinary way of driving to despair, is, by showing a man his sin,
but not his Savior.

Joseph of Arimathea first begged the body of Jesus, and then laid it in a new
Sepulcher; so should we, and then lay him in a new heart.

If a man will have his Beloved, he must part with his Beloved; if he will have
his beloved Savior, he must part with his beloved sin.

Dulce nomen Jesus, In Cant. Sermon. 15.
says Bernard, Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilus in cord: Honey in the
mouth, melody in the ear, joy and exultation in the heart.

Melius mihi non esse, Medit. Cap. 39.
says Austin, quam sine Jesu esse: melius est non vivere, quam vivere sine
vita. I had rather be in Hell with Jesus, than in Heaven without Jesus, if it
were possible.

Joshua, which was a Type of Christ, has the same name with our Savior
Christ; yet in a diverse manner. Joshua was a Savior for them in temporal
things; Christ in spiritual and eternal things: He saved them from the
Canaanites, earthly enemies; Christ from sin, death, hell, and Satan, spiritual
enemies: He gave them a Land flowing with milk and honey in this World; Christ
gives us an everlasting habitation, a celestial Paradise in the World to come.

She shall bring forth a Son, Matthew. 1.21.
and thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their
sins. 1 These. 1.10.
Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. Neither is there salvation
in any other; Acts 4.12.
for there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved. Let it be here noted, that the very name [Jesuite] savoureth of
blasphemous arrogance. One of their own gives the reason; because our Savior
has communicated unto us the thing signified by the name Christ, but not by
the name Jesus.

But we see also their nature, in their 1. Craft, and 2. Cruelty.




Besides, how have they formerly for a long time, shut or rolled up the Book of
the holy Scriptures, yea, and cast them under foot? using in the mean time the
Fathers, Scholasticks, In prima regula tradunt, Papae Romani vocem no^ aliter
ac Christi Sermonem audiendam esse.
Sententiaries, Canonists, Legends, etc. And since this Book of God began again
to be opened, how have they labored to roll it up again? questioning the
Authority thereof, not accounting the same to be Divine, but as it is confirmed
by the judgment of the Church, that is, of the pope. For thus they expressly
write. That in it there is so much of the Deity, as the Popes Church attributes
unto it, neither ought God to be believed, but because of the Church.



They say their weapons are prayers and tears, but see the contrary; The truth
is, they are the Popes Bloodhounds, Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas.
trusting more to the prey, than to their prayers. They strive under pretense
of long prayers, and dissembled sanctity (which is double iniquity) to subdue
all to the Pope, and the Pope to themselves.

These shall receive the greater damnation. Matthew. 23.14.


The name Christ signifies Anointed; the oil wherewith he was anointed, is
called the oil of gladness: Kimchi.
Quia totus mundus in unctione Christi and ejus missione laetabitur, because
the whole World should be cheared up, by the Unction and Mission of Messiah. He
received the Spirit without measure, that of his fullness we might all receive,
and grace for grace, righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

That none of any Degree, Calling, Condition, or Country, are excluded from
partaking of Christ; it is well taken notice of, that the place of Christ's
Birth, was Domus publici juris; not a private House, but an Inn, which is open
for all Passengers; and that not in a Chamber, but the Stable, which is the
commonest place of the Inn. Besides, the Superscription upon his Cross, was
written in Hebrew, Greek, Cyril. Theoph.
and Latin, the three languages that were best known, and most used all the
World over. Moreover, the Cross it self was erected not within the City, but
without the Gate; to intimate (says Leo) Vt Crux Christi non Templi effet Ara,
Leo.
sed Mundi; That it was not an Altar of the Temple, but the World. However,
this we are sure is Gods Truth, That there is neither Jew nor Greek; there is
neither bond nor free; there is neither male nor female; but all are one in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28.
Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. 1. Via in Exemplo. Bern.
2. Veritas in Promisso. 3. Vita in Praemio.


Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Hebr. 13.8.

idem, Objective; for he that was yesterday shadowed in the Law, is to day
showed in the Gospel; one Christ crucified, being the center of the Bibles
circumference.

Subjective, the same in his Attributes, Power and Authority; being always the
Lord of his people, and Shepherd of his Flock.

Effective, the same in his goodness and grace; for he who was yesterday the
God of Salvation, is to day, and shall be for ever Jesus, a Savior.

Christ is our privileged place, where our souls cannot be arrested.
Themistocles being out of favor with Philip of Macedon, took up in his arms
his son Alexander, beseeching him for his sake to accept him. Let us take in
the Arms of our faith the holy Child Jesus, and beseech the Father for his sake
to accept us.

Ignis, crux, bestiae, confractio ossium, membrorum divulsio, Ignatius.
and totius corporis contritio, and toto Tormenta Diaboli in me veniant, dum
Christo fruar.

John Lambert lifting up his hands and fingers flaming with fire, Act. and Mon.
cried to the people, None but Christ, none but Christ! Now am I dressed like a
true Soldier of Christ, (said Filmer, Martyr) by whose merits only, I trust
this day to enter into his joy.

I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ. John 4.25. Isa. 61.1.
Psalm. 45.7. Acts 10.38.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to
preach good tidings unto the meek, etc. God, thy God, has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Him has God anointed with the Holy
Ghost, and with power. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ, Phil. 3.7.
-- That I may win him, and be found in him. And now let it be observed, That
although none may be called Jesuits of Jesus, because there is no Savior
beside him; yet we are called Christians of Christ, because we are anointed as
he was.

Christ has a threefold Title to Christians souls. 1. Jure Creationis, by
Right of Creation, Genesis 2.7. 2. Merito Redemptionis, Bern.
by Merit of Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. 3. Dono Patris, by the Fathers Gift, John
17.6, 7, 9.


As the Needle of a Dy^l removed from his Point, never leaves his quivering
motion, till it settles it self in the just place it always stands in; so
fares it with a Christian in this World; nothing can so charm him, but he will
mind his Savior; all that put him out of the quest of Heaven, are but
disturbances; though the profits, pleasures, etc. of this life may shuffle him
out of his usual course, yet he wavers up and down in trouble like
quicksilver, and never is quiet, till he return to his wonted life and motion
toward happiness, where he sets down his rest, expecting the reality of a
Crown of endless glory.

Quid qui Christo omnino non credit, 1. Cypr.
appellatur Christianus? Pharisaei tibi magis congruit nomen.

A Christian commits no sin without horrible sacrilege; sin committed by a
Pagan, is the Laws transgression, to be punished by death; but the same
committed by a Christian, is not only a sin, but a sacrilegious sin of highest
degree. Belshazzars sins were fully heightened, when he abused the holy vessels;
to have drunk intemporately for the honor of his Idols, in any vessel, was a
fearful sin; but to do it in vessels dedicated to the honor of the true God,
was a double sin.

But this sacrilege to thine who art a Christian, is but small; he abused but
vessels of gold and silver, but thou the Temple of God, by thy sin and loose
living. That which by Baptism was marked and sealed to an holy use, thou
turnest to the service of Satan: By Profession a Christian, by Conversation a
Satanist: Judas-like, thou kissest Christ with thy mouth, and with thy hand
betrayest him.

Christiani hominis est, Agrippa.
operari charitatem, loqui veritatem.

That good Christian Eusebius, to all questions demanded of him, answered, He
was a Christian; to show that in all places, callings and things, we ought to
show our selves Christians.

The Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. Acts 11.26. Phil. 2.5.
1 John. 2.6.
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. We ought also to walk
even as Christ walked. Of the Personal Union.
AMong other Titles of our Blessed Savior, Unio importat conjunctionem
aliquorum in aliquo uno. Aquinas.
he is called Emmanuel, well deserving that Name, for he has done what the
same imports; as being one by whom God would dwell with us, united to our
nature by Incarnation, as well as to our persons by Reconciliation.

The Personal Union is wonderful and unsearchable; the manner whereof is to be
believed, not discussed; admired, not pried into: Personal it is, yet not of
persons; Athanas.
of natures, and yet not natural. As a soul and body are one man, so God and
man are one person. And as every Believer that is born of God, remains the same
entire person that he was before, receiving nevertheless in him a Divine
Nature, which before he had not; so Immanuel, continuing the same perfect
person, which he had been from Eternity; assumeth nevertheless a humane nature,
which before he had not, to be born within his person for ever.

This is our Ladder of Ascension to God, faith first lays hold upon Christ as
a man, and thereby, as by a mean, makes way to God, and embraces the Godhead,
which is of itself a consuming fire.

And whereas sin is a partition wall of our own making, denying us access; God
is now with us: And in Christ, we have boldness, and access with confidence by
the faith of him. Christ's humanity serves as a Skreen to save us from those
everlasting burnings; and as a Conduit to derive upon us from the Godhead, all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places.

Behold, Matthew. 1.23.
a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call
his Name Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is, God with us. Of Christ the
Mediator.
THere is an old Covenant and a new, the old Covenant was this, Hoc sac, and
vive, Mediator est, qai se medium interponit inter parts dissidentes, and
alios aliis reconciliat.
Do this and live; And cursed is he that continues not in all things written
in the book of the Law, to do them; This was a sour Covenant. The new Covenant
is, Creed in me, and vive, Believe in Christ and live; This a sweet Covenant.
Moses was the Mediator of the Law, by his hands the two Tables of the Law were
transmitted to the people: But Christ is the Mediator of the Gospel, the which
he has established with his own blood.

The Heretics called Melchisideciani made Melchizedec our Mediator. Epiphan.
contr. haeret. l. 2. Tom. 1.
Some Papists will have all the Angels and Saints in heaven, to be our
Mediators together with Christ. Their Champion freely confesses, that Christ
is our Mediator, Aquin. p. 3. q. 26. art. 1.
Simpliciter and perfective: yet the Angels and Saints also must be our
Mediators, dispositive and ministerialiter. They are much beholden to this
distinction of principal and ministerial. Some unskilful Physicians give one
drink or one medicine for all diseases: so these men apply this distinction of
Principal and Ministerial, to salve up all soars among them. Christ is the
chief Head of the Church, the Pope is a ministerial head under him. So Christ
is the Principal Mediator, Angels and Saints are Ministerial. Yet if a woman
should hear, she had a chief husband, and a ministerial husband, she could
hardly endure it. They might as well say, there is one principal God, but many
ministerial Gods under him; as to say, there is one chief Mediator, and many
ministerial.

The Mediator between God and man, Confess. l. 10. cap.
(says Austin) must be both God and man: He must have Aliquid simile Deo, and
aliquid simile hominibus; that he may mediate between them both. If he were
only man, he could not go to God; if he were only God, he could not go to man.

As for Angels, they be neither God nor man: therefore they cannot be our
Mediators. As for the Saints in Heaven, they be half-men; they have souls, but
as yet they have no bodies, and they are not God, therefore they cannot be our
Mediators. Nay, properly to speak, the Holy Ghost, the third person in the
glorious Trinity, cannot be our Mediator: for though he be God, yet he is not
man; much less can the Angels or Saints be our Mediators.

Besides, the Mediator of the New Covenant, has established the Covenant with
his blood. It is Christ alone, that by the blood of his cross, has set at
peace all things in heaven and in earth. And no Testament is of force, without
the death of the Testatour. Let them prove that any died for us besides Christ,
and then we will acknowledge other Mediators. As he trod the Wine Press
alone, so he is Mediator alone: It is Sacrilege to adjoyn others to him.
Therefore as he took the pains alone, so let him have the honor alone.

Moreover, Christ is Mediator, not only of Redemption, (as the Papists grant)
but of Intercession also, (of which in due place.) He being so near us in the
matter of his Incarnation, will never be strange to us in the business of
Intercession.

Christ then being the sole Mediator, Let us not cry with those Idolaters, O
Baal, hear us: But ask the Father in the Sons name, and say, O Christ, hear us.
Who prevails more with the King, than the Kings Son? Let us not leave the Son,
and go to Servants.

For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, 1 Timothy 2.5.
the man Christ Jesus. Of Christ's Kingly Office.
THE name [Christ] does belong to our Savior, by special excellency, he being
(as none else ever was) a King, a Priest, and a Prophet.

The works of Christ's Mediation, Dr. Reynolds.
were of two sorts, 1. Opera Ministerij, works of service and ministry; for he
took upon himself the form of a servant, and was a Minister of the
Circumcision. 2. Opera potestatis, works of Authority and Government in the
world.


We must here again distinguish (says that reverend Author) between Regnum
natural, Christ's natural Kingdom, which belongs to him as God coessential, and
coeternal with the Father: and Regnum Oecononicum, his Dispensatory Kingdom, as
he is Christ the Mediator, which was his, not by Nature, but by Donation and
Unction from his Father, that he might be the Head of his Church, a Prince of
Peace, and a King of Righteousness unto his People. In which respect, he had
conferred upon him all such meet qualifications, as might fit him for the
dispensation of this Kingdom. For,

God prepared him a Body, Heb. 10 5.
or a Humane nature.

Apollinaris did imagine. Col. 2.9.
And besides, by the grace of Personal Union, caused the Godhead to dwell
bodily in him.

Plenitudo vasis, and fontis. Joh. 3.34.
not with the fullness of a vessel, such as the Saints had, a fullness for
themselves only; But a fullness without measure, which has a sufficient
sufficiency and redundancy for the whole Church.

This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.

He has given him a Scepter of righteousness, Psa. 45.6. Rev. 1.16. Psalm. 2.9.
and has put a sword in his mouth, and a rod of Iron in his hand.

2 Cor. 5.20.
Which shows, that Ministers are Sacred persons, not to be violated upon pain
of Gods heavy displeasure. Do my Prophets no harm.

Psalm. 2.8. Joh. 17.6.
even to the uttermost parts of the earth, for the territories of his Kingdom.
The Object of Christ's Kingdom of Grace, are all Nations.

Romans 3.27.
A power to make Laws, the law of faith: To expound Laws, as the Moral Law: And
to abrogate Laws, as the Law of Ordinances.

Joh. 5.27. Luke 19.^7.


Mat. 9 6. Joh. 20.23.


Whence we may note, That Christ's Kingdom belongs to him, not by usurpation,
intrusion or violence; but legally, by order, decree, and investiture from his
Father. And as he came rightly by it, so also his government is not with
rigor, but righteousness.

Therefore let us submit to his government; and though we be within the Walls
of the Church, yet let us not flatter our selves in our sins; thinking for all
this that Christ will be merciful unto us; for his Scepter is a Scepter of
righteousness, he must punish sin wheresoever he finds it.

Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. Tell ye the daughter of
Sion, Psa. 2.6. Mat. 21.4. Psalm. 2.12.
Behold, thy King comes unto thee. Kiss the Son. Of Christ's Priestly Office
Sacerdos: sacer dux; docens, orans, offerens. Q. habens sacram dotem.
Not a name of reproach and contempt, but of exceeding great honor in the book
of God.

There was a worthy and glorious Priesthood in time of the Law: there was an
high priest in goodly apparel, clothed with a white linen Ephod, that had a
Miter on his head, a fair breast plate on his breast, on which was written the
names of the twelve Tribes of Israel: He went into the Sanctum Sanctorum once a
year, and offered up the prayers of the people. Besides him there were a great
number of Priests and Levites, throughout all the towns and Cities of Israel:
they offered the sacrifices of the people, and made atonement for them before
the Lord: they taught the people, and instructed them in the ways of the Lord.

Yet all these are nothing to our Savior Christ: he excells them as much as
the Sun does the Stars, or the body the shadow. They were all but shadows of
him, he is the true High Priest. They were but men, he is God and man: they
sinful, he without sin: they mortal, he immortal: their sacrifices were but
figures of his sacrifice: the blood of Lambs, Goats offered by them took away
no sin; his blood purges us from all sin: they received tithes of their
brethren; but they themselves paid tithes to Christ: they prayed for the people
in the Temple; Christ prays for us in heaven.

Wherein we may behold the supereminent dignity of Christ his Priesthood. It
cannot be denied, but that Aarons Priesthood was most glorious; As the
Psalmist speaks of the Church, many glorious things are recorded of it. There
was a costly Tabernacle, a sumptuous Temple, the wonder of the world, there was
an admirable Altar, many oblations and sacrifices, there were sundry Sabbaths
and new Moons, diverse festival days, the feast of unleavened bread, of the
blowing of Trumpets, of Tabernacles, of Dedication, etc. Which were kept with
wonderful solemnity; there were many washings and purgings for the clensing of
the people.

Therefore let us magnify God for this our high priest, by whom we have an
entrance into the Kingdom of heaven. The high Priest went into the Holy of
Holies himself, but he carried none of the people with him, they stood without:
Our highPriest is not only gone into heaven himself, but he has also brought
us thither. That high priest offered Bulls, Calves, Lambs for the sins of the
people; this high priest offered himself for us all.

Therefore let us honor and reverence this our high priest; yea, let us
subject our selves to him in all things, which has made us Kings and Priests
to God his Father, that we may reign with him for ever, and ever.

The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, Psalm.
110.4.
after the order of Melchisedeck. For such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens. Hebr. 7.26, 27.
Who needs not daily as those Highpriests to offer up sacrifice first for
his own sins, and then for the peoples: for this he did once, when he offered
up himself. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God; let us hold fast our profession. Heb. 4.14,
16.
And let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. Of Christ's Prophetical Office.
Christ is said to be a Prophet like unto Moses; that is, both in the
Participation of nature, and of office: A true man, and a true Mediator:
Similes they are, but not Pares: Christ being worthy of more glory than Moses.

Christ is a Prophet, and more than a Prophet, the Arch-Prophet, to whom Moses
and all must vail bonnet.

Let our mind then be wholly fixed on Christ, consider that in him all the
treasures of wisdom lie hid: he is a rich and plentiful storehouse, in whom we
may find all the pearls and jewels of wholesome doctrine: In him there is
salvation, and in no other, therefore all other teachers set aside, listen to
him.

When the Judge of an Assizes gives the charge, all that be present, especially
they of the grand Inquest, consider seriously what is spoken: Christ Jesus the
Judge of the whole world, gives a charge by his Ministry. When the King makes
a Speech in Parliament, the whole House considers earnestly what he says:
Christ Jesus the King of kings speaks to us in the Ministry of the Word. The
Queen of Sheba observed Solomon well: Behold, here is a greater than Solomon,
therefore let us diligently consider him.

Besides, the matters which this great Prophet declares are of great moment,
touching the eternal salvation of our souls. If one should talk to us of gold
or silver, we would be attentive; Christ speaks to us of that which surpasses
all the riches in the world; what madmen are we, that regard him no more?

But alas! since the Fall, every man has Principium lasum, his brain-pan
cracked, as to heavenly things; neither can he recover, till Christ open his
eyes and give him light?

Moses truly said unto the Fathers, Act 3.22. Quinque dicuntur de Deo,
Paternitas, in nascibilitas, filiatio, proc ssio and communis spiratio. Aug.
Paternitas and innascibilitas convenient solum modo Patri; Filiatio tantum modo
Filio; Spi^it^i vero Sancto processio: Communis Spira^io Patri and filio
respectu Spiritus Sancti.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like
unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever I shall say unto you. De
Spiritu Sancto.
THE Holy Ghost is the third Person in Trinity, proceeding from the Father and
the Son; being himself most holy, and the worker of holiness in all Angels and
good men.

He is distinct from the Father and the Son, equal unto the Father and the Son,
and the same God in Nature and Essence with the Father and the Son, though not
the same person.

He is called The Spirit. The Holy Spirit.






The Holy Ghost is oft-times in Scripture signified by Fire. Water.


We shall find it (according to the nature of fire) 1. To illighten us, 1. Mat.
3.11. Isa. 4.4.
as the least spark of fire lightens it self at least, and may be seen in the
greatest darkness. 2. To enliven and revive us, fire is the most active of all
other elements, as having much form, little matter: so whatsoever is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit; that is, nimble and active, full of life and motion.

This fire of the Spirit must be fetched from heaven, Lumen de lumine, from the
Father of lights, who gives his Spirit to them that ask it.

By water, because of its clensing, cooling, 2. Ezekiel. 36.25. Joh. 3.5.
refreshing and fructifying virtue and quality. Indeed many are washed with the
water of baptism, that are not washed with this water: Simon Magus, of whom it
is said, Font quidem lotus, sed non in pectore mundus.

Let us ever say with the woman of Samaria (But with more sensibleness than she
did) Lord, ever give us of this water: then shall we be clean, and fit for the
holy Jerusalem.

He is said to proceed from the Father and the Son, Joh. 15.26.
to show the Essence and Nature that he is of: for as the spirit of man must
needs be truly of man's nature, and is the most formal and essential part of
man: So, and much more, it must be thought of the Spirit of God, upon whom no
composition falls. And this in effect is the Apostles Argument, What man
knows the things of a man, 2 Cor. 2.11.
save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no
man, but the Spirit of God. That is, none knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God who is in him, and of his own Essence and Nature.

That was a sweet promise, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. Joel 2.28.
The best thing upon the basest. What can God do more for his people? This is
to give them all good things in one, so many are the benefits we receive by the
Spirit. Ephesians. 5.9.


Delicata res est Spiritus Dei, therefore we must observe and obey his motions:
We should lay our selves (as instruments) open to the Spirits touch, submitting
to his discipline as Paul did, who said, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me, Gal. 2.20.
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Which requires a great deal of
self-denial.

Serpents (they say) can do no hurt in water; no more can that old Serpent
where the holy Spirit dwells.

This is the Instructor which teaches us, the Spirit of life which quickens
us, the Advocate which speaks in us, the Comforter which relieves us, and the
everlasting Fountain and Spirit of truth, from whom all truth and celestial
riches do flow unto us.

Your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 7.11. Luke 11.13. Ephesians. 4 ^^.
will give good things to them that ask him. Your heavenly Father will give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption. De Sacra Scriptura.
I Will not stand to search how ancient Writing is, Exodus 24.
wherein some have lost time and labor. I know that many do make God the first
immediate Author of it, and do affirm, that the first Scripture that ever was,
was Gods writing of the Law in two Tables. But because we find that Moses wrote
all the Word of the Lord, and Josephus does report a tradition of the Hebrews
for writing and graving before the flood; I hold it probable that both
Scripture and Sculpture are as ancient as the Old World. However we see the
care that God has taken for the publishing of his Will to the Church, which he
has done both sufficiently, that we need no more knowledge for eternal life,
than what is contained in Scripture; and so clearly, that the Word gives
understanding to the simple.

Scripture is twofold, 1. Inward, called Scriptura Cordis. 2. Outward, called
Scriptura Testimonij.


Jer. 31.33. Hebr. 8.10. 2 Cor. 3.3.

Moses was the first writer in the world, as may be proved by the Evangelist,
Luke 24.27.

Hence we conclude, that our Religion grounded in these writings is the old
Religion, even as old as the day of man's creation and fall, whereas all other
Religions are but of yesterday; nay, the gods themselves worshipped by Heathens
and Turks, were long after the time of Abraham.

There is no Question more worthy satisfaction in Divinity, App^llatur ab
Arminio Instrumentum Religio it is.
than that which enquireth into the Authority of Scripture; 1. For all Religion
depends upon it, and wavering in this principle opens a wide door to beastly
Epicurism, Devilish Atheism, and all contempt of Religion and Justice. 2. If
the heart be not persuaded that the Scriptures be of God, it will easily reject
hearing, reading, practice, and all the means of salvation. 3. The doubting of
this cutteth off all faith, Romans 14.23.
and the comfort and strength of faith; for a man must first believe Gods Word
to be true, Titubabit sides, si Scripturarum vacillat authoritas. Aug.
before he can believe it to be true to him; and what comfort in temptation,
without the Sword of the Spirit? or what peace in terror of Conscience without
the Word, which is the Well of salvation? 4. The doubting of this cuts off all
self-denial, mortification and sound repentance; for who will abandon his
carnal delights and pleasures, and undertake the strict course of godliness,
that does doubt whether the Scriptures be the Word of God or not?

But it is clear that the Scriptures are the Word of God. 1. The Lord
professes them to be his own words, Isa. 55.11. Mic. 2.7.2. The Prophets begin
with the Word of the Lord, and the Apostles, 1 Cor. 11.23.3. The matter of the
Scriptures, they treat of the great works of the eternal God, as Creation,
Providence, justice and mercy both temporal and eternal, etc. Speaking of great
mysteries, above the reach of humane wisdom; yea, of things contrary to natural
wisdom. Searching the heart, and discovering the thoughts, Hebr. 4.12. And
containing most ample and large promises of a blessed and eternal happiness by
faith in the Messiah; Amongst us, Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury,
first divided the Bible into Chapters, in such sort as we now account them:
Robert Stephens into Verses: Goodw. Catal. page 109. But not much commended by
Scultetus, who says. Imperitissime plerunque dissecans.
which Covenant none could make or can make good, but only God himself, blessed
for ever. 4. Concerning the Instruments and penmen of Scripture; Their
extraordinary calling, infallible assistance, 1 Pet. 1.11. unblameable
conversation, 2 Pet. 2.21. sincerity and uprightness in writing, sparing
neither others, nor themselves; their style, together with their joint-consent
and harmony, shows they were guided by one and the same Spirit of God. 5. The
divine properties of the Scriptures, viz. Antiquity, admirable perfection,
Psalm. 19.2 Tim. 3.17. Certainty of the truth; the strong and perpetual
opposition of the Devil and the wicked world against them, above all writings,
Jerem. 36.23. And Gods powerful and watchful preservation of them
notwithstanding, 2 Chronicles. 34.15. Jerem. 36.28. and in history at large: in all
which divine properties, the Scriptures carry express footsteps of God
himself, above all the writings in the world. 6. The powerful effects of the
Scriptures; for by them men are led unto God, Joh. 1.8. they do directly work
upon the spirits and souls of men in all their faculties, Act. 26.18. Heb.
4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4. They carry a mighty power to convert and save, Ps. 19. Romans
1.16. 2 Timothy 1.10. And where it converteth not, it is powerful to convince,
harden, confound and secretly to slay, not in it self, but by accident, 2 Cor.
2.15, 16, etc. Now whatsoever carries with it such a divine power and
efficacy, must needs be from God. 7. The Scriptures have many strong
Testimonies: 1. The whole Church of God has ever witnessed to them. 2.
Innumerable Martyrs have sealed the truth with their blood, Rev. 12.11.3.
Heathens and Gentiles have borrowed a number of Stories out of the Scriptures,
which argues that they were in their consciences convinced of the truth and
authority of them. 4. The sensible experience of believers, who have found the
divine effects of the Word in themselves, John 9.25. 5. The testimony of Gods
blessed Spirit (without which all other persuasions are flat and fruitless)
confirming the truth which himself has inspired in every believing heart. Add
unto all, how every part of Scripture se^teth up and magnifieth the true God,
it is all from him, and therefore it is all for him.

This serves therefore to the eviction of the Jew, that asks for signs; In
sacra Scriptura non solum bonitas est, quod praecipitur; and faelic^ tas quod
promittitur; sed etiam veritas est, quod dicitur. Hugo.
vanquishing of Dives, that would send the dead; condemning of Antichrist, that
requires miracles; and quelling of the Anabaptist, that expects revelations.

Dixit Julianus Apostata, vidi, legi, contempsi; cui Basilius, vidisti,
legisti, non intellexisti; si intellexisses, non contempsisses.

Authoritas and oertitudo Scripturae consistit, 1. In narrationis solius
veracitat^, ejusque enuntiatione, de rebus praeteritis, praesentibus and
futuris. 2. In potestate mandatorum and prohibitionum. Hinc pendet a Deo
Authore praecipuo, tum quia verax, citra falsitatis suspicionem; and quia
potestatem habet irrefragabilem.

All the Scriptures teach nothing else (says Augustine) but that we must love
our Neighbor for God, and God for himself. Nihil praecipit nisi charitatem,
Aug.
nec culpat nisi cupiditatem, It forbids nothing but lust, it enjoins nothing
but love; for without love there is no faith, and without faith all our
righteousness is sin.

Scriptura nos obligat 1. Ad credendum. 2. Ad obediendum.


Haec obligatio nulla externa authoritate auferri potest. The Scriptures are
verba vivenda, purposely composed to promote piety in the world.

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, 2 Timothy 3.16. Romans 15.9. Mat. 22.29. Joh. 5.39. Act. 18.24.
for correction, for instruction in righteousness. For whatsoever things were
Written aforetime, Were Written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me. Mighty in the Scriptures. Of the old
and new Testament.
Some Atheistical spirits would make the holy Bible a Babble, but let such take
heed it prove not to them a Babel, their confusion.

Major fuit cura Caesari libellorum quam Purpurae. Julius Caesar being forced
to swim for his life, held his Commentaries in one hand above water, and swam
to land with the other. How infinitely more are we to value this Book of books,
being the souls Promptuary.

The whole Bible is distributed into the old and new Testament. In the old
Testament, we have the Gospel veiled, under promises, prophecies and Types. But
in the Books of the new Testament, we have the Gospel revealed; the Lord
delineating to us the New Covenant of Grace in Christ, unveiled, and actually
exhibited and performed; Christ being the body and substance of all those
ancient types and shadows.

Gods Covenant with man in Christ, is represented to us in holy Scripture
principally two ways;

the Covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.12. and covenants, because of the several
publications of the Covenant, with more and more Augmentations, in several
points or Periods of time. Thus the Covenant is made known in all the books of
Scripture, before Christ's coming; called the old Testament or Covenant, Heb.
8.13.2 Cor. 3.14.

the new Covenant, or the new Testament, Heb. 8.8. Mat. 26.28. Heb. 9.15.

The new Testament is better than the old, not in regard of the substance, the
substance of both is one, which is Christ Jesus; but in respect of diverse
circumstances: For, 1. The Old Testament did but shadow out things to come: the
New Testament makes a gift and exhibition of them. Col. 2.17.
So that as the body is better than the shadow; so is the New Testament than
the Old. 2. That was dark and obscure, this plain and perspicuous. 3. This has
sewer, more lively and easy Sacraments. 4. That was temporal, and therefore
not ratified with an Oath; this is eternal, and lasts for ever: for the which
cause it was confirmed with an Oath. 5. The Mediator or Surety of that was
Moses; the Surety of this is Christ.

In comparison then with the state of the Old Testament, how much more obliged
are we to God, who live in the times of the New, in respect of the clear
Revelation of Grace and Life untous? The Prophets of the Old Testament, they
were as a sound; John Baptist, Christ's immediate forerunner, was a voice, he
is called so; but it is Christ, and he only who is the Word, distinctly and
fully signifying to us the Will of God concerning our salvation. God spoke with
Moses at the door of the Tabernacle, but now he leads his Spouse into the
Presence Chamber: The Old Testament-Christians saw through a veil, but now the
Curtain is drawn; with them it was the dawning of the day, with us it is full
Noon: Oh that we would praise the Lord for his inestimable goodness to us, upon
whom the glorious light of the Gospel shines.

The vail remains untaken away, 2 Cor. 3.14, 18 Mat. 13.16, 17
in reading of the Old Testament. But we all, with open face behold as in a
glass the glory of the Lord. Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your
ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you, That many Prophets, and
righteous men, have desired to see those things Which ye see, and have not seen
them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. Of
Scripture-Interpretation.
ROgo, Greg. Ratio divina in medulla non in supersicie. Tert.
non verbum ex verbo, sed sensum ex sensu transferte; quia plerunque dum
propriet^s verborum attenditur, sensuum virtus amittitur. Greg. Epist. ad
Aristobolum.

That is a false Exposition, which is 1. Praeter fundamentum veritatis, when it
agrees not with the place treated of, but is (...), aliena a proposito. 2.
Prater fundamentum salutiis, when it is not only beside the verity, but beside
the foundation Christ. 3. Circa fundamentum salutis, when it weakneth the
foundation. 4. Contra fundamentum salutis, when it raseth the foundation, not
keeping to the head Christ.


True interpretation, is that which is super fundamentum, upon the foundation.
Hence the Jewish Doctors were called (...) builders, Aedificantes.
because they were bound to build upon the foundation.

That there are no real (though seeming) contradictions, Epiphan.
Epiphanius does illustrate by this comparison. When a man is drawing water out
of a deep Well, with two vessels of a different metal; the water (if a man look
into the Well as it is coming up) will seem to be of a different color; but as
it comes nearer and nearer to him, the diversity of colors vanishes, and the
water in both vessels appears to be of one color; and when we taste it, is
has the same relish. So although at first sight there may seem to be some
contradiction in the holy Scriptures, yet when we better consider of it, we
shall find no contrariety at all, but a perfect harmony.

The Scriptures are difficult, 1. In respect of seeming Contradictions. 2.
Because clothed with dark Phrases, Parables, etc. 3. Because of Prophecies to
come, not yet fulfilled. 4. Because of some places in the Old Testament quoted
in the New, either not to be found, or not in that sense. 5. Because of
different acceptations of one and the same word.


The reason of this obscurity is, 1. To humble proud man, that thinks to know
Omne scibile. 2. To put a difference between Earth and Heaven. 3. To make us
painful. 4. To show what need we have of the Ministry. Act. 8.30, 31.
No man is (...) in heavenly literature: Well says one, He that here is
Scholar to himself, has a Fool to his Master.


Helps to understand the Scripture, 1. Pray. 2. Read reverently. 3. Practice
what we know.


One said, The way to understand the difficulty in Paul's Epistle to the Romans,
Nunquam Pauli sensum ingredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberis. Bern.
ad cap. 12. was to practice the plain precepts, from thence usque ad finem.

It is said, that Origin was the first that wrote Commentaries upon the holy
Scripture.

The Inditer of Scripture, is the best Expositor thereof; for he knows four
things, which no man attains to know: Viz. 1. The mysteries of Heaven. 2. The
perfection of the Laws of Nature. 3. The secrets of the heart of man. 4. The
future succession of Ages. 2 Pet. 1.20.



No prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation.

Of Gods Foreknowledge, and Decree.
Praescientia.
NOn est causa futurorum eventuum: Pras^i^ntia Dei est co^^oscitiva, non
c^^sa^iv^ Orig.
Pro hoc doctissime and satis ample argumentatur Origin. In Genes.

Prescience or Foreknowledge in God, is to be considered Largely, or Strictly.


In the former sense, it notes the whole act of Preordination; in the latter,
the Knowledge of God preceding in order the appointment to the end.

And thus by the Schoolmen it is distributed into Absolute, and Special.


The first is that, by which God from eternity does know all things simply and
absolutely. The latter is that, by which God not only knows the Elect, as he
knows other things; but acknowledges them for his, and loves them above all
others: This is called the Knowledge of approbation.

Consider it now in the former sense, that is, as absolute Foreknowledge; And
there is difference between Providence, Predestination and Prescience: for,
Providence reaches to all that God would do; Predestination only to the
counsel of God about reasonable creatures; but Prescience reaches unto all
things, to be done either by God or any other, and so to Sins.

Now we are not able to express the manner of this divine knowledge, unless it
be by way of negation, that is, by denying to God those ways of knowledge,
which are in the creatures, and do note imperfection. For God does not know
things, 1. By sense; These things are spoken of God metaphorically, or by an
Anthropopathy. 2. Nor by opinion or conjecture; for that is neither certain nor
evident. 3. Nor by faith; for that comes by relation and report of others. 4.
Nor by Art; for that must be by defining, dividing, compounding, comparing,
reasoning, etc. 5. Nor successively; for God knows all things in one view, and
not one after another. 6. But by his Essence, by a way more excellent above all
Men and Angels; by a knowledge most true, certain, evident and perfect.

Produce your cause, Isa. 41.21, 22, 23.
says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob. Let
them bring them forth, and show us what shall happen: let them show the former
things What they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of
them, Isa. 42.9.
or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to come hereafter,
that we may know that ye are gods* Behold, the former things are come to pass,
and now things do I declare: before they spring forth, I tell you of them.
Decretum.
Gods Decree is both unsearchable and inevitable, Zech. 6. Divi^um confilium
d^m devitatur, impletur. Greg.
compared to mountains of brass, which the Poets hammered at in their
Inel^ctabile fatum, as they called it.

Gods decrees lie hid, till they come to execution: They run as a river
underground, till they break out and show themselves. Only when he has once
signified his will, then we understand it, which before lay hid from us; that
is, (to use tho Prophets phrase) when the chariots come out from between the
mountains of brass, when the event declares what was the immutable Decree of
God.

The Decree of God, is so far from calling us off from, that it obliges us to
the use of all due means.

Hominum excusationes sunt Dei tentationes.
I will not take physic not use medicines? When Satan tempted Christ to throw
himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, he answers, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God.

depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.
which says, The foundation of God stands sure, and he knows who are his.
It Is as much our duty to give all diligence to make our calling and election
sure, as it is to believe that the election and calling of God are sure.

It is our part to say Amen to Gods Amen, and to put our Fiat and Placet to
his; saying in every thing, The will of the Lord be done.

Thy judgments are a great deep. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever,
Psalm. 36 6. Psalm. 33.11.
the thoughts of his heart to all generations. De Creatione.
WHat God did, or how be employed himself before the Creation, is a Sea,
Creati^ est acti^ Dei exterua, qua in principle tempor^^, sex dierum spatl^,
mundum produxit sole voluntatis suae imperio, ad nominis sui gloriam.
Wendelinus. Picus Mirand.
over which no ship has sailed; a Mine, into which no spade has deived; an
Abyss, into which no bucket has dived. Our sight is too tender to behold this
Sun.

Wisely and well said that Italian: Philosophy seeks after truth; Divinity
only finds it; Religion improves it.

Whatever therefore the Chaldaean and Egyptian Astronomers, or some other
natural Philosophers, have fancied of the Worlds eternity, or at least for the
first matter of it to be coeternal with the Creator: We will look upon it as an
error repugnant both to true Religion and right reason; and will take the truth
which is contrary to it (though not for a Maxim in Philosophy, yet) for an
Article of Faith.

Aufer Argumenta, ubi Fides quaritur: I believe, and that is enough, though I
cannot prove Principles.

Aristotle held, That the world was eternal: Plato, Plus apud me valent illa
quinque verba: In principio creavit Deus coelum and terram, quam omnia
Aristotelis cater^ru^mque Philosophorum argumenta, quibus docent mundum carere
initio. Eras. Epist. Pellicano. 1.19.
That God made the heavens and Angels, but the Angels made the bodies of men
and beasts; and that there was praeexistent matter, or materia prima. And thus
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. But [In principio creavit
Deus -- ] decides all doubts.

A Picture of Apelles making, would be in great request: The World is the
glorious workmanship of God Almighty, therefore to be admired of us all. We see
what a goodly coat the Earth has; Solomon in all his royalty was not so
clothed as it: We see the Sun in the Firmament, the Moon, the Stars, God
Almighty his candles; the Birds of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, Fishes of
the Sea. The Gentiles had no book but this to look upon, yet it left them
without excuse.

But though the World be a worthy work, yet let us not admire it too much: As
there was a time when it was set up; so there is a time when it shall be pulled
down. The Disciples stood gazing on the Temple, wondering at the workmanship of
it; but Christ told them, that one stone should not be left upon another: So
the time shall come (as S. Peter speaks) when the whole world shall pase away
with a noise. The World was made in time, has continued in time, and shall end
in time.

Here let me insert a word concerning that of the Apostle, Romans 8.20, 21. For
the creature was made subject to vanity -- But it shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption --

The creature is defiled by man's sin, and must therefore be purged by the fire
of the last day; a^ the vessels that held the sin-offering, were purged by the
sire of the Sanctuary.

The creature is said to be subject to vanity, Mr. Trapp.
and bondage of corruption: 1. As corruptible. 2. As teachers of men. 3. As
they are instruments of man's punishment. 4. As they are forced to serve wicked
men's turns and uses, who have no peace with the creature, and should have no
service from them.

The vanity of the creatures is not natural, Parr.
but accidental by sin; which though it be expiate by the blood of Christ, yet
the creature shall not be freed, till sin be taken out of the nature of things.
Sin has involved the creature under the curse, and makes it to groan: not the
sin of it, but of us.

The manner how the creature shall be restored, is difficult to determine.
There are three opinions:

Viator; and therefore that there shall be no need of it, when he shall be
Comprehensor.





The two first opinions seem unlikely; the third is most probable, if the
restoring be only to some singulars of all kinds. But it is not safe walking in
the dark, without a light. We know not how it shall be; but this we may be sure
of, that all things shall be most wisely and excellently brought to pass.

The loast and meanest of Gods creatures, serve to set forth the glory of him
their Creator, and may be in their places some way or other useful to man. For
(says Mr. Ramolds) as in Music, every prick, and quaver, and rest; do serve
in their order to commend the cunning of the Artist, and to delight the ear of
the hearer, as well as the more perfect notes; So the least and meanest of the
creatures, were at first filled with so much goodness, as might not only
declare the glory of God, but in their places minister content to the mind of
man.

In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Genesis 1.1. Heb. 11.3.
Psalm. 145.10.
Through faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so
that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear. All thy
works shall praise thee, O Lord. Of Light and Darkness.
Lux.
ESt qualitas corporis lucidi, qua and ipsum lucidum est, and alia illuminat,
agitque in ea, non est substantia sed accidens, seu affectio corporis.

Light was that bright quality immediately created by God, Calv.
and inherent in some meet subject. Or the first day, which God could make
without means, as Calvin well observes.

This Light was the first ornament of the visible world, and so is still of the
hidden man of the heart, the new creature. The first thing in Paul's commission,
was to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light; To dart such a
saving light into the soul, as might illighten both organ and object; So as
that they who erst were darkness, are now light in the Lord, and do preach
forth the praises of him, who has called them out of darkness, into his
mavelous light.

Light is not a body, nor (as some will have it) a substance, but an accident.
Non constar ex lumine (...); q^id sit nature laminis.
The truth is, no man can tell what it is, of any certainty: An admirable
creature it is, surely a divine and heavenly thing, than which nothing is more
desirable, nothing more profitable.

There are two excellent uses of Light: 1. To refresh men, by the sight of the
earth, and the things thereon. Truly, the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing
for the eyes to behold the Sun. 2. To set us upon serious employments. Man
goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening.


It is called the wings of the morning, because it diffuseth in an instant the
whole Welkin over.

In a word, The most noble among inanimate creatures, is Light.

Tenebrae.
As Light is the most noble among inanimate creatures, so the contrary to i^,
Darkness, is a defect and deformity.

The darkness mentioned, Genesis 1.2. which covered that confused heap, God
created not, for it was but the want of light.

The darkness in Egypt was extraordinary, Exodus 10. when God did so thicken the
Air, that they might take notice of it, not only by the eye, but by the hand;
when they could rather feel than see what was next unto them: so that for three
days space they stirred not from their places. So was also that in Judea, at
Christ's suffering, Mat. 27.45. This darkness some think was universal, not
only over all the land of Jury, but over the whole earth; and so the Text may
be rendered, (...). Tiberius, say they, was sensible of it at Rome. Dionysius
writes to Polycarpus, that they had it in Egypt. And it should seem that the
great Astronomer Ptolomy was so amazed at it, that he pronounced, Either Nature
now determines, or the God of Nature suffers. Sol non fert aspectum illum
miserandum, quem sine rubore and front Judaei irnident, says Aretius: Aret.
The Sun hid his head in a mantle of black, as ashamed to behold those base
indignities done to the Sun of righteousness, by the sons of men.

Darkness is either Natural, or Metaphorical.




Darkness used in a horrowed sense, serves in Scripture to represent a state,
1. Of ignorance in divine matters, 2. Luke 1.^^ Ephesians. 5^^.
when the mind is destitute of spiritual knowledge, unacquainted with the
mysteries of salvation. 2. Of misery, and that of all sorts, Temporal, Psalm.
107.10. Isa. 50.10. Mat. 22.13.
Spiritual, Eternal.
3. Of iniquity: In this respect it is, that the power of sin ruling in men's
hearts, is called The power of darkness. Col. 1.12. Ephesians. 5 11. Romans 13.12, 13.
The works of sin which they act in their lives, are called The works of
darkness, And especially, flagitious enormities, such as rioting and drunkness,
etc.


To say, that God dwelt in darkness, till he had created light, was a devilish
sarcasme of the Manichees; for God is light it self, and the Father of lights;
and ever was a Heaven to himself, ere ever the mountains were brought forth, or
ever he had formed the earth and the world; even from everlasting to
everlasting, being God.

Hell is called utter darkness, being an expulsion from the blessed presence of
God, who is mentium lumen.

And God said, Genesis 1.3, 4.2 Cor. 4.6.
Let there be light; and there was light. -- And God divided the light from the
darkness. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness. has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesus Christ. Of Night and Day.
Night. (...)

NIght is so called in Hebrew, Ps. 104.20, 21.
from the yelling of wild beasts therein; according to that of the Psalmist,
Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do
creep forth; (...) Varre.
the young lions roar after their prey. In Greek, a pungendo, quia ad somnum
pungit. Or of (...), to strike; to which the Latin answers, Nox, a nocendo.
Some say, of an Hebrew word which signifies to rest, because men take their
ease and sleep then: So the Psalmist, Man goes forth unto his work, verse. 23.
and to his labor until the evening. It is a time of silence, and fit for
design; so sings the Poet, -- Statuunt sub nocte silenti, Ovid. Met. 4.

Fallere custodes, foribusque excedere tentant.


The Jews divided the Night into four watches; Mark 13.35.
1. Even. 2. Midnight. 3. Cock-crowing. 4. The Morning.

The Romans divided their Night into ten parts, viz.

1. Crepusculum, Godw Antiq.
The dusk of the evening. 2. Prima fax, Candle-tinning. 3. Vesper, The night.
4. Concubium, Bedtime. 5. Nox intempesta, The first sleep. 6. Admediam noctem,
Toward Midnight. 7. Media nox, Midnight. 9. De media nocte, A little after
Midnight. 9. Gallicinium, Cock-crowing. 10. Conticinium, All the time from
Cock-crowing, to the Break of day.
The darkness God called Night. Genesis 1.5. Psalm. 63.5. Psalm. 16.7. Psalm. 42.8.
Psalm. 119.55.
O God, I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches.
My reins instruct me in the night-seasons. The Lord will command his loving
kindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my
prayer unto the God of my life. I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the
night, and have kept thy law.

Day.
As Night is the time of the Suns absence from our Hemisphere; so Day is the
time of the Suns presence therein. They both contain one whole revolution of
the Suns motion to the same point of the Meridian, in the twenty four hours.

Day is Natural. Artificial


The former consists of twenty four hours, which is measured most usually,
Exodus 12.29. with Numb. 3.13.
from the Sunrising to the Sunrising; or from the Sunsetting to the
Sunsetting. The latter is from Morning till Night, which is the time of light,
measured out to twelve hours, which were not more nor fewer, but longer or
shorter, according to the different proportion of the Days in Summer and
Winter; which is measured from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting: Joh. 11.9.
Mat. 20.
Which division was in use both with the Jews and Romans.

The Romans divided their Day into six parts, viz. Godw. Antiq.
1. Diluculum, The break of day. 2. Mane, The full morning. 3. Ad meridiem, The
forenoon. 4. Meridies, quasi medidies, Midday; or quasi merus dies, perfect
day, Noon 5. Demeridie, Afternoon. 6. Solis occasus, Sunset.


Day has its name in Hebrew, from the noise and hurry that is therein. In
Greek (...), of (...), gentle, or t^me, because it is appointed for tame
creatures: Or of (...), I desire, because it is to be desired. In Latin Dies,
a Deo, Zanch.
as a divine thing: vel a Dio, id est, Coelo, and Sole: vel a dividendo, quod
disjungat lucem a tenebris.

Evening separates by darkness, Morning by light: So the one disjoyns day from
night, the other night from day.

In this vicissitude of Light and Darkness, much of Gods wisdom and goodness is
to be seen: And we ought not to turn the day into night, nor night into day,
without some very special and urgent occasion.

And God called the light, Day. Day unto day utters speech, Genesis 1.5. Psalm.
19.2. Ps. 119.164.
and night unto night shows knowledge. Seven times a day do I praise thee,
because of thy righteous judgments. Of the Visible Heavens.
HEaven is a building of three stories; Triplex est coelum, cerium, sidercum;
ac aliud his superius, invisibile and divinum. Dam. 1.2. de Orthodox. fide.
The first is the Air and the Clouds up to the Moon. The second reaches all
the Planets and Stars. The third is called, the Heaven of Heavens, the place of
Gods most glorious residence, who fills Heaven and Earth.

The Apostle reduces them to Visible, and Invisible. Col. 1.16.



The Visible Heavens are two, Starry; and Airy.




The Apostle Jude seems to give a hint of those Planetical Orbs (Jud. v. 13.)
where he justly reproacheth unsettled spirits, by the name of wandering stars or
planets, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Of this speaks Moses, calling it, The firmament of the heaven. Genesis 1.17.
Josh. 10.13. Psalm. 8.3.
And in Joshua's time, the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven. And David,
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon, and the stars
whi^^ thou have ordained. And again, Psalm. 19.1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork.



This is called by Job, Job 26.7 Super mane; quod juxta commun^ta opinionem
intelligi debet. Vulgo enim totum spatium a terra ^sque ad coelum vacaun
p^tatur, quum plenum aere sit. Genesis 8.2. Genesis 19.24. Psalm. 8.8. Mat. 6.26.
the empty place; He stretches out the north over the empty place. Not that
the Air is indeed empty; there is no vacuity, no empty place in nature: Nature
will put it self into strange courses to avoid a vacuity; Water will ascend, to
avoid vacuity; and it will not descend, to avoid vacuity.

But though the Air be not empty or void, taking emptiness strictly and
Philosophically, (for every place has its filling) yet as emptiness is taken
largely and vulgarly, so the Air may be called an empty place: For as when we
come into a room where there is no artificial furniture, we say it is an empty
room; so the space between us and the Heavens, in a vulgar sense, is an empty
pl^ce.

Of this speaks Scripture, when it s^th, The windows of heaven, the rain from
heaven. The Lord rained brimstone and fire out of heaven; It is very probable
from the upper region of the air, where Meteors be. So the birds of the air are
called the fowls of heaven.

Of the Invisible Heavens.
The Invisible Heaven, Ephesians. 4.10.
is that place whither Christ ascended, far above all aspectable Heavens.
Called the Third Heaven, the seat of the blessed Saints, of the elect Angels,
and happy souls which are dead in the Lord; also Abraham's bosom.

Yet this is not the place of Gods Essence or infinite Substance, 1 King. 8.27.
for so the Heaven of heavens is not able to contain him; But the place of his
presence and glory, not to consine or limit his glory in, but wherein he will
make it appear most glorious; as a Prince will have some room to show his state
and magnificence in.

This Heaven is not every where, as the Lutherans and some others falsely
assert: 1. Because then, it is no longer Gods seat, but God himself: For,
whatsoever is Omnipresent, Jer. 23.24.
must needs be God, as himself proves: Do not I fill heaven and earth, says
the Lord? 2. The Scripture speaks of it as a limited and confined place,
where Gods glory shines more than in any other place, where Christ promises
the Thief to be with him in Paradise, he denies him to be in hell or earth.




houses of clay in comparison, and desirously exchange this temporal for an
eternal and blessed condition. 1. Why should we prefer such base Cottages,
before so Princely a Court? Why should we strive for Earth, and lose the third
Heaven? Why should we grieve to leave a Prison, for the Palace of God himself?
2. Christ is there, to be with whom is best of all.

Paul pronounces his afflictions light, when he weighed them with that weight
of Glory, and looked on things not seen.

And let us use the means, and hold the way to this blessed place: 1. Promoting
Gods glory. 2. Seeking to please him in all things. 3. Beginning heaven upon
earth. 4. Studying sanctification, decking our selves with grace, and getting
the Wedding Garment, for that Wedding Day; for without Holiness none shall see
God, 1 King. 8.27. 2 Cor. 11.12. Isa. 63.15. Luke 16.22. Heb. 11.10. Joh. 14.2.
2 Cor. 5.1.
in that Presence Chamber of his Glory.

Scripture calls this place, The Heaven of heavens. The third heaven. The
habitation of Gods holiness, and of his glory. Abraham's bos^me. A city which
has foundations, whose maker and builder is God. Christ's Fathers house, in
which are many mansions. A building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heaven. The new Jerusalem. The Paradise of God. An holy place,
etc. De Angelis.
ANgels were created, it is conceived in the beginning, Psalm. 33.6.
when the Heavens were; for says the Psalmist, By the word of the Lord were
the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. And it
is likely before Man, Job 38.4, 7.
by those words, Where wast thou, -- when the Morning-stars sang together, and
all the sons of God shouted for joy?

Angels are Spirits of Heaven, resembling their Creator, as children do their
father, both in their substance, which is incorporeal; and in their excellent
properties, Life and immortality, excellency, blessedness and glory.

They are called 1. Spirits, Nomen essentiae. 2. Angels, Nomen officii.


For their number, they are said to be Thousands, and Ten thousand thousands,
(...)
Dan. 7.10. Myriads, Heb. 12.22. which because of the vastness of the number,
we render innumerable. They are innumerable to us, so are our sins, the hairs
of our heads, the sands of the seashore, the stars in the firmament,) not to
God.

The supposed Dionysius the Senator of Athens, Niceph. 1.2. cap. 20.
ordered the Celestial Hierarchy thus: That the first degree is given to the
Angels of Love, termed Seraphim; The second to the Angels of Light, termed
Cherubim; The third, and so the following degrees, to Thrones, Principalities,
and the rest, which are all Angels of power and ministration. So that upon this
account, the Angels of knowledge and illumination, are placed before the Angels
of office and domination. I think such curious brains put all out of order:
Augustine is of a more modest spirit; Quomodo se babeat beatissima illa ac
superna Civitas, and quid inter se distent quatuor illa vocabula, Col. 1.16.
dicant qui possunt, Enchy^. ad Laurent. c. 58.
si tamen possunt probare quod d^cant; Ego me isthaec ignorare consiteor. Let
the like humility be imitated of us all; Let no man presume to understand above
that which is written: And there their several degrees and dignities are only
hinted, as well among themselves, as in regard of the inferior world, and the
government thereof.

The wisdom and knowledge of these Spirits is admirable: Aug. Cogniti^
conc^eata and acquisita. Schoolmen.
The Devils know much, (...); much more do the good Angels: They have matutinam
and vespertinam scientiam; Their morning-knowledge they have by creation, and a
continual contemplation of God; their evening-knowledge they have by
observation from the creatures, and a diligent inspection into the Church.
Their power also is as wonderful.

Their office is, to minister perpetually to God, in obeying his will; unto
Christ, as the Head of the Church; and are also sent out to minister for the
good and salvation of the Saints for Christ's sake.

Not that God needs them, as Princes need the counsel and aid of their
subjects: But he makes use of their service about us, 1. For the honor of his
Majesty, and comfort of our infirmity. 2. To make out his love unto us, by
employing such noble creatures for our good. 3. To make and maintain love and
correspondency between us and Angels, till we our selves come to be like unto
them.

The truth is, though they excel in strength, yet do they Gods commandments,
Luke 20.36.
hearkening to the voice of his word; which they perform, cheerfully,
faithfully, diligently, speedily and constantly; ever standing before the face
of our heavenly Father, and rejoicing more in their names of service, than of
honor; of employment, than preferment; to be called Angels (that is,
messengers) than Principalities, Thrones, etc. accounting it better to do good,
than to be great; to dispense Gods benefits, than to enjoy them.

Let us imitate these good Spirits, chiefly, 1. In subjecting our selves to
Christ, as our Lord and King. Phil. 2.9.
This is their bowing of the knee, and ours too. 2. In doing the will of God
always cheerfully, as they do, and therefore are said to have wings; thus we
pray. Mat. 6.10.
Laudant Deum Angeli, adorant and tremunt: tremere dicuntur, non metu
formidinis, l. 2. c. 50. de sacr. Altar. myster.
cum sint perfect beati; sed administrationis vel obedientiae affectu, says
Innocent 3.

-- Wise, 2 Samuel 14.20. Psalm. 103.20. Heb. 1.14.
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that
excel in strength, that do his commandments: hearkening unto the voice of his
word. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to to minister for them,
who shall be heirs of salvation? Of the Celestial Lights.
Of the Sun. Sol quasi solus, v^l quia solus ex omnibus sideribus est tantus;
vil quia quum est exortus, obscuratis aliis solus appareat. Martinius.

THe Sun is the Prince of Planets, coursing about with incredible swiftness; so
sweet a creature, that Eudoxus the Philosopher professed, that he would be
content to be burnt up with the heat of it, so he might be admitted to come so
near it, as to learn the nature of it.

The Sun is (as it were) a vessel, whereinto the Lord gathered the Light, which
till then was scattered in the whole body of the heavens. This David beheld
with admiration (not adoration, Psalm. 8. Jer. 44.
as those Idolaters that worshipped the Queen of heaven; For that was a witty
speech of Cyril, They were (...), Atheists by night, who worshipped the Sun;
and Atheists by day, who worshipped the Moon and Stars.) And well he might, for
Chrysostom wondreth at this, That whereas all fire naturally ascends, God
has turned the beams of the Sun toward the earth, making the light thereof to
stream downwards. This is the Lords own work, and it ought to be wonderful in
our eyes.

The Sun has his name in the Hebrew ((...)) a servant, as being the
servant-general of mankind, (...)
while he shines indifferently upon the evil and the good, imparting to both
light and heat.

The Sun is called light by an excellency: Grace (...), ab (...), i. e.
splendore. ^ Orus. Pscud. Epid. p. 248.
The Egyptians call him Orus from the Hebrew (...). We are not able to look
into the body of the shining Sun, Quia nimium sensibile ladit sensum.

Furthermore, In this Distinguisher of Time (as Doctor Brown terms it) the Sun,
besides its glory and other benefits, the artifice of its Maker is much
illustrated from two considerations especially, 1. In its motion, that it
moves at all; for had it stood still, and were fixed like the Earth, there had
been then no distinction of times, either of Day or Year, of Spring, of Autumn,
of Summer, or of Winter; for these seasons are defined by the motions of the
Sun. 2. No less wonderful also in contriving the line of its revolution; which
God has so effected; that by a vicissitude in one body and light, it suffices
the whole Earth; and that is the line Ecliptic; all which to effect by any
other circle, it had been impossible.

As for its swiftness, Bellarm, says, Such is his velocity, that he runs in
the eight part of an hour 7000 miles. Si tanta pulchritudo in creatura, quanta
in ereatore^
This dumb creature (says a Divine) gives check to our dullness; as Balaam's
Ass did also to the Prophets madness. And for beauty, it is compared to a
Bridegroom coming out of his chamber: (If a creature be so glorious, how much
more is the Creator!) And surely, if Solomon in all his glory, was not like a
Lilly of the field; much less can earthly glory be like that of the Sun in the
Heavens.

The Sunshine is a sweet mercy, but not prized, because ordinary: as Manna was
counted a light meat, because lightly come by. But should we be left in
palpable darkness, as were the Egyptians for three days together, so that no
man stirred off the stool he sat on, this common benefit would be better set
by. And certainly, Solemn e mundo tollere, is to make the World a Cyclops, a
huge body without eyes.

Sol in mundo sicut cor in corpore; The Sun in the world, Aben-Ezra.
is as the heart in the body: All things feel the quickening heat of the Sun;
not only the roots of trees, plants, etc. but metals and minerals in the bowels
of the earth.

Of the two great Luminaries, the Sun is the greater indeed, being (as
Astronomers resolve, though rather upon probable conjecture, than certain
demonstration) One hundred and sixty six times greater than the earth.

God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day. Gone. 1.16. Deuteronomy.
33.14.
The precious fruits brought forth by the Sun. -- In them has he set a
tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber,
Psalm. 19 4, 5, 6.
and rejoices as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end
of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid
from the heat thereof. Psalm. 104.19. Psalm. 136.8.
The Sun knows his going down. The Sun to rule by day. He makes his Sun to
rise on the evil, and on the good. Truly the light is sweet, Eccl. 11.7. 1 Cor.
15.41.
and a pleasant thing is it for the eyes to behold the Sun. There is one glory
of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another of the Stars. Of the Moon.
The Moon is one of those two great lights which God created: Luna a lucendo,
Tully; quia sola lucet nocte. Varro.
But though she is so called, and in appearance seems the greatest next the
Sun, yet she is the least but one (and that is Mercury) of all the Planets, and
of far narrower compass than the fixed stars: Nevertheless, the Moon being the
lowest of these shining bodies, it appears to be bigger in quantity, and
ministers more light to man's use, than any of the single stars of the greatest
magnitude, yea, than all of them together, when it is at the full; yet this
fullness of light, is for a great part of it but a borrowed brightness from the
body of the Sun, which the Moon receives, and reflecteth like a Looking-glass.

God seems (says a Doctor) therefore to have set it lowest in the Heavens, and
nearest the Earth, that it might daily put us in mind of the constancy of the
one, and inconstancy of the other; herself in some sort partaking of both,
though in a different manner; of the one in her substance, of the other in her
visage.

The mere Irish (says Grimston, Hist. p. 34.
for they are divided like unto the Scottish) kneel down when they see the New
Moon, and speaking unto her, say, Leave us in as good health as thou have found
us.

The superstitious Jews offered cakes unto the Moon, and worshipped her by the
name of Regina Caeli, the Queen of Heaven, as the Papists do the Virgin Mary.
Surely (says a Wit) she deserves to be deposed from her regency, if willingly
accepting of this usurped title, and their unlawful offerings: But seeing man's
importunity forced them upon her against consent, she is free from idolatry.

The World is compared unto the Moon, for its changes and chances; Rev. 12.1.
which the Woman in the Revelations is said to tread under her feet: And
certainly it is good and necessary that every Child of that beautiful Mother
keep it there; for if it once get into the heart or head, it makes them
lunatic.

The lesser Light to rule the night. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 135.9. Psalm. 104.19.
He made the Moon to rule by night. He appointed the Moon for seasons. Of
Eclipses.
Eclipses are disappearings of the Sun or Moon; which though they come in a
course of nature, and are by natural light foreseen many years before they
come, yet there is somewhat in them, which should fill us up with high thoughts
of the power of God. Of a dismal one, Lucan says, Ipse caput medio Titan cum
ferret Olympo, Lucan, lib. x.

Condidit ardentes atra caligine currus;
Involvitque orbem tenebris, gentesque coegit
Desperare diem --


And that they are terrifying and prodigious, another sings sadly, Signa dabant
luctus Superi haud incerta futuri: Ovid. Metavs. lib. 15.

Saepe faces visae, solis qucque tristis imago:
Caerulus and vultum ferrugine Lucifer atra
Sparsus erat, sparsi lunares sanguine currus.


Though an Eclipse be no miracle, yet God once made one (and can do so again)
when Christ the Sun of Righteousness was shamefully crucified; the Sun in the
Heavens (as ashamed to look upon that act (as from man) of prodigious cruelty
and injustice) hid his face; and provided (as it were) a veil for the nakedness
of Jesus, that the women might be present, and himself die, with modesty.

That Eclipse was miraculous, 1. Both in the manner, because the Moon was not
then in conjunction, but full; which (as we receive from Antiquity) caused a
great Philosopher to cry out, Suidas in vit. Dionys.
Aut Deus patitur, aut patienti compatitur. 2. And in the degree, being
universal (as some affirm) over all the world; or as others (which makes it
more strange) that it was only in the land of Judea, all the world besides
enjoying the light of the Sun at that time. Which miracle stands opposite to
that in Egypt, which was plagued with darkness, when the Israelites in Goshen
enjoyed light; whereas then Judea, where the Israelites dwelt, was covered with
darkness, the rest of the world enjoying light.

There remains one more dreadful, viz. the Eclipse of Christ's most glorious
Gospel amongst us; that this bright Sun should go down at noon over our heads,
and our earth be darkened in the clear day, Amos 8.9. Pray against that dismal
day, that it may never be said, The glory is departed from our Israel.

He makes the morning darkness. Amos 4.13. Cap. 5.8. Job 9.7. Non oritur sell,
tantum est non appareat, nam and ortus so'is apparitio quaedam est. Joel 2.30,
31. Cap. 3.15.
He turns the shadow of death into the morning, and makes the day dark with
night. He commands the Sun, and it rises not.

Lavater (in his Comment upon this place) reports, That in the year 1585. March
12. such a darkness fell upon the earth, that the fowls went to roost at Noon,
as if it had been Sunsetting, and all the common people thought the day of
Judgment was come.

I will show wonders in the heavens, -- The Sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the Moon into blood. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened. Of the Stars.
Stella est densior pars orbis; ideo lucent astra, non coeli, quia hi diaphani
sunt, Magir. Phys.
and rari, astra autem densa, eoque lucem retinentia, and reflectentia. A Star
(according to Philosophy) is the thicker part of its orb or sphere; it is
thicker than other parts of the heavens; for otherwise it could not hold the
light, so it could not reflect and send forth the light; it could not be a
vessel for light, or a conveyance for light. For, Light was created the first
day, ( Genesis 1.3.) but the Lights were created the fourth day, ( Genesis 1.14.)
that is, certain vessels were created to hold the light. All these are placed
in the heavens, by the special designment of God, for the use and good of man.

Some Mathematicians have taken on them, to set down the just number of the
Stars, saying, they are but 2200. in all. They are beyond their books, too
presumptuous to go beyond their limits. God can number them all, and call them
by their name, which to man is impossible. Abraham was a great Astronomer, yet
he could never do it. Genesis 25.4. De Civ. Dei, l. 16.
And yet Aratus and Eudoxus vainly vaunted (says Aug.) that they had cast up
the stars, and could call them all by their names. But that to man it is
impossible, Aristotle maintains against those Astronomers, that tell us they
are a thousand and some hundreds. And the wiser sort of Astrologers have
rightly distinguished them into numerable and innumerable, as to men: For to us
they are innumerable, as the sand of the Sea is, Heb. 11.2.
with which they are mentioned.

The power of God is not only seen, in stretching out the Heavens, but his
excellent skill, and infinite wisdom is also displayed, in adorning, decking
and beautifying those Heavens which he has stretched forth. The power and
wisdom of God shines in every grass that grows out of the ground, yea, in every
clod of earth; much more then in the stars of heaven. Especially, when such as
have skill about the course of Nature, do consider, 1. The greatness of the
Stars; it is incredible to ordinary reason; such vast bodies show an infinite
power in their constitution. 2. The multitude of them: A multitude of little
sands make a huge body; then how great a body do a multitude of great bodies
make? 3. The swiftness of their motion; that these mighty bodies should be
carried about every day so far, and never tire nor wear. 4. The exact order of
their motion; that innumerable stars should move continually in the heavens,
and yet not one of them move out of course. 5. The efficacious virtue in their
influence; it is a secret virtue, and it is a strong irresistible virtue, no
power in the creature can stop it.


Hence a right study of the Heavens and Stars is requisite; in them the
wonderful works of God are seen; and a sober knowledge in Nature, may be an
advantage unto Grace. But for those who are insober this way, if their eyes be
not blinded with Star-gazing, Isa. 47.13, 14. Gualther.
I only commend unto them that of Gualther on Zeph. 1.5. Observent ista qui
hodie Astrologiam judiciariam profitentur: Let those amongst us observe this,
who profess Judiciary Astrology; for these worship the Stars no less, than did
the Heathens of old, calling them by the names of those heathenish deities,
that ought to be abolished; and subjecting to them all events of things, yea
Man himself as touching all his manners and fortunes, which the Scripture
affirms to depend upon the eternal providence of God alone. This is
intolerable impiety, and they that fall into it, shall not escape the just
judgment of God.

Some stars are more excellent, of greater virtue and name than others: 2 Cor.
15.41.
The Apostle gives us this clearly, One star differs from another star in
glory. God has made difference and degrees in all creatures, in the heavenly
as well as earthly. As, The Pleiades, or Seven stars in the end of Aries: These
joined together in one Constellation, help to bring the Spring.

Orion, a Star that arises in the beginning of Winter, drawing foul weather
after him as with bands; so that (as the Proverb has it) Winter never rotteth
in the air.

Mazaroth, the Southern stars, that bring in Summer.

Arcturus with his sons, those Northern stars, bringing Autumn with his yearly
fruits. Hierome.
Of Arcturus, Hierom observes, that semper versatur, nunquam mergitur. This is
most true of Christ's Church, much tossed, never drowned.



But though Stars differ thus one from another, yet they envy not one another.
Which lessons us to be content, Note.
though God make our names less named in the world, than the names of many of
our brethren; though he trust more talents to, or put more light in others,
than into our selves.

-- He made the Stars also. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 8.3. Genesis 15 5. Heb. 11.12. Psalm.
147.4. Job 38.31, 32.
-- The Stars which thou have ordained. Look now toward heaven, and tell the
Stars, if thou be able to number them. -- So many as the Stars of the sky in
multitude. He tells the number of the Stars, he calls them all by their
names. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades (...) or loose the
bands of Orien? Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in his season? Or can thou
guide Arcturus with his sons?

Seek him that makes the Seven stars, Amos 5.8. Job 9.9. Psalm. 136.9.
and Orien. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiad^s, and the chambers of the
South. The Moon and Stars to rule by night.

Of a Year.
After God had created the Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven, to divide the
Day from the Night; Genesis 1.14.
He commanded also, Let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and
years.

The Year, is a remarkable standard of time, consisting of twelve Months;
about the quartering out of which, there have passed especially two
distinctions: 1. The first in frequent use with Astronomers, according to the
cardinal intersections of the Zodiac, that is, the two Aequinoctials, and both
the Solstitial points; desining that time to be the Spring of the Year, wherein
the Sun does pass from the Aequinox of Aries, to the Solstice of Cancer; The
time between the Solstice and the Aequinox of Libra, Summer; From thence unto
the Solstice of Capricornus, Autumn; and from thence unto the Aequinox of Aries
again, Winter. 2. A second division is observed by Hippocrates, and most of the
ancient Greeks; establishing the account of Seasons from usual alterations, and
sensible mutations in the Air, discovered upon the rising and setting of
diverse Stars: Accounting

The Spring,
FRom the Aequinoctial point of Aries: This is properly the pleasant Quarter of
the Year, being the Emblem of Man in his Youth.

Of this season, the Song of Songs gives a most dainty description, far past
any of the Poets, who yet have showed themselves very witty that way.

The Winter is past, Cant. 2.11, 12, 13.
the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land: The
fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give
a good smell. The Summer,
From the rising of the Pleiades, or the several stars on the back of Taurus.
This is properly the hottest season in the Year, and the Emblem of Man in his
full strength.

Metaphorically it signifies opportunity, or fit time to do things in; Prove.
6.8.
according to that, The Ant provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her
food in the harvest.

Autumn,
From the rising of Arcturus, a Star between the thighs of Boots. This is the
proper season of gathering in the fruits of the Earth, and the Emblem of Man in
a declining condition.

Of this the Psalmist, The time that corn and wine are increased. Psalm. 4.7.


Winter,
From the setting of the Pleiades. It is a dead season, in which the weather is
cold, ways foul, days short, and the air muddy; the clouds commonly returning
after the rain. It resembles Old age.

It is figuratively taken, for the doleful and dismal condition of such as are
not effectually called by Christ. Omnis illis dies hybernus est; It is ever
Winter with them, no Spring of grace, no Sunshine of sound comfort.

The Day is thine, the Night also is thine: Psalm. 74.16, 17.
thou have prepared the Light and the Sun. Thou have set all the borders of the
earth: thou have made Summer and Winter.

Of the Lowest Heavens.
THe Lowest Heaven is distinguished from the Sky, by waters; as the Sky is from
the Coelum Empyreum, by the Primum Mobile. This is the Air whereon we breathe,
and wherein birds fly, clouds swim, etc.

Fire.
Est elementum callidissimum, siccissimum, levissimum, permeans per omnia, and
omnia pervadens.

It is an Element dreadful, painful, sudden in eruption, active, mereiless and
devouring. It has a strong stomach; what will not Fire digest? It will digest
stones, iron, etc. nay the sublunary world at last; for, 1 Pet. 3.10.
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

Lightning and Thunder.
Fulgetrum seu corruscatio, est splendour flammae emicantis, per totum aerem uno
momento transcurrens, per intervalla, vel cum nullo vel parvo sonitu; ortus ex
modica tenuique exhalatione in nube accensa; splendour est eminus apparens,
longeque sparsus.

Tonitru est sonitus in aere, aut exagitatione vaporis calidi and sicci, in
nube frigida and humida propter antiperista sui excitatus: aut ex ejusdem
vaporis, e nube violenter fracta eruptione, generatus: aut etiam no^unquam ex
nubium cavarum collisione coortus.

Tonitru a terrendo. Thunder is so terrible, that it has forced from the
greatest Atheist an acknowledgment of a Deity. Caligula (who dared his Jove to
a duel, yet) if it thundered or lightened but a little, would be ready to
hoodwink himself.

Alladius King of the Latins, striving to imitate the Thunder, by an Engine
made him, justly perished by a Thunderbolt from heaven: His house also where he
attempted so to do, was consumed with fire.

In Thunder and Lightning there is much of God to be seen and heard, these
being the harbingers (as it were) and officers to make room for him, and to
manifest his power; which the Saints may take comfort in, and the greatest must
acknowledge.

He has made a way for the lightning of the thunder. Job 28.26. Psalm. 77.18.
Psalm. 29.
The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven, the lightnings lightened the world,
the earth trembled and shook. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God
of glory thundereth, etc. Clouds.
Nubes est corpus velex copioso vapore, e locis humentibus in sublime
adscendens; vel ex maxim humidis partibus aeris in media aeris regione
concretum. Breviter est vapor humidus and adensatus, qui in media aeris
regione, a frigore circumstante, constrictus and quasi congelatus pendet.
Vapores enim in sublime elevati, vel maximae humidae aeris parts condensatae,
quae gemina materia est ex qua nubes generantur and constant, caliginosum aerem
efficient; vapores autem copiosi ex mari adscendune, unde aquae maris sunt
velut radices nubium. Job 36.30.

A Cloud is a thick vapor, Illi^ enim fiunt miracu'a magna. Vatab. Haec sunt
sane admiranda and tremenda. Mer.
raised up by the heat of the Sun, to the middle region of the Air, and there
by the cold condensed becomes so thick, that it stops and intercepteth the
Light, so that Clouds and Darkness go together.

How the Clouds are hanged up even in the Air, like Archimedes his Pigeon,
equally poised with their own weight; how they are upheld, and why they fall
here and there, and now and then, we may well wonder, but know not.

In these God bottleth up the Rain, and there keeps in by main strength,
though those vessels are as thin, and thinner than the liquor that is contained
in them. Now that God binds up these heavy Vapors, and keeps them in the
Clouds, as a strong man in a cobweb, till brought by the Winds whithersoever he
pleases to appoint them, and that they drop upon the Earth by little and
little to make it fruitful; this is a wonderful work of God: This duly weighed,
were enough to convince an Atheist; and should bring us to the knowledge of his
power, wisdom, and goodness.

He binds up the Waters in his thick clouds, Job 26.8. cap. 36.29.
and the cloud is not rent under them. Can any understand the spreadings of the
clouds? Rain.
Est fluxus humidae nubis, Great rain is called Nimbus, small rain Imber.
qu^ a calore solis paulatim soluta, aquam guttatins e media aeris regione
demittit.

It is the flux of a moist Cloud, which being dissolved by little and little by
the heat of the Sun, lets down Rain by drops out of the middle region of the
Air.

This is reckoned (and rightly) among the mavelous works of God; 1.
Mavelous power in causing and giving rain. 2. Wonderful goodness in thereby
cooling, refreshing and nourishing all earthly living creatures. So that we may
say, In every drop of rain, there is an Ocean of wisdom, power, goodness and
bounty.

The Rabbis have a saying, That Rain is the husband of the earth, because
those showers foecundate the earth, and make the great Mother of Plenty
fruitful, in bringing forth all things useful and comfortable for the use of
Man.

Who gives rain upon the earth, and sends waters upon the fields. Job 5.10.
Cap 28 26. Cap. 36.27, 28
He made a Decree for the rain. For he makes small the drops of water: they
pour down rain according to the vapor thereof: which the clouds do drop, and
distill upon man abundantly. Rain-bowe.
It is the effect of the Sun shining against a cloud, Thauman is filiam dixere
Iridem Poetae; Colores ejus tam exacti, ut vix artificis possit exprimer^ manus.
and is Nuntius foederis and serenitatis, the Angel of Gods Covenant, and of
fair weather. It is Signum gratiae and foederis, a sign of grace, and of the
Covenant of mercy, and therefore always fresh and green about Christ's throne
of grace, Revel. 4.3. c. 10.1. Ezekiel. 1.28.

It is very likely that from the beginning it was in its causes, which are
clouds and the shining of the Sun; and those causes did sometimes produce the
effects before this time, and so it is like it was often seen before the flood:
But now God made choice of it for a sign of his Covenant with the world, that
there should be no more an universal flood, as before there was.

This Bow was most proper to be a sign of Gods Covenant; and in it there are
many wonders; For the former, 1. Because of the place, which is in the clouds
of heaven, whence came the rain that drowned the world before. Ambros.
2. It is there planted, as if man were shooting at God, and not God at man.
Besides of Gods bow we read, but not of his arrows. 3. It appears commonly
with rain, that so where men might begin to fear the judgment, they may take
comfort against it. For the latter, 1. The beautiful shape and various colors;
Plin. N. H. lib. 12. c. 24.
The waterish colors signifying the former overthrow of the world by water.
The fiery, the future judgment of the world by fire. The green, that present
grace of freedom from both. 2. Where it touches upon any shrubs, it leaves a
sweet and fragrant smell behind. 3. It has in it two contrary significations,
Scaliger.
viz. of rain and fair-weather, of this in the evening, of that in the morning.
Add, whereas naturally it is a sign of rain, yet it is turned by God into a
sure sign of dry weather.

Let us learn to look upon it, not only in the natural causes, Tam Dei meminiss
opus est, quam respirare. Bern.
but as a Sacramental sign of the Covenant of grace; and a Monument of Gods
both justice in drowning the world, and mercy in conserving it from the like
calamity.

-- I do set my how in the cloud, Genesis 9.13, 14. Job 37.15.
and it shall ^e for a token of a Covenant between me and the earth. And it
shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be
seen in the cloud. -- He caused the light of his cloud to shine. Wind.
Est exhalatio sicca copiosa, a terra sursum tendens, qu^ ordinatione Dei
repressa, ab occurrente nube frigida in media region^ a^rit, and succedente
nova exhalatione per aerem oblique propulsa, lateraliter in locum opposi^um
loco unde flare incipit, fertur.

The wind (in the nature of it) is an exhalation arising from the earth, drawn
upwards by the power of the Sun and other heavenly bodies: Ventus a violentia
and vehementia nomen habet, quod veniat abunde, and magna vi i^^uat in unum
aliquem locum. Magir. Phys.
but meeting and conflicting a while with the cold of the middle region of the
air, is beaten back again; And being so light that naturally it cannot descend,
and so resisted that it cannot peaceably ascend, it takes a course between
both, slanting with mighty violence through the air.

Much of God may be seen in the winds, for it is he alone who holds them in
his fist, hides them in his treasures, rides upon them as his Chariot, and
checks them at his pleasure: Yea, God weighs them in a balance, and when they
seem to blow where they list, piercing through the air with their violent
blasts, God sets them their bounds, and appoints them their proportion. Hence
is that phrase, of making the weight for the Winds, Job 28.25.

He brings the Wind out of his treasuries. Psa 135 7. Psalm. 104.3. Joh. 3.8.
Who walks upon the wings of the Wind. The wind blows where it lists, and
thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, not
whither it goes. Nos motum sensimus, modum nescimus. Hail.
Est pluvia in aere inter descendendum conglatiata, propter antiperistasin
aeris calidi, frigiditate naturali^sese contrahente.

The broad flowing water of the clouds, by the force of the cold, is narrowed
up into hail.

Have thou seen the treasures of the hail, Job 38.22, 23.
Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle
and war? Snow.
Many wonders there are in snow; as that it should be made in the lowest part
of the air, and not above where it is coldest: that it should snow upon the
earth, but never upon the Sea, (if Pliny may be believed:) that snow should lie
continually, not only upon the Alps, but upon Mount Aetna, where fire flames
out: that it serves for a cover to preserve earth's heat, though it self be
cold: that being white, it should sometimes bring forth red worms, etc.

It is compared to wool, Psalm. 147.16. for whiteness, lightness, plenty,
softness, warmth: for though it be very cold, yet by keeping in the vapors and
exhalations of the earth, it causes an inward warmth to it, and so makes it
very fruitful. In which respects the Rabbines say, That one day of snow does
more good, than five of rain.

Gregory allegorizing those words, Gregor.
Job 38.22. shows, that earthly treasures are treasures of snow. We see
little children what pains they take to rake and scrape together snow to make a
snow-ball: Right so, they that scrape together the treasure of this world, have
but a snow-ball of it: so soon as the Sun shines, and God breaths upon it,
and so enters into it, by and by it comes to nothing.

He says to the snow, Be thou on the earth. Have thou entered into the
treasures of the snow? Job 37.6. Cap. 38.22. Psa. 147.16.
He gives snow like Wool. Frost.
It is the excess of cold, by the blowing of the coldest winds; which are
sometime called the breath of God; These congeal the waters, and turn them into
ice, contracting them into a narrower room.

Hence it is, that as any Country is more Northerly, so it is colder; the Sea
also is frozen and unpassable.

The hoar-frost heateth and dries the cold and moist earth, nipping the buds
of trees. Vnde pruina dicitur, a perurenda. Hence also perhaps is that, Psalm.
147.16. He scatters the hoar-frost like ashes. Cinis monet ignem subesse quem
foveat.

By the breath of God frost is given, Job 37.10.
and the breadth of the Waters is straitued. Dew.
Est vapor subtilior and tenuior, qui levi and miti frigore in terrae aut
herbarum superficie adeo compactus est, tum adea^ fovendum, recreandumque a
flacciditate, aestu contract a, tum ad juvandum terrae foecunditatem, tum etiam
ad aerem ipsum in quo versamur refrigerandum.

These round orient pearls, that come from heaven in a clear night, do sweetly
refresh whatsoever grows in fields and meadows.

The dew, 1. It comes when the air is clear. 2. It refreshes and cherishes
the dry and fady fields, plants and herbs thereby recover life and beauty. 3.
It allayeth great heats, and moisteneth, and mollifieth the earth, that it may
fructify.

Who has begotten the drops of dew? Job 38.28. Isa. 26.19.
(Thy dew is as the dew of herbs.

I will be as the dew unto Israel. As the dew of Hermon, Hos. 14.5. Psalm.
133.3. Prove. 3.20.
and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion.) By his knowledge
the depths are broken up: and the clouds drop down the dew.

Of all these Meteors, watery, windy, fiery, whether pure or mixed, etc. I say
with Brentius, Fides non in ordinem operis, sed in Authorem oculos suos
dirigit. All these are of the Lord; and faith sees God in all.

Fowls of Heaven.
It is very observable, that birds, though they have more of the earth than of
the other three elements, (for out of the earth was every fowl of the air
formed, as well as every beast of the field, Genesis 2.19.) yet are light, (which
is a wonder) delighting in high-flying, which is innate to them. Of Birds
mentioned in Scripture, these are some, The

Eagle.
Called the Queen of fowls. She is famous 1. For her loftiness, Aquila non
captat musc^^.
she minds great things; flies and petty things she looks not after. 2.
Swiftness of flight and motion. 3. Strength, herein they are the chief of all
have wings. 4. Sagacity, looking intently upon the Sun, without being dazzled;
and by that property makes proof of her young ones. A (...) ^nectus. Prove.
5. Vivacity, renewing her youth and health, till she come to be very old. Aug.
observes, that when her bill is overgrown, that she cannot take in her meat,
she beats it against a Rock, Exc^tit onus rostri.
striking off the cumbersome part, and thereby recovereth her eating.

-- Thy youth is renewed like the Eagles. Psalm. 103 5.
Peacock.
Priding himself in his feathers, and is all in changeable colors (like
friends now adays) as often changed as moved.

Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacocks. Job 39.13.
Pelican.
Reported to open her breast with her bill, and feed her young ones with the
blood distilling from her: Therefore an Hiereglyphick of piety and pity among
the Egyptians. However a melancholy bird, living in lonely places, and crying
out dolefully.

I am like a Pelican of the Wilderness. Psalm. 102.6.
Ostrich.
Called by reason of his bigness, Elian^ Cum^interim tot a co^poris mole
promi^eat. Plin. Peremptores potius quam Parents.
Struthio-Camelus. He is very swift of foot, but so foolish, that being
pursued, if he can hide his head only, so as to see no body, he thinks himself
safe, and that no body sees him, though his great bulk be all in sight. Her
leaving her eggs, makes her the Hieroglyphick of unnatural and careless
(therefore cruel) Parents.

-- The Ostrich, Job 39.13.
which leaves her eggs in the earth, etc. Raven.
Their young ones are fed of God, when forsaken of their dams, and lest bare
and destitute: For out of their dung, and carrion, (says Aristotle) brought
before to the nest, arises a worm, which creeps to their mouth and feeds
them.

-- Who feeds the young Ravens which cry. Psalm. 147.9.
I forbear to mention any more; Only much of Gods wisdom, power and goodness
may be seen in these inhabitants of the air; in the admirable variety of their
colors, tunes, tastes, etc. Also to these creatures God sends us to learn,
setting before us, as in a picture, the lively resemblance of many excellent
virtues, which we ought to pursue and practice.

-- The fowls of the air, they shall tell thee. Job 12.7. Jer. 8.7. Mat. 6.26.
The stork in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and the
crane, and the swallow observe the time of their coming. Behold the fowls of
the air; for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet
your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than they? Of the
Earth.
BY earth I understand not that great material mass, made up of the two
heaviest elements, earth and water, whereof all terrestrial and celestial
bodies were made, Genesis 1.2. But the earth as distinctly severed from the other
parts of the world, which was not made until the third day, verse. 10.

Elementum siccae frigidaeque naturae, densum, in medio mundi collocatum,
r^undum and in proprio loco immobile.

The earth is round (as an apple is, notwithstanding some knots and bunches in
it) and therefore naturally apt for motion (as the heavens are,) that yet
therefore it should stand firm and unmovable, is admirable.

It is upheld by the infinite and Almighty power of God. The air will scarce
bear a feather, because it will descend, unless kept up by a breath of wind;
Ponderibus librata sais.
and yet this vast globe of earth and water, hangs as a Ball in the air.

Terra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa, Ovid.

Aere sublato tam grave pendet onus.
Of this great wonder, the Philosophers after much study, can give no good
reason, because ignorant of this, that God has appointed it so to be, Psalm.
104.5. Heb. 1.3. The Poets fable that Atlas bears up heaven with his
shoulders; the Lord our God by his Word alone bears up heaven and earth.

Non fundamentis suis nixa subsistit terra, nec fulchris suis stabilis
perseverat, Ambros. l. 1. Exam. c. 16.
sed Dominus statuit terram and fundamento voluntatis suae continet. The earth
has no pillar, God has not hanged it upon any thing but himself, who is
indeed infinitely more than all things.

The greatness of this work of God (says Merlin) appears hereby, that men
cannot spread aloft the thinnest curtain, absque fulchris, without some solid
thing to uphold it, and therefore this must needs be the finger of God, and an
Argument of his Almightiness.

That was an odd conceit of Plato's, that the earth was a kind of living
creature, having stones for bones, rivers for veins, trees for hairs, etc. But
that was worse of Aristotle, teaching the worlds eternity.

The earth is the element which is so much beneath man, that he treads it
under his feet, is called terra a terendo, from breaking and wearing; And yet
this which is so trampled upon abides, when man passes away, Eccl. 1.4.

The earth as a Stage, whereon the several generations act their parts and go
off; as the center of the world, and seat of living creatures, it stands firm
and unmovable.

The earth stands (says Hugo de sanct. vict.) Vt venientes mittat, In Eccl.
Hom. 1.
pertranseuntes portet, discedentes recipiat, To send away those people that
come, to bear those that are passing away, and to receive those that are gone.

And God said, Genesis 1.9, 10. Job 26.7. Psalm. 104.5. Eccl. 1.4. Hebr. 1.3.
Let the dry land appear: and it was so. And God called the dry land, Earth. He
hangs the earth upon nothing. He has laid the foundations of the earth, that
it should not be removed for ever. The earth abides for ever; that is, until
the end. Upholding all things by the Word of his power. Earthquakes.
These subterraneous thunders are caused (say some) when sulphurous and
nitrous veins being fired, upon rarefaction do force their way through bodies
that resist them. Where if the kindled matter be plentiful, and the mine close
and firm about it, subversion of hills and towns does sometimes follow; if
scanty, weak, and the earth hollow or porous, there only ensues some faint
concussion, or tremulous and quaking motion.

Others tell us (for Philosophers dispute much about it) this is the reason in
nature, When there is a strong vapor included or imprisoned in the bowels of
the earth, that vapor seeking vent makes a combustion there, and so the earth
shakes.

Histories are full, and many men's experience can give instances of such
terrible shakings of the earth.

In the days of Vzziah King of Judah, Antiq l. 9 c. 11.
Amos 1.1. Zech. 14.5. so terrible was that earthquake, that the people fled
from it. Of the horror of it, Josephus relates, and tells us, That half a
great Hill was removed by it out of its place, and carried four furlongs
another way: so that the Highway was obstructed, and the Kings Gardens utterly
marred.

At Bern, Folan, Syntag. 841.
Anno 1584. near unto which City a certain Hill, carried violently beyond and
over other Hills, is reported by Polanus (who lived in those parts) to have
covered a whole village that had 90. families in it; one half house only
excepted, wherein the Master of the Family, with his Wife and Children, were
earnestly calling upon God.

At Plevres in Rhetia, Alst. Chronol.
Anno 1618. Aug. 25. the whole town was overcovered with a Mountain, which with
its most swift motion oppressed 1500 people.

In Herefordshire, Camd. Brit.
Anno 1571. A great hill lifted up it self with a huge noise, carrying along
with it trees, flocks of cattle, sheep-coats, etc. God by such extraordinary
works of his, shows his justice and displeasure against sin, as also his
special mercy to his praying people.

I will shake the heavens, Isa. 13.13. Psalm. 18.7.
and the earth shall remove out of her place in the wrath of the Lord of hosts,
and in the day of his fierce anger. Then the earth shook and trembled; the
foundations of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. Stones.
A stone is nothing but hardened earth, and has the properties of the earth,
out of which it is generated. Viz. 1. Si^city, Citius e Pumice aquam. Prove.
or dryness. Hence it was a miracle to bring water out of the Rock. 2.
Frigidity, or coldness. As cold as a stone, we say. 3. Gravity, or heaviness.
As it is nothing but a product of the earth, so it has an inclination to
descend, to fall downwards.


Stones are naturally scattered upon the face of the earth, hindering
Travelers; One part of Arabia, was called Arabia Petr^a, because it was full
of stones, and so uneasy either for tillage or travel. Lopis a lade^do pede
(...) haber.
They lie naturally hidden in the bowels of the earth, or under the earth; and
are a trouble to the husbandman in tilling the ground. And they are so
dangerous, that the Latin word is derived from hurting the foot.

-- They sank into the bottom as a stone. Exodus 15.5.
Minerals.
Many precious things are dug out of the earth, as Gold, Silver, Brass,
Effodiuntur oyes, etc.
Iron, etc. which God has there hid, and men have found out. Though the vein
lie low, and far out of sight, yet Mortals are quickly become Metallaries.

Some of the Ancients have wished that we had never found out these metals, Et
Plutonem brevi ad superos adducturos.
because of the great abuse of them. Strabo says that Phaletius feared, lest
in digging for Gold and silver, men would dig themselves a new way to Hell, and
bring up the Devil amongst them. Some s^y, that he haunteth the richest mines,
and will not suffer them to be searched; sure it is, that by the inordinate
love of these metals, he drowneth many a soul in perdition and destruction.

Remember we, that these things (though never so much admired) are but that
which the basest element yields, the guts and garbage of the earth. It is
observable, that God appointed the Snuffers and Snuff-dishes of the Sanctuary
to be made of pure Gold; to teach us to make no account of that, that he put to
so base offices, and is frequently given to so bad men.

Yet there is no hurt in having these metals, so they have not us, and get
within us; so we make not our gold our God, saying to the fine gold, Thou art
my confidence. Crates the Theban Philosopher is said to have cast his gold into
the Sea, to avoid (as he pretended) the hurt it does mankind, saying, Ep. ad
Julian. consolat.
Abite mal^ cupiditates, ego vos mergam, ne ipse mergar a vobis; But it was
indeed for a name, as Hierom rightly judges: calling him therefore, Gloria
animal, popular is aurae vile mancipium, a vainglorious fool.

However, let us make God our chief treasure. A friend of Cyrus being asked,
Where his treasure was? Answered, (...), Where Cyrus is my friend; Let us
answer, (...), Where God is my friend, Whoever has the Lord for his portion,
the lines are fallen unto him in pleasant places, he has a goodly heritage. He
will be all that heart can wish, or need require.

Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for the gold, Job 28.1, 2.
Psa. 17.14. Job 22.25.
where they find it Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of
the stone. -- Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure. The Almighty
shall be thy gold. Fountains and Rivers.
Aristotle assigns this as the cause of the perennity of them ^ of their
Beginning and Original; viz. That the Air thickened in the earth by reason of
cold, does resolve and turn into water, etc. But a greater than Aristotle
(notwithstanding Averroes his excessive commendation of him, Solom.
viz. That there was no error in his Writings, etc.) gives us his opinion, (as
it was likewise the opinion of the Ancient Philosophers) viz. That they come
from the Sea, through the Pores and passages of the earth, where they leave
their saliness behind them.

Thus God does by certain issues or vents send forth the waters of the Sea,
(which here and there break out in springs) that men and other earthly
creatures might have that (...)(as Pindarus styles it) for the satisfying of
their thirst, Rona a tergo formosissima.
and for other necessary uses. A great mercy, the want would more show the
worth.

All the Rivers run into the Sea, Eccl. 1.7.
yet the Sea is not full: unto the place from whence the Rivers come; thither
they return again. Ad locum unde excunt flumina, Psa. 104.10, 11
revertuntur, ut iterum fluant. Vulg. He sends the springs into the Valleys,
Which run among the hills. They give drink to every Beast of the Field: the
Wild Asses quench their thirst. Fruits.
Alma Parens tell us, Quaelibet herba D^^m.
affords all things necessary for man and beast, Ad esum and ad usum, both for
food and Physic; and both these before either man or beast was created. Sing
we, Hoc mihi pro certo, quod vitam qui dedit idem,
Et velit and possit suppeditare cibum.


Green herbs was a great dish with the Ancients. Aristippus told his
Fellowphilosopher who fed upon them, If you can please Dionysius, you need not
eat green herbs. He presently replied, If you can eat green herbs, you need not
please Dionysius.

These are called precious fruits, Deuteronomy. 33.14. and Jam. 5.7. both because they
cost hard labor, to the husbandman, (for that is required, as well as rain and
dew promised.) And because they are choice blessings of God, for the
sustentation of life.

Diogenes justly taxed the folly of his Countrymen; quod res pretiosas minimo
emerent, venderentque vilissimas plurimo, because they bought precious things,
(as Corn) very cheap; but sold the basest things, (as pictures, statues, etc.)
extreme dear, for the life of man had no need of the one, but could not subsist
without the other. Let us take heed of undervaluing the food of life, and
spending money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.2.

And God said, Genesis 1.11, 12.
Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree
yielding fruit after his kind, Whose seed is in it self, upon the earth: Cap.
1.29, 30.
and it was so. And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after
his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in it self, after his
kind: and God saw that it was good. And God said, Behold, I have given you
every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every
tree in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you it shall be given
for meat. And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to
every thing that creeps upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given
every green herb for meat: and it was so.

He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, Psa. 104.14.
and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the
earth.

Worms.
In the earth are worms housed. A worm is one of the meanest creatures, and
therefore to show what a poor thing man is, he is twice in one place compared
to a worm, Job 25.6. Thus Christ also bespeaks himself, when he took our
nature, Psalm. 22.6.

Man may be said to be a worm in several respects; Look upon him, 1. In his
original and constitution, he is from the earth, as the worm is. 2. In his
natural state and condition, he lives upon the earth and earthly things, as
worms do. 3. Because subject to danger, every foot may crush him. 4. Because
unable to resist or make defense; unless the Lord be his shield, and a defense
to him round about. 5. Because he must shortly return into the earth, and when
he comes to the grave, it will be worm to worm.

Mihi experto credit (says Aug.) Believe me who have made trial of it: Open a
grave, and upon the dead man's head, you shall find toads leaping, begotten of
his brains; upon his loins serpents crawling, begotten of his raynes; in his
belly worms abounding, arising out of his entrails. Behold what we now are, and
what we shortly shall be; Behold the Original and filthiness of sin.

The best are but worms-meat; the worms shall cover them, who happily were once
covered with costliest clothing. Mark 9.44.
But take heed of that Worm which never dies; for as out of the corruption of
our bodies worms breed, which consume the flesh; so out of the corruption of
our souls, this never-dying worm. This worm (say Divines) is a continual
remorse and furious reflection of the soul upon its own wilful folly, and now
woeful misery.

Oh consider this, before thy friends be scrambling for thy goods, worms for
thy body, and Devils for thy soul. Go not Dancing to Hell in thy Bolts, rejoice
not in thy Bondage, as many do; to whom the preaching of Hell, is but as the
painting of a toad, which men can look on and handle, without affrightment.

I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my
mother, Job 17.14.
and my sister. Mandrakes.
Before I had passed plants, I should have mentioned one strange one, in
Scripture called Mandrake; of which here a word.

It is a kind of herb, whose root has the likeness of a man. The fruit of the
root called Mandrake Apples, have been anciently conceived to be of an amorous
operation, causing love, and conducing to coition and conception; It is said to
be of pleasant smell, and color, by some Writers, others say, It is of a rank
and unpleasant savor. Howsoever our Divines conclude, Annotac. in loc.
those were not like to be Mandrake Apples, which Reuben brought to his mother
Leah, because at that time of the year (which was Wheat-harvest, and that was
about the beginning of May in those hot Countries) the Mandrake Apples are not
ripe: But rather that the original word (which in the general signifies
amiable) imports some flowers of the field (such as pleased little children,
Tremel.
for Reuben that gathered them was but young) having a beautiful color, and
withal a delightful smell; so that Rachel was taken with a special delight in
them, and desire of them.

Some render it, Lovely flowers; others, Violets; others, Lilies; others again,
Cherries of Jury; The Greek and most Interpreters, Mandrakes, or Mandrake
apples. It is a plant very amiable, Drus.
(according to the name) both for sweetness of smell, loveliness of the flower,
and for the peculiar virtue it has, to cause sleep, affection and conception.

The Hebrew word is not used in all the Old Testament, but only in Genesis 30. and
Cant. 7. in which almost all Interpreters, both Jews and Christians, do turn,
(...)
it Mandrakes; It has allusion to (...) Loves, and (...) that is Beloved; and
it appears by the smell they are said to give, that they were lovely and
pleasant.

Aben-Ezra says, that Mandrakes are fragrant, and yield a pleasant smell
(hence Loves and Mandrakes grow both upon one Hebrew root) but how they should
be good to cause conception, he wondreth, since by nature they are cold. Austin
says that he made trial, and could not find any such operation in them; and
that Rachel coveted them merely for their rarity, beauty and sweetness.

Strange assertions there have been concerning this plant, Psend. Epid.
which seem at least dubious, or rather false; Dr. Brown enumerates four,

1. The first a catachrestical or far derived similitude it holds with man,
that is, in a bifurcation or division of the root into two parts; which some
are content to call thighs: when as fair a resemblance is often found in
others. And whereas illiterate heads have been led on by the name in the first
syllable, as expressing its representation; others have better observed the
Laws of Etymology; and derived it from a word of the same language, that is,
(...), spelunca, because it delights to grow in obscure and shady places.

2. The second assertion concerns its production, that it naturally grows
under places of execution, arising from fat or urine that drops from the body
of the dead; which conceit is not only refuted as erroneous in the foundation,
but in jurious unto Philosophy in the superstruction; making putrefactive
generations, correspondent unto seminal productions; and conceiving inequivocal
effects and univocal conformity unto the efficient.

3. The third affirms the roots of Mandrakes do give a shre^k upon
eradication, which is indeed ridiculous; for such a noise may be observed in
other plants being firmly rooted, upon divulsion of parts.

4. The last, that there follows an hazard of life, to them that pull it up, or
they live not very long after, or that some evil sat pursues them: A conceit
not only injurious to truth (being confutable by daily experience) but somewhat
derogatory to the providence of God. And were (as the same Author concludes)
to introduce a second forbidden fruit, and inhance the first malediction;
making it not only mortal for Adam to taste the one, but capital unto his
posterity, to eradicate or dig up the other. It is good therefore to leave
these Fables, and hold unto the former.

By these Mandrakes and other sweet smells, are held forth Christ's Spouse, the
Church, which is the Lords field and garden, where all kind of divine and
heavenly flowers grow; where is variety and abundance of all sweetness and
^ragrancy; namely, all the sweet incomes of Spirit and life from Christ. As
also that the Spouse does entertain Christ with all her sweetness. Honors
him with all her pleasant fruits. As the favor, love and goodness of God is
great, which he has laid up for those that fear him; so all the goodness and
fruits of the Spirit and grace that flow from them, are unto his honor and
praise, and consecrated unto his use and service.

And Reuben went in the days of wheat-harvest, and found Mandrakes in the
field, Genesis 30.14. Cant. 7.13.
and brought them unto his mother Leah, etc. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at
our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up
for thee, O my beloved. Serpents.
Many have too curiously troubled themselves, in going about to define the kind
or species of the Serpent that deceived Eve; some affirm it was a Dragon,
another a Basilisk, a third a Viper, and others a common Snake. Wherein men
still continue the delusion of the Serpent, who having deceived Eve in the
main, sets her posterity on work to deceive in the circumstance, endeavoring
to propagate errors at any hand.

There is indeed a great difference of Serpents noted in natural history; for
some are very little, some exceeding great; Plin. hist. l. 8. c. 14. Se^pentum
quot colores tot dolo^es. Isidor.
some (according to the signification of the Latin word) creep, and some fly:
And some are in the mixture of colors very specious and delightful to the eye:
and such a serpent it is like the Devil used when he tempted Eve.

However seeing the Devil made use of that subtle creature, as the fittest
instrument to bring about that his cursed design; it gives us to know, that wit
unsanctified is a fit tool for the Devil to work withal: neither is there a
likelier Anvil in all the shop of Hell, whereon to forge mischief, than one
that is learned and lewd, Ingeniose nequam.
witily wicked.

Among Serpents mentioned in Scripture, two kinds are very famous, Nullum
animal tanta c l^ritate l^nguam movet ut Serpens, adco ut triplicem liaguam
habere videatur, cum unam sit. Plin. l. 6. c. 37.
1. The Viper, whose tongue is present death, as we have clear evidence
(besides what is affected by natural Historians) from Scripture Record. When a
Viper came and fastened upon Paul's hand, they looked when he would fall down
dead. And when John the Baptist would show how hurtful and dangerous the
Scribes and Pharisees (among the Jews) were, the calls them, A Generation of
vipers. The vipers tongue is worse than the Lions tooth. 2. The Asp, A kind of
serpent not known in these parts of the world. Some write, that the biting of
an Asp is uncurable; and others say, that it kills withou^remedy within four
hours space. Hence, The poison of Asps is under their lips, Romans 3.13.

There are six properties in a Serpent to be imitated; 1. He being assailed,
will strive to defend his head; so ought a Christian in all afflictions, to
strive to preserve his faith and hope in Christ. Psalm. 58.5.
2. To prevent charming or incantation, he fast stops his ear; of which Austin
thus, Quum caeperet incantatorem suum pati, allidit unam aurem terrae, and
cauda obturat alteram. That the Serpent when she begins to feel the Charmer,
clappeth one of her ears close to the ground, and stops the other with her
tail. Pliny speaks to this purpose, and the like is affirmed by Hierom and
Cassiadore. So ought Christians to beware of the worlds allurements, and Satan's
incantations; but to hearken to the wise charmings of the Gospel. 3. Swimming
over a river, he strives to hold up his head; so ought Christians to take heed
they be not drowned in the world. 4. He shuns the society of man, as his deadly
enemy, 1 Timothy 6 9.
and chooses rather to inhabit the Wilderness, and even to haunt briars and
brambles for his defense. So ought the godly, rather to seek peace and comfort
in solitary retiredness, than to be amongst their professed enemies; yea, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. 5. The Serpent is vigilant,
sleeps little, but less when he suspects danger. So ought Christians, Ephesians.
5.15. 6. They once a year cast their coat, and renew themselves. So ought
Christians, to labor to be rid of old corruptions, and to get new sanctified
souls, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. for, Gal. 6.15.

There are also six properties in a Serpent to be shunned; 1. He has a very
lofty spirit, reaching not only at men, but birds. But let Christians take heed
of pride and ambition. 2. They embrace while they sting, lying in the green
grass, and sweet flowers, to destroy the passenger. But let Christians avoid
flattery, which tickles a man to death. 3. The Serpent is unthankful, he will
kill him that nourishes him. But let not Christians be guilty of that hateful
sin of ingratitude, which renders a man the Prodigy of nature. 4. They are
mavelous voracious, killing more than they can eat. But let Christians beware
they turn not covetous engrossers. Woe unto them that join house to house, that
lay field to field, Isa 5.8.
till there bo no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the
carth. 5. Their hostility and murtherous mind, they would kill all, to set up
their own kind. Such is the depopulator, that thinks he has not room enough,
unless he could be rid of the Poor, and make them harbourless. But let
Christians avoid this, as they would the aforementioned woe. 6. Their enmity to
man, whom they ought to reverence. ( Malice (says Chrysostom) turns men into
serpents.) The like are the Jesuits, that deny allegiance to Kings, etc. But
Christians are taught another Lesson, Romans 13.

Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, Mat. 10.16.
and harmless as Doves. Beasts.
The sixth day God made beasts, over the wildest of whom, once man had power
and dominion; till he rose up and rebelled against God, they were subject unto
him; but man rebelling against God, they rebelled against man; so that now it
is from Gods special Providence that they hurt us not.

Amongst other beasts that are famous in Scripture, there is the

Lion,
Which is, 1. A Noble and Kingly creature. 2. Strong. 3. Venterous and bold. 4.
But cruel and bloody. 5. Libidinous.

It is said he is so fearless of any other creature, that when he is fiercely
pursued, he will never once alter his gate, though he dye for it. No more will
the righteous man his resolution against sin, such is his Christian-courage,
Prove. 28.1.

Elephant,
Called Behemoth; that is, Beasts in the Plural, for his hugeness: as if he
were made up of many beasts. So strong, that he can bear a wooden Tower upon
his back, and upon that several men standing to fight therefrom.

He is the hugest of all earthly creatures, says Pliny; Nine cubits high,
says Elian of some. But certainly the wonders of Gods glory do marvellously
appear in him, he being the Masterpiece among all earthly irrational creatures
in strength and understanding. Of this Animal at large, Job 40.

Wild-Ass,
A most untameable and untractable creature. To the Colt of this wild creature
is a natural man compared by Zophar, Job 11.12. for his extreme rudeness and
unruliness.

Fox,
To which, Persins.
Adversaries of the Church are fitly compared; 1. For their craft, Astuam
vapido servans sub pectore unlpem. Vulpes pellem mutat, non naturam, The Fox
may change his countenance, I^dor. Etym. ^b. 1^.1.
but not his condition. 2. For their cruelty, they do great burt among Lambs
and fowls; for lacking meat, they fain themselves dead, and so the birds
hasting down as to a carcass, volucres rapiunt and devorant, they seize upon
the birds and devour them.

Conie.
I only conclude with her; who, what she wants in strength, has in wisdom;
Proverbs 30.26. Gandet in effossis habitare cuniculus antris, she secures her
self in the rocks and stony places. It shall be our wisdom to work our selves
into the Rock Christ Jesus, where we shall be safe from Hellish Hunters.

The very beasts will teach us to know and own God, from whom we receive so
much good, so many benefits.

And God said, Genesis 1.24, 25.
Let the earth bring forth the living Creature after his kind, Cattle, and the
Beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so. And God made the Beast of the
earth after his kind, and Cattle after their kind, etc. Ask now the Beasts, and
they shall teach thee. Job 12.7. Isa. 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib, but Israel does not
know. Paradise.
Adam and Eve were placed in the Creation. Which Eden was (as is conceived) in
the upper part of Chaldea, whereabout Babel was founded. It was destroyed by
the deluge; Cecidit rosa, mansit spena. Herod. l. 1. Plin. l. 6. c. 16.
the place indeed remains, but not the pleasantness of the place. And yet
that Country is very fruitful, returning seed beyond credulity, as Pliny and
Herodotus report.

Herein grew the Tree of life, so called, per (...) effecti, or by a
Sacramental signification of Christ, who is so called, Rev. 22.2. Also the Tree
of knowledge of good and evil, so called, from the event. God forewarning our
first Parents, that they should know by woeful experience, unless they
abstained, what was the worth of good, by the want of it; and what the presence
of evil, by the sense of it. Multi etiam hodie propter arborem scientiae,
amittunt arborem vitae: Aug.
in terris manducant, quod apud inferos digerunt.



Hierom comforting a young Hermit, bade him look up to Heaven, and Paradisum
mente deambulare, to take a few turns in Paradise, by his meditations; assuring
him, that so long as he had Paradise in his mind, and Heaven in his thought,
Tamdiu in eremo non eris, He should not be sensible of his solitariness.

To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, Rev. 2.7.
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Of the Sea.
Sea.
THE Sea is the seat and source of waters. Mare quast amarum, because the
Seawater is bitter and salt.
There are three things in it specially considerable, viz.

1. The turbulency of it; so stormy and turbulent, that it threatens to
overwhelm all: To overwhelm the ships sailing upon it, to overwhelm the dry
land encompassing of it; and it would do both, if God did not bound it, saying,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, here shall thy proud waves be stayed.
Did not God put an everlasting Law upon it, it would be lawless.

2. There is a wonderful capaciousness in the Sea; (the water (they say) is ten
times bigger than the earth, the Air ten times greater than the water, and the
fire than the Air.) It is so big and broad, so extensive and vast, that it
takes in all the waters that come off the land into its bosom, and yet feels
no access.

3. The Sea is of mighty strength. Though we say, Weak as water; water is a
weak element in one sense, yet in another, water is a strong element; so
strong, that it bears down all before it, and bears all the storms that rage
upon it.

Canutus confuted his flacterers, (who told him that all things in his
Dominions were at his beck and check) by laying his command on the sea, to come
up no higher into his Land, but it obeyed him not.

Illi rebor and as triplex
Circa pectus erat, Horat. Od. 1.1, 3 Virgil.
qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem
Primus, nec timuit praecipitem Africum, etc.
Tollimur in Caelum curvato gurgite, Genesis 1.10.
and iidem
Subduct a ad manes imos descendimus unda:
Hence some have doubted, whether Mariners were to be reckoned amongst the
living or the dead. But wisely said he, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare, He
that cannot pray, let him go to Sea, and there he will learn.

-- And the gathering together of the Waters, Genesis 1.21.
called he, Seas. Fish.
The power of God is great in forming the fishes of the Sea. Especially if we
consider three things about them.

1. Their number, Inter omaes bestias nibil est faecundius piscibus, igitur
tran^fertur ad multiplication^ immensum.
as tous, they are infinite. Therefore how emphatically is their increase
expressed? When God created them, it is said, The Waters brought forth
abundantly. No sort of creatures that multiply so fast as fishes; Who is able
to report the number of these Sea-inhabitants?

2. If we consider their various kinds. Naturalists observe that there is no
creature upon the earth, but has (as I may say) its representative in the Sea,
besides those that have nothing like them on the earth.

3. Many of these inhabitants of the waters are wonderful for the vastness and
greatness of their bodies. The greatest of all living creatures are in the Sea.

We will only instance in the Leviathan, unto whom the Elephant is little.
Pliny tells of one taken that was 600. foot in length, and 360. in breadth;
Plin. lib. 32. cap. 1.
when they swim and show themselves above water, Annare insulas putes, says
the same Author, you would think them to be so many Islands: so many Mountains,
says another; who also adds, that when they grow old, they grow to that
bigness and fatness, that they keep long in a place. Insomuch as ex collectis
and condensatis pulveribus frutices erumpere cernantur, the dust and filth
gathered upon their backs seems to be an Island, which while shipmen mistake,
and think to land at, they incur a great deal of danger.

-- The great and Wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, Ps.
104.25, 26.
both small and great beasts. -- There is that Leviathan, -- made to play
therein. Ships.
The use of ships was first showed by God, in Noah's Ark, whence afterward, No
art which helps more to enrich a Nation.
Audax Japeti genus, Japhets offspring sailed, and replenished the Islands.

Of the Low-Countrey-men it is said, Peterent Coelum navibus Belgae, si navibus
peti posset.

A ship is a fabric for the Sea, a house upon the Sea, a moveable house; and
as it moves variably, so it moves swiftly; the inconstancy of the winds,
makes the motion of the ship unconstant, and the strength of the winds, makes
the motion of the ship swift. Whatsoever they do who are within the ship, the
ship moves on, if they prepare it for motion. Labitur uncta vadis abies. Virgil.
The ship seems willing to be at the Haven as soon as may be.

Let our souls be like a ship, that is made little and narrow downward, but
more wide and broad upward. Let them be ships of desire, hasting heavenward;
and then let our days pass away as they can, we shall be but the sooner at
home. Mortality shall appear to be no small mercy.

-- There go the ships. They that go down to the Sea in ships, Psa.
14.26.107.23, 24.
that do business in great waters: These see the Works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep, etc. Homo.
NVllum animal morosius est, nullum majore art tractandum, Senec.
quam homo.

Nay, (which is worse) Homo homini lupus, homo homini Demon. Therefore (says
David) Let me not fall into the hands of men, as though they were (like Cadmus
soldiers) ad internecionem nati.

Yet man is magnum miraculum, mundi Epitome, imaginis image. Imago mundi in
corpore, Dei in anima.

In man's composition there is a shadow of the Trinity; for to make up one man,
Ea fere bominum natura, (...) omnes sua mirentur, aliena despiciant. Julian.
there is an elementary body, a divine soul, and a firmamental spirit; Here is
the difference, in God there are three Persons in one essence, in us three
essences in one person. So in the soul there is a Trinity of powers, vegetable,
sensitive and rational; The former would only be, the second be and be well,
the third be well and be for ever.

O excellent Nature, in which Cabinet ten thousand forms may sit at once!
Vocabulum Homo est duorum substantiarum fibula. Man is a heavenly thing for his
soul, though earthly in regard of his body.
Man being Lord of these graces, should sit no longer in the vale of tears, but
ascend the Mountain of glory; he should fly to the Trumpet calling to Mount
Tabor, where he shall be transfigured for ever. Give thy possession on earth,
for expectation in Heaven. Not as that French Cardinal, who said, He would not
give his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise.

Man is to be considered in a fourfold estate.

In statu
1. Confectionis, as he was created. 2. Corruptionis, as he was corrupted. 3.
Refectionis, as he was renewed. 4. Perfectionis, as he shall be glorified.
In the first estate we give to man a liberty of nature. Adamus habuit p^sse si
vellet, sed non habuit velle quod posset. In the third we grant a liberty of
grace, for if the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And in the fourth
estate we confess a liberty in glory.

All the doubt betwixt us and the Papists, is of the second estate, how man
corrupted is renewed, how he comes into regeneration after degeneration: And
yet herein we consent, that the will of man is turning unto God; and in doing
good is not a stock or stone, in all and every respect passive; for every man
is willingly converted; and by Gods grace at the very time of his conversion,
he wills his own conversion: And so the will of man is in some sort co-worker
with grace; for this cause Paul exhorts us, not to receive the grace of God
in vain; And to this purpose that saying of Austin is very remarkable, Qui
fecit te sine te, nen justificabit te sine te. Fecit nescientem, justificat
volentem.

The difference then is this, they write that our will is a co-worker with
grace, by the force of nature; we say that it works with grace by grace; we
will indeed, but God works in us both to will and to work.

Man is called earth thrice by the Prophet Jeremiah, Cap. 22.29.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord; that is (as Bernard expounds)

Earth by
1. Procreation. 2. Sustentation. 3. Corruption.
Alas! what is man? Nothing, I had almost said, Somewhat less than nothing;
embarked nine months in a living vessel, at last he arives in the world, Lord
of the Land, yet weeps at his possession; in infancy and age fourfooted, in
youth scarce dressed, makes not his Will, till he lie a dying, and then dies to
think he must make his Will.

O quam contempta res est homo, nisi supra humana se erexerit! Tantus quisque
est, quantus est apud Deum. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the
ground, Genesis 2.7.
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life: and man became a living
soul. After the man is the woman made, Gatak.
as a yoke fellow standing on even ground with him, though drawing on the left
side.

Mulier quasi mollior, the weaker vessel, therefore to bo born withal.

Origin speaks somewhat contemptibly of women; When Christ came into the Coasts
of Tyrus and Sidon, In Mat. 15.22.
Behold a Woman, Mira res Evangelista, A strange thing, O Evangelist! that is,
the Author of transgression, the mother o sin; the weapon of the Devil, the
cause of our expulsion out of Paradise.

But Christ honored women, in lying in the womb of a woman: He appeared first
to women after his Resurrection, and made them Apostolas apostolorum, Apostles,
to preach his Resurrection to the Apostles.

There have been women of special note, Sarah the Mother of the Faithful.
Hester the Nurse and preserver of the Faithful. Women that ministered to Christ
of their own substance, etc.

There have been learned women; Theano Crotoniatis was a Philosopher and a Poor
too. Pythagoras learned his natural Philosophy of his sister Themistocleas.
Clem. Alex.
Olympia Fulvia Morata an Italian of the City of Ferrara, taught the Greek and
Latin tongues at Heidelberg Anno 1554. Aratha read openly in the Schools at
Athens. Leoptia wrote against Theophrastus, etc.

Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, 1 Cor. 11.11.
neither the woman without the the man in the Lord. Man's Body.
PVulchrum corpus infirmis anima, Isocrat.
est tanquam bonum navis and malus gubernator.

The Philosophers say, in respect of the substance of the body, it consists
most of earth and water; but in respect of the virtue and efficacy, it
consists more of fire and air; and so the body is kept in an equal
temperature, in the operation of the elementary qualities.

Omnia operatus est Dominus in pondere, numero, and mensura, that the humors
may keep a proportionable harmony amongst themselves; if this harmony be
broken, it brings destruction to the body; As if the heat prevail, then it
brings Fevers, if the cold prevail, then it brings Lethargies; if the
moist prevail, then it brings Hydropsies: So that the extreme qualities heat
and cold, must be temperate by the middle qualities moist and dry. For the body
of man is like a Clock, if one wheel be a miss, all the rest are disordered,
the whole fabric suffers.

Bodine observes, that there are three regions within man's body (besides all
that is seen without) answerable to those three regions of the world,
Elementary, Etherial and Caelestial. His entrails, and whatsoever is under his
heart resemble the elementary region, wherein only there is generation and
corruption; The heart and vitals that are divided from those entrails by the
Diaphragma, resemble the etherial religion; As the brain does the heavenly,
which consists of intelligible creatures.

Austin complains, that men much wonder at the high mountains of the earth,
Hugo waves the sea, deep falls of rivers, the vastness of the Ocean, the
motion of the Stars, Et relinquunt seipsos nec mirantur, but wonder not at
all at their wonderful selves. And truly the greatest miracle in the world, is
that little world (or rather Isle) of man; in whose very body (how much more in
his soul?) are miracles enough (betwixt head and feet) to fill a volume.

The body is not one member, but many. 1 Cor. 24.44.
Head.
The head is the most excellent part of the body; therefore the chief part of
any thing is called the head. Christ is called the Head of the Church, and the
Husband the head of the Wife; And Israel is promised upon obedience, to be made
the head and not the tail. Hence we uncover our head when we do homage to any
man; to signify, that our most excellent part reverenceth and acknowledges
him.

In the head our reason and understanding dwells; and all the senses are placed
in the head, except the touch, which is spread through the whole body. Besides,
the head is supereminent above the rest of the body, and gives influence to
it. There is also a conformity betwixt the head and the rest of the body: And
thus it is betwixt Christ and his Church, he has graces above the rest of his
members, he gives influence and grace to them, and he is like them.

The hair of the head (as also the nails) is an excrement, 1 Cor. 11.14.
and not to be nourished by the man, (though given to the woman for a
covering.) Under the Law the cutting of both off did signify casting away
transgressions, D^ut. 21.12.
and paring off superflu^^ies, by the constant practice of mortification.

Brain.
Cerebrum, Minsh.
quasi carabrum, the Greek, (...), ab (...), in, and (...), eaput.

There is an assertion that man proportionally has the largest brain of any
creature. Some have found upon observation that they have weighed four pound,
and sometime five and a half. Hist. Animal. lib. 1.
Scaliger says, that the head of a man is the fifteenth part of his body.

Beside the brain-pan, there is the Pia-mater compassing the brain like a
swaching-cloth, or inner rind of a tree.

Eye.
God who at first drew light out of darkness, does by an admirable work, draw
the light of the body, Matthew. 6.21.
out of the black apple of the eye, which Philosophers call the chrystalline
humor.

The Eye is kept most diligently (being a tender part) and strongly guarded by
nature with tunicles: Oculus and s^ma non patiuntur jocos.
There are five in number to keep it from hurt; 1. Aranea tuneca, like a
spiders web: 2. Retiformis, woven like a net: 3. Wea, like a berry: 4.
Cornea, like a horn: 5. Adnata tunica, the cover of the eye, or the eyelids.
Psalm. 17.8.
Hence David, to express the special care that God has over his Saints,
says, Keep me as the apple of the eye.

The Eye before the fall, was the window to let in good instructions to the
soul; but since the fall, it is proxenata peccati, the broker that goes
betwixt the heart and the object, to make up the sinful bargain. And because it
is now the most sinful sense, God has placed tears in it, which are the tokens
of repentance.

Ear.
The Ear is a very honorable part of the body, therefore of old they did hang
earrings and jewels in their ears, Weem.
as a sign of honor. And when men were disgraced, their ear was boared in
token of infamy.

Philosophers call the ear, sensum disciplinae, it i^ so necessary a part for
instruction. It is also an excellent sense for delight; Solomon calls the
ears, the daughters of music. And it is the most excellent member for grace,
for faith comes by hearing.

Besides, there is not a member that the Devil envieth more than the ear,
because it is Janua vitae, the gate of life; as we see in the man possessed
with the deaf Devil. He possessed that sense as the most excellent, to hinder
him from hearing.

The Dragon (they say) biteth the Elephants ear, and chence sucketh his blood,
because he knows that to be the only place which he cannot reach with his
trunck to defend; So satan that red Dragon, if he find no other way, endeavors
to infuse ill counsel at our ears.

Mouth.
Of this member, says one, Man before his fall was content with little, but
since he labors not to fill a mouth, but a gulf, as it were the mouth of the
Leviathan. See Belly, page 134.

Teeth.
The Teeth both in Greek and Latin, have their name from eating, (...), quasi
(...), and so dentes, quasi edentes.

The teeth are the hardest of the bones, if that they be bones; Aristotle is at
least doubtful whether he should reckon them to be bones or no. There are no
other bones so solid and hard as they are, neither come they much short of the
hardness of stones, if they do not equal stones in the edges of them.
Nevertheless they wear by daily use, and therefore they do continue to grow as
long as man's life continues: but only so much, after they are come to their
full growth, as they are worn away.

The seat of the teeth are the jaws, where they have their several sockets into
which they are mortised. Galen terms their comely order in their places, the
seemly dance of nature. But in old men they stand wetshod in slimy humor, or
are hollow, falling out one after another. The grinders cease, Bccl. 12.3.
because they are few.

Tongue.
The Tongue of man is a most honorable member, called his glory, because it is
the instrument to glorify God.

Before the fall the Tongue of man was like a swift writer, and uttered those
things which his heart indicted, and he spoke but with one tongue: But since the
fall it is a world of iniquity, and he is bilinguis, double tongued, yea
trilinguis; for a backbiter is a man with a threefold tongue, or a tongue which
has three stings: We have an example of it in Doeg, who killed three at once
with his evil report; Saul, the Priests, and himself.

There are but five virtues of the tongue reckoned by Philosophers, but there
are many sins of the tongue, some have reckoned up as many as there be letters
in the Alphabet. Moreover it is observable that when the Apostle gives us the
Anatomy of wickedness in all the members of the body, he stays longest on
the Organs of speech, and goes over them all, Romans 3.13, 14. And Saint James
spends almost a whole Chapter upon it. Cap 3.

The Tongue is made in the shape of a sword, and David felt it as a sword in
his bones; it is sharp as a Rasor, which instead of shaving the hair, cutteth
the throat. It is of a flame color, and sets on fire the course of nature.

Master Trapp recites a story out of Camerarius, concerning two brethren
walking forth in a starlight night: Says one of the brethren, would I had a
pasture as larg: as this element; And says the other, would I had as many Oxen
as there be Stars, Says the other again, where would you feed those Oxen? in
your pasture, replied he. What? whether I would or no? yea said he, whether you
would or no, What? in spite of me? yes, said he. And thus it went on from
words, till at length each sheathed his sword in another bowels. Behold how
great a matter a little kindles. And the tongue is a fire.

No man can so change himself, Plutarch.
but his heart may sometime be seen at his tongues end. For well said one, Man
is like a Bell, and his tongue like the Clapper; so long as this stands
still, he may be thought to be without any great flaw, craze or crack in him;
but let it once stir, and then he discovers himself presently; For out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth will speak. Matthew. 12.34.
Therefore good is the Arabian Proverb, Cave non feriat lingua tua collum tuum,
Take heed thy tongue cut not thy throat.

A man has two ears, and but one tongue, to teach him to be swift to hear, and
slow to speak. Robert Smith Ma^tyr, lest 15 sentences to his wife, one of of
which, Remember that God has hedged in your tongue with the teeth and lips,
that it might speak under correction. Alexander forgave many sharp swords, but
never any sharp tongues.
Moreover, God has bedged in this unruly evil, with a double hedge of lips and
teeth: And it is placed on purpose in the midst betwixt the brain and the
heart, that it might take the advice of both. It is also tied fast by the root.

There is much need you see of reforming and polishing this member. Death and
life (says Solomon) are in the power of the tongue: Upon the right or ill
using of it, a man's safety does depend. And lest you should think the Scripture
only intends temporal safety or ruin: Our Savior says, By thy words thou
shall be justified, and by thy words condemned. One of the prime things that
shall be brought forth to judgment, are your words. Again, He that keeps his
mouth, keeps his life: but he that opens wide his lips shall have
destruction. The wise man intimates a similitude of a City besieged, to open
the gates betrayeth the safety of it; all watch and ward is about the gate: So
the tongue is the gate or door of the Soul, by which it goes out in converse
and communication; to keep it open and loose guarded, lets in an enemy,
which proves the death of the Soul.

Face.
The Face is the table of beauty or comeliness, and when that is abused, it is
made the seat of shame; hence spitting in the face is such an act of reproach.
And cocovering the face (as in Haman) the mark of a condemned man.

It is reported of Malcotius (as also of Augustus) that the majesty of his
countenance, Turk. Hist. fol. 415.
with the resplendant beams issuing out of his eyes (as it bad been the rays
of the Sun) were of such piercing brightness, that no man was able with
immoved and fixed eye long to behold the same. Likewise in the description of
Tamerlane, amongst the rest; Fol. 235.
in his eyes sat such a rare majesty, as a man could hardly endure to behold
them, without closing of his own: And many in talking with him, and often
beholding of him, became dumb; which caused him oftentimes with a comely
modesty to abstain from looking too earnestly upon such as spoke unto him, or
discoursed with him.

En quam difficile est animum non prodere vultu. The face varieth as the mind
varieth. Index animi val^us.
That is seen in the face, which is out of sight. Four things are chiefly seen
in the face; 1. Pride, Psalm. 10.4. 2. Fear, Dan. 5.6. 3. Envy and Discontent,
Genesis 31.2, 5. 4. Guilt, and shame, Genesis 4.7. Thus the evidences of the heart
are read there, and we may take the copy of a man's spirit in his countenance.

Dugge.
God has placed the woman's Dugge (says Weemse) in her breast, Duplex est
causa, Physica and moralis.
and not in her belly, as in beasts, and that for two causes, 1. Physical, 2.
Moral. The Physical cause, God has placed them so near the liver, that the
milk might be the better concocted, and the more wholesome for the child. The
Moral cause, that the woman might impart her affection and love more to her
child, by giving it suck with hen dugge, which is so near the heart.

Hence the giving of suck was one of the greatest obligations of old, betwixt
the mother and the children.

Hand.
Amongst the several outward members of the body, the Hand is of great use.
Fox. 1. By the Hand we promise and threaten; Hence the right hand of
fellowship, Turk. Hist. fol. 1392.
(^he left hand is the most honorable amongst the Turks.) 2. We reckon by it,
the Ancients reckoned upon their left hand, until they came to an hundred
years, Prev. 3.16.
and then they began to reckon upon their right hand. Hence Solomon, Wisdom
comes with length of days upon the right hand; meaning, that Wisdom should
make a man to live a long age. 3. We worship with the hand. Idolaters used to
kiss their Idols, but because they could not reach to the Moon to Kiss her,
they kissed their hand in homage before her. To this practice Job seems to bear
reference, when he says, My mouth has not kissed my hand; Cap. 31.27. The
Ancients do understand all that which is from the shoulder to the fingers ends
to be the hands; subdivided into three parts, bracbiums cubitum. and extremam
manum.
purging himself of this kind of Idolatry, as some conceive. In a word, it is
the Organ of Action; and the special Providence of God is to be marked, that he
has made man to take his meat with his hand, and has not left him to gather
it up with his lips, as the Beasts do; for if a man did so, his lips would
become so thick, that he could not speak distinctly; as we see by experience,
by those that have so.

Heart.
The Jews compare the heart of Man for the excellency of it, to three things.

1. To the Holiest of all, where the Lord gave his answers; so the Lord gives
his, answers first out of the heart. 2. To Solomon's Throne, as the stateliest
place where the King sits; so the Lord dwells in the heart of man, as in his
Throne. 3. To Moses Tables, in which he wrote the Law; so God promises to
write his Law in man's heart.
Three things God holds in his own hand.
1. Revenge. 2. Future Events. 3. Searching of men's hearts.
Principale animae non secundum Platonem in cerebro, sed juxta Christum in
cord. It Is not the eye that sees, but the heart; not the ear that hears,
but the heart; not the tongue that speaks, but the heart: Yea, there is in
the heart both 1. Talking, Psalm. 14.1. and 2. Walking, Ezekiel. 11.21.


In Gods account, Quicquid con non facit, non fit.

The heart is the first mover of all the actions of man; for as the first mover
carries all the spheres of Heaven with it, so does the heart of man carry all
the members of the body with it. In natural Generation the heart is first
framed, and in supernatural Regeneration, it is first reformed.

The heart is primum vivens, and ultimum moriens: So the spiritual life of
grace begins in the heart first, and is last felt there. Hence it is that
Michael the Archangel, and the Devil, strove no faster about the body of Moses,
than they do about the heart of man.

Liver.
Next to the heart in man, is the Liver, and from hence it has in latin, the
name jecur quasi juxta cor, as it were placed near unto the heart.

This is the shop of sanguification, or fountain of blood, from whence by the
channels of the Especially vens sorta and vena cava.
veins, it is carried over the several Provinces of man's body.

God has fenced the noblest parts, as the brain, with Pia matter, and
Duramater; the heart with Pericardia, so the liver is enclosed by a Net, called
Roticulum.

Lungs.
The Lungs are the bellows of the voice, and are seated near the heart, to
teach us, that speech is but the interpreter of the heart; against those that
think one thing, and speak another.

Galen a Profane Physician writing of the excellent parts of man's body, and
coming to speak of the double motion of the Lungs, could not choose but sing an
hymn to that God, whosoever he were, that was Author of so excellent and
admirable a piece of work.

Ribbs.
The bones of man are they, (...). Hyp.
which (as Hypocrates says) do give to the body stableness, uprightness and
shape. 1. Stableness, because they do, as it were, defend it against the force
that assaulteth it, and because they uphold the body, as the foundation, walls
and timber uphold the house. 2. Uprightness, because unless the creatures had
bones, they would creep upon the ground as worms do. 3. Shape and figure,
because from them the stature and growth are limited and bounded.

Many are the bones of man's body, and of diverse sorts, and manifold shapes,
that so man may sit his motion to the diverse objects to which his desire shall
carry him: which variety likewise is very useful, that when one bone receives
any hurt, thereby the others might not be hindered in their offices. And yet,
such is the connection of them, and so wonderfully are they sitted together,
that all the bones are as it were but one, by that contiguity that is between
them. The total compage and set of the bones is called a Syntaxe, and the
fabric of the bones so fitted together is called a Sceleton.

Amongst the rest, the Ribbs are eminently for defense in the body of man; of
which there are two sorts, 1. The first called by Anatomists, Costae legitimae,
whereof there are seven; these defend the vital parts. 2. The second, Costa
spuriae, whore of there are five, lying to the belly.

Intrails
They lie in a hid and secret part of the body; therefore David when he would
declare how God knows hid and secret things, he says, Thou tryest my Reins;
that is, my secretest cogitations, Psalm. 139.

Belly.
The mouth, a little and strait hole, is soon filled; but then there is the
stomach of man and belly, a monster (says one) which being contained in so
little a bulk as his body, is able to consunie and devour all things.

This made Seneca cry out, Senet.
Dii boni, quantum hominum unus excercet venture! Quicquid avium volitat,
quicquid piscium natat, quicquid ferarum discurrit, nestris sepelitur
ventribus. What birds soever fly, what fishes soever swim, what beasts soever
run about, all are buried in our bellies.

Deus homini angustum ventrem, etc. (says Chrysostom) God has given us a
little mouth and stomach, to teach us moderation, to the shame of those beastly
belly-gods, that glut themselves and devour the creatures, as though their
throats were Whirl-pools, and their Bellies bottomless.

Navel.
As a Tree by the roots is fastened to the earth, and by the fibrae the little
strings upon them draws nourishment and spirits from the earth a so is it with
a child in the womb, The Navel fastens it to the Mother, and by the Called Ven^
(...).
vein and Arteries in the Navel, it fetches in nourishment and spirits.

Plutarch likens the Navel to the rope and Anchor, which stays the Infant in
that harbor in the Mothers womb; which, when it is cut, the Infant goes from
harbor to the Sea and storms of the world.

Bladder.
Of this part a good Anatomist speaking, says, That it is a large Cistern or
Vessel. In respect of the roundness of it, some have likened it unto a sphere;
the weakness of which in old men; makes them unable to hold and keep their
water.

Thigh.
The thigh is called in Latin femur a ferendo, because it bears and holds
up the creature. It is that which goes from the hip to the knee, and has the
longest and strongest bone in the whole body.

Leg.
It is that which goes from the knee to the heel. It is made of two bones, 1.
The one called the shin-bone, this bone is the inner and thicker, called in
Latin tibia a flute or pipe, either because of resemblance, or else because at
first a flute was made of that bone taken from the leg of a Heart. 2. The other
which is thinner is called the brace-bone, resembling the braces of building,
and joining the muscles of the leg together, as they hold the beams of an house
together.

Note here, the thighs, legs and feet, are Solomon's strong men; Eccl 12.3.
Membra levant baculis tardi^; senilibus annis
And yet in old age their strength is enfeebled, when they bow under their
burden, and are ready to overthrow themselves and the whole body. Hence old
people are glad to betake them to their third leg, a staff or crutch; therefore
He siod calls them (...). Let them learn to lean upon the Lord, and pray with
David, Psalm. 71.9.
Cast me not off in the time of old age: for sake me not when my strength
fails.

Foot.
The foot is the base, ground and pedistal, which sustaineth the whole building
of the body: being the true Organ and Instrument of walking.

The foot is one extreme of the body. The extremes comprehend all the parts.
That which extends from one extreme, or utmost part to another, is extended
through all. From East to West, is all the world over; and from head to foot is
all the body over. Thus Satan is said to smite Job with boils, from the sole of
his foot, to the crown of his head; that is, he smote his whole body. He was
like a roughcast wall from top to toe: Being, as it were, armed (or rather
harmed) Cap-a-pe, with burning and inflaming ulcers.

All these members of man's body, both external and internal, are curiously
wrought, as it were, by the book. Had God left out an hand or an eye in his
Common-place-book (says one) thou had wanted it. Psa. 136.
In thy book all my members were written.

The things very samous amongst the members of the body, are 1. Symmetry, and
2. Sympathy.


measure, has set the members every one of them in the body, as it has
pleased him.

And wisely has he placed them. There are some members that are called membra
ridicalia, radical members; as the Liver, the Heart, and the Brain; And in
these the Lord has placed the natural, vital and animal spirits, These spirits
are carried by the veins, arteries and nerves; The veins carry the vital
spirits from the Liver; the arteries carry the natural spirits from the heart;
and the nerves carry the animal spirits from the brain. There are other members
which are serving members; as the hands, feet, and such.



Besides, the members of the body help one another, the superior rule the
inserior; as the eyes the whole body: The inferior uphold and support the
superior; as the feet the legs; the thighs support the who'e body: And the
middle members defend the body, and provide things necessary for it; as we see
in the hands and arms. And great grief in one member, makes the pain of the
other member seem the less; which all show the sympathy amongst the members.

The variety of the members of the body, shows also the wisdom of God; 1 Cor.
12.17.
for as the Apostle says, If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

I will praise thee, Psa. 139.14.
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. The Soul of Man.
PHilosophers confess, Creando insunditur, and infundendo creatuc.
Anima quaeque intelligimus, and tamen quae sit ipsa intelligere non valemus.

It is a spiritual substance in man, created by God, which can exist when
separated from the body.

Leo decimus concluded atheistically of the soul, Et redit in nihilum, qued
fuit ante nihil, Eccl. 3.21.
But Solomon tells us, the spirit of man that goes upward; whereas the spirit
of a beast that goes downward to the earth. The spirit of a beast is only
vital, man's spirit is both vital and rational: The spirit of a beast is
perishable, man's spirit is immortal. And thus the preacher by comparing the
spirits of men, with the spirits of beasts; By going upward, understands the
immortality of the spirits of men; and by going downward to the earth, the
perishing of the spirits of beasts. Furthermore, by the manner of this Phrase,
he seems to compare the spirit of a man unto a purer exhalation, which
ascending upward, continues in the Air; The spirit of a beast, unto a thick
and black vapor, Abducitur dum absum videtur, opere discedens non vigore, actu
languent non statu, comparer cessat, non esse. De anima. c. 53.
which being dissolved into rain, descends and falls to the earth. The
spirit of a man therefore dies not, (as does the spirit of a beast) As
Tertullian speaks, It is but carried away, when it seems to vanish away;
and failing in his work, not in his strength; departing in respect of actuating
the body, not in respect of its own natural existence; cease only to appear
to be, not cease to be.

It is with the Soul of man, as it is with the needle of a compass, which
always trembles, and shakes, till it turn to the North Pole: but being
turned directly thitherwards, it is quiet, and stands still. So the Soul of
man, being by sin turned away from God, is never at rest, till by true
repentance it return to him again.

And truly, as the soul is the life of the body, so God is the life of the
soul: When the soul departs, the body dies; and when God departs, the soul dies.

Quod intus est, homo est. The first work of Physic in a diseased body,
Prosper.
is to repel the venomous humors from the Heart: because a disease once
seated in this Metropolis, is incurable. And the first care of the members in
man, is to ward a blow made at the Head. Art and Nature in preserving and
defending those two noble parts, are to be imitated of a Christian, in guarding
the Soul, that part of chiesest importance, the peace whereupon consists the
main of all our business.

God has given us two Hands, -- etc. and but one Soul: That once gone, and all
is gone. Yet, There are that Sell, Pawn, Lose, Give
their Souls.

linguam venalem, so it may be said of the Covetous man; that he has animam
vendlem. The Voluptuous man does sell his soul for Pleasure, as Esau sold his
birthright for pottage. And the Proud man does sell his soul for Advancement;
as Alexander the sixth is said to have done for his Popedom.

David did as it were pawn his soul, in committing adultery; Noah, in being
drunk; and Peter, in denying Christ: These redeemed their souls with bitter
repentance. Let us take heed how we play the Merchant-venturers in this case.

Da mihi animas, caetera toll tibi. Genesis 14.21.



O blockish stupidity! Will you keep your Chickens from the Kite, your Lambs
from the Wolf, your Fawn from the Hound, your Pigeons and Conies from (...)
Vermin; and not your Souls from the Devil?

What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? Mat. 16.26.
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Understanding.
The soul is enamelled with four excellent faculties, two superior, viz.
Understanding and Will; and two inferior, viz. the part irascible, and
concupiscible.

The Understanding, is an essential faculty in the soul, whereby it knows,
judges, and discerns naturally truth from falsehood.

Man has a reasonable soul, and a natural judgment, whereby he differs from
bruit beasts: And some there are that do animam excolere, improve their natural
abilities by Art, and so go far beyond others in worth; differing from the
unlearned as much almost, as a man does from a beast. Which yet amounts not
to wisdom, without the concurrence of Gods good Spirit to sanctify all, as the
Altar sanctifies the gold of the Altar. They that are destitute of which,
their abilities are vain; and to such we may say, as Austin once wrote to a man
of great parts, Ornari abs te Diabolus quaerlt.

But though men have the faculty, yet God gives the light: As the Dial is
only capable of showing the time of the day, when the Sun shines on it. He
illightens both the organ and object: He anoints the eyes with eye salve, and
gives both sight and light.

There is a spirit in man; Job 32.8.
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. Will.
The Will is an essential faculty in the soul working freely, having liberty to
choose, refuse or suspend: Not determinate to one thing.

Humane reason and understanding, Actus voluntatis a voluntate producitur, sed
a ratioue suadetur. Vives l. de anima.
is unto the will and affections, as the eye to the body, the Captain to the
soldiers, the Pilot to the ship: the eye be dark, the body walks blindly; if
the Captain be ignorant, the soldiers march disorderly; if the Pilot be
unskilful, the ship sails dangerously. So whilst the will and affectiors do
follow such a blind, ignorant and unskilful guide, as the natural understanding
is in supernatural things; how can they walk without falling? march without
disorder? or fail without danger of drowning?

The actions of the Will are, In civilibus libera, sed non in spiritualibus.
velle and nolle. But, tota voluntas aversa a Deo. Phaedra confessed to her
Nurse, Quae lequeris vera sunt, sed furor suggerit sequi pejora. Senec.

Scotus compares the Will of man, to an Horse at liberty, and the Grace of God
to the Rider: By man's fall the Will lost not its nature, but was changed in
quality; Sent. l. 1. distinc. 17.
therefore as the Horse can run freely without a Rider, so can the Will of man
move freely without the assistance of Gods saving grace; but it is a wild race,
being unbridled: But once brought to conformity by Gods Spirit directing, it is
like the Optic nerves, which be whole at the roots, though one of the branches
be perished.

Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Psalm. 110.3. Phil 2.13.
For it is God which works in you both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure. Note here, that Passions are motions of the sensitive appetite,
stirred up by the apprehension either of good or evil in the imagination,
working some outward change in the body. They are so called, to put a
difference betwixt them and the Faculties of the soul, which are naturally
inbred in it; and betwixt the Habits, which are infused and acquired, and also
always alike and permanent. To enumerate some.

Love. Amor est voluntari^s quidam affectus, quam conjunctissime re quae bona
judicatur, fruandi.
] A passion or affection in the concupiscible appetite, that it may enjoy the
thing which is esteemed to be good, as near as it can.

Austin shows when our love is inordinate, thus: Diligens non diligenda, ant
aeque diligens, quod minus, vel amplius diligendum est; aut minus, vel amplius,
quod aeque diligendum est, contra or dinem charitatis diligit. That is, He that
loves things that are not to be beloved; or loves things equally, which are
less or more to be beloved; or loves less or more, that which is equally to be
beloved; He loves not as he should love.

Hatred.] Est quo voluntas resilit ab objecto disconvenienti, vel ut
disconvenienti: A turning of the concupiscible uppetite from that which is
evil, or esteemed evil. Opposed to Love.

Joy.] Turk. hist. fol. 750.
A passion arising from the sweetness of the object which we enjoy.

It is storied of one Sinan a Jew, that he was so overjoyed with the sudden and
unexpected return of his son, whom he had for many years before given over as
lost; that in embracing of him he fainted, and so presently for joy died.

Grief.] A passion of the soul, which arises from a discontment that we have
received from the objects, contrary to her inclination. Or, a natural
affection, whereby the heart is grieved, in respect of some evil thing which
troubles us. A Painter diversely and by degrees, presenting the sorrow of the
Parents and friends of Iphygenia, when she was sacrificed; when he came to her
Father, he painted him with his face covered, as confessing his Art not
sufficient to express in the visage a grief of that degree.

Jactant Stoici (...)seu indolentiam. And amongst the Thracians, Sorrow was
accounted so effeminate a passion, that they adorned those Men that mourned,
like Women.

Fear.] A certain natural affection, whereby men are stricken, by reason of
some dangerous and hurtful evil, either true or imagined.

This cowardly passion (when inordinate) expectorates and exposes a man to many
both sins and sufferings. The Camelion is said to be the most fearful of all
creatures, and does therefore turn himself into so many colors, to avoid
danger, which yet will not be.

Anger.] It is a passion of the mind for wrong offered. It differs from
Hatred; for Anger seeks revenge sub ratione justi vindicativi; but Hatred is
ira inv^terata. Austin compares Anger to a more in a man's eye, but Hatred to a
beam.

Ira utendum est ut milite vel satellite, non ut duce. Arist.
Memory.
Memory is the Souls storehouse; there we lay up observations, Memoria rerum
prateritarum; being ararium animae. There is a double act of it, 1. Ut
fideliter conservat. 2. Vt prompte reddat.
and from thence we setch them out, as occasions invite.

Our Memory naturally is like filthy Ponds, wherein Fish die soon, and Frogs
live long: Rotten stuff is remembered, memorable mercies are forgotten. Hence we
that should be Temples of Gods praises, are as graves to bury his benefits.

Most men write Injuries in marble, Courtesies in the sand. What Is bad, they
can retain sufficiently; but in matters of God, their memories serve them not.

Most men have Memories like Nets, that let go the clear water, and catch
nothing but slicks and refuse stuff; Or like Sieves, that retain the chaff, and
let go the corn; Or like the creature Cervarius, that if he but look back,
forgets the meat he was eating, though never so hungry, and seeks for new: Or
Sabinus in Seneca, who never in all his life could get by heart these three
names, of Homer, Ulysses, and Achilles.

The Cabalists until of late time wrote not; but taught and learned by mouth
and diligent hearing of their Rabbis, committing things to memory.

Memory is like the leafs of books, which being seldom used, do cleave together.

The Soul should be as an holy Ark, the Memory as the Pot of Manna, preserving
holy truths for holy uses.

Therefore every Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of heaven, Mat.
13.5^.
is like unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his
treasure things new and old. Conscience.
Conscience is Gods Spy, and Man's Overseer.

It is called Conscientia (says Bern.) quasi cordis scientia: For, Scientia
is, when the heart knows other things; Conscientia, quando cor novit se. In
Greek it is (...), in Latin Conscientia; a joint knowledge, or a knowledge
with another: Either cum alio, that is, with the High and Eternal God; for none
besides God and a man's own self, has an immediate knowledge of himself: Or
rather scientia cum alia scientia; there is a knowledge whereby we know that we
know, and that is Conscience.

Damascen defines it thus; It is lex nostri intellectus. And certainly,
Conscientia non est contra scientiam, sed cum scientia; else it is a Chimera of
man's own. Origin, Est correptor and paedagogus animae. Bernard, Est
inseparabilis gloria vel confusio uniuscujusque. The Schoolmen say. It is
Applicatio scientiae ad factum, seu faciendum. Our late Writers, Est practicus
syllogismus, hominem excusans aut accusans.

I conceive, it may be thus defined. Conscience is a function of the
understanding, whereby we apply the general knowledge that is in us, to our
particular thoughts, words and actions.

For it is not a part of the Will, but of the Understanding: not of that which
we call the orical, but of that which is termed practical. For as a dead man is
no man, but (...): So a dead Conscience is no Conscience, but nomine tenus.
Therefore it is in work and action. Whereupon the Schoolmen contend, that it is
neither habitus, nor potentia, but actus: His whole work being to apply the
general Knowledge engraven in us by the pen of Nature, to our particular
thoughts, words and actions.

Bernard has very well observed four sorts of Consciences; Viz. A Conscience
that is 1. Good, but not quiet. 2. Quiet, but not good. 3. Both good, and
quiet. 4. Neither good, nor quiet.


But Scripture makes mention of sundry sorts of Consciences; Viz.

erring or blind Conscience. Joh. 16.2.
As was in them that thought they did God good service, when they killed the
children of God. Such a conscience was in Paul before his conversion, for the
which he was grieved afterward. Hence it is safe to keep to this; Conscience
is regula regulata, but the Word of God is regula regulans.

sleeping Conscience. A man knows the will of God, yet his Conscience being
asleep for a time, he lies snorting in the bed of sin. So did David in his sin
of numbering the people; 2 Samuel 24.
but his conscience awoke at the length, and his heart smote him for it.

seared Conscience. Such as was in them, 1 Timothy 4.2. when men are past feeling,
and hardened in their sins. They are so accustomed to such sins, that custom
becomes another nature; they think those to be no sins. These are in the ready
way to hell.

accusing Conscience. Which will never suffer a man to be quiet day nor night.
This may prove a Tragedy, both in the end and in the beginning too; and it may
end with a Comedy in Gods children. It may lead some to hell, and for others it
may be the way to heaven.

Mordeat nunc ut moriatur -- excusing and clearing Conscience. When the books
are cleared between God and us. And as to this (though all commanded duties be
good things, yet) these cannot acquit our Consciences from sin; but the only
way to come to a quiet and excusing Conscience, is the application of Christ's
merits to our selves. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1.

A man sins against knowledge and conscience, 1. Interpretative, when he
might know better. 2. When he sins against the light of nature. 3. Upon a
doubting conscience: It may be a sin for ought he knows. 4. If formerly he knew
it, though now by error he is drawn aside. 5. Especially when it is against
checks of conscience, either in omission or commission.

The event of such a one is, either, 1. He has a brazen face upon sin, as the
Philistines, when they said, These are great gods, let us fight more stoutly.
Or, 1 Samuel 4.
2. There is excuse for it. Or, 3. They despair, as Judas, when he sought Hell
with an halter.

He has a good Conscience, Qui habet in cord puritatem, in ore veritatem, in
action rectitudinem. This is not amiss; yet some think it expresses not the
power of a good Conscience.

Suspicion is an inseparable companion to an evil conscience: But, Recta
conscientia dulcis nutricula vitae.

Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense,
Act. 24.16.
toward God, and toward man. Of man's Genius.
The blind Painims held, that Genius was the natural God or Angel of every
thing, place or person; And that every man is born with two Genii, the one
whereof encourages us to do well, the other to do evil. So that Genius is a
God (say they) in whose government every man does live so soon as he is born;
either because he takes care for our begetting, or that he is engendered with
us, or that he takes care of us when we are begotten. So Genius a gignendo,
Alst.
quia in nobis tuitionem habet quamprimum simus geniti.

I take it to be the Spirit of man, Nature it self, or delectation moved by
nature; unde Genio indulgere, to give himself to pleasure. Or lastly, by it I
understand the natural inclination of men, which God has divided according to
the different affairs of the world, and varied them according to the variety of
actions to be performed therein. Which they who consider not, rudely rushing
upon professions and ways of life unequal to their natures, dishonor not only
themselves and their professions, but pervert the harmony of the whole world.

For as there are many great Wits to be condemned, who have neglected the
increment of Arts, and the sedulous pursuit of Knowledge; so are there not a
few very much to be pitied, whose industry being not attended with natural
parts, they have sweat to little purpose, and rolled the stone in vain. Which
chiefly proceeds from natural incapacity, and genial indisposition, at least
to those particulars whereunto they apply their endeavors.

And thus many men engage in undertakings, for which their heads were never
squared, or timbred out. Whereas if they went on according to Gods ordination,
and were every one employed in points concordant to their natures; Professional
and Arts would rise up of themselves, nor need we a lanthorn to find a man in
Athens. But want of giving heed unto this, is one reason (as is by some
concluded) why though Universities be full of Scholars, they are oftentimes
empty of Learning.

-- Ye know not what manner spirit ye are of. Luke 9.55.
De Providentia. Providentia latin dicitur a videndo, at Hebraice, ut and
Latin vox a sensu ad intellectum transfertur. Rivet. It is continuata quaedam
creatio; Creation gives esse prime, Providence esse porro. T. Hist. f. 1390.

GOD is said in Scripture to regard, Three ways, Secundum 1. Cognitionem. 2.
Gratiam. 3. Judiciuns.


Ipse quia in Coelo rerum, Pelagoque geratur,
Et Tellure videt, totum inquirit in orbem.
He sees all things, and yet is seen of none. As it is said of the Turkish
Sultan, that he has a window joining to the Divano, where he may hear and see
any thing, and not be seen.

GOD is, 1. Skilful in Dirigendo, a perfect Master. 2. Pitiful in Corrigendo,
Not breaking the bruised reed, nor quenching the smoking flax. 3. Bountiful in
Porrigendo, giving all bread, and breath, and all things.


Elizabeth Young, Act. and Mon.
in the days of Queen Mary, put in close prison for her Religion, hearing that
the Keeper was commanded to give her one day bread, and another day water;
answered, Sir, if you take away my meat, God (I trust) will take away my
hunger. It was B. Hooper's speech, Nothing can hurt us, that is taken from us
for Gods cause; nor nothing can at length do us good, that is preserved
contrary to his will.

GOD is good, 1. In himself; none good but God. 2. Toward others, in his works
of 1. Creation. 2. Preservation. 3. Redemption. 4. Glorification.



Pareus coming out of his Study, slipping many steps, and receiving no harm;
thought on that promise, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways: Psalm 91, 11, 12.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.

God rules by second causes. Yet the creatures are inst^umentum arbitrarium,
not necessarium.
Hence an argument against Atheists: Let them but look and observe the
dependence of causes, and works of Providence; And then (according to the
Poetical Allegory) they will easily conclude, and believe, That the highest
link of Natures chain, must needs be tied to the foot of Jupiters chair.

Multa sine voluntate Dei geruntur, Orig. Hom. 3. in Genes.
nihil sine providentia: Providentia namque est, qua procurat and dispensat,
and providet quae geruntur; Voluntas vero est, qua vult aliquid, aut non vult:
hinc quid velit, vel quid hominibus expediat, indicat; Si non indicet, nec erit
provisor hominis, nec creditur curare mortalia.

Well spoke a learned Divine: We indeed pray to God, Our Father in heaven;
Heaven is the throne of God, but Heaven is not the prison of God; Gods glory
shines most in Heaven, but God is never shut up in Heaven. Therefore he that is
every where, Deuteronomy non minor est in minimis, quam in maximis.
can as well do all, as any one thing. Hence God acts in every thing that acts;
and there is not any motion in the creature, but God is in it. They who act
against the revealed will of God, are yet ordered by his secret will. There is
nothing done against the counsel and purpose of God, though many things are
done against the command and appointment of God.

The greatest confusions in the world are disposed of by the Lord, and are the
issues of his counsels. That wherein we see no order, receives order from the
Lord. Hence many are as much puzzled to interpret what God does, as what he
has spoken.

In a word, Gods Providence is punctual and particular, extending even to the
least and lightest circumstances of all our occurrences. Deus sio curas
universo^, quasi singulos; sic singulos, quasi solos. Aug.


-- The Wheels Were full of eyes. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
Ezekiel. 1.18. Pro. 15.3. Mat. 10.2^.30.
beholding the evil and the good. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and
one of them shall not fall on the ground Without your Father? But the very
hairs of your head are all numbered. Humane (or rather Christian) Providence.
We are to frustrate the Mines made to blow us up, by our own Countermines of
Prevention and Diversion.

Sooner may one prevent, than cure a deadly sickness; and easilier keep out,
than thrust out our unwelcom guest. True of Sin.

Aegrius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes. As they say in Schools of Art;
It is easier to oppose, than answer: So we find it true in Christianity; It is
easier and safer to obviate and meet danger in the way, than to tarry till it
come home to our doors. There is ever more courage in the assailer, and
commonly better success.

A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: Pro. 22.3.
but the simple pass on and are punished.

Original Sin.
-- ATque homines prodigia rerum maxima. So said our Savior to the people of
the Jews; Spuria soboles, Ye are a bastardly brood; because utterly degenerate
from your forefathers faith and holiness. The like also may be said of Mankind,
once made upright, but they have sought out many inventions: Once planted a
noble Vine, wholly a right seed; but now turned into the degenerate plant of a
strange Vine. O man! thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.

As all those little ones that ever might have descended from Abel, Omnes
peccavimus in isto (...) homine, quid omnes cramus isle unus bomo. Aug. In
Adamo tanquam in radice totum genus humanum computruit. Greg.
their blood cried in his; so all that descended from Adam, have sinned in him.

As good parents may beget bad children, (The parents of the Blind man could
see; Grace is not hereditary:) So bad parents may beget good children; Dumb
Zachariah begat a Crier. But how are they good? Not by generation, but
regeneration.

Adam ate one sour grape, and all his childrens teeth are set on edge. Vitra
radicem nihil querere ^portet.

Chinks are not to be sought, where a gate is set wide open: By Adam, sin
entered into the world. O durus casus! Alas! what did man lose? what did he
find? Anselm. de la^u homina.


Original Sin is that old tenant, that Peccatum inhabitans, which Paul speaks
of; which like a leprosy has bespread all the sons of Adam, a capite ad
calcem; beginning when we have our being, like the man that Valerius Maximus
speaks of, who had a Quart fever, from the day of his birth, to the hour of his
death.

We may now say of Man, Quantum mutatus ab illo? Homo lascivia supcrat equum,
impudentia canem, astu vulpem, furore leonem. Yea, we may say of all men, Numb.
32.14.
as Moses of Gad and Reuben, Ye are risen up in your fathers stead, an increase
of sinful men.

In a word, This sin (like Pandora's box, opened through her curiosity) filled
the world full of all manner of diseases. Man that Was in honor, Psalm. 49.20.
Jer. 31.29. Romans 5.12. Heb. 12.1.
and understood not, is become like the beasts that perish. The fathers have
eaten a sour grape, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. -- Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does
so easily beset us.

Actual Sin. Austin defines sin to be factum aut dictum, aut concupitum contra
legem Dei. Contra Faustum l. 22. cap. 27.

Holy Anselm said, He had rather be thrust into Hell, without, than go into
Heaven with sin. The reason may be rendered, Hell would be no Hell without sin;
and Heaven could be no Heaven with sin.

Sin is called in Scripture, a Work of darkness, for diverse respects: 1.
Because it is committed especially, through the darkness of understanding; for
Satan usually blinds the eye of Reason and Religion, and makes Sin appear not
in its own nature, but under the name and habit of Virtue.

Pliny says, the Panther carrie^h with him a sweet scent, but an ugly face:
That enticeth beasts after him, this affrighteth them away; therefore he hides
his head, till he have the prey within danger. So the savor of sin is sweet,
but the ugly face of sin is not seen perfectly, which makes men run into
Satan's snare.

2. Sin for the most part is committed in the dark. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. 3. Sin is
committed through the suggestion of Satan, the Prince of darkness. Ephesians. 6.12.
4. Sin is committed against God, who is light, and in him is no darkness at
all, 1 John 1.5. 5. Sin deserves and ends in utter and eternal darkness.
Mat. 25.30.


Sin (like the Crocodile) slimes our way, to make us fall; and when we are
down, insidiates our intrapped life.

There are four steps (says Bernard) that lead us to destruction; 1. The
dissembling of our weakness; 2. The excusing of our wickedness; 3. Ignorance of
our sinfulness; 4. And persevering in the same.

Sin (like an old person) is loath to look it self in a glass, lest its
wrinckles should be discovered.

Tres gradus peccatorum animae: Chytreus de morte and vita atern. p. 18.
1. Interior cordis immundities, caligo mentis, impiae cogitationes, and
affectus vitiosi non erumpentes. 2. Fxterna delicta. 3. Habitus scelerate
agendi, usu confirmatus.

Long festered ulcers are beyond the possibility of cure, -- Sero medicina
paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
in a body wherein the humors are rank and venomous: So in a soul transported
from reason, such a one enters into resolutions of desperate consequence, and
vents the poison of malice, by the pipes of his treasonable practices. And
where rancor and hatred is deeply rooted, there is refused all means of
atonement. Peccatum Innocent. 3. l. 2. De sacr. alt. Mist. c. 19.

1. Fragilitatis, per Impotentiam, 2. Simplicitatis, per Ignorantiam, 3.
Malignitatis, per Invidentiam.


The Stoics held equality of sins, which may easily be proved to be erroneous;
1. From the diversity of the Sacrifices under the Law, which were less or more
costly, according to the quality of the offense: Levit, 4.3.23, 28, 32. Malac.
2.7. 2. From the diversity of punishments: Exodus 21.16, 22.1, 21.13, 14. Levit.
20.10, 21.9. Rev. 22.12. 3. Scripture says, some are more wicked than others:
Jer. 3.11. Ezekiel. 23.11. Hebr. 10.29. Mat. 12.31, 11.21. Psalm. 19.13.


Sin then partakes of Magis and Minus. There are Motes and Beams. In ^a^em
specie peccati gravius peccat fidelis quam infidelis.
There are funiculi vanitatis, and funes peccatorum, cords of vanity, and
cart-ropes of sin, Isa. 5.18. Besides, the same sin may be more grievous or
scandalous in one, than in the other; but Magis and Minus non variat speciem;
aggravating circumstances make a gradual, not a specifical difference in sin.

But a bad use do the Papists make of their distinction: Peccatum Veniale.
Mortale.


For, Franciscus a victoria writes, That a Bishops blessing, or a Lords prayer,
Austin advises; Non desp^cere p^cc^ta nostra, quia parva: sed timere quia
plura. Flumina magna vides parvis de fontibus orta, Plurima collectis
multiplicantur aquis. Timenda est ruina multitudinis, etsi non magnitudinis.
Aug.
or a knock on the breast, or a little holy water, or any such slight receipt,
without any other good motion of the heart, is sufficient to remit a venial
sin. Sure I am, that is an old and a true Rule, Easiness of pardon, gives
encouragement to sin. There are put in the rank of venial sins, drunkenness,
adultery, angry curses, and blasphemies, covetousness, stealing, lying, cursing
of Parents; In a word, horrible offenses shrowed themselves under this Title of
venial. Surely Socrates the Historian prophesied of these men (I think;) There
are some (quoth he) that let go whoredom as an indifferent matter; which yet
strive for one Holy Day, as for their lives.

But as flies hurt the eye, so little sins (as we call them) yea, ill thoughts
hurt the soul. Sins of ignorance may be reigning sins; Saul was a King, though
the Witch of Endor knew not of it: And Ahab and Jeroboams wife (though in
disguise) were Princes, as well as in their Robes: Yea, concupiscence (as a
young child) may be crowned in the Cradle.

Culpa non potest esse in re irrationali: Levit. 14.
But that sin will be in us while we are in this World, appears, by allusion to
the Leprosy, which having infected the walls, would not be purged out, till
the house were demolished.

In sin there is, 1. Titillatio. 2. Consentio. 3. Consuetudo.


Sin is so evil, that it cannot have a worse Epithet given it. It cannot be
called worse, than by its own name.

Sin, that it might appear sin, Romans 7 13.
-- And by the command might become exceeding sinful. Unpardonable sin.
Peccatum in Spiritum sanctum est (...) universalis a Christo, i. e. voluntaria
veritatis Evangelicae evidenter cognitae renuntiatio and rebellio ex odio
veritatis nata, conjuncta cum tyrannica sophistica and hypocritica oppositione
vel oppugnatione. Buc.


Non arguit aliquam dignitatem qua personae ceterae, carent, sed tantum
proprium officium and opus peculiare ad extra, quod est illuminare nos in
veritatis lucem, illuminatosque iter ad patrem and filium demonstrare.

Nulla est praedicatio ei qui semel crimen sive peccatum in Spiritum sanctum
commisit; Potest dici de illo ut quondam de Hercule dixit Dejanira, Senec.
frustra tenetur ille qui statuit mori.

Non precandum est pro illis qui incidunt in Peccatum Spiritus sancti, 1 Samuel
16.1.1 John 5.16.

Therefore it is called the sin against the Holy Ghost, not because it is
committed against his Deity or Person (as some Heretics have done, which
denied the Holy Ghost to be God, and no subsisting person by himself) but
because it is committed against the office of the Holy Ghost, which is, to
reveal the mysteries of God to us: Hebr. 6.4. -- cap. 10.26, 27.

It is said to be unpardonable, If they could repent, God could no more deny
pardon, than he could despise the wo^kings of his own Spirit.
not because it is greater than Gods mercy, or Christ's merits: But by a just
judgment of God upon such sinners, for their hateful unthankfulness in
despising his Spirit. Whence follows an impossibility of Repentance, and so of
Remission: And such a desperate fury invades these men, that they maliciously
resist and repudiate the price of Repentance, and the matter of Remission, the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, whereby if they might have mercy, yet they
would not: But continue raving and raging against both Physic and Physician,
to their unavoidable ruin.

Exempla hujus Peccati Saul, Judas, Arrius, item Julianus Apostata. But it is
indeed difficult to judge of this sin, Sine rarishmis inspirationi^us. Be^.
because now in this Age of the Church, the spirit of discerning is not so
distributed as of old. Manasses for many years furiously persecuted the Word of
God, erected abominable Idols, and shed much innocent blood in Jerusalem,
whereby this sin was incoated, but not consummate, because at last he came to
have Repentance given him.

Take heed of three things principally: 1. Of every beginning of evil, of
denying Christ, though but through infirmity; so far Peter was in a dangerous
way, and it was time for Christ to look at him. Satan teaches his children
first to go, and then to run: 2. Of acting wilfully and willingly against the
known Truth of the Gospel; there are sins of frailty through impotency, and of
simplicity through ignorance, but take heed of sins of malignity through envy;
this is (Giant-like) to war against God: 3. Of continuing to sin against
conscience. A man may sin, till it be as impossible for him to repent, as to
come out of Hell, being once plunged there.

Most justly may it be said of the man committing this sin, what once most
unjustly by Paul; Away with him from the earth, its pity that such a one should
live.

There is a sin unto death. 1 John 5.16.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost; shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks
a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; Mat. 12.31, 32.
but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, neither in the World to come. Keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19 13.
let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression. Sinners.
By one man sin entered into the World. Non intelligendum hoc de exemplo
imitationis, sed de contagio propagationis. Johan. Polyand. praefat. ad Com.

Nemo mundus a peccato coram te, nec infans, cujus est unius diei vita super
terram. Aug.
Imbecillitas enim infantilium innocens est, non animus infantium.

God at the first created men with their faces (as it were) turned toward
himself; that is, doing his Will: But now they are like him, whom a wicked
spirit is said to have caught by the pate, and wrested his neck about, that his
face stood behind his back.

-- Fixa and mutari nescia, nam quis
Peccandi finem posuit, sibi quando recepit
Ejectum semel attrita de front pudorem?
Quisuam hominum est, quem tu contentum videris uno
Flagitio? --
The three sorts of dead raised by our Savior, aptly resemble (says
Augustine) three sorts of sinners; viz. 1. A sinner is dead in the house (like
Jairu's Daughter) when he does imagine mischief in his mind. 2. Perseverare in
malo Diabolicum, and digni sunt perire cum illo, quicunque in similitudine ejus
permanent in pecca^o. Bern.
A sinner is carried out in the Coffin (like the Widows son of Naim) when he
brings forth ungodliness both in word and in deed. 3. But then is he stinking
in the Grave (like Lazarus) if he sin habitually without any remorse, drawing
iniquity with cords of vanity, and heaping up wrath against the day of wrath.

One said wittily, That the angry man made himself the Judge, and God the
Executioner; there is no sinner that does not the like: The Glutton makes God
his Eater, and himself his Guest, and his belly his God; especially in the
newfound Feasts of this Age, in which profuseness and profaness strive for the
Tables end. The lascivious man makes himself the lover, and (as Vives said of
Mahomet) God the Pandor. The covetous man makes himself the Usurer, and God the
Broker. The ambitious man makes God his state, and honor his God. Of every
sinner, God may say justly, as once by the Prophet, Servire me fecisti; Isa.
43.24.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins; yea (with the Salvages of Calecutt)
they place Satan in the Throne, and God on the Footstool.

If Zions Daughter converse with sinners, she ties her self to the bondage of
iniquity; Deaths Garden brings forth no other flowers but death. The Rose of
pride buds forth vanity; envies wormwood is but bitterness; the fair lilly of
luxuriousness, is but sorrow and contrition; the stinging Nettle of careful
avarice, is but dolou^ and affliction: There is the soul (the Daughter of
Deity) like a Bond-slave, led into captivity, from danger to danger, vice to
vice, sin to sin, thought to thought; from thought to consent, from consent to
delight, from delight to custom, from custom to hardness of heart, from thence
to an evil death, and from an evil death to damnation.

We may say of every sinner, as Salust said of Catiline, Magna vi animi fecit,
sed ingenio malo pravoque.

Sinners resemble those Monsters, that are half like men, and half like beasts.

Sinners may think they see God to favor them, but it is but imaginary; as we
read of Brutus, that he saw his own Angel. They are like mad men, who imagine
many things, which indeed are not.

Wickedness overthrows the sinner. Prove. 13.6.


Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, -- It
shall not be well with him, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a
shadow, Eccl 8.12, 13.
because he fears not before God.

The sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. Isa. 65.20.


Guilt of sin.
The privilege of greatness, neither must nor will be any subterfuge for
guiltiness.

Guilt of sin increases, as sin is propagated; therefore the sorrow of sin
comes with much and daily addition. For as he is an happy man, who can be a
beginner in good things (having a share in all the good that follows the
beginning, even when he is gone:) So cannot he but be a most unhappy man, who
is a Ringleader in evil; for as it is easy to set fire on an house, but not
so easy to quench it; so he has begun mischief, and all the sins and evils of
that unhappy spark, committed many Generations after him, shall be upheaped on
him, to his greater condemnation.

Men may communicate in other men's sins, diverse ways.

Absalom committed the incest, but by the counsel of Achitophel. And the
daughter of Herodias is the mouth that said, Give me John Baptists head; but it
was by the counsel of her mother.

Doeg murdered the Priests of the Lord, but it was Readiness fact who commanded
him: The high Priests servants struck Paul, but their stroke was their Masters;
for he commanded it, and Paul deals with the Master for the injury. And Ahab
sets his Judges on work by a course of Law, to condemn Naboth for his Vineyard;
but the Law sound him guilty, for the Text says, Have thou slain, and got
possession? Or, 2. By writing; Naboth died by Jezabels letters, and Vriah was
slain by David's; which so nearly concerned him, that by the Lords righteous
sentence, the Sword never departed from his house; by which sentence (it is
observed) good Josiah fell by the Sword many hundred years after.

Qui non p^ohib^i malum cum potest, facit.
which hinder not the evil they may and ought. Eli hindered not his sons from
running into reproach, and therefore he fell with them. Pilate, though he wash
his hands never so often, if he hinder not the death of Christ, he remains
guilty.

Gal. 5.26.
Ahab was most wicked, whom Jezabel provoked; therefore take the Apostles Rule,
Provoke not one another; neither to sin, by persuasion; nor to wrath, by rash
and scand^lous speeches; nor to revenge, to right thine own wrongs: But rather
provoke one another to love, and to good works.

Vitia alio^um si feras, faeis tua.
Saul, when Stephen was stoned, kept the clothes, and this was a consent and
communication. Hitherto refer all participation in the action, as receiving
stolen goods, silence and concealment, connivance, and too much indulgence, etc.

It was a proud saying of Isidore the Monk, Non habeo Domine, quod mihi
ignoscas, Romans 7.
I have nothing Lord for thee to pardon. When St. Paul himself, that had been
in the third heaven, complains of his inward impurities.

O what need is here of a Savior! since guilty culpable souls are such as
cannot plead their own cause without an Advocate?

If I wash my self with snow-water, Job 9 30, 31.
and make my hands never so clean; yet shall thou plunge me in the Ditch, Psalm.
130.3.
and mine own Clothes shall abhor me. If thou Lord, should mark iniquities: O
Lord, who shall stand?

Every mouth must be stopped, Romans 3.19.
and all the World must become guilty before God. I know nothing by my self, 1
Cor. 4.4. 1 Timothy 5.22.
yet am I not hereby justified. Be not partaker of other men's sins.

Punishment of sin.
Sinners imagine not their last act will be Tragical, -- Callecius in orbem
Sap^ latet molii coluber s^b graminis umb^a. Mant. Culpa habet plus de ratione
mali quam paena. Aquin.
because their former Scenes have all been Comical; the end is so far off, that
they see not those stabbing shames that await them in a killing ambush.

When Seneca asked the question, Quid est homini inimissimum? he answered,
alter homo. Our enemies studies are the plots of our ruin; but more truly in
sin, who slily makes us work our own overthrow, when we know not of it; and
endure our own damage, when we see it not.

Elementum in loco non ponderat (says the Philosopher;) and it is true of sin:
But how light soever it seems in the committing, it will one day lie full
heavy, even as a Talent of lead, Zeeh. 5.7. or as an huge Mountain, Hebr. 12.1.
When once we come to a sight and sense of it, when Gods wrath and man's sin
shall face one another.

Sin, before it be committed, is blandus amicus; in committing, dulce venenum;
But after committed, Scorpio pungens; like those Locusts, that had effeminate
faces, but stings in their tails, Rev. 9.

Sin and punishment are knit together with Chains of Adamant. Ra^o antecedentem
seclest. um deseruit p^ de poena clauds. Horace.
Flagitium and flagellum sicut Acus and filum. Punishment follows sin, even as
the soul of Remus (as is reported) did his brother Romulus.

Where iniquity breaks-fast, calamity will be sure to dine; to sup where it
dines, and lodge where it sups.

Sin has venom in it, appear it never so fair, as Pope Alexander poisoned the
Turks brother in candid Suckets.

Sin is like those Lamiae, certain shapes of Devils, which taking on them the
show of beautiful women, devoured children and young men, allured unto them
with sweet enticements.

A cerain Gentleman of Rome being infinitely in debt, and yet sleeping
securely, When the was dead, Augustus the Emperor sent to buy his bed, saying;
it seemed to be a wonderful one: Even so we may well wonder to see men sleep
securely in sin; when we consider, that their damnation slumbreth not, 2 Pet.
2.3.

Though the Lord speak not instantly to every sinner as he did to Abimelech,
Genesis 20.3. Behold thou art but a dead man: yet it is true of every sin, Cheys.
when it is finished it brings forth death. So soon as Jonah entered into the
Sea, the storm rose, to teach us, that ubi peccatum, ibi procella, where there
is sin (especially committed with rebellion) there will inevitably arise a
storm of divine wrath.

When men will not hear, then there is no remedy but they must feel. For when
God lays siege to the soul, he has both warning-pieces and murdering-pieces;
if the one will not reclaim sinners, the other shall ruin them. The sinner
therefore is blinder than Balaam, that walks on in an evil course, and sees not
the sword of Gods vengeance before him

I have read in the History of Scotland, that a Lady had a room hanged with
curious Arras, behind which were placed certain Cross-bows ready bent and
charged, and in the midst of the room there was a goodly brazen image,
resembling the King, holding in the one hand a fair golden Apple, set richly
with Smaragds, Jacincts, Saphiers, Topazes, Rubies, Turkasses, and such like
precious stones; which the King viewing, demanded whom the image did represent?
to whom she answered, him; and said, she provided it as a gift for him, and
therefore desired him to accept it, though not worthy so high a dignity;
wherein the King delighting, removed the Apple, the better to advise it:
whereupon the Cross-bows discharged so directly upon him, that striking him
through in sundry places, he fell down stark dead, and lay flat on the ground.
Even so the poor sinner is not aware, Prove. 7.23.
till a Dart strike through his liver.

It is storied, that in the inmost part of Afric, are certain wild beasts
having the countenance of a woman, which in like manner are called Lamiae, as
before; And my Author says, that they have their paps and all the rest of
their breast so fair, as any Painters wits can devise; by which being
uncovered, they deceitfully allure men unto them, and when they have taken
them, they do forthwith devour them. So does sin, making a man cry out at last,
woe is me now, Jer. 4 31.
for my soul is wearied because of murderers.

It is best of all therefore not to sin, and next to that, to amend upon
punishment.

Pliny makes mention of a fountain near Monacris in Arcadia, Not. Hist. l. 2.
c. 103.
of which whosoever drinks, presently falls down dead; the name of the fountain
is Styx, so called, because it was of all men abhorred: So should we be
affected to the evil of sin, as to a thing that brings present death. Man
drinks iniquity like water, but every draught slayes the soul, as the water of
Styx the body. As thou would not drink poison, so beware of it.

The Poets have feigned a river to be in hell, called by the same name; Romans
12.9. (...).
which sometime is taken for hell it self. Art thou afraid of hell? be also as
much afraid of evil.

Pro peccato magno paululum supplicii satis est pati. Thinks the sinner, a
small punishment may serve for a great offense: But if God do punish, the
punishment shall have the same proportion with the offense.

God proportions the punishment of man with his sin; and that two manner of
ways, 1. In the quality and manner of it. 2. In the quantity or degree of it.
The justice of God is visible in both. Adonibezek was (and so have many others
been) punished in the same manner that he had sinned. But all shall be punished
in the same degree that they have sinned. (...) abyssus (...) a invocat.
When the iniquity of the Amorite is full, he shall have his fill of wrath.
When God is pressed with sin, as a cart with sheaves, then he lays on load in
judgment. If sin be great, so shall the punishment of it be.

Gods judgments against sinners, are feathered from themselves, as a fowl shot
with an arrow, feathered from her own body. Which is according to Julians
Motto, Propriis pennis perire, grave est.

No sooner had man sinned, but the earth was cursed for his sake: It was never
beautiful nor cheerful since, and looks to be burnt up shortly with her works.

But yet the Punishment of sin may come long after the comitting of sin. The
one is a seed-time, the other a reaping-time, betwixt which there is a distance
of time. Job. 4.8.
The seeds of sin may lie many years under the furrows. A man may commit a sin
in his youth, and not find the harvest of it till old age.

The strongest sinner shall not escape punishment. There are no sons of Zerviah
too hard for God. God desires in a special manner to be dealing with these, for
they in the pride of their spirits, think themselves a match for God, (though
indeed their strength is but weakness, and their wisdom foolishness,) hence
(like Pharaoh) they send defiance to Heaven, and say, who is the Lord? When God
sees the hearts of men swollen to this height of insolent madness, he delights
to show himself, and grapple with them, that the pride of man may be abased,
and every one that is exalted, may be laid low; that he only may be exalted,
and his name set up in that day.

Behold, Numb. 32.23.
ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out.

Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. Psalm. 140.11.


Evil pursues sinners. Pro. 13.21.


The wicked is driven away in his wickedness. Cap. 14.32.


Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, Jer. 2.19.
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and see that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my
fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts.

Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, Cap. 4.18.
this is thy wickedness because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart.

-- If thou do not well, Genesis 4.7.
sin lies at the door. Supplicium imminet, id^ proximum et presentissinium;
says Junius there.

Then when lust has conceived, Jam. 1.15.
it brings forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death.

What fruit had ye then in those things, Romans 6.21.
Whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.

For the wages of sin is death. v^s. 23.


Free Will.
THere are a generation of men, The Motto. M^hi sol^d. beo.
that will needs hammer out their own happiness, like the Spider, climbing by a
thread of her own weaving. But, Sub laudibus naturae latent inimicigratiae,
says Aug. The friends of free will are enemies to free grace.

But whoever does well weigh, Au^. observes, our Savior says not p^rf^^re,
but facere
John 6.44. with cap. 15.5. and other places of Scripture, must needs conclude,
that down goes the Dagon of free will, with all that vitreum acumen of all the
Patrons thereof; whether Pagans, or Papagans; Pelagians, or Semipelagians; etc.

Pareus in Revel. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely;
glosseth thus, He says, whosoever will; he says not that it is in the power
of free will, but requires the will to receive it. The will is ours, but the
will of receiving is not in us, it is the gift of grace: For what have we that
are have not received, 1 Cor. 4.7. Mind but the case of Paul, Act. 9. and of
Lydia, cap. 16. and it will be clear, that God comes into the heart, while the
doors of it are shut.


The Arminians and Papists (as to that great and special truth which the
Orthodox maintain against them) will grant an irresistible work of light from
God upon the understanding, they will grant also a potent work upon the
affections; but this they will not yield, that God makes the will to will; that
is, so boweth and changes the heart, that it readily imbraceth, what once it
abhorred, yet in all that are converted, this power so efficacious must needs
be acknowledged; for will not experience witness, that every man's will before
converting grace came, was as opposite to God, and as averse to all holiness,
as any natural man's in the world?

Simpliciter velle hominis est, male velle corruptae naturae, Bern.
been velle supernaturalis gratiae.

Quem trahit Deus, volentem trahit, says Chrysostom. Vbi non est Spiritus
Domini non est libertas arbitrii. Aug.
To which August. Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus,
qui operatur in nobis velle. Therefore he adds, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube
quod vis.

Cyrus had this written upon his Tomb, (...). I could do all things, as
Arrianus reports. So could Paul too, but it was through Christ strengthening
him, Phil. 4.13. To which the same Apostle adds elsewhere, Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.

No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. Joh.
6.44.


For without me ye can do nothing. Cap. 15.5.


For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure. Phil. 2.13.


The Law.
LEX a ligando, vel ab eligendo dicta est; Norma faciendorum.

Lex Naturae.
The Law of Nature is used in two senses; 1. The one, which springs from
reason, sense, induction and argument, according to the Laws of heaven and
earth. 2. The other, imprinted on the spirit of man, by an inward instinct,
according to the law of conscience; herein man participates of some light
touching the perfection of the Moral Law, but how? Sufficient to check the
vice, not to inform the duty.

Yet this Law of Nature imprinted in the soul, may restrain the outward man,
and stir up in him a desire of virtue and moral honesty; and prescribe and
follow some things which God commands in his Law. Valleius says, That Cato was
homo virtuti similimus, cui id solum visum est rationem habere, quod haberet
justitiam, omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, etc. And much may be spoken of
Aristides, Phocion, Socrates, and others, for their integrity.

Conscience (say our Divines) is nothing else, but the correspondency of the
spirit of man unto the Law, to bind or loose him; to accuse or excuse him, to
condemn or absolve him; Therefore such as have a conscience, must needs have a
Law also; yea, the Thracians gloried that they were (...), living Laws, walking
Statutes.

For when the Gentiles Which have nst the Law, Romans 2.14, 15.
do by nature the things contained in the law: these having not the law, are a
law unto themselves.

Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another.

Lex Civilis.
Legibus proposita sunt supplicia vitiis, praemia virtutibus.

It is said that Philosophy Moral did spring from disorder and confusion;
Natural, from learning the causes of things by effects; Cice^o.
(for other teaching had they none, that were removed far from the Hebrews,)
and the law from evil manners, cruelty and oppression.

Dracoes laws were said to be written with blood, and not with ink. And it is
said of the Athenians, that their laws had need of a law to mend them.

-- Neither against the law of the Jews, Act. 25.8.
-- nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at all. Lex Ceremonialis.
Lex occultum Evangelium, Evangelium revelata lex.

The Ceremonial law was the Jews Gospel, for it was Christ in figure; and to
him it led them. Christus apellatur anima legis.

The Ceremonial law did obscruely and imperfectly represent Christ to the old
Church, and is now abolished by his coming in the flesh. In the twelveth year
of our Saviors age, (the same year wherein he taught in the Temple, Luke 2.)
the Sanctuary was polluted, by casting about the bones of dead men, through
every part and Porch thereof, at the very feast of the Passover, in the night
time. This Josephus says, was done by the Samaritanes, out of hatred to the
Jewish services: But God had surely a special hand in it, to show that people,
that those shadows were to vanish, now that Christ the body was come and showed
himself.

All things have their time, the Ceremonial law had her time; and the Gospel
has his time. We our selves have but our time, some threescore years and ten,
and then we are gone.

Precessit lex Evangelium, sicut umbra lucem, virga Spiritum, timor charitatem,
initium perfectionem; Dominantis Praeceptum, amantis concilium. Innocent. l. 2.
de sacr. Altar. Mist.

When the Sun is behind, the shadow is before; when the Sun is before, the
shadow is behind. So was it in Christ to them of old, this Sun was behind, and
therefore the Law or shadow was before. To us under the Gospel, the Sun is
before, and so now the Ceremonies of the Law those shadows) are behind, yea
vanished away. Before the Passion of Christ (wherein they all determined) the
Ceremonies of the Law were neither dead nor deadly; Nec mortifer^ nec mortuae.
Non mortiferae ut cunque. mortuae et mortiferae.
after the Passion, till such time as the Gospel was preached up and down by
the Apostles, though dead, yet (for the time) they were not deadly. But since
that they are not only dead, but deadly to them that use them, as the Jews to
this day.

For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John. Aquin.
For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

Wherefore then serves the Law? Mat. 11.13. Joh. 1.17. Gal. 3.19.
It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the
Promise was made, etc.

Lex Moralis.
Lex est Sanctio sancta jubens honesta and prohibens contraria.
Legibus vivendum non exemplis; Divinis regulis and normis, Aug.
non humanis personis imitandum est.

The Antinomians cry down the Law, calling Repentance a Legal grace, and
humiliation a Backdoor to Heaven. Istebius Agricola (the first of that Sect)
and his followers, held most unsound opinions; That the Law and Works belong
only to the Court of Rome. That so soon as a man begins to think how to live
godly and modestly, he presently wandreth from the Gospel. That a man was never
truly mortified, till he had put out all sense of conscience for sin. That St.
Peter understood not Christian liberty, when he wrote these words, Make your
Calling and Election sure. And that good works were perniciosa ad salutem. This
he once publicly revoked, but afterward relapsed into the same error, and
has at this day too many Disciples; who amongst other places do most
grievously wrest that Text, 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous
man, etc. Therefore good men are exempted from obedience to the Law.

To which we answer, Just lex non est posita, neque ad condemnationem, neque
ad coactionem.
That a righteous man is freed from the coaction and malediction of the Law,
but not from the regulation of it: To whom, the commandments of God are not
grievous, but joyous. The just man does well, not for fear of punishment, as
compelled by the Law; but of grace and mere love toward God and goodness,
virtutis amore. Albeit there were no Law, yet he would be a Law to himself.

Christ is legis finis Int^rficiens, Aug. and
Perficiens.


The Ceremonial Law he has slain, and taken out of the way: The Moral Law he
has fulfilled for us, and we by him; that is, by faith in his name, which
makes his obedience to become ours.

The Law is not impossible to be obeyed, absolute in se; but ex accidenti, in
respect of us, because of the corruptions of our hearts and natures.

Luther had three golden sayings concerning the Law; 1. The first was, Walk in
the heaven of the Promise, but in the earth of the Law: That in respect of
believing, this of obeying. 2. That in the justification of a sinner, Christ
and faith were alone, Tanquam sponsus cum sponsa in Thalamo: howbeit it is such
a faith as works by love. 3. He that can rightly distinguish betwixt Law and
Gospel, let him praise God for his skill, and know himself to be a good Divine.


For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in heaven. Ideo moralis lex vocatur; quia
de moribus^est omni beminum generi and semper communis. Zanch.
The Moral Law it is eternal, and albeit some special duties of certain
commandments shall cease when we come to heaven, yet the substance of every one
remains. We live by the same Law (in effect) as the Saints above do: and do
Gods Will on earth, as they in heaven. The ministerials of this Law shall pass
away, together with this life: the substantials shall pass into our glorified
natures, and shine therein, as in a Mirror for ever.

Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: Mat. 5.17. Ne
minima quidem litera. Luth. Romans 3.31.
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, It is
easier for Heaven and earth to pass, than one title of the Law to fail.

Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the
Law.

For the Law is holy, and just, Cap. 7.12.
and good.

Lex Talionis.
Lex Talionis, A^^st.
quand^ quis idem patitur, quod alteri fecit. Vocatur a Graecis (...), quasi
recipro^^ and mutua passio, a verbo (...), id est vicissim patior. A Latinis
Talio, and jus talionis, quia talia tribuuntur, qualia quis f^cit, Aulus
G^llius in Histor.
aut alteri praestitit. Vnde apud Gellium dicitur retaliare, quasi talia
retribuere qualia alter secit. De hoc jure etiam in sacris literis extat
preceptum, Moses exigit vitam pro animo, oculum pro oculo. Christus in
Evangeli^ inquit, qu^ mensur^ metieritis, remetietur vebis. Et Propheta Esaias,
vae tibi qui spolias alterum, quoniam ipse sp^liaberis.

What would thou have done with me (said Tamerlane to the fierce Bajazet,
Turk. hist. fol. 220.
then his prisoner) had it been my fortune to have fallen into thy hands, as
thou art now in mine? I would (said Bajazet) have enclosed thee in a Cage of
Iron, and so in triumph have carried thee up and down my Kingdom. Even so (said
Tamerlane) shall thou be served.

One Perillus gave to Phalaris King of Cicile, -- Necenim ^ex justor ^lla est;
Quamn^cis artisic^s art p^ri^^ s^^.
an hollow or brazen Bull, wherein to scortch and torment men by fire; praising
the device with this commendation, That the noise of the tormented, would be
like the bellowing of a Bull. But there was a due reward unto the inventour,
for the first trial was made of himself.

God usually retaliates and deals with men, according to the manner and way
of their wickedness. The sin and suffering often meet in some remarkable
circumstance. Babylon has blood for blood: Jacob comes as the elder to Isaac,
and Leah comes as the younger to Jac^b: He that denied a crumb, wanted a drop:
Asa that set the Prophet in the stocks, had a disease in his seet. Sodom sinned
in fullness of bread, and it is expressly noted, that their victuals were taken
from them by the four Kings. Their eyes were full of uncleanness, and they were
smitten with blindness: They burned with lust, and were burned with fire: They
sinned against nature, and against the course of nature, fire descends and
consumes them, Sisera annoy's Gods People with his Iron Charets, and is slain
by a nail of Iron. Jesabels bra^s, that devised mischief against the innocent,
are strewn upon the stones: By a Letter sent from Jezreel, she shed the blood
of Naboth, and by a Letter from Jezreel, the blood of her sons is shed.
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Solomon's Temple (the seven years work of so many
thousands) therefore he is turned a grazing, and seven seasons pass over him.
The blasphemers in the Revelations, gnaw their tongues through pain; and Dives
was tormented in that part chiefly, Cyprian yielding the reason of it, Quia
lingua plus peccaverat.

Thus God delights to give men their own, to pay them home in their own coin,
to remete them their own measure, to beat them with their own weapons, to
over-shoot them in their own bows, and to shape their estates according to
their own patterns. When it is thus; know the sin by the judgment, and silence
murmuring; Adonibezek, an Heathen, observed, As I have done, God has done to
me.

With what judgment ye judge, Mat 7.2.
ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again. The Gospel.
THE word (...), Of to b^^e, and (...) nuntius (...) unutium:
Evangelium, signifies glad-tidings, that is the proper notation of the
Original word: And the same may our English word [ Gospel] admit; for Spel in
ancient signified speech; Gespel then is a good speech. Or quasi, Gods-spell,
Gods power or charm, to call us to be Christians, as Romans 1.16. The Gospel is
the Power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes.

It is sometimes taken for the Sacrifice which the Heathen offered to their
gods, It is so used in Xenophon. Homer Odyss.
for joyful news. And sometimes for the reward which is given to him who
brings glad-ridings. In Scripture it is taken for glad-tidings in general:
For the history of Christ. But by an excellency it is restrained to signify,
The most joyful message of salvation: And sometimes for the publishing of the
Doctrine of Christ.

Consider the Gospels 1. Antiquity. 2. Excellency.


It is at least as old as Moses, which was the first writer that we read of.
The Athenians thought it to be a new Doctrine. Yet it is as ancient as Moses,
nay, as Adam: for the Doctrine of the Gospel was in Paradise.

The Law was before the Gospel, yet the Gospel is more worthy than it: darkness
went before the light; the night before the day: yet the day is more glorious
than the night. All creatures were made before man, yet man excels them all.
The Sword Bearer goes before the Major, yet he is not greater than the Major.
All things are not to be esteemed by their precedence and priority in the
world: There comes one after me (said John) yet in honor and dignity he is
before me. So the Gospel comes after the Law, yet it is more excellent than
the Law.

In the Law there is nothing but matter of fear, in the Gospel of love; in the
Law God is against us, in the Gospel he is Emanuel, God with us. The Law
curses, the Gospel blesses; The Law is a denunciation of wrath, of a curse
against us, because of transgression; only the Gospel is an annunciation of
mercy and forgiveness: That breaths forth only a cold blast, a North Wind of
threatening; this sends forth a warm gale, a South Wind of Promise. The
office of the Law is to accuse and terrify, of the Gospel to heal and comfort:
Finally, the Law is a killing Letter, but the Gospel a quickening Spirit.

Great and many are the blessings brought upon the world, even upon the heads
of those who unfainedly believe the Gospel. Viz. 1. Reconciliation with God;
not only of God unto us, but of us unto God; which is, the staying or taking
away that enmity against God, and those hard thoughts of him, which lay burning
and working in our inward parts; together with kindling of a spirit of love
toward him, and the raising of an honorable opinion in us of him, in the
stead thereof, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21. 2. Justification, or
righteous-making in the sight of God, setting us free from all guilt, demerit
and imputation of sin whatsoever, Act. 13.38, 39. Romans 3.21, 22. and 5.9. 3.
Adoption, or relation of Sonship, John 1.12, 13. Romans 8.14, 15. Gal. 3.26. and
4.6, 7, etc. 4. Mortification of the body of sin and death which is in us. The
Gospel ministers wisdom and strength to do it, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Col. 3.3, 5. 1
Pet. 4.1. 5. Our vivification to a more excellent life, an inspiration of a new
principle of vital motions and actions, far more honorable and august than our
former, Romans 6.4. Jam 1.18. Ephesians. 2. 6. Peace with God, that of Conscience also,
Romans 5.1. Act. 10.36. Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 3.17. 7. Redemption and deliverance from
the wrath and vengeance to come, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. 1 These.
1.10. 8. The Gospel lifts not up the world, with the hope and expectation of a
Redemption or deliverance from the wrath which is to come; but of an
investiture and possession also of the glory which is to come: Yea, it carries
on them who believe, so far in the ways of righteousness and peace, until they
be ready to enter into the city of the great King. Col. 1.12. Act. 20.32.


Hence the Gospel must needs be a doctrine of ^oy. Many of the Jews whom the
thunders of Sinai, the terrors of the Law moved not; John Baptist wins with
the Songs of Sion.
To which put pose S. Cyril mystically interpreting those words of the Prophet
Micah 4.4. That every man should sit under his vine, and under his fig tree;
observes, that Wine is an emblem of joy, the Fig Tree of sweetness; and by
both is shadowed that joy which the Evangelical doctrine should produce in
those who sit under the preaching of it. Indeed, those doctrines which reveal
God and Christ, can only give solid comfort unto the soul; and these doctrines
are no where made known but in holy Writ; and they are most clearly delivered
in the Gospel.

The Gospel holds forth the New Covenant, (that constellation of Promises;) so
called, not simply, but in respect of the discovery of it; as we call some
places the New world. Unto this Covenant, the Sacraments are the Broad-seal,
and the Spirit is the Privy Seal. This Covenant was a great chearer to David's
heart, 2 Samuel 23.5. He has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things, and sure: Which is all my salvation, and all my desire.

Also Christ's Testament and last Will: And this is the comfort of Gods elect,
that Heaven is conveyed unto them by legacy: All that God requires of us, is,
to take hold of his Covenant, and to receive his gift of righteousness; And
this also he has promised to cause us to do, writing his law in our hearts,
etc.

And truly, the Gospel is chiefly promissory; yea, it is a Promise, and that
such as has many Promises in the womb of it; and those (as the Apostle Peter
calls them, 2 Pet. 1.4.) exceeding great and precious; not of temporals, but
spirituals, nay, eternals. Fellowship with God, remission, adoption, eternal
life; what not? are the choice and precious benefits which the Gospel reveals
and offers to us. So that it is a treasury of divine riches, a storehouse of
the souls provision, a Cabinet of heavenly pearls; all things truly good, and
justly desirable, being contained in, and conveyed to us by it.

Besides, the preaching of the Gospel is the bell whereby we are called to
eternal glory. As by the sound of a trumpet the people were called together in
the time of the Law; so this is the Silver-trumpet sounding in our ears,
whereby we are called to the Kingdom of Heaven.

The common opinion is (and the most ancient Copies say as much) that Matthew
wrote his Gospel eight years after Christ; Mark, ten; Luke, fifteen; and John,
forty two.

Plato, when ready to die, blessed God for three things, 1. That he made him a
Man. 2. That he was born in Greece. 3. That he lived in the time of Socrates.


David Chytraus also blessed God for three things, 1. That he had made him a
Man, and not a Beast. 2. That he had made him a Christian, and not a Pagan. 3.
That he had his education under those excellent Lights, Luther and Melancthon.


Austin wished but to have seen three fights, 1. Romam in flore, Rome in the
flourish. 2. Paulum in ore, Paul in the Pulpit. 3. Christum in corpore, Christ
in the flesh.


But greater is our happiness in enjoying the Gospel, Verse. 17.
Mat. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear.
For verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

We have the Turtles voice, the joyful sound, the lively Oracles. The Sea ab
out the Altar was brazen; and what eyes could pierce through that? Now our Sea
about the Throne is glassie, like to Crystal, clearly conveying the light and
sight of God to our eyes. All Gods Ordinances are now so clear, that we may see
Christ's face in them, and be transformed into the image and similitude of
Christ.

Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, Luke 2.10.
Romans 10.15.
and bring glad tidings of good things!

Repent ye, Mark 1.15.
and believe the Gospel.

Christ's Humiliation.
Incarnation.
The Scripture tells us, how that man comes four ways into the world. Aug.
Sermon. 20. de Temp.
1. By the help of man and woman; so all are usually born. 2. Without any man
or woman; and so the first man was created. 3. Of a man without a woman; and so
was Eve made. 4. Of a woman without a man; and so was Christ born. So that
Christ birth differs from the birth of others.


He that was more excellent than Angels, became less than Angels, Vt nos
aquaret Angelis, minoratus est ab Angelis. He that laid the foundation of the
earth; and made the world, was himself now made: Factor terra factus in terra;
Creator coeli creatus sub coelo; being the Child of Mary, sine quo pater
nunquam fuit, sine quo matter nunquam fuisset. So that (as David sang, This is
the day which the Lord has made;) we may say, This is the day wherein the Lord
was made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

This was that Holy, that Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, that
Flower of the field, growing without man's labor.

When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman.
Gal. 4 4. Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16.
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. God was manifesi in the
flesh. Passion.
It was a great kindness which Abraham showed unto Lot, when he hazarded his
own life and the lives of his family, to recover him out of the hands of
Chedarlaomer: But not comparable to that kindness which our Kinsman the Lord
Jesus showed us, when he gave his life to deliver us from the hand of our
enemies.

Mortuum Caesarem quis metuat? Sed morte Christi quid efficacius? If Caesar he
once dead, who will ^ear? Christ, even when dead, is terrible to his enemies.
Nothing more effectual than his death; By suffering death, he destroyed him who
had the power of death. When he was condemned of man, he condemned sin, that it
should not condemn man. Passus est ut infirmus, operatus ut fortis; Aug.
He suffered as a weak man, but wrought as a strong one. As the Serpent without
life erected in the wilderness, overcame the living serpents that stung Israel:
So the Lord Jesus by suffering death, slew that Serpent, that living in us, had
stung us to death.

Sanguis ejus effunditur, Patre ordinante, filio volente, Spiritu sancto dante,
Gorran.
Juda tradente, Judaea procurante, Pilato judicante, Gentili exequente.

The High Priest under the Law, as he was a type of Christ in sundry respects,
so likewise in his death. He who killed a man negligently, fled to the City of
refuge, and stayed there until the death of the High Priest, and then he was
free: Jesus Christ by his death frees us, and sets us at liberty.

One says, Christ continued in his torment twenty hours at the least. Others
say, Sedul. Hom^. ^
that he was so long on the Cross, as Adam was in Paradise in pleasure. Origin
de morte magni Regis.

The Thieves fared better on their Crosses, than Christ on his; for they had no
^rrision, no superscription, no taunts, no insultations; they had nothing but
pain to encounter, but death to grapple with; but he death and scorn.

Pro servis dominus moritur, pro sontibus insons,
Pro aegroto medicus, pro grege pastor obit;
Pro populo rex mactatur, pro milite ductor
Pro opere ipse opifex, pro homine ipse Deus.
As Eve came out of Adams side sleeping, so the Church is taken out of Christ's
side bleeding; Vt effundatur sanguis Christi, ne confundatur anima Christiani.
A flux of blood in the head, is stanched by opening a vein in the foot: But
here to save all his members from bleeding to death, blood must be drawn from
the head.

Which of Christ's senses was not a window to let in sorrow? He sees the tears
of his Mother, hears the blasphemy of the multitude, is put to death in a
noisome place to his scent; his touch felt the nails, and his taste the gall, a
reed for reproach is put into his hand, a diadem in scorn is set upon his head;
his head harrowed with thorns, his face (of whom it was said, Thou art fairer
than the children of men) is all besmeared with the filthy spettle of the Jews;
those eyes clearer than the sun, are darkened with the shadow of death; those
lips (which spoke as never man spoke) are now drenched in gall and vinegar; Nam
cum mortis aculcum non possit accipere natura deitatis; noscendo tamen,
s^scepit de nobis, quod pati posset pro nobis. Leo. Sermon. 8. de Pas. Hoc primum
tormentum, and magnum mysterium, quod passibilis factus est. Hillar. de Trin.
l. 10. Christi humilitas est nostra sublimitas, Christi crux nostra victoria,
Christi patibulum noster triumphus. Orig. Hom 8. L. 9.
and those feet that trampled on the Powers of darkness, are now nailed to the
footstool of the Cross.

Though Christ were both God and Man, yet he suffered not in his Divine, but in
his Humane nature; which may be thus illustrated: 1. A Man (we know) consists
both of soul and body; and yet when he is dead, we do not understand it of his
soul, for that cannot die, but his body only. 2. Thus: The Sun shines on a
Tree; the Carpenter cuts down the Tree, but wounds not the Sun. 3. Or as the
two Goats mentioned Levit. 16. the one is slain, but the other escapes; so of
Christ in his two natures.


God the Creator suffers in the flesh, that the flesh of the creature should
not suffer for ever. God himself reconciled the world unto himself; God himself
became Mediator; God himself redeemed Mankind with his own blood; He who was
offered, assumes the flesh of the creature, and becomes Reconciliator.

We may say of Christ's bloody sweat, what the Poet Lucan having his veins cut,
dying said, Sanguis erant lachrymae, quaecunque foramina novit
Humor, ab his largus manat cruor, ora redundunt,
Et patulae nares: sudor rubet: omnia plenis
Membra fluunt venis, totum est pro vulnere corpus.


Englished by D.T.

His blood were tears, and what pores sweat did know,
Blood in great plenty did spring forth and flow,
Through's mouth and nose: his sweat was red, each lim
Swet with full veins, all is but one wound in him.
Read Isa. 53. all along.

His own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree; 1 Pet. 2.14.
that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye
were healed.

Is it nothing to you, 1. am. 1.12.
all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day
of his fierce anger.

Descensio Christi ad Inferos.
Sepultura Christi est requies Christiani. Ambros.

Buried our Savior was, 1. That none might doubt of his death. 2. That our
sins might be buried with him. 3. That our graves might be prepared and
perfumed for us, as so many beds of roses, or delicious dormitories. Isa. 57.2.

If Christ did descend personally into Hell, he must either descend in body or
in soul. Now his body could not go into hell, for that was laid in the grave
that very night, by Joseph of Arimathea. And for his soul, that could not be in
hell; for Christ said to the Thief upon the Cross, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise; And how could that be, if his soul did then go thither?

Again, there was no end why Christ should do thus, Vestigia nu^^a retro^sum.
Because this is a rule in Divinity, That souls that are once in bell, shall
never come out thence. It is finished.


Christ by dying destroyed him who had the power of death, that is the Devil.
Heb. 2.14.


His Resurrection.
When the Philistines thought they had Sampson sure within the Ports of Azzah,
he arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gates of the City and the two
posts, and carried them away with the bars thereof on his shoulders, up to the
top of the mountain which is before Hebron. But our mighty Conqueror and
Deliverer, Qui agnus extite^at in passione, factus est L^^ in resurrectione.
Bernard.
has more excellently magnified his power: For being closed in the grave, the
Sepulcher sealed and guarded with soldiers, a stone rolled to the mouth of the
grave, and he thus clasped in the bands of death; He rose again the third day,
before the rising of the Sun, he carried like a Victor the bars and posts of
death away, ^s upon his shoulders, and upon the Mount of Olives he ascended on
high, leading Captivity captive.

The manner or specialty of Christ's rising.
1. In the same Body that fell; Feel it (says he to his Disciples.) Else no
resurrection. And in this proportion all rise.

2. So as he saw no corruption, because he knew no sin. A specialty and
privilege above the sons of men, who must say to corruption, Thou art my
father.

3. By his own power: I have power to lay down my life, Virtute proprid ut
victor prodi^t d^ sepultura. Idem.
and to take it up again.

4. As a Common blessing, as a Representative, and not as a Private person. All
his did the same with him, that were within the purchase of his blood.

Our Phaenix consumed to ashes, is now revived; The young Lion of the tribe of
Judah, of late sleeping in the grave, by the quickening yell of his Sire, viz.
the Power of the Godhead, was raised and roused up; The stately Stag resumed
his shed horns; The late withered Flower of the root of Jesse, reflourished;
The Sun of Righteousness once shadowed with a cloud, and eclipsed with
disgrace, shines put again with brighter beams.

All was done for which he was put into the grave; and why should he be kept
any longer in prison, the debt being paid?

Christ is risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20.
and become the first fruits of them that slept. Ascension.
As the Grissin is like a Lamb in his legs, the Lion in his back, and the Eagle
in his beak; so Christ in his Passion was a Lamb, in his Resurrection a Lion,
and in his Ascension an Eagle; for, He went away to his Father.

Christus ascendit.

Quo? In coelum Aerium, Stellatum, Empyreum.


Which is called, Domicilium Dei, Angelorum and hominum beatorum; novus Mundus,
Coelum novum, Coelestis Hierosolyma, Paradisus, Sinus Abrahae, etc. Thus,
Christus excelsior coelis factus.

Secundum quam naturam? Humanam, hinc localiter and visibiliter.

Qua potentia? Sua, non aliena.

Quando? 40 dies post Resurrectionem, ut 1. Certi simus, de ejus resurrectione.
2. Instruat suam Ecclesiam de regno suo, ut discerent quae docerent discipuli.


Effecta sequentia, 1. Intercessio Christi. 2. Nostra glorificatio. 3.
Testimonium peccata esse remissa. 4. Christum victorem esse. 5 Missio Spiritus.
6. Nunquam nos carere consolatione. Christum nos semper defensurum.


Hinc in c^elum circumfusa nube sublatus est, ut hominem, quem d^lexit, quem
induit, quem a morte protexit, ad patrem victor imponeret. Cypr. de Idol. van.

Thou have ascended on high, Psalm. 68.18.
thou have led captivity captive. When he ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4.8.
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. For such an high Priest
became us, Hebr. 7.26.
who is holy, harmless, undesiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than
the heavens. His session at the Fathers right hand.
A King having an only begotten, may set him in the throne as heir and
successor to reign with him, and use right of dominion over all, as partner in
the Empire. Thus David dealt by Solomon; Vespasian by Titus; and our Henry 2.
by his eldest son Henry, whom he crowned while he was yet alive, though
afterward he suffered him not to be what himself had made him.

This Exaltation of Christ, Christus sedet ut judex, stat ut vindex.
is an argument sufficient to prove his Deity: He that sits on the right
hand of the Majesty on high, is God. Scripture does not say, he stands,
(though in another sense he is said so to do,) that belongs to servants and
inferiors; but he sits. Kings, Senators, Judges, sit when they hear causes.

He sits, not at the commandment or appointment of another, but of himself: He
knows his place, and takes it; not at the left hand, but, which is higher, at
the right hand: his Fathers Equal.

Out of this we have two notable comforts.

He that sits in Heaven laugheth them to scorn. Moreover, this is a singular
comfort, that our Head, King and Defender is in Heaven, and has equal power,
glory and majesty with God: We have a friend that sits on the right hand of
God, and has all power in Heaven and Earth; therefore let us fear nothing; he
will keep us, none shall do us any harm, but it shall all turn to our good in
the end.

Many shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, Luke
13.29.
and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God. Mat. 19.28.
Ye shall sit on the twelve seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Which
is not spoken of all the Apostles, for Judas never sat there: nor yet of the
Apostles only, but of all Christians: Know ye not that we shall judge the
world? We shall one day sit in heavenly places with Christ: we sit there
already in our Head, but we shall likewise sit there in our own persons with
our Head.

Let this comfort us against all the calamities of this life: here the children
of God are oftentimes made the wickeds footstools, they sit on them, and tread
on them. A rich man (though wicked) shall be more esteemed. Here they sit as
forlorn persons, none regards them. Many times they sit weeping and wailing for
their sins, for their sufferings: But let this comfort us against them all; how
contemptible soever we sit here, we shall sit with Christ Jesus, though not in
that degree of glory, yet in the same Kingdom of glory with him for ever.

This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, Heb. 10.12.
sat down on the right hand of God. Cap. 8.1.
We have such an High Priest who is set on the right hand of the Majesty in the
heavens. To which of the Angels said he at any time, sit on my right hand, Cap.
1.13.
until I make thine enemies thy footstool?

Intercession.
The word (...), is attributed in Scripture both to Christ and the Spirit; but
when it is attributed to the Spirit, it is rendered by Comfort; when to Christ,
by Advocate: And not without reason, since the Spirits work is to speak
comfortably to us, and Christ's to plead powerfully for us.

It is said, The Holy Ghost makes intercession for us: yet the Holy Ghost is
not our Intercessor: He does not in our nature pray for us as Christ does, Romans
^.26.
but he teaches us to pray: Neither does he in his own person make
intercession with sighs and groans: for the Holy Ghost cannot sigh and groan,
but he stirs up to it.

Christus Oratur a nobis, As the Father. Orat in nobis, By his holy Spirit.
Orat pro nobis. As our Advocate.


Oramus Ad illum. Per illum. In illo. Aug.



Ad Deum non opus est suffragatore, sed mente devota; for Christ is our eye,
whereby we see the Father; and our mouth, whereby we speak to the Father: And
none is in such favor with the Father, as the only Son that lies in his
bosom.

When Christ is said to intercede, we must not imagine he does it in heaven,
after the same manner he did when he was on the earth, to fancy a supplicating
voice, bended knees, with sighs and groans, or with strong cries and tears:
This suiteth not with the Majesty of Christ in heaven, neither does he it after
such a carnal manner: But Christ is said to make intercession for us two kind
of ways.

1. Non voce sed miseratione: not by uttering any voice to his Father; but by
having pity and compassion on us.

1. By a fourfold presentation, Vnigenito filio Deum pro homine interpellare
est apud coaeternum patrem s^ipsum homine demonstrare. Greg. l. 21. Moral. c.
13.
viz. 1. Of his Person in both natures, Divine and Humane. 2. Of his merit, the
force and efficacy of his Passion, the recordation of his obedience. 3. Of his
will and desire in our behalf, not in a begging or precarious way, yet he
signifies it. 4. Of our Prayers and Supplications which we make in behalf of
our selves and others, and the Prayers of the Church which she makes in our
behalf. He perfumes our prayers with the odor of his sacrifice, and so
presents them to his Father.

The consideration of Christ's perpetual intercession in Heaven for us, may be
singular comfort to all Christians. Preces sacrisicii sai odore sanctificat.
Calv.
We count him happy that has a friend in the Court: then how happy are we that
have such a friend as Christ in the Court of Heaven? Say on my Mother (said
Solomon to Bathsheba) I will not say thee nay: So says God the Father to
Christ, Say on my Son, make intercession for thy members, I will not say thee
nay. Blessed are we that have such an Intercessor, let us fly to him: Only let
us not grieve him with our sins, but glorify him by an holy life: then we may
boldly commence our suits to him, and he will prefer them to his Father, to our
everlasting joy and comfort.

We have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
Jesus Christ the righteous. Christ is entered into heaven it self, Hebr. 9.24.
now to appear in the presence of God for us. He ever lives to make
intercession for us. Cap. 7.25.
Predestination.
JNterpreters have observed, Praedestinare nihil aut majus aut minus significat
quam destinare. Chamierus.
that this word (...), that signifies to predestinate, is but six times found
in the New Testament, and never in the Old. And it is used, either De rebus,
concerning things, twice, Acts 4.28. and 1 Cor. 2.7. Or else De personis,
concerning persons, four times, Romans 8.29, 30. and Ephesians. 1.5, 11. And so,
Significat non simpliciter praedestinare ad aliquid, (says Mr. Leigh out of
Zanchy) Sed ita praedestinare ad aliquam rem, ut etiam sines terminos
constituas, Qu^tenus pro objecto habet homines, est aeternum et immutabile Dei
decretum de suturo hominum statu aeterno. Wendelinus.
quibus ad rem consequendam certo deducatur is quem praedestinasti; puta media
omnia, tempus loca, and alia id genus.

They say it is never applied to Reprobates. However, Divines under
Predestination, do usually consider the Decree both of Election and Reprobation.

It will not be good for any to teach this Doctrine, till they have well
learned and digested it; for about it have been many disputes, with unhappy
issue; and it is a Doctrine which has been (if it be not by some at this day)
much misused and exagitated.

In Romans 8. we see our calling was according to Gods purpose; Crit. Sacr.
so I say, our calling, justification, glorification, do depend upon
Predestination, not Predestination upon them.

Before Augustines time, Prelates and Doctors of the Church (some I mean)
having no occasion to enter into an exact handling of this point; taught that
men are Predestined for the foresight of some things in themselves; of which
opinion was Augustine at first, but after reclaimed.

But it seems the will of the Arminians, has made a foord in the depths of
God; it has found out the ways that are past finding out. It made Paul stand
at a stay, and cry, O the depth! (...), but these lead along their Scholars,
that they pass over almost with dry feet. The path of Election and grace is
discovered, and these men will tell you the reason of Gods counsel.

But we say (and so does the Scripture) Elegit nos ab aterno, and ad gratiam
and ad gloriam, and ad salutem and ad salutis viam, quam praeparavit ut in ea
ambulemus. Act. 18.48. Crediderunt quotquot erant ordinati ad vitam etaernam.
Credere est effectum ordinationis.

The Turks use to say, what is by God written in a man's forehead before his
birth, cannot in his life be a voided. But let none be so sottish and
blasphemous, as to say, If I be predestined to be saved, then I may live as I
list; for howsoever I live, I must he saved: And if I be predestined to be
damned, all my care cannot alter the counsel of God; And therefore our best way
is to take our pleasure while we may.

From whence have thou this collection? not from God and his Word, but from the
Devil and thine own ignorance. For, put the case (as a Divine says well) thou
were on the top of an high Tower; God has predestined, that thou shall come
safely down, or break thy neck in coming down: will thou now leap down upon
this reason, neglecting the ordinary way? I trow thou will not trust thy body
upon these terms; then art thou mad so to trust thy soul. God has
predestined thou shall live to the end of this present day, or that thou
shall die before night, will thou upon this drink poison, etc. Saying, why? If
God have predestined that I shall live, I shall live though I eat poison: If
to die, I shall die, though I be never so careful? If thou be in thy right
mind, thou will not do thus.

Hezekiah had the assurance of prolonging his life fifteen years, yet neglected
not the means of preserving his life. So the Predestination of God, ought not
to make us careless of the means of salvation.

Origin makes mention of one who being sick, and desiring to send to the
Physician, was persuaded by his friend not to send; for, says he, If it be
appointed you shall die, the Physician cannot help you: if to live, you shall
not need him. The sick man of a sounder brain than his friend, excellently
answered: Nay, if it be appointed I shall live, I will send for the Physician,
that such appointment may take effect.

Thus God has predestined me to be saved; So has he predestined me to be
called and justified, before I be saved. Though glorification necessarily
follow Predestination, yet not immediately, but there are means from one to
another, which God has predestined to be used. As thou art predestined to
glory, so also by the same act to holiness, without which he has
predestined to save none.

It is therefore concluded, that this opinion then is most absurd in reason;
and also most blasphemous. And this for certain, that whosoever thinks,
reasons, and lives thus; In that time he can have no assurance that he shall
be saved: And if he continue thus to the end, there can be no greater sign of a
man's reprobation and damnation.

For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate. Romans 8.29.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to
himself, Ephesians. 1.5.11.
according to the good pleasure of his will. Being predestined according to
the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will.
Election.
Christus est caput electorum, non causa electionis.

Shall Pilate be resolute, and say, what I have written I have written, Electio
est voluntas divina conferendi gloriam singularibus quibusdam personis, cum
praeteritions aliorum. Daven.
and not alter it; and shall God revoke?

Some there be (says Master Philpot) that for an extreme refuge in their evil
doings, run to Gods Election, saying, If I be elected, I shall be saved what
ever I do; but such be great tempters of God, and abominable blasphemers of his
holy Election: These cast themselves down from the Pinnacle of the Temple in
presumption, that God may preserve them by his Angels through Election.

We are elected to the means as well as to the end, to sanctification as well
as salvation.

As for the opinion of Universal Election, that is plainly exploded: Act. and
Mon.
All are not called, and therefore all are not elected.

True it is, God has his chosen among all: Among Harlots, as Rahab: Elegit qui
e multi^ aliqu^^ legit.
among Publicans, as Zacheus: among the Pharisees, as Nicodemus: among
Persecutors, as Paul: Eusebius.
among Thieves, as the young man, whom St. John recalled: Among poor distressed
servants, as Onesimus, etc. Therefore we are to preach to all.

The Elect have admirable felicities, above all the men in the world. For, 1.
They have most dear acceptance with God, Ephesians. 1.5. 2. They are adopted to be
the children and heirs of God in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. 3. They have the pleasures
of Gods house, Psalm. 65.4, 5. 4. In adversity they are sure of countenance,
Isa. 41.8, 9. protection, verse. 10. Avenging of their wrongs, Isa. 41.11, 12.
Luk, 18.8. Deliverance and victory, Zach. 1.17, 20, 21. 5. The non-suting of
all actions and accusations in heaven against them, Romans 8.35. 6. They are made
the friends of God, Joh. 15.5, 16. 7. They are assured of Preservation to the
end, Mat. 24. 8. They shall obtain glory in Jesus Christ, being chosen to
salvation, 2 These. 2.13, 14, 15.

There be diverse Infallible signs of Election: As, 1. Separation from the
world. 2. A sole relying upon Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of grace in him;
so as we trust wholly upon him for righteousness and happiness, Tit. 1.1. 3.
The sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. 4. The testimony of the Spirit
of Adoption, Romans 8.15. 5. The conformity of Christians unto Christ, both in
active and passive obedience.

The foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.16.
having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his.

Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.


Reprobation.
Certain it is (how offensive soever this doctrine be to the common people,
Reprobatio est, praedestinatio quorundam ad aternam mortem, propter peccata
infligendam; ad declarandam justitiam divinam.
and distastful to flesh and blood) that wicked men are appointed from
everlasting, to the enduring of the miseries which are inflicted upon them, in
this life or in Hell.

Yet because for present we cannot understand how this should be, and perhaps
may be much troubled about it; therefore to ease our minds, and to assure us
there is no hard dealing in God, let us seriously consider, 1. Seeing God has
comforted us, and trusted us with many clear points of Knowledge; cannot we be
contented that God should speak darkly to us in one point? Especially when we
are told that is a point unsearchable: And the rather, Romans 11.32.33
seeing weak Christians are not tied to eat strong meat, they may safely let
this doctrine alone. 2. Sin is no effect of Reprobation, but only a
consequent. Gods decree does not force any man to sin. 3. That God is no way an
Author of sin; for whereas the most that can be objected is, Romans 9.
That God hardens whom he will, All sound Divines are agreed, that God does
not infuse any wickedness from without in men's hearts: Reprobationis
possitivae et damnationis causa, in ipsis vasis ad contumeliam preparatis
haret. Pareus in 4 Genesis verse. 2.
But whereas they are in themselves by custom in sin hardened, as a just
judgment he gives them over to Satan and his power, but does never restrain
them from good, and the means of it. 4. Say not that sin came upon men by
reason of the rigor of Gods Law, which is impossible to be kept; for when God
gave his Law at first, man was able to keep it; and it came by his own default,
that he was not able to keep it afterward. 5. For thy self, if thou have
truly repented, and do believe in Jesus Christ, and have in thee the signs of
a child of God; for thy part thou art free from this danger, and out of all
question in a safe estate, and therefore ought not to grieve, but rejoice
with singular praise to God.


I might enlarge, I only add, It should much satisfy us, that however, in the
day of Jesus Christ, those mysteries of Religion shall be broken open, and all
then shall be made clear unto us, as clear as the shining of the Sun at
noonday.

God lets Reprobates alone, which is a sad Omen, Hos. 4.14, 17. Ezekiel. 16.42.
Never was Jerusalems condition so desperate: A man is ever and anon meddling
with his fruit trees, paring and pruning, etc. But for his Oaks and other
trees of the forest, he lets them alone, till he comes once for all with his
axe to fell them. Jude 4. (...). 1 Pet. 2.8. 2 Pet. 2 12.


Men who were before of old ordained to this condemnation. That is, written
down, enrolled, set down in the black bill. Christ is a stone of stumbling, and
a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient,
whereunto also they were appointed. Opposed to chosen, verse. 9.

These, as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed. Romans 9.2^.


-- The vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

Indeed Molinaeus says well, Non dicit Deum ^o^ aptasse adinter^tum ne
vintretur dicere Deum eis indidisse peccatum, quo adexitium preparentur.

Gospel-Mercy and Grace.
Promises.
WHereas Jesus Christ is said to be the Mediator of a better covenant, which
was established upon better promises. It would be known, whether the New Test^
have better promises than the Old; Hebr. 8.7.
was not Christ promised to them in the time of the law, as well as to us in
the time of the Gospel? Did not God say to Adam, The seed of the woman shall
break the serpents head? To Abraham, in thy seed shall all Nations be blessed?
How then are our Promises better than theirs, when as Christ and the Kingdom
of heaven were promised to them as well as to us.

Answ. In the promises there are those two things considerable, 1. The matter.
2. And the manner. As for matter and substance, the Promises were all one, both
in the Old and New Testament; that is, Christ and eternal salvation by him, But
ours in respect of the manner, are better and do excel theirs. For, 1. Their
Promises were included within the narrow compass of Judea, our promises are
blazed all the world over. 2. Their promises were published by men, by the
Patriarchs, Prophets, which were but servants; ours by Christ the Son of God.
3. They according to the promise had the graces of Gods spirit as well as we
have, yet not in such abundant measure, as they be now poured out in the time
of the Gospel. 4. Their Promises were dark and obscure, covered under the vail
of many Ceremonies, and shadowed out by temporal things: Ours are more clear
and evident. 5. Theirs were at the delivery of the Law, with a condition, Do
this, and live; Cursed be he that continues not in all things, etc. Ours,
believe, and live. 6. The Sacraments whereby the Promises were confirmed unto
them, were more hard and difficult: the cutting off the foreskin, the
preparing of a Lamb for every house: Ours are more easy and familiar: the
sprinkling of a little water, the procuring of bread and wine. 7. Their
promises were of things to come, there should come a Lamb, that should take
away the sins of the world: Ours are of things already come and exhibited. This
Lamb is come, and has offered up himself on the Altar of the Cross for us.

Thus has God in mercy vouchsafed us better promises; surely he looks for
better obedience at our hand. To whom much is given, much is required.

See at once both the goodness and faithfulness of God; his goodness, in that
before he gave his Son, he gave the Promise of him; he was Promissus priusquam
missus; first, assured verbally, then sent actually; and his faithfulness, in
that as he promised, so he gave him; Sicut promissus sic missus, he was not
more mercifully promised, than faithfully sent. Divine promises are as sweet
bits to stay our stomachs, before the full meal of actual performances.

Promises (says Cyril) are Christi manitissima; Cyril.
whereunto the righteous run and are safe. Dicta Jehove sunt dicta pura, we
should expectare impletianem.


Divine promises shall be performed, as sure as the heavens are over our heads,
and the earth under our feet.

God does not pay his promises with fair words only, as Sertorius is said to do
(...) neither is he like Antigonus (...)(ignominiously so called, because)
forward in promising, slack in performing: but as his love moved him to
promise, so his truth binds him to perform. When God has once passed his
promise, and so made himself a voluntary debtor, he fails not to perform it.

Though God will come according to his promise, yet he will have his peoples
prayers lead him. Gods promises must be put in suit.

-- Exceeding great and precious promises. 1 Pet. 1.4.
And thou said, Genesis 32.12.
I will surely do thee good. Remember the word unto thy servant: Psalm. 119.49.
upon which thou have caused me to hope. Redemption.
Christ has redeemed us both by price and power; not as Moses that married a
Black-more and she continued so; but Christ changes his. Those whom Christ
has redeemed by his blood, he does also in some measure sanctify by his
Spirit.

For as in the natural body of man, (...). Andrews.
the Spirit ever goes with the blood, there being in every part thereof an
artery to carry the spirit, where there is a vein to carry the blood: So it is
with Christ, his blood and his Spirit go always together; so that his blood
does never cleanse any man from the guilt of sin, whom his spirit does not in
some measure sanctify and free from the power and dominion of sin.

The Arminians Universal Redemption, is endeavored to be founded upon 1 Cor.
1^.22. Romans 5.18. et alibi. Upon occasion of which places, an Armiman uttered
these Blasphemies in public; Lord, thou say, thou art just; if thou savest
not all by Christ, as thou damnest all by Adam, I say, thou art not just: Lord,
thou say, thou art love: if thou savest not all by the second Adam, as thou
damnest all by the first, I say, Zach. 3.2.
thou art not love, and shall light short of my love. O hellish blasphemy! The
Lord rebuke thee.

Our recreation or redemption, is a greater might and mercy than all the rest;
for in the creation God made man like himself, but in the redemption he made
himself like man: Ma^gna est redemptio, cum et precium datur, et pecunia non
videtur. Tertul.
Illic participes nos fecit honorum suorum, hic particeps est factus malorum
nostrorum. In making the world, he spoke the word only; but to redeem the
world. Dixit multa, et fecit mira. Passus est dura verba, duriora verbera. The
Creation of the world, was a work (as it were) of his fingers, Psalm. 8.3. But
redemption is called the work of his Arm, Psalm. 98.1. Also it is a greater
work to bring men from sin to grace, than being in the state of grace, to bring
them to glory; because sin is far more distant from grace, than grace is from
glory.

By Christ we have a plenary redemption of soul and body, out of the claws of
Satan. As the bird is in the fowlers net, so were we in the Devils snare: but
we may say with them in the Psalm, the net is broken, and we are delivered;
yea, we are delivered eternally, we shall never fall into that bondage again.
The afflictions whereunto we are incident in this life, viz. Sickness, poverty,
malevolent tongues, imprisonment, death it self, etc. are temporal; but our
redemption and joy are eternal. Let that comfort us, in all the calamities of
this life.

We love them that obtain a temporal redemption for us. If a young man be bound
prentise to an hard Master, for fourteen or twelve years, and if one should
buy out his Apprentiship and set him free; would he not take himself much
beholden to him? If thou were a Gall-yslave under the Turk, and one should rid
thee out of it, were thou not much beholden to him? We were bound Prentises to
Satan, he kept us in his snare at his will and pleasure: being his bondmen, we
should have remained in hellfire world without end. Now Christ Jesus has
redeemed us, and made us the freemen of God, and Citizens of heaven; how are
we indebted to him? Christ has brought us out of the Gally of sin and
damnation; therefore let us sound forth his praises all the days of our life.

In the work of redemption God lays naked to us the tendrest bowels of his
Fatherly compassion. For by giving us his Son, he showed us all his love at
once, as it were imbodyed. All other spiritual blessings meet in this, as the
lines in the center, as the streams in the fountain.

If the Centurion were held worthy of respect, because he loved our Nation
(said they) and built us a Synagogue: What shall we say of Almighty God, who so
loved our souls, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

The end of our redemption is to serve God, we are redeemed from our old
conversation, not to our old conversation: we are bought with the blood of
Christ, not to serve the Devil, our selves, the flesh, the world: we have
served them too much already: from henceforth we must serve God, Heb. 9.14.

Christ has therefore broke the devils yoke (says one) from off our necks,
Servati sumus ut serviamus.
that we may take upon us his sweet yoke, and not carry our selves as sons of
Belial. Serve we must still, but after another manner, as the Israelites did,
when brought out of the Egyptian bondage: yet thou shall keep this service,
says Moses, Exodus 12.25.

Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in
your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20


By his own blood Christ entered in once into the Holy place, Hebr. 9.12.
having obtained eternal redemption for us.

In whom we have redemption through his blood. Ephesians. 1.7.


Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
-- but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.


Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, Rev. 5.9.
and tongue, and People, and Nation.

Reconciliation.
It is the note of Chrysostom upon the phrases of reconciling and making
peace; (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Colos.
that the one implies an enmity, the other a war; and it is elsewhere
asserted, that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and consequently, against men for all
their unrighteousness and ungodliness; in this respect it is that all men by
nature are children of wrath. So long as man stood in his integrity, there was
Pax amicitiae, a peace of amity and friendship between God and man; but when
man sought out many inventions, God was most justly provoked to anger. Thus at
first, and ever since sin has proved the makebate, the kindlecoal, that
incendiary between the Creator and his creature.

The meditation of which may convince us of, 1. The odious nature of sin. Pro.
6.19.
No persons more abominable than the contentious; Solomon justly declameth
against him that sows discord among brethren: That beatitude of our Savior,
Mat. 5.9.
carries in it according to the rule of contraries, a curse, Cursed are the
peace-breakers, for they shall be called the children of the Devil. But oh! how
accursed and hateful a thing is sin, which has broke the peace, not between
man and man, brother and brother only; but God and man, father and son. Let our
anger wax hot against that which causes his wrath to wax hot against us. 2.
The miserable estate of a sinner, Caelestis ira quos premit miseres facit. Sen.
Trag.
because he is under the wrath of God. Divine anger is an unsupportable
burden; No wonder if the Psalmist put the question, who may stand in thy
sight, when once thou art angry? Psalm. 76.7. Not Angels in heaven. Jude 6. Nor
great men on earth, Rev. 6.15, 16. David seeling some drops or sparks of this
anger, says, there was no rest in his bones by reason of it. Those that do not
feel, have cause continually to be in fear. Mind this against Socinians.
But now by Christ, we are not only reconciled to God, but God is also
reconciled to us: there being a pacification of Divine wrath by Christ's death.

Under the Law the High Priest made an atonement for the people, Levit. 16. So
did Christ for his people. God and man were fallen out, Christ made us friends;
God was displeased with us, he pacified his wrath toward us: which the Father
by an audible voice winesses from heaven, Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, In
quo hominibus bona volu^. Euthym.
in whom I am well pleased. That is (as Cajetan and others) Habeo in eo
complacentiam ad redimendum and reconciliandum genus humanum.

As the salt waters of the Sea, when they are straightened through the earth, they
are sweet in the rivers: so (says one) the waters of Majesty and justice in
God, though terrible; yet being strained and derived through Christ, they are
sweet and delightful.

In many things we offend all: who then can be saved? Our sins for number
exceed the sands of the sea, and the least sin is sufficient to throw us into
hell without Christ. But by Christ we are reconciled to the father, and have
peace with him.

Hence we may have a blessed calm lodged in our consciences, as when Jonah was
cast over board, there followed a tranquillity.

Let the meditation of this, Ephesians. 4.32.
cause a reconciliation amongst Christians; forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake forgave you. Consider, 1. God himself offers reconciliation to
us, Jer. 3.1. and shall we be so hardhearted, as not to be reconciled one to
another? Let us be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful. 2. All we do is
abominable in the sight of God without it. Mat. 5.23, 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee: go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother. Thou
should have done it before, yet better late than never. First seek the
Kingdom of God. God should be first served, yet he will have his own service
to stay, till thou be reconciled to thy brother. If I speak with the
tongues of men and Augels, if I come to Church, and hear never so many
sermons, talk never so gloriously of Religion, etc. and dwell in hatred, be not
reconciled, I am but a tinkling cymbal. 1 Cor. 13.1. 3. We can have no
assurance of our reconciliation to God without it. Mat. 18.35. As the King
dealt with his servant, so God will cast such into the Prison of hell for ever.
This should make us all to quake. 4 We have no certainty of our lives. This
night may our souls be taken from us. Jovinian the Emperor supped plentifully,
went to bed merrily: yet was taken up dead in the morning. And if death take
us, before we take one another by the hand, as a token of hearty
reconciliation; what shall become of us?


We should not suffer the sun to go down upon our wrath. Johannes
Eleemosynarius Archbishop of Alexandria, Ephesians. 4.26. Soc est in occasu, vir
maxim honorande.
being angry in the day with Nicetus a Senator, toward night sends this
message to him, My honorable brother, the Sun is in setting, let there be a
setting of our anger too. If we do it not within the compass of a day, yet let
us do it within the compass of our lives. Aculeus apis, not Ataleus serpentis.
Let not our anger be like the fire of the Temple, that went not out day nor
night. Let us not say with Jonah, I do well to be angry, even unto death, Cap.
3.9. Let our anger be the sting of a Be, that is soon gone; not the sting of a
Serpent, that tarries long; and it may be proves lethall.

Christ is a merciful and faithful High Priest, Hebr. 2.17.
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people.

He has made peace through the blood of his Cross. Colos. 1.20.


God has reconciled us to himself by Jefus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation, viz. that God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, and has committed unto us the word
of reconciliation: We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

If when we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son: much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

Glory to God in the Highest, Luke 2.14.
and on earth peace, good will toward men.

General Calling.
It is the estate and condition of Christianity. For herein we are called to
the service of God, in all parts of holiness, with promise of eternal reward
through the merits of Christ.

So it is termed, because the means by which God works upon us, ordinarily is
his Word, or the voice of his servants, calling upon us for amendment. And
because through the mighty working of the Spirit of Christ, the voice of Gods
servants speaking out of the Word, is directed unto us in particular with such
power and life, and our dead hearts are so revived, that the doctrine is, as if
God did speak to us in particular, we receiving the word of the Minister, as
the very voice or word of Christ: Thus the dead hear the voice of the Son of
God, and live. As also, because God would hereby note unto us the easiness of
the work, he can do it with a word: As he made the world, and calls up the
generations of men, as the Prophet sheaketh, so can he in an instant with a
word convert a sinner, He said, Let there be light, and there was light: So if
he say, Let there be (...) grace, there is presently true grace.

There is a twofold calling: 1. External, that general invitation, which by the
preaching of the Gospel is made unto men, to invite them to come in unto Jesus
Christ: most in the world are thus called, both good and bad. 2. Internal, when
the Spirit of God accompanies the outward administration of the Word, to call a
man from ignorance to knowledge; and from a state of nature, to a state of
grace. So that the first is alone by the outward sound of the Word; But the
other, not by the trumpet of the Word alone ringing in the ear; but by the
voice of the Spirit also, persuading the heart, and moving us to go to Christ.

Of this calling spoke our Savior Christ; No man comes to me, Inanis est
serm^ docentis, nisi intus sit qui docet.
except the Father draw him, namely, by his Spirit as well as by his Word.
Judas was called; He was not a Professor alone, but a Preacher of the Gospel.
Simon Magus was called; he believed and was baptized. Herod was called: He
heard John Baptist sweetly, and did many things that he willed him. Sundry at
this day come to Church, hear Sermons, talk of Religion, that do not answer
Gods call. Therefore let us entreat the Lord to call us effectually by his
blessed Spirit, out of our sins, to holiness and newness of life.

If we be thus called, we shall receive the eternal inheritance, which Christ
has purchased for us. Let us be suitors to God, that he would make us
partakers of this calling, that makes an alteration of us, 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. If
we were Idolaters, as Manasseh; to call us out of our superstition and
idolatry: If persecutors, as Paul; to call us out of our persecuting: If we are
Adulterers, as David; to call us out of our uncleanness: If Drunkards; out of
our d^unkenness: If covetous oppressors, as Zacheus was; to call us out of our
oppression, and make us new creatures in Christ Jesus.

Excellently says a Divine of our time; There is a (...), a seemliness
appertaining to each calling: so here. We must walk nobly and comfortably, as
becomes the heirs of God, and Coheirs of Christ. Scipio, when a Harlot was
offered him, answered, Vellem, si non essem Imperator; I would, if I were not
General of the Army. Antigonus, being invited to a place where a notable Harlot
was to be present, asked counsel of Menedemus, what he should do? He bade him
only remember that he was a Kings son: So let men remember their high and
heavenly calling, and do nothing unworthy of it. Luther counsels men, to answer
all temptations of Satan with this only, Christianus sum, I am a Christian.

They were wont to say of Cowards in Rome, There is nothing Roman in them:
Luth. in Genesis


Of many Christians we may say, There is nothing Christian in them. It is not
amiss, before we be serviceable for the world, to put Alexanders question to
his followers, that persuaded him to run at the Olympic games, Do Kings use to
run at the Olympicks? Every believer is Gods firstborn; and so higher than the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. He must therefore carry himself accordingly,
and not stain his high blood.

Many be called, but few chosen. God has saved us, and called us with an holy
(yea heavenly) calling. Mat. 20.16. 2 Timothy 1.9. Heb. 3.1. Ephesians. 4.1.
I beseech you, walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. Conviction.
It is said, that Frogs will leave croaking, if but a Light be hanged over the
lake wherein they are. A clear discovery of the Truth, is a powerful means to
muzzle the mouths of Heretics.

God smites the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips does he slay the wicked. By his word he tells a man (as he did the
Samaritaness) all that ever he did. Yea, the Word is a most curious Critic,
judging exactly, and disclosing the words which he speaks in his very
bedchamber, that is, in the most secret retirements of his heart.

Conscience alone has but a weak light, and that light is partial; but a
serious application of the Word, discovers wickedness, when our blind
Consciences do not.

I was alive without the law once; Romans 7.5.
but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died. Conversion.
This is the main end of the Gospels ministry, to open men's eyes, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

We our selves may challenge no more, than S. Austin in his child Adeodatus,
Nihil agnosco meum nisi peccatum; I own nothing in our Conversion, but the
faults and defects.

Bernard, for a certain time after his conversion, remained as it were deprived
of his senses, by the excessive consolations he had from God. Cyprian
confesses to Donatus his friend, that before his conversion, he thought it was
impossible for him to change his manners, and to find such comfort as now he
did in a Christian life. Accipe quod sentitur antequam discitur. And so he goes
on. Austin says the like of himself. And the Eunuch after conversion, went on
his way rejoicing.

Divines say, The infallible evidence of conversion, is when a man has changed
his first principles, and his last ends.

Cyprian called Caecilius that converted him, Novae vitae parentem. And
doubtless, it is an high honor to have any hand in such a work.

He which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, Jam. 5.20.
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. I cannot
here omit a passage of a very grave Divine: Mr. Ley his Pattern of Piety. 145.
I have known (says he) a person, who neither by education or affection was
disposed to Popery, who having the ill hap (when his Conscience was perplexed)
to fall into the hands of a Popish Priest, upon this reason (because (as the
Priest suggested) that Religion afforded more comfort, because it had, and
exercised, a power to pardon sin, which our Ministers neither did, nor durst
assume unto themselves) he became a Papist. Job 33.24.
But it is honor enough to Ministers (and may be comfort enough to their
hearers) that God gives them commission to deliver a Penitent man from Hell;
not as the means (for that is Christ alone) but as instruments, 1. To apply
Christ crucified, or rather risen again, unto him. 2. To pronounce his safety
and salvation, upon the due use of that means. And this is the greatest honor
that ever was done to any mere creature. Angels had never such a commission:
They indeed are Ministers for the good of those that shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1.14. But Ministers are called Saviors, (...)
Obad. 21.

Take heed unto thy self, 1 Timothy 4.16.
and unto the doctrine: continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee. Regeneration.
There are two parts in this work of grace: 1. The one is, Qua regeneramur, by
which we are begotten. 2. The other is, Qua renascimur, by which we are born
again. The one is Gods act purely; the other implies the manifestation of life
in our selves. A distinction that serves to clear some controversies in
Religion.

The Word of God is the instrument of our Regeneration, being made prolifical
and generative by the Spirit. The Father is the original cause: Jam. 1.18.
The Son is the meritorious and effective: And the Holy Ghost consummates and
applies it, 1 Pet. 1.3.
through faith wrought and increased in us by the Word and Sacraments. So that
here is God the Father's will; God the Son's merit; and God the Spirit's
efficacy: Tit. 3.5, 6.
By his overshadowing the soul, is the new creature hatched and brought forth.

When the Donatists upbraided Austin with the impurity of his former life; he
answered, How much more they blame my former fault, by so much the more I
praise and commend my Physician.

Miraturque novas frondes and non sua poma, says the Poet, Virg. Georg. 2^
speaking of a graffed tree: So may Regenerate persons themselves, and all that
behold them, wonder at the change which is wrought in them. Every man by his
first birth is still-born, dead in sin; by his new birth he becomes alive to
God: As the Father said of the Prodigal, This my son was dead, and is alive.
And surely, what difference was between Lazary lying dead in the grave, and
Lazarus standing alive on his feet, the same is between a natural and a
regenerate man. Yea, look what alteration there is in the same Air, by the
arising of the Sun, the like is in the same person by the infusion of holiness.

Paracelsus in his second book De vita longa, says, that Lepra curatur per
regenerationem, Chymically; it is to be understood, so Sin spiritually.

The Regenerate man's actions are as contrary to those that he did before, as
fire and water; so that it may be said of him, as it was once of Troy being
taken, Senec.
Thalamis Troja perlucet novis; every act, word and work are all altered; every
chamber made new and swept, to entertain the Object of the regenerate.

It was a strange change that Satan mentioned and motioned to our Savior of
turning stones into bread: But nothing so strange as the work of Regeneration
and Renovation, a turning of stony hearts into hearts of flesh.

In this great work, the substance of the Soul is the same, only the qualities
and operations are altered. In Regeneration our natures are translated, not
destroyed, no not our constitution and complexion. The melancholy man does not
cease to be so after conversion, only the humor is sanctified to a fitness for
godly sorrow, holy meditation, etc. and so of the other.

The fountain of blessed Immortality, is the new birth; which is the unmaking
of a man, and the making of him up again. The whole frame of the old corrupt
conversation is to be dissolved, that a better may be erected.

The dignity and necessity of this work, are motive enough to labor it. (...).
Its a being heaven born (as the word imports) from above; and without it,
Heaven will be too hot a place to hold us.

A man (with Job) may come to curse the day of his first, but shall never have
occasion to curse the day of his new birth.

Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. John 3.3.


Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, verse. 5.
he nannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit, verse. 6.
is Spirit.

Justification.
There is a twofold Justification, by 1. Infusion. 2. Imputation.


Justificare, est ex imputatione justitiae Christi pro justo reputare. Inquit
Lorinus Jesuita, in Psalm. 45.

St. Paul saying, we are justified by Faith without works, Romans 3.28. And St.
James saying, that we are justified by works, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.24.
may be thus reconciled. His Sermon of Christ crucified, page 68.
There has been (says Mr. Fox) a long contention, and much ado in the Church,
to reconcile these two places of Scripture; but when all is said that may be
said touching them, there is none that can better reconcile these two different
places, than you your selves, to whom we preach; And how is that? I will tell
you (says he) do you join the lively Faith that St. Paul speaks of, with those
good works that St. James speaks of, and bring them both together in one life,
and then have thou reconciled them; for so shall thou be sure to be justified
both before God by St. Paul's Faith, and before men by St. James works.

That we are justified only by the righteousness of Christ apprehended by
Faith, is the very Basis, Foundation and State of Christian Religion, whereby
it is distinguished from all other Religions whatsoever. Jews, Turks, Pagans,
and Papists explode an imputed righteousness; yea, Papists jear it, calling it
a putative Righteousness. Let us therefore hold fast this comfortable and
faithful word, and transmit this doctrine safe and sound to posterity. It was
Luthers great fear, that when he was dead, it would be lost again out of the
world.

Christ is in the midst of his Church, whose righteousness is communicated to
every true Believer, who only comes within the Sphere of his activity. The more
virtuous the central Agent is in any thing, the larger will his Semidiameters
be, and consequently his circumference. The more powerful the fire is, the
further will it cast its heat circularly.

By Christ all that believe, Act. 13.39.
are justified from all things, from which we could not be justified by the Law
of Moses.

For what says the Scripture? Romans 4.2.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for Righteousness.

Therefore we conclude, Romans 3.28.
that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Union with Christ:
This Union is neither natural nor corporal, nor Political, nor personal, but
mystical and Spiritual, Unitas not compaginat uni, Our unity with Christ makes
us one ^ith him.
and yet it is no less true and real, than that of God the Father, and God the
Son; For as the Holy Ghost did unite in the Virgins womb, the divine and humane
natures of Christ, and made them one person, by reason whereof Christ is of our
flesh, and of our bones; so the Spirit unites the person of Christ, his whole
person, God-man, with our persons, by reason whereof we are of his flesh, and
of his bones.

Our Union with Christ is expressed in Scripture by five Similitudes; 1. By
marriage, Christ the Husband, we the Spouse. 2. By a body, Christ the Head, we
the Members. 3. By a building, Christ the Foundation, we the Superstructure. 4.
By ingraffing, Christ the Vine, we the Branches ingraffed into him. 5. By the
Similitude of feoding, Christ the food, we the body nourished.

As the Spirit of man quickens no separate part; Ezekiel. 37.9.
neither could those dry bones live, till they came together, bone to his bone,
and the wind breathed upon them; Aug.
so nor Christ any that are not united to him.

Christ and his Members make one spiritual body. Whiles Christ lays hold on us
by his Spirit, we lay hold on him by Faith. Hence the Church is called Christ,
1 Cor. 12.12. And the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. Yea, hence we have the
honor of making Christ perfect.

O happy union! the ground of communion. Omnis communio fundatur in unione.
O happy Interest! the ground of influence. Hence we have communication of
Christ's Secrets, 1 Cor. 2.16. The Testimony of Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.5. Consolation
in all Afflictions, 2 Cor. 1.5. Sanctification of all occurrances, Phil. 1.21.
Participation of Christ's merit and Spirit, and what not?

I am the vine, ye are the branches. Joh. 15.5.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17.
For we are Members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Ephesians. 5.30.
Sanctification.
Justification and Sanctification are inseparable concomitants; indeed they are
not to be confounded, but withal they ought not to be severed; distinguished
they must be, divided they cannot; and therefore they are fitly called Twins in
the womb of Free Grace. Hence it is that we find those two frequently joined
together, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ezekiel. 36.26. Mic. 7.19.

One bade his Fellow at the Sunrising look toward the West instead of the
East, where he might the better see the appearance of the Sun upon the tops of
the Turrets; even so the assurance of Election is best seen in Conversion and
Sanctification, 2 Pet. 1.10. Malac. 4.2.

Sanctification is an universal healing of all the sinful and diseased parts of
the Soul; for as in Original sin there is the seed plot of all evil; so in
Regeneration, there is the Root of all actual Graces.

Therefore who ever will have the comfort of Sanctification, must look that
they have not only illumination in their minds, but also renovation of their
hearts. Its no advantage (with the Toad) to have a Pearl in the Head, and
poison all over the body.

Gods children are called Temples of God, and of the Holy Ghost; now as the
Temple consisted of three parts, viz. Sanctuarium, sanctum, and sanctum
sanctorum, so does man; the body is as the outer Court, the Soul as the holy
place, and the Spirit as the most holy, and Sanctification (as a golden vein)
must run through all these.

When we fall into Sin, we are like unto a man which falls upon a heap of
stones, and into the mire; such a one may be quickly washed, but not so soon
healed; even so Justification is at once, but Sanctification comes on gradually.

For it is with man, as it was with the house wherein was the fretting and
spreading Leprosy, mentioned, Levit. 14.41, etc. For though that House might
be scraped round about, and much rubbish and corrupt materials be removed, yet
the Leprosy did not cease till the house, with the stones and timber, and
mortar of it, were all broken down. So it is with man, Grace may do much, and
alter many things that were amiss in him, and make him leave many sins to which
he was formerly given; but to have Sin wholly cast out, and left, that is not
to be expected, These reliqui^^ vetustatis (as Austin calls them) remain.
till this earthly Tabernacle of his body be by death pulled down, and
dissolved.

There is an outward and an inward Sanctification; he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly: Judas seemed to be a Saint, yet he was a Devil. Let us entreat the
Lord to sanctify our hearts as well as our hands; our Souls and Consciences as
well as our tongues. That is true Sanctification that begineth at the heart,
and from thence flows to all the parts. What should we do with a fair and
beautiful Apple, if the core be rotten? A straw for an outward glorious
Profession, if there be no truth in the inward parts.

Libanius the Sophister reports, that a Painter being one day desirous to paint
Apollo upon a Laurel board, the colors would not stick, but were rejected; out
of which his Fancy found out this extraction, that the chaste Daphne
(concerning whom the Poets feign that flying from Apollo, En peragit cursus
sarda Diana snos.
who attempted to ravish her, she was turned into a Laurel Tree) could not
endure him even in painting, and rejected him after the loss of her sensitive
powers. Indeed good Souls do even to death resent the least image and offer of
impurity.

The very God of peace sanctify you wholly. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
But ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
but ye are sanctified, by the Spirit of our God. -- To receive an inheritance
among all them who are sanctified. Act. 20 32.
Adoption.
A child of God is two ways, By 1. Nature, 2. Grace.


The child of God by nature, Adoptio est gratuita assumptio personae non
habentis jus in haereditate ad participationem hereditatis. So the Civilians
define it.
is Christ, as he is the eternal Son of God. A child by grace, is three ways.
1. By creation: thus Adam before his fall, and the good Angels are the children
of God. 2. By personal union: thus Christ, as he is man, is the Child of God.
3. By the grace of Adoption: thus are all true believers.

In this grace of adoption, there be two acts of God: One is Acceptance,
whereby God accepts men for his children: The other is Regeneration, whereby
men are born of God, when the Image of God is restored in them, in
righteousness and true holiness.

The excellency of this benefit is great every way; for, Titulo redemptitionis
and adoptionis.
1. He which is the child of God, is heir and fellow-heir with Christ, and that
of the kingdom of heaven, Romans 8.17. And of all things in heaven and earth, 1
Cor. 3.22. He has title in this life, and shall have possession in the life to
come. All Gods sons are heirs; not so the sons of earthly Princes; Gods
children are all higher than the Kings of the earth. 2. Again, He who is Gods
child, has the Angels of God to attend on him, and to minister unto him for
his good and salvation, Heb. 1.14.


If Jacob was at such pains and patience to become son-in-law to Laban; if
David held it so great a matter to be son-in-law to the King; what is it then
to be sons and daughters to the Lord Almighty?

As many as received him, John 1.12.
to them gave he privilege to become the sons of God.

Behold, 1 John 3.1.
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God.

Consolation.
The Devil is man's Accuser, (...), is in full opposition to (...).
the Holy Spirit is his Comforter, whose office it is to make intercession in
our hearts, to God for us; and upon our true repentance, to make our apology;
to comfort us by discovering our graces, and pleading our evidences; which they
who refuse to read over and rest upon, they do help Satan the accuser, taking
his part against themselves.

As it is not meet for a Judge to ride in his own circuit; so nor for a
doubting Christian to judge in his own case.

It Is storied, that a Minister once could have no rest in his spirit, until he
went to visit a certain man; to whose house coming late in the night, and all
being in bed except the man alone: Truly (said the Minister) here I am, but I
know not to what end: Yes (said the other) but God knows; for I have made
away so many childrens portions, and here is the rope in my pocket with which I
was going to hang my self. But how (says the Minister) if I can tell you of
one that made away more, and yet was saved? Who was that (says the man) I
pray? Adam, who being a public person, and entrusted with all for his
posterity, fell, and so lost all. Thus it is God that shines through the
creature, and comfort by the means.

The soul is apt to seek the living amongst the dead, to hang her comforts on
every hedge. But as air lights not without the sun, and as fuel heats not
without fire; so neither can any thing soundly comfort us without God.

God who comfort us in all our tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4.
that we may be able to comfort them which be in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Grace.
GRace is twofold, 1. Active in God, his free favor. 2. Passive from God,
grace wrought in man.


It was a custom amongst the Persians, Plus quali animo astimatur, quam quid
datur. Aelianus.
None might come to their King or Prince without gifts. Syneta, a poor
husbandman, meeting in the field Artaxerxes King of Persia, presented unto him
an handful of water out of the next river; and was rewarded by the King with a
Persian garment, a Cup of gold, and a thousand Darices of silver. But what had
man, wherewith to move God to be favorable to him?

When Alexander gave a whole City to one of his servants, and he out of modesty
denied it; his speech was, He did not dispute what was fit for him to receive,
but what did beseem him to give. The like may be said of Christ, the great gift
of God, and effect of his love and favor to mankind.

Bernard once preaching upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our Savior
Christ, said, The shortness of the time constrained him to shorten his Sermon:
And let none (quoth he) wonder if my words be short, seeing on this day God the
Father has abbreviated his own Word; for whereas it filled heaven and earth
(as the Prophet speaks) it was on this day so short, that it was laid in a
manger.

Christ eases us of a threefold burden, 1. Affliction, 2. The Law, 3. Sin.
Which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.x

Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. 2 Cor. 9.15.
Dona 1. Aedificantia. 2. Sanctificantia.


The former, wicked men may enjoy; the Saints have only the latter. Paracelsus
called the virtue of the Weapon-salve, Donum Dei; so are the Graces rather of
his Spirit.

There is in Grace, 1. Vita originalis and habitualis; which is from death of
sin. 2. Vita actualis and renovata; which is quickening from deadness.


Again, Grace is 1. Inchoata and incompleta. 2. Perfecta, completa and
consummata.


Philosophers and Divines say, Justa a^eudo sumus justi.
There is an Esse natural, by union of soul and body; And an Esse spirituale,
by union of the soul and Christ. The habits of the former Virtues, are got by
frequent acts; but Grace, by Divine infusion. Grace coming into the soul of
man, Pembl. vind. Great. page 7.
like Light into the air, which before dark, is in all parts at once
illuminated; or as Heat into cold water, that spreads it self through the whole
substance; or as the Soul into the body of Lazarus, or the Shunamites child,
not by degrees, but all at once infused, and giving life to every part.

So is our New man born at once, though he grow by degrees; that is, the soul
in conversion is at once re-invested with the Image of God in all its
faculties; so that though the actions of Grace do not presently appear in each
one, yet the habit, the seed, the root of all Divine virtues, is firmly
reimplanted in them, and by the strength of this grace given, they are
constantly disposed to all sanctified operations.

Well said the Roman Theodosius, That living men die, is usual and natural; But
that dead men live again, by repentance and grace, is the mighty work of God
alone.

Gregory the Great, seeing the Merchants of Rome setting forth many beautiful
British Boys to sale; sighed and said, Alas for grief! that such fair faces
should be under the power of the Prince of darkness; and such beautiful bodies
should have their souls void of grace.

The body is better than food, the soul than the body, grace than the soul, and
only Christ than grace. Whosoever carries this Moli or Herb-of-grace, Vlysses-like
frustrates all charms.

Without grace, Trees excel us in length of life, Beasts in strength, and
Devils in knowledge.

Martial reports of a Fly, that by a drop of Amber falling upon it, grew in
such request, that a great sum of money was bidden for it; so grace makes us
esteemed of God. Act. and Mon.
William Tims convented before Bishop Bonner, Tims (said the Bishop) thou have
a good fresh spirit; it were well if thou had learning to thy spirit. Yea (my
Lord) said Tims, and it were well also, that as you be learned men, so ye had a
good spirit to your learning.

A sinner wants grace, Non quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit:
Whereupon it follows in a Schoolmans inference, That Gods not giving, is not
the cause of a sinners not receiving; but rather his not receiving, is the
cause of Gods not giving. Which made Ambrose count a sinner worse than a
serpent; Serpens aliis infundit venenum, injustus sibi.

If thou begin 1 To hate and fly sin. 2 If thou feel thou art displeased
with thine infirmities and corruptions. 3 If having offended God, thou feel
a grief and sorrow for it. 4 If thou desire to abstain from all appearance of
evil. 5. If thou avoidest the occasion. 6 If thou travailest to use thy
endeavor. 7. If thou prayest to God to give the grace; These are so many
testimonies and pledges of Grace, and the Spirits ruling within thee.

Furthermore, if there be any life in the body, at the heart it will beat, at
the mouth it will breath, at the pulse it will be felt: So where there is the
life of Grace in any, Bish. Andrews.
it will appear to himself by his good thoughts, and holy desires which he
has in his heart; and it will appear to others by the gracious words that
proceed from his lips, and from the good works that proceed from his hands: And
if it cannot be perceived by any, or all these ways; then certainly there is
no life of Grace in a man.

It is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace. Heb. 13.9.
Corruption.
Corruption in Physicis opponitur generationi. Ames.
Sicut igitur in generatione forma and perfectio rei in generatur: Sic in
corruptione eadem forma et perfectio de perditur. Forma autem et perfectio
hominis, quae moralis est et spiritualis, consistit in conformitate debita ad
imaginem and voluntatem Dei, ad quam in creatione prima fuimus generati, and
invocatione sumus regenerati. Mutatio igitur ab isthac perfectione ad peccati
deformitatem et confusionem, recte ac proprie dicitur corruption.

We must distinguish (says Bernard) inter morbum mentis, et morsum Serpentis;
inter malum innatum, and malum seminatum; Satan's suggestions, and our own
corruptions.

We must with the man in the Gospel, cast off our cloak, and run after Christ;
and if we approach to heaven, with Moses take off our shoes, viz, our filthy
lusts; because the lighter, the swifter.

But this must be in the strength of God; Austin striving against corruptions
in his own strength, heard a voice, In te stas, et non stas.

This Corruption of nature has a regency and dominion in wicked men, and a
residency and dwelling in the best, and will have: Being like a fretting
leprosy in our cottages of clay, though the walls be well scraped, yet it will
never utterly out, till the house be demolished.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Romans 7.24.
Virtue.
(...) qu^si (...) amabilis. Some think it is derived (...), a Mart vel bello,
quia in bello maxim opus est virtute; vel quia in bello precipue virtutis vis
conconspiciatur. Some derive it a verbo (...),tollo, quia attollit mentem ad
summa and ardua virtus bellica. Others a verbo (...) which signifies to make a
free choice of some excellent thing, upon mature deliberation.

Virtus a viro, a vi ut alii: alii vero dicunt quasi viri status. Non est
virtus virtuti contraria. Senec. There is magnitudo 1. Molis, et 2. Virtutis.


Splendidior virtutis usus erga alium, quam erga seipsum.

Eximia vertus est impios rapit in admirationem ei amorem sui. Erasm, in vit.
Origenis.

The Poets pictured virtue with a vermilian blush; and as it is truly said,
that Rubor est virtutis color, so it may be said, that paupertas est virtutis
fortuna.

Yet wise men honor virtue even in their enemies, as King Philip in
Demosthenes, Vertus laudatu^ in host.
when as he said, If any Athenian living in Athens does say, that he prefers
me before his country, him verily would I buy with much money, but not think
him worthy my friendship: But if any for his countrey-sake shall hate me, him
will I oppugn as a castle, a strong wall, or a bulwark, and yet admire his
virtue, and reckon the City happy in having such a man,

The very Heathens made their passage to the Temple of honor, through the
Temple of virtue; to show that as glory is the end, so virtue is the means.
The way to be famous, is first to do worthily. Ruth. 4.11.

Add to your faith, 2 Pet. 1.5. Phil. 4.8.
virtue.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things.

Vice.
Vitium, ut est negatie habitus, privative opponitur habitui: ut est habitus
vel act us malus, opponitur habitui bono contrary.

There is (says one) a certain list of vices committed in all ages, and
declaimed against by all Authors, which will last as long as humane nature; or
digested into common places, may serve for any Theme, and never be out of date
until Doomesday.

Uice at best is but a diseased harlot, all whose commendations is, that she is
painted.

Uices road is paved with ice, inviting by the eye, but tripping up the heel,
to the hazard of a wound or drowning.

One vice does blemish many virtues. Yet no virtue but beset with vices, or
extremes on both hands. And this is evident, not only in moral virtues, but
also in natural habits, whether they be outward or inward.

For all the several jemmes in virtue, vice has counterfeit stones, wherewith
she gulls the ignorant.

It is said of Mahomet the great, Turk. Hist. fol. 433.
that he had many lovely virtues, but these good parts were in him obscured
with most horrible and notorious vices: In so much that craft, covetousnes and
dissimulation, were in him accounted for tolerable faults, in comparison of
his greater vices.

Heliogabulus was generally hated for his insatiable lust, and least pitied in
that ebb of his frailty (his miserable death) when men use most to be pitied,
being attended at his funerals; with military reproaches: Here go we to bury a
dog of distempered lusts. Sejanus was shaken with an unexpected end, and made
miserable in his best fortunes, interred with dry eyes, but who will pity the
fall of ambition? Herostratus memorable for nothing but villainy, purchased by
his fame an infamous end. Bloody Perillus expert in the invention of cruel
projects, punished with the torture of his invention. And frequently it comes
to pass, the fleering Parasite circumvents himself with his own policy.

Naaman, 2 Kings 4.1.
Captain of the host of the King of Syria, was a great man with his Master,
and honorable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria: He
was also a mighty man in valor; but he was a leper. Repentance.
Publicanus percussit pectus, Innocent. 3. p. l. 2. c. 13. De sacr. Alt. Mist.
in percussione tria not anda, jctus, sonus, tactus; per quae signantur illa
tria quae sunt in vera paenitentia necessaria, viz. 1. Cordis contritio, 2.
Oris confessio. 3. Operis satisfactio. Nam sicut tribus modis peccamus, scil.
Cord cogitando, ore loquendo and opere perpetrando; ita tribus modis paenitere
debemus, scil. Cord per dolorem, ore per pudorem, and opere per laborem.

Yea, four things are required in true repentance, 1. Contrition. 2.
Confession. 3. Satisfaction in case of oppression. 4. Faith.


For without all our repentance is but Judas-like, for he had contrition, in
that he repented himself, when he saw Jesus condemned; and he confessed his
sin, in that he said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood; And he
made satisfaction and restitution so soon as he could, in bringing again the
thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests.

Furthermore, Vbi metus nullus, emandatio inde nulla; and ubi emandatio nulla,
Eertul.
ibi paenitentia necessariovana. For well said Luther, Optima paenitentia est
nova vita.

It Is not many, but some reigning sin that undoeth us, as there is more matter
of one chain that is fast, than of many if loosned; and of one leak open in the
ship, than of many stopped. Therefore as in India (by reason of scarcity of
iron) they keep Prisoners in golden chains; so some Satan keeps in chains of
iron, and others (as it were) in chains of gold.

Tribunal judicis eterni securus aspiciet, quisquis reatus sui conscius, Greg.
digna eum nunc paenitentia placare contendit.

Bradford being at the stake, casting up his countenance to heaven, said, Act.
and Mon.
O England, England, repent thee of thy sins, repent thee of thy sins, etc. Aut
paenitendum, aut pereundum.

The Heart, if wounded, will make use of means to get the arrow out; the
swallow, if blinded, of her feathers to restore her sight: Tertul.
And shall not man use the ordained means to be cured of the wound of sin and
sting of death?

Quem paenitet peccasse, pene est innocens. Senec. Trag.
If we have filled Gods bag with our sins, we had need to fill his bottle with
our tears. Pigeat sane peccare rursus, sed rursus paenitere non pigeat; Tertul.
pigeat iterum periclitare, sed non iterum liberari.

The Angels themselves sing at lamentation for sins, neither does the earth
afford any sweeter music in the ears of God. This heaviness is the way to
joy, never sin repented of, was punished, the good God accounts of our will as
our deed. If God should require sorrow proportionable to the heinousness of
our sin, there were no end of mourning; but his mercy does not regard so much
the measure, as the manner of it. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted; Paenitudine commissa delentur.
if you say you mourn, Christ says you are blessed; now either distrust your
Savior, or else confess your happiness, and with patience expect his promised
consolation. If a man mourn not enough, stay but Gods leisure, and he will make
your eyes run over with tears. Weep still, and still desire to weep, but let
your tears be according to the rain in sunshine, comfortable and hopeful:
These tears are reserved, this hungring after Spiritual grace, shall be
satisfied, this sorrow shall be comforted; there is nothing betwixt God and
you, but time.

Theodosius the Emperor, when reproved by Ambrose, Theod. Eccles. Hist. l. 5.
c. 18.
for the slaughtet at Thessalonica, he lay on the ground and humbly begged
pardon, using these words, Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves unto the dust:
quicken thou me according unto thy word.

Too late repentance did never man yet good. Therefore as it is required of
repentance to be true so likewise speedy; for paenitentia sera raro vera. That
Carrier is a fool that will lay the heaviest burden upon the weakest, feeblest
beast. So also who does intend to lay the great load of repentance, upon his
faint and feeble dotage. Almighty God requires the first fruits, the firstlings
are his darlings, the fattest lambs are fittest for sacrifice.

Repent ye. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish. Matthew. 3.2. Luke 13.3. Acts
3.19. Cap. 17.30. Luke 15.7, 10.
Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. The
times of ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to
repent. I say unto you, that joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more than over many just persons which need no repentance. There is
joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents.

God has raised up Jesus, Act. 5.31. Hebr. 6.1. 2 Cor. 7.10.
and exalted him with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance. Repentance from dead works. Repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of.

Impenitency.
Show me a man that has not some hardness of heart, and we will send him to
heaven without Jacobs ladder.

There is a threefold hardness of heart, 1. Natural. 2. Actual. 3. Judiciary.


Natural and hereditary, Impenitence perfectly conforms one to Satan, who is in
male obsirmatus, and sins without remorse, in malo perseverare diabolicum.
whereby all men are by nature not only averse from, but also adverse to the
motions of Grace. This is called a neck possessed with an iron sinew, Isa 48.4.

Actual, adventitious or voluntary, which is, when, by often choking good
motions, a man has quit his heart of them; being arived at that dead and
dedolent disposition, Ephesians. 4.18. past feeling, and ripe for destruction, This
is called a brow of brass in the abovenamed text. Isa. 48.4.

Judiciary, or penal hardness; which is, when God for a punishment of the
former, withholds his grace, and delivers a man up to Satan to be further
hardened, and to his own hearts lusts, which is worse. The incestuous person
was delivered up to Satan, and yet repented; but he that is delivered up to his
own heart, to a reprobate mind, cannot be renewed by repentance: but is in the
ready rode to that unpardonable sin.

The hardest creatures are flexible to some agents, flints to the rain, iron to
the fire, stones to the hammer; but man's heart yields to nothing; neither the
showers of mercy, nor the hammer of reproof, nor the fire of judgment; but like
the stithy, is still the harder for beating. All the plagues in Egyt could not
mollify Pharaoh's heart.

Because the Jews were so stony hearted, They were (says one) rigidiores
lupis, duriores lapidibus.
Jerusalem became a heap of stones, and the conquering Romans dashed them
against those stones, which they exceeded in hardness. Here let the wicked see
their doom, the stones that will not be softened, shall be broken; there is no
changing the decree of God, but change thy nature, and then know thou art not
decreed to death. Stony hearts shall be broken to pieces with vengeance, do not
strive to alter that doom, but strive to alter thy heart, make of a stony heart
a fleshly heart, and so prevent it in thy particular.

Thou after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Make you a new heart, Ezekiel. 18.31.
and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O House of Israel.

Faith.
Parts fidei salvifica sunt tres, Illud est optimum cujus privatie est pessima.
1. Notitia verbi Dei, and imprimis promissionis gratiae. 2. Assentio eidem ad
hibita. and 3. Persuasio seu siducia de certo obtinenda gratia promissa.


In Faith there is a 1. Direct and 2. Reflex
Act.

There is also certitudo 1. Subjecti. and 2. Objecti.


The first is rather justificati than justificans.

God the Father adopteth us, as the fountain of adoption; God the Son as the
conduit; God the Holy Ghost as the Cistern; and Faith as the cock whereby it
runs into our hearts.

Tantum possumus, quantum credimus. Cy^^.
We say that the ring stancheth the blood, when indeed it is the stone with in
it: There are many that make Faith an Almighty Idol, it shall save; but thus
they make themselves idle, making Faith a meritorious cause of justification, a
Doctrine which in time will trample Christ's blood under foot.

There is such affinity between Faith and Hope, that (as Luther said) it is
hard to find one without the other; they cannot be well separated; as the
Cherubims on the Mercy-seat; yet they differ much.

Especially in the 1. Object. 2. Subject. 3. Order. 4. Office.
1. For the first, Faith has for her object the Truth, Hope for her object the
goodness of God. Faith (as Aug. notes) is of good things and bad, but Hope
looks on good things only. The Christian believes that there is a hell as well
as a heaven, but he fears the one, and hopes only for the other. Faith
believes, 1. Things past, Christ was dead and buried, and is risen again. 2.
Present, he sits at the right hand of God. 3. Future, he will come to judge
the quick and dead. But Hope only things to come. 2. For the second, Faith is
in the understanding; Hope in the will. 3. For the third, Faith is the ground
of things hoped for, and always goes before; Hope follows after. 4. Lastly,
Faith is our Logic, to conceive what we must believe; Hope our Rhetoric, to
persuade us in tribulation unto patience. In a word, the difference between
Faith and Hope in Divinity, Sodullus. Minorit.
is the same as is between Fortitude and Prudence in Policy; Fortitude not
guided by Prudence, is rashness; and Prudence not joined with Fortitude, is
vain; Perfectionem legis habet qucredit in Christum. Ambr. in Romans 10.4.
Chrysologue.
so Faith without Hope is nothing and without Faith, Hope is mere presumption.


Whosoever touched the consecrated things that belonged unto the Tabernacle,
was holy; so is he that touches Christ by faith; Accedere ad Christum est
credere, qui credit accedit, qui negat recedit.

Virtues separated, are annihilated. Neither in the flint alone, nor in the
steel alone any fire is to be seen, but extracted by conjunction and collision,
Faith is so well eyed, and so sharp sighted that as the Eagles eye, being aloft
in the clouds, can notwithstanding espy, s^^ frutice (...), and sub (...)
piscem; so faith here on earth can notwithstanding search into the deep things
of God in heaven: most perfectly seeing those things, which humane sense can no
way perceive.
So heaven by joining faith and good works together.

Herein a faithful man exceeds all other, that to him there is nothing
impossible, he walks every day with his Maker, and talks with him familiarly,
he lives in heaven, though be be seen on earth: when he goes in to converse
with God, he wears not his own clothes, but takes them still out of the rich
wardrobe of his Redeemer, and then dares boldly prease in and challenge a
blessing: The Celestial Spirits not scorn his company; yea, his service: he
deals in wordly affairs as a stranger, and has his heart ever at home; his
war is perpetual without truce, without intermission, his victory is certain;
he meets with the infernal powers, and tramples them under feet; the shield
that he bears before him, can neither be missed nor pierced, if his hand be
wounded, his heart is safe; he is often tripped, never foiled; and if sometimes
foiled, yet never vanquished; iniquity has often craved entertainment, but with
a repulse; if sin of force will be his tenant, his Lord he cannot be; his
faults are few, and those he has God will not see; he is set so high, that he
dare call God Father, his Savior Brother, heaven his Patrimony, and thinks it
no presumption to trust to the attendance of any else. There is no more love in
his heart, than liberty in his tongue; what he knows, he dare confess; if
torments stand between him and Christ, he contemns them; banishment he does not
esteem, for he sees the Evangelist in Pathmos cutting in pieces, Esaias under
the saw, Jo^as drowning in the gulf, the three chrildren in the furnace, Daniel
in the lions den, Stephen stoning, the Baptists neck bleeding in Herodias
platter; he emulates their pain, their strength, their glory: he knows whither
death can lead him, and outs^ceth death with his resurrection.

Abels faith is a never-dying Preacher. Perkins on Heb. 11. Oportet in fide
stare, in side ambulare, in fide perseverare. Orig.
Invoco te tanquam languida and imbecilla fide, Cruciger.
sed fide tamen. Lawrence Saunders a Martyr, in a letter to his wife, wrote
thus. Fain would this flesh make strange, Act. and Mon.
of that which the Spirit does embrace. O Lord, how loath is this loytering
sluggard to pass forth into Gods path; were it not for the force of faith
which pulls it forwards by the reins of Gods most sweet promise, and hope
which pricks on behind, great adventure there would be of fainting by the way.

Aristotle said, Anxius vixi, dubious morior, nescio quo vado; But Paul, I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Terra fremit, regna asta crepant, ruat ortus and orcus, Si modo firma fides,
nuilae ruina nocet.

The just shall live by faith. Heb. 10.38.


Unbelief.
Infidelity is a grievous sin. As faith is the greatest virtue, so infidelity
is the greatest vice. It is a bar to keep out Gods blessings, Christ could do
nothing among his own brethren, for their unbelief sake.

As wine a strong remedy against hem-lock, yet mingled with it, doubleth the
force of the poison; so it is with the Word when mingled with unbelief.

Unbelief rejects the remedy, frustrates the means, holds a man in an
universal pollution, and leaves him under a double condemnation; One from the
law wherein Christ found him, and another from the Gospel for refusing the
remedy. In a word, it shuts a man up close Prisoner in the laws dark dungeon,
till death come with a writ of Habeas Corpus, and hell with a writ of Habeas
animam. Yea, this leads the ring-dance of the rout of reprobates. Therefore let
us labor to pluck up this bitter root out of the hearts of us all.

Take heed brethren, Heb. 3.12.
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief. Hope. Philosophers call
it extension^^^ appetiti^s naturalis. Sp^i objectum est bo^um futurum, arduum,
possibile, adipisci Aquinas. The object of Faith is verbum Dei, of Hope, res
verbi. Alsted.

Hope is a grace of God whereby we expect good to come, patiently abiding till
it come; As joy is an affection, whereby we take delight in the good that is
present.

Spes in humanis incerti nomen boni, spes in divinis nomenest certissimi; as
proceeding from faith unfeigned, which can believe God upon his bare word, and
that against sense in things invisible, and against reason in things incredible.

Hope makes absent joys present, wants plenitudes, and beguiles calamity, as
good company does the time. This life would be little better than hell (says
Bernard) if it were not for the hopes of heaven. S^d superest sperare selutem,
and this holds head above water, this keeps the heart aloft all floods and
afflictions, as the cork does the line, or bladders do the dody in swimming.

It Is the grace of Hope that sets a man in heaven, when he is on earth. A
Christian could not go to heaven on earth, Dr. Holdsworth
and take a spiritual slight, but for hope. The promise brings down heaven to
the heart; it inverts that speech of St. Paul, he says, while we are present
in the body, we are absent from the Lord. But hope turns it, and makes it while
we are in the body, it teaches us how to be present in heaven. Here is the
benefit of hope.

Alexander an Heathen, had such a notion about an earthly hope, Juvenes multum
babe^t de futuro and parum de praeterito, and ideo quia memoria est praeteriti,
spes autem futuri, parum habent de memoria, sed multum vivunt in spe. Idem.
which had no ground neither, but the great things his own ambition promised
him: for when one seeing him give away all his present inheritances, said, what
Sir, will you make your self a beggar? No (says he) I will reserve hope for
my self. But certainly, Hope is a greater and better possession unto the people
of God here, than all the great and good things which they possess. Put as
much into their hands as you can, there is more than that put in their hearts
by hope. A child of God looks over all his possessions, and pitcheth upon
expectation as his portion. The estate which a believer has in the promises,
is more than the estate he has in possession. Riches in the promise, is better
than riches in the chest. There is no enjoyment but that in Heaven (where we
shall enjoy all that ever was promised) so good as hope, for what is promised.

Fides intuetur verbum rei, spes autem rem verbi. Luther.
Unto faith must be annexed hope: faith makes a Christian, hope nourishes and
sustains a Christian.

Spes alet agricolas. Jam mala finissem letho, sed credula vitam. Spes fove^,
and melius cras fore semper ait.
It is our duty patiently and cheerfully to wait and hope for a mercy promised;
cheering our selves up with such hope as do they that bear with their cooks,
making them to stay long for their dinner, in hope thereby to fare the better.

Hope is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. As a ship cannot be without an
anchor, no more can we without hope. The ship is the soul of a Christian, the
anchor is Hope, the sea where it is tossed, is the world, and the place
whereinto the anchor is cast, is heaven. As the anchor in a storm or tempest
holds the ship fast that it is not tossed up and down, nor shaken with wind,
and waves: So does hope the ship of our souls, in the tempestuous sea of this
world. Only an anchor goes downward, this upward; that into the bottom of the
Sea, this into the top of Heaven. Anchora in imo, spes in summo.

The hopes of the wicked are not long lived, they are soon dashed and
disappointed, Pro. 11.7. It Is likened to a spiders web, Job. 8.14. a little
thing, a beso in easily and speedily sweeps away the house and inhabitant
together; such is the hope of the wicked, its suddenly ruined.

That Is true hope that runs out into holiness; for faith and hope work a
suitableness in the soul, to the things believed and hoped for. 1 John 3.3. etc.

Let us desire God to increase our hope, and to strengthen it daily more and
more. That this anchor being in heaven already, may put us in an assured hope
of heaven: And the Lord in mercy so fortify this grace, that no storms of
afflictions may be ever able to prevail against it. Lord increase our hope.

This I recall to my mind; therefore have I hope. For we are saved by hope:
Lam. 3.11. Romans 8.24.
but hope that is seen, is not hope: for what a man sees, Why does he yet hope
for? But if we hope for that We see not, then do We With patience Wait for it.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable. 1 Cor. 15.19. Prove. 14.32.
But the righteous has hope in his death.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3.
Which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Presumption.
There are two sorts of persons (says a learned Divine) among others
observable in the Church, namely infirmi and glorioli, weak Saints, and
presumptuous hypocrites; Ille vincit qui gratiam Dei sperat, non qui de sua
virtu^e praesumit. Tertul. Quicquid a vabis minor extimesci^, major hoc vobis
Dominus minatur.
these are usually cast down with an apprehension of their own sinfulness,
these are commonly lifted up with an opinion of their own righteousness: Those
abhore themselves as the worst of sinners, these boast themselves to be the
best of Saints; Those account themselves to be nothing but sin, these think
themselves to have no sin.

Presumptuous sinners promise to themselves, the future vision of Gods face;
whilst they go on in the wilful breach of Gods law. They persuade themselves
that their condition shall be happy, though their conversation is wicked.
Impudently laying as full claim to heaven, as the exactest Saint.

Presumption usually springs from the false reasonings which are in the minds
of men.

Concerning 1. The freeness of Gods grace in electing. 2. The fullness of his
mercy in forgiving. 3. The worthiness of Christ's blood in redeeming.


Thus is the sweetest honey turned into gall by bad stomachs: the most
wholesome Antidotes become poison to wicked men; and the precious supports of a
lively faith, are abused to be props of presumption, by arrogant hypocrites.

Origin did too much presume of the mercy of God, when he carried sticks to an
Idol; Damascene when he did service unto Mahomet; Cranmer when he did subscribe
to the Pope; Aaron when he made the calfe; and Solomon when he fell to
idolatry: yet these men were prompted on, either by passion and perturbation
within, or temptation from without: The greatest example we have of a godly
person falling into presumptuous sin, is David; for we see him with all crast
and subtilty studying how to accomplish that which the very light of nature
condemns; and when he has so done, we see him covering and excusing of it. Oh
there the Philistines were upon this Sampson, and his strength was gone; there
presumptuous sins did for awhila prevail over him.

When the heart at any time (Says Dr. Preston) deliberates, and yet that word
is not sufficient to express it; Of Gods alsufficiency.
But when the heart works according to its own proper inclination; and then
wilfully disobeye; the Lord, in any commandment, certainly then it casts God
away.

Austin calls sins of Presumption, Peccata vastantia conscientiam.
sins that lay waste the conscience. This is that great transgression, that
wickedness with a witness.

He that hears the words of the curse, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
and yet blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
Walk in the imagination of my heart, to add^ drunkenness to thirst; The Lord
will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall
lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.

The soul that does ought presumptuously, Number. 15.30, 31
the same reproacheth the Lord: and that soul shall be cut off from among his
people. Because he has despised the Word of the Lord, and has broken his
commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off: his iniquity shall be upon
him.

Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. Ch^ys. in Mat. 27.
I ought never to despair of the grace of God, Quia semper inveniam Deum
benigniorem quam me culpabill^rem. Bern. Deserentes se non des^rit, sed and
impios quaeritqui eum non quaerebaut. Ambros. Origin. Hom. 1. In Genes. Calv.
lib. cui titul. de Fr. Spira Ge^vae. in prefat.
let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression.

Desperation.
Despair is Satan's Masterpiece; it carries men headlong to hell, as the
Devils did the herd of swine into the deep.

Non tantos peccatum, quantos, desperatio perdit.

My punishment (says Cain) is greater than I can bear. Or, mine iniquity is
greater than can be forgiven. In either sense he sins exceedingly, and worse
perhaps than in slaying his brother, whether he murmer against Gods justice, or
despair of his mercy. Mine iniquity is greater than can be forgiven. Mentiris
Cain, says an Ancient. Cain did not say so, because it was so: but it was so,
because he had said so.

Nemo desperet videns similitudinem suam magis esse cum Diabolo quam cum Deo,
Posse se iterum recuperare formam imaginis Dei, quia non venit salvator vocare
justos, sed peccatores in panitentiam.

Fraciscus Spira, being in a deep despair, for renouncing the Gospels
Doctrine, which he did once so stoutly profess; said, he would willingly suffer
the most exquisite tortures of hell fire for the space of 10000 years; upon
condition he might be well assured to be released afterward. He further added
in that hellish and horrible fit, That his dear children and wife (for whose
sake principally he turned away from the Gospel to embrace this present world)
appeared now to him as hangmen, hags and torturers; In fine, that his
abominable fault had deserved, Non modo damnationem, sed etiam aliquid gravius,
damnatione acerbius.

Unhappy Spira denied his Lord but once; but many there be, that have not only
denied him often, but in some sort desied him also: Like Pilate crucifying the
Lord Jesus, to give life unto Barabbas a Murderer; that is, to Sin, which
slays the soul.

Mention is also made of a covetous Oppressor, that made this Will, viz. I give
my goods to the King, my body to the grave, and my soul to the Devil.

Thus the timorous are carried to more precipitate resolutions through despair,
than the temerarious through inconsideration; so violently are they tossed in the
sea of dangers, that have lost their anchor of hope.

Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. Psalm.
94.17. Verse. 18. Verse. 19.
When I said, my foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

Charity.
Charity may fitly be compared to the precious stone Pantarb, Philostr. in vit.
Apo^onii. l. 3. c. 14.
spoken of by Phil^stratus; a stone of great beauty and of strange property: so
bright it is and radiant, that it gives light in the darkest midnight; and that
light is of such admirable virtue, that it brings together the stones which
it reaches, into heaps, as if they were so many hives of bees: But nature,
lest so precious a gift should be undervalued, has not only hid this stone in
the secret bowels of the earth, but has also put into it a property of
slipping out of the hands of those that hold it, Nisi provid^ ratione teneatur,
unless they hold it fast indeed.

Charity is accepted, and uncharitableness condemned in the smallest matter.
Non ex munere animus mun^rantis est aestimandus, sed ex animo munus. Buxt.
Epist.
It is not the quantity of the gift, but the affection of the giver; it is not
the quantity of that which is denied to be given, but the heart of him that
denies it, which the Lord takes notice of: For there is both, 1. Charity in the
heart, viz. that affection of love which makes us to hold our neighbors dear,
and to desire and seek their good in every thing which is dear unto them, and
that for Christ his sake, according to the will of God, 1 Cor. 13. where are
the properties of Charity at large described. 2. And Charity in the hand, viz.
the actions and duties of love, as 1 Timothy 1.5. according to that 1 John 3.18.
Now therefore when it troubles us to part with the least imaginable benefit, as
too much for them who have nothing; when crumbs of bread which fall from our
table are denied, when a cup of cold water is denied, how told is Charity? is
it not crumbled into a lesser nothing than those crumbs?

Charity believes all things; Not that it is so credulous as to take up every
thing for truth upon a common and ungrounded report; that is no commendation in
any man, much less in a godly man. Therefore the meaning is, De quolibet
praesumendum bonum, nisi constet de contrario. Dav.
Charity interprets every thing in the best sense that it will bear, and
makes the fairest construction which every man's case and condition will admit.
It is a rule in the Civil law, Supponitur esse bonns, qui non probatur esse
malus; He is supposed to be an honest man, who was never proved otherwise.

Exuberat charitas, says Ambrose, Charity overfloweth. It is Puteus Rehoboth,
(...) Puteus platearum, vel latitudinum.
puteus latitudinis, the Well of breadth; which name we read to be given by
Isaac to a Well which his servants dug, Genesis 26.22. For, Charity does
spread abroad her waters, wheresoever is need of them.

Alexander Quintus Pope of Rome said of himself, That when he was a Bishop, he
was rich; when he was a Cardinal, he was poor; and when he was Pope, he was a
beggar. And plainly so it is with many, who the richer they are, still are the
poorer, in respect of their charity.

It were a vain thing to fear, when a child is conceived, lest the spirit
should not find the way into it, and lest the bones should not grow in him: And
no less vain is their fear, who are troubled lest by giving to the poor, their
estate should decay, that either themselves or theirs should be brought to
misery. But well said he, Non timeatur in his expensis defectio facultatum, Leo
Sermon. 10. de Quadrag.,
quoniam ipsa benignitas magna substantia est, nec potest charitati de^sse
materies, ubi Christus pascit and pascitur. In omni hec opere illa intervenit
manus, quae panem frangendo auget, and erogando multiplicat; That is, In these
expenses let not a failing of means be feared, because bounty it self is great
wealth; neither can the matter of bounty be wanting, where Christ himself
feeds, and is fed. In every such work that hand is a fellowworker, which
increases bread by breaking it, and by giving multiplieth.

A small charity shall not want a reward: De gradib. superb.
For as Bernard notes, this is the difference between God and the Devil; Ille
obtulit pomum, and abstulit paradisum; Deus offert paradisum, and postulat
pomum: He offered an Apple, and took away Paradise; God offers Paradise, and
requires but an Apple. Mat. 10.42.

Portus innecessitate constitutorum homo misericors; A merciful man is the
haven of them that are in distress.

Chrysostom says; Homil. de misericordia and duabus viduis.
Tria sunt quae in misericordiae opere optanda sunt Christiano, ut possit
facere, ut velit, ut complete: There are three things which in the work of
charity a Christian ought to desire; That he may be able to do it, that he may
be willing to do it, and that he may accomplish his will and do it. For there
are which can, and will not; which would, but cannot; and which can and will,
but do not, by delaying of it. Wherefore he concludes, Qui potest facere, oret
ut velit; and qui vult, oret ut possit; and qui utrique paratus est, det operam
ut misericordiam instanter efficiat, ne quod vult and potest differendo non
complete: Let him the refore that can do it, pray that he may be willing; let
him that is willing to do it, pray that he may be able; and let him that is
ready in both, be careful that he do it quickly and diligently, lest by
deferring he do not perform that, which he is both able and willing to do.

That charity should be in secret, Ambrose says excellently: Videndus est ille
qui te non videt; requirendus est ille, qui er^bescit videri: ille etiam
clausus in carc^re occurrat tibi, ille affectus agritudine mentem tuam
personet, qui aures non potest: He is to be seen by thee, who does not see
thee; He is to be sought out, who is ashamed to be seen by thee; Let him meet
thee who is shut up in prison, and let his voice who lies sick in bed found in
thy mind, which cannot sound in thine ears.

Charity never wants Kindred; for as Olympiodorus speaks, Qui desiderio
illorum tenetur, quamvis natura nullos affines and consanguineos habeat,
charitatem tamen habens, omnes homines quamvis externos, esse sibi filiorum
loco putat and fratrum: He that has a desire of them, although by nature he
has no kinsfolk, no kindred, yet having Charity, he accounts all men,
although strangers, to be in the place of children and brethren unto him. And
excellent is that of Catena Graeca, Si quis fratrem non habet, ille proculdubio
spiritum adoptionis filiorum non accepit; and si quis pater non est, is porro
improbus est: If there be any one who has not a brother, no doubt he has not
received the spirit of adoption of the sons of God; And if any one be not a
father, what is he but a wicked man?

We should be charitable, feed the hungry, and clothe the naked: For, 1. They
are our own flesh, Isa. 58.7.2. It was the sin of Sodom, not to strengthen the
hand of the poor and needy. It was a damned Dives, that would not relieve a
poor Lazarus. 3. God feeds us with the finest of the wheat, clothes us with the
choicest silks, etc. yea, feeds with Manna, flesh of his Son; clothes us with
garments of salvation, with the righteousness of Christ. 4. It is the exercise
of faith, Eccles. 11.1. 5. It makes a man to be of good report, Psalm. 112.9. 6.
It Is argument of a good man, Psalm. 112.19. 7. It is feeding of Christ, Mat.
25.35, 40. 8. It Is unhonour to Religion, Jam. 1.27. 9. It procures many a
prayer and blessing, 2 Cor. 9.10. Job 29.13.2 Tim. 1.16.10. There is Carentia
mali, potestas sublevandi, actual^ compass^ in miser^s: All which are in God. 1
Cor. 14.1. Col. 3.14. 1 Timothy 4.12. Rev. 2.19. 1 Cor. 13.
It Is maintaining and saving of life, Job 29.13.11. It makes like unto God, Luk
6.36. Psalm. 146.7. And Christ, Mat. 14.16.12. It Is lending to the Lord, Pro.
19.17.13. It Is pleasing and acceptable to God, Act. 10. Heb. 13.16.

Follow after charity.

And above all things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

Be thou an example of the believers, -- in charity.

I know thy works, and charity.

Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, -- and have not charity, I
am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. I am nothing. It profits
me nothing.

And now abides faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these
is charity.

I have insisted the longer on this necessary grace and duty, remembering we are
fallen into those frozen times, of which our Savior, Mat. 24.12. Because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.

Covetousness.
Chrysostom says, I had rather dwell with a thousand possessed, Cited by Ste^^^
in Luke 16.
than with one covetous man; for they hurt their garments and themselves, but a
covetous man hurts his neighbors. In Mat. 10.

He is like S. Peter's fish, albeit his mouth be full of gold, yet is he nibling
at every bait. If Naboth has a little Vineyard, Ahab will have it, or else he
will die for grief.

It is a disease common amongst men, to covet the greatest things, and not to
enjoy the least.

The Heart-wolf (says Pliny) be he never so hungry and ready to eat, if he see
another prey, he forsakes the first, and follows after that. Such a Wolf in the
heart is ambitious Avarice; it makes no use of what it has gotten, but
greedily hunteth after more.

Nothing can quench the combustible slime of the pond Samosaris, Nam saevior
i^nibus Ae^nae, fervens am^r ardet habendi.
nor the burning flame of the high hill Chimera, but only Earth: So nothing can
satisfy the muddy thoughts of Covetousness, or stop the mouth of the inflamed
hearts of the Malicious, but only the grave. For when his imagination persuades
him that he has made sure his first Purchase; the unsatisfied disease of his
Dropsy, drives him beyond all limits of justice and reason, to thirst for
more, and to think it good purchase: Whereas there are no Perquisites of
lasting and true tenure, but only those of Virtue.

The covetous person (says one) is a servant to himself, yea, to his servant;
he will for money do homage to a drudge; a liveless piece of earth is his
master, yea his God, which he shrines up in his chest; He is like a true
Chymick, turning every thing into silver, keeping it to look on, not to use;
like another Ahab, he is sick of his neighbors field; He cares not for
advantage, to lose his friend, pine his body, and damn his soul.

Midas quasi (...) a non videndo; because Covetousness has so blinded him,
that he cannot see his own good. If the Philistines had not bored out Sampson's
eyes, he would never have been their Milner. The World is a Miln, turned about
with the wheel of Time; the covetous man is Sampson, toiling for each corn; not
seeking (because not seeing) the things of above: Nay, this unhappy wretch is
like the Miln-wheel, which all the day long turns about, and at night remains
in the same place.

Covetousness brings naught home at last. It is written of the fish
Scolopendrae, that having sucked in the fishers hook, that sowre-sweet morsel,
She has a rare trick to rid her from it,
For instantly she all her guts does vomit.


Tarpeia daughter to the chief Keeper of Romes Capitol, Go^^^. Ant ^.
is said to betray it into the enemies hand, bargaining to have for this
treason, all the golden Bracelets upon her enemies left hands; who when they
were admitted, did cast not only their Bracelets, but Bucklers upon her,
through the weight whereof she was pressed to death.

Servas pecuniam, Cyp^: ^ ^em.
quae te servata non servat.

Possidere se credunt, qui potius possidentur, nec ad pecuniam suam domini, sed
magis pecuniae mancipati.

Sequi Chriftum quomodo possunt, qui patrimonii vinculis detinentur?

Needless it was, Babington in Gen^s.
and but a Philosophical folly or pang, that Crates cast his money into the
Sea, and said, Ego te mergam, ne mergar a te. For wealth and godliness may
meet: But take heed and beware of Covetousness.

Covetousness is to be hated, -- Quid non m^rta^ia pectora c^git, Auri sacra
fames? -- Quae reverentia leoum, Quis metus aut pudor est unquam, properantis
avari?
because it is 1. A sin against nature, making our soul terrene, which should
be celestial. 2. The procurer of a curse; Woe t^ them that join house to house
-- 3. The root of many evils. 4. A besotting sin; Thou fool -- 5. A leader into
snares, which drown men in destruction and perdition.


Let your conversation be without covetousness. Hebr. 13.5.
Love.
Gods love to Man.
The beloved Disciple tells us, God is love, 1 John 4.16. So he is four ways:
1. Substantialiter, Q^icqui^ in Deo, D^us est. Alst.
(Not that we should think him to be a quality, who is a living substance, but)
There is nothing in God but God; God is not accidentally, but substantially
good. 2. Causaliter; We love him because he first loved us: Magnes amoris amor;
Love is both the loadstone and whetstone of love. Our love is but the reflex of
his. 3. Active, loving all that he made, Man especially. The ground of this
love being wholly in himself. 4. Passive Being lovely, and most worthy to be
beloved.


O taste and see that the Lord is good. Psalm. 34.8.
Man's love to God.
When the subject of our hatred is sin, it cannot be too deep; and when the
object of our love is God, it cannot be too high.

Too many love God, as men the Physician, Non propter se, sed propter sanitatem.

Love all, but God above all. Ordo charitatis est, ama post Deum Patrem: This
is Loves method; first love God, then our Kindred; And if it happen that God
and they come in competition, Odium in suos, pietas in Deum est.
then hatred to Kindred, is piety to God. Pilate that for love of men condemned
Christ, did kill himself; Judas that for love of money betrayed his Lord,
hanged himself; and Julian's Treasurer, that for Julian's love did leave
Christ, did vomit blood, and die suddenly. So let all thine enemies perish, O
Lord.

Say not because we are commanded to love God with all our mind, soul and
strength; therefore it is not lawful to love any thing else: For we answer, We
may love something praeter Deum, sed omnia propter Deum; We may love other
things beside God, if we love them in and for God.

Christ will have of his Church her first love, just love, and only love:
Therefore she is called his Turtle-dove; for as that bird has but one mate, so
the Church must have God only for her Love.

Love makes Christ's yoke easy, and his burden light; Ovid. Chrysol.
Solus amor nescir difficultates. Yea, Love makes men Martyrs for God, Audac^m
faciebat amor.

God had rather men should love than fear him; to be called Father than Master.

O love the Lord, all ye his Saints. Psalm. 31.23.
I will love thee, O Lord, my strength. Psalm. 18.1.
Man's love to Man.
Why we should love one another, this one briefly and pithily expresses, thus:
1. Dilecti diligamus, We are loved our selves, therefore let us love. 2.
Dis^^^o^ diligamus, they are beloved, whom we are charged to love. 3. Yea,
Diligentes diligamus; they also love God, and us, whom God commands us to love

S. John proves the necessity of loving one another, 1 John 4.11. in these
words, viz. If God then first so loved us, then ought we also to love one
another. Wherein he comprehends four Arguments:







1. Necessitate praecepti, because he has commanded us to love them.

2. Necessitate naturae; for nature compels us. The Pythagorians (as Plutarah
reports) if they were angry one with another, never slept till they had sh^^^en
hands. And Pliny reports of two goats, which meeting on a narrow bridge, Honor
may be honored, but Love will be abused. 1 Cor. 13.7.
so that they could not pass both together, and yet were not able to turn; The
one lay down, and let the other pass over his back. Indeed we are ready enough
to tread on one another backs, but to bear one another necessities we are
unwilling.

3. Necessitate gratiae; Love is a virtue so necessary, that a Christian cannot
be without it.

Qui est summum bonum and verun^ illud unicum est,) and so much, even so that
he sent his only begotten Son, that he should die for our sins; Then ought we
in some measure to love one another.

It is a sure sign we love God, when we love our brethren. For (suth one
elegantly,) As lines in a circle, drawn from the center to the circumference,
the nearer they come to the center from whence they proceeded, the nearer needs
must they come one to another; and the farther off they go from it, the more
are they distant one from another. So Christians, the nearer they come to God,
(that indivisible Center, of whom, and to whom are all things, Romans 11.36.) in
their love, the nearer must they needs come in affection one to another; and
the farther they go from him in that, the further off they are from one another
in the same affection. 1 Pet. 2.^. Romans 12 9. 1 John 3.1^.


Love as brethren. Let love be without dissimulation. My little children, let
us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth. Anger. Ira
furor brevis; quasi ex se ire, it makes a man (as it were) to go out of himself.

Iratum simile est canibus, inquit Aristotel. qui cum primum audiverant pulsum
januae, statim latrant, and non considerant utrum domesticus an aliquis
extraneus sive peregrinus pulsaverit, qua in re peccant, and saepe verbarentur:
ita etiam ira incontinentes ad vindictam rapiuntur, Arist.
antequam consideraverunt quid ratio jubeat faciendum est in judicando. Ira
excitatur ex calidissimo and subtilissimo humore, nempe fluxibili. Impedit ira
animum ne possit ceruere v^rum.


Ira sex has habet filias; Indignationem, Humorem anim^, Tumultum, Blasphemiam,
Contumeliam and Rixas. For, 1. A man accounts himself not worthy of such a
wrong. 2. Then he begins to swell. 3. And then he meditates revenge. 4. He will
fall to cursing. 5. To give distasteful speeches. 6. And last of all, there is
falling to open strife in words or blows.

Some are soon angry, and soon quenched: like flax, soon kindled, and soon
burnt out: Others, long ere they be angry, and long ere they be pacified; like
green wood, long ere it be kindled, and long ere it be quenched: But the worst
of all are those, that are soon angry, and hardly quenched; these are most
opposite to God, who is slow to anger, and ready to forgive.

Sorrow will not remedy mischief; Mulichre est furere in ira. Sense.
and anger is vain, where force is wanting to revenge.

Est ira quaedam licita. But we must not suffer the sun of Reason to be
overruled by that affection. For, immoderate Ange^ blinds Reason, and pulls out
the eyes of it, as the Philistines did Sampsons.

Be angry, Ephesians. 4.26.
and sin not. Hatred.
They that hate, suffer in themselves the punishment of that evil they wish
unto another. He which hates, is the patient; he which is hated, the agent:
Contrary to the sound of the word, the hater is in torment, the hated in ease.

We must not hate the person of any man, Ames in illo quod Deus fecit,
persequere in illo quod ipfi sibi secit. Aug.
be he never so wicked, but his evil works: because we must hate nothing that
comes from God by grace or nature; for he is the Author of nothing but good,
and no good is to be hated. God made the man, but the man made himself sinfuls

Most unkindnesses that fall out among friends, grow upon misunderstandings:
The neglect of clearing and removing them, causes dwelling suspicions;
Suspicions breed a very habit of misinterpretation; This breeds a lothness to
come to the light, to show the reasons of our dislike; This lothness begets a
very separation in heart, and at length turns to downright hatred.

Suffer not hatred to nestle in the heart; for when it is grown from a passion
to an habit, which is, to be settled in an alienation and estrangement from the
person hated, then it grows to wish and desire, and seek his hurt. I could like
that Exposition well (said Maldonat) if it were not Calvin's: And that Reformed
Religion (said George Duke of Saxony) if Luther had not had an hand in it.

Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, Pro. 15.17.
than a stalled ox, and hatred therewith. Malice.
Malice, Malice (as we say of rennet) the older it is, the stronger.
in short, is Anger inveterate; It is an inward hatred, or grudge harbored in
the heart against others.

It may be known by diverse signs, viz. A constant base estimation of others,
and inward loathing; Frequent desires to hurt them, longing for ability and
opportunity of revenge; Proud and arrogant carriage, whereby it appears a man
despisech others; Habitual backbiting, judging and censuring; And resolution
not to forgive a wrong done.

Habet malitia currum suum; rotis quatuor consistentem; viz. Savitia, Bern^
impatientia, audacia, impudentia. Valde enim velox est iste currus, ad
effundendum sanguinem; qui nec innocentia sistitur, nec patientia retardatur,
nec timore frenatur, nec pudore inhibetur; Trahitur autem duobus pernicibus
equis, and ad omnem perniciem paratissimis, terrenae potentiae, and saeculi
pompa: porro praesident duobus his equis aurigae duo, tim^r and livor; timor
quidem pompam, livor potentiam agit. Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 22.
Pulli serpentum etsi breviores sunt, veneno tamen aequales; Luporum catuli
venatione nocere non possunt, sanguine tamen gaudent, and morsibus laedunt.

The infirmities, or wrongs of others may be the occasions, but they cannot be
the causes of malice: It comes; from the Devil without, and an ill nature
within. And has bad effects, viz. Conforming us to the nature of the Devil;
pleading man's unregeneration; sowring our gifts; hindering Prayer and the Word;
procuring God's hatred, and pulling down his judgments. 1 Cor. 14.20*


In malice be ye children. Envy.
All the lusts in the world are reduced to three heads; the lust of the eyes,
the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life. Envy is the chiefest lust of the
eyes, and it is properly so called, because a man seldom envieth another, until
he sees some good he has above himself.

Envy is the trouble which a man conceives in himself, at the good which
another receives.

It is the most furious of all the winds that shake the affairs of the world. A
most quick-sighted and sharp-fanged malignity: And is an evil, wherein is
steeped the venom of all other vices.

Dogs by cherishing are made tame; Lions by bringing up are made gentle; Basil.
but an envious man, the fairer he is spoken, the worse he is.

The envious man feeds on others adversity, like the Beetles, who feed on their
fellows dung.

A notable example of Envy we have, Lib. 1. c. 25.
in those spightful Heathens of old (as Eusebius reports) who turned the sacred
Monument of the Tomb of Christ, into the Temple of their Venus.

Invidia est animi tinea. Cypr.
Whilst an envious man looks obliquely upon the goods of another; He loses
what is good in himself, or at least takes no delight in it.

Envy is the inseparable companion of all honorable actions. Invidia virum
probum sequitur. Naz.
Invisurum facilius quam imitaturum.

The nature of the Basilisk (says Pliny) is to kill all trees and shrubs it
breaths upon; and to scorch and burn all herbs and grass it passes over.
Rumpit saxa, etc. Envy is ultio animae, an Aetna in man that continually burns
intus and extra; it (like the Cantharides) finds feeding on the fairest roses.

This passion is a murderer,

Of a man's own self; for, wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the
silly one. It begins at the eyes, but rots down into the bones. Invidi^ Sicul^
non invenere Tyranui, tormentum. Hor* Epist.
It is the same to the whole man, that rust is to iron. Socrates called it
serram animae, the souls saw; and wished that envious men had more ears and
eyes than others, that they might have the more torment by beholding and
hearing of other men's happinesses. Invidia simul peccat and plectitur. For
because it cannot come at another man's heart, it feeds upon its own. Like the
little Fly, to put out the candle, it burns it self. Or like the Be, it loses
its sting and life together. Or like the Viper that leapt upon Paul's hand to
hurt him, but perished in the fire. Or as the Snake in the fable, that licked
off her own tongue, envying teeth to the File in the forge. Or like him in
Pausanius, who envying the glory of Theagines a famous Wrestler, whipped his
Statue (set up in honor of him after his death) every night so long, till at
length it fell upon him, and killed him.

Caracalla did his brother Geta, of whom he said, Divus sit, modo non sit
vivus; I would he were any where, so as I were rid of him. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a murderer. In a word, Envy looks with a spightful eye, like that
of the Basilisk, that hurts the object upon which it sixeth.

-- Bitter envying. Jam 3.14, 15.
It is earthly, sensual and devilish. Enmity.
Enmity is opposed to Amity, and is Hatred irreconcilable. Nothing can be said
more this way; for an Enemy may be reconciled, but Enmity cannot.

It is a mutual malevolence between parties, with a mutual desire to hurt and
destroy each other.

There is Antipathy amongst creatures; The mortal hatred between the Horse and
the Bear, the Swan and the Eagle, the lesser Birds and the Owl, etc. The
report is also (though by some refuted) between the Toad and Spider, Magirus.
that they poisonously destroy each other. As also that a Lion is afraid of a
Cock.

Pliny says, The brood of Serpents, and the generation of Mankind, are
irreconcilable enemies to each other. And Bodinus says, there is such a
capital antipathy between the Woman and the Serpent, that in a great multitude
of Men, if there be but one Woman amongst them, he makes at her, and stings her
about the heel.

But the sharpest hostility is betwixt the godly seed of the Woman, and the
wicked seed of the spiritual serpent Satan: who so far as he is discovered to
be what he is indeed, is hated and abhorred of Mankind in general, as he hates
all Mankind without exception.

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.15.
and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. Self-denial.
In the very root of it, it is such a disposition or frame of heart in a man,
which inclines him, that is, makes him willing and ready to neglect himself, in
all personal and self-accommodations, especially in outward things, when, and
as the glory of God, and general good of men require it, for their furtherance
and advancement. He submits all interests, ends and enjoyments whatsoever, to
the glory of God, and good of men, according to the occasions and exigencies of
these. He does things contrary to his own interests, and to the discommodating
of himself, in a manner denying any such person in being as himself.

This is pressed, 1. By express precept and command, 1 Cor. 10.24. 2. By the
great example of Jesus Christ himself, the Lord of all, the Pattern in the
Mount; He laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. Romans 15.3. 3. By the example
of some Saints, 1 Cor. 9.9. Phil. 2.3. 4. By the great promise of life and
salvation, Mat. 19.29. and 10.30. Mark 10.29.30. and alibi. Thus he casts the
world into this heavenly Ecstasie, by provoking men to drink their fill of the
hope and expectation of the glory and great things of the world to come. 5. By
a formidable Engine, able to batter and break in pieces the most adamantine
heart. Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. cap. 5.29, 30.

It Is the greatest slavery in the world, to be subject to our own passions.
For, Just. Martyr.
a man may be overcome of his enemy, either by fortune or advantage: which when
they alter, he may recover his honor, and repair his loss; because he still
bath the heart and courage which he had at first: But he that is overcome of
his own passions, is in desperate case; because the inward hold which was his
own, is lost. It is the greatest victory to overcome ones self, and to give his
judgment power over his affections, which will ever advise him to unmask those
blind guides, and to look to that course, which is most for his honor and
safety.

Valentinian the Emperor dying, affirmed, That he was proud of one of his
victories only, viz. That he had overcome his own flesh, that worst of enemies.

Darius in fight against Alexander, cast the Crown from his head, that he might
run away with more speed. Let us much more cast away every impediment, and run
with patience the race that is set before us.

A man must deny 1. Suos, his friends. 2. Sua, his goods. 3. Seipsum, himself.


This last is the most difficult; A man will rather say nay to all the world,
Proximus egomet mibi.
than to himself: yet, either this must be done, or else he himself is undone.

If any man will come after me, Mat. 16.24.
let him deny himself. Self-love.
He that is wholly shut up within himself, is an odious person; And the place
he lives in, longs for a vomit to spue him out.

It is his Pleasure, his Profit and Preferment, Haec tria pro trino numine
mundus habet.
(says one) that is the natural man's Trinity; and his Carnal self, that is
these in Unity.

Self-love writes, as that Emperor did, (...), for mine own use only. It makes
men like those envious Athenians, who sacrificed for none but themselves, and
their neighbors of Chios.

Contrariwise, true Christian love wishes well to Community. Quoted by Mr.
Buroughs. His heart, divis.
I would to God (said Mr. Dod) I were the worst Minister in England! Not
wishing himself worse, but others better. Much like that of Paul, Act. 26.29.

Self must be shouldred out, all private interests let fall, and all
self-respects drowned in the glory of God, and the public good; or else we
want that pious ingenuity that becomes Saints. It is said of Cato, Lucan.
that he did -- Toti genitum se credere mundo. And Timothy was of a choice and
excellent spirit, that naturally cared for the Churches welfare, Phil. 2.20.

Men shall be lovers of their own selves. 2 Timothy 3.2.
For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Humility.
Humilitas est animi demissio orta ex vera status and conditionis suae
agnitione. Cameron. Praelect. in Mat 18.2. Humilitas virtus Christianorum,
prima, secunda, tertia. Aug.

Vasa sunt virtutis quibus utitur ille qui aquas vivas a font vivo Jesu
Christo haurire cupit; praecipue tamen, fides, spes, charitas, benignitas,
humilitas.

Nosce teipsum, is a rule very difficult: For as the eye can see all things but
it self, so some can discern all faults but their own.

As men of this world are infaeliciter faelices, so the children of God are
faeliciter infaelices. A presumptuous confidence goes commonly bleeding home,
when an humble fear returns with triumphing trophies.

Yet, Vexatio dat intellectum, and, in morbis recoligit se animus. Deified
Alexander seeing one of his wounds bleed, remembered he was but a Man.

The humble man admires every thing in another, whilst the same or better in
himself he thinks not unworthily contemned. His eyes are full of his own wants,
and others perfections. When he has but his due, he magnifies courtesy, and
disclaims his deserts. Bernard compares humility to the Violet, which grows low
to the ground, and hangs the head downward, and besides hides its head with its
own leaves; only the fragrant smell bewrayes it. Aug. Confess.
He is more ashamed of honor, than grieved with contempt. His words are few and
soft, neither peremptory nor censorious; because he thinks both each man more
wise, and none more faulty than himself. And when he approaches unto the
Throne of grace, he is either vile in his own eyes, or else nothing. He
emulates no man in any thing but Goodness. No man so contented with a little,
so patient under miseries; because he knows the greatest evils are below his
sins, and the least favor above his deservings. He is a lowly valley, sweetly
planted, and well watered; the proud man's earth whereon he trampleth, but
secretly full of wealthy Mines, more worth than he that walks over them: A rich
stone set in Lead; and lastly, a true Temple of God, built with a low roof.

God is more clear than all light, more inward than any secret, and more
excellent than all honor, but not to those that are high in their own conceits.

When the Ruler entreated Christ for his son, (Come down ere he die,) our
Savior staid; but when the Centurion did but complain of the sickness of his
servant, Christ, unasked, says, I will come and heal him. He that came in the
form of a servant, would rather visit the sick servants Pallet, than the rich
Canopy of the Rulers son.

Gilbert Filiot Bishop of London, disliking Becket Archbishop of Canterbury,
would often say, Ad Zachaeum non divertisset Dominus, nisi de sycomoro jam
descendisset: Zacheus had not entertained Christ, had he not come down from the
Sycamore-tree. Not the lofty, but the humble receive him.

Scaliger says of Erasmus, Quo minor est quisquis, maximus est hominum.
Maximus esse potuisset, si minor esse voluisset. But so humble was Beza, that
his own words were these: I was chosen Pastor at Geneva, when I deserved not to
have been one of the sheep. Humbleness of mind is Schola and scala coeli? the
school teaching, and ladder reaching to heaven.

The fruitfullest trees grow always in the valleys, Quanto major es, tanto te
geras submissius.
none in the mountains; and the highest trees hang down their heads; the
fairest trees are the deepest rooted: The higher a star is, the less it
appears; so the higher that we are promoted, we should be less in our own
conceit.

There are some which are 1. Humbled, but not humble, Jer. 5.3. 2. Humble,
Multi humiliantur nec sunt humiles. Bern.
but not humbled. 3. Humbled, and humble, Psalm. 78.34.


There be many motives to Humility; as the consideration of things which are --
1. Intra. 2. Juxta. 3. Contra. 4. Infra. 5. Supra.


If we look within our selves, our conscience will tell us, that our sins are
for their number great, for their nature grievous. If we look round about us,
our Neighbor has more wit, more wealth, more worth. Against us, our Adversary
is a roaring Lion. Cum sis humilimus, cur non sis humilimus?
If we look downward, we behold the earth, our mother, as the womb from whence
we came, and the tomb to which one day we must return. If upward, God resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble.

Be clothed with humility. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Pride. The Schoolmen say, as humility is vacuum spirituale, so Pride is
plenitudo diabolica.

It is supergressio regulae rationis, or lifting up of the mind against a
precept, or an inordinate desire of excellency in any thing. Aug. says it is
perversae celsitudinis appetitus; it is a tumor and swelling of the mind,
Superbia in communi est, qua quis inordinate supergreditur illud quodest. Ames.
and lies principally in contemning and slighting of God himself, his Word,
promises, threats, ordinances, worship, works: in self-esteem and admiration,
in a swelling for gifts and graces, successfulness of endeavors: for birth,
breeding, wealth, honor, place, relation, and in despising of others.

It is either 1. Inward in the heart, Proud persons value themselves (like
Jayes) by their feathers.
Hab. 2.4. Pro. 16.5. Or, 2. Outward, and that


In the -- 1. Speech, Dan. 4.30. cap. 3.15. Psalm. 12.3. 1 Samuel 2.3. 2. Looks,
Prove. 6.17. Psalm. 131.1. 3. Habit of the body, Act. 12.21. Luke 16.19. 4.
Gesture, Isa. 3.16. 5. Actions, Isa. 3.5. Nehem. 9.16, 29.

Every proud man forgets himself: Remember what thou art by sin, Prosper.
and shall be in the grave, and thy plumes will fall.

What profit in that Honor, so short-lived as perchance it was not yesterday,
Irenaeus.
neither will it be to morrow? Such men as labor for it, are like froth, which
though it be uppermost, yet is unprofitablest.

Pride is the first; and last vice of a Christian; Aug. in Psalm. 7.
And therefore not unfitly may it be called, the heart of the old man, that is
in every regenerate Christian; which is the first part of man that lives, and
the last that dies.

Pride (says a Divine) is the great Master-pock of the soul, (it will bud and
cannot be hid; It is the spiritual leprosy that breaks forth in the very
forehead. And as Wisdom makes the face to shine, and humility renders a man
lovely; so Pride on the contrary, sits in the face and deformeth it. Hence,
Hos. 5.5. So that Pride is a foolish sin, it cannot keep in, it will be
above-board, and discover it self by lofty looks, big-swolne words, proud gate,
ridiculous gestures, garish attire, etc. But especially by stubbornness against
God and his ways.

Pride proceeds from ignorance of God and his will, of a man's self and his
duty; hence is that connection of those verses, Hos. 5.4, 5. Laodicea was
therefore proud, because ignorant, Rev. 3. Those question-sick Phantasticks
were proud, (...).
knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.4. But humble Agur (though full of heavenly light,
yet) vilifies and nullifies himself to the utmost, Pro. 30.2. Exemplifying that
of Solomon, cap. 11.2. With the lowly is wisdom.

Pride was anciently pourtrayed (Pope-like) with three crowns on her head: Upon
the first was written Transcendo; upon the second, Non obedio; upon the third,
Perturbo.

Many are like Dionysius the Tyrant, to whom when Aristippus petitioned, he
received no answer, until he fell at his feet, as if his ears had been there.

Thou reprehendest me of pride (said Aristippus to Diogenes) for wearing my
apparel neat; but I see thy pride in thy slovenly attire, and affected
beastliness, Multo deformior est illa superbia quae sub quibusdam humililatis
signis latet. Hier. l. 2. Ep. 22. Cypr. Venustas tribuitur a natura,
corrumpitur ab art. Lucifers Motto, E^o fimilis Altissimo. Isa. 14.14.
spying it through that rent and torn mantle of thine.

They which out of pride do paint, coloring themselves white and red, begin
betimes to prognosticate of what color they shall be in Hell. Again, Qui se
pingunt in hoc seculo aliter quam creavit Deus, metuant ne cum venerit
resurrectionis dies, artifex creaturam suam non recognoscat.

The sinfulness of this sin appears, 1. It blinds the mind and hardens the
heart of man, Dan. 5.20. 2. All other sins fly from God, but Pride flies upon
God, Jam. 4.6. 3. It Is the root of other sins, Prove. 13.10. Ezekiel. 7.10. 4. It
is Morbus Satanicus, 1 Timothy 3.6. 5. It Is that sin which makes God abhor man,
Pro. 16.5. cap. 6.16, 17. Psalm. 119.21, etc.

Pride precedes a fall: As swelling is a dangerous symptom in the body, so is
pride in the soul. As the swelling of the sails is dangerous for the
overbearing of a little vessel, so is the swelling of the heart by pride.
Nebuchadnezzar's fall may be an example that Pride is the certain way to ruin;
for, the same man that would be like God, God made him unlike a man, a beast,
until he lifted up his eyes to heaven. The like of Pharaoh, Adonibezek, Agag,
Haman, Herod, etc.

It was a great foretoken of Darius his ruin, when in his proud Embassy to
Alexander, he called himself the King of Kings, and Cousin of the Gods; but for
Alexander, he called him his Servant.

Sigismund the young King of Hungary, beholding the greatness of his Army, said,
What need we fear the Turk, who need not at all to fear the falling of the
Heavens, being able with our spears and halberds to hold them up? He afterward
shortly received a notable overthrow, being himself glad to get over Danubius
in a little boat to save his life. Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.
Yea, Bajazet the Terror of the world, and (as he thought) superior to Fortune,
yet in an instant overthrown into the bottom of misery and despair. Prove.
16.18. Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.

If a man (says one) have a bladder that is full of wind, the way to let it
out, is either to unty it, or prick it, or rend it. So the way to let pride out
of the heart, is, Act. 2.37. Joel 2.13.
1. To unloose our high conceit of ourselves, and our own worth. 2. To prick it
with hearty remorse, and godly sorrow for sin. 3. If that will not do it, to
rend it even in pieces, with the remembrance of Gods fearful judgments due unto
it.

Proud? Gerard.
O earth and ashes! Sperma foetidum, vas stercorum, esca vermium; A filthy
seed, an unsavory vessel, meat for worms.

Woe to the crown of pride. Isa. 28.1.
My soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. Jer. 13.17.
Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride, -- Knowledge.
Intelligentia est fons scientiae and sapientiae. Alsted.


Est habitus partim naturalis, partim acquisitus; naturalis quoad inchoationem,
acquisitus quoad perfectionem.

It Is fitly compared to the Israelites Jewels, whereof they made a Calf. As the
same gold being in Jewels was precious, but being cast into an Idol, became
odious: So the wit of man, which in the days of his innocence was good and
gracious, is in his corrupted state become vain and vicious.

It Is also compared to an untilled field, not only lying barren, but yielding
the thorns, weeds, and brambles of sin and error, till husbanded by the good
Spirit of God.

The best Minerals have their poisons, till extracted; the sweetest flowers
their faeces, till separated: so the best wits their folly, till by Gods Spirit
refined.

In relation to spiritual things, the understanding being weighed, will be
found (like Belshazzar) too light, lighter than vanity it self.

Let not then the wise man glory in his wisdom. Jer. 9.23.
The Knowledge of man is as the waters, some descending from above, and some
springing from beneath; the one informed by the light of nature, the other
inspired by divine revelation. The light of nature consists in the notions of
the mind, and the reports of the senses: For as for the knowledge that man
receives by teaching, it is cumulative, and not original; as in a water, that
beside its own springhead, is fed with other springs and streams. And
according to these two illuminations or originals, Knowledge is divided into
Divinity and Philosophy.

Man's Knowledge has three beams: 1. There is Radius directus, which is
referred to nature. 2. Radius refractus, which is referred to God, and cannot
report truly, because of the inequality of the Medium. 3. Radius reflexus,
whereby man contemplateth himself.

There is Scientia intuitiva, and Scientia discursiva or abstractiva, (as the
Schoolmen have it) And both these do admit of further subdivisions. But Weems
does very well illustrate them: I have the abstractive knowledge of a Rose in
winter in my mind; I have the intuitive knowledge in my mind, when I see the
Rose in June.

The first creature made at the first creation, was Light; and the first work
of the Spirit in man's heart at the second creation, is to beat out new windows
there, and to let in light, 2 Cor. 4.6. And then (as Aenaeas Silvius said)
Semper in sole sita est Rhodos, qui and calorem and colorem nobis impertit.

Knowledge is 1. Intellectual. 2. Experimental.


Some knowing men are nothing the better for all they know. The Devils are full
of objective knowledge, but they get no good by it: No more do those men, that
draw not their knowledge into practice, but detain the thuth in
unrighteousness; It swimmeth in their heads, but sinketh not into their hearts.
Therefore let thy knowledge be not only apprehensive, but affective,
experimental and practical.

And beg this of God: For well said Austin, Quando Christus magister, quam cito
discitur quod docetur? When God by his Spirit takes in hand to teach a man, he
soon becomes a skilful scholar. Nescit tarda molimina (says Ambrose) Spiritus
Sancti gratia; The Spirit is not long in teaching those that commit themselves
to his tuition.

Pimenta writes (Epist. ad Claudium Aquavivum, de statu rei Christi, apud Indos
Orientales) that the Barbarians of Ciandegri in the East Indies, seeing the Sun
eclipsed, Anno Dom. 1600. did fast and weep all day, crying out, O nos miseros,
quoniam Draco devoravit solem^ showing themselves as great Wizards as the
Countrey-lad, who watering his Ass when the Moon was going under a cloud,
presently conceived, that his beast had drunk up the Moon. But (blessed be God)
the Red Dragon cannot devour our Sun.

There is nothing so sweet to a good soul, as the knowledge of dark and deep
mysteries. The little Book of the Revelation was in John's mouth sweet as honey,
cap. 10.10. But as the Unicorns horn separated from the beast (if any such
Animal be) is sovereign, but on his head hurtful; so is Knowledge, as it is
sanctified, or unsanctified.

Austin desired no more of God, but Noverim te, noverim me; that I may know my
self, and know thee.

Claritas in intellectu, quae parit ardorem in affectu: That light in the
understanding, that kindles the affections, is sweet knowledge; But knowledge
without love, is like as rain in the middle region, which does no good to the
ground. Nummos habuerunt Athenienses ad numerandum, and scientiam ad sciendum.
But knowledge is not sufficient, unless we have love too.

Knowledge puffs up (says the Apostles) but love edifieth. Yet those were
foolish persons whom Austin makes mention of, that neglected the means of
knowledge, because knowledge puffs up; and so would be ignorant, that they
might be humble, and want knowledge, that they might want pride. This was to be
like Democritus, who plucked out his eyes, to avoid the danger of uncleanness.

The greatest part of our Knowledge, is but the least part of Ignorance, yet we
are apt to think we know all that is knowable; as in Alcibiades his Army, all
would be leaders, none learners. Epicurus said, That he was the first man that
ever discovered Truth; and yet in many things he was more blind than a Beetle.
Aratus the Astrologer vaunted, that he had counted the Stars, and written of
them all. Hoc ego primus vidi, said Zabarel. Laurentius Valla boasted, Which he
therefore called, Logicam Laurentinam. Scire tuum ulbil est. Juven.
that there was no Logic worthy to be read but his. And Nestorius the heretic
braged, that he alone understood the Scriptures, and that till his time all the
world was benighted. But well says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think
that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

Open thou mine eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. Anoint thine eyes with
eye salve, that thou may see. Rev. 3.18.
Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. 1 John 2.3.
Ignorance.
Ignorance is threefold, 1. Purae negationis. 2. Privationis. 3. Affectata.


As for that which is by negation, when God in wisdom has denied to us the
knowledge of some things, it is no sin to be ignorant of them; This ignorance
was in Christ, which knew no sin; He was ignorant of the Day of Judgment. But
privative ignorance is a sin: Quia aliud est nescire, aliud est nolle scire:
nescire ignorantia est, scire noluisse superbia est. Bern.
For us to be deprived by the fall of Adam, of that excellent light wherein we
were created; this is a sin, and may justly be required of us. But affected
ignorance is most fatal and damnable. It is hell upon earth, that light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather than light.

Some Papists make a virtue of Ignorance, she is the mother of Devotion;
whereas in truth she is the mother of Destruction: Ye err (says our Savior)
not knowing the Scriptures. And Christ shall come in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance to them that know not God. Therefore let us not sooth up our selves
in our ignorance, but labor to be plucked out of that pit daily more and more.

Ignorance may excuse a tan^o, but not a toto. When the Sienois having rebelled
against Charles the Fifth, Vt mitius ardeat. Aug.
Emperor, sent their Ambassador to excuse it; He not able to apologize for it
any other way, thought in a jest to put it off, saying, Shall not we of Siena
be excused, seeing we are known to be all Fools? But the Agent replied, That
shall excuse you, but upon the condition which is fit for Fools, that is, to be
kept bound and enchained. He that committed things worthy of stripes, though he
knew not his Lords will, shall be beaten, though with fewer stripes.

Ignorance is the ground and mother of many sins, displeasing to God, who
complains of it, and punishes it; And argues that a man has no interest in
the Covenant of grace. Ignorant sane improbus omnis. Arist.
Nay, it is the mother in some sort of all sin: For in all sins we commit,
though we be endowed with singular knowledge, our understanding for the time is
blinded, by Satan and our own corruption.

Diogenes being asked in mockery, How it came to pass, that Philosophers were
the followers of Rich men, and not Rich men of Philosophers? answered soberly
and sharply too, Because the one sort knew what they had need of, and the other
did not.

Into the second tabernacle went the High Priest alone, Heb. 9.7. (...).
once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the
[ignorances] of the people. Wisdom.
Aristotle in many places of his works, distinguishes between Wisdom and
Prudence: Wisdom, he makes to be a right apprehending of truths in general;
Prudence, Xenophon de dict. and fact. Socrat. (...)and (...).
an applying them to particular cases and uses. But Socrates said, That there
was no such difference; since he that knows good things to do them, and evil
things to avoid them, is to be held a wise man, and none else.

So that true Wisdom draws all into practice, teaching men to prove by their
own experience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable will of God is.
Sapiens est cui res sapiunt prout sunt (says Bernard;) He is the wise man that
savoureth things as they are. And herein lies the whole wisdom of a man (says
Laetantius) Vt Deum cognoscat and colat, Lib. 3. c. 30.
that he know and worship God aright; that with a practical judgment, he ponder
the word and ways of God, in order to salvation.

But alas! Of the most that would be knowing men, it may well be said, (...).
as Tully says the Proverb went of the Athenians; That they used their wisdom,
as men do their artificial teeth, for show only: And that they did scire quae
recta sunt, sed facere nolle; Know what was right, but had no mind to do
accordingly.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. That is, Psalm 111.10.
it must necessarily go before wisdom; not that it is any cause essential, but
after it must necessarily follow wisdom; that is, all kinds of wisdom, Viz. 1.
Prespicere, to know those things which are before us; It is the beginning of
our knowing of God. 2. Despicere, to look into our selves, to know our own
excellency by creation, our excellency by regeneration, and (lest we should
presume) our weakness in both. 3. Circumspicere, to be wise toward our
neighbors.


Hoc est vere sapere, ea discere in terris, Hieronimus ad Paulinum.
quorum scientia nobis perseveret in coelis.

Difficile sane est veram sapientiam invenire, Chrysostom. in Job. 18.
si quando ad legendum scripturus add^cimur, tum grave secularium rerum onus
incumbit, viam inundat, and siquid profecimus, aufert.

Si sapientia and veritas non totis animi viribus concupiscatur, Sedul.
Minorit. in praescript. advers. haeres.
inveniri nullo pacto potest: at si quaeratur ut dignum est, subtrahere sese
atque abscondere a suis dilectoribus non potest.

Wisdom can behold the face of affairs, which way it looks, in the glass of
others relations.

The soul of Wisdom is Prevention. -- (...)
Decernendum est sapientia quo and qua tendamus; sed post jacturam quis non
sapit?

Sapiens ipse fingit fertuna sibi, and errando discit. Yea, wise men make
greatest benefit of their greatest adversaries.

Men's una sapiens, plurium vincit manus. Pallus and Mercury will effect that
Briarius may wonder at; strong Wits supply the defect of weak hands.

Supernal and supernatural wisdom, is such as can neither be fathomed, nor
found out by humane abilities, or by natural reason. Luciosi and qui hebeti
sunt visu (says Vives;) Those that are weak-sighted and sand-blind, if at any
time they look wishly upon any thing, with desire to see it the better; they
see it so much the worse, and nothing so well as they did before. Think the
same of the most acute and perspicacious Naturalist: when he comes to look into
the things of God, he is not only sand-blind, but stark blind. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Therefore with Gods heifer must all those plow, that will find out his riddles,
1 Cor. 2.10.

A man that is truly godly and spiritual, is the wisest man; because he has
the most excellent and profound reason; he has a mass of rationality, that the
world knows not of: We may say of a godly man, as the Heathen said of a learned
man; A learned man has four eyes, and the vulgar have but two; so a godly man
has three eyes, and a natural man has but two, and scarce that. A natural man
can reason things, but it is with a corrupt or natural eye; whereas a Saint can
reason with a spiritual eye. And therefore you shall have godly persons usually
when they are described in Scripture, they are called wise men, as it is often
in the Proverbs; The wise man and the fool are put in opposition the one to the
other; the wise man is the godly man, and the fool is the sinful man, let him
be as wise as he will be.

Men that are only carnally wise, are only like Moles, that dig dexterously
under ground, but are blind above ground.

Soul-light is not enough to make us truly wise, but there must also be
Spirit-light. The whole man is corrupted, and therefore the wisdom of man is
corrupt also. There is a maim in the Intellectuals and higher faculties, and
not only in the Sensual appetite. All the discourses of the Understanding, till
it be sanctified, are but sottish and foolish. And therefore (as James
intimates) if Wisdom be merely natural, 'twill be presently devilish.

A Christian should be wise for the Kingdom of Heaven; but it is sad to be wise
for the World, and to be a fool for Duty; to be serious in trifles, and to
trifle in serious matters. And as sad, when it tends only to gratify the
senses; when vain men rack their wits, and employ their understandings to rear
up their lusts; sacrificing their time and care, and precious thoughts, upon so
vain an interest. And worst of all, when men make use of their wit to contrive
mischief, and hatch wickedness: Such have not only somewhat of Beast, but Devil
in them, as Christ said by Judas, Joh. 6.70.

Happy is the man that finds wisdom, Prove. 3.13.
and the man that gets understanding.

If any of you lack wisdom, James 1.5.
let him ask of God, that gives unto all men liberally, and upbraideth not;
and it shall be given him.

If any man among you seems to be wise in this world, 1 Cor. 3.18.
let him become a fool that he may be wise.

Folly.
A Fool is a sapless person (as the word imports) without the sap or juice of
wisdom, Stultus, a (...) Emarcuit. Dicitur proprie de floribus flaccescentibus
and decidentibus, postquam omnem humorem amiserunt.
goodness, and honesty. Or one of a base and vile spirit, fallen below all
noble or holy resolutions.

Throughout the book of Proverbs, the fool and an ungodly man (as a wise man
and a godly man) are Synonoma's, words signifying the same thing.

Sin is the greatest folly in the world, being a declining from the rule of
right reason, both from spiritual reason and from natural, Jer. 8.9. True
wisdom is to walk by a right rule, to a right end: But while we sin, lust (in
some degree or other) is the rule, and self is the end. In both which we join
hands with folly, and are the companions of fools.

Qua ratione vocetur impius stultus? Am^s.
1. Privative, and 2. Positive.


Privative, Non quia destituitur facultate ingenii and prudentiae naturalis.
Sed 1. Quia deesse solet ipsi divinae voluntatis cognitio, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2. Quia
illorum quae cognoscit, efficax illa approbatio qua saperent ipsi spiritualia,
deest, Romans 8.5. 3. Quia deest illi subjectionis and obedientiae affectus,
etiam in iis quae aliquo modo probat, Romans 8.7. 4. Quia non cavet sibi a
periculis maximis, Pro. 7.7.22, 23. c. 14. v. 15, 16. 5. Quia non tantum
destitutus est sapientia vera, sed ejus etiam incapax est, Pro. 17.10.16.27.22.

Positive, 1. Quia pravis and perversis opinionibus est imbutus. Non enim
abrasa tabula est men's ejus, sed quasi atramento omnium errorum obducta, Pro.
24.9. 2. Quia hac sua condition delectatur, and in illa sibimet placet, Pro.
1.20.8.5.9.6.12.15. 3. Quia oblatam sapientiam repellit and odit, Pro. 13.19.
4. Quia exercitiis stultitiae delectatur, Pro. 10.23. 5. Quia stultitiam suam
spargere and aliis communicare amat, Pro. 12.23.13.16. 6. Quia contemnit and
opponit sese mediis instructionis, Pro. 15.5. 7. Mediis illis quae maxim
faciunt ad sapientiam abutitur, Pro. 26.9. 8. Omnes suas facultates applicat ad
nequitiam exercendam and manifestandam, Pro. 6.12.13.14.

Thus Sin and Folly are more than like one another; for they are the same. He
is a fool, who has not wisdom to direct himself; but he is the fool, who will
not follow the counsel and direction of the wise. He is a fool, that has no
knowledge; and he is a fool, who makes no use of the knowledge which he has.

A fool is not able to judge of the nature of things; and therefore he is angry
with every thing that hits not his nature, or his humor. Hence Solomon, Eccl.
7.9. Be not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of
fools.

They that are emptiest of understanding, are fullest of will; and usually so
full, that we call them wilful. And surely those men are more foolish than
others, inasmuch as they think themselves wiser than all.

Stustorum plena sunt omnia. Wisdom (like the Rayl) flies alone, but
foolishness (Partridge-like) by covies. Mr. Adams.


There is the 1. Sad fool. 2. Glad fool. 3. Haughty fool. 4. Naughty fool.


The sad fool, that is the envious man, an enemy to all Gods favors if they
fall from him; he dies languishing. The glad foll, or rather mad fooll, the
dissolute man, ready with a jest to put goodness out of fashion; he dies
laughing. The haughty fool, the ambitious man, ever climbing towers, though he
never looks how to get down; he forsakes peace at home, to seek war abroad. The
naughty fool, the coveteous man, the very fool of all, losing his friend, time,
body, soul, and yet having no pleasure for it, Jer. 17.11. He wastes him self to
preserve his means; Christ calls him fool, which might best do it, Luke 12.20.
As for the Atheistical fool, he is that mere animal, that has no more than a
reasonable soul, and for little other purpose, than as salt, to keep his body
from putrefying.

When an heir is impleaded for an Idiot, the Judge commands an apple, or a
counter, with a piece of gold to be set before him, to try which he will take;
if he takes the apple or the counter, and leaves the gold, he is then cast for
a fool, and unable to manage his estate; for he knows not the value of things,
or how to make a true election. Wicked men are thus foolish, and more; for when
(which is infinitely more sottish) Heaven and hell, life and death are set
before them; they choose hell rather than heaven, and death rather than life;
They take the mean transitory, trifling things of the world, before the favor
of God, Pardon of sin, a part in Jesus Christ, and an inheritance among the
Saints in light.

Fools make a mock at sin. Prove. 14.9.
Shame shall be the promotion of fools. Cap. 3.35.
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Ephesians. 5.15.
Sincerity.
It is the bottom grace, especially commending us to God. It is conceived not
to be so properly a distinct grace, as the perfection of every grace. Its the
filling up of all our duties; without this they are as empty sounds.

A sincere man is like a Chrystal-Glass with a light in the midst, which
appears through every part thereof, so as that truth within, breaks out in
every parcel of his life. There is in his obedience to God, 1. An universality.
2. Uniformity. 3 Ubiquity. He has respect unto all Gods Commandments, so far
as he knows them; without prejudice or partiality; and is the same at home as
abroad, in the closet as in the Congregation. His faith is unfeigned, his love
cordial, his wisdom undissembled, his repentance a renting of the heart; he
truly aims at pleasing God, and not at by-respects.

Christ is said to be girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Rev. 1.13. So
the Angels are brought in girded there, Cap. 15.6. to signify the best estate
of their Pastors, coming nearest then in sincerity to Christ. In the first age
of the Church, they wore their girdle about their middle, but the more
spiritual they became, their girdle went the more upward. To this the Apostle
may seem to allude, Ephesians. 6.14. And truly here (as one says well) if ever
unbelt unblest; he is a loose man that wants this girdle of sincerity.

There is a devilish proverb passes amongst men; That plain dealing is a
Jewel, but he that uses it shall die a beggar. But the contrary may be
asserted, that it is both a means formally enabling to outward happiness; and
also a special qualification, that has in a peculiar manner the promises
annexed to it. Pro. 14.11. Cap. 11.3.2. Chro. 16.9. And whereas it may be said,
that it often falls out that uprightness is oppressed; This is easily answered,
if we consider, 1. That many of the outward calamities that befall godly
persons, are not simply evils (as the world judges) but rather marks of
special honor God puts upon them. Jobs body was full of ulcers, but his heart
was pure; and those tribulations he grapled with, were only probatory, to try
his strength, to draw out his graces, and increase his glory. 2. We must not
limit God to every moment of time, when he will honor and clear his people:
The world at first was a confused Chaos, but at the end of six days, it was a
curious work: So God has his time, and we should not desire God should break
off his work, before he has made an end of it. Jam. 5.11. And David calls upon
us to mark the upright man, Psalm. 33.37. The beginning may be trouble, but the
end is peace.

Qualis, Majorisreatus, minoris infamia.
es, tali^ appare. For secret sins, 1. They are as visible to God as the most
open. 2. As damnable to the soul. 3. And what they want in number, they have in
nature, and frequently in delight.

Encouragements to sincerity. 1. Its the only perfection we attain here. Deuteronomy.
30.6. 2. It makes us acceptable to God. Ephesians. 6. ult. 3. Where it is, God
passes by many infirmities. 2 Chro. 30.19. 4. It is the best policy. Psalm.
101.1. Pro. 11.3. 5. It brings wonderful comfort and support under all
afflictions and temptations. 2 King. 20.3. 2 Cor. 1.12.


That sincerity is most opposed by Satan, is plain, Job. 2.3. As if the Holy
Ghost would intimate this unto us, that Satan pulled more at that, than at his
estate. Satan did not care at all to pull Jobs Oxen, etc. from him, but to pull
his grace and sincerity from him. As this gotten and improved, is the joy of
Angels; so could it be stolen away or destroyed, it would be the joy of Devils.

Sinceritas, quasi sine cara, pure honey, without the wax or dross of
hypocrisy, fraud or duplicity, sound-hearted persons are in Gods esteem
perfect persons. Truth of grace is our perfection here, in heaven we shall have
perfection as well as truth.

Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts. Psalm. 51.6.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. Joh. 1.47.
Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 32.2.
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me. Psalm. 25.21.
Hypocrisy.
The hypocrite is the worst kind of player, D. H.
by so much as he acts the better part, he has always two faces, oftimes two
hearts; he can compose his forehead to sadness and gravity, He is like the
picture of Janus, having one face before, another behind. Or, sons solis, now
hot, now cold.
while he bids his heart be wanton and careless; in whose silent face are
written the characters of Religion, which his tongue and gestures pronounce,
but his hands and heart recant; he turns into the Church and salutes one of
the pillars, on one knee worshipping that God, which at home he cares not for;
while his eyes are fixed on some passenger, his heart knows not whether his
lips go; he rises, and looking about with admiration, complains of our frozen
charity; he will always sit where we may be seen best, and in the midst of the
Sermon pulls out his table book, as if he feared to lose that note, then he
turns to a quotation in his Bible with a noise, and doubleth down the leaf as
if he had found it asks a loud the Preachers name, and repeats it, he can
cammand tears, reckons many sins with detestation, while he keeps his
darling in his bosom; no times, no prayers fall from him without a witness,
belike lest God should deny that he has received them, and lest the world
should not know it, his own mouth is the trumpet to proclaim it; with the
superfluity of his usury he builds an hospital, and harbors them whom his
extortion has spoiled; flesh on friday is more abominable than his neighbors
bed; he abhors more not to uncover at the name of Jesus, than to swear by the
name of God; he comes to the sickbed of his stepmother, and weeps, when he
secretly fears her recovery; he greet^ his friend with so clear a countenance,
as the other thinks he reads his heart in his face; he is the strangers Saint,
the neighbors disease, the blot of goodness, a rotten stick in a dark night,
a poppie in a corn-field, an ill tempered candle with a great snuff, an Angel
abroad, a Devil at home, and worse when an Angel than when a Devil. (...).


There are many men, who are servants of the eyes, as the Apostles phrase is,
Ephesians. 6.6. who when they are looked on, act virtue with much pompousnesse,
Ambitie, and lux uria, and impotentia scenam desiderant; sanabis ista si
absconderis. Sen^ Epist. 95.
and Theatrical bravery: But these men when the Theater is empty, put off their
upper garment, and retire into their primitive baseness. Diogenes endured the
extremity of winters cold, that the people miget wonder at his austerity, and
Philosophical patience: But Plato, seeing the people admiring the man, and
pitying the sufferance; told them, that the way to make him warm himself, was
for them to be gone and take no notice of him. Even so they that walk as in the
sight of men, serve their design well enough, when they sill the public voice
with noises and opinion^ and are not by their purposes engaged to act in
private.

Serapion in Cassian noted to a young person, who perpetually accused himself
with the greatest semblances of humility, but was impatient when Serapion
reproved him. Did you hope that I would have praised your humility, and have
reputed you for a Saint? It is a strange perverseness to desire others to
esteem highly of you for that, in which to your self you seem most unworthy.
Nil lascivi^ est Carisiano, In Saturnalibus ambulat togatus. Mart.


Carisianus walked in his Gown in the feast of Saturn, and when all Rome was
let loose in wantonness, he put on the long robe of a Senator, and a severe
person, and nothing was more lascivious than he. And such was the Cynick whom
Lucian de^ided, because that one searching his scrip in expectation to have
found in it moldy bread or old rags, he discovered a bale of dice, a box of
persumes, and the picture of his fair Mistress. But alas I to take delight
either in the suppletories of our own good opinion, or to think the flatteries
and praises of others should heal the wounds of our honor; will prove but an
imaginary and Fantastic restitution.

Hypocritae curiosi ad cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosi ad cognoscendam
suam. Aug.
Hypocrites are curious searchers of the lives of others, careless correctors
of their own. And surely the mind that sharply looks to the faults of others,
Bazil.
does but slowly consider her own defects. Men's peracute perspiciens alienos
errores, tarda est ad proprios cognoscendos defectus.

It is said the French are wiser than they seem, and the Spaniards seem wiser
than they are: The godly are as the French, and hypocrites as the Spaniards;
who carry the basest spirits under the proudest looks. Like the Philosophers,
Sapientes potius cupimus videri and non esse, quam esse and non videri. He is
an image in a cross way, that may point at the way but cannot go it. Or like
the Play which is called the motions, wherein is no life though motion.

Friendship in Court is like Music at a feast, a man has nothing but a sweet
sound for his money: Or rather it is like those Apothecary drugs, that are hot
in the mouth, but cold in operation: It is quick to promise, but slow to
perform; receiving substance, but returning smoke, so is hypocrisy.

The fish Sepia is betrayed by a black color, she casts out to cover her: So
counterfeits by a cloud of pretended holiness, which shall only serve for a
cloud of witness against them.

The more eminent men are in quality, the more foul is the quality of their
offense; therefore as dishonorable actions, are greatest blemishes in those
that are honorable by blood or profession; because virtues are greater
ambellishments in them than in others: Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas.
So wicked actions are most odious to those who are not only professors, but
professed patrons of Religion and virtue; in these it is an advance of evil.
Dissembled hypocrifie doubleth iniquity.

If it were possible the Devil were then worse than himself, it was when he
came up in Samuels mantle Jesabels paint made her more ugly. If ever you take a
Fox in a Lambs skin, hang him up, for he is the worst in the generation; A
Gibeonite in old shoes, fly like the plague; these are so much the worse
Devils, as they are holy Devils. The Heathen could say, (...), God has a
revenging eye. Vice is made virtues Ape, in an hypocrites practice; if he see
Chushi run, this Ahimaaz will outrun him; he mends his pace, but not his path;
the good man goes slow, but he will be at heaven before him. In a word, an
hypocrite is the most hardly saved; publicanes and sinners enter into heaven
before them, And most hellishly damned, such and such (says the Scripture)
shall have their portion with hypocrites.

Beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 12.1.
which is hypocrisy. Deceit.
Jesabel is fair without, Q^^^quid id est, timco D^nao^ and dona ferentes.
but it is under painting; honey in the mouth, but gall in the heir; whose mind
conceales Aloes, when the mouth distilleth nectar; some respect to Aloes (sure
I am it is true of flattery) that the juice thereof causes the faster for to
sleep, and sleeping for to dye: so he that tastes honey in the cup of flattery,
shall assuredly find the gall of death in the bottom of security.

A great many do verify the old proverb, They persuade the Hare to fly, and
the Hounds to follow.

The Temple that Rome did erect to Castor and Pollux, in time came to be called
only Castors Temple. Godw. Antique
So of the two Consuls, Biblius and Julius Caesar; though the expenses went
deeper on Biblius side, yet Caesar carried away the thanks; insomuch that
whereas they were used to subscribe Charters with both the Consuls names, it
was contrariwise, viz. Julius and Caesar being Consuls

He who is untrue in his word, Ille mihi tam exosus est, quam inferni portae.
Qui aliud animo occultat, aliud ore profert. Turk. Hist. fol. 466.
and unjust in his actions, is apt to perpetrate all other nefarious villainies,
and to suborn others to do the like

It is said of Pope Alexander, that he was a man beyond example for flalshood;
seldom true in any of his Promises, or just in any of his dealings.

Selymus Emperor of the Turks, practicing with Haman a Jew, his Father
Bajazets Physician to poison him; he accomplished it, pretending it was a
potion: But afterward coming to Constantinople, and expecting some great
reward for his foul treason; by the commandment of Selymus, he had his head
presently struck off; with this exprobation of his treachery, that opportunity
serving, he would not stick for reward, to do the like against Selymus himself.

Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Psalm. 55.23.
Flattery.
Words many times are like waters to Physicians, full of flattery and
uncertainty.

Court Parasites (or Parrots) know no other dialect, Tuta frequensque via sub
amici fallere nomen; Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
but what may delight the ears of their Masters. Omnia loquuntur ad gratiam,
nihil ad veritatem.

Mel in ore, verba lactis; fell in cord, fraus in factis. Sigismund the
Emperor (when a fellow flattered him above measure) gave him a good box on the
ear; In vita Alphon.
and when he asked, why smite you me? he answered, why clawest thou me?

When Aristobulus the Historian, presented Alexander the great, with a
flattering piece, concerning his own worthy acts; he cast the book into the
river Hydaspes, and told the Author, he could find in his heart to cast him
after it.

The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud
things. Psalm. 12.3.
Sobriety.
It is a power or gift, No men sobrietatis sumitur a mensurd.
enabling men to use moderately all lawful pleasures of this life, and to
refrain from all unlawful.

Tim. 6.8. Any thing in measure suffices nature. Natura minimum petit. Senc^.
Unto this Solomon gives a good motive, Eccl. 1.4. Consider, 1. The vanity of
them all; especially in respect of any spiritual profit; And we fancy in them
more good, than they can possibly afford us. 2. Though nothing in themselves,
yet of sufficient activity to inflict vexation upon the spirit of a man. They
do but fill the soul with wind, and wind got into the veins is a fore
vexation. Solomon speaks by experience, they draw with them in their loose a
great deal of trouble, so fat are they from making a man truly happy.

Cor. 7.30, 31. viz. with as little of our desires and delights therein as may
be.

The truth is, there is a drunkenness wherein even Nazarites may be overtaken.
Very cares of the world and voluptuous living have a kind of inebriating power,
Dr. Slater.
as much disturbing reason, and oppressing the senses, as wine and strong
drink: Our Savior else had never coupled them together, Luke 21.34. Nothing
more infatuating and besotting the mind than these, in spiritual things.

Ebrietas non solum in potione vini, sed in omnibus rebus ostenditur; quibus
and in contractibus and in negotijs saeculi and damnis, and lucris, amore,
Hieron. in Ezekiel. 44.
and odio men's inebriatur and fluctuat, and statum suum tenere non potest. O
thou that are drunken, but not with wine.

In property of speech, sobriety is a branch of Temperance (of which, more
afterward) moderating the appetite in use of drinks. Moralists say it
respects, 1. The quality of drink, not permitting to any frequent or ordinary
use of wine or strong drink, Pro. 31.8. 1 Timothy 5.23. Modice, hoc est medice. To
cure infirmities, not to cause them. Pro remedio parcius, non pro delicio
redundantius, says Ambrose. Epist. 82.
The effects and fruits of it, are luxury and outrage, Pro. 21.1. St. Paul
very fitly yoketh together drunkards and raylers, 1 Cor. 6.9. And no wonder,
for when the wine is in, the wit is out.

2. The quantity of drinking, some set these bounds; 1. Necessity, to satisfy
nature, to quench thirst. 2. Cheerfulness and alacrity, which is called
poculum hilaritatis. 3. But to the third, which they call the cup of
wantonness, no man proceeds without the violation of sobriety.


The truth is, Impletus venture non vult studer^ libenter.
the measure is best taken from the fitness it brings to do the duties of
general or particular calling. And what ever measure exceeds that limit,
transgresses against sobriety.

This sobriety is such a virtue, as that the name it has usually amongst
Greeks, is amiable, viz. (...), as it were the keeper and guard of wisdom. It
is a moderation Ex judicio rationis, and a keeping of a man in his right wits;
And so long as a man has his wits about him, he is master of his lusts.

The grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, Tit. 2.12,
13.
teaching us -- we should live soberly. Let us who are of the day be sober. 1
These. 5.8.
Luxury.
Luxuria and negligentia mores sunt hominum non temporis vitia. Sene^.


Epictetus may say, semper aliquid disc^ns, senesco; But Polixenus, semper
aliquid bibens, nihil ex timesco.

Seneca speaks of some, that singulis auribus bina aut terna dependent
patrimenia; hanged two or three Lordships at their ears. And such are those
amongst us (as one says) that turn their lands into laces, and rents into
ruffs, etc.

Usually such persons spend all, till they leave themselves nothing at all;
Preter celum and canum, M. Livius.
but air to breath in, and earth to tread upon; as a certain Roman prodigal
boasted.

-- That Is for the back; -- Quid enim majore Chachinne Excipitur vulgi, quam
pauper Apicius? Iuv. Sat. 11. Valor.
now for the belly; It is reported, that the expenses of Apicius his kitchen
amounted to more than two Millions of gold. He having eaten up his estate, and
finding by his account, that he had no more then 200000. Crowns remaining,
thought himself poor, and that this sufficed not to maintain his luxury;
whereupon he drank down a glass of poison. Some say, he hanged himself.

The glutton Philoxenus, is said to inveigh against nature, for making his neck
so short, and to wish himself a Cranes neck, that the pleasure and tas^ of meat
might be longer in rellishing. To such a one, neither water, land nor air is
sufficient.

Suttan Solomon was so given to it, Turk. Hist. fol. 144.
that when his brother Musa drew near unto the place where he lay (as his
manner was) banqueting with great pleasure in his camp, and full of wine; he
was not sensible of the danger: Nay, when news was brought unto him, that his
brother was at hand with a great power, he in his drunkenness caused the
messenger that brought the news to be beaten; and when he had with greater
earnestness than was to his liking, affirmed that his report to be true, he
commanded him to be slain, for troubling his mirth.

But Strabo writes of the Gauls, Grimst. p. 58.
the ancient inhabitants of France, that they were so temperate, as that they
did avoid by all means to be fat and big-bellied; and if any young man were
biggar than a certain measure, he was blamed.

It was said of Ninias second King of the Assyrians, Summum bonum in ventre,
aut sub ventre posuit.
that he was old excellent at eating and drinking; And of Sardanapalus one of
the same line, Tully tells us, that his gut was his God. And Plutarch that he
hired men to devise new pleasures for him.

What mines are able to maintain the expenses of Prodigality? It was usually
said of Henry Duke of Guise, that he was the greatest usurer in France; because
he had turned all his estate into obligations.

These three (says one) B. B. B. Back, Belly, and Building, fine clothes,
sumptuous feasts, and over-stately structures, like the daughters of the
horse-leech, suck out the blood of men's substance.

The Prodigal makes his own hands his Executors, and his own eyes his
overseers; drawing much of his Patrimony through his throat, and spending the
rest upon harlots; who usually leave him as bare, as crows do a dead Carcass.
Ruin follows riot at the heels. Luxury is attended by beggary. A famous and
ample instance we have in that Parable, Luke 15 -- And daily experience shows
it to be a plain truth.

But behold, a worse mischief; As the clouds darken heaven, so intemperate
banqueting the mind. Chrysologus.
As the violence of winds and waves sinkes a ship, so luxury our souls and
bodies in the depth of Hell.

He that loves pleasure, shall be a poor man: he that loves wine and oil,
shall not be rich. Prove. 21.17.


We to them that are at ease in Zion, Amos 6.1, 4, 6.
-- That eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the
stall: -- That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointment; etc.

Zeal.
It is the Extreme heat of all the affections, when they are seething or
hissing hot; (...).
when we love God and his people, out of a pure heart fervently. He loves not
at all in Gods account, whose love is not ardent, desires eager, hopes longing,
Non amat qui non Zelat. Aust.
hatred deadly, anger fierce, grief deep, fear terrible, voice, eyes, hands,
gestures, actions, all lively.

Unto true Christian Zeal, there be these six things required. Will. Dict.
1. A desire after something which is truly good, or against something which is
evil indeed. 2. That in this desire there be earnestness and vehemence. 3. That
there be a grief for this good thing we desire, or for some abuse done to it.
4. That this desire and grief be tempered with charity and discretion. 5. That
we seek not our own, but Gods glory. 6. Lastly, that all this do proceed and
come from sincere and distinct knowledge of the word. Gal. 4.18. Romans 10.3. 1
Cor. 10.31.

Zeal without knowledge, is dangerous, as appeared in the Jews, and does in
many others; It makes men proud, and having drunk in an opinion, they cannot be
removed with reason. As a man cannot write in a paper already written, nor plow
in a ground over-runne with bushes; so it is hard to fasten any reason upon a
mind prepossest with fancy.

Zeal is such a thing, which if it be well ordered, is most beautiful in a
Christian, but if not, a thing of exceeding danger: as fire in moderation is
most comfortable, in extremity most fearful.

Separate Zeal and knowledge, and they become both unprofitable: But wisely
join them, and they perfect a Christian, being like a precious Diamond in a
Ring of Gold. For Zeal without knowledge, is like a little ship, without
ballast and fraught, but with a great many sails, which is soon either dashed
against the rocks, or topped over. And knowledge without Zeal, is like a goodly
great ship, well ballasted, and richly fraughted, but without any sails, which
quickly falls into the hands of Pirates, because it can make no speed.

It is good to be zealously affected always in a good matter; but Zeal
misplaced, how dangerous is it! It is better to creep in a good way, than to
run in a wrong way. Even idleness is better than such dillgence. Yet they who
misplace their Zeal, are commonly more in diligence, than they who place it
aright; and they who are in a false way, make more have, than they who are in a
true. The nature of man will carry him two miles at his own bidding, rather
than one at Gods.

Zeal without knowledge is as wildfire in a fools hand: it is like the Devil
in the Demoniack, that casts him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into
the water.

Examples of holy Zealots, were Bucholcer Luther, Laurentius, Athanasius,
Ignatius, Paul, Baruch, of whom it is said, Nehem. 3.20. Seipsum accendit, (...)
he burst out into an holy heat, he wrought with a kind of anger against
himself and others, because the work went on no faster. i. e. animum accendit.
Hic in bonum sumitur est studii ardentis, non irae. Buxt.


Chrysostom says of Peter, that he was like a man made all of fire: And Basil
was said to be a Pillar of fire, such was their Zeal. When Polycarpus had heard
of any false doctrine broached by any, he was wont to stop his cares, saying,
Ah my Lord, why have thou reserved me to these times! And would presently go
his way. Old father Latimer said, we had good things in England, only deest
ignis, viz. Zelus.

Give God thine affections; else thine actions are still-born, and have no life
in them.

The best way to keep fire alive, is under ashes; So Zeal which is the fire of
the spirit, is best preserved in an humble soul, remembering it self to be dust
and ashes. Genesis 18.27. Job 42.6.

Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
Tins. 2.14.
and purify unto himself a pecullar people, zealous of good works.
Luke-Warmness.
A lukewarm Christian, is one that stands indifferently affected, neither
eager for the truth, nor an open adversary thereunto. Neither a Zealous
professor, nor a professed enemy to Religion, but a neuter.

Such (says a Divine) are our civil Justiciaries, Quoties Judaeos foeliciter
degere videant, cognatos little se appellant, ut pote a Joseph oriundi: Quando
vero cos rebus adversis constictari, intelligant, adfirmare nihil eos ad se
pertinere.
Politic professors, neuter-passive Christians; a fair day mends them not, and
a foul day pairs them not; peremptory, nover to be more precise; resolved to
keep on the warm side of the hedge, to sleep in a whole skin, suffer nothing,
do nothing that may interfere with their hopes, or prejudice their preferments.
Thinking they can at once keep correspondency both with God and the world: And
therefore Camelion-like turn themselves into any color, and accommodate
themselves to any company.

Such of old were those Assyrian Colonies, 2 King. 17.41. that feared the Lord,
and withal, served their graven images. And such like were their successors the
Samaritanes, of whom Josophus records, the Jews while they flourished,
should be their dear Cousins; but, if at any time under-hatches, they would not
once own them. Such were the ancient Ebionites, of whom Eusebius tells us, that
they would Keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and the Lords day with the
Christians. And still we have now a days more than a good many, in utrunque
parati, unresolved, and ready to be any thing with the time.

Such Profligate Professors, and temporizing Gospellers, the Lord holds in
such special detestation, that they are held worthy to be set in the front, and
to lead the ring-dance of such reprobates, as shall be hurled into hell. Yea,
the Lord will spew such parasites out of his mouth, as too loathsome morsels
for his stomach to brook or bear with.

I know thy works, Rev. 3 15. Verse. 16.
that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot.

So then, beause thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee
out of my mouth.

Vigilance.
True Christian watchfulness, is an earnest care and bending of the mind, to
live every day, as one would live upon his dying, or upon his judgment day;
which may fall out to be every day, for ought that we know.

1. There is a watchfulness in reference to God; We should watch, 1. What God
does. 2. What God says.
2. And we should watch in reference to our selves. We should watch, 1 What we
do. 2. What we speak. 3. What we think.

Every thought, word and work must be accounted for, and brought to judgment:
And therefore it is as much our wisdom, as it is our duty to watch over them.

Whilst Ishbosheth slept upon his bed at none, Baanah and Rechab took away his
head. Scilicet ut paratum and intentum momentis omnibus quo vellet subito
educeret. Sueton.
Whilst the Crocodile sleeps with open mouth, the Indian Rat gets into him,
and eats his entrails: Our enemy is always ready to annoy us, should we not
therefore be vigilant?

It was a piece of Julius Caesar's policy, never to fore-acquaint his soldiers
of any set time of removal or onset, that he might ever have them in
readiness to draw forth whithersoever he would. Christ, who is called the
Captain of our salvation, deals in like manner.

Merit^ semper sonare auribus nostris debet haec vox, vigilaete. This word
[Watch] should be ever sounding in our ears, running in our minds. Bucer in
Mark cap. 13.37.


It fares with the best, as with a drowsy person, who though awakened and set
to work, is ready to fall asleep at it: So Peter, James and John (those pillars
as they are called, Gal. 2. (fell asleep at their very prayers, Mat. 26.40.
Such dull metal are the best men made of; and so weak is the flesh, be the
spirit never so willing; so ill disposed is our most noble and immortal part,
the soul, to supernal and supernatural employements.

Meditation and Prayer are the creatures of the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. and that
we may not run out into extravagancies, or put up yawning petitions, we must
watch and pray; yea, watch while we are praying, meditating, etc. against
corruption within (the sin that does so easily beset us, Heb. 12.1.) and
temptations without, whether from the world (the things whereof are so near us,
and natural unto us Or, from the Devil, who is ever busiest with the best (as
flies with sweet-meates) and with the best part of their best performances, as
in the end of their prayers, when the heart should close up it self with most
comfort.

Keep thy heart with all diligence, Pro. 4.23. otherwise it will presently be a
dunghill of all filthy and abominable lusts, and the life a long ch^in of
sinful actions, a very continued web of wickedness. Take heed where you set
gunpowder, since fire is in your heart. Austin thanks God that the heart and
temptation did not meet together.

Beside, Satan will be interrupting, as the Pythoniss did Paul praying, Act.
16.16. as the fowls did Abraham sacrificing, Genesis 15.11. as the enemies did
Nehemiah with his Jews building. Who therefore praid and watched, and watched and
praid.

What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Mark 13.37.
Security.
There is a twofold security, 1. Spiritual and good. 2. Carnal and sinful.


The one arises from the actings of a vigorous faith, grounded upon the
promise and Word of God. Hope in God is the security and settlement of the
soul. Spes illa solum firmitatam hahet, qua Deo nititur.
God is the Saints Anchor-hold, they cannot be removed by any storm, when once
they have fastened upon him. He is the hope of all the ends of the earth; and
hope in him shall never end; but in a full enjoyment of him in heaven.

But the latter is accompanied with the neglect of good means, and with a
presumption of a good end.

Security is a life led, sine cura; it abandoneth the fear of God, chaseth a
way faith, ripeneth sin, and hasteneth judgments. For it willingly sleeps in
sin, as unwilling to be awakened, blesses it self in iniquity, and therefore
the curse must needs be near.

For a man to become so secure, as not to have any feeling of the danger
wherewith he is enclosed; such a one seems to be strangely metamorphosed into
a man of iron.

When Callipolis was taken by the Turks, Turk. Hist. fol. 186.
and the news thereof brought to Constantinople; such was the madness of the
Greeks, that they made small account thereof, and to extenuate the matter, when
they had any talk thereof, in jestingwise commonly they said, That the Turks
had but taken from them a pottle of wine: But for that, it proved a right great
loss, and much concerned the State, as the issue made to appear.

For the manner of the taking of Babylon, Heredotus reports, that upon one of
their great Holy Days, when all the City were in their dancing and disports.;
Ex inopinato eis Persae astiterunt, Chron. 35.
on a sudden the Persians came upon them; they came into the City, and took a
part of it, when the other part sung out their song, and danced on, and knew
not that the enemy had surprised them.

To shake us out of security. consider, 1. Our whole life is a Temptation. 2. A
godly man is never without a treasure, and a thief to steal it. 3. No place
admits security. 4. The further sin goes, the more deadly it is. 5. No wise
man contenteth himself with present ^ase, nor lives by things present, but
providently forecasteth for after times.

A man is never less safe, Bern. si vis securus esse, time securitatem;
fortuna, quem nimium fovet, stultum f^cit.
than when he seems furthest from danger; fear of security being the guard of
safety, great fortunes being the recks of ruin. If thou would be secure,
then fear security; for whomsoever fortune too much cherishes, she makes a
fool: Which the wisest King expresses thus, Pro. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness
profit nothing. Herein not much unlike to Merchants, who having had good
success at Sea, adventure for more, and so lose all. So that it is too true,
that as much light hurts the eyes; so too much felicity clouds the
understanding; making the conceit of a safety, the cause of sorrow. Hence is
that golden rule of Solomon, Pro. 28.14. Beatus est home, qui semper est
pavidus.

In the days of Noe, Mat. 24.38.39.
that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying, and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark, and know not
until the flood came, and took them all away.

When they shall say peace and safety; 1 These. 5.3.
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as trava^l upon a woman with child,
and they shall not escape.

Fortitude.
He that will not strive against the wind, will not reach the Port; it becomes
men as well to oppose misfortunes, as children to cry over them.

A valiant man undertakes without rashness, and performs without fear; he seeks
not for dangers, but when they find him, he bears them with courage and
success: he has oftimes looked death in the face, and passed by with a smile,
and when he sees he must yield, he both welcomes and contemns it; he forecasts
the worst of all events, and encounters them before they come, in a secret and
mental war: he is the master of himself, and subdues his passions to reason,
and by this inward victory works his own peace: he is afraid of nothing, but
the displeasure of the highest, and runs away from nothing but sin: he looks
not how strong he is, but how innocens; his sword is to him the last of his
trials, and he draws still as defendant, not as challenger: where no man better
manageth it, with more safety, with more favor: be had rather have his blood
seen than his back, and disdains life upon base conditions; he had rather
smother an in jury, than revenge himself of the impotent, and it is a question
whether he more detests cowardliness or cruelty: he talks little, and brags
less; he lies ever armed with wise resolution; he is neither prodigal of blood
to mis-spend it idely, Posse et nolle nobile.
nor niggardly to grudge it, when either God calls for it or his country: his
power is limited by his will, and he holds it the noblestrevenge, that he might
hurt, and does not: he is so ballasted with wisdom, that he floats safely in
the midst of all tempests.

When Modestus the Prefect would have won Basil to that heresy; first, he
gave him fair speeches: Alas Sir (says he) this language is fit to catch
little children. Know you not (says the Prefect) who we are that command it?
No body (says ^asil) whilst you command such things. Your goods shall be
confiscated. Answ. He needs not fear confiscation, that has nothing to lose;
nor banishment, to whom heaven is his only country; nor torments, when his
body will be dashed with one blow; nor death, the only way to set him at
liberty. You are mad (said the Prefect.) Opto me in aternum sic delivare (said
Basil) I have torn garments and a few books; and so I live in the world, as
one that is always ready to leave it. As for my body it is so weak, one blow
will make it insensible of grief and tormments.

Ignis crux bestiarum conflictationes, -- (said Ignatius) yea, let all the
torment men and Devils can invent fall upon me, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus
Christ. And again, Frumentum dei sum, Lions teeth are but like a Milne, which
bruiseth, but wastes not the good wheat, only makes it fit to be good bread.

Polycarp being bidden by the Proconsul, to defy Christ and he should be safe,
answered, Octoginta sex annos illi jam inservivi, etc. Rather die a thousand
deaths, than deny my Lord Jesus.

Contemptus a me est Romanus and favor and furor, (said Luther.) Again, Mallem
vivere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare. And again, in the cause of God he
was content. Totius mundi odium and impetum sustinere. He said to God
concerning outward things, Valde protestatus sum, me nolle sic satiari ab eo.

Sr. Anthony Kingston coming to Hooper and telling him life was sweet, Act. and
Mon.
and death bitter: His answer was, The death to come is more bitter, and the
life to come more sweet. The Earl of Murray, said by John Knox (a Scottish
divine) when interred, here lies the body of him, who in his life time never
feared the face of any man.

Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2 3.
Fear.
There are many kinds of fear, 1. Natural, which is the gift of God, the
ornament of nature, by which we are warned, and in some sort armed for the
avoiding of evil, that may befall us. 2. Servile, whereby goodness is not
loved, but punishment is only feared. 3. Initial, to which he may apply those
words in Prove. 1.7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. 4.
Filial, a fear of God as he is our Father, whereby we are solicitous not to
lose his favor. 5. Worldly and carnal, when a man rather than to forsake his
own contentment and case, cares not to forsake God, by forsaking his
Commandments.

Augustus coming ill to his Crown, is said to have broken sleeps, and used to
send for some in talk to pass the night away. Caligula the Emperor hid
himself, when ever he heard the thunder.

Our fear of God must not be servile, but filial, Si Domnius, ubi timor.
Malach. 1.6.
to this end the fear and love of God are to be mixed. Timete cum amore, and
amate cum timore. This by some called reverentialis timor, by others a chaste
fear, because it is like the fear of a chaste wife, who fears to lose her
husbands love.

But the last swayes exceedingly; we are too much afraid of man. When Gehazi
saw the host of the Aramites, he cried, Alas, what shall we do? When Herod
frowned on them of Tire and Sidon, they quaked and sought his favor, etc. At
this day, if a great man set himself against us, and threaten to break our
backs; If a rich man be our enemy, and threaten to sit on our skirts; we are in
a woeful case, we know not what to do, there is no heart in us.

Against this fleshy and ungodly fear, oppose this buckler, The Lord is my
helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me, Such a man threatens me; God
sends a cursed Cow short horns; he has a thousand ways to curb him; God can
take the breath out of his nostrils in the twinkling of an eye: Overcome him by
flies, as Pharaoh: With one fly, as Adrian: He can send Worms to eat him up,
as he did Herod, etc, What comparison between God and man? God is a Spirit,
man is flesh: God is strong, man is weak: God is the Creator, man is the
creature. If God be on our side, who can be against us?

Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: Mat.
10.28.
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Magnanimity.
A Painter in a rage casting his Pensel from him, made such a some for a
Maddog, as he could not otherwise have light upon by Art and industry. Yet
reason, not rage, is (as I conceive) a fit ingredient toward the making up of
this virtue.

The old age of an Eagle, is better than the youth of a lark.

It is reported of the Cannibals, that in a whole age a man shall not find one
that does not rather embrace death, than either by word or countenance remisly
to yield one jot of an invincible courage. There is none seen, that would not
rather be slain and devoured, than sue for life, or show any fear.

It was Alexanders great encouragement at his last fatal battle, that he was to
fight with all the power of Persia at once.

Mahomet. the Persian Sultan, enraged with the overthrow of his Army; in his
fury caused all the ten Captains which had the leading thereof, to have their
eyes plucked out; threatening also to attire all the soldiers, that fled out of
the battle, in women's apparel, and so disgraced, to carry them about as cowards.

Famous was the faith and fortitude of Philo the Jew, Eus^b. l. 2. c. 5.
one of the Legates sent from them to the City of Rome: who after he was
excluded, threatened and commanded to depart; being likewise in danger to
receive a mischief from Cajus the Emperor, who was much moved and incensed
against him: yet he being reviled, went forth, and unto the Jews which were
with him in company, he said: We ought to be of good cheer: for by right God
should take our part, Since Cajus is angry with us.

The Lacaedemonians were wont to say, It is a shame for any man to fly in time
of danger: But for a Lacaedemonian, it is a shame for him to deliberate.

Socrates would not hearken to his friend Criton, persuading him to shift for
himself by a dishonorable flight. Necesse est ut eam non ut vivam, as Pompey
said.
Much less should a Christian, when called by God to suffer. Go? (said Luther)
I will surely go (since I am sent for) in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;
yea, though I knew there were so many Devils to resist me, as there are tiles
to cover the houses in Worms. When Spalatinus had sent to him, to enquire
whether or no he would go to Worms, and appear in the Gospels cause, if Caesar
summoned him: Luth. Epist.
Omnia de me praesumas (said he) praeter fugam and palinodiam. Fugere nolo,
multo minus recantare, it a me confortet Dominus.

When the Earl of Salisbury, being enclosed round with the Army of Sultan
Melexala, Turk. Hist. fol. 104.
was advised to fly: The noble Earl answered no more, but God forbid that my
fathers Son, should run away from the face of a Sarasin.

Should such a man as I flee? Said Nehemiah. I am ready (said Paul) not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

-- The righteous is bold as a Lion. Prove. 28.1.
Pusillanimity.
Honorable exploits try what metal we are of; as hard weather tryes what
health. Withered leaves fall off in a wind: rotten boughs break when weight is
laid on them: and earthen vessels when set empty on the fire.

This cowardly passion of faintheartedness dispirits a man, expectorates his
manliness, and exposes him to the cruel mercy of an enemy.

Some do account one pair of heels worth two pair of hands; But better of the
two to be boldly temerarious, than basely timorous.

As was Hannibal, Decad. 5. f. 1.
of whom Livy reports, that Princeps praelium inibat; ultimus concerto praelio
excedebat. He was first in the battle, and last out.

Want of courage shows that men (like stags) have stout and stately heads, but
want hearts. Besides, there is this evil in cowerdice, that it is catching.

If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. Prove. 24.10.
Deuteronomy. 20.8., Isa. 35.4.


What man is there that is fearful and faint-hearted? Let him go and return
unto his house, lest his brethrens heart faint as well as his heart.

Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not.

Patience.
The Patient man is made of a Metal, not so hard as flexible; his shoulders are
large, fit for a load of injuries; which he bears not out of baseness and
cowardliness, because he dare not revenge, but out of Christian fortitude,
because he may not; he has so conquered himself, that wrongs cannot conquer
him; and here he finds that victory consists in yielding: he is above nature,
whiles he frames below himself; not to resist, being urged, is more than
heroical; he is Gods best witness, and when he stands before the bar for
truth, he hears his unjust sentence, and rejoices; the Jaylors that attend
him, are to him his Pages of honor, his Dungeon the Vault of Heaven, his Rack
or Wheel the stairs of his ascent to glory; good Laws serve for his protection,
not for his revenge; he tries the Sea after many shipracks, and beats still at
the door he never saw opened; when crosses afflict him, he sees a Divine hand
invisibly striking with these sensible scourges, against which he dares not
rebel nor murmr; This man only can turn necessity into virtue, and put evil
to good use; he is the surest friend, the easiest enemy, the greatest
conqueror; in a word, he is so much more happy than others, by how much he
could abide to be more miserable.

Patientia est honestatis ac utilitatis causa, Cicer.
voluntaria ac diuturna perpessio rerum arduarum.

Non sentire mala non est hominis, non f^rre non est vire.
that it should be as pleasant a thing to us to be in Equuleo, as in lecto,
(Christians (as Christ did) feel pain, but they patiently endure it,) there can
be no patience when there is no sense of evil. Neither is it (as your
Moralists) a mere yielding to necessity: But it supposes a sense of evil, and
then in the formality of it, is a submission of the whole soul to the will of
God.

Miranda est du^itia, sed neganda patientia
and Pirates by sea suffer much hardship. Catiline did patiently abide cold and
other extremities: Baal Priests endured cutting and slashing: And covetous
misers and earchworms will endure much to get money; yet that is no patience.

Saul was patient when men despised him, he gave them not a word, but it was in
Policy. Some have patience perforce, because they cannot be avenged, they have
no power to do it; that is dissimulation. Others suffer much for vainglory, as
heretics have done: But we must suffer for Gods glory, etc.



Philosophers have discoursed of Patience, and commended it; but Christians
themselves have staggered, when they have been exercised with a sharp sense of
evils: Which shows us, that its easier in a calm and sedate condition to
discourse of patience, than to exercise in time of trial.

Patience is a noble virtue. Nobile vincendi genus est Patientia.

1. Sapientem demonstrat. David showed himself a wise man, when he bare
patiently the railing of Shemei. So did Hezekiah when he answered not
Rabshakeh. The world counts them fools, that put up reviling speeches, yet they
be the true wise men.

2. Forttiudinem superet. He that is slow to anger (says Solomon) is better
than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City.
(...) Septuag.
It is counted cowardlinesse not to resist, yet it is the best valor in the
world

3. Sine ictu de host triumphat. Non feriend^, fed ferendo.
We give our enemy never a blow, and yet we overcome him; It is a victory
gotten not only without bloodshed, but without the striking of a stroke.

4. In mart vitam conservat. As the Salamander is said to live in the fire: So
Patience makes us to live in the fire of afflictions.

5. De regno securitatem praestat. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore let this
excellent virtue be embraced by us all.

As faith inlayed with charity is Regina virtutum. So Patience is one of the
chief Maidens of honor, that wait upon her. By faith we live, and patience we
possess our souls, after we begin to live in Christ. By faith we have an
interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, and by patience we sail through the
tempestuous sea of this world till we come to the haven of rest. By faith we
apprehend the promises: And Patience is an iron pillar, for the just to lean
upon, to uphold them against all crosses and afflictions.

Ye have need of Patience, Heb. 10.36.
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

In your patience possess your souls. Luke 21.19.


But let patience have her perfect work, Jam 1.4.
that ye may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing.

Murmuring.
The Hebrews in their Talmud, say, that the Moon complained in the day of her
creation, Buxto f^
that she was not appointed for so good a use as the Sun, to shine in the day
time, but in the night: because of her grudging (they say) that God appointed
she should not shine from the day of her creation, till the sixth day.

Its a dangerous thing to sit sick of the sullens, or be discontented at any of
Gods dispensations.

To complain more than we have cause, is sinful; and therefore much more to
complain when we have no cause at all. Yet some are ready to complain when they
are encompassed about with many mercies, Mr. Caryl.
and are not satisfied when they are filled; they complain because they have
not what they would, or because others have more than they, though themselves
have enough, if they knew what is enough.

Some complain when they have meat enough, because they have not sauce; yea,
some complain when they have enough of both; Fortuna multis dat nimis, nulli
satis.
the affluence of all things, not only for necessity, but delight. These are
never well, neither full nor fasting; being so far from having learned the
Apostle's lesson, to be content in all estates, that they are content in none.

The people of Israel murmured not only when they wanted bread, but when they
had it, when they had Manna they murmured for Quails, and at last they
murmured at their very Mannah, their souls loathed that light bread: Consider
how great their sin is, who complain upon such terms as these, who complain
before they are hurt; yea, when they have cause to be very thankful.

We live in complaining times, nothing pleases many among us, because every
thing is not as they please. The Lord has healed all our strokes in great
degree, but our complainings are not healed. If we be found complaining when we
have no cause, we may quickly provoke God to give us cause enough of
complaining. When children cry for nothing, they are usually made to feel
something. This humor is childish enough in children, worse in men, and worst
of all in Christians, who are also the children of God.

There are two things which God will not bear in his, viz. 1. When they grow
wanton with a mercy. 2. When they complain without a cross.


To complain under a cross, is to act below grace; to complain of a cross, is
to act against grace; to complain beyond a cross; is a defect of grace; but to
complain without a cross, is a defect in nature. Irrational creatures will not
complain, when they have the conveniences of nature.

Great storms arise out of little gusts. It is our wisest way to crush the very
first insurrections of unruly passions, to smother the smoke thereof; which
else with sum up into the head, and gather into so thick a cloud, as we shall
soon lose the sight of our selves, and what is best to be done.

Passions proceed from bad to worse, like heavy bodies down sleep hills, once
in a motion, move themselves, and know no ground but the bottom. Turk. Hist.
fol. 423. Invalidum amne naturd qu^^ rulum. Senc^.


Mahomet, the first Emperor of the Turks, being wonderfully grieved with the
dishonor and loss he had received at the last assault of Scodra; in his
choler and fran^ick rage most horribly blasphemed against God, saying, That it
were enough for him to have care of heavenly things, and not to cross him in
his wordly (...).

The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth againsh the
Lord. Prove. 19.3.
Do thou well to be angry? Jon. 3.4.
These are (...), complainers -- Jude 16.
Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured; and were destroyed of the
destroyer. 1 Cor. 10.10.
Temperance
It is the modernation of lust and appetite, in the use of the gifts and
creat^^^ of God.

The Jews are said to be generally very temperate. For their diet (whether in
obedience to the precepts of reason, or the injunctions of Pars^mony, (...)
they are very temperate; seldom offending in ebriety or excesle of drink, nor
^^^ing in gulosity or superfluity of meats. In vit. Juliani.


Tanta fuit Juliani temperentia, ut ex virg nibus quae specios a sunt capta, ut
in Perside, ubi faeminarum pulchritudo excellit, nec contrectare aliquam
voluit. Alexandrum imitatus, Ejecit and tonsores and coquos, tanquam deliciarum
and intemperantia ministros; Theatra and ludos non curat, similior detestanti
eos ludos, quam spectanti. Camd. (...).


Queen Elizabeth was so famous for this virtue, that K. Edward ^ called her by
no other name, than his swept Sister Temperance. She did seldom eat but one
sort of meat, and rose ever with an appetite, and lived about seventy years.

For the better practicing of which virtue, remember these four rules.



We must use moderation in our apparel. And that is to apparel our selves
according to our sex, according to the received fashion of our Country,
according to our place and degree, and according to our ability. Here the
common fault is, to be out of all order: for none almost know any measure.

We must use moderation in getting of goods. And that is, to rest content if we
have food and raiment for our selves, and them that belong unto us, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Here is our flint; We may not desire to be rich, verse. 9. The King himself must
not multiply his gold and silver, Deuteronomy. 17.17. And yet has he more need of
gold and silver, than any private man.

There must be a moderation in the spending of our goods. Contrary to the
fashion of many, that spend their substance in feasting, and company, and keep
their wives and children bare at home.

Paul reasoned of Temperance.

One of the fruits of the Spirit is Temperance.

Add to Knowledge, Temperance.

Gluttony. This sin is com mitted five ways. Praeprupere, Laute, Nimis,
Ardenter, Studiose. Plures crapula quam gladius.

It is the bane of the body: For many more perish by intemperance, than by
violence; by surfeiting, than by suffering. Epicures are as desperate as
Soldiers; Meat kills as many as the Musket; the Board as the Sword.

Life is a lamp; and as a lamp is choked with overmuch oil, or a little fire
extinguished with too much wood; so natural heat is strangled in the body, with
immoderate eating.

Contrariwise, Homini cibus utilissimus simplex. It Is said of one, Confecit
tumulum in dentibus.
Tenuis mensa sanitatis matter, (says Chrysostom) But much meat, much malady.

And it is the sepulcher of the soul. Many a man's table is a snare to him,
whiles fullness breeds forgetfulness; And that both of God and his works, Isa.
5.12. And of men and their miseries, Amos 6.6.

It Is storied of Epicurus, That while he looked too much to his Palate, he
looked not at all to the Heavenly Palace: Howbeit Aelian (if he may be
credited) reports better of him. And Tully says, Whatever his opinions were,
his life was temperate.

But what a Cormorant was Heliogabalus, who was served at one supper with seven
thousand fishes, and five thousand fowls? His thirst was unquenchable; his
appetite like the hill Aetna, ever on fire after more.

Many live as if they were fruges consumere nati; Horat. -- Epicuri de gre^e
porci. Idem.
whose Corpse are so many Casks to hold (or rather mar) meat. Like that famous
Roman Parasite Offellius Bibulus, of whom it is said, Dum vixit, aut bibit aut
minxit.

Many walk, Phil. 3.18, 19.
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ: whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly. Drunkenness.
Some could wish themselves Whales, Ven^l-^oemones
so as the Sea were strong liquor.

No glue like that of good fellowship. Et gratiam conciliant potando.

Drunkenness is called good fellowship; even as the Impious Pope was called
Pius; the Cruel, Innocent; and the fierce, Clement.

Mergit mentem extrema potatio. Senec. It is Voluntaria insania. Aug.

And for the body, Ebrietas nequitia est, quae te non sinet esse senem. An
intemperate man is one that (like some candles) sweals away his life.

Funde iterum: Mantuan. Eclog. 9.
potare semel, gustare; secundus
Colluit os poius; calefacta refrigerat ora
Tertius; arma siti bellumque indicere quartus
Aggreditur; quintus pugnat; victoria sexti est;
Septimus ( --) triumphat.
Bacchus is usually painted by the Poets, naked, to show, that when a man is
drunk, Proverbium est in Sanhedrin, intrat vinum, exit arcanum. Drus. In vino
veritas.
he reveals all the secrets of his heart. Quicquid est in cord sobrii, est in
lingua ebrii.

A Drunkard (says Aug.) abominatur a Deo, despicitur ab Angelis, deridetur ab
hominibus, destituitur virtutibus, confunditur a daemonibus, conculcatur ab
omnibus.

The foulness of Drunkenness will appear, if we consider our selves as -- 1.
Men. 2. Civil men. 3. Christian men.


He that has this sin, has lost himself.

That it is good to be drunk once a month, is a common flattery of sensuality,
supporting it self upon Physic, and the healthful effects of Inebriation. Dr.
Brown.
-- But at least, for dementation, sopition of reason, etc. though American
religion approve, and Pag^n piety of old has practiced, even at their
sacrifices; Christian morality and the doctrine of Christ will not allow.

The Turks do so detest this sin, that in October Anno 1613. they observing
their feasts of Bairan, (which is our Easter) the which they observe twice a
year; Turk. Hist. fol. 1332.
a Turk having drunk wine too freely, (the drinking whereof is forbidden
amongst them, although they love it well, and drink in private) was
apprehended, and carried before the Grand-Visier; who seeing the fact verified,
inflicted this punishment upon him, to have boiled Lead poured into his mouth
and ears; the which was speedily executed.

It were well if Drunkards would consider what Anacharsis has told them, That
the Vine bears three grapes; The first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, and the third of misery and mischief. Or what Mahomet did his
followers, That in every grape there dwelt a Devil. Or rather what David, Psalm.
11.6. -- fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion
of their cup.

Not in rioting and drunkenness. Romans 12.13.
Prudence.
A wise man stands like a Center unmoved, while the circumference of his
estate is drawn above, beneath, about him: He is his own Lawyer, the treasury
of knowledge, the oracle of counsel, blind in no man's cause, best-sighted in
his own; his Passions are so many good servants which stand in a diligent
attendance, ready to be commanded by Reason, by Religion; and if at any time
his Passions do rebel, he can first conceal their mutiny, and then suppress it:
Both his eyes are never at once from home, but one keeps house, while the other
roves abroad for intelligence: He desires to know much, but most of all
himself, not so much his own strength as his weakness; neither is this his
knowledge reduced to the Theory; but practice of affairs.

Prudentiae tres parts secundum Tullium. 1. Memoria de praeterito. Prudens, q.
Porro videns.
2. Intelligentia de praesenti. 3. Cautela de futuro.


A prudent man, his wisdom begins in the right knowledge of God, and ends in
the right knowledge of himself.

Every prudent man deals with knowledge. Prove. 13.16.
His wisdom is to understand his way. Cap. 14.8.
He looks well to his going. Verse. 15.
Rashness. Philip of Maecedon would have revenged the death of his son
Demetrius, by putting to death his son Perseus. And Alexander because his
favorite Ephestion dies, hangs up his Physician.

Dogs in a chase bark at their own masters; and so do men in their passions let
fly at their best friends.

We must not too far engage our selves upon every instigation; then we do but
lean on broken reeds, and build our hopes on sandy foundations.

Avoid Temerity: By making more haste than good speed, men do but brew their
own sorrow. Consider,

1. That rashness does nothing well; And, The hasty man (we say) never wants
woe. A man going in haste; easily slideth. 2. A note of a man fearing God, is
to carry his matters with discretion. 3. The Law rejected a blind sacrifice;
the Gospel requires a reasonable; and all sacrifices must be seasoned with the
salt of Discretion. 4. Rashness and temerity lays us bare and naked to the
lashes of God, of men, and of our own consciences.
Watch carefully against thine own rashness in 1. Judgment. 2. Affections. 3.
Speeches. 4. Actions. 5. Passions.


Deliberandum est din, A man may else cut off his own right hand with his left.
quod stutu^ndum est semel.

Bulaam, though the Angel met him with a drawn sword, yet he would needs on:
And what was the issue? He died by the sword of Israel, though he seemed a
friend to Israel. Not to be warned, is both a just presage, and desert of ruin.

Plutarch makes report of one, who unadvisedly casting a stone at a dog, hit
and hurt his own mother: So many there are, who ignorantly and inconsiderately
contending against Babel, do grievously wound the Church of God; and do more
wrong to their cause, than to their adversaries.

The fool rages, Prove. 14.16.
and is confident.

Be not rash with thy mouth, Eccl. 5.2.
and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God.

We ought to do nothing rashly. Act. 19.36.


Modesty.
The heaviest cars of corn stoop most toward the ground; Boughs, the more laden
they are, the more low they hang; and the more direct the Sun is over us, the
less is our shadow: Even so, the more true worth is in any man, the less
self-conceitedness is in him.

John Baptist thought not himself worthy to lay his hand under Christ's feet,
when Christ thought him worthy to lay it on his holy head in baptism. Who am I?
(said Moses) when he was to be sent for Egypt: Whereas none in all the world
was comparably fit for that embassage.

Non socum in aliis innumerabilibus rebns multa me latent, Epist. 119. c. 21.
(said Austin:) Not only in innumerable other things am I utterly unskilful,
but even in the holy Scriptures themselves (my proper profession) the greatest
part of my knowledge is the least part of my ignorance.

Ego in parvo tuguriolo (says Hierom) cum Monachis, Epist. ad Aug.
i.e. cum compeccat^ribus meis, de magnis statuere non audeo: I, in my little
Cell, with the rest of the Monks my fellow-sinners, dare not determine of great
matters.

This is all I know, Quod quaeris in^us habes. Ne te quaesiveris extra. Pers.
that I know nothing, (said Socrates.) And if I would at any time delight my
self in a Fool, I need not seek far, I have myself to turn to, (said Seneca.)

And certainly, the lower a man is in his own eyes, the higher he is in Gods.
God values us according to our abasements. The Church was black in her own
eyes, fair in Christ's.

He that shall humble himself, Mat^ 23.12.
shall be exalted. Vainglory.
If the Vainglorious glory in his devotion, he gives not alms but upon record;
and if he have once done well, God hears of it often; for upon every unkindness
he is ready to upbraid him with his merits: He can fulfill the Law with ease,
and earn God with superfluity. If he have parted with a little sum to pious
uses, Hierom was wont to call the Philosophers Animalia gloriae and popular is
aur^ mancipia.
you shall find it in the Church-windows. A bare head in the street does him
more good, than a meals-meat. He picks his teeth, when his stomach is empty,
and calls for Pheasants at a common Inn. You shall find him prizing rich
Jewels, when his purse yields not money to pay for earnest. He is ever on the
stage, and acts still a glorious part abroad. He is a Spanish Soldier on an
Italian Theater; a Bladder full of wind, a Skin full of words, a Fools wonder,
and a Wise man's fool.

I know none more vainglorious than the Pope; for he ( Simon Magus-like) gives
himself out to be some great thing, even the Church-virtual: And that in his
breast (as in Noah's Ark) is comprehended all wisdom and worth. The like do his
Janissaries the Jesuits, who will needs be taken for the only Scholars, Laus
proprio sord^scit in ore.
Politicians and Orators of the world. The Church (say they) is the soul of the
world; the Clergy, of the Church; and we, of the Clergy.

Many are apt to overvalue and over-rate their own abilities, as if they had
engrossed all Knowledge, and had the Monopoly of Wisdom in their own breasts;
as if all must borrow or buy of their store, and light their candle at their
torch. But no man is a greater stranger to true Knowledge, than he who boasts
he has more than his neighbors. It is the emptiness of Knowledge, not a
fullness of it, which makes so great a sound.

Socrates made no distinction between Wisdom and Sobriety. We shall be sober,
Coplav (...) non distinguebat.
if we take not that upon us that we have not, nor brag of that which we have.

Let us not be desirous of Vainglory. Gal. 5.26.
Chastity.
It is an abstinence and forbearing, not from Marriage, Castitas a (...) orno,
quia praecipuum est hominis ornamentum, River.
but from all strange and roving lusts, about the desire of that Sex.

Christians must have chaste desires, not indulging to themselves a liberty of
looser thoughts; keeping the threshold of their Temples pure, that the Holy
Ghost may observe nothing unclean in the entry of his habitation.

For he that lusts after a woman, wants nothing to the consummation of the act,
Incesta etiam est sine stupro quae stuprum quaerit. Seneca.
but some convenient circumstances; which because they are not in our power,
the act is impeded, but nothing of the malice abated.

The chaste Tragedian Sophocles, being demanded whether he ever applied his
mind to sensual affections? replied, Dii meliora! Heaven forefend a Strumpet
should put on a Tragic buskin. This may reduce a man's straggling motion, to a
more retired harbor.

Origin mistaking those words, [There be Eunuchs, which have made themselves
Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake,] gelded himself.

But that person is truly chaste, that has liberty and opportunity to sin,
Jerome.
and will not.

So severe in this was our blessed Savior, that he commanded us rather to put
our eyes out, than to suffer them to become an offense to us; that is, an inlet
to sin, or an invitation or transmission of impurity: Meaning the extinction of
all incentives of lust, the rejection of all opportunities and occasions, the
quitting of all conditions of advantage, which minister fuel to this Hellfire.

Now the beginnings, temptations, likenesses, and insinuations of lust and
impurity to be forbidden to Christians; Such are all morose delectations in
vanity, wanton words, gestures, revellings, luxurious diet, garish and
lascivious dressings and trimmings of the body. In a word, all making provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, all lust of concupiscence, and all
lust of the eye, and all lust of the hand, unclean contacts are to be
rescinded, all lust of the tongue and palate, all surfeiting and drunkenness.

For it is impossible to keep the spirit pure, if it be exposed to all the
entertainment of enemies. And if Christ forbad the wanton eye, and placed it
under the prohibition of adultery; Archeselaus Philos. apud Plutarch.
it is certain, whatsoever ministers to that vice, and invites to it, is within
the same restraint; it is the eye, or the hand, or the foot, that is to be cut
off. Nihil refert quibus membris adu Iteraveris.

For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain
from fornication: 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 5.
that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification
and honor; not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know
not God. Uncleanness.
He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. This metaphor
of sowing, shows well what it is to live after the flesh.

For, Sowing has these four things required, viz. 1. Praeparatio terrae. 2.
Praeparatio seminis. 3. Manuum injectio. 4. Seminis multitudo.


And to those four do answer, 1. Suggestion, which prepares our hearts to
receive the bad seed. 2. Consent, which seeks for and provides the seed. 3. The
act of sinning, which is like the hand casting the seed into the ground. 4. The
continuance in sinning, which answers the multitude of grains.


Fornication is a complex word, comprehending all manner of bodily uncleanness
with women: And when Adultery is forbidden, there is not only a prohibition of
the violation of the rights of Marriage, but it is also extended to signify
all mixtures not matrimonial. As,

1. Whoredom.
Which is (in a strict sense) that uncleanness which is committed with a Maid
or Widow. It is soluti cum soluta.


Hophni and Phineas, by their wicked life, made men abhor the offering of the
Lord. They were guilty of the four Cardinal vices, or rather (as Peter Martyr
wittily) of the four vices of the Cardinals: 1. Of Imprudence; for they were
ignorant of their function. 2. Of Injustice; for they lived of rapine. 3. Of
Effeminateness; for they would not stay for their dinner. 4. Of Intemperance;
for they stained themselves with whoredom.

This is a grievous sin; Because, 1. It stains the body with a peculiar kind of
filth. 2. Such a one is guilty of Sacralidge, for that our bodies are
consecrated to God, as his Temples. 3. Because we are not our own; to give our
bodies to any other, much less to Satan and the flesh, seeing that God himself
has bought us, and that with a great price, to the end that both in body and
soul we should serve him.

Whoremongers, Heb. 13.4.
God will judge. 2. Adultery.
Which is (properly) folly committed with a strangers wife. Adulterium, quasi
ad alterius torum.


It was to be punished with death, even by the law of Nature; because the
society and purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men.

It is a capital crime, there is great theft in it, (as the word imports, (...)
In the very theft.
John 8.4.) whiles the child of a stranger carries away the goods or lands of
the family. Besides, this sin strikes at the very sinew, heart and life of the
marriage-knot, and dissolves it.

Clytemnestra Agamemnons wife, was a notable Adulteress. But nothing like
Messalina, who said, Se inter diem and noctem viginti quinque passam concubitus.


Adulteri sunt ulcera reipublicae. The wide womb of the earth can never find a
grave to hide their shame.

Nebuchadnezzar roasted in the fire Zedekiah and Ahab, two false Prophets of
Judah, because they committed Adultery with their neighbors wives, Jer. 29.22,
23. The Egyptians used to cut off the nose of the Adulteress; the Prophet
allu^es to this, Ezekiel, 23.25. The Athenians, Lacedaemonians and Romans were very
severe against this sin, as Plutarch reports. The old French and Saxons also,
as Tacitus tells us.

The Law of God was strict this way, and where men have failed to punish, God
has done it remarkably. In Anno 1583. in London, two Citizens committing
Adultery on the Lords day, were struck dead with fire from heaven, in the very
act of uncleanness: their bodies being left dead in the place, half burnt up;
sending out a most loathsome savor, for a spectacle of Gods controversy
against Adultery and Sabbath-breaking.

God did it effectually on Charles 2. King of Navar, who was much addicted to
this sin, which so wasted his spirits, that in his old age he fell into a
Lethargy. To comfort his benumbed joints, he was bound and sewed up in a sheet
sleeped in boiling Aquavitae. The Surgeon having made an end of sewing him, and
wanting a knife to cut off his thread, took a wax candle that stood lighted by
him. But the flame running down by the thread, caught hold on the sheet, which
according to the nature of the Aquavitae, burned with that vehemency, that the
miserable King ended his days in the fire.

Master Cleaver reports of one that he knew, who had committed the act of
uncleanness: and in the horror of conscience he hanged himself: But before, he
wrote in a paper, and left in a place to this effect; Indeed, I acknowledge it
(s^id he) to be utterly unlawful for a man to kill himself: But I am bound to
act the Magistrates part, because the punishment of this sin is death. This act
was not to be justified, but it shows what a controversy God has with
Adulterers, and what a deep gash that sin makes in the conscience.

Adultery is 1. Mental. 2. Actual.


What need therefore (with Job) to make a Covenant with our eyes? Lusting is
often the fruit of looking; as in Joseph's Mistress, who set her eye upon
Joseph, and David, who saw Bathsheba bathing, Lust is quick sighted. Sampsons
eyes were the first offenders that betrayed him to lust, therefore are they
first pulled out.

For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the
Judges. Job 31.11. Heb. 23.4.
Adulterers God will judge. 3. Incest.
In a strict acceptance, it signifies that kind of naughtiness, which is
committed between two near of kin.

Take heed of intemperance; Lot in a drunken pang forgets he is father, and
does that, that heaven and earth are afterward ashamed of.

Est Venus in venis, ignis in igne furit. The text says, he neither perceived
when either of them lay down, Genesis 19.33.
nor when they arose; Indeed drunkenness drowns both the understanding, sense
and conscience; for surely he would never have done that abominable act, if he
had not been overcome with wine, (...)
which might make him forget what was become of his wife, and so cause him not
to doubt, but that she was in his bed. Yet it is observed, there is a tittle
extraordinary in the Hebrew, to note that it is a thing incredible, Ne nos
abeamus in securitatem.
Coire, quempiam necientem. Cajetan and Pererius conclude it possible, and give
reasons for it. Calvin says best, that it was not so much his wine, as a
spirit of slumber sent upon him from God, for a scourge of his intemperance.
Luther adds, that we may watch against security.

It is well observed by our Divines, Genesis 19.8.
that Lot offended against the chastity of both his daughters, in offering them
up unto the Sodomites; and they now conspire against his chastity; so is he
punished in the same kind wherein he offended; which was just as from God,
though evil in them. God permits him to fall most horribly in the solitary
mountain, whom the wickedness of Sodom could not overcome.

It is ordinary with the Pope to dispense with incestuous marriage. Instance in
Philip 3. Sands in his Survey.
of Spain, of whom it is said, that he might call the Archduke Albert, both
Brother, Cousin, Nephew and Son: for all this was he unto him, either by blood,
or affinity: Being Uncle to himself, Cousin-German to his Father, Husband to
his Sister, and Father to his Wife; And all by Papal dispensation. God suffers
such commixtions to take effect, whiles he makes more lawful conjunctions
fruitless, for the greater shame of the fact.

Abhorred filthiness! 1 Cor. 5.1.
not so much as to be named without detestation. 4. Sodomy.
This soul sin is so called from the men of Sodom. It is an abuse of either sex
against nature. Such may be men in shape, but are worse than beasts in their
lusts.

Two ways a thing may be said to be against the nature of man: 1. In regard of
the constitutive difference of man, which is Reason; and so all sin is against
nature. 2. In regard of the Genus of man, which is Animal, a living creature.


Now the sin here spoken of is also against man's nature in this last respect:
For such filthiness is not sound amongst the beasts; for God has ordained that
the male and female should couple together, and not the female and female, nor
male and male; But in this horrible manner did the Sodomites, Romans, and other
of the Gentiles.

It is a sin (says Aristotle) that is repugnant, not only to nature in her
greatest depravation, but which fights with the nature of beasts. But it is
clear, that when God for sakes men, they are ready to do things, which the very
beasts abhor.

At this day in the Levant, Blunts Voyage.
Sodomy is held no sin: The Turkish Basha's have many wives, but (which is far
more abominable) more Catamites.

This is a sin so against nature, that Children (natures end) and Posterity are
utterly lost by it.

-- God gave them up to vile affections: Romans 1.26, 27.
For even their women did change the natural use into that which is against
nature; And likewise also the men leaving the natural use of the woman, burned
in their lust one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly.
-- Add unto these, that of Moses; Whosoever lies with a beast, shall surely
be put to death. Exodus 22.19.

Father Latimer, B. of Worcester, gave Henry the 8. a New Years gift, which was
a New Testament, and an Hand-kercher, with this posie about it: Fornicatores
and adulteros judicabit Dominus.

God judges them sundry kind of ways. 1. His judgment is on their souls which
are translated from God to the Devil, Hos. 4.11. 2. On their bodies; Fornicatio
quaesi formae necatio, 3. On their goods, Prove. 29.3. 4. On their good names:
One principal thing that the Orator cast in Catelin's dish, was, Cane pejus and
angus.
his beastly and incestuous life. 5. On their children.

Corpus, opes, animum, famam, vim, lumina, scortum, Debilitat, perdit, necat,
aufert, eripit, orbat. Long lasts not the summer-fruit of wanton love, or
rather lust; blasted most time in the blossom, and rotten before it be well
gathered.

Demosthenes went to Lais the Strumpet for a nights lodging, Laeta venire
Venus, eristi^ abire solet.
she asked 10000 Drachmes; Nay soft (says he) Nolo tanti emere poenitere.

Concupiscence is like an hot fire, and our bodies like a seething pot. Now
this pot is cooled four ways especially:

Incrementum gastromargiae initium luxuriae.
the less is the heat of lust. It is Fasting-spittle that Kills this Serpent.
If we stuff our Corpse like Cloak-bags, making our Mouths as Funnels, our
Throats Wine-pipes, and our Bellies barrels; there must follow some vent.

Quaeritur Aegistus qua re sit factus adulter? Ovid.

In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.


The Crab-fish, when as the Oyster does open, slips in a little stone, that she
cannot shut herself again, and so devours her. If the Devil find us idle and
gaping, he takes his opportunity to confound us. Let every generous spirit then
resolve with Maximinus; Quo major sum, eo magis laboro; and quo magis laboro,
eo major sum.

Amalekites, we find in Sacred history, burnt Ziglag, and took the women
captive; which when David, and the people found, they lift up their voice and
wept, until they could weep no more; 1 Samuel 30.
and after that they smote them (as the Text says) from the twilight, until
the evening of the next morn. Lust is an Amalekite, it burns our Ziglag, sets
on fire this little City, captivating our senses, and making us prisoners unto
it; But if we (with David) weep so that we can weep no more, if we cast cold
water into the pot, if our eyes be fountains of tears, and we weep day and
night; assuredly we shall pursue this cursed Amalekite, and overcome our
untamed affections, we shall smite them from the twilight of our youth, to the
evening of our old age.

Also as a shower of rain extinguisheth the force of fire, Chrysostom.
so does meditation of the Word, the fire of lust in the soul.



Ne sedeas, sed eas; Ne pereas per eas. Whereas other vices are conquered by
struggling and striving with them; the best way to subdue this vice, is to fight
with it after the manner of the Parthians, who did fight flying.

Tu fugiendo fuga, nam fuga sola fuga est. 1 Cor. 6.18.


Flee Fornication.

Simpilicity.
Pro. 1.22. How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? By which
understand such as are easily drawn into a fools Paradise. These may be called,
the best sort of bad men; These simplicians are much better than scorners, and
far beyond those fools that hate knowledge. All sinful men are not alike sinful.

Simplicitas sine plica.
having not the wit and skill to contrive any mischief or harm to others.

It comprehends, 1. Faithfulness without deceit. 2. Humility without pride. 3.
Gentleness without fierceness. 4. And uprightness without respect of persons.
Being opposed to fraud, vainglory, morosity, and partiality.

Christ was a simple man: all the treasures of wisdom were hid in him: he was
wiser than Solomon, than any Politic Achitophel, than any Matchiavel
whatsoever: yet a simple man. He would not employ his wits and wisdom about
such things as might be hurtful to any. So must all Christians be: though God
have given them never so sharp a wit, Simplic husp aes^ns Deus est, off^nditur
astu. Mant. Eclog. 7.
so searching a head, never so great wisdom, experience and learning; yet they
must not use it to the hurt of any, but to the good of all, so near as they can.

Jacob was a plain man. Genesis 25.27.
I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.
Romans 16.19.
-- In simplicity and godly sincerity. 2 Cor. 1.12.
Subtilty.
Genesis 3.1. This was a good quality, (for God made every thing good) but Satan
abused it to a bad end. 2. For sacred sagacity, a sharp wit, a deep reach, a
spirit that searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. of
this Pro. 1.4.



A number there be that have the Serpentine wisdom, and want the Dove-like
simplicity: They think they cannot be wise men, unless they be crafty and
hurtful men: (...).
they are more like the Devil than Christ. The Devil has a plaguey wit, a
subtle pate of his own; but he never does any good with it, but all the
mischief he can: So do those that are the Devils brood; they have wit enough:
but what good do they with it? Nay, what hurt? How dangerous be they in a town
or a Country?

And certainly, as a murderer desiring to wound deeply, that he may strike
deadly, will look that his weapon be sharp; Diabolus a te ornari quaerit.
so the Devil (as at first) chooses the sharpest and subtilest wits for his
instruments of mischief, that having seduced them, he may by them prevail the
more for seducement of others.

O full of all subtilty and all mischief, Acts 13.10.
thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Meekness.
Since the fall, graces are best known by their contraries.

Meekness excludes 1. Wrathful fierceness. 2. Proud stubbornness. 3.
Contentious wrangling.


It includes 1. Humility. 2. Tractableness of spirit. Or an ingenuous (not
culpable) facility.


Such a one was Moses, Numb. 12.3. So free from passions, (if Josephus may be
believed) that he knew no such thing in his own soul; he only knew the names
of such things, and saw them in others, rather than in himself.

Diogenes the Emperor taken by the Turks, being brought before the Sultan,
Turk. Hist. fol. 10.
and humbling himself in such sort as best beseemed his heavy fortune: The
Sultan presently took him up, and thus cheerfully spoke unto him! Grieve not
noble Emperor, Vt generosi and nobiles equi melius facili f^aenu reguntur, sic
natura hominum, etc.
(said he) at thy mishap, for such is the chance of war, over whelming
sometimes one, sometimes another: neither fear thou any harm; for, I will use
thee not as a Prisoner, but as an Emperor.

Fierce ruffianly spirits do not become christianity, no more than the wolves
would the lambs bosom.

It was not the shape of a bird of Prey, in which the Spirit appeared; but a
Dove.

Fell columba caret, rostro non cadit, and ungues possidet innocuos, --

Meekness is the best Christian temper, The world counts it an effeminate
softness, God counts it an ornament.

A Christians words and carriage should be like the waters of Siloe at the foot
of Zion, that ran softly. Quid pulchrius est, quam vivere optantibus cunctis?
Senec.


The more true wisdom, the more meek. Men that are but morally wise, we see are
so; much more the heavenly wise; are less angry, and more humble.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Mat. 5.5.
Perverseness.
There is Perversitas 1. Verbis. 2. Factis.


Against both which, that is an excellent prayer of Zuinglius; viz. Deum Opt.
Max. Precor, ut vias nostras dirigat: ac sicubi simus Bileami in morem,
veritati pertinaciter obluctaturi; angelum suum opponat, Epist. lib. terti^
qui machaerae suae minis hunc asinum (inscitiam and audaciam dico nostram) sic
ad maceriem affligat, ut fractum pedem, hoc est, impurum illicitumque carnis
sensum, auferamus, ne ultra blasphememus nomen Domini Dei nostri.

A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: Prove. 12.8.
but he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised. Goodness.
Referred to man, it is that unperfect agreement of all our faculties and
powers with Gods will, or integrity of heart and manners. As also that quality,
whereby men become beneficial and helpful to others, after Gods example. This
is created goodness.

Those who have hearts full of goodness, and lives full of good works, shall
not miss of a full reward. Abbat. de mend^^^o.


Vbi been est, vestigia premito; ubi male, cautus aversare.

I my self am persuaded of you, Romans 15.14.
my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness.

Ever follow that which is good, 1 These. 5.15.
both among your selves, and to all men.

Wickedness.
There are some who are called civil honest men, and many conceit that these
are good men; and not a few, that these are in a middle state between good and
evil; but the truth is, there is nothing between a godly and wicked man, no
medium of participation between these extremes.

Good and evil (in a remiss degree) may mingle in the same subject; but no man's
person is in a middle state between good and evil. Scripture sets all men in
two orders, to show this division runs through the whole world. Eccl. 2.9.

He is to be numbered among the wicked. 1. In whom sin reigns. He yielding
ready and free obedience to it, as to his natural Lord. 2. He that is a
customary sinner, or drives a trade in sin. Instead of pleading against sin,
(which a godly man does) pleading for it. And instead of making prepuration to
resist the lusts of the flesh, making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof. 3. A wicked man preserves in himself a purpose to sin, whiles he
seems to pray and protest against it; (as Aug. before his conversion.) He may
put up prayers against sin, but he puts up no desires against it. As sinful
custom is the rode of his life, so sinful purposes are the rode of his heart.
Isa. 56.12. Ezekiel. 11.21. 4. Wickedness carries fullness of consent in sin.
Olim haec meminisse juvabit.
A wicked man may have many checks at sin, and some motions to good, from his
conscience; but he has none from his will; so that as he is taken captive at
Satan's will, 2 Timothy 2.26. So also at his own will: The Devil takes him captive
when he pleases, and he is pleased to be taken captive by the Devil. 5. Where
there is wickedness in sinning, there is delight in sin. Pure delight in sin,
is impurest wickedness. To delight in sin, as sin; is inconsistent with any
degree of grace.

There is both industry, and also Art in wickedness; some are curious and
exact in shaping, (...).
polishing and setting off their sin: So the Holy Ghost intimates, Rev. 21.27.
To work an abomination or a lie; is more than to do an abomination, or to tell
a lie. It notes a person not only industrious, but also crafty; Or (as the
Prophet speaks) wise to do evil, Jer. 4.22. So that wickedness denotes not
ordinary, but great sin; for though every wicked man be a sinner, yet every
sinner is not properly a wicked man.

It Is a fearful sign of a man given over by God, to be forward, eager,
craftily and coveteously sinful; so was Judas, who having left the Lord, the
Lord left him: And if the Lord once leave us, fire shall sooner cease to fly
upward, than we shall cease to pursue sin, with greediness; and in this
pursuit shall be as little able to stay our selves, as a man running down a
steep hill, that cannot recover himself, till he come at the bottom.

It was given in answer to a godly man, who desired to know of God, why Phocas
was set up for the Emperor? because there could not be a worse man found; and
that the sins of Christians required it. Lipsius makes mention of one Tubulus
(about Tullies time) who was so desperately wicked, Hest. 7.6. Pessimus isle.
Vt ejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videretur, That his name seemed to be
not the name of a man, but of wickedness it self. (...)
Such a one was Haman, a very breathing Devil; Bipedum nequissimus, as wicked a
man as went on two legs, a Merum scaelus, a man made up of mischief.

Young serpents may be more dangerous than old ones, because not so much
feared: So many little evils be. Senec.
If only one be sick in a family, there is not so much notice taken; but if
whole families be infected with the plague, then all possible care is used. Why
knows thou not, that that flame may begin to appear in one house, that will
serve to burn down the whole City?

A wicked man is a very miserable man. His triumphing is short, but his
declining is for ever: All his good things will soon be at an end, but his
evils shall never end: His light is quickly put out, but when once it is dark
with him, he shall see the light no more.

As says the Proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked.
1 Samuel 2 4*^^
The Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness. 1 Samuel
3.^^.
They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. Job 4.8.
Diligence.
It is the spirit of action.

Erasmus says of Jerome, Minima pars vitae dabatur somno, minor cibo, nulla
^ti^.

Bernard in his studious call, whither he had retired himself, would often say to
himself, Bernard, Bernard, remember for what end thou came hither.

The Author of that useful History, The travels of the old Patriarchs, Kings
and Prophets, when he comes to write the motions of Antiochus Epiphan^s, who
was a great King, but of a most malicious spirit, against the people of God; he
observes that this Antiochus in pursuance of his bloody designs, had run more
hazzards, and taken more tedious journeys to satisfy his malice, and reach his
ambitious ends, than any of the Saints had done, upon any command or service of
God; upon which consideration, he makes this excellent conclusion, That wicked
men take more pains to go to Hell and eternal destruction, than godly men do
in the way to eternal life and salvation. Grimst. Exercitium of ex and arce^,
because it ^erives out diseases. Rust eats up the steel that is not used. Prove.
10.4.


It Is storied of the French Pesant, he is very laborious, so as he will toil
three days in a rock, that he may plant one stock of a vine, and this labor is
the cause of his wealth, and no less also of his health.

-- The hand of the diligent makes rich. Idleness.
The sloathful man wears the time out in contemplation, B. H. Idleness is
viv^ hominis ^cpultura.
he takes no less care how to spend time, than the wife how to gain by
expense. Summer is out of his favor, for nothing but long days, that make no
haste to their even; he loves to have the Sun witness of his rising, he lies
longer far more for loathnesse to dress him, than will to sleep, and after
some yawning calls for dinner undrest, and having digested it, will a little
sleep; he goes to the marketplace to meet some of his companions, and stays
with him some idle question, as how are the days lengthened? how kindly the
weather is, how forward the spring, and ends with what shall we do? When all
the people are gone from Church, he is best sleeping in his seat alone; he
enters bonds, and forfeits them by forgetting the day; necessity drives him to
every action, and what he cannot avoid, he will yet defer; when he is warned of
Jury, he had rather pay the mulct than appear; he had rather freeze than fetch
wood, and chooses rather to steal than work; he eats and prays himself asleep,
and dreams of no other torment but work. This man is a standing pool, and
cannot choose but gather corruption, he is a man in nothing but speech and
shape.

A man is said to be idle, 1. When he does nothing, is unimployed. Mr.
Greenbill, Oriosus est, (...) opus Dei (...) peratur. Opus Dei, is opus Dici.
Man is to labor both ad ruborem, and ad sudorem. Res perfect^ occupata,
alterius rei non est capax. Senec. But, va^iam semper dant o^ia mentem.
2. When he does not what he should do. 3. When he puts not forth himself to
do what he ought to do in conscience, and according to right reason. That is to
do as much as he is able to do.


The evil of idleness is great, for, 1. It Is against the end of man's creation.
2. Its a sin against the light of nature, which puts every thing upon motion.
3. It puts the world (which is Gods family) out of order. 4. It sets a man
among the dead; an idle man is both unsavory and unactive. 5. It lays a man
open to Satan and variety of temptations. 6. Idleness is the mother and nurse
of all lusts. Nihil agendo homines discunt male agere. 7. It Is against common
equity: Idle persons in the Commonwealth, are like Drones in the hive, that eat
up the honey from the laborious Bees. 8. Poverty and beggary are the issues of
it. 9. It Is a wasting of precious time, and hiding of our Talent.

Among the Athenians, Idleness was actionable at law; it was called actio
(...); and their enquiry after each man and woman was, Qua art alerent, what
trade they had to live upon.

In Marcus Aurclius days, he having occasion to send a letter two or three
days journey from the Town, he could not find one idle body in Rome City to
carry it, they followed their callings so earnestly.

Calvin said nothing was more troublesome to him, than an idle life. And when
his colleagues earnestly entreated him in his sickness, to abstain from writing
or dictating; he answered; What? Would ye have me idle when my Lord comes?

Thou wicked and sloathful servant (says Scripture.) Aliquid age ut te
diabolus inveniat occupttum. Nemo casu fit saplens. Senec.
God puts no difference betwixt an idle and an evil servant. Therefore let us
not be idle Drones, but busy Bees in the Lords work.

Very sucklings get not their food, without much tugging and tiring themselves
at the dug. Neither grace nor glory will be had with wishing.

The desire of the sloathful kills him. Prove. 21.25.
Why stand ye here all the day idle? Mat. 20.6.
Mercy.
Quasi miserum cor, Senec.
est aegritudo animi ob alienarum miseriarum speciem.

When the man that fell among thieves, lay wounded and half dead; The Priest
passed by, Luke 19.
viz. Aaron with his Ceremonies and sacrifices could not help us. And the
Levite only looked on him and passed by, viz. Moses with the law and moral
obedience could not help us: But Christ the good Samaritane, had compassion on
us, and helped us.

How? 1. Pouring in wine to wash our wounds, justifying us. 2. Pouring in oil
to supple and heal, sanctifying us.


Let this mind be in us, which was also in Christ Jesus.

Craesus taken prisoner by Cyrus, Parce utere potestate tua, ut din utares.
Senec. de ira.
and after severe punishment and restraint, upon the execution-day being set
upon the top of a faggot to suffer death, Cried forth, O Solon, Solon, vera sunt
quae dixisti, Neminem ante obitum faelicem: Which Cyrus understanding, delivers
him, saying, Et ea quoque mihi evenire possunt.

This was also a virtue for which Q. Camd. Eliz.
Elizabeth was said to be famous. Next to the holy Scripture she preferred (as
the best piece) Seneca's book of clemency.

In a word, Mercy is an excellent and divine virtue, it draws near to the
nature of God, who is the Father of mercies.

Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Mat. 5.7.
Be ye therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful. Yea, Luke 6.36.
Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies.
Col. 3.12.
Cruelty.
Crudelitas est atrocitas animi in paenis exigendis.

Cruelty has usually something to cover its deformity.

It is one of the companions of ambition and covetousness. If Ahab have a
desire to Naboths vineyard, either Naboth must part with it, or his life.

There is a manifold cruelty, 1. Mr. Marburie.
Cruelty of combination, when we make our selves strong in a faction, to oppose
and oppress all that go not our way. 2. Cruelty of the eye, when we can be
content to behold our brethrens miseries, without any compassion. 3. Cruelty of
heart, when we make our selves merry with their afflictions. 4. Cruelty of
tongue, when we insult over them, and brand them with taunts. 5. Cruelty of the
hands.


When we 1. Either persecute their persons with molestation. 2. Or touch their
liberty with unjust restraint. 3. Or rob them of their goods by cruel
direprions. 4. Or hinder the course of justice that should do them right. 5. Or
procure their death.


So that they are not all innocent of this great offense, that keep themselves
from shedding of blood: They that invade the means or maintenance of life,
that pinch the labourer in his wages, or make the hireling work for nothing, or
let their hire sleep in their custody, whilst he pineth for want of things
necessary, are all guilty of it.

Tacitus says of the Germans (out of whom our Saxons) that they were so given
to Mars, that they thought it no better than sloathful, to get that by sweat,
which they might have by blood.

It Is storied of Nero, he fell into such a sucking vain of slaughter, Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 25.
that he abstained not from his most dear and familiar friends: Yea, he
tormented with diverse kinds of death, his own mother, his brethren, his wife.

Strabo says, that the ancient Irish were so savage, that they fed upon man's
flesh. Grimst. p. 34.
Solinus adds more, that when they were victors, they rubbed their faces with
the blood of them that were slain in the fight, after they had drunk some.

Exemplum de populis habitantibus in minori Asia, circa pontum habemus, qui
crudis and humanis carnibus vescuntur, and proprios suos liberos coquunt, and
amicis inter epulas proponunt. Exemplum etiam de quodam Phalaride, qui dicitur
filium suum comedisse.

The Turks are a most barbarous people; having Christians in their hands, Turk.
Hist. fol. 756.
some they have put quick into the ground to the wast, and there for their
pleasure shot at them with arrows: others have they stripped their skins over
their ears: and others miserably empailed.

And no less famous (rather infamous) for inhumanity, are the Spaniards. Sr.
Fr. Drakes travels.
Of some they have squeezed out their brains. Others they have roasted till
their eyes dropped out. And think they show the innocent Indians great favor,
when they do not for their pleasure whip them with cords, scratch them with
thorns, and day by day drop their naked bodies with burning bacon.

Another Author adds, In India you may find more cursed prodigies than ever
the Sun beheld in any Map of misery, where the Roman Apostles did exceed Cain,
or (if possible) Judas; where they ravished and then murdered Queens, tore
infants in pieces, cast men to mastives, cut children in collops to feed dogs;
men never did the like, Devils could do no more. The Romans descended from
Edom, say the Jews, Edom had a name of blood, Mount-Seir, was their
possession, Usually Heretics are exceeding cruel, witness the Sadduces of old,
and Anabaptists of later times. Eus^b. l. c. 3.23.
the hill of blood, Acheldama their purchase, the field of blood. Our English
when they grow Romish, against the nature of our Nation, become bloody; which
is imputed to the situation of the English College in Rome, which is founded
in the ruins of bloody Neroes house. Of all the stories of Christians, of
Heathens, of all the bloody Tragedies plotted in hell, or acted under heaven;
never any so horrid as the bloody baptism of India by the Jesuits; They have
long intended to have the second part of this Tragedy to be acted here.

The courtesy that Polyphemus promised Ulysses, was, that he should be the
last that he would devour. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro.
12.10.

It was said of our K. Edward the fourth, that he had made the white rose
flourish, as long as Henry the fourth the red: if he had not made it change
color with too much blood.

Q. Tomiris having overcome Cyrus, and taken him, cut off his head, and casting
it into a boll of blood, said Satia te sanguine. Those who are the lovers of
other men's miseries, usually misery finds them out.

-- Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly mine honor be
not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will
they dug down a wall.

Cursed be their anger, for i^ was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel.

Revenge.
Some have been heard to say, Proni^^eres ad vindictam sumus quam gratiam.
Bodin.
O how sweet is revenge! What a pleasent draught is a draught of blood!
Spightful spirits hunger and thirst for the downfall and misery of those who
stand in their way; nor will any thing satisfy hatred, but the ruin of those
who are hated.

Yea, some men, though themselves be mortal, yet their wrath may seem to be
immortal: As was Hanibals against the Romans: and our Edward the first against
the Scots: Dan. Hist. fol. 201.
Adjuring his Son and Nobles, if he died, not to bury his corpse, till they had
absolutely subdued the country.

Bodinus relates a most tragical story; An Italian was at deadly feud with one
once his familiar friend, Bodin. lib. de Repub. cap. 6. page 951.
and for ten years sought occasion to satisfy his wicked revenge, but being
frustrated of his hope, pretended reconciliation, and having one time an
advantage, sets on the man, overcomes him, and is going to kill him. The
miserable men desired him to spare his life; The revengeful man said he would
do it, on condition he would renounce God, and all the benefits of his soul;
Though this was hard to the poor man, yet fear of death makes him renounce God
and Salvation, upon which that wretched malicious enemy kills him, with this
boast, Now he had satisfied his revenge, for he had not only killed his body,
but damned his soul. It is a great depravity in our natures, and surely an
affection that savoureth of hell; to comfort our selves in the sufferings of
others: But to procure the miseries of others in those extremities, wherein we
hold an hope to have no society ourselves, is methinks a strain above Lucifer,
and a project beyond the primary seduction of hell.

Revenge, Indignus Casaris ir^.
1. It is an effeminate passion; the generous mind disdaineth it, as not
daining to debase himself. These are the worst spirits that are possessed with
thoughts of revenge.

-- Quippe minuti
Semper, and infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas,
Vltio. --
Hail, Vero magni est animi quasdam injurias negligere, nec ad quorundam.
convicia habere vel aures, vel linluam. Erasm.
thunder, lightning, hurt not superior bodies, but inferior: so childish
quarrels hurt not great and high minds. 2. It is a biting passion, like a worm
it gnaweth the heart of him that is infected with it. 3. It is full of
injustice, it tormenteth the innocent. 4. The execution is not only painful,
but dangerous, he does that he wishes to be undone; the fear of justice
tormenteth him, and the care to hide him, those that love him. 5. To kill his
enemy is not revenge, for he feels not the power of his wrath, which is the
end of revenge. In true revenge the revenger takes some pleasure, and he upon
whom he is revenged, must feel the weight of his displeasure, and repent, which
he that is killed cannot do. Besides, to kill is cowardly, for though it makes
an end of the quarrel, yet it wounds the reputation. It is a trick of
precaution, not of courage; the way to proceed safely, not honorably.

A wise man will neglect injuries.
Momus in Lucian, tells Jupiter, It is in thy power whether any one shall vex or
wrong thee. One having made a long and idle discourse before Aristotle,
concluded it thus, I doubt I have been too tedious unto you (Sr. Philosopher
with my many words: In good sooth, said Aristotle, you have not been tedious to
me, for I gave no heed to any thing you said.

The manlier any man is, the milder and more merciful, as David, 2 Samuel 1.12.
And Julius Caesar, who when he had Pompey's head presented to him, wept, and
said, Non mihi placet vindicta, sed victoria, I seek not revenge, but victory.

True it is, that private revenge is utterly unlawful, unless it be in a man's
own necessary defense, where the case is so sudden, that a man cannot call in
the help of the Magistrate, but must either kill or be killed. Otherwise that
of Lactantius holds true, Non minus mali est injuriam refer quam infer.
And that of Seneca, Immane verbum est ultio, revenge is a cruel word.

I will conclude this in the words of Ambrose; O domine, Comment. in Luke l.
10. in illa verba lucae.
cur emere me jubes gladium, qui ferire me prohibes? Cur haberi precipis quem
vetas promi: nisi forte, ut sit parata defensio, non ultio; ut videar potuisse
vindicare sed noluisse.

Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: Romans
12.19.
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. Murder.
It is reported of the Bees, that aegrotante una, lamentantur emnes, when one
is sick, Homicidium est injusta homin is occisio. Ames.
they all mourn: And of sheep, that if one be faint, the rest will stand
betwixt it and the sun, till it be revived: Only man to man is most
pernicious. We know that a bird, yea a bird of prey once fed a man in the
wilderness; that a beast, Homo solus sibi inimicus.
yea a beast of fierce cruelty spared a man in his den; Whereupon says a
learned Father, Ferae parcunt, aves pasount, homines saeviunt; hence also we
may conclude with Solomon, Pro. 17.12. Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a
man, Cypr. sermon. 6.
rather than a fool in his folly.

Surely if others sins have a woe hanging at their heels, according to that of
Job, Cap. 10.15. bloody men shall have a woe with a witness. Nahum. 3.1. as
those that walk in the way of Cain, ^ude 11.

The blood of one Abel, had so wany tongues as drops; (...) Mr. Caryl.
and every drop a voice to cry for vengeance. True, neither did the blood, nor
the earth speak formally; the blood had no voice, and the ground was silent;
blood has no more voice of its own than water has, or than a fish that lives
in the water has; but the Lord speaks thus, to show that he will certainly
bring bloody sins, chiefly the sin of blood to light. The justice of God in all
ages has sent out his writ of enquiry after bloody men, and for the blood of
the innocent. Yea, God will (as it were) give a tongue to the earth, he will
make speechless creatures speak, rather than blood shall be concealed.

Blood may be concealed a long time, but blood shall not always be concealed.
Murder is a crying sin, for which God makes inquisition, and strangely brings
it to light. Wonderful are the instances how murderers have met with the hand
of revenge; some immediately from God, others from the civil sword of the
Magistrate, some from the hand of murderers like themselves, and many have done
violence to their own lives, being haunted and hunted, by the furies of their
own consciences.

It was a saying of K. James, that if God did leave him to kill a man, he would
think God did not love him.

The blood of man violently spilt, does not bring sorth hony-bees, to sting
hands and face; but the monstrous beast called revenge, which has destroyed
whole kingdoms.

The blood of a wicked man, Mr. Needlars Expos. Not.
if innocently shed, cries; If Abel had murdered Cain, Cains blood would have
cried and called upon God, for justice against Abel: But Abels blood cries
according to the worth of the person, for Abel was a Saint, etc. Psalm. 72.14.
Psalm. 116.15.

Blood-guiltiness made not only Cain restless, Clamitat, in coelum vox
sanguinis, and Sodomorum vox oppressorum: merces retenta laborum.
but how terrible also was the voice of it in Judas conscience? It did need no
tongue, no voice, no witness to accuse it, but his own; No man accused Judas,
but in case of blood, Judas must accuse himself: Mat. 27.3 The burden of it
lies so heavy on the conscience; and how strangely does the Lord bring forth
blood by the persons themselves!

The busy brood of Romes factors, are called Jesuits; but they may more fitly
be called Jehuites, Jesus was as meek as a Lamb, but Jehu was a man of blood,
so be they.

Andronicus the old Emperor of Greece, in his speech to his young Nephew,
said, Forasmuch as I (next unto God) have been the Author of thy nativity and
increase, give me my life, Turk Hist. fol. 172.
spare thy fathers head, and with violent weapon spill not that blood, from
which thou thy self have taken the fountain of life. Man truly beholds heaven
and earth, and heaven and earth behold men's actions. Wherefore make not the
heaven and the earth beholders of so wicked an outrage, as never man ever
committed. If brothers blood long ago cried out unto the Lord against Cain, how
much louder shall the fathers blood cry unto the Lord, and declare so great a
wickedness unto the earth, the sun and stars, and make it abhorred of all
the Princes of the world? Regard my miserable old age, which of it self
promises unto me shortly death. Reverence the hands, which have oftentimes
most lovingly embraced thee, yet crying in thy swathing clouts; Reverence those
lips, which have oftentimes most lovingly kissed thee, and called thee my other
soul. etc.

Charles the ninth of France, Author of the bloody Massacre of Paris, died of
exceeding bleeding. Richard the third of this Kingdom, and Q. Mary, had the
shortest raigns of any since the conquest. Absalom and Achitophel came to
tragical and unhappy ends. So did all the Primitive persecutors, according to
that, Psalm. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days.

Phidias painted the image of Minerva, with his own, that none could deface the
one, but both. So has God imprinted his own image upon man: And though (its
true) by the fall it is defaced and abolished, yet are there some relics
thereof still abiding, which God will not have destroyed.

Consider, if hatred be so damnable, what is murder? It is the destruction of
Gods image, of a member of Christ, for whom Christ died, and a Temple of the
Holy Ghost. The land is polluted by it, and cannot be expiated but by blood. If
Dives be in Hell for not saving life, how shall they escape Hell that destroy
it?

Whose sheddeth man's blood, Genesis 9.6.
by man shall his blood be shed: for in the imag^ of God made he man.

The Law is made for the lawless and disobedient -- for murderers of fathers,
1 Timothy 1.9.
and murderers of mothers.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, Psalm. 51.14.
O God.

Ingratitude.
Omne dixeris maledictum, cum ingratum hominem dixeris.

To render good for evil is divine; to render good for good, is humane; to
render evil for evil, is brutish; but to render evil for good, is devilish.
While I hold up his chin, to save him from drowning; he with his heel should
kick me under water!

Lycurgus the Lacedemonian lawgiver would make no law against such; Quod
prodigiosares esset beneficium non rependere, because it could not be imagined,
that any would be so unworthy, as not to recompense one kindness with another.
And the old Romans decreed, that such as were found guilty of this fault,
should be cast alive to the Cormorant, to be pulled in pieces and devoured.

Ingrato quod donatur, deperditur, says Seneca. And, Amare non redamentem,
Ille non dignus est dandis, qui ingratus est de datis. Speed.
est amoris impendia perdere, says Hierom: All Is lost that is laid out upon an
unthankful person; He buries benefits, as the barren earth does the seed.

He is (as once was said of the Pope) like a Mouse in a satchel, or a Snake in
ones bosom, who do but ill repay their Hostess for their lodging.

An unthankful man is a naughty man, nay, he is an ugly man: Therefore our
Savior fitly yokes them together.

-- To the unthankful, and to the evil. Luke 6 35.
Injury.
Qui nescit ferri injurias, vivere nescit. Socrates, when one gave him a box on
the e^r in the marketplace, said, Quam molestum est nescire homines, quando
prodire debeant cum gratia? What an odd thing it is, to go abroad without an
headpiece?

Pestifera vis est valere ad nocendum, says Seneca. And yet again bars
revenge: Hydrae, uno capite resecto, septem alia repullala bant. Vnde
Proverbium, Hydram seca^.
For (says he) Quemadmodum praecisae arbo^es plurimis ramis repullulant, ita
crudelitas auget inimicorum numerum tollendo; For, it engages all their
relations against us in the quarrel.

In a matter of strise (says Basil) he has the worse, that carries it. And
Aristotle himself yields, That of the twain, it is better to suffer the
greatest wrong, than to do the least.

But how many have we like the angry Be, that care not to sting another,
though it be to the loss of their own lives? Whiles we are thus busy in
breaking those darts, that men shoot from afar against us; we are oppressed by
the Devil near hand us. Nay, in thus resisting evil, we give place to the
Devil; whom if by patience and forbearance we could resist, he would fly from
us.

Not rendering evil for evil. 1 Pet. 3.9.
Innocence.
After that Bajazet and his four sons were made away, Turk. Hist. fol. 782.
at the command of Solomon the Magnificent, there remained the youngest, but
newborn, and at nurse; who was now, upon the death of his father, commanded by
his said Grandfather to be strangled also. The Eunuch sent by Solomon to have
done the deed, and loath to do it himself, took with him one of the Porters of
the Court, a desperate and otherwise an hard-hearted Ruffian, a man thought fit
to have performed any villainy: He coming into the chamber where the Child lay,
and fitting the bowstring to the Child's neck to have strangled him, the
innocent Babe smiled upon him, and lifting up it self as well as it could, with
open arms offered to have embraced the Villain about the neck and kissed him.
Which guiltless simplicity so wounded the stony-hearted man, that he was not
able to perform the intended butchery of the poor simple Child, but fell down
in a swoun, and there lay for dead. Such is the rare force of Innocence.

Yet, we must neither be Foxes, nor Asses. The Roman rule was, Ne^ fugere, n^^
soqui.
He that makes himself too much a Sheep, shall scarce escape worrying with
Dogs. Columbine simplicity does well, when it is mixed with Serpentine
subtilty. A Serpents eye (says one) in a Doves head, is an excellent ornament.

Be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Mat. 10.16.
Contentation.
Pirrhus being demanded of Cyneas, What he intended after he had won his many
great intended Victories? answered, Live merrily. To whom he replied, So he
might do already, would he but be content with his own.

It is not the great Cage, that makes the Bird sing; Nor the great Estate,
that brings inward joy, and cordial contentment. As a Bird with a little eye,
and the advantage of a wing to soar with, may see far wider than an Ox with a
greater, so the Righteous with a little estate, joined with faith and devotion,
may feel more comfort, and see more of Gods bounty, than one of vast
possessions, whose heart cannot lift it self above the earth.

But few are content with their estate: If a man have an hundred pounds, he
would have two; Vaus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit o^bis, Aestuat insoelix
angusto limine mund. Juvenal.
if two, then five; if five, then a thousand; if a thousand, then ten thousand,
etc. and so in infinitum. If a man have one house, then he would have another;
if two or three, then a whole Town; if one Town, then many, nay a whole
Country. If he be a Gentleman, he would be a Knight, a Lord, etc. Nay, if he
have one Kingdom, he must have many: If he have the whole World, he will dig
for more, as Alexander did.

The greatest thing in the least compass, (...). Isoc.
is a contented Mind in a man's body. And this only has the child of God, who
sees, that true piety has true plenty; and therefore he is never without a
well-contenting sufficiency. As a Traveller when he comes to his Inn, if he
can get a better room or lodging, he will; if not, he is content, for he
considers it is but for a night: So the Christian Pilgrim, if God send him in
a plentiful estate, he gladly makes use of it; if otherwise, he can live with a
little: and if his means be not to his mind, he can bring his mind to his
means, and live upon reversions. A little of the creature will serve turn to
carry him through his pilgrimage; in his Fathers house he knows is bread
enough; and on the hope of that he goes on as merrily, and feeds as sweetly, as
Sampsen did of his honeycomb. 1 Timothy 6 6, 8.


Godliness with contentment is great gain. Therefore having food and raiment,
let us be therewith content. Yea,

Be content with such things as ye have. Hebr. 13.5.


Ambition.
The poysonful Aconite so much desired of the Panther, is purposely hung up by
hunters, Pliny.
in vessels above their reach; whereof they are so greedy, as they never leave
leaping and straining thereat, till they burst and kill themselves. Even so,
Pride and Ambition admit neither the beams of grace to mollify the hardness,
nor the bounds of nature or reason to restrain the swelling exorbitancy thereof.

Ambition is an immoderate thirst after Honor, Latini ambitiosum vobant,
utpote modum non tenentem in ambiendis bonoribus. Steph. These. Graec.
Tertulli^n calls ambicious men Animalia gloriae and samae negotiatores.
or an excessive desire of greatness. Having Lucifer's Motto, Ero similis
Altissimo.

An ambitious man will be ever first, he never looks backward, but will be
forward: And not therewith satisfied, but still cries, Aut Caesar, aut nullus.

There are some people that sleep with their eyes always open. Such are
ambitious men, whose senses although bound up so, as they will not hear truth
told them, nor the manifest danger; yet is the eye of their imagination ever
watchful, to seize upon every advantage, that may serve to further their end:
So as they never take hours rest in the sweet sleep of Content. They sow the
seeds of discontent, and blow the coals of sedition in the hearts of rebellious
subjects.

This was the sin that lost the first Sheep: For he not being content in the
green pasture wherein God had placed him, must needs be brusing of the fruit of
the Apple Tree, which the same Lord had forbidden him to eat of; And so
striving to be as God, made him fall from what he was.

It is a sin of such force, that even Christ's Disciples strive, Luke 22.24.
in a most grievous manner, in the chamber prepared for the Passover, in
Christ's presence, and presently after they had received the Sacrament; about a
small matter, earthly Supremacy, which of them should be greatest.

It is the last vice that leaves us: Hence it is called by some, Aug. in Psalm.
7.
the heart of the old man; because it is Primum vivens, and ultimum moriens,
The first that lives, and last that dies. By others, the shirt of the soul;
because it is the last vice it puts off.

Art thou ambitious? Do thou spread thy fails, Dum petit infirmis nimium
sublimia penni^ Icarus: Icarii^ nomina fecit aquis. Ovid.
for the wind of Popular applause to breathe upon? Have thou both wing and will
to soar aloft with Icharus? Beware his fall: thy waxen wings will be dissolved.
Thus whilst thou art floating, and (Camelion-like) feedest upon the air of
thine own fancy; whilst thou art building a second Pyramides in the air, death
shall prevent thee.

Ambition has a short reign, seconded with perpetual infame: Insomuch as the
wide womb of the Earth can never afford a grave sufficient to bury its shame.

The best remedy when we find it tickle us, is to quench it in the fountain of
all gooness. Thus Paul: I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, ^
Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God which was in me.

Curiosity.
Cambyses, to decide a frivolous controversy, let the lot be by hitting his
sisters son directly through the heart with an arrow.

Antonius Piles was excellently learned, and had so subtle a wit, that in
common speech he was called Cymini sector, a divider of Cummin-seed, (...)
which is one of the least seeds.

There are a great many that trouble their heads about matters, rather to be
admired, than curiously pried into: And generally they end in this, that lusts
are the measure of their living, and vain speculations the issue of their
learning.

It is good therefore for every one manner intra metas. Bernard says, that it
is better apta than alta sapere.
They be not the highest instances, that give the surest informations; Well
expressed in Thales, that whilst he gazed upwards to the stars, fell into the
water: For if he had looked down, he might have seen the stars in the water;
but looking aloft, he could not see the water in the stars.

-- Quae te dementia coepit,
Quaerere solicit quod reperire times?
I fear me, our eyes be greater than our bellies; and that we have more
curiosity than capacity: We embrace all, but we fasten on nothing but wind.

Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; Psalm. 131.
neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me.

Surely I have behaved and quieted my self, as a child that is weaned of his
mother; my soul is even as a weaned child.

Blessing.
Benedictio 1. Divina, cujus author Deus. 2. Humana, cujus author homo.


Deus benedicit 1. Animantibus, ut crescant and multiplicentur. 2. Sabbatho ut
sanctificetur.


Homo benedicit 1. Deo, nomen ipsius celebrando. 2. Rebus, cultui illas divino
celebrando. 3. Fratribus.


Ex authoritate 1. SAcerdotali, ut pracipitur Aaroni, Number 6 23. 2. Prophetica
se^ Patriarchali, ut fecit Noah. 3. Ex charitate, ut unusquisque proxinto
fausta omnia precatur.


The blessing of the Lord it makes rich, Pro. 10.22. Romans 12.14.
and he adds no sorrow with it.

Bless them which persecute you; bless, and curse not.

Cursing.
If the Prophets cursed their enemies at any time, Gorran.
it was not livore vindictae, sed zelo justitiae; Not out of a vindictive
spirit, but by the instinct of Gods holy Spirit, and out of a zeal for Gods
glory. Austin says, that David's Cursings are rather Prophecies, showing what
shall come unto them, than any wishes of his own, as desiring that such things
should come to pass.

Cursing men are cursed men. Witness the Jews, who to this day are still great
Cursers of Christians; they shut up their daily prayers with Maledic Domine
Na^araeis! And how it comes home to them, who knows not? even wrath to the
utmost.

Epiphamins and Chrysostom falling out about Origin's writings, wished a curse
to one another; and it fell our accordingly; The one died ere he came home, and
the other was unbishoped.

Pol^n^s tells of one Thomas Linacle, Pol. in cap. 53.
an Englishman, who reading Mat. 5.44. Bless them that curse you; cried out, O
my friends, either this is very absurd, or we are no Christians.

We may not curse any (says Hierom) no not the Devil; Com. in cap. 3. Ep. ad
Titum.
though he deserves to be cursed, yet it must not go out of the Archangels
mouth. It may be some uncircumcised Goliath accustoms himself to such grievous
things; but the tongues of the children of God drop no such gall and poison,
but honey and oil, and much graciousness.

If thou say, Thou art provoked; this excuses thee not, but manifests thy
cankered nature. A (...) has fire in it; but unless it be provoked by the
Steel, it is not seen.

As the Bird taking her flight from her nest, fetches a compass, and by and by
returns thither again: So Curses come in where they go out; returning upon a
man's self, as do stones cast against a wall.

A man that takes up an Adder in his hand, or Fire to throw against his enemy,
hurts himself most; so it is with them that curse their adversaries.

I have not suffered my mouth to sin, Job 31.30.
by wishing a curse to my enemies soul. Imprecation.
Holy men of God have sometimes made use of Imprecations, Diris se devovens,
thereby to clear themselves from false imputations. The like may be done by us,
but sparingly, and not without great necessity; lest if we do it falsely or
rashly, God say Amen, and set his Fiat to it, as he has done in sundry
instances in several (...).

Mention is made in our Chronicles, of two that rotted above ground, Act. and
Mons
according to their wish: And of another hanged; which he confessed was just
upon him, for that in Carding and Dicing he had often wished himself hanged, if
it were not so and so.

In Germany, Anno 1551. Ioh. Man. lot. com. p. 192.
The Devil in a visible shape lifted up a Cursing woman into the air, and
there-hence threw her down, in the view of many people, and brake her neck.

Another brought her daughter to Luther, entreating his prayers for her, for
that she was possessed by the Devil, upon her cursing of her; For when she said
in a rage against her daughter, Involet in te Diabolus, The Devil take thee; he
took possession of her accordingly.

The same Author relates a like sad story, of a stubborn son, cursed by his
father, who wished he might never stir alive from the place he stood in; And he
stirred not for three years.

The Jews saying of Christ, His blood be on us and on our children! God said
Amen to this woeful curse, which cleaves close to them and their posterity.

As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him, As he delighted not in blessing,
so let it be far from him.

As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment; Psalm. 109.17,
18, 19.
so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him; and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually.

Violence.
Robbing is a violent taking away from any. (...)
Hence violence and ^obbery are joined together, Levit. 19.13. A^o^ 3.10.

Wicked men are said to drink the wine of violence, Pro. 4.17. that is, They
spoil others; and what they get that way, they live upon, make merry with.

There are secret Robbers, doing it by deceit and fraud; ^.
robbing while they pretend to seek for right: And so the Law may be made a
shadow to many lawless actions. He is a Robber, that takes his neighbors right
from him by pretense of Law, as well as he that takes away his purse by the
highway. Again, others rob secretly, while they seem to fell. A man may rob
with a pair of Balances or Me^ewand in his hand, as well as with a Sword or
Pistol in his hand.

And there are also open and violent Robbers, who waste, ^.
spoil and destroy all that comes near them, and ear not who sees: Such are
Warlike robbers, who bring power to do what they cannot do by justice: Those
boisterous sons of Mars, (...)
men of blood and violence, who make their will their law, and think they may
do whatsoever they have power to do. These have a will to destroy as much as
they can; but they cannot destroy as much as they will: If they could, the
whole World must fall before them, if it will not fall down unto them. And
truly, the usual effect of War is waste and spoil. (...)
It is said of the Turkish wars, that where the Grand Seignour's horse sets his
foot, no more grass will grow; he makes havoc of all.

Alexander the Great was told to his teeth, by a Pyrate taken at Sea, and
condemned by him, That he was the greatest Thief in the world: I am condemned
(said he) for robbing at Sea in a little Ship; but thou robbest at Land all the
world over, and art applauded. And what was Julius Caesar, who said, That for a
Kingdoms sake, Right might be violated? (...)
And who robbed his Country of Liberty, for the satisfying of his unlawful
desire of Greatness?

And certainly, He that has power, hopes he may oppress, and go unpunished.
Some durst not oppress, but for the shelter of an high place. More there are
who steal by reason of their abundance, than by reason of their want. What they
have, gives them ability to rob for more. These are Nimrods, G^n 10.9.
mighty (...) before the Lord; not of beasts, but of men, whose estates and
lives they sacrifice to their own lusts.

Yet there want not some to commend these, Called (...)
as there were that applauded Cain for killing his brother; and that extolled
the Sodomites, Core and his Accomplices, and Judas the Traitor. Yea, there was
one Bruno found, that wrote an Oration in commendation of the Devil, who has
given him his reward (no doubt) by this, unless he recanted that monstrous
madness.

These unjust men of violence may prosper for a while; And God suffers it to be
so, 1. That men may have opportunity to discover themselves what they are. 2.
To make them more unexcusable for being what they are. Hence such as will not
let God rest, yet God lets them rest: Though they would throw God out of
Heaven, if they could; yet he will not throw them out of the Earth, though he
can. But yet mark the issue, when we come to see the opening of Gods hand. It Is
a sad thing for men to feed upon those murdering morsels of sin, which they
must even be disgesting in hell.

We may not wrong or rob any man, either by force or fraud, directly or
indirectly.

Mr. Perkins makes mention of a good man, who being ready to starve, stole a
Lamb: And being about to eat of it, with his poor children, and (as his manner
was afore-meat) to crave a blessing, durst not do it; but fell into a great
perplexity of conscience, acknowledged his fault to the owner, and promised
restitution, if ever able to make it.

Samuel could say, 1 Samuel 12.3. Whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I
taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? It were well such
innocence could be found in men now adays: We have be, full of plundering and
spoiling one another; yea, many have been spoiled of all they had.

A poor man's livelihood is his life, (...) B^o^ victum, substantiam.
Mar. 12.44. Luke 8.43. He is in his house, as a snail in his shell; crush
that, and you kill him quite. God therefore who loves Par pari refer, to pay
oppressors home in their own coin, will have life for life, if they may escape
so, Pro. 22.23.
and not be cast to hell among those cruel ones.

Oh that these Cannibals would think of this, before the cold Grave hold their
bodies, and hot Hell hold their souls!

I shall conclude, with telling you what David says, Psalm. 140.11. Evil shall
hunt the violent man to overthrow him. That is, Certain ruin abides the
violent man; One judgment of God or other will hunt him like a wild beast, till
he be overthrown. Yea, his own violent dealings shall come upon him, and
overwhelm him.

Thou shall not steal. Exodus 2^.15. Isa. 33.1.


Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; -- When thou shall cease
to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, --

Trust not in oppression, Psalm. 62.10.
become not vain in robbery.

Usury.
Erubescit Vsura nomen, Usura dicitur, quasi usu ara, i.e. usu^ aris, and est
commodum certum quod propter usum re^ mutuatae recipitur.
sed lucrum non erubescit.

In Usury three things are considerable, 1. Lending. 2. Gaining. 3. Covenanting.


Tolend money for gain, Vsura est lucrum quod accipitur solius mutuationis
causa. Ursi^.
interposita paction^, that is Usury. It is gain taken merely for the lending
of a thing: Herein it is conceived lies the formality of it, viz. the
covenanting, agreeing, and contracting to have so much for what is lent.

Gregory Nyssen gives this character of an Usurer, comparing him to one giving
water to another in a Fever, which does him no good, but a great deal of
mischief: So he seems for the present to relieve his brother, but afterward
greatly ^^^ments him.

Another thus: An Usurer is an exacting Creditor, Qui nullum diem gratis
occidere creditori permittit. His money is to Necessity, like cold water to an
hot Ague, that for a time refreshes, but prolongeth the disease.

The Usurer follows his Debtors, as Eagles or Vultures do an Army, to prey upon
the dead corpses. Men come to him as birds to an heap of corn; they desire to
seed, but are destroyed in the ne^s. He loves no labor, but lives a sedentary
life; his Pen is his plough, Parchment his field, Ink his seed, and Time his
rain to ripen his greedy desires. This man has no excuse for hard-heartedness;
for where can he cast his eyes, that he beholds not objects of charity?

Usually he is as unwilling to part with what he has unjustly gotten, as what
he has good title unto: As is the proverb (or rather fable) of the young Kite,
that thought she had vomited up her own guts, when it was only the garbage of
some other fowl, that she had hastily swallowed, and was not able to digest.

The Usurer (says one) breeding money of money to the third and fourth
generation; proves like the Butlers box, which at length draws all the Counters
to it.

Agis the Athenian General, Plu^.
set fire upon all the Usurers books and bonds in the Marketplace; than which
fire, Agesilaus was wont to say, he never saw a fairer.

Aristotle in one page condemns the Usurer and the Dicer; Ethi^. l. 4. c. 1.
and yet some Christians blush at neither.

Many are the evasions which men have framed; amongst the rest, (...)
distinguishing biting Usury from toothless Usury. But both these are
condemned, Hzek. 18.8.13. And no man of note in all Antiquity ( Jews and
Manichees excepted) for one thousand five hundred years after Christ, has ever
undertaken the defense thereof; neither is there any ground in Scripture for
that distinction.

Indeed, whereas mention is made of biting Usury, it tells us, (...)
that Usurers are Men-eaters, Psalm. 14.4. Like Pickrels in a pond, or Sharks in
the sea, that devour the lesser fishes. These Ostriches can digest any metal,
especially Money.

I conclude, There is no footing for Usury in the Word of God: Ab hoc us^ram
e^ige quem non sit crimen occidere. Ambrose. Vel minimus f^uctus expecu^ia
p^rcipino^ potest sine Dei offensione, and proxi^^ injuria. Calv. Fanus est
animae funus.
It rather makes void three great rules which our Lord and Savior has given
us in the Gospel; Read them, and ponder them, Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.35. Heb. 13.5.

Let men therefore take heed how they meddle with Usury, seeing there is such a
cloud of witnesses against it; and not trust to a distinction of man's brain,
making biting Usury unlawful, and other Usury lawful; lest by this distinction
they get money in their coffers, and lose their souls at last. For as Alphonsus
says, Such gain is the sepulcher of the soul; and he must not sojourn in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, that puts his money to usury: And surely it is an ill
Trade, that excludes a man from Heaven.

Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
Psalm 15.1. Verse. 5. Exodus 22.25. Neher^. 5.7, 10.


-- He that puts not out his money to Usury.

If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shall not be
to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay upon him Usury.

You exact Usury every one of his brother. I pray you, let us leave off this
Usury.

Restitution.
It is necessary to the remission of sin. Things stolen must be restored; and
fraud is no better than theft.

Restituere est aliquem iterato in possessionen^ and dominium rei substituere.
Aquin.
Restitution is a constitution of a man in the right possession of the thing
again.

The wrongs whereof restitution is to be made, are bona -- 1. Animi. 2.
Corporis. 3. Famae. 4. Fortunae.


The goods of the Mind, if we have been the means of the distraction of any:
The goods of the Body, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum. Ep.
54.
if we have wounded any: The goods of Fame, if we have defamed any: And the
goods of Fortune, (as we call them;) If we have wronged any this way, let us be
careful to make restitution. Sin is not remitted (says Aug.) unless the thing
taken away be restored.

De quanto, how much is to be restored, we will not curiously dispute. At the
least simplum, the same thing, if it be possible; If not, yet something
equivalent thereunto, and according to the quantity of the wrong: If the party
have sustained much wrong, by a long detention of it, then duplum or triplum,
as the Schoolmen speak. Zacheus offers a fourfold restitution.

The person to whom restitution is to be made, Et ubi non est bares, ecclesia
baeres. De vit. Constable. lib. God hates Holocaustum ex rapina. Isa. 61.8. Mal.
1.13.
is the party himself, if he be alive; or else his heirs; And where there is
none, (says Eusebius) the Church is heir.

Sultan Selymus told his Counselor Pyrrhus, who persuaded him to bestow the
great wealth he had taken from the persian Merchants, upon some notable
Hospital, for relief of the poor; That it ought rather to be restored to the
right owners: which at his command was done accordingly.

Mr. Buroughs in his Commentary on Hosea, says; I my self know one man that
had wronged another but of five shillings, and fifty years after could not be
quiet, till he had restored it.

Father Latimer says, He that makes no restitution of goods detained, shall
cough in hell, and the Devils shall laugh at him. And he further says, that
preaching upon this subject, diverse were so wrought upon, that they presently
came in and made restitution of goods unjustly gotten, considerable sums:
Amongst whom, Mr. Bradford was struck in the heart, for one dash of a pen,
which he had made without the knowledge of his Master; and could never be
quiet, till by Latimer's advice, restitution was made; for which he did
willingly forgo all the private and certain patrimony which he had on earth.

If our Conscience tells us, we have wronged any, let us make satisfaction for
the wrong. 1. It is Gods precept, Ezekiel. 33.15. 2. They are worse than Judas,
that restore not, Mat. 27.3. 3. The thing remaining, will ruinate thee and thy
house too; as Naboth's Vineyard did Ahab.

Whose ox have I taken? 1 Samuel 12.3. Luke 19.8.
-- and I will restore it.

If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold.

If he has wronged thee, Philem. 1^.
or owes thee ought, put that on mine account; I will repay it.

Piety.
It is a kind of heavenly impression or propension in the heart and soul of a
man, which inclines, and is apt to carry it in all the motions and tendencies
of it upon God, or toward God; that is, to cause it to remember God and his
glory, in all the actings and workings thereof, and to raise, frame and order
these in a regular and due proportion thereunto. 1. God commands it in this
sense, 1 Cor. 10.31. To do a thing to Gods glory, requires, 1. That the deed be
such for the nature and kind, as is apt to yield matter or opportunity to men
to glorify God. 2. That such actions be qualified with dueness of circumstance
in time and place. 3. That a man consult with the glory of God, and steadily
inform himself, what that would have done for its exaltation. 4. That the heart
or soul, in or before the doing of it, make a secret deed of consecration, or
dedication of it to this end. 2. It is pressed by great and precious promises, 1 Timothy 4.8. With what an high hand is it lifted up by the most high, when as he
lays down both heaven and earth at the feet of it? 3. By threatenings, Psalm.
14.5, 6. 1 Pet. 4.18. 2 Pet. 1.6.3.7. All these arrows are levelled at the face
of ungodliness. 4. It Is very powerful: Many have a form, but few the true power
of godliness.


Heathens themselves, showed a veneration of their Gods, by imitating them. To
profess Christ in words, and decline him in practice, is no less than to
disclaim him, and pronounce him a Cheat. 1 John 2.6.

The goodness of Gold is not only tried by ringing, but also by the touchstone:
So the trial of Godliness and Faith is to be made not of words only, but by
action and performance of deeds. Ea est enim vera pietas, quae proponit divina
humanis, and perpetua temporalibus.

Exeat Aula qui vult esse pius, is too often verified.

Follow after Godliness. 1 Timothy 6.11. Verse 6.1 Tim. 4.8.


For, Godliness with contentment is great gain.

Yea, Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.

Impiety.
Turn a Child loose into an Apothecaries shop, or an Idiot; and that Gally-pot
which looks fairest, shall have his first hand, though full of poisonous drugs;
whereas the judicious would choose the wholsomest; being led not by sense, but
by skill: So the Impious is taken with the specious show of sinful pleasures,
at least he supposes that Gain is godliness; but the truly wise know the
danger, being fully assured, that Godliness with contentment is great ga^n.

Antiochus intemerantia vitiorum ita fascinatus, ut Judaeos cogere caepit,
Joseph. de bello Iud.
ut abrogato more patrio, nec infantes suos circumciderent, porcosque super
aram immolarent, quibus omnes quidem adversabantur, optimus vero quisquis
propterea trucidabatur.

The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, Romans 1.18.^
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Sanctity.
It is an honorable impression, property or quality, in the rational nature or
being, which disposes the subject to an absolute and utter separation and
abhorrency in affection, from whatsoever is sinful, or such: And such ways and
actions which proceed from such a principle as this, may be called holy.

Some do difference it from Godliness thus: Holiness is as before described;
but Godliness is a disposition which inclines the person in whose soul it
takes place, to act for God, and to make the advancement of his glory, the
supreme end of their ways and actions. Holiness may be compared to the luster
or brightness in gold; Godliness, to the weightiness, or that propension in it,
which in the motion of it carries it toward the center. Holiness respects the
nature and quality of the action, and engages to a serious and zealous
rectitude in these: Godliness respects the end of the action, and carries the
agent in his intentions herein upon God.

Besides, they are different in their nature, in that Holiness is ascribed to
God, (...).
but never Godliness: He is often said to be holy, never godly. And the holy
Apostle exhorts to these, as to two several graces, 2 Pet. 3.11. Yet they are
never divided in their subject: For the holy man is stirred up of God, to make
God and his glory the sovereign end of all his ways, which is Godliness.

To promote Holiness in the world, God uses various engines, viz. Precepts or
commands, Lev. 11.44, 45.

Pet. 1.17. 3. God has made many great and precious promises unto it, wherein
he stands engaged to the sons and daughters of men, 2 Cor. 7.1. 4. God is
unable to bear the world in an aversness from holiness, Heb. 1.14. 5. The
beauty and glory of it; hence often called by that name, 2 Cor. 3.18. Ephesians.
5.27. 6. The peace it brings. 7. And joy it begets.



-- What manner of persons ought we to be, 2 Pet. 3.11.
in all holy conversation and godliness? Civility.
As there are some things that glister, but are not true Gold; so some things
shining, which are not true Grace: Civility and Morality are far from true
Sanctity. Yet herein it is not only possible, but easy to mistake: Learn
therefore to difference them.

David, when he prayed, Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Sermon. 1. de Sp. ^.
To which Bernard says excellently, Hanc sollicitudinem non facit nisi
Spiritus Sanctus, qui ne minimam paleam intra cordis quod possidet habitaculum
patiatur residere.

David, and the returning Prodigal, looked upon their sins, as against and
before God. Psalm. 51.4. Luke 15.21.



Tit. 2.14.

The soul has her senses, as well as the body; and these must be exercised,
Heb. 5.14. A Bristol-Stone looks like a Diamond. We had need to try the things
that differ, that we be not cheated, and so undone; as many a man is by
purchasing a counterfeit commodity at an unreasonable rate.

This I pray, Phil. 1.9, 10.
that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment.

That ye may approve things that are excellent, --

Honesty.
By it generally all kind of duties are signified, which men are mutually to
practice one toward another, without doing any uncomely or wicked thing.

An honest man had rather complain, than offend; and hates sin more for the
indignity of it, than the danger: He has but one heart, and that lies always
open: All his dealings are square and above board; he bewrays the fault of what
he sells, and restores the owner gain of a false reckoning: He esteems a Bribe
venomous, and only to be gilded over with the color of a Gratuity. When his
name is called in question, his Innocence bears him out with courage: His
Conscience overruleth his Providence. Finally, he hates falsehood worse than
death; He is a faithful client of Truth; No man's enemy, and it is a question
whether more another friend or his own.

But contrariwise, too many are like the Dragons of Armenia, that have cold
bodies, and yet cast fire out of their mouths: Like the Seafish which gapes as
if she would swallow up the Ocean, but being ripped up, and her entrails opened;
there is no water found in her belly. Christians in show; Devils indeed.

-- In all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2.
Liberty.
Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, necessitate infallibilitatis and non
coactionis: Zanar. Metaph.
Deus efficaciter in homine libero operatur, sed tantum abest quod hac
efficatia tollat libertatem, quod magis eam ponit; voluntas non potest cogi,
servata sua natura; Quia e^si Deus potest cogere voluntatem meam ut lucrem
poenas meorum delictorum, tamen hoc non esset ex vi meae voluntatis, nec ex
coactione intrinsica libera, sed ex violentia intrinsic^ impellentis: Deus
autem agere solet per concursum and influxum naturam agentem modificantem, and
ideo ei non infert violentiam.

Libere operari dicitur dupliciter: 1. Quoad electionem; and sic est libera,
quia potest eligere and non eligere. 2. Quoad executionem; and sic potest
impedire ab extrinsico per multa impedimenta; Quod probatur locis multis
Scripturae, Cor hominis disponat viam suam, sed Domini est dirigere gressus
ejus.


In homine reperitur triplex libertas, 1. Prima dicitur libertas a culpa, quia
in liberate, natura est non peccare. 2. A poena, quia possumus evadere
angustias and mala quibus premimur. 3. A coactione in electione, quia possumus
libere eligere.


Duas priores libertates per peccatum primi parentis amisimus, si stemus in
puris naturalibus, solum tertia libertas remanet. Bern. de great. and lib.
arbitr.

Liberty (though but bodily) is such an inestimable good thing, that the
Rabbis say, If the Heavens were parchment, and the Sea ink, it would not serve
to write down the praises of it.

Eutychides drew his Gally near where the Persians had entrenched themselves,
Sir W. R.
and spoke to the Ionians (a people camped amongst them more for fear than
favor) and bid them remember liberty: The like did Themistocles to the Eubaans,
which much prevail^d to make them either dissert or mutiny.

Christian liberty consists in -- Deliverance from evil, in respect of the
Law's 1. Breach; for, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. He was made a curse, to deliver us from the curse. 2. Bond, which
obliges us in our own persons to very perfect righteousness; to attain
everlasting salvation, Non ^stis sub lege, sed sub gratia.
according to the tenor of the Law, Do this and live. But now we may (with the
Publican and Prodigal) condemn our selves, and appeal from the bar of Gods
justice, to the Court of his mercy.


1. Creator, having free access to God, in the blood of Jesus: Christ has an
easy yoke, the service of God is not a bondage, but a freedom. 2. Creatures,
in that all things are pure to the pure: For the dominion of the creatures lost
by Adam, was restored again by Christ. All are yours, you Christ's, and Christ
God's.


In maxim^ liberate, minima licentia. Therefore let us not be worse, because
we should be better.

Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5.1, 13.
and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage.

For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.

Scandal.
Scandalum est rei non bonae sed mal^ exemplum, Tertul. Aquin.
adificans ad delictum.

Est dictum aut factum, minus rectum, prabens occasionem ruinae.

A Scandal or Offense properly, Scandalum est quo quis impellitar in ruinam and
evertitur. Cameron.
is a stone or block, or rub in the way, whereat a man stumbles, and either
hinders or hurts himself. In borrowed sense, it is any offense, cause or
occasion, given or taken, whereby a man hurts or hinders himself or others,
in matter of Religion and Salvation, whether by word or deed.

There is Scandalum Datum. Acceptum.


1. Offense is given, By wicked and false Doctrine, corrupt and false Opinions,
etc. Thus were the Sorcerers a slumbling-block to Pharaoh; and the false
Prophets to Ahab. Yea, and good men are apt by untryed counsels to give
offense, as Peter to Christ, Mat. 16.23.

2. By wicked and bad example of life. So were Eli's sons scandalous. And thus
good men by improvidence may give great offense; as David by his soul sins made
the enemies to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14.

3. By discouraging with threats, reproaches or oppositions, the good way of
God. Thus Saul wasted the Church.

1. Offense is taken, sometimes from evil things; as when men provoke
themselves to liberty in sin, by examples of good men in the Scripture; as
Noah, David, Peter, etc. Whereas these should rather put us upon watchfulness
and fear.

2. Sometimes from good things; Bonares neminem scandaliza^ nisi malam mentem.
Tertul.
Even the best things, a man may turn to his bane. And thus was the word out of
Christ's own mouth, to the Jews and Pharisees, Mat. 15.12. Joh. 6.60. Nay, unto
some Christ himself is a rock of offense, and a stone to stumble at, 1 Pet. 2.8.

3. Sometimes men take offense ungiven, from the inevitable occurrences of Gods
providence, all which he turns to the good of his Church: And thus many cast
themselves back by the Heresies in the Church, by the dissentions in opinions,
by persecution and oppression of the ungodly, by the paucity and contempt of
such as cleave unto Christ, by the prosperity of wicked men, by the use or not
using Christian liberty.

Sicut ubicunque fuerit triticum, necesse est ut inveniatur illic and zizania:
sic ubicunque fuerit bonum Dei, illic and erit scandalum inimici. Chrysostom. in
Mat. 6 Hom. 33.

Sicut necesse est ignem calere, and nivem frigere; ita est necesse ut
iniquitas mundi erroribus plena, scandala pariat, etc. Hieron. in Mat. 18.7.
What is there spoken is Necessitate consequentiae; because of the wickedness of
men, it will certainly be so: And God justly permits the same for causes to
him best known. But yet by what follows, it appears, that Gods permission
neither forces man's will, nor excuses any evil act.

Peccare non tantum in se perditionis habet, Hom. 25. in Epist. ad Romans
quantum quod reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur, (says Chrysostom:) To sin, has
not so much perdition in it, as to induce others to sin.

To show in the glass of the Word, the hatefulness of this evil. To give
offense, or take it, 1. It Is against the rule of Christian charity in a most
high kind. The former wounds thy brother, the latter thy self; not in body, but
in soul and conscience. 2. Thou sinnest against Christ, 1. Cor. 8.12. It is not
only to destroy a member, but to reach at the head; so strait is the union
betwixt Christ and his members, Mat. 25.45. Nay, it is an high sin against the
blood of Christ, and virtue of his death, Romans 14.15. 3. A sin it is, that
pulls most severe woes upon the sinner. The Serpent was more punished than Eve;
Eve than Adam; Jesabel than Ahab; and Jeroboam than Israel.


Add, what a dreadful curse also it is, to be given up to admit strong
delusions, and to be carried away against the care of a man's own salvation, by
any occasion whatsoever. A plague inflicted on the limbs of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. -- But especially if they gather offense from that which
should be the occasion of their holiness and happiness, as Christ and his Word.

Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 10.32.
nor to the Church of God. Constancy.
(...). That which is but almost done, is not done; says Basil. Et non
quaruntur in Christianis initia, sed finis, says Hierom.

Temporary flashings, are but like Conduits running with wine at a Coronation:
Or like a Land-flood, that seems to be a great Sea, but comes to nothing.

Tutius recurrere quam male ourrere, was an Emperors symbol; Better run back,
than run amiss. But to run well till a man sweats, and then to sit down and
take cold, may cause a consumption.

It was excellently resolved by a Martyr, The Heavens shall sooner fall, than I
will deny my dear Lord. And another, Though ye may pluck my heart out of my
bowels, yet shall you never pluck the truth out of my heart.

Hierom of Prague said, Make the fire in my sight; for had I feared it, I had
never come hither. Castalia Rupea said, You may throw my body from this steep
hill, yet will my soul mount upward again: Your blasphemies more offend my
soul, than your torments do my body. Fabrianus said, That every drop of his
blood should preach Christ, and set fo^th his praise.

Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury said, Act. and ^on.
Forasmuch as my hand offended, in writing contrary to the heart, my hand shall
be punished therefore; for may I come to the fire, it shall first be burned.
Which accordingly he did, and held his right hand so steadfast and unmovable
(saving that once with it he wiped his face) that all men might see his hand
burned, before it touched his body.

It is the Evening that crowns the Day; and the last Act that commends the
Scene.

Be thou faithful unto death, Apoc. 2.10.
and I will give thee a crown of life. Inconstancy.
The unconstant man treads upon a moving earth, and keeps no place; He has
not patience to consult with reason, but determines merely upon fancy. No man
so hot in the pursuit of what he likes; no man sooner weary. He is fiery in
his passions; his Heart is the Inn of all good Motions, wherein if they lodge
for a night, it is well; by morning they are gone; and if they come again, he
entertains them as guests, not as friends. He is good to make an Enemy of; ill
to make a Friend.

In an unconstant man, Senec. lib. de Tranquil.
there is first Nusquam residentis animi voluntatio, uncertain rollings of
spirit; and then vita pendens, a doubtful and suspensive life; For our actions
do often bear the image and resemblance of our thoughts.

A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. Jam. 1.8. (...).
Perseverance.
God's elect child cannot fall finally:

Adam without sin resisted not the Principalities, etc. that opposed him; how
much less we, that are burdened with a body of sin?



A son (says Christ) abides in the house for ever. Aug.
He that makes men good, makes men to persevere in goodness. Gods grace in his
children, is winning infallibly, holding inseparably, and leading indeclinably.
Dr. Field.
Perseverance in good, begins not in the will, but in Gods protecting grace,
that upholds the will from desisting: Hence to every new work, the will needs a
new grace; as Organs give sound no longer, than while the bellows are blowing
them.



nor be kept. But the Scripture says, we are kept from falling, because we are
grounded on the Rock; and therefore the Rock does keep us, even from falling
from the Rock: faith a certain Author, in his Ground of Arminianism, Natural
and Politic.

We should be like the Sun till Noon, ever rising: But there be many like
Hezekiah's Sun, that go back many degrees; whose beginnings are like Nero's
five first years, full of hope and peace; Or like the first month of a new
servant; Or like to the four Ages, first golden, then silver, brazen, iron; Or
to Nebuchadnezzars image, begin gloriously, but end basely. Look to your
selves; this is a fearful sight, a fearful condition. Can he be ever rich, that
grows every day poorer? Can he ever reach the goal, that goes every day a step
backward from it? Alas! how then shall he ever reach the goal of Glory, that
goes every day a step backward in Grace?

Successivorum non s^mul est esse and perfectio, says Aquinas; which accords
to that of Tertullian, Perfectio ordine posthumat. But, Multorum est incipere,
finire paucorum: The Galatians began well, so do many; but Paul finished his
course, so do few. Like the Diurnal-river in Peru, so called, because it
falls with a mighty current in the day, but in the night is dry, because it
is not fed with a Spring, but caused merely by the melting of the Snow, which
lies on the mountains thereabouts.

De Origin scribit Erasmus, in vita ejus, p. 1. Animum ejus plusquam
adamantinum fuisse (inde Adamantius dictus) quem nec vitae austeritas, nec
perpetui labores, nec dura pauperta^, nec aemulorum improbitas, nec
suppliciorum terror, nec ulla mortis facies, a sancto instituto vel tantillum
dimovere potuit.

Antiochus mustering all his Army, in the presence of Hannibal, much of their
furniture being of glittering gold; asked him, If all this were not enough for
the Romans? meaning to overcome them: Hannibal answered, Enough, were they the
most covetous men in the world; meaning to animate good soldiers. Certainly,
Per finalem perseverantiam pertingitur ad praemium; Innocent. 3. l. 2. de sacr.
Altar. Mist. c. 41. Luke 9.62.
qui perseveraverit usque ad finem, hic salvus erit.

No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God.

He that endures to the end, shall be saved. Mat. 10.22. Gal. 6.9.


Therefore let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap,
if we faint not.

Apostasy.
The just man falls seven times a day, but he rises again: Ille propri^ est
a^ostata qui fidem veram antea professus, ab ea in totum recedit. Apostata idem
sonat quod desertor and transfaga.
If a man fall on the bridge, he may rise again; if he fall besides it, he is
drowned.

All falling after knowledge, is not the unpardonable sin: Noah fell, Lot,
David, Solomon, etc. It is not (...), but (...); The Elect cannot sin against
the Holy Ghost. They that so sin, must fall, 1. Toti: The Elect fall but in
particular, either in their understanding or in their will: They that commit
this sin, fall wholly, in their understanding and will too: They obscure the
light which they have received, choke the good motions that were in them, and
with their whole will, might and main, run against the truth they professed. 2.
A toto, from all the former gifts; not from some one part of the Celestial
doctrine and calling, but from the whole doctrine concerning salvation, Capit
aresce^e, sed non exar^it; mota fu^t, sed non amota; concu^a, sed non excussa
aut extincta. Tertul.
maliciously resisting it. A man may fall on his knees, yet not on the whole
body: So a man may fall from some one fundamental point, though not from the
whole body of the heavenly calling. 3. In totum, wholly and finally, without
recovery. These fall and never rise again, because God denies them his hand.


But Gods hand is still under his, and his goodness lower than they can fall.
His supporting grace preserves them from utter r^^idivation; his Almighty
power from utter destruction.

There is an invisible hand of Omnipotency that strikes in for his own; Qu^m
^^it non (...). Vatab. in Psalm. 37.24. Con^eritur annulus ^su. Cowper Per
paucos invenies qui ^edeant ad gradum pristinum. Bern. Greg. Bpist. Heb. 3.12.
they can never fall below the supporting hand of God, which will help them up
again.

A Scottish Divine said, he found the Zeal of his People, so by little and
little fall away; that his last conflict was not with the Profane, but
justiciaries, and such as were unrebukeable in their lives.

To escape the pollutions of the world, and be again entangled therein and
overcome; is but a taking of Satan's chain from the leg, and ^ying it to the
neck.

Minoris excessus est veritatem non cognoscere, quam in eadem non cognita
manner. Aliudque est quod ab errante committitur, aliud quod per scientiam
perpetratur.

Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. Good Works.
De bonis operibus.
Faith only justisieth, Fides sola est quae justificat, fides tamen quae
justificat, non est sola. Calv. Bern.
but not faith alone. It is the eye only that sees, and no other member
besides, and yet the eye alone without the head, or separated from the head,
sees not at all: So faith only justifies us in the sight of God: but that
faith which does thus justify us, is not alone. Frustra sibi de sola fide
blanditur, qui bonis operibus non ornatur.

We must have oil in our lamps always; As under the law, they were to bring
pure oyl-olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always; So
should we shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may glorify God.
So said Gregory, Epist. ad The ^d.
Justitiam quam mente geretis oportet coram hominibus luce operum demonstretis.

Nihil prodest verbis proferre virt^tem, Cyprian,
and factis destr^ere veritatem. Turks and Pagans who plainly deny Christ, do
not derogate so much from the glory of Christ, as do profane professors of his
name. Where the tongue professes Christ, and thy heart is given to impiety,
this is not professio sed abnegatio Christi. Ille vero est beatus qui recte
credit, Bern.
and recte credendo been vivit, and been vivendo fidem rect^m custodit.

Sicut corporis vitam ex motu dignossimus, ita ^idei vitam ex bonis operibus.
True it is, all fields are not alike fruitful; But a naked profession without
the power of godliness, will help thee no more, than change of garment helped
wicked Ahab in the campany of good Jehosaphat; for through it the arrow of Gods
vengeance pierced him, among the thousands of Israel.

Efficatius est vitae quam lingu^^testimonium. Ha^e^t and opera suam linguam.
Good works are witnesses of the saving and renewing power of Christ; they are
testimonies of our being in Christ; though not meritorious, necessary they are;
not for which eternal life should be conferred; yet by which eternal life must
be obtained.

This is a faithful saying, Tit. 3.8.
and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works: these things are good
and profitable unto men.

Obedience.
Quod non lego non credo. Triplex Preceptum Ludolphus. Helvetius.

1. Cautelae 2. Probationis, 3. Instructionis,
Others
1. Obligationis, 2. Tentationis, 3. Instructionis.


Let Ministers have a care of negligence; Gods gifts groan under our disuse or
misuse; and God hearing gives them the wings of an Eagle; so that such may say
as once Zedekiah did, when went the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee? God
dries up the arm, and darkens the eye of idle and Idol-shepherds. And let
every Christian be careful, for the careless neglect of the Gospel shall pull
damnation on us. Say we rather with Samuel, speak Lord, for thy servant
hears. Or with the Dutch Divine, Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and
submittemus illi, Sexcenta si nobis essent colla. Let the Lord utter his mind,
and he shall have ready obedience, whatever come of it.

What God has joined together, let not us put a sunder: the most of us with
Malchus have but one ear to hear the promise, but not the precept of the
Gospel; Mr. Hardy.
we like well to gather the Rose, and suck the honey of a promise, but the
condition we hate as the pricles and sting; we would gladly have the Privilege
assured, and yet we abhor the duty required; but be not deceived, if we will
have the one, we must do the other; God will not fulfill his part, unless we
perform ours; and therefore it is in vain to expect an accomplishment of his
promise, but on his own terms* In fine, mercy is the spring from whence the
promise flows, but duty is the channel in which it runs down to us.

Mine care have thou pierced, says the Psalmist; but the Apostle has it thus,
Psalm. 40.6. with Hebr. 10.5.
A body have thou fitted me: Christ's obedience began at his care, but his whole
body was obedient, when he offered himself upon the cross.

Hearing is good, but to obey that which we hear is better. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but be that does
the will of my Father, which is in heaven. Christ shall come from heaven, to
render vengeance to them that obey not the Gospel. I was not disobedient (says
Paul) to the heavenly vision. The ancient Israelites were banished out of Gods
rest, because they obeyed not his voice. Let us by their example learn to obey
God, that we be not excluded out of his everlasting rest.

Our Savior is the Author of salvation, not to all that talk of him, etc. But
as a Physician is the cause of health, to those patients that will follow his
directions; so Christ is the Author of salvation unto all those that obey him.

Let us then examine our obedience. Christ wills us to avoid sins, that cause
his Gospel to be ill spoken of: By good works to adorn it, to stop the mouths
of adversaries, etc. Do we so? does not drunkenness, covetousness, pride,
malice, and uncleanness abound? As they said and promised to Joshua, so let us
to Christ, Voluntatem e^ promptitudinem nihil aliud exigit deu^. Chrysostom. Hom.
ult. in Mat.
Whatsoever thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest u^,
we will go. Does Christ command us to abandon covetousness? which is idolatry
and the root of all evil? then let us not be glewed to the world. Does he
forbid us drunkenness, malice, pride, etc. Let us have no fellowship with those
unfruitful morks of darkness, but rather reprove them; let us forsake father
and mother, etc. and follow him; for without obedience there is no salvation.

1. And let us obey, Fully, the young man in the Gospel, most proudly vaunted,
that he had kept all the commandments from his youth; let us endeavor that we
may say so in truth, and sincere heart: And as Zachary and Elizabeth, let us
walk in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. 2.
Cheerfully, God loves a cheerful giver. I was glad (says the Psalmist) when
they said, let us go up into the house of the Lord. 3. Constantly, A runner
has not the prize, till he come to the Goal. A traveller has not his money,
till he come to his journey's end. Here we are as children, growing higher and
higher, in knowledge, faith, love, obedience, etc. Let us hold out to the end,
running constantly in the way of obedience, Triplex obedient^^ 1 Vo^i. 2.
Co^formitat^^. 3 Resignationis.
that we may have eternal salvation.
Obedience is the Touchstone of Faith. As the tree is known by the fruits, so
Faith by obedience.

We shoul do by Christ and his Word, as some flowers by the sun, open and shut
with it.

Behold, 1 Samuel 15.22.
to obey is better than sacrifice. Action.
As the life of things stands in goodness: So the life of goodness in action.
The chiefest goods are most active, the best good a mere act.

Religion as it is communicative like light, so it is active like fire. Those
who rest either in hearing, or contemplation alone; put Paralogisms, that is,
tricks and fallacies (Sophister-like) upon themselves, and upon their own
souls, and will prove egregious fools in the end.

Therefore it is most safe to follow David's example, Not only to prick up our
ears, but also to put our hands unto Gods commandments.

My hands will I lift up unto thy Commandments, Psalm. 119 48.
which I have loved. Civil Justice.
Delphidio Oratori vehementer quendam accusanti, Pet. Man^. in vit. Julian.
and pre argumentorum (...) tandem exclamanti; Ecquis (Florentissime Caesar)
volens esse paterit usquam, (...) ^^gare sufficerit? Respondet Julianus, Ecquis
innocens esse poterit, si accusasse sufficient?

Justitia 1. Commutativa, 2. Distributiva.


Sicut justum est, ut in delinquentes digna debeat vindista procedere; it^
iniquum est, Greg. Epist. l. 2^
quibusdam afflictionibus quempiam irrationabilitur subjacere.

Excellent was the Epistle of Adrian the Emperor, to Minutius Funda^^^, the
Proconsul of Asia, E^scb. l. 2. c. 9.
in the behalf of the Christians. If your Provincial can prove ought against
the Christians, whereof they charge them, and justify it before the bar; let
them proceed on, and not appeach them only for the name, with making outcries
against them. For it is very expedient, that if any be disposed to accuse, the
accusation be thoroughly known of you, and sifted. Therefore if any accuse the
Christians, that they transgress the laws, see that you judge and punish
according to the quality of the offense. But in plain words, if any upon spite,
or malice, in way of cavillation complain against them; see you chastise him
for his malice, and punish him with revengement.

Par tibi culpa fuit, Par tibi paena subit.
Nec culpa est levior, nec tibi paena minor.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34.
but sin is a reproach to any people. Alms.
The sun, that fountain of light and heat, who continually sends his light and
beams upon the earth, the earth net being able to return them to heaven again
in Oblique line, reflects them to us, and the other creatures: In like manner
we, whosoever we are, being heated by the sunshine of the Sun of righteousness
(being we are not able to reflect them upon him) must communicate them to our
brethren about us.

Our A^ms should come up before God, as the smoke of the incense from the
censer of the Angel, or the golden Altar before the Throne.

Man that came naked out of the womb of the earth, was even so rich, that all
things were his; Heaven was his roof or Canopie, bespangled with goodly stars
of all magnitudes; Earth his floor; The sea his fish pond; The Sun and Moon
his torches, and all creatures his vassalls: And if he lost the fullness of his
Lordship by being a slave to sin, yet we have Dominium gratificium, Gerson^
Every son of Abraham is heir of the world. Freely we having received, freely
we ought to give.

Beneficium qui dedit taceat, narret qui accipit; haec s^ilicet inter duos
beneficii lex est; alter statim oblivisei debet dati, alter accepti nunquam. He
that does a good turn, must instantly forget it, but he that receives it, must
always remember.

Charity best appears, when we can say, Quantum ex quantillo. Lumen de suo
lumine, etc. Ennius.
Yet still this rule is to be observed, Omni petenti, not omnia petenti. I will
so light another man's candle, as I will not put out my own.

Ne dormiat in the sauris ^uis quod pauperi prodesse potest. Cypr.


Munus bonum est Eleemosyna, omnibus qui faciunt eam coram summo deo. Idem.

Qui pauperi Eleemosynam dat, deo suavitatis odorem sacrificat.

Mr. Fox being asked, if he remembered a poor man he used to relieve? answered,
The Christian Primitives were no Possessives, they sold their possessions and
goods, and parted to every man that stood in need. Non enim ^ta divites, says
Chrysoft. none were so rich, etc. Bis dat qui cito dat.
I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such.

Liberality implies liberty; yet many there are, like spunges, suck up water a
pace, but they let not fall a drop though they he full, till they be squeezed.
They part with their Penny as with blood out of their hearts, Citius aquam ex
punice, clavam ex manu Herculis extorqueas.

But when a man gives an alms, being drawn to it with many and violent
entreaties, he loses the grace of his gift both with God and man.

Nemo libentur debet quod non accepit, sed expressit. Among men he accounts not
himself a debtor, who has not freely received, but wrung out a penny from a
rich man. That which is extorted from a man, he properly gives not: Necessity
in this kind and liberty cannot well stand together.

Pliny writes, that it was observed among the Romans, Senec. R^nitentem and
trabentem se ab aris.
that never any good came to a man by offering a beast in sacrifice, that
violently drew back from the Altar, and could not be brought to it, but with
much force: And most certain it is, that God esteems of no offering of ours,
which is not as free as liberal.

Give Alms of such things as you have. Luke 11.41. Heb. 13.16.


To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased.

He that shows mercy, Romans 12.18. (...).
with cheerfulness.

Hospitality.
Nihil interest habere estium apertum, vultum clausum: Cicero.
It is nothing worth to admit man with an open door, and to receive them with a
shut and reserved countenance. Says the Orator.

Hospitality is an excellent duty, and we have many spurs to prick us to it. 1.
God requires it. 2. We have many examples of it. 3. We our selves may be
strangers, therefore do as we would be done to.


In it these things are required, that it be done.

1. Frequentur, one swallow makes not a spring. It was the continual practice
of Lot and Abraham, as may appear by their behavior. 2. ^eleriter, we must not
tarry till strangers offer themselves; we must pull them in, as Abraham and
Lot; we must constrain them, as Lydia did Paul and Silas. 3. Hilaritur, without
grudging, we must not repine at it, speak hardly of them when they be gone. 4.
Humiliter, after a meek manner, as if we were rather beholden to them, than
they to us. 5. Abundantur, according to that ability wherewith God has blessed
us. 6. Perseverantur, be not weary of well doing.
But alas! most men are too much wedded to the world: Where are our Abraham's to
entertain Gods messengers? Our Lots to compel his Ministers to come in? but
many a rich glutton to bar the door, and deny the very fragments of his table.
The Prophet Elias, lacks his host of Sarepta; the Prophet Elisha his hostess
the Shunamite; Paul cannot find the Purpurisse, nor Peter the Tanner; Job we
find not; Captain Cornelius is a black swan in this generation; No Philip to
feast the poor, nor Martha to give the courteous entertainment; nor Mary to
pour ointment on their heads; Christ is a beggar in his membe^s.
Lazarus lies still at the door, and cannot by long craving and crying obtain
some crummes, his pillow is the Pavement stones, the rich man's horses chew and
spew upon gold and silver, and his Mules go under rich velvet; Dogs are deer,
and feed more daintily; Foolish Nabal, who like Sodom and Gomorrah, was full of
bread, yet he denies distressed David of the superfluity of his house: Yea,
they that make a great show of Christianity, are ready to say with that very
churl, shall I take my bread and my water, and my flesh, and give it unto men,
whom I know not whence they be?

Habet semper unde det, Aug.
cui plenum est pectus charitatis. Coronat Deus voluntatem, ubi non invenit
facultatem. Idem. Given to hospitality. 1 Timothy 3.2. (...).
Coaction.
It is a received Axiom: Quod ex necessitate bonum est, non est bonum; that
which is good of necessity, is not good: yet it is to be understood de
necessitate coacta, of a coacted necessity, not of a voluntary.

God is necessarily good: yet willingly good. Death comes necessarily upon all,
yet some die willingly. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: But the
good which is done upon a constrained necessity, loses the name of good:
Patience perforce is no patience.

A willing mind in a good action is all in all. If Solomon had not willingly
built the Temple, it had not been pleasing to God: If the Centurion had not
willingly set up the Synagogue, God would not have respected it: If the woman
of Shunem had not willingly entertained the Prophet, it had been no good work
in the sight of God: If Dorcas had not made the coats willingly, they had not
been acceptable unto God.

-- Not by constraint, 1 Pet. 5.2.
but willingly. Beginning or Original.
Dimidium facti qui been Caepit habet
First actions make deepest impressions either of fear or courage.

Great lakes are made from small rivers. Great matters from small beginnings.

Small matters (says a Divine) art not to be neglected, Mr. M^nt^n.
in nature, Art, Religion or Providence. In nature matters of moment grow up
from small beginnings. Nature loves to have her cause and seed of every thing
small. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Thin exhalations end in great
showers. Small breaches in a Sea bank let in great inundations.

We must therefore not consider matters in their beginning only, but progress
and ultimate issue. A little sin does a great deal of mischief, and a little
grace is of great efficacy. Penes R^ges est infer bellum, penes antem Deum
terminare.
Contention at first is but as a spark, but afterward it being fomented and
blown up by unsober spirits, puts whole Kingdoms into combustion. Heresy at
first is inconsiderable, but it creeps like a Gangrene, from one place to
another, till it have destroyed the whole body. Men begin to quarrel one with
another about trifles, and God infers great mutations and changes of States
and Kingdoms.

Learn we then not to neglect evils that are small in their rise and original.
Resist sins betimes, give no place to Satan, Principiis ^bsta.
we know not the issue of his tyranny and encroachment. And learn we also not
to despise the day of small things, the low beginning of grace, Providence and
deliverance. God uses to go on when he has begun a good work.

-- Behold, Jam. 3.5.
how great a matter a little fire kindles. Progress in Sanctification.
Non progredi est regredi. The cessasion or sleep of grace, makes such a
confusion in the whole man, as Christ sleeping in the ship, did to it.

Christians (like waters of the Sanctuary) should rise higher and higher. As
the morning Sun, they should shine more and more unto the perfect day.

The blessing on man in the first creation, was, increase and multiply: in the
second, grow in grace.

A Christian (how perfect soever) has still his Plus ultra; Runners in a race
look not how much they have run, but how much remains.

A Christian has his degrees of growth, and his several ages, of childhood,
youth etc. A Christian must go by degrees to heaven, as they went up by steps
and stairs into Solomon's Temple.

They go from strength to strength. Psalm. 84.^.
End or Result.
Duplex, Finis 1. Consummans. 2. Consumens.


The end is The first in intention. The last in action.


In good things Satan would disjoin the end from the means; he tells us, we
may come to beaven, and not labor for it here in this life: And in things to
be avoided, he seperates the means from the end; he tells Eve, she may eat of
the forbidden fruit, and not dye; he tells us, that we may live here
voluptuously, and yet not be punished with hell fire-hereafter.

Better is the end of a thing, Eccles. 7.8.
than the beginning thereof. Comforting the Comfortless.
To comfort such mourners in Zion, as do groan under the sense of sin, and fear
of divine wrath, is as difficult a work (says Luther) as to raise the dead;
and scarce one of a thousand can skill of it. For though every Christian should
have seeding lips, and an healing tongue, to comfort the feeble-minded,
taking-them down into Christ's wine-seller, and there drinking to them in a cup
of consolation, propounding unto them the sweet and precious promises, which
are Pabulum fide^, the food of faith: yet few can do this to purpose, because
they are either unskilful in the word of truth, or unexperienced; They utter
them more from their brains, than either from their breasts or bowels, Haud
i^nara mali, miseris succurrere disco. Virg.
I mean their own experience. This made Christ himself a more compassionate
high Priest, Heb. 5. And that eminent servant of his, St. Paul, had by this
means got an excellent faculty in comforting the disconsolate, 2 Cor. 1.4. So
had Luther, as having himself from his tender years been much exercised with
spiritual conflicts, as says Melanchton.

To move us to this Christian work, Consider, 1. The compassion and sympathy
that should be betwixt us, in respect of our near linking together in the body
of Christ, (...). Iso^^.
Ephesians. 4.25. 2 Corin. 11.29. 2. We have received comforts from God to this end,
2 Cor. 1.4. 3. Sorrow is a gulf, how many has it swallowed up for want of
comfort? 2 Cor. 2.7. 4. We our selves are yet in the body, and may suffer what
others now feel. Heb. 13.3. The nail in the wheel that awhile ago was aloft,
is now below in the mire and dirt; so we that now enjoy prosperity, may on the
turning of an hand be in adversity. 5. God himself becomes our debtor by
promise, to recompense it into our bosoms. Psalm. 41.1, 2. 6. The souls of the
afflicted shall bless us. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17. The comfort (lastly) we minister to
others, is reflected upon our own souls. In spiritual things none is a loser
by communication. No man loses knowledge by instructing the ignorant; nor
abates his own Zeal, by inflaming the Zeal of others, nor impairs his own
comfort, but increases it, by ministering comfort to the distressed.

Yet a great number there are, who are little affected with the miseries of
their brethren, saying (at least in their hearts) as the chief Priests and
Elders to Judas, What is that to us? Whereas the beastliest amongst bruit
creatures, even swine, seem to be affected with the outcryes of their kind: Men
only more brutish than they, triumph in the miseries each of other, and are
not moved with their outcryes; as bitter as that in the Prophet, Jsa. 38.14.

But what barbarous and savage inhumanity is it of them, that, as David says,
add affliction to him whom God has wounded? A generation there is rife in all
places, dallying with the heaviest afflictions of Gods Children: But see how
bitterly David in a spirit of Prophecy curses such men, Psalm. 109.16. Let them
tremble at it, whose practice it is.

The main work of a comforter is. 1. To strengthen the sorrowful man. 2. To
abate the strength of his sorrows.


Those who undertake the office of comforting others, should observe three
things especially. 1. The nature of the affliction. 2. The degree or measure of
it. 3. The temper of the person afflicted.


Comforts dug out of the Scripture alone have virtutem pacativam, a settled
property to compose the soul, when distempered; and to lodge a blessed calm,
and Sabbath of rest in it, far above all Philosophical consolations: Whereunto
when Cicero had ascribed very much, N^scio quomedo imbec^llior est medicina
quam morbus.
yet he is forced to conclude, That the disease was too hard for the medicine.
And this well appeared both in Socrat^s, who died doubtingly; and Cato, who
desperately slew himself, after he had first read Plato's discourse concerning
the immortality of the soul. So foolish a thing it is, to fly in distress of
mind to creature comforts, and not to run to the name of the Lord, that strong
tower.

Besides, there is an holy cunning in catching up words, which drop from the
lips of men in affliction; and it is our wisdom to make improvement of them, as
the servants of Benhaded, sueing for their Masters life, did of Ahabs. 1 King.
20.33.

For instance, Mr. Caryl makes mention, there was an ancient professor (as he
has been informed) in much distress of conscience, even to despair; he
complaining bitterly of his miserable condition to a friend, let this word
fall, That which troubles me most, is, that God will be dishonored by my fall:
This word was hastily caught at, and turned upon him to the asswaging of his
grief; Art thou careful of the honor of God, and do thou think that God
has no care of thee, and of thy salvation? A soul forsaken of God, regards not
what becomes of the honor of God: Therefore be of cheer; if Gods heart were
not toward thee, thine could not be toward God, or toward the remembrance of
his name.

-- Comfort the feeble minded, 1 These. 5.14.
-- Christian Conversation*
Hippocrates took an oath of his followers, to keep their profession unstained,
and their lives unblameable. When our life is contrary to our profession, it is
a slander to the Gospel, and a dishonor to Christ.

Votum bonum and hominum est and dei, sed dei propter authoritatem gratiae,
(...). 3. l. 3. de (...). altar. mist. c. 8.
hominis propter libertatem arbitrii; hinc Apostolus, Non ego, sed gratia dei
mecum; and i^^rum, Coadjutores dei sumus.

The whole life of a Christian (says Austin) is an holy desire, Tota vita boni
Christiani sanctum desiderium est.
and this is always seconded with endeavor, without the which, Affection is
like Rachel, beautiful, but barren. A Christian must not only have a good
heart, but a good life, showing forth the graces of the Spirit. We must study
to honor God, and honor our profession.

The life of Christianity consists in a regular walking, which includes four
things, viz. 1. As the walking of the body is a moving from one place to
another, so the Christian life is a continual moving of the heart, from sin to
sanctification* departing from our selves, and drawing near to God. Multi been
ambulant pedibus, male moribus; They go not toward Zion, but abide in Babel and
Egypt, where they walk but in Circuitu in a circle, the center whereof is
Satan, the circumference several sorts of sins, beyond which they walk not:
From one of these they walk about to another, so as they return to the same:
They weary themselves in a way of iniquity. 2. Walking includes, that we are
not yet where we should be; We should remember what the Angel said to Elijah,
as most pertinent to us, 1 King. 19.7. Torophilact.
Arise and walk, for thou have yet a great journey to go. Quidam sunt in
Patria, quidam in vi^: Some are got into the heavenly country, and some are
but yet in the way. No settling here, but forward, according to that of the
Psalmist, They go from strength to strength, until every one of them appears
before God in Zion. 3. It includes, our care of keeping the right way. The
Devil walks, but it is to and fro, up and down. Worldlings walk, but it is on
the left hand. Heretics walk, but it is on the right hand; yea, Apostates run,
but it is retrograde, so as they fall backward. But this is a walking to God,
not a wandering from God. Eamu^ post Christum q^^a veritas, per Christum quia
via, ad Christum ^uia vita.
Christ is the way, if we walk in it, we walk with God, as Enoch, before God,
as Abraham, toward God, as David. Christ is the end, the way, the guide; Let us
walk after Christ, because he is the truth; in Christ, because he is the way;
and unto Christ, because he is the life. 4. It concludes a continual progress
in godliness. In walking one foot interchangeably goes before the other, till
we come to our desired place of rest; so in piety.


Thus every good man is a great Peripatetick, walks much; and happy he who
neither goes back, with Hezekiah's sun; nor stands at a stay, with Joshua's
^^n; but rejoices as a strong man to run his race, as David's sun Yea, shining
(...) unto the perfect day. Aust.


The walking Christian is the most wise. All knowledge without practice, being
but like a precious stone in a Toads head. Surgunt indocti and rapiunt C^lum,
and nos cum omnibus doctrinis nostris, detrudimur in G^hennam. What greater
folly than for learned men to be disputing of heaven, and others less knowing
to surprise it? This is like him that gazed upon the Moon, but fell into the
pit. Phil. 1.27.


Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Example.
The Lord that made us knows our mold, Facile est errare cum pluribus, quando
veritas cun paucisametur. Tertul. l. de Pudic. c. 2.
and how easily we are persuaded to taste of the forbidden fruit, and how prone
to be carried headlong to Error; and therefore gives us many Caveats, and sets
Bars in our way to stop us, that we run not to evil, because we see others lead
the way before us.

Mahometisme has more under it than Christianity: Austin teaches us to take
Religion not by tale, but by weight; numbers make not a thing good, but weight
of truth; some are so mannerly that they will not go one step before a great
man, no not to heaven; Many will say with Hushai, Whomsoever the people and all
the men of Israel choose, 2 Samuel 16.18.
his will I be; but not with Joshua, choose you what Gods soever you will serve,
but I and my house will serve the Lord. The inferior Orbs have a motion of
their own, contrary to the greater; good men are moved by Gods Spirit, not by
the Planetary motion of Popular greatness. Let us prize righteousness highly,
because it is found seldom: The pebbles of this world are common, but the
pearls rare; The vulgar stream will bring no vessel to the land of peace.

In matters of faith, its good to build upon a surer foundation than numbers,
whom it was never safe to follow: Hieron.
And in matter of practice, to walk by rule, not by example. Multitudo
errantium non parit errori patrocinium. And again; Quid sit agendum prudens
specta, non quid agatur.

That oftentimes is verefied, That in Synodis and conciliis major pars saepe
vincit meliorem. But it was not so with Paphnutius, who perceiving the unjust
proceeding of the Counsel at Cesarea-Palestinae, took Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem by the hand, saying, come, let us rise and be gone, for it becomes
not us that have suffered so much for the truth of Christ, to be present, or to
communicate with wicked men in their sins.

Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2.
Vivitur exemplo. Especially men of repute are as seeing-glasses, by which most
men dress themselves.

The commpn people are like tempered wax, whereon the vicious seal of greatness
makes easy impression. It was a custom for young Gentlemen in Athens to play
on Recorders, at last Alcibiades seeing his blown cheeks in a glass, threw
away his pipe, and they all followed him: Our Gallants instead of Recorders,
embrace scorching lust, staring pride, staggering drunkenness; till their
souls are more blown than those Athenian cheeks: I would some Alcibiades would
throw away these vanities, that all the rest might follow. Thus spreads
example, like a stone thrown into a Pond, that makes circle to beget circle,
till it spread to the banks.

There was nothing so forcible with David, to cause him to praise God, and to
hope in him, as the approbation of the Saints concerning hope and thanksgiving:
Which approbation no doubt he saw to be in them, by some external exemplary
good deeds: Psalm. 52.9.
I will give thanks unto thee for that thou have done; I will hope in thy name,
(the reason is) for thy Saints like it well.

Christians must walk Exactly, and Exemplarily.


According to the counsel of our Savior, let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works. Mat. 5.17.
It is not enough to do good works in secret, but we must show them openly; and
though we must abhor to do our works for this end, that they may be seen; yet
we must so do them, as they may be seen.

It was spoken of Constantine, that he was Preteritis melior, venientibus
auctor; better than his Predecessor^, and a good president to those that
succeeded him. Of Gregory the great (who sent Austin into England, to propagate
the Christian says) that he was Preteritis pejor, yet venientibus auctor; bad
in comparison of his Pred^cessors, but good in comparison of his successors.
Like Fabullus in the Poet, Mart.
Optimus, molorum; so he, worst of the good Popes, best of the evil. But
Epiphanius so lived, that vitam doctrina, doctrinam vita comprobaret.

As the Ox follows the herd, so will I follow good men (says Cicero) etiamsi
ruant, although they do amiss. But this was more than Paul desires, 1 Cor.
11.1. And moreover, Saints actions admit of this distinction. 1. Some are noted
as sinful, wherein they bewrayed humane infirmity: these are spectacles of
natural frailty, not examples for like practice. 2. Some were done by special
dispensation; so Abraham attempts ^o slay his son, and Israelites rob
Egyptinns; Now dispensations stretch not beyond the particulars to whom they
are given. 3. Some they did by special and extrordinary calling, as Abraham
leaves his country for Pilgrimage, in Canaan, and John Baptist was a kind of
an Eremite; and yet neither the one a Pattern of Popish Pilgrimage, nor the
other of their Eremitical life. 4. Some are occasioned by special necessity of
times, or appearance of scandal; so Primitivy Christians had all things common;
and Paul makes his hands to minister to his necessities: And yet here is
neither footing for Anabaptistical community, nor for Ministers using manual
labor, except where cases and times are alike. 5. Some were according with the
general law Moral, as those of Patience, humility, obedience, etc. and herein
indeed is our bond of imitation.


A deformed man (says Peter Martyr) being married to an uncomely woman, caused
his wife daily to look on beautiful pictures, by means whereof their children
were handsome and comely. So a right beholding of their walking, who have been
burning and shining lamps in the Church, may be very inducing to an imitable
practice.

Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.1.
Time and Opportunity.
Tempus est ens realis, non rationis; est aliquid in re, Polanus.
non in sola mentis notione.

Time is the common measure of all things.

Bernard complaining of those, who while they live, are negligent, and whose
manner is to say, come let us talk together to pass away the time; with grief
of Spirit, says, O done^ praeterat hora, O donec pertranseat tempus, etc. O
until the hour be gone, O until the time be past, which the mercy of thy Maker
has bestowed upon thee, to perform repentance, to procure pardon, to gain
grace, and to obtain glory.

This life is at it were a Fair, and while the Fair lasts, there is to be
bought in it any thing that is necessary. In sentent.
But (as Nazianzen speaks) Quodsi nundinarum tempus sluere sinus, nullum
aliud es hahit^rus; If thou suffer the time of the Fair to slip away, thou will not have any other.

It is storied of Alexander the great, that when he came to besiege any place,
he caused a burning light to be set up, and by a crier published, that so long
as the light burned, so long he gave them time to seek for mercy, by
surrendering themselves and the place; but if within that time they did it not,
he made it known unto them, that the sword should destroy them all. Now what is
man's life but a burning light? and so long as this light continues, God gives
us time of making our peace with him, and of providing for our safety: but this
light being once extinguished, there is no more any thing that may afford
comfort unto us.

Considering that man's end (which he knows not) is a time on which indeed his
welfare does principally depend, and for which he ought carefully to be always
ready, seeing he does not know the time when it shall be; therefore Bernard
cries out, Miser, quare omni hora te non disponis? Cog^ta te mortuum, quum sit
de necessit ate te moriturum; O miserable man, wherefore do thou not dispose
thy self every hour for thine end? Think thy self to be dead, who know that
of necessity thou must dye.

Non parum habemus temporis, Seneca.
sed multum perdimus; The common complaint is, we want time: but the truth is,
we do not so much want it, as wast it.

Time is to be redeemed for holy uses.

Pliny seeing his Nephew walking for his pleasure, Totum illud tem pus
perdidist^, in quo non de Deo cogita^^i Aug.
called to him, and said, Poteras hascce horas non perdidisse you might have
better bostowed your time than so. Nullum mihi per otium dies exit, says
Seneca, for time that is consumed idly, is rather spilt than spent. Nolite
tempus in nugis conterere, says another.

It is reported of holy Ignatius, that when he heard a clock strike, he would
say, here is one hour now more past, that I have to answer for.

Mr Hooper the Martyr, Act. and Mon.
was said to be spare of diet, sparer of words, and sparest of time.

Latimer rose usually at two of the clock in the morning to his study. Bradford
slept not commonly above four hours in the night, and in his bed till sleep
came, his book went not out of his hand. He counted not that hour well spent,
wherein he did not some good, either with his pen, tongue or study. These
worthies well weighed, that they that lose time, are the greatest losers, and
wastfullest Prodigals.

For the improving of time well, 1. Know the use of time, that it is a
seed-time, wherein thou must go forth and sow, though in tears and showers. An
husbandman will not lose his seed-time, whatever* weather it prove. 2. Know the
worth of time, before the want of time. It is a very folly, to be niggards of
wealth, and prodigal of time. It is the great sin of some, that they cast
away their short time in doing evil, or doing naught to the purpose: As little
children who spend their candle in play, and are glad to go to bed by dark, and
never perceive their childish folly till it be too late. But Christian wisdom
is, to set such a price on time, as not to let it slip without making our
selves gainers of something better than it self.

Upon these words of Job, Cap. 9.25. My days are swifter than a Post; says a
Divine, We seldom consider, or consider as we ought this common truth; We live
for the most part, as if we could not tell how to get rid of our time; or, as
if we were weary of our time, and knew not how to spend it out; as if time were
rather chained to a standing Post, than were like a running Post.

All time is short, and we have a very short estate in time. Time passes
irrecoverably; Time in motion cannot be stopped, and once past cannot be
recalled. Hence the Ancients emblem'd time with wings, as if it were not
running, but flying; To show that time is very swift, it is gone suddenly.

Redeeming the time. Ephesians. 5.16.
Omnia tempus habent, quia in tempore suo omnia been fieri habent, and bona
sunt, quum been fiunt omnia. There is a time to all things, because in their
time all things are well done, and all things that are well done, are good
being done.

Si^ Paratus homo ad omne tempus, sive bonum sive malum sit, ut per b^na and
mala probatus, transeat ad bona glorificandus. Let a man be ready for all
times, whether good or bad, that being proved by good things and bad things, he
may pass to good things, to be glorified in them.

Plato was wont to say, (...).
that God did always work by Geometry; Another Sage said Pondere, mensura,
numero, Deus omnia fecit: God has done all in number, weight and measure; made
and set all things in comely and curious order and equipage: He has also
prefined aforehand a convenient and beautiful season for every thing, Ordering
the disorders of the world, to his own glory and his Churches good.

Seeds (though fertile) cast into the ground out of season, fructify not.

Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in anno. He was a wise man, that being
invited to a feast on the next morrow, answered, Nescis quid serus vesper vehat.
Ex multis annis crastinum non habui, For these many years I have not had a
morrow day to promise for any business.

One Aratus answered King Philip (being asked counsel upon a design) if thou
be a Sooth-sayer, thou may let slip this good opportunity; but if thou be a
King, thou must not neglect to take the Ox by both his horns.

He has made every thing beautiful in his time. Eccl. 3.11. 1 Chro. 12.32.


The children of Issachar, were men that had understanding of the times, to
know what Israel ought to do.

As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men. Gal. 6.10.


Reward.
Achilles conqueritur de rege Agamemnone, quod pari honor afficiat in exercitu
vires fortes and ignavos, ideoque recusat amplius pro Graecis pugnare. Sic
Crates Philosophus Thebanus conqueritur de hac iniquitate sui temporis, quod
reges and Principes non spectant dignitatem and merita personarum, Plus inquit
enim detur adulatori guam Philosopho. Eodem mode legimus in (...) quae est apud
Mat. 20. Quod Mercenarii qui totum diem in vinea laboraverunt, indigne tulerunt
se non plus mercedis accipere, quam ii qui unam solam aut duas horas
laborassent.

There is Praemium ante Pramium. Psalm. 19.11. As every flower has its sweet
smell; so every good action has its sweet reflection upon the soul.
Righteousness is its own reward, though few men think so, and act accordingly:
Haud facile invenies multis e millibus unum,
Virtutem pretium qui putet esse sui. R. David.



Howbeit the chief reward is not till the last cast, till we come to heaven.
Sicut opus non est usque ad mortem perfectum, sic nec merces. As the work is
not done till death; so neither is the full wages till then to be had.

Romes factors do falsely father this assertion upon us, that we teach it to be
unlawful been operari intuitu mercedis: Whereas we hold no such opinion. It is
a mere slander of theirs. We confess there is a reward laid up for the godly,
and we may lawfully look up to it: yet in that two things are to be observed.

Solum, nor precipue: It must neither be the only thing, nor the chief thing
that sets us on work. The principal motives to good works, must be Gods glory,
and the love of Christ, and the consideration of our own duty; all we can do is
a debt we ow unto our God. The Philosopher could say, that Nuda virtus is to be
desired; so God is to be loved and served for himself alone, without any other
by-consideration.

Paul being ready to die, looked at the reward, From henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. But what crown? not which he had
merited, but which God has promised; and for his promise sake would give it to
him. Though Promissum and Merces are relatives, yet Merces and Meritum (as the
Papists surmise) are not. We look for a reward, because God has promised it,
not because we have merited it: for when we have done all that we can, we are
unprofitable servants.

Otherwise let us be bold (as Christ himself, Hebr. 12.2.) to cast up our eyes
to the reward. Else those that have no respect to the reward, that regard it
not at all, are unthankful to God. Therefore let that ample reward reserved
for us, be as a bell to tollus unto good works.

Verily there is a reward for the righteous. Psalm. 58.11.
Great is your reward in heaven. Mat. 5.12.
Moses had respect unto the recompense of the reward. Hebr. 11.26.
Honor.
Honor est benefacti and operationis signum. Arist.
Otherwise it is but parchment honor.

The spider takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces. On purpose (I
think) God set her there, to admonish idle Ladies of their duties.

Virtus in action consistit. Let us draw out what we have drunk in, for
general use.

Envy and Jealousy attend the greatest persons, Vi^tutis invidia comes.
as dark shadows do the beautifulest bodies, in brightest Sunshine.

Honores mutant mores. Many think the sunshine of their present prosperity and
greatness shall never set: yet no sooner hoary age comes on, but Friget estus
honoris; and says, with lame limme^ and queasy voice, Non ^adem est atas.

Honor to whom honor. Romans 13.7.
Fame.
Many ways a man may backbite and defame with his tongue, that unruly member.

Imponens augens, manifestans in mala vertens,
Qui negat, aut minuit, tacuit, landatque remiss.
The smiting of another man's good name in any kind behind his back, is
backbiting; and is an irreparable wrong.

And the Heathen could say, he that easily believes slanders. Aut improbis,
aut puerilibus est moribus; Is either a knave, or a fool.

Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer (Hebr. a Pedlar) among thy
people. Lev. 19.16.(...)
Fame (snow-ball like) crescit ^undo; But before we give credit to report, it
is good to hear the bell ring out, and what sound it gives on both sides.

Bona fama propria possessio defunctorum. A good name is above gold and silver,
it is greatly desired of all; but all take not the right course of getting it:
Some think to get them a name by building, as they that set up the tower of
Babel: Some by hunting, as Nimrod: Some by drinking as Facidius: Some by
whoring, as Herculet: Some strive to get them a name by their courteous
behavior, as Absalom did, by a counterfeit kind of kindness toward all: Some
by their great variety of learning, etc. But all these miss the mark, they
begin at the wrong end. The best foundation for a good name, is faith and good
works. This will leave a sweet savor behind it: Wheresoever it comes, it will
procure favor of God and men: When the name that the wicked have gotten shall
rot, the faithful shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Therefore let us be
all Zealous this way, so shall we be renowned in this world, Quam magnus
mirantium tam magnus invidentium populus est. Senec.
and eternally famous in the world to come.

Plato was once in such esteem, that it was an ancient Proverb, Jovem, greece
loqui si vellet, non aliter loquuturum quam Platonem. But the common people are
apt to praise and dispraise with one breath.

Fame follows desert, as the sweet sent does the rose. A man shall be sure to
have both the comfort and credit of his worthy parts and practices.

In the Olympic games, those that overcame, Dignum laud virum Musa vetat
mori^ Ho^at.
did not put the garlands on their own heads, but stayed till others did it for
them. That which had been much to a man's commendation, if out of another man's
mouth, sounds very slenderly out of his own.

It is an hard thing to recover a man's good name, if once lost. It happened,
Lau^ pro^rlo sordescit in ^re.
that upon a time, Fire, Water, and Fame, went to travel together: but before
they set forth, they consulted, that if they lost one another, how they might
meet again. Fire said, where you see smoke, there you shall find me; Water
said, where you see marsh, or moorish low grounds, there you shall find me; But
Fame said, take heed how you lose me, for if you do, you will ran a great
hazard never to meet me again.

Still, the Euge of a good Conscience, and Gods approbation, is principally to
be sought after.

-- Whose praise is not of men, but of God. Romans ^.29.
Mer^t.
Caelum gratis non accipiam (said the Jesuit) before grace I had free will to
it, and when I had grace, I deserved glory.

Satan had persuaded the Scottish Knox, he had merited by his Ministry; but
that God brought to his mind those scriptures, What have thou that thou did
not receive? And, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me.

The Jews of old did seek to be justified by their own works, and these latter
Jews being asked, whether they believe to be saved by Christ's righteousness or
not? Answer, that every Fox must pay his own skin to the flear.

The Church of Rome seeks to be justified by her own righteousness, and the
righteousness of Christ. They hold that Christ's righteousness merits, that our
works should merit. And Bellarmine says, De Iustif.
Opera sanctorum tincta sanguine Christi merentur, that is, the works of the
Saints dipped in the blood of Christ do merit. And truly that is a sly and
nice distinction of the Jesuits, which they invented of late, to make us
believe, that by the doctrine of merits they derogate nothing from the glory of
Christ. Indeed they say, that we make satisfaction for sin, and merit heaven:
yet it is not we that do it, but Christ by us: not our works simply in
themselves, but as dyed in the blood of Christ. Our Merits are Christ's merits,
and therefore they may deserve heaven. I, but Christ has purged our sins by
himself, not by our selves: he has done it by his own blood immediately, not
mediately by our works dyed in his blood: Therefore that is a mere delusion to
mock the world withal.

Upon those word, Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and
labor of love; The Jesuits say, It is a world to see what wrything and
wringing the Protestants make, to shift off this place, whereby it is clear,
that good works are meritorious, and causes of salvation. If it be an
unrighteous thing with God, not to give heaven to our works, then we have it
not on mere mercy, but of justice.

But we say, It is just with God so to do, not in regard of our merit, Justum
est ut reddat, qui debet: debet autem qui promisit.
but of his own promise. They that came into the vineyard at the last hour, had
as much as the first: yet not of merit, but of Covenant. It is an unrighteous
thing for one to break his promise. God has promised to reward our works with
eternal life; therefore he should be unrighteous, if he did it not: yet we must
not depend on our merits, but on Gods promise ratified by an oath, as he
shows in the following words.

And for Opus operatum, it is not sufficient so much as to acceptance with God,
because it is not enough to do a good work, which God requires at our hands,
but we must perform it in such a manner, as the Lord requires: We must not
only do bonum but been. Besides, Merit is a mere fiction, since there can be no
proportion betwixt the work and the wages.

It is well observed, Co^^on on Cant. Certum est nos facere quod faimus; sed
ille ^acit, ut faciasmut. Aug. Like as Roma is become Amor inversus.
that the Church in the Canticles is no where described by the beauty of her
hands or fingers. Christ concealeth the mention of her hands, that is, of her
works. 1. Because he had rather his Church should a bound in good works in
silence, than boast of them; (especially when they are wanting) as Rome does.
2. Because its he alone that works all our works in us and for us. We do what
we do, but it is he that causes us so to do.

St Paul is so directly against Popish justification by works, that one says,
both wittily and well; The Epistle of Paul to the Romans, is become the Epistle
of Paul against the Romans.

Certainly those misled and muzled souls did worse than lose their labor,
Act. and Mon. fol. 1077.
that built religious houses, Pro remissione and redemptione peccatorum, pro
remedio and liberatione animae, pro salute and requie animarum patrum and
matrum, fratrum and sororum, etc. These were the ends that they aimed at, as
appears in stories.

The Papists think, that as he that stands on two firm branches of a tree, is
surer than he that stands upon one only: so he that trusts to Christ and
works too, is in the safest condition. But, 1. They are fallen from Christ that
trust to works. 2. He that has one foot on a firm branch, and another on a
rotten one, stands not so sure, as if he stood wholly on that which is sound.
But let them be Moses disciples, let us be Christ's; set not up a candle to this
sun of righteousness; mix not thy puddle with his purple blood, thy rags with
his raiment; but detest all mock-stayes; And account accursed for ever that
blasphemous direction of Papists to dying people, Conjunge Domine obsequium
meum cum omnibus quae Christ us passus est pro me: Join Lord mine obedience
with all that Christ has suffered for me.

We are all as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. Luke 17.10.
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.

When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; Romans 3.20.
We have done that which was our duty to do.

Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight.

The Church, true and false.
Ecclesia.
WHen the Original world was overwhelmed with waters, Ecclesia Coetus est
hominum e turba reliquorum mortatium ^vocatus advitam aeternam.
none were saved but such as were in the Ark; when Sodom was burnt with sire,
none were saved but those of the family of Lot; when Jericho was destroyed,
none were preserved, but those which were in the family of Rahab: These are
figures, shadowing to us, that when the Lord comes to cut down the wicked, to
cast them for ever into the wine press of his wrath; Salvation shall belong to
the household of faith, even that family whereof God in Christ Jesus is the
Father.

Ecclesia 1. Invisibilis. 2. Visibilis.


But when we say, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, it is not meant of a visible,
but of the invisible or universal Church, which is the whole company of the
elect, in heaven, in earth, and not yet born; for the visible Church or
particular Congregations, it may be said, there are many Wolves within, and
Sheep without.

Therefore it is not satisfactory to us, to be gathered out of the general
mass of mankind, into the fellowship of the Church visible; but we must
examine how we are in the Lords floor, whether as Chafe or Corn, for a day of
winnowing will assuredly come, wherein the Lord shall gather his good Corn
into his Garner, and the cast Chafe into unquenchable fire.

Many would deal with the Church, as Amnon with his sister Tamar; first ravish
her, then defile her, and then turn her out of doors.

The Church of God in this world, is like a man of war at sea, whose Master is
Christ; whose Mast his Cross, whose Sails his Sanctimony; whose tackle
patience and perseverance; whose cast-peeces, the Prophets, Apostles,
Preachers; Premuntur justi, ut pressi clament, clamentes exaudiantur, exauditi
glorificent Deum. Quint. Cur^. 1.8.
whose Mariners the Angels; whose Fraught is the souls of just men; whose
Rudder is Charity; whose Anchor is hope; whose Flag in the top of her is Faith;
and the word written in it, is this, Premimur, non opprimimur; we are cast
down, but we perish not, 2 Cor. 4.8.

The Church Militant, is sometime fluctuant, as the Ark of Noah; sometime
movable, as the Ark in the Wilderness; sometime at rest, as the Ark in the
Temple. In persecution, in removes, in peace.

What is the color of the Church (says one) but black? her arms, but the
Cross? her song, but the note the oppressed servant in Aristophanes sung, I
suffer affliction? For the world is a Sea, a threshing-floore, a Press, a
Furnace; (...).
The Church the Ship, the Wheat, the Grape, the Gold; and afflictions the
winds, the waves, the flaile, the fire.

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted. Isa. 54.11.
Yet, Built upon the rock, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail aaginst.
Mat. 16.18.
And, Glorious things are spoken of thee (dicta and praedicta) O City of God.
Psalm. 87.3.


Saints.
The word signifies a thing or person, separated or set a part from common,
(...)
and dedicated to a special, especially, a holy use. Holiness (in the general
nature of it) is nothing else but a separation from common, and dedication to a
divine service, such are the Saints; persons separated from the world, and set
apart unto God: The Church in general (which is a company of Saints) is taken
out of, and severed from the world: The Church is a fountain sealed, and a
Garden enclosed; so also, every particular Saint is a person severed and
enclosed, from the common throng and multitude of the world, 2 Cor. 6.17.

Or thus, A Saint is an holy one, or a person called to holiness: having the
perfect holiness of Christ put upon him, by imputation of faith; and the
quality of imperfect holiness poured into his heart, by the spirit of
sanctification.

Unless even ancient professors (says a Divine) look very well to themselves,
they may take a great deal of p^ins, and when all com^ to all, after all their
praying fasting, hearing, etc. they may be found to be nothing in the world,
but men that walk after the flesh, that is, according to the refined and well
educated Principles of old Adam. Men may be Ishmaels, brought up in Isaach's
family, and yet be built upon Mount Sinai when all is done.

Now the way that God judges of all men, is as they are the Children either of
the old or of the new Adam; and not (as men do) according to such a proportion
of strictness in their lives; for the Pharisees went beyond many weak
Professors in common righteousness.

Saints therefore are not to be judged according to some kind of holiness they
may come up to, but according to the Principles they walk by; either as they
walk according to the flesh, or according to the Spirit. And thus Paul
distinguishes Saints and others, 2 Cor. 5.16.

Saints are called Eagles, for their 1. Delight in high flying. 2.
Sharp-sightednes and steadfast looking into the sun of righttousness. 3.
Singular sagacity in smelling out Christ, and resenting things above. 4.
Feeding upon the bloody sacrifice of Christ. Mat. 24.28.


Saints must walk in a diverse way to a world of wicked people as Noah did,
really reproving their darkness by his light, Solus ipse diversa ambulavit via.
Chrysostom.
their pride by his lowliness, their vainglory by his modesty, their
ostentation by his secret devotion; Not only (Planet-like) keeping a constant
counter-motion to the corrupt manners of the most, but also shining forth fair
with a singularity of heavenly light, spiritual goodness, and Gods sincere
service, in the darkest midnight of damned impiety.

True Saints of God are earthly Angels. So Chrysostom calls Paul, Angelum
terrestrem. And Dr. Tailor Martyr, blessed God, that ever he came in company
with that Angel of God John Bradford. A^^ and Mon.


Saints may be called Heaven, and that in a double respect; 1. Because God is
said to dwell in the Saints, they are his habitation; And wheresoever God
dwells he makes a Heaven. 2. Because the Saints (not only those of Heaven, but
they on earth) have their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. So that as carnal
and earthly minded men are called earth, because their hearts and conversations
are fixed to the earth; so spiritual and heavenly-minded men may be called
Heaven, because their hearts and conversations are fixed in heaven.


Thus Saints are glorious, wonderful, magnificent, Princes in all lands, of an
excellent spirit, more excellent than their neighbors, A Crown of glory, a
royal Diadem, higher than the Kings of the earth, greater than the four famous
Monarchies, etc. And yet these worthies of whom the world is not worthy, these
precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, these Jewels of Jesus Christ,
which are his very glory, 2 Cor. 8.23. (...). Forti animo mala fer, nec his
miser esto dolor
Are counted the offscouring of all things, esteemed as earthen Pitchers,
shamefully slighted and trampled upon, with the feet of insolency and cruelty.
Howbeit as stars (though we see them sometimes in a puddle, though they reflect
there, yet) have their situation in Heaven, so Gods Saints, though in a low
condition, yet they are fixed in the Region of happiness.

-- The Saints that are in the earth, Psalm. 16.3.
-- The excellent -- Foundation.
There is 1. Fundamentum fundatum. Ephesians. 2.20. 2. Fundamentum fundans. 1 Cor.
3.11.


The first is a scriptural foundation, the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, the other is a personal foundation, Christ himself. Be sure to add
practice to these, Mat. 7.24.

Fundamentals are few in number, Certa semper sunt in pu^is. Tertul.
but many in virtue: Small in sight, but great in weight.

Every particle of truth is precious, as the filings of gold, neither may we
alter or exchange a letter or syllable in Fundamentals.

-- Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. Rome.
Rome has left her seven mountains, to plant her self in Campo Martio, Lips.
de Mag. Romans lib. 3. Cap. 11.
who lies as it were entombed in her own ruins. Lipsius cannot so much as
trace the ancient tract of he^ walls: So in respect of her state
Ecclesiastical; that which was the garden of Eden, is now overgrown with
weeds: and the Daughter of Zion, is now become the Whore of Babylon.

Rome, of Christ's Spouse, is become the strumpet of Satan; of the school of
Simon Peter (whose being there is yet questionable) the school of Simon Magus;
of the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a cage of impure spirits. She calls her self
Queen, but Hierom, the purple Whore.

Once the Church of Rome wrote her laws in milk, but now she writes them in
Sunday letters; Prayers and tears were once her weapons, but now fire and
sword; And if in show of peace she turn he^ destructive instruments into
mattocks, it is but to play the Pioner, and make way for death.

Roma radix omnium malorum. It is the City that is mounted on seven hills, and
cannot be hid, but is apparently discerned and described to be the great City
Babylon, the seat of Antichrist.

The sweetest wine turns into the sowrest vinegar; the whitest ivory burnt,
into the blackest coal; So about the year 1414. Theodoricus Vrias in Germany,
John. Man^. lo^. com. 226.
an Augustine Friar complained, not without cause, Ecclesiam Romanam ex aurea
factam argenteam, ex argentea ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut in
stercus abiret. Yea, Diput. de Rep. l. 1. c. ^^.
Matchiavel observed that there was no where less piety, than in those that
dwelt nearest Rome.

If Franciscus de sancta clara and his fa^tors were the wisest men under
heaven, and should live to the worlds end, they would be brought to their wits
end, before they could accomplish this works end, to make a reconciliation
betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt Rome and us: for, what concord has
Christ with Belial? They can never fall in, or make music in one Quire.

For gross Idolatry, or for fundamental errors only must we separate.
Corruption grew so great in the Church of Rome, that it justly occasioned first
the Separation of the Greek Churches from the Latin, and then of the Reformed
Churches from the Roman. And Bellarmine bewails it, that ever since we cried up
the Pope for Antichrist, his Kingdom has not only not increased, but has
greatly decreased. Dent. on Apoc. 9.11.
Certainly the date of her reign is almost out, and the time draws on apace,
wherein both she and her King Abaddon shall be laid in the dust.

Esto procul Roma, qui cupis esse pius. Rome has fallen culpably, and shall
fall penally. Sibylla long since foretold this, Tota eris in Cineres,
quasinunquam Roma faisses.
in the eight book of her Oracles. The ruin of Rome must be like the ruin of
Jericho, which can never be re-edefied.

There was something surely in that which we have read, that when the wars
began in Germany, Anno 1619. A great brass image of the Apostle Peter (that had
Tu es petrus, etc. fairly embossed upon it) standing in St Peter's Church in
Rome, there was a great and massy stone fell down upon it, and so shattered it
to pieces, that not a letter of all that sentence (whereon Rome founds her
claim) was left whole so as to be read, saving that one piece of the sentence,
Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will build my Church, which was lest fair and
entire.

True, it is no easy thing to overturn the Kingdom of Antichrist, which like an
huge tree has taken deep root in the earth for many ages; and men need not
marvel that it is so long a cutting down. Especially if we consider, that the
Lord will still have his Church in combat here in this world, to shake it from
security. Again, the Lord for the sins of the Church, and want of care of
through Reformation in those to whom the Lord has detected their abominations,
stays the good speed of this glorious deliverance: Besides, the Lord will
have the destruction of Antichrist and his Kingdom wrought by leisure, that so
man may make due regard, and consider of so great a work.

Yet let us cast our eyes upon Gods word and promise, and firmly believe, if
Agag be to be slain, God is raising up some Samuel to do it. Yea, let us cast
our eyes on Gods work already, and we shall see him gone a great way in the
accomplishing of his word; Whereby we may strengthen our says, in that which
remains.

For how has the word preached discovered him to be that man of sin? detecting
his frauds and impostures, with which for many ages he deluded the blind
world? How are his Bulls and Excommunications (which in former ages seemed to
shake the Kingdoms of the earth) esteemed but as wind? Moreover, how have all
the reformed Churches shaken off with detestation his Antichristian yoke and
usurped power over the Scripture, Church, men's Consciences, etc. And how have
many Princes, already disclaimed and despised his claws over them? Keeping
from him those sums which were wont to warm his holiness kitchen, etc.

I might also add, how weak all their endeavors and means are to prevent
final ^uine, viz. Sophistry, Knotty distinctions to hide and delude the plain
sense of Scripture, threatenings, treacheries, Machivilian contrivances, wars,
treasons, murders, Massacres, Powder-plots, etc. Lo, these are the inseparable
marks of Popery, and the brands of their Divellish religion. And these do but
hasten their incurable destruction, rendering them odious to all Christian
States, Princes, and people, yea to Turks and Infidels.

How is the faithful City become an harlot? Isa^ 1.^1* 22.
it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it: but now murderers. Thy
silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water. Come hither, Rev. 17.1.
and I will show thee the judgment of the great where, etc. Babylon the great,
is fallen, is fallen, etc. Cap. 18.2.
Come out her my people, Verse. 4.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Pope.
If the servant of servants be above the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, then
where is Christ's Prerogative? Ye take too much upon you, O ye sons of Levi.

St. Peter had a priority, but not superiority; or if a Primacy yet not a
supremacy over the rest; ^^lv. Inst. l. 4. c. 6.
he had (as our Divines acknowledge) a precedence in place, named for the most
part first, as the foreman of the quest; and a^preheminency in grace, reputed
for his excellent Knowledge and Zeal; he was the first Confessor, Mat. 16.16.
The first preacher, Act. 2. The first baptizer, Act. 10. The first worker of
miracles, Act. 3.

Austin says, Epist. 28.
Deus docuit Petrum, per posteriorem Paulum; yet another adds, Etsi ille
primus, iste praecipuus.

It was Frederick the Emperor his saying, In capite orbis Deus per imperium
exaltavit Ecclesiam; in capite orbis Ecclesia nunc demolitur imperium.

Cyprian speaks much against Pope Stephen, Epist. ad Pomp.
assuring Pompeius, upon the reading of the Epistle, Pope Stephen sent to
Cyprian, he should Magis ac magis ejus errorem denctare, qui causam h^reticorum
contra Christianos, and contra Ecclesiam Dei asser^re conat^r: He taxes him
also of impertinencies, and contradictions to himself, that he did imperite and
improvide scribere.

Liber erat, Mant. Eccl. 2.
servile jugum sibi condidit ipse:
Pondus idem legum (vidi ipse volumina) quas (...)
Antiqui potuere patres, nec possumus ipsi.
Ne^ servare atas poterit ventura nepotum.
Thomas Holland of Exet. Col. Oxf. When he was to take his journey, said to the
fellows, Commendo vos dilectioni Dei, and odio papatus, and superstitionis.

The Pope imitates Peter (to whom he pretends succession) in the worst things;
he cuts off not only the ear, but head; he denies Christ, but weeps not for it.

Vzziah (though a King) must not meddle with the Priests office; and Azariah
the High Priest must not intrude himself into the Kings office; yet the
High Priest of Rome will have both swords; he will be a Priest and a King too:
he will be for matters of the world, as well as for matters of God. Boniface
the eight showed himself one day, in the attire of a Priest, another day in the
attire of a Prince affirming that he was both.

Bellarmine of late has somewhat minced the matter, that the Pope has no
power in temporal matters direct: yet indirecte quoad bonum spirituale he may
play Rex. Excellent* So as a man get into an house, it makes no great matter
whether directly or indirectly. And so as the Pope may depose Princes, and
dispose of their Kingdoms, and butcher them at his pleasure; what avails it
whether directly or indirectly.

I am sure this is indirect dealing, by an indirect distinction to break down
the wall of partition, that God himself has set up between the Priest and the
Magistrate.

That the Pope exalts himself above all that is called God, I prove 1. In that
he is not only in equipage with God, in remitting of sins; but is made more
mighty: for God in the creation made but creatures, but he can make as many
gods as he lust. 2. More merciful than Christ, which is concluded for this
reason, It is not read in all the Scripture that Jesus Christ drew any soul out
of purgatory: but the Pope of his great piety and mercy does every day an
infinite number; nay, Credat Judaeu^ Appella.
Pope Gregory did bring Trajans soul out of hell. 3. More wise then God, for he
can institute a sacrifice alsufficient, to save those that Christ's sacrifice
cannot save. 4. Of more authority than God, whose word is not authentical
without his allowance. But what he says (though never so cross to the Text)
is Ipsissimum Dei verbum.


Besides, all the names and titles of Christ given him in the Scripture, to
show him Lord of the Church, are attributed to the Pope, the head of
Antichristian heresies. Bellarmine says, that he is universal Pastor, Rex
Regum, Dominus Dominantium, De conc^^. an^ho. l. 2. c. 17.
Admirabilis, Leo de tribu Judae Radix David. And those which Antichrist would
only rob him of, are, Head of the whole body of the Church, Bridegroom of the
Spouse, Foundation of the Church; as if one body might have two heads, one
spouse two husbands at once.

Moreover, mind his horrible pride, claiming authority above Kings, Emperors,
Laws, Scriptures; yea, over men and Angels: Their doctrine is, that Papa babet
imperium in Angelos and Daemonas: And their practice the like; For Clement the
sixth in his Bull upon the Jubilee 1350. Prorsus mandamus Angelis Paradisi,
quatenu^ animam in Purgatorio penitus absolutam in Paradisi gloriam
introducant. And is not this to make himself a god? is not this that beast,
full of the names of Blasphemy?

I might add much, I will only conclude with that saying of Pope Marcellus
the second, wherein he seems to be pretty ingenious, On^ph. in vita.
for striking his hand upon the table, he uttered these words, Non video quo
modo qui hunc locum altissimum tenant salvari possunt, I see not how any Pope
can be saved. And that of Pius Quintus, Cornel. a Lap. i^ Number. 11.11.
recited by A lapide. When I was first in orders, I had some good hopes of
salvation; when I was made a Cardinal, I doubted, but now that I am Pope, I do
almost despair. 2 These. 2.3, 4.


That man of sin -- The son of Perdition, etc.

Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he as god, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is god.

Papists.
The Pope has given liberty to some to have all their own rites, only
acknowledging his Supremacy; but the ground being laid, for point of Doctrine
it matters not; there is enough gained, to make him that had sworn obedience, to
accept of all the rest.

They that bear witness to themselves (as Papists do) are not to be heard in
their own cause, (...).
unless they compass such a decree, as Stratocles did for Demetrius; Whatsoever
Demetrius will command, shall be holy before God, and just amongst men.

There is no more certain sign of a bad cause, than extended testimonies, and
wire-drawn Arguments: The Arguments of Papists are as headless arrows shot.
We demand sithes (as the saying is,) and they answer us with Mattocks. This may
serve to wash away their varnish of Antiquity.

Papists are like those (...), Epist. 73.
that would take on them to decide all questions; Itaq, a Socrate and Platone
exagitatur; vel Papa potius; These with their Bishops are determined for ever
to defend in all points the Popish part, and to arm themselves to fight in the
B. of Romes quarrel, though it were against God and his Scriptures.

Papists do as Cyprian speaks of Heretics, Et gladis and venenis subverte^tes
veritatem. I say of them as Cyprian of the Marcionites, Nihil est apud illos,
nisi perfidia, and blasphemia, and contentio sanctitatis, and veritatis inimica.

Carnis ut hic malus affectus sic lumina mentis Mant. Eclog. 2.

Claudat, in errores ut sponte feramur apertos.
Hi cursus fecere novos: Eclog. 10.
liquere priores*
Quos dederat vivo veterum prudentia patrum.
Will ye plead for Baal? Judge. 6.31.
will ye save him? -- If he be a god, let him plead for himself. Antiquity,
It is like fame, Arist.
Caput inter nubil^ condit, her head is muffled from our sight.

Indeed it is venerable, and witnesses the more ancient they are, the more to be
credited, as less corrupt. But yet it is like unto old age, only a crown, if
it be found in the way of righteousness, and not otherwise.

Papists boast much of Antiquity, as once the Gibeonites did of old shoes and
moldy bread: But disjoined from verity, it deserves little reverence: for it
must have no more honor than what it can maintain. The longer Manna was kept
against the command of God, the more it stank.

Antiquity after Scripture, is a cipher increasing the number; otherwise it
stands for nothing, or for worse than nothing.

Ye have heard, Mat. 5.21.
that it was said by them of old time, -- But I say unto you -- Custom.
It is a Law or Rite not written, Longavi ^nim temporis, usus and cons^e^udinis
non est vilis (...).
which being established by long use, and the consent of our Ancestors, has
been, and is daily practiced.

But to speak divinely, Its lawful enough to change these for the better.

Certainly an ungodly custom was that, Joh. 18.39. to save the wicked, and
condemn the just; what ever was the ground, why should any Barabb^^ escape by
it? Well said Calvin, In ista consuetudine turpe and crassum fuit vitium.

All, or most of the West-Indians, being asked, why they make war against any
of their neighbors? use commonly this answer, It has been the custom for
them and us, to fight still one against another.

It is then concluded with Cyprian, Consuttudo ^ine veritate, vetustas error is
est.

The customs of the people are vain* Jer. 10.3.
Idolatry.
The matter informed by Divinity, is of two kinds, Matter of belief and truth
of opinion; and matter of service and adoration, which is also judged and
directed by the former; The one being as the internal soul of Religion, and the
other as the external body thereof: And therefore the He^then-religion was not
only a worship of Idols, But the whole Religion was an Idol in it self, for it
had no soul, that is, no certainty of belief; as a man may well think,
considering the chief Doctors of their Church were the Poets, and the reason
was, because the Heathen gods were no jealous gods, but were to be admitted
into part as they had reason* neither did they respect the pureness of heart,
so they might have external honor and rites.

Idolatry is, when we worship false gods, supposing them to be true*

Papists prove the worshipping of Saints, out of those words, 2 These. 1.10.
where it is said, that God shall be glorified in his Saint^; whereas to worship
them so, is to take some of Gods glory, and give it unto them: But the Angel
would not suffer John to fall down and worship him.

A coveteous wretch is an Idolater, Qui^quid qui^ amat supra, vel aque ac Deum,
id sibi Deus est. Ambitiosus honos, and opes, and foeda voluptas: H^c tria pro
trino Numine mun^us babet. Mant*
in respect of his inward and outward adoring of Mammon. Inward worship
consists in our faith, hope and love; for as that is our master to whom we
submit our obedience, so that is our God in which we trust most, and love most;
As the wantons best beloved is his saint and goddess, the Epicures panch is
his God, the covetous beast who had rather be damned than damnified, has his
Mammon in place of his god, with all his heart, mind and soul, making gold his
hope, and saying to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence.

This covetous Idolater is like a box that apprentices use to put money in,
which will never restore any thing back, till it be broken: So nor a covetous
man till he be dead and rotten, and broken asunder like a Potters vessel; then
hapily the worms shall have his Carcass, and unthrifty heirs his estate.

Son of man, these men have set up their Idols in their heart, Ezekiel. ^4.3.
and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face: should I be
enquired of at all by them? 1 John 5.21.
etc.

Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, Amen.

Superstition. (...) Et f^agmen, pro quo legen^um juxta Masoretha^ (...) Ju^
carnium abominandarum.

Many that cannot digest the flesh of Popery, yet can take great delight in the
broth of Superstition; According to that, Isa. 65.4. Broth of abominable things
are in their vessels.

It is a form of Divine worship, devised by men, beside, Superstitio a
superstando. Est cultus indebitus praeter verbum Dei. Zanch: D^. Hall.
or beyond the commandment of God; breeding in the followers of it a servile
fear.

Superstition is devout impiety, the superstitious man worships God but as he
lists, he gives God what he asks not, more than he asks; this man dare not
stir forth till his breast be crossed, his face sprinkled; if but an Hare
cross him in the way, he returns; if he see a snake unkilled, he fears a
mischief; if the falt fall toward him, he looks pale and wan; in the morning
he listneth whether the Crow crieeth even or od, and by that token presageth of
the weather; if he hears but a Raven croak from the next roof, he presently
makes his Will; but if a fancy shall second his thoughts with a dream of some
fair garden, or green rushes, or the salutation of a dead friend, he takes
leave of the world, and says he cannot live: He will never ^et to Sea but on a
Sunday, Mat. 23 24. (...) Percolantes culic^m camelum antem absorbentes. Pro
ve^bialis haec est sententia in eos qui in rebus minimis sunt superslitiosi,
and intermi magna ne^ligunt. The world encompassed by him. p. 81.
neither ever goes without an Erra Pater in his pocket; when he lies on his
deathbed, no^ sin troubles him so much, as that he once are flesh on a
Friday, no repentance can ^expiate that, the rest need none. He never dreams
without an interpretation, without a prediction, and if the event answer not
his exposition, he expounds it according to the event; Old wives and stars
are his counselors; he wears Paracelsian characters for the toothache, and a
little hallowed wax is his antidote for evils; he goes about to have the Cross
still of his right hand, etc.

Superstition will needs obtrude upon Christ Will Worship, whether he will or
no, as the people would once have taken him by force, and made him a King, John
6.15. Or as the Lycaonians, would needs have stolen a sacrifice upon Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 14. And the Salvages of Nova-Albion, upon Sir Francis Drake and
his company, at their parting with them.

Superstition is very pleasing to nature, and suitable to sense and carnal
reason; being usually very pompous and costly. I have read of a Lady in Paris,
who when she saw the bravery of a Procession to a Saint, she cried out, O how
fine is our religion beyond that of the Huguenots? they have a mean and
beggarly Religion, but ours is full of solemnity and bravery, etc.

Superstition is for most part, not liberal only, but prodigal, Mic. 5.7. And
no wonder, when as good works are by Bellarmine said to be Mercatura regni
caelestis, the price and purchase of heaven.

It is said of Lycurg^^ the Lacedemoni^n, that he made a Law that no man should
be at very great charge for a sacrifice, lest he should grow weary of Gods
service: yet when the famous carver Phidias advised the Athenians to make the
statue of Minerva rather of Marble than Ivory; 1. Because more durable. (this
passed with allowance) 2. Because less chargable: at the mention hereof, with
infinite indignation they commanded him silence.

Pliny tells us of Alexander the great, that when, as being yet a youth, he
cast great store of frankincense upon the Altar, and his Schoolmaster told
him, he must not be so liberal, till he had subdued the frankincense
countries: When once he had conquered Arabia, he sent his Schoolmaster a ship
full of frankincense, largely ex^orring him to worship the gods therewith.

That man's nature is very forward to superstitious worship, willing to take
more pains to follow the inventions of man, than to keep the institutions of
God, appears; Jerusalem (where they ought to have worshipped) was nearer unto
most of the Israelites, than either Dan or Bethel were; for Bethel was in the
utmost bounds of the South, and Dan in the utmost bounds of the North, and yet
thither would they go, to worship the calves. And it is further observed by
some, that the Israelites grew so Zealous in a short time in that abomination,
that they who dwelt near Bethel, did disdain to worship at Bethel, to serve God
at their own doors, and therefore they would go to Dan; and they that dwelt at
or near Dan, would go to Bethal to worship.

Thus the blind votaries among the Papists, at this day will needs go a
Pilgrimage to the remotest places, to Jerusalem, and visit the sepulcher, etc.
These long journeys are but a step to them, and hard penances they glory in.
The nature of man will carry him two miles at his own bidding, rather than one
at Gods.

How may this shame godly men, for their sloth in doing the will of God; when
they hear how industrious evil men are in doing their own? Yea, how may it
shame them, that they should take less pains to keep a righteous law, than
many do to satisfy a filthy lust?

Diligence is good about that which is good; it is good to be zealously
affected always in a good matter; but Zeal and diligence misplaced, how evil
are they! It is better to creep in a good way, than to run in a bad way; Even
idleness is better than such diligence, But to be sure, Satan will never
check their diligence, who are doing his work; nor take them off from their
pace, who are going or galloping his way.

In vain do they worship me, Mat. 15.9.
teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men.

-- Who has required this at your hand? Isa. 1.12.
--

I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. Act. 17 22.


Read Mic. 6.6, 7. Col. 2.23.

Tradition. Additio ad scripturam fit tripliciter, in quo additum est 1.
Contrarium et est erroris. 2^ Diversum et est praesumptionis. 3. Consonum, et
est sidel is instructionis.

It is Humane, Mat. 15.2. Divine, 1 Cor. 11.2. 2 These. 2.15, and 3, 6.


A divine ordinance or tradition, is a doctrine, first delivered from God, and
written down afterward for the use of the Church; This we are bound to believe
absolutely. An humane ordinance, is not written in the Word, but delivered from
man to man: A tradition thus taken, is either good or evil, according to the
subjectmatter, and intention of men. And therefore this is to be believed
conditionally, as it agrees with the Word.

The Pharisees had many traditions and unwritten verities; pretended to be
invented and prescribed them by their Elders; that by the observation thereof,
they might be the better enabled to keep Gods commandments. These they styled
complections or perfections, because thereby they conceited, that the written
Law was made more complete and perfect; The like say the Papists of their
traditions.

These whether true or false, are delivered by Word, 2 These. 2.15. and Writing,
2 These. 2.2.


And many errors have come in by wresting and writhing men's writings, L. 1. de
Tri^. c. 3.
to another meaning, than ever they were intended; Thus, 2 Pet. 3.16. So Austin
was served, and he foresaw it, I believe (faith he) that some of my readers
will imagine Me sensisse quod non sensi, aut non sensisse quod sensi, That I
was in many things of another mind, than ever I was indeed. And it fell out
accordingly; for as Baronius witnesses, after Austins death, there arose up
diverse, Baron. Annal. Tom. 6.
Qui ex ejus scriptis male perceptis, complures evexerunt, errores, who by
mistaking of what he had written, brought in many pernicious errors, and
avouched him for their Author.

-- Why do you transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? Mat. 15.3.
2 These. 2.15.


-- Hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our
Epistle.

Read Mat. 15.6. Mark. 7.3, 5, 8, 9, 13. Col. 2.8.1 Pet. 1.18. Gal. 1.14. 2
These. 2.2.

Holy things and places.
Non revocari possunt ad communem usum, quae in sacris usurpantur Numb. 16.37,
38, 39.

Upon the offense of any of the vestals at Rome, they had a most excellent way
of execution; In the Campus sceleratus, or field of execution, Plutarch in Numa.
there was made a vault under the earth with an hole left open above, whereby
one might go down; and within it there was a little couch with a burning lamp,
and a few victuals: whether the defiled votary was to be brought through the
marketplace in a litter so closed up with thick leather, that her mournings
might not be heard to the moving of pity. She being thus brought to the place
of execution, was let down by a ladder into the hollow cave, and the hole
presently stopped. And the reason why they suffered such a kind of death, was,
because they thought it not fit, that she should be burnt with fire, which kept
not the sacred fire with greater sanctity. And it was thought unlawful to
punish them by laying violent hands on them, because they had in former times
served in so holy a function. Holiness has honor.

Things are called holy, Sacrum aliquid dicitur, ex co quod ad divi^uvs cultum
ordinatur. Aquin.
either by nature, as God, who is truly, always and only of himself holy: Or by
separation, or being set apart to an holy use or end; Which Origin calls
Sancta Sanctificata, by accession of external holiness from without: So
Jerusalem is called the holy City, because the City of God, where he was
worshipped. And when we stand in our Churches (says Chrysostom) we stand in a
place of Angels and Archangels, in the Kingdom of God, and heaven it self;
which they that profane (think either by talking, sleeping, laughing, playing,
or any thing else unbeseeming the service of God) may justly fear to be whipped
like dogs, out of the heavenly Temple and City too. For mine house shall be
called an house of prayer for all people, Isa. 55.7.

Yet let us not dote upon the Temple of the Lord, but reverently adore the Lord
of the Temple; putting off our shoes from off our feet, when we come to stand
upon holy ground; that is, our sensuality and other sins; for, Quid pedes
(says Erasmus) nisi affectus? quid pedes calceament^rum onere liberi, nisi
animus nullis terrenis cupiditatibus oneratus? Affections are the feet of the
soul, keep them unclogged.

Herod's Temple at Jerusalem was set on fire by Titus his soldiers, that it
could not be quenched: And at the same time Apollo's temple at Delphos was
utterly overthrown by earthquakes and thunderbolts, Antiq.
and neither of them could ever since be repaired: The concurrance of which two
miracles (says Godwin) evidently shows, that the time was then come, that
God would put an end both to Jewish ceremonies, and Heathenish Idolatry.

Believe me the hour comes, Ioh. 4.21, 23.
when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the
Father.

But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit, and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him.

Sacrilege.
Aquin^s notes it may be committed, Here lego does signify as much as adimo or
aufero, in which sensewe call him sacrilegum, qui legit, i. e. qui adimit, et
a^^ert sacra.
vel 1. In personam, when an Ecclesiastical man is abused. 2. In locum, when
the Church is abused or profaned. 3. In rem, when things dedicated to holy
uses, are otherwise employed.


And this last kind may be committed three ways: Quando 1. Sacrum de sacro
aufertur; as the consecrated Vessels out of the Temple. 2. Non sacrum de sacro;
if a thief shall break open a Church, to steal away private treasure hid
therein. 3. Sacrum de non sacro; when the Church is robbed of her possessions
and endowments.


If many would examine themselves according to this rule, they would assuredly
conclude they deserve the whip, turning claustra into castra.

This Luther complained much of in his time, Luth. in Genesis 47. Homil. in Jocl.
3.5. O^im Coenobi is ^a^ita^ant monstra Papist^, Nuncin Coen^blis habitant et
monstra Rapist^.
That even in the Reformed Churches, Parishes and Schools were robbed of their
due maintenance, as if they meant to starve us all: Spoliantur Parochiae and
Scholae, non aliter acsi fame necare nos velint. The like says Gualther, Non
desunt Pseudo-evangelici, There want not such False-Gospellers amongst us, who
restore not the Church her wealth, pulled out of the Papists ^ingers: But make
good that saying of one, P^ssid^bant Papistae, possident Rapist^; Papists had
Church Livings, and now Rapists have gotten them.

A Priest in Jerusalem (the City being besieged) took all the Goblets and
Vessels of silver, not so much as sparing the little golden Pitchers which
Augustus and his wife sent to the Temple; and did distribute amongst the
people, and said, Without ^e^r we may use these divine things, seeing we fight
for God and his Temple; therefore he said, it was safe for them to drink those
things that were kept for the Priests sacrifices. He also took the wine and
oil, and they anointed themselves without fear.

Non equidem recusabo dicere quae dolor jubet: Joseph. de ^e^. Iud. l. 6. c. 16
Puto si Romani contra noxios venire tardassent, a^t ^iatu terrae devorandam
fuisse civitatem, aut diluvio perituram, aut fulmina ac Sodomae incendia
passuram. Sexcenta millia mortuorum portis ejecta, quorum sepulturae erant ex
oppido ejectio.

Sacrilege is a very dangerous sin. Cacus met with his match, when he robbed
Hercules. Mercury (say the Poets) had a mind to steal Jupiter's thunderbolts,
but durst not meddle, lest he should speed as Prometheus had done for stealing
fire. The Eagle in the fable, that stole a piece of flesh from the Altar, and
carried it together with a live-coal that stuck to it, to his nest, set his
young and all on fire. Dionysius that robbed his God, was cast out of his
Kingdom, though he was wont to boast, that he had it bound to him with chains
of Adamant. And Belshazzar paid dear for drinking in the bowls of the Sanctuary.

In a word, Such do but as the fish that swallows the hook; it proving as
unfortunate and fatal to them, as the Gold of the Temple of Tholose did to
Scipio's soldiers, of which, whoever carried any part away, never prospered
afterward.

I might be large in giving instances this way: Only consider what a sad end
befell Cardinal Wolsey, whilst he sought more to please the King than God, as
himself said: And what a revenging hand of God pursued five of his Servants,
that were instrumental for him in a sacrilegious enterprise. Whereupon
Scultetus wishes; Annal. 3 32.
Vtinam his and similibus exemplis edocti discant homines res semel Deo
consecratas timide attrectare! I would men would take heed by these and the
like examples, how they meddle with things once consecrated to God! Such (as a
Divine says very well) may be compared to those that being of a cold and
phlegmatic stomach; eat hard and choleric meats; Well they may please their
palates, but it cannot be for their health; and may justly fear to have their
meat sauced, and drink spiced with the bitter wrath of God.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans 2.22. Mat. 3.8,
9.


Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. -- Ye are cursed with a curse, for
ye have robbed me, -- Prove. 20.25.


It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy.

Read Joel 3.5. Dan. 5.23, 24, etc.

Tithes.
Bellarmine contendeth, that Tithes are due to the Ministry, Non jure divine,
sed ecclesiastico: Yet he allows, that in some sense it may be affirmed, that
they are due jure divino.

1. Quoad substantiam, non quantitatem. 2. Si addatur ecclesiae determinatio.
3. That the very quantity is due, jure divino: non ex vi juris divini, sed ex
vi juris ecclesiastici.
These are nothing else but starting-holes: For it is a firm and immovable
truth, that the very Quantity is due to the Ministers of the Gospel, whether
the Church determine it or not; for Gods institution depends not on the
constitution of the Church.

Tithes they say are Jewish: But if Melchisedech (of whom afterward) tythed
Abraham, by the same right whereby he blessed him; And if Tithes by all laws of
God, Nature and Nations, have been hallowed to God (as Junius and other Modern
Divines argue and allege;) And if things consecrated to Gods service, may not
be alienated; It will appear to be otherwise.

They are due to the Ministers of the Gospel; not of alms or of benevolence,
but of justice we have a right and interest to them. The labourer is worthy of
his hire; A beggar is not worthy of alms: When ye give a labourer his hire, ye
give him but his due.

All are to pay, high and low, rich and poor, because it belongs ad justitiam
commutativam, in qua non consideratur conditio personae, sed qualitas rei ad
rem.

Give to Caesar, the things that are Cesar's; and to God, the things that are
God's. Caesari tributa, Deo decimas. Nay more, Decimae non dantur clericis,
quia boni sunt, sed quia clerici sunt: sicut tributa dantur regibus, non quia
probi, sed quia reges sunt. How cheerfully then ought ye to give it to them,
that are faithful and diligent in the work of the Lord?

But if any man list to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. This is a thing controversal in this last and wicked age of
the world, wherein charity waxes cold, as to all in general, so to the
Ministers in special: But it may be sufficiently evinced out of the Word of
God: We need not (says one) stand to man's Courtesy, for then in most places
we should have a Cursie.

Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
live of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are
partakers with the altar?

Even so (Note that) has the Lord ordained, (...)
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Simony.
Qui vendunt vel emunt praebenda Ecclesiarum, dicuntur tales a Simone,
Simon^ales. The buying of Spiritual things is so called, from Simon Magus his
offer.

The Schoolmen generally define it thus: B^^l^f^r.
Est studiosa voluntas emendi, vel vendendi aliquod spirituale, seu spirituali
annexum. So not the hand only, but the heart commits Simony. (...).
There was no Pactum between Simon Magus and the Apostles, but only voluntas:
He made an offer of money to them; and that was condemned. And if so, who then
in this Age, almost, can say, he is assured to have a good conscience in this
thing?

For the branches, it is committed four ways: 1. Per pecuniam: Sad, when Lady
Pecunia is the Janitrix to let men into the Church. 2. Per adulationem; which
is venenum mellis dulcedine palliatum. 3. Per importunas preces ambientium; Est
orare ducum species violenta jubendi. 4. Per sordidum obsequium; Ready to do
any base kind of service.


Whereas the Ambassador of Christ should resemble his Master Christ in the
Church. Mind Gal. 4.14. and Gal. 1.10.

Ecclesiastica benefici^ nullo modo vendere licet, Aquin.
quia eis venditis intelliguntur spiritualia venditioni subjici.

Simonaici tam vendentes quam ementes spiritualia, poenis puniuntur, scil.
infamia and depositione, si sint Clerici; and excommunicatione, si sint Laici.
Idem.

If thou come in by Simony (says Ambrose) Caro dominatur populis, animae
servit daemonibus: Caro sacerdotium comparavit, anim^ detrimentum Paravit.

I shall shut up this with those Verses, which were not amiss to be imprinted
in the hearts of all.

Haec duo damna feres, si tu sis Simonis haeres,
Mortuus ardebis, and vivus semper egebis.
-- Simon offered them money; saying, Give me this power, Act. 8.
-- But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, -- Thy heart is not
right in the sight of God, etc. Things indifferent.
Sunt autem res mediae, opera sive actiones, quae in sese, sive suapte natura,
nec Bucan:
nec bonae vel malae sunt: sed ex usus ipsarum circumstantiis, vel bonae, vel
malae causentur: Aut res indifferentes, sive actiones dicuntur, quae lege, aut
verbo Dei neque praecise jubentur, neque express prohibentur fieri.

These things indifferent may not be used indifferently, But with caution, 1.
Concerniing Faith, that we do nothing with a doubting conscience. 2. We must
have respect to our brethren, whether strong, weak or obstinate, that we give
none offense unto them thereby. 3. That Christians do not condemn one another,
for the using or not using of things of this nature.


It is a safe rule, Quod dubites, ne feceris: Plin. Epist. Mallem praesentia
and tuta, quam vetera and pericalosa. Tacit.
In doubtful cases be sure to take the surer side.

An erroneous Conscience makes a thing unlawful; for actions receive their
qualification, according to the will of the agents, and the will is moved by
the thing apprehended: If reason judge that thing to be sin, and yet the will
be carried unto it, it is manifest that such an one has a will to sin; and the
outward action which is informed by the will, whether it be lawful or unlawful
in it self, is a sin.

Nih^l faciendum de quo dubites necne recte factum; Nothing is to be done,
Cicer. Ossic. l. 1.
which thou doubtest whether it may be lawfully done or no, said a Heathen man.

Posse and nolle, nobile est. Forbear for fear of offense, unless it be in
point of necessary duty; for then we may not do evil, that good may come, Romans
3.8.

Omnia libera per fidem, serva per charitatem: Faith gives liberty, but Charity
is a binder. Paul by faith may circumcise Timothy; by charity he will not
circumcise Titus.

Off with that hair, away with that apparel, those colors, etc. which wound
thy weak brothers soul. It will be no grief of heart (as Abigal told David in
another case) to have forborne, in case of scandal. A great grief it would be,
if by some rash word we should betray a brother, or smite out the eye of our
dearest child: Should we then destroy the life of grace in another, by our
unadvised walking?

Unto the pure, all things are pure. Read 1 Timothy 4.4. Tit. 1.15. Romans 14.3.


Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him which eats. Verse. 15.


Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

Read Romans 14 5. 1 Cor. 8.11, etc.

Questions.
The Schoolmen were great Questionists; and they had it from the Artemonites, a
sort of Heretics, Anno Christi 220. that, out of Aristotle and Theophrastus,
corrupted the Scripture, by turning all into questions. In detestation of whose
vain jangling and doting about questions, Luther says, Prope est ut jurem,
nullum esse Theologum Scholasticum qui unum caput Evangelii intelligat; I durst
swear almost, that there was not one School-Divine, Tom. 1. Oper. lat. Ep. 47.
that rightly understood one Chapter of the Gospel. Again, God loves
Curristas, non Quaeristas, says he.

It is a question of the Papists, Whether an Ass drinking at the Font, do drink
the water of Baptism, and so may be said to be baptized? But Melancton answered
well, Est quaestio digna Asinis. Such Questionists are (as Stapleton says of
Bodin) Magna nugatores, great Triflers.

True it is, we must be ready to render a reason of our faith; but then it must
be when we see it will be to some good purpose; Nodum nodo dissipat. Aret.
as if otherwise, forbear; or u^ty one knot with another, as Christ did, Mat.
21.24.

-- Sick about questions, 1 Timothy 6.4. (...). 2 Timothy 2.23.
--

But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes.

Read 1 Timothy 1.4. Tit. 3.9, etc.

Imagination.
This Janus of Imagination has different faces: The face toward Reason, has
the print of Truth; the face toward Action, has the print of Good: which
nevertheless are faces, Quales decet esse sororum.

In matters of Religion, Imagination is raised above Reason; hence is the
cause, why Religion sought access to the mind by Similitudes, Types, Parables,
Visions and Dreams.

Those that abused the light of nature, Romans 1.21. (...).
for a reward, became vain in their imaginations. Sense and Motion.
Sense is that faculty, whereby a man in his body is enabled to discern things
without himself, and accordingly to desire and move to them.

1. Seeing, by which man is not only enabled to behold the Creation, and see
what God has wrought; but finds it a chief help for all the employments of
life in all callings. 2. Hearing, (which is performed after a wonderful manner)
by which is let into the soul and body not only sounds of delight, but also of
necessity. 3. Tasting, by which we distinguish of meats profitable or hurtful
to the body. 4. Smelling, by which we receive in those delightful scents God
has caused to arise from diverse of his creatures, and to avoid things noisome.
5. Touching, which (though it be the most stupid sense) is of great use for
man's safety.
These are called Outward senses; and what images of diverse things they have
got by going abroad, they do deliver in to the Common sense, the Fantasy and
Memory, where they are received in, refined and treasured up; and these are
called the Inward senses. So that the former may be called the Body's guard,
and the Soul's int^lligencers.

All sense proceeds from the brain, and therefore is placed (as Galen
observes) in the upper part of the body, as the fittest situation for
convenience to the senses, of the eyes and sight especially. The spring and
original of the senses (says another) is in the common sense, seated in the
forepart of the head: This differs from the rest of the senses, as the root
from the branches, or as a line drawn from the point.

Our senses are inlets to the understanding; and therefore the senses of the
body are advantageous to the mind: The eye does not see for it self, or for the
body only, but the eye sees for the understanding: The like may be said of the
rest of the senses. They may be servants to sin, or servants to grace. Let not
therefore those senses which God has given us, both for natural uses to the
body, and for spiritual uses to the soul, be abused and turned to the
disservice of the body, much less to the destruction and damnation of the soul.
For by these the heart may in a moment be both affected and infected.

Amongst the rest, Seeing and Hearing are two principal senses of inquisition,
and reporcers of knowledge, never satisfied: yet no knowledge of Gods will
revealed by the senses: As one of Plato's School said, That the sense of man
carries a resemblance with the Sun, which (as we see) opens and reveals
all the terrestrial Globe; but then again, it obscureth and concealeth the
stars, and celestial Globe: So does the sense discover natural things, but it
darkeneth and shuts up divine. Hence it is, that many learned men have been
heretical, whilst they sought to fly up to the secrets of the Deity, by the
waxen wings of the Senses.

Of the Senses, read Eccl. 1.8. Job 6.30. cap. 12.11. Genesis 27.12.21.27. 1 Cor.
12.17, etc. 2 Cor. 5.7.


But we walk by faith, not by sight.

Motion is one of those two sorts of senses, wrought by the soul upon the body.
For of it self it is but a dead lump, as it shows it self to be, when the soul
is gone out of it.

The soul gives unto the body a threefold motion:





Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. driving it to the motion of the
whole, or some part of it. And in vain were appetites or desires given to the
creatures, if this motion were not given, because without it they could never
compass things desired.

In God we live, and move, and have our being. Act. 17.28.
Reason.
Duplex est actus rationis (say the Schoolmen) Primus and secundus: Ita and
duplex actus scientiae, primus and secundus. There is in an Infant the first
act of reason, when he begins to speak; and the second act, when he
begins to learn: So then (say they) the first act of knowledge, is the
second act of reason. An Infant has the first act of reason, but not the
second; And a learned man, when he is sleeping, has the first act of
knowledge, but not the second.

Reason is that faculty or power of the soul, whereby we debate and discourse
of things and objects, that we may be able soundly to judge of that which we
rightly understand. Sometimes it is taken for the use of this faculty, viz.
Discretion. Act. 25.27.

Or, Reason is a faculty of the soul, wherein men excel all creatures in this
visible world. This is admirable, for by the light of this man can conceive of
things, as well as by sense; yea, of things that never were in the senses. It
can conceive of the nature of God, and discern him from his works. It can
conceive of things by a discerning reflection; conceiving of it self, and
understanding that it does understand. It can distinguish between good and
evil, truth and falsehood, viz. the moral goodness of things. It can in a small
moment of time go almost over the whole world, and view it all. It can (in a
sort) invent things that never were in being, etc.

And yet bare reason is further from grace, than sense is from reason. The
distance between man's nature and grace, is greater than that between man's
nature and a beast's. It is as easy to change a beast into a man, or to make a
beast understand reason; as to change a Sinner into a Saint, or to make an
Infidel a Believer.

Neither is mere humane reason any competent Surveyer of the ways of God. Not
that any of the ways of God are against reason, but many of them are above our
reason; the ways of God are ordered by the quintescence of reason, but in
which of the sons of Adam is that to be found? When we measure the ways of God
by the standard and scantlings of our reason, what a disguise do we put upon
them? Yea, how do we disguise God himself? We make him a Justice, a Mercy --
like our own, Isa. 55.8.
what a God do we make of him? My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the Lord. And shall any reduce and shrink up the
thoughts and ways of God, to their narrow and straightened model? The Lord said
of Adam in scorn, when he attempted a likeness to God, Behold, the man is
become as one of us, Gen 3.22.
to know good and evil. How then does God scorn them, that would make his
ways and thoughts as their own?

When therefore we are apt to think there is no reason for that, for which we
our selves can see no reason; Consider, What if God should appear and tell
thee, It shall be thus, and the reason of it is, because I will have it so? Is
not that answer enough to any man? The will of God is reason enough, and ought
to be the most satisfying reason.

Many there are in the world, whose actings outrun their reason; they speak
they know not what, and they do they know not why; In a word, they are more
busy than wise. The inadvertency of such, our Savior made the ground of his
Prayer, Luke 23.34.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. But the soul has her
senses as well as the body, Heb. 5. ult. And Reason is the souls taster,
distinguishing truth from falsehood, as the palate distinguishes bitter from
sweet. Princes have their tasters before they eat, lest there should be poison
in the dish. God has given unto man a taster for his spiritual meat.

There are three sorts of minds in the world. 1. Corrupt. 2. Natural. 3.
Spiritual. And answerably three kinds of reasonings.

Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Here was a
reasoning in this, but it was corrupt. In this sense the most unreasonable man
has reasoning in him; he never does any thing, but he has some kind of reason
for it.

Mark 3.6. Christ had told a Leper his sins were forgiven; the Scribes sitting
there, reason in their hearts, Why does this man speak blasphemy? Who can
forgive sins but God? This was properly corrupt, but true reasoning, Here was
only the defect, natural light comes too short, they did not see that he was
God, and therefore might forgive sins; Else it was true enough according to
their Principle, had he been but a mere man; but their reason was lame and low.



The whole bulk of godliness consists either in 1. Believing. 2. Doing, or 3.
Suffering.


And consult but these Scriptures, Hebr. 11.19. 2 Cor. ^, 14. Romans 8.18. And
though (in the first of them at least) there is nothing that seems to be more
without reason, yet you will find that in them all there is the purest,
sublimest and most excellent reason. What we say of Logic, in a natural way,
Logic is the Art of reasoning, that is the definition of it; may truly be said
of godliness in a spiritual way, godliness is the true Art of spiritual
reasoning. 2 These. 3.2. (...).
Hence there is not one dram of spiritual reasoning, but in godly people; and
therefore wicked men that have not faith, they are said to be absurd or
unreasonable men. Men compact of mere incongruities, solecising in all;
opinion, speeches and actions.

As the mind or understanding is the highest faculty of the soul; so the
reasonings are the most immediate and highest acts of the mind. From them it
comes to the will and affections, and then it goes out into the actions.
Therefore the mind is Christ's or the Devils chief throne. The reasonings of the
mind, are the chief strength of the mind, the immediate flowings of the mind.

Hence the most rational men (if wicked) are the worst men in the world,
because they have more strength of reason than other men; and the reason being
corrupt and naught, the stronger it is, the worse the man is.

Therefore (said a godly Divine) if I have a child or a friend that is wicked,
I wish he may never be very rational; because the stronger his reason is, being
corrupt, the worse will his will and affections be. Insanire cum ratione.
Many of the vulgar are mad without reason, they will hate a thing upon
hearsay; but when men are mad with reason (that is with wicked reason) they
are mad to purpose. Labor to get up our hearts to be swayed by spiritual
reason, and let Gods people be careful to perform such service unto God, as
whereof they can render a sound and intelligible reason out of his Word. Romans
12.1.

-- Cannot my taste discern perverse things. Job. 6.30. (...) Cap. 32.8. 1 Cor.
2.11.


But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding.

What man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is in him?

Affections.
They do often saucily insult over sound reason, as Hagar did over his
Mistress. They are exitus animae, the outgoing of the soul.
Like a watery humor coming between the eye and the object, and hindering the
sight. Like the mud which arising in the water, troubles and confounds the
seeing spirits.

They are oftimes ponderous bolts and clogs, causing us to cleave to the center
of misery. And whereas they should be the whetstones of virtue, Gratia non
tollit, sed att^^lit naturam. Lactant. Luke 14.9, 10.
they frequently prove the firebrarnds of vice.

The remedy is not to turn them out of doors, for then a tribe would be
wanting in the souls mystical Microcosm: But to correct their exorbitancy, and
reduce them into right order: using our Saviors language to them, Friends,
come down lower; and to sound judgment, sit up higher.

Respect of Persons.
The word properly signifies accepting of ones face, or outside, (...)
and so notes a respect to others out of a consideration of some external
glory that we find in them. So that respect of persons is had, when in the same
cause we give more or less to any one than is meet, because of something in
his person which has no relation to that cause.

Respect of persons is, 1. Warrantable. or, 2. Vicious.


It is lawful to prefer others out of a due cause, as their age, callings,
gifts, graces; yea, we ought to put a respect upon them, because of that
excellency wherewith God has furnished them. But when the judgment is blinded
by some external glory and appearance, and a cause is over-ballanced with such
circumstances as have no affinity with it; it is unlawful, and a sin.

In religious matters, we may be guilty of it many ways; I mention one, When
the same works have a different acceptance because of the different esteem and
value of the persons engaged in them. Omnia dicta tanti existimantur, quantus
est ipse qui dixerit, Avarit^. 1.
nec tam dictionis vim a^que virtutem, quam dictatoris cogitant dignitatem,
says Salvian.

A constant hearer of Calvin at Geneva, Ego, relicto Paulo, audirem Calvinum.
Zanch. Miscel praefat. Nolo tame^^ amplec^i Evangelium quod Lutherus (...).
Epist. ad Card. Mogu^t.
being solicited by Zanchy to hear Viret, an excellent Preacher, who preached
at the same time; answered, If Saint Paul himself should preach hear at the
same hour, I would not leave Calvin to hear Paul. Although I am not Ignorant
(said Gregory Duke of Saxony) that there are diverse errors and abuses crept
into the Church; yet I will none of that Gospel-reformation that Luther
preaches. And Erasmus observed, That what was accounted Orthodox in the
Fathers, was condemned as Heretical in Luther. Compertum est damnata ut
Haeretica in libris Lutheri, quae in Bernardi, Augustinique libris ut
Orthodoxa, imo and pia leguntur.

Thus too many look upon the cup, rathar than the liquor; regarding the man;
more than the matter; not considering what, but who brings it; in which they
do prefer the earthen vessel before the golden treasure: And many times are apt
to despise excellent things, because of the despicablenesse of the instrument.

My brethren, James 2.1.
have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect
of persons. Opinion.
Opinio est ascensus pendulus, scientia immobilis. Als^ed.

There are (says one) as many internal forms of the mind, as external figures
of men.

That was a strange spirit of Bacon the Carmelite, who would endure no
guessing, or doubting; And was therefore called Doctor Resolutissimus; as
requiring that every one should think as he thought: This (as a worthy Divine
says) was too Magisteriall. Job 32.10.


-- I also will show mine opinion. Controversy.
Optimus ille censendus (says an Ancient) qui in Religionis controvers^is
retulerit magis quam attulerit: neque id cogat videri tenendum, quod
presumserit intelligendum.

But there are many now a days, that fain what they please, and conceit what
they like; and at last think themselves bound to justify their wild
conceivings.

Let us therefore as many as be perfect, Phil. 3.15.
be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. Strife.
A quarrelsome person is like a cock of the kind, ever bloody with the blood of
others and himself. He loves to live (Salamander-like) in the fire of
contention.

We read of Francis the first King of France, that consulting with his Captains
how to lead his Army over the Alps into Italy, whither this way, or that way?
Amaril his fool, sprang out of a corner, where he sat unsean, and bade them
rather take care, which way they should bring their Army out of Italy again.
Even so, it is easy for one to interest himself in quarells, but hard to be
disingaged from them, when once in.

There are that make it their work to cast the Apple of contention amongst
others; such are the Pests of societies, and must therefore be carefully cast
out, with scoffing Ishmael.

Such kindle-coals are Satan's seeds-men, who is an unquiet spirit, and strives
to make others so; Loves to fish in troubled waters, does all he can to set one
man against another, that he may prey upon them both: Greg.
As the Master of the Pit suppeth upon the bodies of those cocks, whom he has
set to kill one another.

The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water: Prove. 17.14.
therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with. Read. Pro. 22.10.
Romans 13.13. 1 Cor. 11.16. Phil. 2.3. Jam. 3.14, 16, etc. Schism.
Schism in the Church, is the same that faction is in the Commonwealth; viz.
such dissentions in which men separate one from another. Or, It is a dissertion
or separation, when one or more separate and rent themselves, from the outward
fellowship of the faithful; cutting asunder the unity and peace of the Church,
upon some misgrounded mislike.

There can be no greater sin committed (says Chrysostom, Hom. 11. ad Ephesians.)
Inexpiab^is discordiae m^^ula, Marterii sanguine ablui and passion: g^rgari non
potest. Discordiam neque si sanguin^m fundemus, expiabiabimus. S^en^c.
than to break the peace of the Church. It is an inexpiable blemish (says
Cypr. lib. de unitat. Eccles.) such as cannot be washed off with the blood of
Martyrdom. The error of it may be pardoned (says Oecolampadius, in Epist. ad
frat. in svevia.) so there be faith in Christ Jesus; but the discord we cannot
expiate, though we should lay down our lives and blood to do it.

De verbo controversia est, de re quidem convenit. This is very much verified
amongst Christians in these days.

A Doctore glorioso, and Pastore contentioso, and inutilibus questionibus,
liberet Ecclesiam suam Dominus, said Luther, From a vainglorious Doctor, from
a contentious Pastor, and from endless and needless controversies, the good
Lord deliver his Church.

Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque est, christianus non est, qui in Christi
Ecclesia non est. Cypr. Q.


Are not all those Schismatics, who have dissented and separated from the
Church of Rome?

We indeed have separated our selves, A.
but they of the Church of Rome are Schismatics; because the cause of our
separation is in them: viz. their Idolatry, and manifold Heresies The case is
the like: A man threatens death to his wife: hereupon she seperates; yet not
she, but he makes the reperation: because the cause of the separation, and the
fault is in him. And therefore for the avoiding of Schism, remember this rule;
So long as a Church or people do not separate from Christ, we may not separate
from them.

Divisions are Satan's Powder-plots, to blow up Religion. All other sins
destroy the Church consequentially, but division and separation demolish it
directly.

The Church suffers by dissentions, whereof we ought to be as tender, as of
treading upon our parents that begat us.

Christi tunica est unica; they that rent it by schisms, are worse than the
rude soldiers.

To break unity in the Church, is to cut asunder the very veins and sinews of
the mystical body of Christ.

Schisms for the most part do degenerate into Heresies, as an old Serpent into
a Dragon.

Now I beseech you, Romans 16.17.
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Read Joh. 19.23. 1 Cor. 1.13.
Cap. 3.3, 4. Gal. 5.20. etc.

Concord.
In primitiva Ecclesia, says one, Christiani animo animaque inter se
miscebantur, and omnia praeter uxores, indiscreta habebant. Sed fraternitas
omnis ^odie extincta est, and unanimitas Primitiva non tantum diminuta (de quo
Cyprianus suis temporibus qu^ritur) sed e medio penitus sublata esse videtur.

Presently after the Primitive times, an Heathen could say, Nullae infestae
hominibus bestiae, ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christiani, No beasts are so
mischievous to men, as Christians are one to another. Sad! And the Turk can
say, he shall sooner see his fingers all of a length, than Christian Princes
all of a mind.

Of the ancient Britanis, Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincun^^^
Tacitus tells us, that nothing was so destructive to them, as their
dissentions. And Cyprian said of those persecutions in his days, Non venissent
fratribus haec mala, si in unum fraternitas fuisset animata.

Alexander the great his men, passing the river Tigris (which for the
swiftness is also called Arraw) by clasping themselves together, made so
strong a body, that the stream could not bear them down. Methinks it is high
time for us now to set aside all private emulations and exceptions; As the
creatures in the Ark laid by their Antipathies within, because of the common
danger of an inundation without.

The number of two has by the Heathens been accounted accursed; because it was
the first that departed from unity.

Concordiares parvae crescunt, Yea, Communion of Saints is the next happiness
upon earth, to communion with God.

Keep the unity of the spirit, Ephesians. 4.3.
in the bond of peace. Behold, Psalm. 133.1. (...) Devincientiam. Trem.
how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity. This
staff of binders ought to be kept unbroken. See Zech. 11.7.14.
Church-Ordinances.
Prophets.
THe word Propheta is diversely taken, for the writings of the Prophets; They
have Moses and the Prophets, or the Law and the Prophets: For a Preacher, a
Divine, an Interpreter, a Watchman, a Pastor, a man of God, an Angel of God, a
fore-seer, a fore-teller, as Isaiah, Jeremie, etc.

They were called Seers, because the eye is surer than the care, and seeing
more certain than report.

Tanta est profunditas Christianarum literarum, (says Austin) so great is the
depth of Divine learning, that there is no fathoming of it. Prophets are
pictured like a Matron, with her eyes covered, for the difficulty. For which
cause some learned men, (as Paulinus, Nolanus, Psellus in Theodoret, any
others) would not be drawn to write Commentatries.

Yet difficulty does but whet desire in gallant spirits. The more harder the
vision, the more earnest was the Prophets inquisition.

-- Searching (with greatest sagacity and industry, as hunters seek for game, 1
Pet. 1.10, 11. (...).
and as men seek for gold in the very mines of the earth, so much the word
imports) What, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them
did signify. There are three sorts of false Prophets set down by Hierom; 1. Qui
nimium instahant somniis vanis. 2. Qui ad dirimendum veros Proph^tas, dixerunt
se habere visiones Dei. 3. Qui ut ^ Populo nobiles haberensur, dixerunt se
Prophetas. The first in a Fantastical humor imagined every dream to be a
prophecy. Thesecond like foxes to destroy Gods vineyard, in envy of the Lords
Prophets: arrogated to themselves the spirit of Prophecy. The third drunk with
vainglory, for their better credit among the people, assumed the name of
Prophets. The three marks in a word are, Falsity, Impiety, Ignorance.

Both the old Church and new were ever pestered with public deceivers; boldly
obtruding upon them erroneous opinions for Divine Oracles, and seeking to drag
disciples after them; Such as of late times were Servetus, Socinus, V^rstius,
Pelargus; the first Anabaptist, etc. Compelling people by their persuasions to
embrace those distorted Doctrines, that produce convulsions of conscience.

The Manichees derived their name of Manna; because they held that whatsoever
they taught, was to be received as food from heaven. Mon^anus said, he was the
Comforter, etc Novatus called himself Moses, and a brother that he had Aaron.
The family of love set out their Evangelium r^gni. The Swenkfeldians ( Luther
called them Stinkfeldians from the ill favor of their opinions) entitled
themselves with the glorious name, The confessors of the Glory of Christ.

They have their Pithanology, their good words and fair speeches, Demon
mentitur ut fallat blanditur ut noc^at, bona promittit ut mala tribuat, vitam
pollicetur ut perimat; lucent ejus verba, venena tamen sun^ manifesta. Cypr
Sun^ mala mista bonis, sunt bona mista malls. Vitate (...) qui oves a Pastore
secernunt. Cyp^
wherein (says a pregnant Author) they can vent a spittle of diseased
opinions, and whereby they deceive the hearts of the simple. It is not safe
therefore to hear or hold discourse with such, lest they insinuate and infect;
as the Montanists did Tertullian; the Valentinians diverse well-affected
Christians; And as Acacius did Anastatius second Bishop of Rome.

False teachers, some truths they will teach, the better to persuade to their
falsehoods. As one says wittily, together with the gold, silver and Ivory of
Orthodox Tenets, they have store of Apes and Peacocks. As in Solomon's ships, 1
King. 10.22.

Libert as prophetandi is much challenged by Arminius and other Sectaries. But
if in matter of Religion every man should think what he lists, and utter what
he thinks, and desend what be utters, and publish what he defends, and gather
disciples to what he publishes; this liberty (or licentiousness rather) would
soon be the bane of any Church.

But who shall hinder? Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? was a question moved by
the old Donatists and our new Dolts. Answ. The power spoken of, Deuteronomy. 13. is
still in the Christian Magistrate, to inflict capital punishment on gross
Heretics such as Servetus at Geneva, and Campian here, etc. And this they may
in time be convinced of (Persecution and Prosecution may be easily differenced)
when they begin to see both themselves and their webs (spider-like) swept down
by the hand of Justice.

There were false Prophets among the people, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
even as there shall be false teachers among you --

And many shall follow their perni^i^r^^ ways, etc.

Of the Sibyls.
(...), Q. Jovis consilio^^m conscia. Heyl. (...) recepit.
quasi (...), Aeolice pro (...), and (...), i. e. Jovis consilium, vel
conciliaria. Alii a Kabala a Kibel, i.e. Doctrine a divinitus promulgata,
animisque hominum sanctorum, a Deo infusa. Est autem generale nomen enthearum
puellarum, i. e. numine deorum afflatarum.

Concerning their number and names, Authors do much vary; Some common pieces
make them twelve, that is Sibylla, Delphica, Erythraea, Samia, Cumana, Cumaea,
or Cimmeria, Hellespontiaca, Lybica, Phrygia, Tiburtina, Persica, Epirotica,
and Aegyptica. Others precisely ten, leaving out the two last. And others make
them far fewer. So that in the enumeration of them, I perceive learned men are
not satisfied; and many conclude an irreconcilable uncertainty.

Neither will I much meddle with their pictures which are very common, and such
(I think with Dr. Brown) as pleased the Painter. For touching their age, they
are generally described as young women, which History will not allow; The Sibyl
Virgil speaking of, Anus quasi (...)sine mente.
being termed by him Longaeva Sacedos; Another is termed Anus, that is properly
no woman of ordinary age, but full of years, and in the days of dotage, as
some do Etymologyze the word. And it was thought of one that she doted with old
age; so that (as says my Author) with the same reason they may delineate old
Nestor like Adonis, Haecuba with Helen's face, and time with Absoloms head.

Hae omnes de nativitate lequebantur salvatoris nostri. Nascetur Propheta
absque matris coitu, ex utero ejus. Cosmograph. l. 2.
And for their Prophesies of Christ, have been in high esteem; Insomuch that
Munster has this saying, Cum notamus quid certum and indubitatum, ob
certitudinem and infallibilitatem qua in Oraculis hisce Sibyllinis semper fuit
inventa, dicimus, Sibyllae folium est, as true as Sibylla's Oracle.

B^^an places them with the Prophecy of Balaam, and Caiaphas, concerning
Christ, and the mysteries of man's salvation, and says of them all thus, A deo
esse profect^, and ipsis vel non intelligentibus, vel aliud cogitantibus
suggesta; ut tum Gentes, Loc. Com. 78.
tum Judaei increduli, suor um etiam hominum convincerentur, and redderentur
inexcusabiles: ideoque vaticinia illa ^udienda, quiae oraculis Prophetarum sunt
consentanea. Yet it is to be feared that such persons (though Gods word did
pass from them, as the speech that is uttered through a Trunk) did not believe
nor eat the word they spoke; no more than Plato, Seneca, and other Heathens, in
their divine sentences.

It is conceived that those wise men mentioned Mat. 2. had heard of Jesus
Christ, the true morning star; either from the Chaldaean Sibyl, or from the
Jews in the Babilonish captivity; or from the prophecy of Balaam, for he was
an East-countrey-man, and uttered a very clear and comfortable Prophesy of the
Messiah, by whom himself received no benefit.

Thus God has spoken through persons not of the best, as the Angel spoke in
Balaams Ass. In impiis quandoq^e sunt do^ae Dei, sine Deo.
Wholesome sugar may be found in a poisoned Cane, a precious stone in a Toads
head, and a flaming torchin a blind man's hand, whereby others may receive
benefit, though himself receive none. Yea, some wicked men have greater common
gifts than the godly, as many metals are brighter and more orient than the
heavens.

-- This spoke he not of himself, John 11.51.
-- Read Numb. 23. and 24. Psalm. 68.18. Mat. 7.22. etc. Christ our Savior.
Nomen Jesus salut is beneficiu^ quod ab illo expe^t a^dum de^ notat.

Concerning the word (...), says Cicero, Hoc vero quantum est? ita magnum, ut
latino uno verbo exprimi non possit. The Greek word for Savior is so
emphatical, that other tongues can hardly find a fit word to express it.

Judas Macchabeus, and Hircanus, and such a one was Flaminius the Roman, Hlu^.
in Flam.
to the poor Argives; who therefore called him Savior, Savior, and that with
such a courage, Vt corvi fortuito super volantes, in stadium deciderent, (...).
that the birds fell to the earth, amazed with that outcry, the air was so
dissipated with their acclammations.

Tim. 4.16. Jam. 5.20. Job 33.24. etc. Let Ministers hence learn both their
dignity and duty.

Yet true it is, Christ (to speak properly) is the sole both Sovereign and
Savior of his body the Church: Is nimirum soter est, qui salutem dedit.
Sed servatores dicuntur (says Mercer) but they are called Saviors, because
they preach the word of this salvation, and are instrumental to Christ in that
great work, like as the Apothecary is to the skilful Physician, in curing his
patient of a deadly disease.

They that made Angels or Saints Saviors, as Papists do; Lib. adve s. haeres.
do (as Iraeneus says) abscindere and devidere Jesum a Christo, Christum a
salvatore, salvatorem a verbo, and verbum ab unigenito.

Unto us is born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Him has God exalted with
his right hand, Luke 2.11. Acts 5.31.
to be a Prin^e and a Savior for to give Repentance and forgiveness of sins.
To the only wise God our Savior be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now
and ever. Amen. Apostles.
The chief office to which the Apostles were designed by Christ, Apostolatus
era^ functio, quae post fundatus semel Ecclesias, succ^ssionem non admisit; sed
cum ipsis Apo^tolis des^it. Down.
was to bear witness of him, and that they might be enabled to the faithful
discharge of it, he promised he would, and accordingly did after his ascension,
cause them to receive the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon them.

If we look upon them with a carnal eye, their condition was mean and low,
there was nothing in them that might render them worthy of so high a
Prerogative: they were poor rude illiterate despised fishermen: In this
respect it is the Apostle says, We have this treasure (not in golden or
silver, but) in earthen vessels. 2 Cor. 4.7.
Yet they were to be the first Publishers of the Doctrine concerning Christ
come in the flesh; yea, they were not only to be the first declarers, but in
some kind or other sufferers for the truth of that which they did declare? And
therefore had need to be furnished, as aforesaid.

They were men of holy and exemplary lives, Phil. 2.15.
men that did shine as lights in the world by their good conversation; men whom
those grand Apostates and enemies of Christianity, could charge with nothing
but simplicity.

It is said, that Andrew watered Achaia, James the elder Spain, the younger
Jerusalem, Thomas India, Philip Syria, Bartholomew Armenia, Matthew Aethiopia,
Simon Mesopotamia, Thaddeus Egypt, Matthias Judea, John the Evangelist Asia,
And Peter, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, etc.

Or if you will have what other histories record, Thomas preached to the
Parthians, Medes, Persians, Germans. Simon Zelotes. in Mauritania, Africa,
Brittannia. Judas called Thaddaeus in Mesopotamia. Mark in Egypt. Bartholomew
to the Indians. And Andrew to the Scythians.

Thus their sound went into all the earth, Romans 10.18.
and their words unto the ends of the world.

Paul is pictured with a sword in one hand, and a Bible in the other; Durandus.
to show what he was before and after conversion.

Let Ministers of the Gospel remember it is their duty, as well as it was the
Apostles, to bear witness to Christ; and therefore be true and faithful,
asserting only the truth of the Gospel. And let people receive with faith what
is by them attested with truth; that as there is fidelitas in test, so there
may be fides in auditore, these faithful witnesses may find believing ears.

These men are the servants of the most high God, Acts 16.17.
which show unto us the way of salvation. Presbyter.
Talem vere esse decuerat, Joseph. and Mat.
and tormentis fortior, torquentibus durabilior, securior quoque imperantibus,
ipso etiam pro crematus est igne violentior. In laudem Eleezari sub Antiocho
Martyris.

Hodie quidem gravitur advigilatur nequis Presbyter ordinetur, qui corporis
aliqua part sit mutilus ne de honestetur Ecclesia: Erasm. in vit. Origin.
Vtinam pari studio advigiletur, ne quis ad hec honoris recipiatur, nisi cui
men's sit integra: mentem turpitur mutilam habet, cui deest S. literarum
cognitio, turpius qui nullo pietatis amore ducitur; and paulo post, totus
inclinatur in mundum, a Christo praet^r titulum alienus.

The Athenians had their (...), which was a solemn examination of the
Magistrates, whether fit to govern or no; and of Orators, whether of good
practice and report; otherwise they were dispriviledged, and not suffered to
speak or plead publicly. In Ordination of Presbyters, all possible care and
caution is to be used.

Lay hands suddenly on no man. 1 Timothy 5.2^.
Minister of the Word.
Will thou leap into Moses chair, or rather into Christ's Chair, and have not
gifts in some comparable measure to teach the people out of it? Certainly one
day it will be said to all saucy and insufficient Ministers, Friends how came
you hither? Who made you the dressers of my vineyard, (...)?
that have no skill to dress it? who made you dividers of my word, that mangle
it, and cannot cut aright? who made you builders of my house, that know not how
to square a stone, or frame a piece of timber for my house? Dancers have their
School (says Nazianzen) fiddlers and Musicianers are trained up to it, and is
the Ministry such a light thing, that whosoever will, as it was in Jeroboams
time, may be a Minister? It is (...). The greatest Doctors in Divinity, must be
Scholars all the days of their life: and who is sufficient for these things?

A Minister must look to three things, viz. 1. Qualification for the work. 2.
Mission or call to the work. 3. Execution and discharge of the work.


To unsent Preachers, we may use the Spanish Proverbs; Observe what have that
man makes, to leave his wits behind him. Such bablers do no more good than
they, Act. 19.13. The Apostle holds it for impossible, that any should preach
that are not sent, let such look to it as run before they are sent, press into
pulpits without a Call thereunto. Let them remember Nadab and Abihu, with their
strange fire; Core and his accomplices, with their dismal usurpations; and Vzzah
and Vzziah, with their exemplary punishments. If they do not, they shall smoke
and smart for it.

In Physicis a^r non facit seipsum ignem, Aquin.
sed fit a superiori. No man might come uncalled to the King of Persia, upon
pain of death. What then shall become of such as come without a Call to the
King of heaven? Christ would not let the Devil preach him, Quia extra
vocationem, because (as one well notes) he had no calling to such an office.

A Minister ought to wear out himself in the Lords work, both to spend and be
spent for the good of souls; Some have conceived by that text, Joh. 8.57. that
Christ had so spent himself, in winning souls, and weeping over the hardness
of men's hearts; that he seemed to the Jews to be much elder than he was.

Corruption optimi pessima. Woe to those Ministers, that with Elies sons, cover
black sins under a white Ephod: Such are fit for no place but Hell, as
unsavory salt, is fit for no place but the dunghill.

Gifts are in some men, tanquam in Organo; in others, tanquam in domicilio.
Schoolm.
But as Diamond is the best cutter of Diamond; so that takes most with the
heart, that comes from the heart,

All men must give an account for their idle words, and Ministers for their
idle (yea Idol) silence.

A Ministers Motto, is Holiness to the Lord, this must be written in his
forehead. Dxod. 28.(...)


Good Ministers should be as fixed stars in the Churches firmament, by the
influence of their lips feeding, by the regular motion of their lives
confirming, and by the light of both inlightning many.

A good Minister must be as Moses for his meekness, and a Phineas for his
Zeal. Athanasius was called, a lodestone for his sweetness, Magn^s and
Adamas. Ministers must be to their slocks, as Moses to Aaron, instead of God.
(...) Vici Dei. Ex. 4. Aut p^^cantem, aut praedicantem.
and an adament for his stoutnesse. The Apostles had fiery tongues, but yet
cloven. Barnabas and Boanerges, the son of consolation and of thunder, make a
good mixture. The good Samaritan poures into the soars, both wine to search,
and oil to supple. See further the requisites of a Minister, laid down by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. Where he is very exact in forming him.

John Baptist was the voice of on crying. Nazianzen says, he cried louder by
his life than doctrine: He was tota vox, his apparel, diet, conversation, etc.
Paul was insatiabilis Dei cultor; as Chrysostom calls him. And it was Austins
wish, that Christ when he came, might find him either praying or preaching, And
certainly there can be no better posture or state for the messenger of our
dissolution to find us in, than in a diligent prosecution of our general or
particular calling. Quid magis Ecclesiae curandum, quam ut idoneus praesit
Episcopus?


Those that despise or want the Ministry, have the chariot without the horses
and horsemen, 2 King. 2.12. the letter without a guide, Act. 8.31. they forget
whither their wresting of mysterious places conduces.

Ministers are the supporters of a people; So Aaron was to bear the names of
the children of Israel before the Lord on his two shoulders, for a memorial; so
upon his heart.

A good Minister is a friend in court, which we say, is better than penny in
purse: He is like a candle, which spends it self to give light to others; Or
like a cock, which by the clapping of his wings, awaketh himself, and by his
crowing, others. He is the very glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23.

The Ministry, is Onus ipsis etiam Angelis tremendum. Chrysostom.
A burden too heavy for an Angels shoulders, except God put under his arm.
Austin was termed Hereticorum malleus; but so sensible was he of the greatness
of his undertaking, that he wept when he first entered into any government of
the Church. Act. and Mon. 1578.
Bradford was hardly persuaded to become a Preacher. Latimer leapt when he had
laid down his Bishopric, being discharged (as he said) of such an heavy
burden. And Luther was wont to say, that if he were again to choose his calling,
he would dig or do any thing, rather than to take upon him the office of a
Minister.

See the sands, the gulfs through which a godly Minister must s^^le; if he do
his duty, the world hates him; if he do not, God will curse him: By the first
he is in danger to lose his goods, his name, his life; By the second his soul,
his heaven his God; But let us imitate Christ and his Apostles, Peter converted
souls, Paul subdued Kingdoms, Auctin brought great fame to Hippo, Ambrose to
Mi^ain, Ignatius to Antioch, Policarp to Smyrna. Dionisius Areopagita to
Athens, Irenaeus to Lions, Cyprian to Carthage, Gregory to Nissa, Theodoret to
Cyrus, etc. Shall we succeed them in chair and not in care?

Say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the
Lord, Col. 4.17.
that thou fulfill it. Pastor.
As Shepherds oftentimes go to seek the lost sheep, in a coat made of the
sheeps own wool; So Christ came to seek man in man's clothes: And mark in what
fit places he looked for him; In the womb, he sought man amongst men; In the
stable, amongst beasts; In the Temple, amongst heretics; in the cross,
amongst thieves; He looked also into the grave, where he found some of his
sheep fallen into the ditch.

See the pains Christ our Shepherd took to find us, Mat. 23.37. How willing he
is; 1. He groans for them. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! 2. How he loved them, how
often would I have gathered thee? 3. His kind entertainment, as a Hen her young
ones. Surely three Arguments that he was willing to find us.

Pastor oves 1. Educit de lacu miseriae. Psalm. 40.2. 2. Conducit per viam
justitiae. Psalm. 32.8. 3. Perducit ad pascua vitae. Psalm. 16.11.


Shepherds (as the Roman Postellers observe) must have three things, 1. Scrip.
2. Staff. 3. Whistle.


Where note by the way, that Romish Prelates and Priests, are first for the
Scrip, Cum non pascunt, sed pascantur: Non a Pasco derivantur, sed a pascor
pasceris. Acsi victuri assent sine ^ura, cum pervenirent ad curam.
then for the Staff, and last of all for the whistle; for the truth is, they
are all for the Scrip and Staff, and nothing for the Whistle; So long as they
are full fed (with the Priests of the Grove) fare well, and rule the roast, it
makes no matter in what Pasture the sheep feed, of what puddels they drink, or
in what ditch they starve. These shepherds feed themselves, and not the flock,
being more like Pasties than Pastors. These love the fleece more than the
flock.

A good Pastor must resemble the Planet Jupiter, Romans 13.13.
he must be 1. Benevolus in affectione, well-willing in affection. 2. Calidus
in dilectione, hot in love. 3. Humidus in compassione, moist in compassion. 4.
Diurnus in Conversatione, daily in conversation.


He must also discern the wholesome grass from the hurtful, and not suffer the
flock to taste of that.

-- He gave some Pastors. Ephesians. 4.11. John 21.15, 16.


Feed my lambs, feed my sheep.

The Word of God.
The Divine glass is the Word of God, the Politic glass is the state of the
world; many look on this, neglect that.

The Prerogative of God extends as well to the reason, Sacra Scriptura regula
credendi certissima tutissimaque.
as to the will of man; So that as we are to obey his law, though we find a
reluctance in our will; so we are to believe his Word, though we find a
reluctance in our reason.

Its happy when the Word falls into hearts, as showers of rain into a fleece of
wool; which fall gently, and are received as gently.

Pythagoras his ipse dixit, (...).
was enough to satisfy, or silence his whole school; so so should Gods Word
all carnal reasonings.

The Word has a twofold working, 1. Proper to convert, confirm, quicken grace
and save. 2. Accidental, through Satan and our corruption, to harden and make
worse, 2 Cor. 2.


We must labor to keep Gods Word, 1. In memory, Pro. 4.21. Deuteronomy. 4.9. In cujus
cord est lex Dei, imaginatio mala non habet in eum dominium.
Eaten bread is soon forgotten. 2. In affection, Psalm. 119.11. As the Pot of
Manna in the Ark. The Rabbines have a saying, He who has the law of God in his
heart, is armed against evil lusts. 3. In practice; A special help against
forgetfulness, yea, this is the best art of memory.

The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Psalm. 19.7.
Confession of Faith.
Ambrose calls the Creed the Key of the Scriptures.

The word [ Simbolum] amongst other significations, signifies a ring; and well
may it be so called, the matter whereof is dug out of the rich mines of the
Bible, refined with the fire of Gods Spirit, and accurately framed by the
blessed Apostles (or rather so called, because it is the sum of the Apostles
Doctrine) yea, the wedding Ring (as I may say) wherein the Minister at our
baptism wedds us to Christ.

Creed Presents us mainly with The act of faith, [ I Beleeve] wherein note, the
1. Particularity, [ I] we speak particularly in the Creed, I Believe; whereas
in the Lords Prayer we speak plurally, Our Father; because charity does require
us to pray one for another, but we cannot believe nor confess one for another,
Hab. 2.4.
For Spiritually as well as corporally each one must live by his own, and not
by another food and Physic: As also because no man knows what is in another
heart, 1 Cor. 2.11. 2. The formality [ I believe in] for there are
distinctions, viz.

Credere Deum, to believe there is a God: Deo, to believe God. In Deum, to
believe in God.


The very Devils do the first. Multi and mali do the second. But only a true
believer does the last; Credendo amare, Credendo in eum ire, credendo ei ad
haerere.

God] 1. Essentially, in name, God; in attributes Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth. 2. Personally, the Father Son, and Holy Ghost.

Further, in this Creed are observable, 1. The Articles, which are twelve; that
is, in common account, though not a like distinguished and expressed by all men
in the total number, or the particular enumeration. In all which, there is both
the confession of one God in three Persons, and of the Church with her
Prerogatives. 2. The assent, in the word Amen, which is a setting to of our
seal in point of believing; because it is a word not only of wishing, but of
assurance. Of which in the next place.

Fables are not without Moralls; A man must have a Personality of Faith, as
well as of devotion. There is an old Legend, of a Merchant who never would go
to Mass, but ever when he heard the Saints bell, he said to his wife, pray thou
for thee and me: Upon a time he dreamed that he and his wife were dead, and
that they knocked at Heaven-gates for entrance; St Peter (the feigned Porter)
suffered his wife to enter in, but shut him out, saying, Illa intravit pro se
and te; As she went to Church for thee, so she must go to heaven for thee also.

With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10.
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Amen.
This word is taken in Scripture three ways.

Viz. 1. Nominaliter, 2. Verbaliter, 3. Adverbialiter.


As a noun, and so it is as much as true, or truth; thus it is taken in the end
of the Gospels, and elsewhere, Rev. 3.14. As a Verb, and then is as much as So
be it; in which sense it is taken in the end of the Lords Prayer, and in diverse
other places, Deuteronomy. 27.15, etc. As an Adverb, signifying verily, and so often
used by our Savior.

Nec Graecum est, In Joh. tract. 41
nec Latinum (says Aug.) It is neither a Greek word, nor a Latin, but an
Hebrew word: Et mansit in interpretatum, and by the Providence of God remains
uninterpreted, ne vilesceret nudatum, lest happily being unfolded, it should be
less esteemed: As Hallelujah, Hosanna, etc.

It is Particula confirmantis, In Psalm. 40. Signaculum orationis. Jerome
a Particle of confirmation, as Ambrose well observes. So be it. So be it. The
Lord grant it may be so. It must in a fervent Zeal, be the shutting up of all
our prayers. It was doubled by the people, Neh. 8.6. when Ezra praised the
Lord, the great God, all the peeple answered, Amen, Amen. With lifting up their
hands, and no doubt their hearts too, Lam. 3.41. As the Church says, We mill
lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the Heavens. If the hand be lifted
up without the heart, it is an hypocritical Amen, and unacceptable unto God.

Dictio est acclamationis, approbationis, and confirmationis. The Rabbines say,
that our Amen in the close of our Prayers, must not be. 1. Hasty, but with
consideration, 1 Cor. 14.16, 2. Nor mained or defective; we must stretch out
our hearts after it, and be swallowed up in God. 3. Nor alone, or an Orphan;
that is, without faith, love and holy confidence.

The spirits of the whole prayer are contracted into it, and so should the
spirit of him that prays.

It is either prefixed or preposed to a sentence, Christus Amen utitur
quinquagies. Gerrard.
and so it is a note of a certain and earnest asseveration: Or else it is
affixed and opposed; and so it is a note either of assent or assurance. Of
assent, and that either of the understanding, to the truth of that that is
uttered, as in the end of the Creed and Gospels; or of the will and affections,
for the obtaining of our petitions. Of assurance next, as in the Lords Prayer,
and many other places: It is the voice of one that believes, and expects
that he shall have his prayers granted. And then it is as much as So be it;
yea, so it shall be.

It is used in all languages, A^nsw.
to betoken unity of faith and spirit.

The poor misled and muzled Papists are enjoined not to join so far with a
Protestant in any holy action, Specul. Europ.
as to say, Amen.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting. Amen,
and Amen. Psalm. 41.13.
Preaching. Praedicatio verbi est medium gratiae divinitus institutam quo res
regni Dei public and explicantur and applicantur populo ad salutem and
^^ifitati^nem.

Melanchton said, the work of three sorts of persons was very difficult.

Viz. Regentis. Parturientis. Docentis.


A woman may not teach in the public Assemblies, be she never so learned or
godly. I do not render you Chrysostoms reason, The woman taught once, In 2 Timothy
1.12.
and marred all; therefore she must teach no longer. Some women indeed have
been servants of the Church, but they were Deaconisses, to minister to the
sick, Dr. Bastwick against Indepen.
and such like; Not Praedicantisses, to preach, or have Peter's Keys at their
girdles.

Requiritur in Praedicatore Audacia. Preces. Labor and diligentia.


Jeremiah was not timorous, when the Priests, the people, the Kings resisted
his words; but he was bold even unto death: and you see, that which at first
they despised, at the second preaching they willingly embraced. Vid. Cap. 26.8.
11: 16. A preacher also must not only instruct his people, but also pray for
them; neither must he be so bold as to take Gods glory from him, by saying, so
or so shall it happen; but if the Word of the Lord be with him, he will entreat.

And withal he must be diligent and laborious. Ministers must not be married to
their Livings, as our Church had man and wife married, for ever hereafter to
hold their peace: Too many notwithstanding there were (if not still are) who
like Elocution a Romish god, will never hold their peace till they have a
Temple dedicated to them, but after they have obtained, seldom or never are
heard to speak again.

Praedicat viva voce, qui predicat vita and voce: he does preach most, that
lives best; As it was said of John Baptist, Cum miraculum nullum fecerit,
perpetuum fuit ipse miraculum. A good man does always preach, though he never
come in the Pulpit, whereas such a Minister as is no where a Minister but in
the Church, is like Achitophel, who set his house in order, and then hanged
himself. The Word preached is like Aarons rod, if in the preachers hand, it is
comely; but if he cast it from him, it will prove a serpent.

But if the Preacher be a wicked man, Vvam carpe, spinam cave. Consider what he
says, not what he does. Hear him as long as he sits in Moses chair; but
meddle not with him, sitting in the seat of the scornful.

De scriptis Gentilium libenter assumit, Ecclesia; Innocent. 3. l. 4. De sacr.
Alt. mist. c. 4.
siquid in ^eis probe dictum vel factum, agnoscit; and tanquam mulieris captiva
resecat ungues pilosque superfluos, ut ab aliena superstuitate mundata;
thalamumque veritatis digna sit introire.

Thomas the Apostle converted the Indians, as Vesputius witnesses; Whose text
was always Mat. 10.34. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came
not to send peace, but a sword. He and his company preached so powerfully, that
the hearers have wept, and bled, and died, for hearing their doctrine.

Of Chrysostom, in his preaching, it is said, he was used, not Aures
titillare, but corda pungere, not to tickle men's ears, but to prick their
hearts. He stoutly told Eudoxia the Empress, that for her covetousness, she
would be called a second Jesabel; and to her threatening message, he answered,
go, tell her, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I am afraid of nothing but sin. He so
took with hearts, that when he should have been silenced, the people cried out,
Satius est ut sol non luceat quam non doceat Chrysostom^s; It were better the
sun should not shine, than that Crysostome should not teach.

Austin wished when Christ came, he might find him, Aut precantem, aut
praedicantem. Its storied of Bonaventure, his words were not inflantia, but
inflammantia. Of Wallaus, that when he left Middleborough, it seemed rather the
children were to part with their father, than people with their Pastor.

Dionisius Areopagita begged these two things of God, 1. That he might know the
truth himself. 2. And that he might preach it as he ought to others.

A congregation or multitude of several tempers, and conditions (said Greg.
Naz.) is like an Harp of many strings; hard to give every one a touch in
preaching; especially as may please all, and offend none.

Many will hear the Preacher for a little, as the People did Jeremy; but if he
please them not, Populus expetant placentia.
please them not, they will even go so far in malice, as they will rise up
against him, and seek his life.

But they who find fault with the Ministers, for preaching damnation to the
wicked, come somewhat near that Blasphemy of Alphonsus King of Spain, who said,
That if he had been at the Creation, he would have made things better than now
they are. He found fault with Gods works, these with his word. If they had
penned the Scriptures, I suppose it would have been without damnation.

A Bucket either above or beside the cock, gets no water; and people that are
either above or withdraw from the Ordinances, Ruth 2.
get no benefit. If Ruth will glean ears of corn, she must keep in Boaz field,
and close by his servants.

Cry aloud, Isa. 58.1.
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Preach the word, 2 Timothy 4.2.
be instant in season, out of season.

Necessity is laid upon me, 1 Cor. 9.16.
yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.

Eloquence.
There is the vein of speaking, and there is vain speaking.

It is reported of Cyneas, that he conquered more Cities by his Eloquence, than
his Master Pyrrhus did by his puissance.

Jerome styled Eusebius, Romani Eloquii tubam.

Paul's speech and preaching was not with wisdom of words, nor with entising
words of man's wisdom; Floride potius q^am solid. Ut placeret quam ut doceret
Sancte magis quam scit^.
but in demonstration of the spirit and of power. And truly it is not good to
put the sword of the Spirit into a velvet scabbard, that it cannot pierce. More
to tickle the ear, than to affect the heart. It repented Austin (as well it
might) that when he was young, he had preached more to please than to profit.
The window must not be so painted, as to keep out the light. Gods holy things
must be handled with fear and reverence, rather than with wit and dalliance.

Yet there is a lawful use of Rhetoric in Sermons; so it be free from
ostentation. Let Ministers set out the Word of God as skilfully and adornedly
as they can, so as they still aim at the winning of souls. Omne tulit punctum,
qui miscuit utile dulci.
It Is excellent, at once both to please and profit, both to tickle the ear, and
take the heart.

The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words. Eccles. 12.10. (...) Verba
deside^i.
Contempt.
Judaeis primum erat apud Deum gratia, sed illi negligentes, indisciplinati and
superbi postmedum facti and fiducia patrum inslati; dum divina praecepta
contemnunt, datam sibi gratiam perdiderunt.

Ingentia beneficia, flagitia, supplicia.

Good turns aggravate unkindnesses, and men's offenses are increased by their
obligations. Ideo deteriores sumus (says Salvian) quia meliores esse debemus.
Men are therefore the worse, because they ought to be better. And shall be
deeper in Hell, because Heaven was offered unto them, and they would not.

Mitius punietur Cicero quam Catalina: non quod bonus, sed quod minus malus.
Heavy is the doom that abides Gospel-contemners. If Heathens shall be damned,
then such shall be double-damned.

Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; -- for I say unto you, Mat.
11.21, 22.
it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, and the land of Sodom, at the
day of judgment, than for you. Hearing.
The Jewish Rabbis have observed amongst their hearers; 1. Bernard ever when
he came to the Church door, used to say, stay here all my worldly thoughts, and
all vanity, that I may entertain heavenly meditations.
Some like spunges, that wanting judgment, took all for truth that was taught
them. 2. Others like an hourglass, once out of the Church, and turned to some
worldly employments, they forget all they heard before. 3. A third sort like a
streiner, that in hearing let go any thing that may be for their souls good;
and keep only that which is of least account, and to as little use. 4. And
lastly, others like unto a fine sieve; hearing the Word with an honest heart,
retaining what might be for their souls good, and letting go that which might
hurt either themselves or others.

There be four things to hold the Word from slipping from us, 1. Meditation. 2.
Conference. 3. Prayer. 4. Practice.


They say there is a way of castration by cutting off the ears; Dr. Donn.
by reason there are certain veins behind the ears, which if they be cut,
disable a man from generation. Certain it is, if we intermit our ordinary
course of hearing, there will follow a castration of the soul, and the soul
will become an Eunuch, and we grow to a barrenness, without any further fruit
of good works.

Vbi non est auditus verbi, Luth.
ibi non est domus Dei

Hear, Isa. 55.3.
and your souls shall live.

Reading.
Ad Dionysium demissa e Coelo vox, Apud Eusebius. l. 7 Hist. cap. 6.
lege omnia quaecunque in manus tuas venerint, quo probare quaeque and singula
discernere potes. Read all whatsoever comes into thine hands; for thou shall
be able to weigh, to prove and to try all.

Its said, the Word read converted Cyprian. Yet as milk from the breasts is
more nutritive, than when it has stood, and the spirits are gone out of it; so
the Word preached rather than read, furthereth the souls growth. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.13.
Thomas a Kempis was wont to say, he could find rest no where, Nisi in angulo
cum libello. Father Latimer (notwithstanding both his years and constant pains
in preaching) was at his book most diligently about two of the clock every
morning. And Jerome exorted some godly women, to whom he wrote, not to lay the
Bible out of their hands, until being overcome with sleep, and not able any
longer to hold up their heads, they bowed them down, as it were to salute the
leaves below them with a kiss.

Give attendance to reading.

Prayer.
As in a ship which is ready to sail, so soon as the sails are hoised up,
presently some skilful Mariner starteth to the Rudder; so every morning wherein
we rise from our rest, and make our selves ready to go on in our pilgrimage,
let us first of all take heed unto our heart, for it is the Rudder of the whole
body, let us knit it unto God.

Our tears only and prayers being poured out abundantly, can quench the fiery
indignation of Gods wrath: Our eyes therefore (with David's and Jeremiah's)
should be a fountain of tears.

We should desire that our words in prayer, Plus valet unus sanctus orando,
quam innumeri p^ca^^^es praeliando.
may not be like the way of a ship in the sea, where there is no impression.

Ethilfrid King of Northumberland, making war against the bordering Brittons,
and hearing some Moncks did assist his enemies swords, with their devout
Orizons, commands their spoil, with these words, if they pray to their God
against us, Arma Ecclesiae praec^s. Reliqua arma parum prosunt
then plainly they fight against us. Moses prayer prevailed more against
Amaleck, than Isreal's sword.

Sometimes God hears slight prayers, to encourage; sometimes not the strongest,
to teach us we may not depend upon them.

As a Lawyer can make good sense out of his clyents confused instructions; and
a Parent knows what the child means, when yet cannot speak perfectly; even
so, he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.

God will not hear the prayers even of his own children, Mald^nat. in Mat. 7.7.
when they ask either Mala or Male, either things in their own nature bad, or
not good for them, or good things for bad ends, Mat. 7.11. James 4.2, 3.

Take these rules for Prayer. 1. See there be due preparation. Consider thy
self that prayest, a vile man, sinful dust and ashes: The Lord with whom thou
have to do, a most wise, holy and powerful Majesty: And meditate of the things
thou art to beg, lest thy mind wander and be distracted. Multi enim dum ore
loqu^ntur coelestia, Innocent. 3. l. 2. c. 51. de sacr. Altar. mist.
cord meditantur terrena. 2. Pray for lawful things: We often pray for mercies,
as children for knives; which when they have, they know not how to use. 3. Pray
in the name of Jesus Christ. 4. Pray in faith, Quod a nobis avidius
desideratur, ^o de nobis saavius laetatur. Greg.
else we are like the waves of the sea, and shall obtain nothing. 5. Pray in
fervency: A bird cannot stay in the air, without a continual motion of the
wings; neither can we persist in prayer, without constant work and labor.
Precatio sine intention, est sicut corpus sine anima; so that the Jews wrote
about the doors of their Synagogues. But Austins father said of Monica praying
for her son, Dig^ior sequetur affectus, qu^m serventior praecedit affectus.
Epist. 121. Omnis rogatio humilitate aget. Diu d^siderata dulcius obtin^ntur.
Impossible est filium tantarum lachrymarum perire. And certainly, if that of
Austin be true, then that prayer shall have the greatest efficacy, which has
the greatest fervency. 6. Pray in humility: This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him; thou prayest, and art not heard; quia dives es, because thou art
rich in thy own conceit; Austin in Psalm. 34.6. He sends the rich empty away. 7.
Pray with importunity: A kind of godly impudency (says Nazianzene) is to be
used in prayer. 8. Pray perseveringly.

And I add, endeavor to walk up to prayers: Austin said, while he was
unregenerate, he prayed, but it was tanquam nolens, for fashion, but I desired
to have those sins kept up that I prayed against. But if we regard iniquity in
our hearts, the Lord will not hear us.

Our Savior in the days of his flesh was full of prayers; Isaac went into the
field to pray; David was encumbered with the mighty affairs of the kingdom,
yet he prayed thrice a day. In the worthy commendation of the great Master of
the Rhodes, Turk. Hist. f. 580.
one thing very considerable, is, that all the time he could spare from the
necessary affairs of his weighty charge from assaults, and the natural
refreshing of his body; he bestowed in prayer and serving of God; he oftentimes
spent the greatest part of the night in the Church alone praying; his
headpiece, gorget, and gantlets lying by him: So that it was often said, that
his devout prayers and carfulness would make the City invincible. Constantine
was stamped in his coin, praying, he would especially be marked for that.

Two main motives to prayer, are, 1. Our necessities are many, for soul and
body; we are as houses that stand in need of continual reparations. 2. Our
enemies are many, within and without: And there is no strength in us against
this great multitude, unless God stand by us, and for us.

I give my self unto prayer. Hebr. I am prayer, that is, a man of prayer. Psalm.
109.4.(...)
Psalms.
The Psalms are the Souls Anatomy, the Laws Epitomy, the Gospels Index; In a
word, the Register, Enchiridion and Summary of the whole Bible.

Vain songs, are Songs sung to the world, lascivious Ballads, are Songs sung to
the flesh; Satirical libels are Songs sung to the Devil; Only Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, making melody in the heart, are Songs sung to the Lord.

Spiritual silence is a sweeter note, than a loud (if lewd) Sonnet. If we will
needs rejoice, let us rejoice in the Lord; if we sing (says David) let us sing
to the Lord.

And truly none have such matter of rejoicing as the Saints, whose joy is so
exceeding great, that they are neither able reticere nor recitare, neither to
conceal, nor yet sufficiently to express it. For howsoever there be some
pleadings in the Court of conscience every day, yet the godly make it Hilary
term all the year.

Papists forbid people to sing Psalms, and permit only Quiristers to sing,
lest the music should be marred; but the Apostle bids every Saint to sing.

Mind Saint Austin, Quantum flevi in hymnis and canticis suave sonantis
Ecclesiae tuae, voces ille influebant auribus meis, and eliquobatur veritas tua
in cor m^um, and ex ea aestuabat i^de affectus pietatis, and currebant
lachrymae, Confess. 9. c. ^.
and been mihi erat cum eis.

Singing of David's Psalms under the Gospel, is an Ordinance of Christ. For, 1.
The Apostle takes away Philosophical inventions, and Jewish traditions, and
leaves that enjoined as a standing ordinance, Colos. 3. 2. The Apostle reckons
it among durable duties, as prayer, redeeming the time, etc.


Spiritual Songs they are called, both because they are indicted by the Spirit;
and because they spiritualize us in the use of them.

Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. James 5.13.
Seal.
A Seal is for two ends, viz. Safety, and Secrecy.


The Jews use to write on the back of their sealed Packets. Nun, Ch^t^; Shin;
that is, Niddui, Cherem, and Shammatha; all sorts of excommunication to him
that shall offer to break up sealed businesses.

Sealing is used in three cases, to keep things 1. Secret, that they may not be
seen. 2. Distinct, that they may not be confused. 3. Safe, that they may be
forthcoming.


There is a sealing of Signation, and Obsignation.


To ratify civility, (...)
as Hest. 8.8. And spiritually, as 2 Cor. 1.22. and alibi.

Sacrament.
This word in so many letters and syllables is not indeed in the Scripture, no
more than the word Trinity, Catholic, etc. but being now generally received,
it is not to be rejected, seeing the Doctrine contained under it agrees with
the Scripture, and nothing thereby is added thereunto. The fathers of the Greek
Church called these holy Rites mysteries, because the substance of them was
only known to the members of the Church, and hidden from others; so the
ancient Teachers of the Latin Church called them Sacraments, because of the
affinity and nearness between them and a Sacrament.

A Sacrament properly is that solemn oath in war, Cicero de offic. l. 1. Gerrh.
Lac. Commun.
by which soldiers bound themselves to their chief Captain, (for such was the
discipline the old Romans in their wars.) And Sacraments metaphorically are the
Churches band, binding them to God; so that when we are partakers of these holy
signs, which God has appointed in his Church, Est Sacramentum Sacrum and
visibile signum invisibilis gratiae Dei, ad eam in nobis obsignand^m a Deo
institutum.
we do bind our selves to him, we do openly profess his true Religion; we vow
to fight under his banner against our enemies; so that they are testimonies and
tokens of the Covenant between God and us, that he is our God, and we bind our
selves to be his people, to serve him, and no other God. And thus we may
consider a Sacrament, as a visibe sign and seal ordained of God, whereby
Christ and all his saving graces, by certain outward Rites are signified,
exhibited, and sealed up unto us.

Indeed a sign and seal differ one from another, as the general from the the
especial; for every seal is a sign, but every sign is not a seal. A seal
certifieth, assures and confirms a thing; a sign only shows it, but a
Sacrament does both. It is a sign to signify and represent; a seal to ratify
and assure; Aug. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 1.
an instrument to confer and convey Christ with all his benefits to, them that
truly believe in him: A pledge unto us of Gods promises: a visible word, and as
a notable glass wherein we may behold assured testimonies of Gods eternal
favor, and of the abundant riches of his grace, which he bestows upon us.

The word of God may fitly be resembled to writings or evidences, and the
Sacraments to seals, which the Lord alone puts unto his own letters. Now God
adds them to the Word, not that the Word was not sufficient without them; but
for an help to our weakness; that we might have lively pawnes before our eyes,
of those things which we hear with our ears. And these he has ordained to be
seals of the Covenant of grace; which although not needful on Gods part, who
is always better than his word, yet are very requisite to succor us, who are
prone to doubting: The Lord therefore has added them to give us greater
assurance, even as a Seal to a writing makes it more authentical. So that
Sacraments are as a visible Sermon, preaching unto us most lively the promises
of God; that as the word we hear does edify and instruct the mind by the
outward ears, so do the Sacraments by the eyes and other senses.

The essential parts of a Sacrament, are either, 1. Outward, which has the
sign, with the ceremony ordained, and the word, Or, 2. Inward, which is the
matter or thing signified, viz. the saving benefits of Christ Jesus, and the
privileges of the Covenant of Grace; that is, remission of sins, imputation of
Christ's righteousness, regeneration, adoption, etc.


Hence we must esteem Sacraments, not according to their outward value, but
according to the blessing annexed in their lawful use. For in as much as they
are significations and seals of such excellent things; they are with all
reverence to be handled and esteemed, even as means which exhibit to us, and
confirm the best blessings of God.

Yet neither the Word, not Sacraments profit any thing without the Spirit; this
grace proceeds from the holy Ghost, who is unto our faith as marrow unto the
bones, as moisture unto the tree, and as a comfortable rain unto the fruits of
the earth: If this inward Master and Teacher be wanting, the Sacraments can
work no more in our minds, than if the bright Sun should shine to the blind
eyes, or a loud voice sound in deaf ears, or fruitful corn fall into the barren
wilderness, or a shower of rain fall upon the hard-stones. Hence whenever we
come unto these aright, the Spirit works in us, mollifying the hardness of
our hearts, framing us unto new obedience, and assuring us that God offers to
us his own Son for our justification and salvation. Therefore learn
whenever we come to the Word and Sacraments, to crave the gracious assistance
of the blessed Spirit, to guide, direct, and regenerate us to eternal life; to
sanctify us, and to assure us of Gods endless favor in Christ Jesus.

It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh prefiteth nothing. John 6.63.
Baptism.
It is either, 1. Proper; as bare cleansing and washing, Heb. 9.10. Or, 2.
Figurative.


And then it is, 1. Metaphorical, as affliction, Mat. 20.22. 2. Synecdochical,
put for the whole doctrine of John, Mat. 21.25. 3. Allegorical, as repentant
tears, Luke 7.38. 4. Catexochen, for baptizing of Infants, or adults converted.


The School teaches of three sorts of Baptism, 1. Fluminis per aquam. 2.
Flaminis per spiritum. Ephesians. 4.5.
3. Sanguinis per Martyriuns.


But of all these three sorts, there is but one only Sacrament of Baptism, the
which is one in three regards Vnum quia, 1. Ad unum. 2. In unum. 3. Per unum.
1. Once truly received, it is never to be reiterated again. Against the
Marcionites, Hemerobaptists and others. 2. For that all of us are baptized into
one Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. For John's and Christ's baptism differ not
in substance, but in circumstance. 3. In regard of the water and words
wherewith we baptize. We may not use any other element but water, nor any other
words, but I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost.


Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water, John 3.5.
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. The Lords Supper.
There are four kinds of Suppers.

The 1. Sinners Supper. 2. Devils Supper. 3. Good man's Supper. 4. Lords Supper.


The sinner makes a supper to the Devil, Foenus pecuniae, funus animae.
when in gaining the world, he loses his soul. The Devil prepares a black
banquet for sinners in Hell; upon these two dishes, weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

The good man provides a Supper unto God, when he opens the door of his heart,
and suffers the words of exhortation to come in, Rev. 3.20. But here of the
last.

Against the Papists that say, the bread is really turned into flesh, Zwinglius
says well, Hi tentant Deum, qui dicunt miraculum is it hic Dei virtute fieri,
ubi nemo sentit miraculum. Epist. ad Amic. quend.
Durandus says, verbum audimus, motum sentimus, modum nescimus, presentiam
credimus.

Of the likeness that is betwixt Christ's Incarnation and the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper; and how the one explaines the true nature of the other; Theodoret
has an excellent parallel. Dialog.
For, 1. As in Christ there are two natures, of God and man; so in the
Sacrament are two substances, the heavenly and the earthly. 2. As in Christ
these two natures are truly and entirely; so are those substances in the
Sacrament. 3. As after the union those two natures make but one person, so
after the consecration the two substances make but one Sacrament. 4. As the two
natures are united without confusion, or abolition of either in Christ; so in
the Sacrament are the substances, heavenly and earthly, knit so, that each
continues what it was, and works answerably on us.

None but holy ought to approach this Table, -- Procul hinc, procul ite profani.
all others are strangers, who ought to be dealt withal, as, Exodus 29.33.
Rather (says Calvin, following Chrysostom) will I suffer my self to be slain,
than this hand of mine shall reach the holy elements, to those that have been
judged contemners of God.

In all that come to the Lords Supper, there is required a fitness, 1.
Fundamental, and 2. Actual.


Even of those that know God savingly (says one) and are truly godly (in the
main) it may truly be said, that they also serve the Devil, and not God, when,
and as far as they fulfill the Devils pleasure, and are led by that learning
which he has taught the world, in and about the worship of God; as when men
join with polluted and mixed assemblies (mixed I mean; with openly profane and
scandalous persons, and such of whose interests in Christ they have no ground
or proof at all;) in the service of the Lords Table.

Give not that which is holy unto the dogs. Mat. 7.6. 1 Cor. 11.26.


But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup.

Catechizing.
Dr. Hall calls it, a preaching conference, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
book called, The old Religion. Erasmus, Munus arduum, and plane senile.

It has been of ancient use in the Christian Church: And in the Reformation it
was one great means of propagating the Gospel.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin and Cyril, were Catechists.

If this were diligently used, both young and old should be better acquainted
with the Principles of Religion; and being wisely done, would be more
profitable than Preaching without Catechizing; for want whereof, many that run
to Sermons, have been found to be very ignorant of the main Principles of
Religion.

Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Psalm. 34.1^.
The Sabbath.
God sepapated it from all other days of the week, for his worship.

The Sabbath of old had many privileges, which no other day had. 1. The
antiquity thereof. 2. It was written with Gods own finger. 3. There was a more
exact rest observed in it; therefore the Jews called it, a Sabbath of Sabbaths,
or Regina Sabbathorum, the Queen of rests. 4. Gods own distinction, raining no
Manna that day. 5. Other holy days were memorative, or figurative only; but
this was both memorative and figurative, (which Bellarmine marks.) 6. Other
feasts might be transferred to it, but it might be transferred to none. (...).
7. The whole Week takes denomination from it, and is called a Sabbath, Luke
18.12. that is, in the Week.

Now our Christian Sabbath or religious rest, is called a Sabbath Day by our
Savior, Mat. 24.20. Called therefore also the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. as one of
our Sacraments is called the Lords Supper, and the Table of the Lord, because
instituted by him. Yet (with grief be it spoken) it is so observed by some,
that it may more fitly be styled Dies Daemoniacus, quam Dominicus. Alsted.
(...). Ignat.
But let every one of us sanctify it, that is, keep it spiritually, rejoicing
in the meditation of Christ's law, more than the rest of our bodies. For,
external rest alone may be called the Sabbath of the Ox or of the Ass, but the
internal or secret rest, is true consecrating of a Sabbath.

It is observable, that though upon all days Christ was operative, and
miraculous, Dr. J. T.
yet chose he to do many of his miracles upon the Jews Sabbath; And many
reasons (doubtless) did concur and determine him to a more frequent working
upon those days of public ceremony and convention; amongst which these may be
two: 1. That he might draw off and separate Christianity from the yoke of
Ceremonies, by abolishing and taking off the strictest Mosaical Rites. 2. And
that he might do the work of abrogation and institution both at once.

So that he has dissolved the bands of Moses, in this and other instances,
(principally in the sacred command for the Sabbath Day) that now we are no more
obliged to that rest, which the Jews religiously observed by prescript of the
Law, Col. 2.16. For that which now remains moral in it, is, that we do honor
to God for the Creation; and to that and all other purposes of Religion,
separate and hallow a portion of our time.

Concerning the Lords day which now the Church observes, it was set apart in
honor of the Resurrection; And he who keeps that day most strictly, most
religiously, he keeps it best, and most consonant to the design of the Church
(from whence it had its positive institution) the ends of Religion, and the
interest of his soul.

The works that may be done on the Sabbath, are those of Piety. Charity.
Necessity.


In Scripture, he that gathered sticks, was paid home with stones, Number. 15. The
first blow given the German Churches, was upon the Sabbath Day, which they
carelessly observed: And Prague was lost upon that day.

Sanctifying the Lords day, in the Primitive times, was a badge of
Christianity. When the question was propounded, Servasti Dominicum? Have thou
kept the Sabbath? The answer was returned, Christianus sum, intermittere non
possum; I am a Christian, and may not do otherwise.

That holy man Johanna, D^usius.
when the Sabbath Day approached, put upon him his best apparel, and welcomed
the Sabbath, going forth to meet and salute it, with Veni Sponsa mea, Come my
sweet Spouse: He was glad of it, as the Bridegroom of the Bride.

Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. Exodus 20.8.


Kingdom of God
There is the Kingdom of God's 1. Power. 2. Grace. 3. Glory.


Psalm. 103.19. Psalm. 145.13. Mat. 10.30. Hereunto, Devils and all creatures
whatsoever are subject.

Luk 17.21. Romans 14.17.

Cor. 6.9. Luke 22.16. Called heavenly, 2 Timothy 4.18.

Now of these two latter, the one is the means, the other the end; for grace is
the way to glory, holiness to happiness. Therefore,

Seek ye first the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
and his righteousness. Gods Presence.
There is a twofold presence of God in his people: 1. Felt and perceived. 2.
Secret and unknown.


Sometime God is not only present with his people, but also makes them sensibly
perceive it; as Simeon; and therefore his mourning was turned to mirth, and his
sobs to songs

Again, sometime God is present, but not felt; and this secret presence
sustains us in all temptations; it ever leaves life in our souls, like the
tree, wherein life remains, when the leaves are gone.

Fear thou not, Isa. 41.10.
for I am with thee. Church Order and Discipline.
Order.
THe Church of God, is not a Den of Confusion, but an House of Order.

Ceremonies are of two sorts; some are typical, others are of order: Those are
abrogated, not these, says Peter Martyr.

The Ceremonies of the Law, were primo mortales, postea mortuae, Legalia
faerunt ante passionem Domini viva, statim post passionem mortuae, hodie
sepulta. Aug^
postremo mortiferae: So that to leave Christ for them, or to join Christ with
them, is the plain way to destruction.

Yet such is the nature of misguided zeal, that under color of weeding out
Superstition, it will pluck up by the roots many plants of Paradise, and acts
of true Religion.

God is the God of order; therefore it is good to have respect in the Church,
to things both real and ritual. For, Ordine servato, mundus servatur; at illo
Neglecto pessum, totus and orbis abit.
Order being kept, the World is kept; but when
That is neglected, all the World's gone then.


Faith and Order, that is (says one) Doctrine and Discipline; these two make
the Church fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with
banners.

Our Savior caused the people whom he fed to keep order in their sitting on
the grass; they sat down rank by rank, as rows or borders of beds in a garden;
so the Greek imports: whereupon an Expositor notes, Ordinatim res in Ecclesia
faciendae, Order must be observed in the Church.

Let all things be done decently and in order. 1 Cor. 14.40.


Reproof.
Wise men ever take a freedom of reproving, especially when vice is bold and
daring: for when Modesty dies, Virtue is then upon the vanish.

Seasonable speech falling upon a prepared heart, has often a strong and sweet
operation.

Friends (as Bees) are killed with the honey of Flattery, but quickened with the
vinegar of Reproof. The Eagle, though she love her young ones dearly, yet she
pincheth and beats them out of the nest.

We must reprove mildly and lovingly, with soft words, but hard arguments.
Gentle showers comfort the earth, where dashing showers drown the seed. A
gentle reproof may soften, where a greater does but harden.

Some warmth must be in a reproof, but it must not be scalding hot. Aegros quos
potus fortis non curavit, ad salutem pristinam aqua tepens revocavit.
They that could not be cured with strong Potions (says Gregory) have been
recovered with warm water.

We must take heed that our reproofs be not grounded upon mistakes. It is easy
to blame what we do not apprehend. Many disfigure the opinions and practices of
others, with conceits of their own. As the persons of the primitive Christians
were often put into Lions or Bears skins, by their barbarous and Heathenish
persecutors, and then baited with dogs; So are the matters of too many later
Christians debated.

We must also have a care, that in reproving other men's faults, we run not into
the same our selves: We must not reprove pride with pride, check passion with
passion, or speak against bitterness of spirit, with a bitter spirit. It Is
possible our own corruptions may rise up against the corruptions of others; But
it is very ridiculous to hear sin chiding vice.

Furthermore, Correct thy friend secretly, and commend him openly. Do not blab
and blaze his fault abroad, to his grief and disgrace; but clap a plaster of
reproof upon the sore, and then (Chirurgion-like) cover it with thy hand, that
the world may be never the wiser.

Quintilian reports of Vespasian, That he was patientissimus very, very
patient of truth, though never so tart. Queen Elizabeth was well pleased with
Mr. Deering's plain dealing, It Is said of Gerson (that great Chancellor of
Paris) that Nulla re alia tantopere laetaretur, quam si ab aliquo s^aterne and
charitativ^ redargueretur: He rejoiced in nothing so much, as in a friendly
reprehension. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 37. Psalm. 141.5. Levit. 19.17. Jud. 23. Ex igne
Gehennali. Jerome.
who told her in a Sermon, that once she was tanquam Ovis, but now, tanquam
indomita Juvenca. And of Queen Anne ^ullen her mother it is said, that she was
not only willing to be admonished, but required her Chaplains freely and
plainly to tell her of whatsoever was amiss.

But expect it, Whoever is a Nathan to reprove, shall never want a Dathan to
gainsay; though such shall perish in the confusion of Korah. Vice usually goes
armed: Touch it never so gently, yet (like the nettle) it will sting you; And
if you deal with it roughly and roundly, it swaggereth, as the Hebrew did with
Moses, Who made thee a man of authority? etc. Yea, Reproof is now adays become
as stronger Physic, not fit for every complexion. Tange montes and fumigabunt;
Offer to wake men out of their sleep, and they will brawl with their best
friends. But remember that of Gregory, Si ea quae nobis corrigenda sunt
tacemus, valde delinquimus: And better it is that the Vine should bleed, than
die.

Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

-- And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

Power of the Keys.
God has made his Ministers stewards in his house, as Obadiah was in Ahab's
house, and as Eliakim in Hezekiah's. And in this sense God has laid upon them
the key of the house of David; to open, and none shall shut; and to shut, and
none shall open. Isa. 22.22.

Read also Mat. 16.19. and 1 Cor. 4.1.

Excommunication.
Est Ecclesiae sententia, praeunte legitima cognitione, prolata in Dei nomine
and authoritate, qua declaratur quispiam ejusdem Ecclesiae socius, si scelere
aliquo, vel contumacia Ecclesiam offenderit, and re^ipiscere ad adificationem
Ecclesiae recuset, ex Christi mandato just exclusus ex Sanctorum communione,
sive ex Dei Ecclesiae corpore.

Erastus contends very fiercely with Calvin and Beza, Est enim Execratio res
tristis and mali ominis.
about Excommunication, denying the Church any such power. The very Heathens
had their public Execrations, not rashly to be used against any; as Plutarch
witnesses. The Jews had their three sorts of Excommunication, one heavier than
another, viz. Niddui, Cherem, Shamatha, or Maranatha; which they derive as low
as from Hen^ch, Jud. 14. Answerable to which, we have three parts or degrees of
Church-censure:

Viz. 1. (...) and (...). 2. Suspensio and Exclusio. 3. Excommunicatio.


The end and scope of which is, Purgativa respectu Ecclesiae, preservativa
respectu fidelium, sanativa respectu delinqu^ntis. Aquin.
That the wicked may be corrected, Scandal removed, the Church and Ordinances
kept unpolluted, Infection prevented, the Excommunicated person ashamed,
amended and restored, others warned, and Gods judgments avoided.

The Church must be careful to avoid Rashness in proceedings. Plutarch highly
commends that Athenian Priest, that being commanded by the people to curse
Alcibiades, refused to do it: Whereas the Pope is said (Wasp-like) no sooner to
be angry, but out comes a sting, an Excommunication. And withal, that she cast
not out Jonas, whilst she keeps Cham in the Ark.

Read Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, etc. And, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, 7.

Shame.
Men usually palliate and cover their vice, under the cloak and name of some
virtue; base covetousness, they call good husbrandry, and prodigality, bounty:
They blush not at the fact, though they be ashamed of the title; this shows,
that the sense of shame is one of the strongest restraints to keep man from
sin; Dallnight. Aph.
and the last passion that leaves him. He therefore that is once past this
apprehension, lets loose the reins of his own will, and abandons himself to all
madness of mischief.

But this know, that all and every sin (however varnished) is an
excrementitious superfluity, or superfluous excrement, Jam. 1.21. not only
shameful, Superfluitas, a superflu^^do.
but also baneful to the soul; out with it therefore; Retentio excrementorum,
est Parens morborum.

Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush. Jerem. 6.25.
Doctrine of Devils.
Impostour.
The Devil (as Gods Ape) works effectually in his, and by his agents upon
others. By corrupt teachers he catches men, as a cunning fisher by one fish
catches another, that he may feed upon both.

I have read of a Friar (or rather a liar) who promised to show an holy
relic, an Archangels feather, but it being stolen away, and a coal placed
in the room; the nimble jugler persuaded his Auditory; they were unworthy to
see so great a Relic; but God had sent instead of it, one of the very coals,
with which St. Lawrence was broiled to death.

It were well if such deceivers were served in their kind, as one Verconius
was in the time of Alexander Severus; who pretending that by his familiarity
with Alexander, he could prefer peoples petitions; and so got their money; Fumo
pereat, qui fumum vendidit. Reusn.
was upon his being convicted before the Emperor, adjudged to be hanged up in
a chimney, and so perish with smoke, for that he sold smoke to the people.

Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, 2 Timothy 3.13.
and being deceived. Miracles.
True Miracles do as far exceed naturals, as naturals do artificials. Miracula
quae sunt a Deo multis nobis distinguuntur a fi^tis miraculis damonum.
A Miracle is ever above, beside or against nature, and second causes; such as
whereof there can be no natural reason possibly rendered; no, though it be hid
from us. Therefore the Devil himself, he may juggle and cast a mist but he
cannot do a true Miracle.

Miracles are called, Signa, quia significant. Prodigia, quod porro dicant.


Some call them Praedicidia, because they do praedicere aliquid mali; But there
are also Miracles of mercy.

The Gospel at the beginning was adorned with many Miracles,

Because, 1. It seemed strange to the world, a new Doctrine. 2. It seemed
repugnant to the Law of Moses, instituted by God. 3. It could not be proved and
confirmed by natural Reasons.


But now since the famous Miracles of Christ's Resurrection, Ascension into
heaven, of the sending of the holy Ghost, the spreading of the Gospel over all
the world; we must not still curiously gape after Miracles. Those wherewith God
honored the Gospel at the first, were sufficient for the confirmation of it to
all posterity.

The rich man in hell would fain have had a Miracle, for the saving of his
brethren: Lazarus must be sent from the dead to them; but it was answered him,
they have Moses and the Prophets, Qui adhuc prodigia ut credat, inquirit,
magnum est ipse Prodigium.
that is enough; if we will not believe for the preaching of the Word, all the
Miracles in the world will not save us. He that now requires Miracles for the
confirmation of his faith, is himself a great Miracle, says Austin. Manna
ceased when they came into Canaan; as if it would say, ye need no Miracles, now
ye have means.

Yet the Gospel at this day has many Miracles, There were seven Miracles at
Christ's death, but the conversion of the thief was the greatest, in it all the
rest were included.
though they be not observed: men are metamorphosed and changed by it: Of proud
they become humble; of Devils, Saints, Men are raised from the death of sin
by it; they that were blind in the knowledge of Christ, are come to a clear
sight in matters of Religion: they that were lame, and could not walk in the
way to the kingdom of heaven, are made to run cheerfully in it: They that were
dumb, and could not speak for Christ, are made to speak wisely and boldly in
his quarrel.

There be counterfeit Miracles. Mi^anda non miracula.


1. Sometimes they seem to be, that which they are not, as blood in the Papists
breaden god, a mere cousenage.

2. They may be wrought by a natural cause, which men see not, nor can
comprehend. At best, Miracles make not a man just or righteous, but famous,
Fulgen.
As Mahomets iron chest, hanging aloft by loadstones. The Lamp in Venus Temple
burning continually, by the stone Asbestus, which was found in Arcadia.

3. If they be to confirm falsehood. Whereas a true Miracle is effected by the
power of God, exceeds the bounds of Nature, and is for the confirmation of
the Truth.

Let us then take heed of curiosity, or enquiries farther than Gods Word.

An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign. Mat. 1^.39.
Error.
Errors in Theology and Philosophy crept in, for that men of sublime wit,
sought truth in their own little world, and not in the great and common world;
says Heraclitus.

Novelties in Divinity are to be avoided; that of Tertullian being true, Primum
quodque verissimum.

As glasses cannot strengthen one another, but may easily break one another;
and bubbles in the water deface one another: So false holds and errors may
destroy one the other, but they can in no wise establish one the other.

Error is fruitful, Usque quaque fidei ven^na non cessant spargere. Aug.
and ever declining from bad to worse. Witness

Pharisees] Hierom deriveth their Pedigree from Pharez, mentioned, Mat. 1. But
he is deceived; It being most like they took their name either of Pharash, to
expound, Or (as some will) of (...) Expandere, concerning which in the next
page.
they being Interpreters of the Law; or of Pharesh to separate; they being
highly conceited of themselves, and apt to say unto others, stand farther off,
for I am holier than thou. Josephus says, they seemed to outstrip all others,
both in height of holiness, and depth of learning.

They went very far in works of Piety, for they made long prayers; in works of
Charity, for they gave much alms; in works of Equity, for they tithed mint,
anise and cummin; And in works of courtesy, for they invited Christ often. In
a word, they were the most exact and accurate sect of that religion, as St.
Paul (who once was one of them) bears them witness.

But though these persons did seem to have taken up their seats in heaven
aforehand, yet, wrong ends being propounded, and these things rested in, their
best works were but beautiful abominations, and their practice a smooth way to
Hell.

These did make broad their Phylacteries, etc. which were ribands of blew silk;
Or (as some say) scrowles of Parchment, Vanissimi profecto Pharsaei illi, qui
cum ipsi non servarent in Cord mandata at membranulas decalogi complicantes
and quasi coronam capiti facientes, Phylacterium ex sua proprietate,
custoditorium est. Bod.
upon which the Law being first wrought or written, they bound it upon their
garments. The sum is, God had commanded them to bind the Law to their hand,
and before their eyes, wherein (as Hierom and Theophylact well interpret it) he
meant the meditation and practice of his Law. They (says a learned Author)
like to the foolish Patient, which when the Physician bids him take the
prescript, eats up the paper; If they could get a list of Parchment, upon their
left arm next their heart, and another scrole to tie upon their forehead, or
(if these be denied) a red thread in their hand; thought they might say (with
King Saul) Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have done the commandment of the
Lord. Thus they went about, as it were clothed with the Word of God, but his
Word was far from their hearts, neither did it appear in their lives.

Sadduces] Never a barrel better herring. These were a brutish sect and sort of
the Jews, that held monstrous opinions; some of them are set down, (...).
Erasm. Adag.
Act. 23.8. diverse others more gross may be read of in Josephus. Amongst
other, they held, that all the reward that righteous men are to look for, is
here in this world. The occasion is said to be this, when Antigonus taught, R.
Nathan.
that we must not serve God for wages, his scholars understood him, as if he
had utterly denied all future rewards or recompense attending a godly life; And
thence framed their heresy, denying the Resurrection, world to come, etc.

Herodians] They were such as were of Herod's Religion; as one would say, of the
Kings Religion; because they followed the Decrees and examples of the Emperors.

Some will have it, they were a sect of people, who said, Sic Tertul. Epiphan.
Chrysostom. Theophylact. and Hieron. uno ore affirmant.
Herod was the Messiah, because by the Decree of the Roman Senate, when the
Scepter departed from Judah, he was declared King.

Nicolaitans] They were a sect of Heretics, which sprung up about fifty years
after Christ. Many think they arose of Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons.
Perhaps of some other Nicolas; or at most, that under that name they vented
their damnable and poisonful doctrine.

These held all bodily lusts lawful, a promiscuous use of women; and with their
bodily whoredom, they maintained spiritual. In a word, they taught and
practiced such beastly filthiness, Aug.
as is not to be named, Rev. 2.14, 15.

Pelagians] From a Monk of Bangor, Morgan by name, Hence Aug. Quid eo Pelago
vult mergi Pelagius, unde per petram liberatus est Petrus?
who traveling beyond sea to spread his heresy, called himself Pelagius, by a
Greek word of the same signification, because it sounded better in the ears of
foreign Nations.

Vbiquitarians] This fiction began about the time of Berengarius, was fostered
and furthered by Gerson Chancellor of Paris; But this being cast out of France,
Luther brought back into the Churches of Germany, etc. But well said that good
woman, who being asked by the Bishops, Do thou believe that the body of
Christ is really and substantially in the Sacrament? Act. and Mon.
I believe (said she) that that is a real and substantiallie.

Arminians] The followers of Arminius, maintaining a propitiation made, or a
sacrifice offered by Christ for all: And leaving the death of Christ, in the
hand of man's free will, assisted only by general grace, to make it effectual
to himself, or not.

Antinomians] Istebius Agricola, was the first, who with his followers held
unsound opinions; That the Law and works belong only to Rome; That St. Peter
understood not Christian liberty, Sentiunt Christianis non amplius lege Dei
morali opus esse, nec Decalogum in Ecclesia Christiana praedicandum, quia
fideles sunt per spiritum renati.
when he wrote, Make your calling and election sure; That good works were
Perniciosa ad salutem, etc. with such trash. All which he afterward condemned
and recanted in a public Auditory; but relapsed after Luthers death into the
same error. He has at this day many followers, holding the like, and other
strange opinions; That God is never displeased with his people, though they
fall into adultery, or the like sin, no not with a fatherly displeasure; That
God never chastises his people for any sin, no not with a fatherly
chastisement; That God sees no sin in his Elect; that the very being of sin is
abolished out of Gods sight, that they cannot sin, and if they do, it is not
they, but sin that dwells in them; which was once an answer of a female
Antinomian, Mr. ^ey his light for smoke
when demanded by her Mistress, how stolen linnens and other things came into
her chest? although at first stiffly denied.

Millenaries] They are not content to affirm, that after the fall of
Antichrist, the Jews all have a glorious conversion, and the whole Church such
an happy Halcion, as never before; But also that the Martyrs shall then have
their first resurrection, and shall with Christ reign upon earth a thousand
years in all worldly delights, Homo Ingenii pertenuis.
etc. which seems an addition to the text they ground it upon, Rev. 20.4. Or at
least such an earthly reign cannot be inferred. This is as ancient as Corinthus
the heretic, and Papias (Scholar to Saint John) a man much reverenced for
opinion of his holiness, but (says Eusebius) not oppressed with wit.

Anabaptists] Quo hominum genere, Rhenan. in Ep. ante opera Origin.
nihil inanius, nihil pestilentius, nihil exitialius hic orbis vidit unquam.

One of late says, Anabaptists play the Devils part, in accusing their own
children, and disputing them out of the Church, and Covenant of Christ;
affirming them to be no disciples, no servants of God, nor holy, when God says
the contrary, 1 Cor. 7.14.

Ranters] Speaking great swelling words of vanity, they assure through the
lusts of the flesh, Joh. Manl. loc. com. 322. and 490. As the Arrians, Negunt
fi^ium de essentia patris genitum, coaeternum, ceaequalem, and secundum
personam (...) Patri. And many more.
through much wantonness, those that were clean (for a little, or a while, as
some read) escaped from them who live in error. He^serus and Monetarius
corrupted many matrons whom they had drawn to their side. David George a
ringleader amongst them, was so far from accounting adulteries, fornication,
incest, etc. to be sins, that he did recommend them to his most perfect
scholars, as acts of grace and mortification. And are not our Ranters (as they
call themselves) come up to him, and gone beyond him in their most prodigious
opinions and practices?

I might be infinite, but enough of that which is worse than nothing, I being
as weary of mentioning them, as Rebecca was of conversing with the daughters of
Heth. All these can conspire against the truth, though they cannot consent
among themselves. Dr. Featly.
But as metal upon metal is no good Heraldry, so error upon error is no good
Divinity.

Errors are best discerned, when most incurable.

Ye therefore, 2 Pet. 3.17.
beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led
away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. Heresy.
The best of men may err from the truth, James 5.19. what Saint is recorded in
the Word of God, whose failings and errors are not recorded? Tho Elect may be
sometimes led aside, Haereticum hominem faciunt haec tria conjuncta, Error,
evictio and con^^acta.
yet not totally nor finally, and very hardly into gross errors, Mat. 24.24.

Heresy (says one) Est impugnare Dei veritati cum perseverantia. Another,
there must be in it, Error in ratione, and pertinatio in voluntate. Best of all
thus. An error strictly and properly taken, is that we hold or do, out of bare
ignorance of the truth. But Heresy is an Error and more, having these three
things in it, Viz. 1. In regard of the matter, it must be in some great and
fundamental truths. 2. It is accompanied with pertinacy and obstinacy, after
clear light offered. 3. There is in it, a taking of pleasure or delight. It is
numbered among the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.20.


Heretics (like the dog in the fable) lose the substance of Religion, while
they gape too earnestly at the shadow.

Fire proves gold, the furnace vessels, tribulation friends, wars good
subjects, Permittit Deus haereses, ut qui probati sunt appareant.
and schism or heresy the true Christian. Therefore it behooves that there be
heresies in the Church; as it is necessary there should be poison and venomous
creatures in the world, because out of them God will work medicines, 1 Cor.
11.19.

Tertullian compares heretics to the sepiae, a kind of fish; who lest they
should be taken of their pursuers, cast behind them abundance of black matter,
and so escape out of sight.

Epiphanius was semper haereticorum acerrimus oppugnator. And Knox the Scottish
Divine, he so fully answered all his adversaries objections, Lot. Com. Heresy
is exceedingly infectious, and for most part mortal; hence the Italian Proverb,
Jealousy, Frenzy, and Heresy can hardly be cured. Tit. 3. (...)
that one of them said, I see all our shifts will serve nothing before God,
they serve us in so small stead before men.

All heresies are found to flow (says Chemnitius) either from the
superstitious pride of Samosatenus, or from the sophistry of Arrius, or from
the ignorance of Aelius. These men's wits will better serve them to devise a
thousand shifts to elude the truth, than their pride will suffer them to
acknowledge it. And here St. Paul's rule takes place,

A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition reject:
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself. See Hos. 4.17. Blasphemy.
Blasphemers set their mouths against heaven, Blasphemous speeches, Leviter
volant, sed non leviter violant.
and their words are stout against God. Such are all desperate speeches,
imposing upon God, any thing unbeseeming of his Majesty, which he can by no
means away with.

The Church-Historian reports of Julian the Apostate, that when he was wounded
in the battle against the Parthians, he took of his blood, Theod. l. 3.6.20
Niceph. l. 10. c. 35.
and threw it up to heaven, he stretches out his hand against God, saying, in
derision of Christ; O Galilaean, thou have overcome: This outward gesture of
his body expressed the secret indignation of his mind. (And indeed,
blaspheming of God, Vicisti Galilae^.
properly taken, is ever joined with an intent to cast reproach upon God.)
Amalachit^ Israelitas in exitu de Egypto vel ob lassitudinem vel ob legalem
immunditiem extra castra degentes ^cciderunt, and little circumcisionem
amputatam in subsannationem Dei projecerunt in coelum. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 6.
And it is observed by Hierom, who says, he received it from the tradition of
the Jews, that the Amalekites who were professed enemies to them, did lie upon
the watch, to take all advantages against them; In their march from Egypt to
Canaan, and when at any time they turned aside out of the way, either because
of legal uncleanness, or upon any natural necessity, they would fall upon them
and slay them; which being done; they cut off that member which had the seal of
the Covenant (Circumcision) upon it, and with their hand stretched out, threw
it up toward heaven, as if they would challenge God himself to revenge their
blasphemy of him, and the contempt of that sacred institution.

Such was the blasphemy of Caius Caligula, that he set up his picture in many
places, and claimed men's prayers unto himself, and dedicated the Temple in the
holy City to his proper use, translating and consecrating the name to new
Caius, as a famous God. This was far beyond the Bishop of Constantinople, who
only desiring to be called Universal, Gregory the great calls it, N^m^nistud
blasphemia.

It is a sin against the light of Nature, which Princes have severely punished,
some by searing their lips with an hot iron, and others with death. The very
Turks cannot endure them that wound the ears of heaven, but punish the
Christians their Prisoners, when they through impatience or desperateness do
blaspheme Christ. But how piercing is it to the heart of God and his people?
visible vengeance has fallen upon such wretches, and they have come to a
fearful end.

Mr. Anno 1553. in Helvetia at a town 3. miles distant from Lucerna, on a Lords
day, under the townwall. The truth of this relation is farther attested by
others. Job Tincelius. Philip Loincerus. Theat. Hist. p. 142. Isa. 37.23. Psalm.
42.10. Psalm. 56.7.
Trapp in his Exposition on Malachy, recites a terrible story out of Andrew
Musculus, concerning a desperate Dice-player, who having lost a great deal of
money, swore that if he lost the next cast, he would sling his dagger at the
face of God. He lost it, and in a rage threw up his daggar with all his might
toward heaven. The daggar vanished in the air, and was seen no more: five drops
of blood fell down upon the table where they were playing, which could never be
washed out (part of it is still kept in the town for a Monument) and the
blasphemer was fetched away presently body and soul by the Devil, with such an
horrible noise, as affrighted the whole town. The other two came to a miserable
end shortly after.

Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy one of
Israel.

As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily
unto me, where is thy God?

Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God.

Types.
TYPOI.
A Type is a shadow of things to come. (...), Typus vestigium, figura,
exemplar, forma, signum rei futurae. Sometimes called (...), subostentio,
obscura repraesentatio; and (...) umbra. Heb. 9.9. (...).
All that was in the Ceremonial Law, were types of our Savior Christ, and of
the Kingdom of heaven. The Sanctuary a shadow of heaven, the Tabernacle of
Christ's body; the Highpriests of Christ: Their sacrifices types of his: the
brazen serpent a figure of him, etc. They had the shadow, and we the substance.

The Levitical Ordinance is also called a figure or Parable. That is, such a
form of service, as intimated some greater matter, than to the sense appeared;
And called upon the people to look through the type to the truth of things,
through the history to the mystery.

When the sun is behind, the shadow is before; when the sun is before, the
shadow is behind. So was it in Christ to them of old. This Sun was behind, and
therefore the Law or shadow was before; to us under grace the Sun is before;
and so now the Ceremonies of the Law, those shadows are behind, yea vanished.

Which are a shadow of things to come, Colos. 2.17.
but the body is of Christ. Priest.
The name of a Priest is an honorable name in the book of God, not a name of
reproach and contempt. Sacerdos, q^sacer dux; docens, ^rans, ^fferens.
Artaxerxes in his letter to Ezra gives him an honorable title. Ezr. 7.12.

There was a worthy and glorious Priesthood under the Law: An High Priest in
goodly apparel, etc. Besides him there were a great number of Priests and
Levites, throughout all the towns and Cities of Israel; they offered the
sacrifices of the people, made an atonement for them, and instructed them in
the ways of the Lord.

Yet all these are nothing to our Savior Christ; he excels them as much as the
sun does the stars, or the body the shadow.

The Priests lips should preserve knowledge; Mal. 2.7.
and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord
of hosts. Melchisedeck.
In the sacred Scriptures he is said to be the Priest of the most high God,
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 8. c. 4.
so consecrated and ordained, neither by any oil prepared of man for that
purpose, neither by succession of kindred attaining to the Priesthood, as the
manner was among the Hebrews. Wherefore our Savior according unto that order,
not of them which received signs and shadows, is published by an oath, Christ
and Priest. So that the history delivers unto us, neither corporally
anointed among the Jews, nor born of the Priestly tribe, but of God himself
before the day star, that is, being in essence before the constitution of all
wordly creatures, immortal, possessing a Priesthood that never perishes by
reason of age, but lasts world without end.

The thing concealed by Moses is the eternity of Melchisedeck: not indeed, but
in respect of Moses history. He is introduced by him on the sudden, as if he
came then presently from heaven, and returned thither again: for Moses never
spoke of him before nor after. Genesis 14. So that whether he were Shem (as the
Hebrew Doctors and others) or some other, is not easy to determine. The
Melchisedechian Heretics held that he was the Holy Ghost, or at least some
created Angel. Others say, it was Christ himself, under the habit of a King and
Priest. It is most probable that he was a mortal man, and a Canaanite, but yet
a most righteous man, and a Priest of the most High God by special
dispensation; and so a pledge and first fruits of the calling of the Gentiles,
to the knowledge and obedience of Jesus Christ, of whom he was a lively Type.
And that Kedarlaomer and the other Kings that overran the country, and
spoiled it, forbear out of reverence to the man and his office, to meddle with
his Territories. He is said to be (...), not because he had no (...), stock or
kindred; but because there is no (...), no mention of it, no commemoration of
his kindred in the Scripture. Without father and mother he was, not in respect
of generation, but in respect cofommemoration; his parents are not mentioned,
no more are Jobs, nor the three childrens. Chrysostom. Theoph.
And for his eternity, he was without beginning of days, quia hoc scriptum non
est; Christus, quia non habet initium.

Tedious I might be (says Dr. Reynolds) in insisting on this point, who
Melchisedech was, But when I find the Holy Ghost purposely concealing his name,
In Psalm. 110.
Genealogy, beginning, ending and descent; and that to special purpose; I
cannot but wonder that men should toil themselves in the dark, to find out
that of which they have not the least ground of solid conjecture, and the
inevidence thereof is expressly recorded, to make Melchisedech thereby the
fitter Type of Christ's everlasting Priesthood.

The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, Psalm.
110.4.
after the order of Melchisedech. Sacrifice.
Amongst the Heathens, whatsoever was burnt or offered up unto the Gods upon an
Altar, it had the name of a sacrifice: And sometimes it was called victima,
quod vincta ad ar as stabat, because the beast that was to be sacrificed, stood
bound unto the Altar. Sometimes Hostia, from an Obsolete verb hostio, which is
to strike; because certain underofficers called in Latin Papae (standing by
the Altars, all their upper parts naked, and a lawral garland upon their head)
did hostiare victimam, strike down and kill the sacrifice. Others are of
opinion, that this name Hostia is taken from Hostis, Ovid.
an enemy; according to that of the Poet, Hostibus a domitis hostia nomen
habet: Because either before war to procure the Gods favor, or after war
in token of thankfulness, they did hostiam ferire, offer up the sacrifice.

There were diverse sorts of sacrifices among the Jews. 1. Whole
burnt-offerings. 2. Trespass-offerings. 3. Sin Offerings. 4. Peace Offering.


The sacrifices we are principally to offer up now, V^^ Dei est, purum,
gratissima victima, pectus. Naz.
are, 1. Christ is to be offered up daily to God, as the Propitiation for our
sins. 2. A brokon and contrite heart. 3. Prayer and thanksgiving to God. 4. We
must offer our selves.

-- An Holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Four things commend the sacrifice of Christ 1. Sufficientia, quoad pretium. 2.
Efficacia, contra peccatum. 3. Gloria, quoad Praemium. 4. Victori^, quoad
adversarium.


As man had sinned, so the blood of man must be poured out for the sin of man:
yea, the blood of such a man as knew no sin: A sinner cannot satisfy for
sinners. Neither was he to be a mere man, but God and man: The power of man is
finite, the power of God is infinite: Therefore he that delivered us from sin,
offered up himself by his eternal Deity.

Blood.
Quid est sanguis quam rubens humor? quid caro quam terra conversa in figuras
suas? Tertul.


Robert Samuel Martyr, said, our bloodshed for the Gospel shall preach it with
more fruit, Act. and Mon. Sanguis Martyrum s^men Eccles^.
and greater furtherance, than did our mouths, lives and writings; as did the
blood of Abel and Stephen, and many more.

As Christ was man consisting of flesh and blood, so he was also God, an
eternal and incomprehensible Spirit. From this infinite and unspeakable Deity,
the blood of Christ receivs a power to make satisfaction for our sins. Whereupon
it is called the blood of God, Act. 20.28. So it is called by a communication
of Properties, and to set forth the incomparable value and virtue thereof. The
blood of Martyrs was offered up by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, yet it was
not meritorious: It was the power of the Deity that made Christ's blood
meritorious: That gave both value and virtue to it, both to satisfy and to
sanctify. And so we come to have a double benefit by the blood of Christ,
justification and sanctification from sins, which are dead works.

The blood of Christ may be considered two ways in the work of redemption, 1.
As the price of our Redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. 2. As it carries the right of
Redemption. Blood implies neernesse of relation, Act. 17.26. As the blood of
Adam runs in the veins of all his posterity, and so there is a natural
relation among all mankind; So God has made Christ and us of one blood, Heb.
2.14. Christ as God had power to redeem us; but as being Immanuel, God with us,
he had also a right to redeem us.

The Pelican with her blood both feeds her young, and cures them being s^ung
with serpents; This is applicable to Christ in a spiritual sense. The Idolaters
offered the blood of their sons and daughters to their Idols, but they would
not offer their own: But Christ gave not any blood but his own, by his own
blood he made a way into Heaven for us. Constantine being told, that nothing
would cure his Leprosy but the blood of Infants; would rather dye: But Christ
was content his blood should be shed to cure us. A mother brings up her child
with her own milk, but Christ his children with his own blood.

Is not this the water (said David. 2 Samuel 23.17.) for the which three worthy
men ventured their lives? he would not drink of it though very thirsty. Our
swearing, drunkenness, etc. these cost the blood of the Son of God: We are
washed from them in the blood of Christ, and shall we wollow in them? When we
are provoked to sin, let us reason with our selves; Indeed the water of these
sins is sweet, but did it not cost the blood of Christ? We think sin to be
nothing, yet all the Martyrs on the earth, and all the Angels in heaven could
not have freed us from (...) Christ's blood is the price of our redemption, the
Son of God must shed his blood for it. Therefore let the consideration hereof
be a perpetual bridle to restrain us from sin.

Without shedding of blood is no remission. Hebr. 9.22.
Mass.
A certain Sorbonist finding it written in the end of St. Paul's Epistles,
Missa est, Buxto f.
etc. bragged he had found the Mass in the Bible. And another in reading in
Joh. 1.41. Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion. Some of them (as
Bellarmine for one) would fain ground it on Malac. 1.11. (...)
Others fetch the Missa from an Hebrew word which signifyes tribute, coming of
another which signifies to melt (because it many times melts away men's
estates) Recte quidem, Rivet.
per Missam scilicet piet as omnis liquefacta and dissoluta.

Upon these words, Heb. 7.18. Reprobatio quidem fit praecedentis mandat^, etc.
Here the Jesuits show themselves very acute, their wit mounteth above the
Moon. The old Mandate (say they) is gone, viz. the Levitical Priesthood, with
the sacrifices thereof: And the new Mandate is come in the room thereof; that
is, the Gospel with the sacrifice thereof, the Mass. Whereof Maunday Thursday
(...) his name; quasi Mandat Thursday; because then the old Mandate of the
^ascal Lamb was abolished, and the new Mandate of the sacrifice of the Mass
was ordained in the supper. Indeed Dr. Jones well observes, it was once called
Shear-Thursday, because the Priests did shear their hair and shave their
crowns on that day^: Afterward it had the name of Maunday Thursday, not of
the Latin word Mandatum (that is far fetched) but rather of the English word
Maund or basket, because the People brought their provision for feasting on
that day in such. To love one another is called the new Mandate, but the supper
has never that name. But here the Jesuits (it may be) make this note, rather
to show their wit than Divinity.



There is but one bloody sacrifice, which was once offered on the cross, but
there is an unbloody sacrifice, which Christ instituted at his last Supper, Cum
faciam vitula pro f^^gibus ipse venito.
where the body and blood of Christ are offered under the similitudes of bread
and wine; which is a commemoration and an applification of his sacrifice on the
cross to us^ for Christ said to his Disciples, Hoc facite, that is,
sacrificate, As the Poets say.

Hoc facite with an Accusative case does signify to sacrifice? The Poet does
not say, facere vitulam. Besides, Christ then ordained no Propitiatory
sacrifice, which was to be offered every day, he instituted a Sacrament, not
such a sacrifice.

Moreover, 1. In every sacrifice there is sensibile quiddam, as Bellarmine
confesses, and they also say, it is an eternal thing, and they call it
Visibile sacrifiolum. But in this imaginary sacrifice there is no outward
sensible thing, that may be discerned by the senses. They say that the body and
blood of Christ are there invisible under the shape of bread and wine:
therefore by their own Position it is no sacrifice. 2. They confess it to be
an unbloody sacrifice, and then no Propitiatory, for the quick and dead,
Sacrificium incruentum.
as they will have it: For without shedding of blood there is no remission of
sins; There is no blood shed, therefore no remission of sins. Then a Mass is
worth nothing, but a Fantastical dream of their own.

The Papists were used to say, the sacrifice of the Mass, that it was
propitiatory for the quick and the dead; but being forced to it by the light of
Scripture, they let go that hold, and affirm that it is only representativum,
commemorativum and applicativum of the sacrifice on the cross. But however
they minse it, all the sacrifices instituted by God must cease, after the
oblation of that sacrifice, whereby eternal redemption is obtained for us. And
then this new forged sacrifice, is but a bird of their own hatching, and must
cease. Besides, if Christ be offered up in the sacrifice of the Mass, then he
suffers at every Mass; for there can be no offering of Christ without
suffering: but he suffers not, even in the judgment of the Papists: Neither
Bellarmine nor any of them all can (though full of shifts) tell handsomely how
to elude this Argument. Here their unbloody sacrifice has a deadly wound.
There can be no oblation of Christ, without the suffering of Christ.

Dr. Thomas Tailor, in his Caveat against offenses, affirms: No Protestant
ought to be present with his body at Popish Mass, with pretense of keeping his
heart to God, nor can without scandal.

1. For the Pretense. 2. For the Presence it self.
For the Pretense: No man can give his heart to God at that time he gives his
body to an Idol. For, 1. Body and soul make but one man, and one man can have
but one faith, one Lord and Master, one God, one Worship. 2. God requires not
the whole heart only, but the whole man and strength: and he that created,
both body and soul, requires them both to be glorified in. 1 Cor. 6.20. 3. She
is no chaste wife that gives any other man the use of her body, with
Protestation she keeps her heart to her husband. 4. God will have no such heart
reserved for him, he will have no part of a divided man: He is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and truth; not in spirit and falsehood.

For the Presence: A number of scandals are infolded. 1. Here is a denial of
Christ, and of the faith; which were it in the heart, it would be confessed in
the mouth. Here Is a dastardly joining with the enemy against Christ. For he
that is not with him, is against him. And what union between Christ and an
Idol? 2. A scandal in his own conscience, allowing himself in that which he
condemns, Romans (...).
14.22. His body allows what his heart condemns. He is a man damned in
himself. His body and soul are at fight one with another, and both at fight
with faith and truth. 3. A scandal to others: an occasion by such wicked
example to draw others into the snare, and so far as he can, to destroy such as
for whom Christ has died. Romans 14.15.

Let none object Naaman the Syrian, craving leave to bow in the temple of
Rimmon, and the Prophet bade him go in peace, 2 King. 5.

For, among many answers; The text shows, 1. That Naaman confessed it a sin;
And how then can any hence prove it to be none? 2. That he prayed twice against
it; And what thou prayest, thou must do. 3. He professes he will never worship
any now, but the true God. 4. He craves the Prophets prayers, that he may never
be drawn contrary to his purpose: To which part the Prophet says, Go in peace;
not giving him leave to bow before Rimmon, but promising his prayers, he bids
him farewell. 5. Naaman might have pleaded a calling, yet that would not serve,
nor satisfy his conscience: How much less theirs, that plead only for
new-fangledness, and a rash running out of their way, so sinning without a
cause?

Nor let any say, Those were Heathen Idols; the Mass is not so bad, it has
some good things in it concerning God and Christ. For, the Mass is as gross
Idolatry, as ever the Heathens committed, who never worshipped a baser thing
than a piece of Bread. And let them tell us a difference between bodily
fornication of Heathens and Christians, and we will conceive the same in the
spiritual whoredom of Pagans and Papists. But let him that has an ear, hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches: Come out from amongst them, and touch
no unclean thing.

I wish Travelers in foreign Nations would observe this. Experience shows, how
alluring the Antichristian Harlot is, how many are daily won to her Idolatry.
Many that have frequented their Masses, conceiving it no great harm to be
present there, if they can pretend to keep their heart to God; (proving
Neutrals, Samaritans, and Cakes half-baked,) have had their hearts given up to
horrible delusion, infection, and final destruction. Have not they now kept
their hearts well to God, think we?

We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.10.
once for all. Acceptance.
Sincerity cannot fail of Divine acceptance, where endeavors are vigorous. The
poor Widows mite was above the rich men's magnificence. Willingness of mind
contributes much to the worthiness of the work.

Hiparchian was graced as well as Musaeus, though the best of his measures was
but piping to the Muses.

God (as the Philosopher said in his Apology) accepts of our few ears, Sen^e.
Epist. 29. ad Lucillum.
being scattered with a good mind into his Garner, since we are not able to
bring handfuls into his barn.

Sic minimo capitur thuris honor Deus. For if there be first a willing mind,
it is accepted according to that a man has, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that he has not. Tabernacle.
By it was signified the Body of Christ. As the High Priest came into the first
Tabernacle, and by it passed into the Holy place; so the Deity of our Savior
Christ came into his sacred Humanity, and by it entered into heaven. It was a
Type not only of Christ who dwelt among us, full of graces and truth, Joh.
1.14. but of the Church built by Christ, 1 Cor. 3.9. and also of every true
Christian, Ephesians. 2.10.

The Curtains were coupled with Loops; so should Christians by Love. Exodus 26.
The Taches made them one Tabernacle; so should we hold the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. It was Goats hair without, and Gold within: God hid his
Son under the Carpenters son; and the Kings daughter is all glorious within.
Rams-skins covered the Ark from the violence of wind and weather; shadowing out
Gods protection to his his people. The Vail was made with Cherubims; to note
the special presence and attendance of the holy Angels in the Assemblies of the
Saints. And the Hanging for the door of the Tent, shadowed him that said of
himself, I am the door.

It is observable, that the Holy place in this Tabernacle, has an Epithet to
abase it withal, Heb. 9.1. The Apostle calls it a Worldly Sanctuary. 1. (...)
Because it was made after the manner of the world: For as God stretched the
Firmament as a vail and curtain to separate the things above from them beneath,
so the Sanctuary had a vail, that made a separation between the first and
second Tabernacle. 2. Because it was made of worldly matter, as of hair, silk,
etc. 3. Because it was not eternal, as our Sanctuary of Heaven is, (there our
High Priest appears for us before God;) But a frail, brittle, and mortal
Sanctuary, as the world is.

Which was a figure for the time then present, Heb. 9.9.
etc. Noah's Ark.
By the description set down, Genesis 6. the Ark, in shape, was like to a Coffin
for a man's body, six times so long as it was broad, and ten times so long as it
was high: And so fit to figure out Christ's death and burial, and ours with him,
by mortification of the old man; whereby we are become dead and buried with
Christ, Romans 6.3, 4, 6.

This Ark, in the judgment of all Interpreters, was a type of the Church.

The Ark was made after God's appointment, not Noah's: So the Church must be
framed by God's will, not by man's. All were drowned, that were not in the Ark:
So all (regularly) are damned, that are not in the Catholic Church. The Ark
was near drowning, yet never drowned: So the Church may be brought to a low
ebb, yet it shall continue still. There was in the Ark good and bad, clean and
unclean: So we must never dream to have all holy and sanctified persons that be
in the Church. In the Ark there were diverse mansions and rooms, some for men,
some for beasts: And, In my Fathers house there are many dwelling places. Noah
and his family were saved in the Ark, yet with much ado; they endured much,
they were in continual danger, they passed through many difficulties, the smell
of beasts, little outward light, the Ark ready to rush on rocks and mountains:
So the children of God shall be saved, yet through many tribulations. Lastly,
the Ark had but a few in it, eight persons, yet there was the Church;
Universality is no necessary note of a Church. Christ's flock is but a little
flock.

The Ark was prepared, 1 Pet 3.10.
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. Ark of the Covenant.
The Ark is a representation of the Church, It was a chest, or cabinet, wherein
to keep the two Tables of the Law, Exodus 25.
which above all other things must have the Law of God in it. Signifying also
thereby, that Christ is the end of the Law, covering the imperfection of our
works.

It had upon it a Crown of Gold; to set forth the Majesty of Christ's Kingdom,
or the eternity of his Deity; which, as a crown or circle, had neither
beginning nor end. It was transportative, till settled in Solomon's Temple, So
till we come to heaven shall we be in a continual motion. It was a visible
sign of God himself among them, and therefore carried with staves, that it
might not be touched, for reverence sake. It was made of Shittim wood, which
corrupts not; Christ's body could not putrify in the grave, etc. In a word,
the several coverings did tipyfy Christ covering the curses of the law, in whom
is the ground of all mercy.

Which things the Angels desire to look into. 1 Pet. 1.12. (...).
Temple.
It was exceeding famous.

Called, The Temple of the Lord. Jerem. 7.4.
The place where Gods name was. 1 King. 8.29.
The holy and beautiful house. Isa. 64.11.
Gods resting place. 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
The mountain of the Lord. Isa. 2.3.
The desire of their eyes. Ezekiel. 24.21.
The house of God. Eccles. 5.1.



David had told Solomon, the house he builded for the Lord, Si Palatia
Principum, si aedes privatorum ornamenta sua habent, quid in and Templa?
Alsted. Architec. c. 9.
must be exceeding magnifical of fame and of glory, through all countries. 1
Chro. 22.5. There were 153^00 men employed about the work of the Temple, 1
King. 5. The glory and stateliness of it, you may read, Cap. 6. It was known
far and near, hence it was prophesied Psalm. 68.29. Because of thy Temple at
Jerusalem, shall Kings bring presents unto thee.

It was divided into three parts, The Court of Israel, the court of the
Priests, and Gods Court. Hence Jeremy the Prophet, thrice rehearses these
words, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
Cap. 7.4. In the third court, or Sanctum sanctorum, the Lord did show himself
in a special manner unto the High Priest once in the year.

The Temple was built of huge stones, as may appear, Mark. 13.1. I conceive,
this is meant of the latter Temple, re-edified by Zerubbabel.
Josephus writes of them, that they were fifteen cubits long, twelve high, and
eight broad; and so curiously cemented, as if they had been inocculated one
into another, that a man would have thought, they had been but one entire
stone. Quasi tota moles ex unico ingenti lapide in tantam magnitudinem
consurgeret.

But there is no trusting to forts and strong holds, no, though they be the
munitions of rocks; (as Isaiah speaks.) The Jebusites that jeared David and
his forces, were thrown out of their Zion, Babylon, that bore her self bold
upon her twenty years provision, laid in for a siege: and upon her high towers
and thick walls, was surprised by Cyrus; So was this goodly Temple by Titus. He
left only three Towers of this stately edifice unrazed, to declare unto
posterity the strength of the place, and valor of the vanquisher. But sixty
five years after, Elius Adrianus inflicting on the rebelling Jews, a wonderful
slaughter, subverted those remainders, and sprinkled salt upon the foundation.
Hence was fulfilled the presage of our Savior, feast thou these great
buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down, Mark. 13.2.

Quod vero Templum habere poscit Deus, cujus Templum totus est mundus, Cypr^d^
Idol van. Dr. Sibbs.
etc. in nostro dedicandus est monte, in nostro consecrandus est pectore. And
certainly, next to the love of Christ in dwelling in our nature; we may wonder
at the love of the Holy Ghost, that will dwell in our defiled souls. Delicata
res est Spiritus Sanctus


Let our care be to wash the Pavement of this Temple, with our tears; to sweep
it by repentance, to beautify it with holiness; to perfume it with prayers, to
deck it with humility, to hang it with sincerity. The Holy Ghost will dwell in
a poor (so it be a pure) house.

Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? -- Which Temple ye are. 1 Cor.
3.16, 17.
First Fruits.
The first of the first fruits of thy land thou shall bring into the house of
the Lord thy God. Exodus 23.19.

The import of it seems to be this, that the best, yea, and the best of the
best is not to be held too good for God.

Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, Jer. 2.2.
the love of thine espousals, etc. Circumcision.
De circumcisione Praeputii, Aurium, Labiorum, cordis manuum, pedum and
reliquorum membrorum. Orig. Hom. 3. in Genes.

It was the seal of the covenant to the people of God. Genesis 17.10. It was also
to them a sign of the mortification of the old man; and the resemblance holds
well, for, 1. As in outward circumcision, the foreskin (by which was signified
natural pollution) was cut off, so by repentance the inward and spiritual
circumcision, our corruption is cut off from the heart, and taken away. 2. The
body bled in that, in this the heart, in a spiritual construction.

And thus outward circumcision, was but a sign of the inward; that of the
body, did signify that of the soul; the cutting off of the foreskin of the
flesh, set out that of the foreskin of the heart: neither was to be omitted,
not that of the flesh, because faederally enjoined; nor that of the heart,
because Mystically signified by that of the flesh, and being the substance of
it.

Circumcise the foreskin of your heart. Deuteronomy. 10.16.
-- Circumcision made without hands, etc. Pascal Lamb.
As Israel was corporally and typically delivered by the blood of Paschal
Lamb; so are we spiritually and truly purchased by the blood of Christ; our
hearts being sprinkled therewith, Exodus 12. (...).
by the hysop-bunch of faith; and our bodies washed with pure water. For there
was not only an effusion, but an affusion; namely to the lintel and
door-cheeks, with a sponge of hysop.

And as the blood so sprinkled, did assure them of their deliverance from the
plague and judgment of God, that though never so many were slain among the
Egyptians, yet none of their firstborn should lose their lives; the destroying
Angel should not enter into their houses: even so, the blood of Christ
sprinkled on our consciences, by the sponge of faith, keeps away the Devil
from us. Where this blood is sprinkled, the Devil can there have no entrance or
possession.

Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. 1 Cor. 5.7.
Manna.
The Hebrew Manna is quite different and contrary to that of the Apothecaries,
Exodus 16.
which is a Syriack dew, and will neither melt with the sun, nor putrify in the
night, neither is it hard, nor fit for food (which the Israelites Manna was)
but for Physic only.

To this speaks Dr. Brown; Pseud. Epid. p. 300.
what Meteor that was that sed the Israelites so many years, they must rise
again to inform us. Nor do they make it out, who will have it the same with our
Manna; nor will any one kind thereof, or hardly all kinds we read of, be able
to answer the qualities thereof, delivered in Scripture; that is, to fall upon
the ground, to breed worms, to melt with the sun, to taste like fresh oil, to be
grounded in Milns, to be like Coriander seed, and of the color of Bdellium.
Thus he^

Certainly it was delicate fare, as might beseem Angels to eat, if they did eat
any at all: Such as the Poets fain to be their Nectar and Ambrosia.

The Nanna came down in the dew, so does Christ the bread of life in the
Ministry of the Word.

Man did eat Angels, food. Psalm. 78.25.
I am that bread of life. John 6.18.
Religion and Religious Exercises.
Religio.
TRue Religion is a grace of God, whereby we know, and worship the true God
according to his own will.

(...).
So I call it, to distinguish it from all false religions, which are not from
God, nor supernal; but from men and nature, and therefore are called
Will Worship, Col. 2.23.

Religion; and that is the true God, and things of God; and in all the matters
of Religion, we must keep God in our eye, the special way of glorifying God
here upon earth: and the only means appointed to make us like unto God;
Neither is it any thing else but the way unto God, and the happy means to
bring us into communion with God, which is true beatitude. 1 John 1.3.

Religion, because ignorance leads men every way but unto God. Gal 4.8. Act.
17.23. Where there is no true knowledge of God, there can be no true worship of
God, Romans 10.14. And besides, the knowledge of his Divine Nature must frame the
right manner of his Worship. We must both know what he is in himself, and what
he is to us. Exodus 20.2. Hebr. 11.6. 2. The second Act of Religion, is that
whereby we religiously worship the true God only; for it teaches that all
Divine worship belongs to him alone. 1 Samuel 7.3. Mat. 4.10. God is of the
nature of those things which must be had alone; No man can serve two Masters at
once: one woman cannot have two husbands at once; Now God is our alone Master,
and a jealous husband, who admits of no corrival. Furthermore, whatsoever is to
be worshipped, is superior to him that worshippeth; But only the true God is
superior to the soul of man: Saints are our equals, Angls our fellow servants,
Rev. 19.10. And all the other works of God (much more the works of men) are far
man's inferiors.

Religion, which is the will of God. Deuteronomy. 10.12. Mic. 6.8. Isa. 1.22.

That Is a Religion not pleasing to God, 1. Which has a wrong rise or spring,
With too many, Religion is passeable as Coin, because it has the States stamp
upon it.
viz. Custom and formality; and not chosen upon mature deliberation. 2. Which
harh not subjection to the Principles of it, viz. Regeneration, Faith,
Sanctification, etc. Which are Principia constitutionis. 3. Which has other
ends, than God has propounded or intended in the same.

The two heads of Religion, or the two main hinges upon which all Religion
turns, are, 1. Purity of Doctrine, or soundness of opinion. 2. And cleanness
of practice, or holiness of life. Here Is the character of a Christian in his
compleatnesse; these two constitute a perfect man. These were typified in the
old law by the Vrim and Thummim set in the breast plate of the High Priest.
This Motto fitted not only the Priests of the Old Testament, or the Ministers
of the New but befits every Christian, every true believer should bear this
upon his breast. It is an ill hearing, and a sad spectacle, when these two are
separated; Themselves are in an ill condition, and they are fit instruments to
make others worse. Unfound Doctrine frets like a canker, and an unclean life is
catching like a leprosy. We are aptest to take an unfound Doctrine, from those
whose lives are clean; and we are aptest to imitate their unclean lives, whose
Doctrine is found. The jealous and just God hates and plagueth halting betwixt
two; dow-baked duties, lukewarmness, neutrality and all mixtures in Religion;
his soul loathes all such speckled birds, plowing with an Ox and an Ass,
mingled seeds, linfey-wolsey garments. Levit. 19.19.

Those were wretched times, Jerem. 2.28. When it was said, The tale of Proteus
can no longer be a fable, when the business of Religion in England may be the
Moral. Turk. Hist. fol. 211.
according to the number of thy Cities, are thy gods, O Judah. When people
multiply to themselves as many religions (so I may say) as Pigeons; it is more
than possible, they pursue none to purpose.

It is said of T^merlan^, he disliked of no man for his Religion whatsoever, so
as he did worship but one only God, Creator of heaven and earth, and all that
therein is: being himself of opinion, that God in Essence one, and in himself
immutable, without change or diversity; yet for the manifesting of his
omnipotency and power, as he had created in the world sundry kinds of people:
much differing both in nature, manners and condition, and yet all framed to the
image of himself: So was he also contented to be of them diversely served,
according to the diversity of their nature and manners.

But there is but one true Religion; 1. Because there is but one true God, the
object of true Religion. Ephesians. 4.4. 2. Because there but is one end and scope of
Christian life and duty, and that is eternal blessedness; and one way to that
mark, which is Christ himself; and one walking in that way, which is Christian
practice. 3. Because there can be no agreement together of two diverse
religions, no more than iron and clay can be tempered together. 2 Cor. 6.14,
15, Joh. 4.24. 4. Because of the express word of God; 1. Commanding straightly,
that himself be worshipped alone, and enduring no compeer, Exodus 20.3. 2.
Prohibiting that no tribe or family, man or woman should turn his heart from
the Lord, to any other God. Deuteronomy. 29, 18. 3. Threatening severely to stretch out
his hand upon them that swear by the Lord, and by Malcham. Zeph. 1.5. 4.
Executing his wrath and displeasure upon this mixture of Religion, spewing out
of his mouth those that are neither hot nor cold. Rev. 3.16.

Popish religion says, Were I to choose a religion to license lasciviousness,
and gratify the flesh; it should be the Popish Religion, said Sir Walt. Rawl.
that a lewd miscreant or infidel in the business of the Altar partakes of the
true holy and blood of Christ; that men may save the labor of searching, for
that it is both easy and safe to believe with the Church at a venture; the bare
act of the Sacrament confers grace, without faith; that the mere sign of the
Cross made by a Jew or infidel, is of force to drive away the Devil; that
Mass in the very work wrought, does not only pardon our sins in this life,
but when we lie frying in purgatory; that Alms given merit heaven, dispose to
justification, satisfy God for sin; that abstinence from some meats and drinks
is meritorious; that indulgences may dispense with sin afterward to be
committed; that one man may deliver another soul out of torments; So that he
that wants neither money or friends, needs not fear the smart of sins. O
Religion, sweet to the wealthy, to the needy desperate^

Valdus of France, Wickliffe of England, Hierom of Prague, and Luther of
Germany, framed not a new Church, but reformed the old, they endeavored (and
not without happy success) to cleanse and scour, restore and reform those
Churches, which were foiled filthily with the blemishes of disorder and error.

Cardinal Wolsey, when bidden not for to fear; the King loved him as well as
ever he did: said, that was not the cause of his sadness; but had he served
God, as diligently as he had done the King, he would never bave forsaken him in
his gray hairs. Anselmus.
A godly person seeing a woman curious about her person to please her lover, and
himself not so diligent to please his God; cried out, O miserable man, whom so
infinite love, blessings, and riches, cannot provoke to such car^ and diligence
of pleasing God, Tertul.
as the vilest things do make our industry to please the Devil.

Religion is the greatest enemy to religion; the false to the true. Favos etiam
vespae faciunt. Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium.
Wasps also make combs, though instead of honey we find Gunpowder.

Traitors against Kings and Kingdoms must be punished in an high degree, and
great reason: But why, when hourly we hear high treason against God, goes that
uncensured, so much as with a word?

The Egyptians worshipped whatsoever they conceived comely; And Zenophanes
says, if beasts could paint, they would pourtray God to their own shape and
feature, because they can conceive no further.

Fourteen principal cities in Germany, protested for Luther, from whence came
the name of the Protestant Religion.

It was the offer of great Cham the Tartarian Prince, Tuus Pontif^x meus
Pontifex (...), tuus Lutherus meus Lutherus e^^o. Bu^^ing.
of whom Lipsius reports, that when Stephanus the mighty King of Poland was
departed, sent a Legate to them, telling them he would be of any religion, if
he might reign. Of Charles the fifth Emperor, it is said, his actions that
seemed most favorable, were the most pernicious to Religion. However truth of
Religion is not to be judged by the prosperity or adversity of the Professors.

Religion is rather a setler than stickler in Policy; if they work otherwise,
they labor out of their vineyard, and move out of their proper sphere. Far
then is Religion from overthrowing government, or everting the degrees of
superiority and inferiority that be among men. True indeed, we are all one in
Christo, Gal. 3.28. but not in mundo; in Christ, but not in the world. Christ
died indifferently for all; that is, for servants as well as for masters; yet
the degrees that be in the world must be retained, and acknowledged, to the end
of the world.

Yet in all ages Religion has been slandered. Elias was called a troubler,
Paul an Innovator, Luther a trumpeter of rebellion, Melanchton a blasphemer of
God and his Saints, Calvin a Mohammedan, Zanchius an Anabaptist, a
Zwenckfeldian, a Novatian, and what not? Contra Sychophantae morsum non est
remedium.
Arminius paved his way first by aspersing the fame and authority of Calvin,
Zuinglius, Beza, Martyr, and other champions of the truth. The Papists reported
the Waldenses (those ancient Protestants) to be Manichees Arrians, Catharists,
etc. As they do us to be Libertines, Enthusiasts, Atheists, etc. Thus they set
their mouths against heaven, and their tongue walks through the earth, Psalm.
73.9. But well said one, God will cut out such false tongues, Psalm. 12.3. And
broyl them upon coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.4.

However, Religion is both the bulwark and beauty, muniment and ornament of a
land. Even as Sampsons strength and glory lay in his hair, so does the strength
and glory of a land consist in Gods sincere service: which if it should be
shaved and deprived of, though every shower were a shower of gold, (says a
Divine) every stone in the land a pearl, every beggar an honorable Senator,
every fool as wise as Solomon, every weakling as strong as Sampson, yet for all
our wealth, honor, strength, wisdom and glory; we shall sing a doleful
Miserere with Phineas wife; The glory is departed, for Religion is gone.

If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, Jam.
1.26, 27.
but deceives his own heart; this man's religion is vain.

Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world.

Divine Worship.
The Serpents Grammar first taught Deum pluraliter declinare; (...)
Eritis si^ut Dii, Ye shall be as Gods. And here is the first broaching of
plurality of Gods, which since this time has multiplied to an innumerable
rabble of false gods. Of Divine powers adored by the heathens, Hesiod reckons
up thirty thousand that were in his time: What an Army, may we think there were
of them in after ages? It is said, that in China are no fewer than an hundred
thousand Idols. See Mr. Fullers Pantheon. But all religious service done to
any, but God, is manifestly condemned as impious. Be the gods of the Heathens
good fellows, the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with
another. Read, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.

Worship is either, 1. Civil. Or, 2. Divine.


The former may be given to men, and it is twofold, 1. A civil worship of duty,
from inferiors to their Superiors, as from children to their Parents, from
servants to their Masters, from subjects to their Magistrates. 2. A civil
worship of courtesy, which is from equals, when one equal will bow to another,
or when a Superior bows down to his inferior.


But the latter is Gods peculiar. For nothing but God, or that which we make a
God, is or can be worshipped. Either he is a God whom we worship, or (as much
as in us lies) we make him one. Whatever creature shares in this honor, this
honor (ipso facto) sets it up above, and makes it more than a creature. The
very Heathens thought every thing below a God, below worship.

Indeed Papists have worship for creatures, and they have distinction for it,
but no Scripture for it. They tell us of their Latria, worship only proper to
God, and Dulia, which is for Saints, and Huperdulia, which is for the Virgin
Mary, and for the sign of the Cross. Thus they make vain distinctions, which
God and the Scripture make not. They that invent a worship, must invent a
doctrine to maintain it by. And indeed vain distinctions are good enough to
maintain vain superstitions.

This divine worship of God is twofold, 1. Internal. and 2. External.


The former is to love God, fear God, and trust upon him: These are acts of
inward worship. The latter is nothing else but the serving of the Lord
according to his own institution, D^o serviendum ell, non ex arbitrio, sed ex
imperio. Tert.
in those several ways wherein God will be honored and served, by humble
adoration, supplication, etc. God requires both, and there is a necessity of
joining both together; but internal worship is the chief. External worship
honors God most, but internal worship pleases God most. The external worship
may be complete in it self, but is never pleasing to God without the internal.
Internal is complete in it self, and pleasing unto God without the external.

But in both we must be zealous. The Lacedaemonians (though sore assailed by the
Pe^sians) would not resist, till their sacrifices to their gods were fully
ended.

God is a Spirit, John 4.24.
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit, and in truth. To these
we oppose the profane person, he has no gods at all, in matters of Religion
his heart is a piece of dead flesh, without feeling of love, of fear, of care
or of pains, from the deep strokes of a revenging conscience; custom of sin
has wrought his senselesness, which has been so long entertained, that it
pleads habitation; we are born sinful, but have made our selves profane; at the
first he sinned and cares not, now he sins and knows not; appetite is his Lord,
and reason his servant; when ought succeeds to him, he sacrifices to his
nets, and thank either his fortune or his wit, and will rather make a false
god, than acknowledge the true: His conscience would fain speak with him, but
he will not hear it, and when it cries aloud in his ear for audience, he drowns
it with good fellowship: He never names God, but in his oaths; never thinks of
him but in extremity: The inevitable necessity of Gods decree makes him
desperately careless, so with good food he poisons himself; his usuallest
Theme is the boast of his young sins, which he can still joy in, though he
cannot commit: He cannot think of death without terror, which he fears worse
than Hell, because this he is sure of, the other he but doubts of: He comes to
the Church as to the Theater (but not so willingly) for company, custom,
recreation, perhaps for sleep: He is hated of God, as much as he hates
goodness, and differs little from a Devil, but that he has a body The Law is
made, for the unholy and profane. 1 Timothy 1.9.
Look diligently, lest there be any profane person, as Esau. -- Heb. 12.16.


Servant of men.
There is a service due from man to man, but comparatively to our service of
God, we must not be the servants of men. We ought to serve men heartily, but we
must serve none but God with all our hearts.

He is a servant of men, in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 7.23. that subjects
himself to their lusts, either for hope or fear; laboring to please men,
though it be with sinning against and provoking God. That Rule holds good in
Rhetoric, but not in Divinity, Cicero.
Non ad veritatem solum, sed etiam ad opinionem little qui andiunt, accommodanda
est oration.

This was a Principle held very fast by the Heathens, Magis ob temperandum est
Diis apud quos diutius manendum erit, quam hominibus, Witness Antigoua in
Sophacles.
quibuscum admodum brevi tempore vivendum est. Better obey God, with whom we
must ever live, than men with whom we have but a while to continue.

Men-pleasers that curry favor with all, they lose a friend of God: neither do
they long hold in with those, whom for present they do so much please.

Whether it be right in the sight of God, Acts 4.19.
to hearken unto men more than unto God, judge ye. Servant of sin.
Every man till regenerate, is a servant to sin, and overcome by it, Quot vitis
tot domi^i.
till the grace of regeneration do renew him, and set him at liberty. All
unregenerate men have put their neck into sins yoke, and are unwilling to have
it taken off again.

Sin may have a twofold prevalency or dominion over a man; 1. Either with a
full and plenary consent. 2. Or else unwillingly, with reluctance and
contradiction. As Josephus says of Herod, that he reigned over the Jews for
many year by mere force, they opposing and resisting of him; but afterward
they willingly consented to him. By this distinction Divines use to resolve
that case of conscience, whether a godly man may be said to be under a reigning
sin? for as we understand the word reigning (as aforesaid) so it is true or
false, etc. Romans 7.25.


There Is a great difference betwixt the regency and residency of sin; In a
regenerate person rebel it may, reign it shall not. It fares with sin: in
them (says one) as with those beasts, Dan. 7.10. they had their dominion taken
away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season. While we are at conflict and
combat with sin, it will not be our ruin; but when we willingly take these
bonds and chains upon us, then sin will be our overthrow.

Sin comes to prevail over a man by degrees, James 1.15. Nemo repe^te fit
turpissimus.
so that as the cloud in Elias time, which was at first but as big as an hand,
did afterward increase into a vast cloud, able to darken the whole sky; so
sin has its beginnings and subtle ingresses, but afterward these sparks do
prove a very great flame. Therefore it should be our godly wisdom, to subdue
sin in the beginning of it, to break it in the egg, before it come to be a
flying Serpent. One spark let alone may endanger a whole town; if we give
indulgence to our lusts at first, Voluptates, l^tronum more, (quos Philetas
Aegyptii vocant,) in hoc nos amplecluntur, ut stran^ulent. Senec. Epist. 51.
Romans 6.12.
they will be our Masters afterward.

Jacob complained of Labans deceit about his wages, but to all eternity thou will have cause to cry out, that sin has deceived thee, promising joy and
pleasures; but instead of this honey, thou meetest with gall and wormwood to
feed upon for ever.

Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof. Servant of God.
To serve God is a comprehensive term, taking in all the duty of man in
holiness. To serve God, is to give him all the duties both of natural and of
instituted worship; We serve God while we love him, fear him, believe in him,
trust upon him; yet all these have distinct and proper respects to God: We
trust God as he is faithful, believe on him as he is true, fear him as he is
great, love him as he is good, and serve him as he is our Sovereign and Lord
of all.

Carnal men count the service of God unprofitable. The reason is, because they
account nothing good, but that which is outwardly good, Psalm. 4.6. They can
look no further than they see, and therefore because they see no profit, they
conclude there is none to be had; and are ready to say, Mal. 3.14. It is in
vain to serve God. At the best many desire to be his retainers, rather than
servants; willing they be to shroud themselves under that name, because they
think, that in the end it will go well with such; also they think it a disgrace
to be said to be of no Religion; yet for all that they are loath to be tied,
desiring to be free still, and at their own disposing, serving God now and
than, out of formalitie more than conscience, and when their own occasions will
give leave.

The end of our Redemption is to serve God, whom we must serve, 1.
Integraliter, with the whole man. 2. Peculiariter, him and him alone. 3.
Perseveranter, to our lives end. 4. Totaliter, in every part of the same.


If God be not served with all, he counts himself not at all served.

There is no fishing to the Sea: No service to the Kings: Nor no service to the
King of kings.

Our Master, 1. Is rich. 2. Loving. 3. Liberal. 4. Lives for ever.


Add, God will protect his servants, Psalm. 146.14. Never be ashamed of them,
Heb. 11.6. And his service is best and sweetest at last.

To be called the servant of God, (...). Philo in l. de Regno.
is an higher title than Monarch of the world, said Numa the second King of
Rome. Constantinus, Valentinianus and Theodosius, three Emperors, called
themselves Vasallos Christi, the vassals of Christ, as Socrates reports.

It is written, Mat. 4.10.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Read, Cap. 12.28.
Josh. 24.15. Luke 1.74. John 12.26. Romans 1.9. 1 These. 1.9. 2 Timothy 1.3. Heb.
9.14. cap. 12.28, etc.

Truth.
If any ask, as Pilate did, John 18.38. What is Truth? I answer, it is the most
perfect essence of any thing, or the most absolute perfection it self of any
matter. Veritas and bonitas differ but as the seal and the print, for truth
prints goodness, and they be the clouds of error, which descend in the storms
of passions and perturbations. It has these two properties. 1. It is Divine,
grounded on the Scriptures. 2. Truth is single, one and the same, at agreement
with it self; whereas error is manifold, dissonant, and contradictory to it
self. Veritas simplex Error multiplex.
And truth is ever the same. The declarative truth of God, is like Christ the
essential truth, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Truth, though it
be very old, yet waxes not old. Neither ever wants she voluntary witnesses
to depose for her, or arguments that offer themselves in her defense; As the
Poets feined, the stones came of their own accord to the building of Thebes.

Yet Truth has many cold friends; When Callidus once declared against Gallus,
with a faint and languishing voice; Oh (says Tully) Tu nisi fingeres, sic
ageres? Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
Would thou plead on that manner, if thou were in good earnest? Men's faint
appearing for the Truth, shows they do but feign: Their coldness probably
concludes they do but counterfeit. Yea, Truth has always opposites. Dogs
(says a Divine) though they fight never so fierce, and mutually entertear one
another, yet if a Hare run by, they give over and run after her. Martial makes
mention of a Hare on the Sicilian shore, that having hardly escaped the hounds
that hunted her, was devoured by a sea-dog: Whereupon he brings her in thus
complaining, In me omnis terraeque aviumque marisque rapina est: An expectas ut
Quintilianus ametur.

For sitan and Coeli, si canis astra tenet.


Moreover, the defenders of the truth in all ages were accounted Schismatics,
Tertullian says it has ever been seen, veritatem in terris peregrinam agere,
and inter ignotos facile calumniatores invenire
Elias the troubler of Israel, Paul a mover of sedition; Amos accused of the
like before Jeroboam; yea, Christ to seduce the people, and to affect Caesar's
Kingdom. And Satan is the enemy of Truth, either openly or covertly. Indeed
though he be the father of lies, yet he sometimes speaks truth for his own
advantage. But as it is said concerning Judas speaking for the poor, Joh. 12.6.
so Satan will sometimes speak that which is true, not that he regards the
truth, or that he would speak a word of Truth (for he has nothing but lies in
his heart; there is a lie in his heart, when there is truth in his mouth.) But
when ever he speaks truth, it is to deceive and do hurt by it.

However, Truth may challenge credit. It needs not stand begging audience, or
creep upon the ground with flattering insinuations. Truth is a great Prince,
Magna verit^s, and praevalet.
it commands rather than entreats, every word of it being a Law or charge.
Truth is not afraid to be tried. It often lies in a corner, but never seeks
corners, as ashamed to be seen or discussed by men. Truth (as some have said)
lies in a deep pit, it is hard to find it out, it lies out of sight; yet
Truth does not hide it self, but dares stand forth in the face of all the
world. It no more fears the trial, than pure gold fears the touchstone, or
than a scholar who has made good progress in his learning, fears to be
examined. He that has Truth with him, needs not care who appears against him.
Nay more, Truth, the more it has been opposed, the more it has appeared,
Veritas abscondi erubescit, says Tertullian. It was Zwinglius his prophecy,
scio veritatem superaturam esse, and ubi ossa mea in favillam erunt redacta;
occiditur quidem Christus, sed brevi resurgit, ac de hostibus triumphat. Tom.
2. p. 323. R^primi non d^p^imi potest.
In respons ad Epist. amici cujusdam non vulgaris. Truth may be overclouded,
but (like the Sun) it will break out and appear more glorious.

Mahomet the great Turk, (...).
seeing his beautiful wife Irene was the occasion of his neglect of his Realm,
and his people ready to rebel against him, by his dallying with her: In the
midst of his Bassa's struck off her head, Even so rather than hazard truth and
a good conscience, let go peace, which her name in Greek signifies.

We must know no relations in Truths case; Socrates is my friend, Amicus
Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.
and Plato is my friend, but Truth is a better friend than both. Whosoever
dares speak against truth, we must dare to speak for it. It Is noble to show our
selves friends to Truth, though we lose friends by it: and enemies to error,
though we get enemies by it.

Veritatem desiderant multi, sed ad eam viam ignorant. Vt e font aqua
ha^ritur, ex igne accenditur ignis, ex lumine lumen, ita ex Christo qui est
veritas, Dei veritas. Veritas est in Jesu, and Jesus est veritas; veritas Deus
est, and qui deum novit, veritatem novit.

Note further, that according to the Philosophers, there is a threefold truth,
1. Metaphysical, in being, the conforming of a thing to the Idea, Veritas in
Essend^; cognosc^ndo, sign sicando.
by which it was framed. 2. Logical, in knowing, the conformity of the
understanding with the thing. 3. Ethical, in signifying the conformity both
sermonis and facti, of our words to the things, and our actions to right
reason; by which distinction it manifestly appears, that there is a practical
as well as a speculative truth, 1 John 1.6.

And the Truth is done, Either, 1. Objectively, which is to conform in doing to
the Truth, that is the Word of God, the rule and square of Truth; to make the
Law of God the rule of our conversation, Ezekiel. 18.5. Or, 2. Modally, which is
to do what we do heartily and sincerely; for it is not sufficient that we do
what is right, but that we do it truly, with a good and upright heart, Isa.
38.2. To the former speaks Cyril and Tollet, Facere veritatem est operari
secundum legem justitiae, rectitudinis and honestatis. And to the latter thus,
Facere veritatem nihil aliud est, quam f^n^ere agere. Vorst.

Mercy and Truth are met together, Psalm. 85.10, 11.
righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from
heaven.

Lying.
Pythagora^ was wont to say, Mendacium a mend^.
that in two things we become like unto God, 1. In bestowing benefits. 2. In
telling truth.

Mentiri, Mendacium est falsa ennciatio cum intention fallendi.
is contra mentem ire, to lie, is to utter a known untruth, with an intention
to deceive or hurt.

There is, Mendacium 1. Malltiosum. 2. Officiosum. 3. Jocosum.


For the first, it has been the practice of the Christians enemies, first to
belie them, and then persecute them. Thus Epiphanius testifies, that after
Saul was turned Christian, the Grecians (with whom he sometime was forward to
join against Stephen) sought his death; but first they gave out, that he turned
merely out of discontent, because he could not obtain to wife the Highpriests
daughter. And before the French Massacre, it was given out, that the
Protestants in their night-meetings committed most abominable uncleanness.
Those that kill a dog (says the French proverb) make the world believe he was
mad first. The Devil was first a liar, and then a murderer; and he has taught
his Impes, Diligi proximum ut teipsum, nolite destruere ut alium extruas.
first to take away the credit of the Church, and than to wound her. For the
second, that is a good rule, In mendacio officios^, memento ne destruas
spiritum tuum, ut serves alterius corpus. And for the last, lie not in jest,
lest God send thee to Hell in earnest.

The Cretians were loud liars; (...) etc. Tit. 1.12.
And Tertullian says of Tacitus, he was mendaciorum loquacissimus, he never
opened his mouth, but there came forth a swarm of lies.

It was grown to a common Proverb, A Friar, a Liar. One of them undertook to
show a feather of the wing of the Angel Gabriel. The poor people are persuaded
to believe, that the thunder of the Popes Excommunication has so blasted the
English Heretics, that their faces are grown all black, and and ugly as
Devils; their eyes and looks ghastly: their breath noisome and pestilent, etc.
That they are grown barbarous and eat children, blaspheme God and all his
Saints.

It was a golden age when that argument took place, Sacerdos est, non fallet:
Christianus est, non mentietur. Hierom writes of one upon the rack, that
uttered these words, Non ideo negare volo, ne peream; sed ideo negare volo ne
peccem. Gods people are children that will not lie, they will die rather.

Seneca observes, Epist. 97. ad finem. Mendacium vitro pellucidius. --
that a lie is of a thin and transparent nature, a diligent eye may see through
it. Lying is a blushful evil, therefore does the liar deny his lie. Aristotle
says, it is in it self, evil and wicked, destructive to humane societiy, and
contrary to the order of nature, which has given words to express men's minds
and meanings.

There is a threefold lie which we must both avoid and oppose.

1. Verbal, when a man tells a false tale, or brings up a false report;
Mendax h^^ ^^cratur ut cum vera aixerit non credatur.
which is a breach of the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false
witness. 2. Doctrinal, when a false Position is averred to be the truth of
God, and stamped with Divine authority. Any erroneous doctrine is branded with
this title. For this cause (says Paul) namely, because they received not the
love of the truth, God shall send them strong delusion, that they shall believe
a lie, 2 These. 2.11. 3. Practical, this is a lie not spoken, but done, when a
man's actions contradict his profession, of which the Apostle, He that says, I
know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him, 1 John 2.4.
There is equivocation now set forth of a later impression, Archpriest
Blackwel, and Provincial Garnet.
a Pest which the Jesuits have ala^^ called back from hell, for the comfort of
afflicted Catholics, as some have not been ashamed to profess. But it is
plain, the Devil did only equivocate with our first parents, and yet is called
a liar.

Every sin the more congenial it is to the Devil, the more sinful and
abominable it is, Now, every sin is of the devil, both by temptation and
approbation; but only some sins are of the devil by way of practice, and the
sin which is chiefly of him by practice, is lying.

Remove from me the way of lying. Psalm 119.29.
Jesting.
Quid nobis cum fabulis, cum risu? Non solum profusos, Bern.
sed atiam omnes jocos declinandos.

Tertullian says, he was Null^ rei naim nisi poenitentiae; borne for nothing
else, but for repentance.

Sir Thomas Moore being brought to the Tower a malefactor; Act. and Mon. fol.
970.
and one of the Officers demanding his upper garment for a fee, meaning his
gown, he said he should have it, and took him his cap, saying, that it was the
uppermost garment that he had. So, when he was to be beheaded, he said to the
Executioner, I Pray you let me lay my beard over the block, lest you should cut
it. It seem he thought it no glory, unless he might die with a Jest in his
mouth. Surely, it was very unseasonable. The Chronicler seems to doubt, Edw.
Hall^ Chron.
whether to call him a foolish-wise-man, or a wise-foolish-man.

Creed mihi, r^^ s^vern est gandium verum; True mirth is a severe Business.
Seneca.
Scurrility, consists not with piety and Christian gravity.

-- Nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient; Ephesians. ^.4.
(...).
but rather giving of thanks. Obscaenity
Idle and was^ words are to be accounted for, how much more then evil and
wicked?

Plato and Xenoph^n thought it fit and profitable, that men's speeches at
meetings should be written.

Evil words are not wind (says a late Writer) as most men imagine, but the
Devils drivel, that leaves a soul sta^^ upon the speaker, and often sets the like
upon the hearer. Shun obscene borborologie (says another) and un^avoury
speeches; thou losest so much of thine honesty and piety, as thou admittest
evil in thy tongue.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. (...).
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto
the hearers. Voice.
Christ's not lifting up his voice in the street, Isa. 42.2. is vox jactantis,
non docentis.

There are many voices (says one) all the Prophets are voices, Preachers are
voices; Non vox hominis, sed Dei certe.
but there are some voces ad placitum, temporizing voices, crying for their own
profit; others which are voces aequivecae, as an hatchet that will not cut, a
fire that will not burn: But John Baptist was the properest voice of them all.

Reverend Mr. Samuel Crook was wont to say to his friends, rejoicing with him,
and blessing God for him, I am nothing but a voice. So John, he professes
himself to be no more but a voice; And indeed he was totus vox, all voice, his
apparel, his diet, his conversation did preach holiness as well as his
doctrine, John 1.23.

Every faithful Minister is ordained to be a crier, and so had we need, we have
to do with deaf men, dead men, living carcases, walking Sepulchers of
themselves. Now therefore as our Savior lifted up his voice, Isa. 58.1. Clam^s
etiam ut stentora vincas.
when he said, Lazarus, come forth: So must Christ's Ministers (when they speak
to such as lie rotting and stinking in the grave of their corruptions) cry
aloud.

Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and arise from the dead. Loquacity.
We read of it, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear; but never, he that
has a tongue to speak, let him speak.

Empty vessels are full of sound, wisest men are most silent; for as some
gravel and mud passes away with much water; so in many words there wants no
sin.

In multi loquio stulti loquium. Many words are hardly well managed. It is
seldom seen that a man of many words miscarries not.

The silence of Swans may for a time be overcome with the noise of Swallows;
Vir linguae nequaquam crit stabilis.
but when the Swallows are hoarse, the Swans will sing.

Epaminondas is worthily praised by Plutarch, for this, Quod nemo plura nosset,
and pauciora loqueretur: That no man knew more, and spoke less than he did.

Talkativenesse is a sign of worthlesnesse; taciturnity of solidity.

He that has knowledge, Prove. 17.27.
spares his words. Silence.
It is a privative, at least a negative. A dumbness is a total, so silence is
a temporal privation of speech.

It is a good rule that one gives, either keep silence, or speak that that is
better than silence.

Well said Hierom, Discamus prius non loqui, ut postmodum ad loquendum ora
reseramus: In Eccl. 3.7.
nihil nobis rectum esse vid^atur nisi quod discimus, ut post multum silentium
ex discipulis efficiamur magistri.

Seneca says, summa summarum haec est, tardiloquum te esse jubeo. Epist. 40.
And Ambrose, In Psalm. 38.
Ovalidum scutum circumspect a munitionis silentium! O fidissimum stabilitatis
fundamentum! Multi enim etiam stabili cord firmati incauti tamen, sermonis
fluctuantis errore ceciderunt. But here is a misery, saepe non possumus loqui
quum volumus, and saepe non volumus quum possumus; saepius autem utrumque non
debemus, quum facimus.

There are three sorts of silent persons, 1. Some, and it is their cunning. 2.
Others, and it is their weakness. 3. But there are, and it is their wisdom.


To these I may add a fourth; There is a superstitious silence, such as were
those old Monks of Egypt, who (says Cassian) were Vmbrarum more silentes and
(...), as speechless as Ghosts. So the Carthusian Monks, who speak together
but once a week. Some kinds of Sectaries also at this day, will not speak a
word to any, but those of their own Sect, and that but at some times.

Better to be counted proud (says Luther) than be sinfully silent. Epist ad
Staup.
So that there is a time to speak; and as sometimes, Dixisse culpa sit quae
fuerunt retinenda; so at another time, Tacuisse noceat quae dicenda fuerant.

Such as love to vaunt themselves, and out of ostentation to set forth their
good parts to public view; may be compared to a vessel without a cover,
touching which the Law says, that it shall be counted unclean. But to utter a
man's knowledge for the benefit of others, is not pride, but zeal, however the
world censure it: And they have doubtless an heavy account to make, who hide
their Talents; Vile latens virtus --
and having a great treasure of rare abilities, will not be drawn to impart
them: The canker of these men's great skill, shall be a swift witness against
them.

Silence in some cases is a crying sin. Taciturnity is sometimes a virtue; but
not at all where it tends to the be^raying of a good cause, or the detriment of
the Church. Meam injuriam patienter tuli, etc. Hierom to vigilantius.
Whiles the wrong thou did reached only to my self; I took it patiently; but
thy wickedness against God, I cannot bear with. The like, Hest. 7.4. Isa. 62.1.

Divines observe, there are seven seasons of speaking. 1. When we may bring
glory to God, and do good to our brethren. 2. When we have an opportunity to
vindicate the honor and truth of God. 3. When we may relieve the credit of a
brother that is wronged, 4. When we may instruct or direct those that are
ignorant. 5. When we may comfort or support those that are weak. 6. When we may
resolve and settle those that are in doubt. 7. When we may duly reprove and
convince those that do evil.

There are also seven special seasons of silence. 1. Till we have a call. 2.
Till we be rightly informed about the state of the matter or thing to which we
must speak. 3. Neither may we speak rashly, without suitable preparation, either
actual or habitual. 4. Nor when, what we speak is like to be a snare unto our
selves, Amos 5.10, 12. with verse 13. 5. So likewise, nor when our own passions
or corruptions are up. 6. Nor when men are not capable of what we speak. 7. Nor
to burden or grieve the spirits of any, especially of those that are already
afflicted.

I conclude then, it is a great part of prudence to know when to be silent, and
when to speak: when it is a time to speak, silence is our folly: and when it is
a time to keep silence, speaking is our folly.

A time to keep silence, and a time to speak. Eccles. 3.7.
Prolixity.
O quam multa quam Paucis. Tertullus knew full well that Prolixity was
troublesome, when he uttered that insinuating expression.

That I be not tedious unto thee, -- hear us of thy clemency a few words. Acts
24.4.
Wish.
To wish that a thing had been or not been, out of a tenderness that God
should be offended by sin, is not only lawful, but very commendable: But to
wish things otherwise than they are, as murmuring against, and misliking Gods
administration, or out of a tenderness to our selves because we suffer; is not
only sinful, but abominable; because our wills rise up against the Will of God.

But what a zeal to God, and love to his contrymen had Paul.

I could wish that my self were separated from Christ, Romans 9.3.
for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh. Vow.
God it is to whom a vow belongs; Vota sunt promissiones solennes D^o factae
de iis quae in nostra sunt potestate, and Deo gratae ad fidem in precibus
confirmandam.
And therefore Aquinas says, Quod vo^um soli Deo fit, sed promissio etiam
potest fieri homini; And therefore a Vow is properly an act of Religion, and of
Divine worship.

One main use of a religious Vow, is to tie our selves thereby, to the better
abearance: that we slip not collar, that we detrect not the yoke of Gods
obedience. Broken bones must have strong bands to close them. Tottering houses
must be crampt with iron bars, or they will soon down. If the Vows of God be
upon us, it will help against the fickleness of our false hearts: which cannot
but know, that if God be alsufficient to us, we must be altogether his: His is
a Covenant of mercy, even the sure mercies of David; Ours is a Covenant of
obedience to him in every part and point of duty.

Wicked men break these bonds (as Sampson did the green withes) and cast away
these cords from them: And the best are too s^ack, though in their affliction
they are wondrous apt to promise great matters, Us tales esse perseveremus
s^ni, quales nos futuros esse profitemur infirmi.
if they may but be delivered. Pliny in an Epistle to one of his friends, that
desired rules from him how to order his life aright; I will, says he, give you
one rule, that shall be instead of a thousand, That you be sure to be the same
when well, that you vowed to be when you were sick.

However that was not right of Hierom If that holy father be not wronged.
, Melius est vovere, quam votum non Praestare; For Isidorus better, by David's
example toward Nabal, In male promissis rescinde fidem, in stulto voto muta
decretum, quod incaute vovisti, ne facias, impia enim, est promissio quae
scelere adimpletur, neque debet votum esse iniquitatis vinculum.

Vow, Psalm. 76.11.
and pay unto the Lord your God. Covenant.
The old Romans had a great care to perform always their word, whatever it
cost them; insomuch that the first Temple built in Rome, was dedicated to the
Goddess Fidelity. In after times indeed, Romany promittere promptum erat,
promissis autem, quanquam juramento firmatis, minime stare: They were forward
to promise, but careless to perform.

Many such degenerate Romans we have, that can dispense with promises at
pleasure, slipping them off as Monkies do their collars, and (Peacock-like) all
in changable colors, as often changed as moved. But a good man will rather
suffer loss, than forfeit his honest word.

-- He that swears to his own hurt and changes not. Psalm. 15.4.
Oath.
Against the Anabaptists. It is not unlawful to swear. For, 1. God never
forbids an Oath simpliciter, but (...). 2. He does not say in the third
Commandment, Non assumes nomen Dei omnino, sed non assumes in vanum. 3. It is
commanded as a part of Gods worship. And by an Oath God is glorified; we
profess, that is God present every where; that he sees the heart; that he is a
just revenger of untruths. Besides, humane society is thereby benefited,
strifes are ended, and love is preserved.

Object. But I say unto you, swear not at all.

Answ. It cannot be Christ's meaning simply to forbid swearing; for he came not
to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. He takes away the corrupt glosses of the
Pharisees, but not the use of an Oath, as may appear in all the other precepts
there reformed, but not abolished. Again, as Christ said, Ne juretis omnino, so
he said, Ne resistatis malo; yet the Magistrate may resist evil.

There were two glosses of the Pharisees in this.

1. If any swear by the Name of God, or by those things that did appertain
immediately to the worship of God, as by the gold offered to God in the Temple
or by the sacrifice on the Altar, he sinned: But if he did swear by other
creatures, by heaven, earth, Jerusalem, the Altar; it was no sin. 2. That the
breach of the first Oath was damnable, but not of the second. These Christ
reformeth. Moreover the Pharisees meant only of private Oaths, in the ordinary
speech of men; for in public judgment, they did swear only by God alone.
Besides, if it were unlawful to swear, how shall Christ be justified, that
adds to his speech. Amen, Amen.
Indeed for reformation of this vice of blasphemy and ordinary swearing,
whereby (as Chrysostom says) Christ is continually crucified again, it were to
be wished, that that Law made by Ludovicus King of France were universally
established, That whosoever swears vainly, should be burned in the mouth with
an hot iron.

An Oath (says Tully) is affirmatio religiosa. It is lex naturae, Heb. 6.16.
and Jus Gentium. The use of it is mainly to settle minds, and end
controversies. It is the end of all contradiction, there is no more litigation
when one has sworn, all are to be as mute as fishes.

We must have a reverend estimation of an Oath, Assumere Deum in testem dicitur
jurare, quia quasi pro jure introductum est, ut quod sub invocatione divini
testimonii dicitur, pro v^re habeatur, Aquin.
and these conditions must be observed in it, viz.

Vt sit in, 1. Veritate. Jer. 4.2. 2. Judicio. Jer. 4.2. 3. Justitia. Jer. 4.2.


It must be, 1. For the confirmation of a truth, not of a falsehood. It is a
most vile thing to make God who is truth it self, the witness of a lie. 2. In
judgment, with wisdom and discretion, upon great and weighty causes: When the
glory of God, and the good of our brethren requires it; When the truth cannot
otherwise he known. 3. For just and lawful matters, not for things that are
unjust and unlawful; we must not swear to kill, to take a purse, or the like.
Unto the first of these are opposed false Oaths, to the second rash, to the
third unjust.

The depravation of our Nature has abused the lawful act of an Oath, by
equivocations and mental reservations; making it like the Gypsies knot, fast or
loose, at pleasure. No scruple in a cauteriz'd conscience, passing the bounds
of Religion. But as the wasp falls into the honey, that after drowns her; so
man into the hands of delightful sin, that after kills him.

Therefore the sacred and solemn obligation of an Oath, is to be interpreted,
not by him that takes it, but by him that takes his assurance by it.

-- He that swears, Eccl. 9.2.
and he that fears an oath. Perjury.
It is a sin of an high nature, Perjurij paena divina Exitium, humana dedecus.
condemned by the light of nature, and punished by the Heathens. God punishes
Perjury with destruction; Men, with disgrace: This was one of the Laws of the
twelve Tables in Rome.

A man forswears himself, Lombard. Ex Aug.
when he swears that which 1. Is false, and knows it to be false. 2. Is true,
but thought it to be false. 3. Is false, but held it to be true.


At least the two first kinds are abominable.

Antiochus muros Hierosolumitanos obsessus, Judaeis pacem denunciat,
libertatemque vivendi legibus, illi vero libenter haec audientes, fide accepta
and jurejurando interposito, Joseph. de Bello Judiac. lib. 1. c. 15.
e Templo exiverunt; at Antiochus cum ingressus vidisset locum egregie munitum,
violato sacramento jussit suum exercitum, ut solo aequaret murum, quo Templum
septum fucrat; and hoc facto reversus est Antiochiam, secum ducens Oniam
Pontificem, qui Menelaus alio nomine dicitur; who was slain in Syria, by the
suggestion of Lycias to Antiochus.

But for this cruel tyranny and perjury, he had a cruel death and doom
unexpected.

Michael Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople, made the Greek Church
acknowledge the Pope's supremacy, and did many other things contrary to his
oath: And therefore lies obscurely buried (says the Historian) shrouded in
the sheet of defame.

Rodulphus Duke of Sweveland, who by the Pope's instigation, brake his oath of
allegiance to Henry the Emperor, by the cutting off of his faithless right
hand, lost his life.

Vladislaus King of Hungary, for his perjurious setting upon the Great Turk, at
the battle of Varna, Turk. Hist. fol. 297.
was deservedly defeated. Mind Amurath's prayer unto Christ: Behold thou
crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name made with me,
which they have without any cause violated: Now if thou be a God, as they say
thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy name, and me,
and show thy power upon thy perfidious people, who in their deeds deny thee
their God.

A Turk causing a Christian to pay a sum of money most unjustly twice over, by
taking an oath before the Judge where the matter was examined, to the contrary,
fol. 1310. April. 16 1611.
that he had not paid it: The Christian withal prayed God to show some
public sign which of them had done the wrong: And thereupon the Turk going
forth to repair home to his own house, fell down dead in the street.

Perjury is a sin which violates the name of God exceedingly, and evidences
that men have no fear of God in them, that they make an Idol of him to serve
their own turns; That such men are neither for God nor man to trust; not only
Religion, but even common honesty suffers by them. No marvel ten if the Lord
recompense such sins upon men's heads.

-- Thou shall not forswear thy self. Mat. 5.35.


Read Zech. 5.4, 5. Mal. 3.5, etc.

Remembrance.
Seneca brings in Hercules, In Traged.
lamenting and saying, Tot feras vici horridas, reges tyrannos, non vultus meos
in astra torsi. Oblivio Jovis erat causa miseriae.

Fullness breeds forgetfulness; saturity security. Many in their low estate
could serve God, but now resemble the moon, which never suffers Eclipse, but at
her full: and that is by the earths interposition between the sun and her self;
at which time also she gets furthest off from the Sun. Its the saying of one,
that Solomon's wealth did more hurt, than his wisdom did him good: it was his
abundance that drew out his spirits, and dissolved him, and brought him to so
low an ebb in grace. Deuteronomy. 8.10.
The fed hawk soon forgets her Master. Therefore when thou shall have eaten and
be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord.

Let us be careful we forget not Gods word, neither let slip any one sermon
without some profit. There are several helps to memory.







Mary kept Christ's sayings, and pondered them in her heart.

Emmaus, conferred together: The Bereans that came from St. Paul his sermon,
took their Bibles and conferred together: Many eyes see more than one: that
which one has forgotten, another may remember. Repetition will be as a nail to
fasten the things we have heard.



In sucoum and sang^inem.
by which they get profit. This is the digesting of our spiritual meat, and the
converting of it into our substance. It is never our own truly, and indeed,
till it be practiced.

Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, Heb. 2.1. Ne praete^fl^amus.
lest at any time we should let them slip. Abstinence.
Nature is contented with a little. Natura pau^is contenta.
For who perceives not that at all things are seasoned by the desires? Darius
in his flight, when he drunk of the water that was dirty, and polluted with
dead Carcasses; affirmed, he never drank sweeter or more pleasant. The reason
is, because he never abstained from drink, until he was thirsty. Cicer. Quest.
Tus^.


It is necessary that every one be so far forth continent, as may destroy the
vices, not the flesh; for oftentimes in the pursuit of the enemy, Greg.
therein we kill the Citizen whom we love. And oftentime while we do as it were
spare our fellow-Citizen, we further the enemy in the skirmish.

Abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22.
Testimony.
Testimonium est fallibile in fide humana; in fide divina, infallibile.

The witness of the Holy Ghost is the work of faith, the witness of our
spirits the sense of faith wrought. This is better felt by experience, than
expressed by words; known altogether and only to them that have it.

The state of Gods children is full of sweet certainty and assurance; he that
having a cause to be tried, and has two sufficient witnesses, doubts not of
the day: Now Gods Children have two witnesses, Omni exceptione majores, 1.
Their own spirit, which is not to be condemned: for if conscience a natural
thing, be a thousend witnesses: much more the spirit, which is a supernatural
power given of God:) 2. The Holy Ghost, which cannot deceive, or be deceived,
witnesses with our spirits. Besides, what an honor is this to the Saints,
that the Holy Ghost should bear witness at the bar of their consciences?

There are several ways of bearing witness to Christ; 1. By openly publishing
the truth of Christ, promulging of the Evangelical truths concerning the
Messiah. 2. By leading lives answerable to the Christian profession: holiness
and uprightness of conversation, does attest and credit the Doctrine of Christ.
3. By suffering (especially death it self) for Christ's cause and the Gospels.
To such the name of (...) is eminently applied.

Under the law, one witness was allowed sufficient in case of Religion, Deuteronomy.
29.16, 17. Malitia tua te adduxit ad mortem, non nos. Lyran. V^erque Diabolum
habet, isle in lingua ille in a^re. Dav. Detractores Canini dentes Diaboli.
Pa^isien.
But two were required in civil cases. Cap. 19.15.

Witnesses of old, were wont to put their hand upon the head of the offender,
and say, It is thy own wickedness which condemns thee, and not we.

We may neither raise an evil report, nor receive it; neither be the
talebearer, nor tale-hearer. The one carries the Devil in his tongue, the
other in his ear. Not only those that make a lie, but those that love it when
it is made to their hands, are shut out of heaven. Rev. 22.15.

Every man has two great witnesses, either for or against him.

1. Conscience within him. 2. God above him.
Other faculties may rest, but no passage shall be able to escape the record of
conscience.

Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, Ovid.
ita concipit intra
Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo.
This is Gods deputy-judge holding court in the whole soul, bearing witness of
all a man's doings and desires, and accordingly excusing or accusing, absolving
or condemning, comforting or tormenting.

But yet the witness of God is the most desirable witness; The witness we
have on earth is nothing worth, unless we have a witness in Heaven. If we have
not the inward witness of our own conscience, it is little advantage, though:
we have a thousand outward witnesses: Conscience is more than a thousand
witnesses, but God is more than ten thousand consciences.

As the witness of good men is more desirable, than the witness of all other
men; and the witness of a good conscience, is more desirable than the witness
of good men; so the witness of God is more desirable than (without which we
cannot have it, and with which we shall have it,) the witness of a good
conscience. Job 16.19.


Behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. Contemplation.
A contemplative life without practice, is like unto Rachel Jacobs wife,
beautiful and bright-sighted, but yet barren. It is good therefore to have
Rachels beautiful face to be seconded with Leah's fruitful womb.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. John 13.17.
Consideration.
Cras tibi respondebo, said Melanchton to his adversary Eccius.

It is but little that can be learned in this life without due and deep
consideration, which is an act of the practical understanding, whereby it
reflects and stays upon its own intentions: and comparing them with the rule,
it proceeds to lay a command upon the will and affections, to put them in
execution.

Without this, though a man had all possible knowledge locked up in his brain
and breast, it would be but like fire in a flint-stone, insensible and
unprofitable, till beaten out by sound consideration: But when consideration
has soundly enlightened a man's mind, informed his judgment, and determined his
will according to rule; then it must needs bring forth sound resolutions,
purposes and practices.

Solomon got much of his wisdom by this means, as appears by his
Ecclesiastes, which some have not unfitly called, Solomon's Soliloquy.

Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Psalm. 4.4.
Study.
A wise man's tongue runs not before his wit, but he weighs his words before he
utters them. He dippeth his words in his mind (as Plutarch says Phocian did)
ere men see what color they are of. Such a one was Melanchton, who, when some
hard question was propounded to him, would take three days deliberation to
answer it.

In some that is verefied, Studium partium maxima part studiorum. Above all let
us study to go to Heaven. 1. We have a place to study in; enter often into the
closet of our own hearts, examine whether we be in regia via or not that
leads to heaven. 2. We have a book to study on; the book of books, the sacred
book of holy Scriptures. 3. We have a light to study by; Gods Spirit, who must
enlighten our eyes, that we may see the wonders of Gods laws. 4. And we have a
time to study in; from infancy to old age, from the cradle to the grave, the
term of our life, so far as is possible. In which study we must use all
diligence. 2 Pet. 1.10.

Aquinas at Lewis the French Kings table, was so deep in his study, when others
were chatting; that he forgate himself, and smiting upon the table, said, Jam
contra Minichaeos conclusum est. When Rainolds friends desired him, he would
not perdere substantiam propter accidentia; his answer was, Nec propter vitam
vivendi perdere causas.

One calls Scaliger, Portentosi ingenii juvenem, of a stupendous wit. And it
is said of Willet, that when he preached in Cambridge, he showed himself to be
the man, Quem rus non infuscavit.

Study to show thy self approved unto God. 2 Timothy 2.15.


Read, Pro. 15.28. Eccl. 12.12. Heb. 4.11. etc.

Soliloquy.
A wise man can never want with whom to discourse, though he be alone.

Its good to have our eyes in our head, with Solomon's wise man: yea, to have
our eyes like the windows in Solomon's Temple, broad inward. But men's minds are
naturally as ill set as their eyes, they turn neither of them inward.
Lamiae-like, they are sharp-sighted abroad, to discern other men's faults; but
mole-like, blind at home, to take notice of their own. Corrupt nature shows no
sin. Men deal with their souls, as some do with their bodies; who, when their
beauty is decayed, they desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and
from others by painting. So their sins, from themselves by false-glasses, and
from others by excuses.

A good man's business lies much within doors, and he takes the fittest time,
for the better dispatch of it, when he is in secret; putting his hand into his
bosom and recoiling upon his own heart, by self-reflection.

But as it is a sign that there are great distempers in that family, where
husband and wife go diverse days together, and speak not the one to the other:
So in that soul that flies from it self, and can go long without
self-examination.

Fan your selves, (...)
yea fan your selves. Zeph. 2.1. So Tremel. Excutite vos, iterumque excutite.

Read, 2 Cor. 13.5. Lam. 3.4. Psalm. 4.4. Psalm. 77.6.

Confession.
There is no way to purge the sick soul but upwards. Confessio peccati ost
vomitus sordium animae.

But to show how unwilling men are to confess their sins; they are apt (says
one) to decline sin through every case; as, In Nominativo per superbiam,
striving to get them a name. In Genitivo per luxuriam. In Dativo per symoniam.
In Accusativo per detractationem. In Vocativo per adulationem. And in Ablativo
per rapinam. But yet they will not confess so much in any case.

Per miserere mei, tollitur ira Dei. Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Man no
sooner confesses the debt, but God crosses the book.

Certainly Bellarmine (with reverence to his learning) missed the cusheon
wretchedly, when he could not find in all the book of God, any Promise made to
confession of sin to God.

If we confess our sins, 1 John 1 9.
God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

Read, 2 Samuel 12.13. Prove. 28.13. Psalm. 32.5.

Contrition.
The sacrifices of God, are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God thou will not despise. Great comfort to a soul that is at the next door to
despair. This comforted Bernard on his deathbed, he died with this sentence in
his mouth. And Austin caused it to be written on the wall, over against the bed
where he lay sick and died.

Happy when a man (with those converts, Act. 2.) is so pricked and pierced,
that he feels the nails wherewith he has crucified Christ, sticking fast in
his own heart, as so many sharp daggers, or stings of Scorpions.

But it is the Spirit that convinces of sin. These waters flow not till his
wind blows. Neither can a sigh for sin be breathed out, until he imbreath it
into us. the eye is the instrument both of sight and sorrow. What the eye never
sees, the heart never ru^s. Sight of sin must precede sorrow for sin. Let us
therefore get our eyes anointed with this eye salve.

I will pour upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Zech. 12.10.
the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only
son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn. Tears.
All tears are not pleasing to God. There be, 1. Lachrymae rancoris and
indignationis: such were the tears of Esau; he wept more upon stomach, being
vexed in his mind, that he should be thus defrauded by his brother, than for
any grief for sin. More for the loss, than the fault.

2. Lachrymae Simulationis: such are Crocodiles tears, Vt fl^rent oculos
erudiere suos. Ovid.
and (as they say) some women's tears, that have them at command.

3. Lachrymae compunctionis: being pricked with sorrow for sin. These be good
tears, which the Angels in heaven rejoice at.

Some report of Mary Magdalen, that after our Saviors resurrection, Adeo ut
lachrymae cutem genarum exederint.
she spent thirty years in Gallia Narbonensi, in weeping for her sins. And of
St. Peter, that he always had his eyes full of tears, insomuch as his face was
furrowed with continual weeping. Its said of Sr. Philip Sidney, that when he
met with any thing he well understood not, he would break out into tears. --
faciles motus men's generosa capit. The spouse in the Canticles, had her eyes
like the pooles of Heshbon, glazed with tears.

Verbum, preces and lachrymae, miserae arma sunt Ecclesiae. Oration sine malis,
est tanquam avis sine alis.
And as music upon the water sounds farthar, and more harmoniously, than upon
the land: So prayers with tears are more pleasing to God, and prevalent with
him. Tears are not words formally, but virtually; their voice is very
significant, Tears are effectual Orators.

La^ga Dei pietas veniam non dimidiabit,
Aut nihil, aut totum (te lachrymante) dabit.
Let us drown our sins in a deluge of tears. Peter never looked more sweetly,
than when he wept most bitterly. David never sung more Pathetically, Chrysostom.
than when his heart was broken most penitentially: when tears instead of
Gemmes were the ornament of his bed.

It is a witty observation of one, that God is said in Scripture to have a bag
and a bottle; a bag for our sins, a bottle for our tears; and that we should
help to fill this, as we have that. Every drop of these is kept safe, as so
much sweet-water.

Put thou my tears into thy bottle. Psalm. 56.^.
Pardon.
Est Paenae meritae remissio.
Seneca. Sed nisi peccassem quid tu concedere posset? Ovid.

Dum tribuit veniam, denotat culpam.
Pardon of sin, is the removing, or the lifting off, (...)
or the passing away of sin from the sinner. Job. 7.21.

Called 1. Paying of a debt. 1 John 2.12. 2. Removing out of sight. Isa. 38.17.
3. Washing and purging. Psalm. 51.1, 2. 4. Covering and not imputing. Psalm. 32.
5. Blotting out. Isa. 43.25.


Sin makes a man a debtor; Grave votabulum debitorts.
And (says Ambrose) the name of debtor is very unpleasing; yet such is every
sinner, a debtor to Gods Justice, by reason of the breach of his law. Indeed,
man as a creature was a debtor to Gods authority commanding, but withal, he was
able to pay that debt to the full, and therefore it was no burden nor misery:
whereas man as a sinner, is a debtor to Gods Justice punishing; and this such a
debt as he is never able to satisfy, and therefore must lie in prison for ever.
A sinner may be red with blushing at the time of sinning, but must needs be
oftentimes pale for fear of paying. Augustus would fain buy his pillow who was
so much in debt, as conceiving it was good to sleep on. How can a sinner sleep
securely, who is indebted so deeply?

But now forgiveness takes off this obligation, and consequently the
punishment it self: so that look as a forgiven debtor is freed from whatsoever
penalty his debt did render him liable to; yea, from being so much as liable to
the penalty; so is the forgiven sinner from the punishment it self, which is
the remote term, and the obligation to it, which is the proxime term of Pardon,
In this respect it is that Anselm says, to forgive sin, is not to punish it.
And Austin to the like purpose. And the schools.

For know, there is a great difference between these two, to withold the
Execution off, and to withdraw the obligation to the punishment: It is one
thing for a creditor to give day of payment, and another thing to cancel the
bond. A vast difference between forgiving and forbearing mercy. This latter God
vouchsafes even to those who go on in sin; but the former only to his own
penitent servants.

Novatus the proud Heretic, denied possibility of pardon to them that had any
whit fallen off in times of persecution, though they rose again by repentance.
But Gods thoughts are not as man's, Isa. 55.8. Mic. 7.18. Beg we supernal grace
to believe this, and measure not God by our model. God forgives all manner of
sin, all without exception, Mat. 12.31. yea, though it be blasphemy. He blots
out enormities, as well as infirmities, Isa. 44.22. The sun by his force can
scatt^r the greatest mist, as well as the least vapor: (...).
And the sea by its vastness drown mountains as well as mole-hils. The grace of
our God abounds to flowing over. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin. Dicitur Christus emundare abomni peccato, quia nullum est tam imm^ne
facinus, quod Christi sanguine non potest clui. Justin. in 1 Job. 1.7.


Paul was a blasphemer (and so sinned against the first table) he was also a
persecuter (and sinned against the second table) he was injurious (and so came
near unto the unpardonable sin and) yet he obtained mercy and pardon. Ego
admisi, unde tu damnare potes me; sed non amisisti unde tu salvare potes me,
says Austin. Man cannot commit more than God can and will remit to the
penitent.

Men may forgive the trespass, God only the transgression: Ministers remit
sins ministerially, as Nathan did; God only authoritatively, and by his own
power.

Forgive us our debts. Mat. 6.12
Read, Mat. 18.27. Psalm. 33.1.2. Psalm. 103., ^ 2, 3, 12. Isa. 55.7. etc.
Mortification.
It is the one half of Christianity: It is a dying to the world, a denying of
the will and all its natural desires: An abstinence from pleasure and sensual
complacencies, that the flesh being subdued to the spirit, both may join in the
service of God, and in the offices of holy Religion.

Haec tria in se comprehendit, 1. Agnitio Peccati. 2. Odium Peccati. 3. Fugam a
peccato.


Ab initio mortificationis naturae, peccatum languescit; in progressu labescit;
Origin.
In the beginning of the conflict, corruption grows sick of it; and by our
pressing and pursuing, it pines away it self into a consumption.

As Christ has suffered in the humane nature, so must we in the sinful nature:
using it as Christ was used; that is, first stripping it naked by confession,
and then piercing it; the hands of it, in respect of operation; the feet, in
respect of progression; and the heart, in respect of affection.

We are so incorporated to the desires of sensual objects, that we feel no
relish or gust of the spiritual: there is no proportion between the object and
the appetite, till by mortification of our first desires, our wills are made
spiritual; and our apprehensions supernatural and clarified. For as a Cook told
Dionysius the tyrant, the black broth of Lacedaemon would not do well at
Syracuse, unless it be tasted by a Spartans palate; so neither can the
excellencies of heaven be discerned, but by a spirit disrelishing the sottish
appetites of the world, and accustomed to diviner banquets.

And this was also mystically signified by the two Altars in Solomon's Temple,
in the outer Court whereof beasts were sacrificed, in the inner Court an Altar
of Incense: The first representing mortification or slaying of our beastly
appetites: The second the offering up our prayers. Without our spirits be
mortified, we neither can love to pray, nor God love to hear us.

It was Bishop Hoopers speech, before a Christian can be brought to perfection,
Sic mihi res eadem vulnus opemque feret. Ovid.
he must first be brought to nothing. Unmortified men and women are no
creatures fit for God.

Origin (through a gross mistake) made himself an Eunuch. Demosthenes put out
his own eyes. Crates cast his money into the Sea. And Thracius cut down his own
vines.

Peccata sepae raduntur, sed non eradicantur. Sin has a strong heart, and is
not easily brought down: It is the hardest task in all Christianity, yet must
be none, or we are undone.

Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, etc.
Colos. 3.5.
Solitude.
A solitary condition is a sad condition, a sorrowful condition. Indeed there
is a solitariness which is the sweetest part of our lives, when we retire
awhile from the world, from the throng of men and business, that we may be
more intimate with Christ, and take our fill in communion with him: This is to
go alone, that we may meet with God in heaven upon earth: But to be so left
alone, that we cannot meet with men, is one of the greatest afflictions upon
the earth. Such solitary times are sad times.

There is an elective alonenesse or retiredness, at sometimes very useful for
contemplation and prayer; and thus we are never less alone, than when we are
alone, for then God is more specially with us, and we with him. It is said,
Genesis 32.24. Jacob was left alone; that is, he stayed alone purposely, that he
might have freer communion with God, in that recesse and retirement from the
creature,

So the Church gets her into the clefts of the roks, Cant. 2.14. Sed quid
prodest solitudo corporis, si non sit solitudo cerdis? Greg.
Isaac into the fields; Daniel to the rivers side; Christ into the Mount; Peter
up to the leads or house top; that they might pour out their prayers, and
solace themselves with God in secret. Thus it is good for man to be alone from
the company of man, that he may enjoy (more fully) the presence of God. It Is a
desirable solitariness, to talk with God, and with our selves.

Yet solitariness is to be well and carefully managed; for Satan is readiest
to assault, when none is by to assist. Neither is there a greater tie to
constancy than the society of the Saints. This the Heathen Persecutors
perceived, and therefore banished and confined the confessors to Isles and
Mines, where they could not come together for mutual edification. Communion of
Saints is to be accounted a point of practice, as well as an Article of belief.

All solitariness therefore is not to be affected, because it is the hour of
temptation.

I watch, Psalm. 102.7.
and am as a Sparrow alone upon the house top. Society.
God is for society, he is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints,
Psalm. 89.7. Christ sent out his Disciples by two and two, Mark 6.7. He himself
came from heaven to converse with us, therefore we may not (like Stoics) stye
up our selves. A mild affablenesse and amicable conversation, is to be
preferred before a stern froward austerity, or wild retiredness.

Man is (...), (says the Philosopher) a sociable creature, or Natures
good fellow. A^ist. Polit. 1.
He that loves to be alone, is either a beast or a God. Yea, one subordinate
end of man's creation, is, that man might live with man, in holy society and
communion.

Let two cold flints be smitten together, and fire will come forth; so let two
dull Christians confer and communicate their soul-secrets, and they shall find
the benefit of it.

We see (says a late writer) that God will have the sweetest works in nature,
to be performed with natural help. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the
Pleiades? Says God to Job, Chap. 38.21. These Pleiades be the seven stars,
that have all one name, because they all help one another in their work, which
is to bring on the spring, and like seven sisters so are they joined together
in one constellation, and in one company. Now the best time of the year, the
sweetest warmth comes with those Pleiades; And the best time of our life
comes when we keep together in true love and fellowship.

Optimum solatium sodalitium; There is great comfort in good company. Quid sit
vera amicitia nondum novit, qui vult alium esse mercedem quam ipsam; says
Austin, Lib de Amicitia.
What true friendship is, he does not as yet know, who desires any other
reward than it self.

No sooner had the Philippians received the Gospel, but they were in fellowship
to a day. Cap. 1.5.

Noscitur ex socio, qui non dignoscitur exse. As sincerity is the life of
Religion, so is society the life of sincerity.

Besides, Vis unita fortior. Jonathan will not go without his Armer-bearer:
Christ, when to begin his passion in the garden, took Peter, James and John
with him, for the benifit of their prayers and company, though they served him
but sorrily. Christ's Dove is but one? Jerusalem is a City compact together; The
Church is terrible as an Army with banners, the gates of hell cannot prevail
against her. Unity has victory, but division breeds dissolution.

Quanto plures and boni in amicitia constituti sunt, tanto status little
melioratur.

The more they are that unite, so they be good, the better it is with them. We
lose much of our strength in the loss of friends; our Cable is as it were
untwisted. Hence David so much bemoans the loss of Jonathan; and Paul counts
it a special mercy to him that Epaphroditus recovered. 2 Samuel 1. Phil. 1.27.


I conclude then, Its not so much perfection to live immured in a cell, as to
converse with the world, and yet live abstracted from it, and dead to it; for
so did Christ.

Two are better than one. Eccl. 4.9.
Way.
Domine, sequemur te, per te, ad te: te quia veritas: per te, quia via; ad te,
quia vita says Bernard.

Christ has paved us a new and living way to God, with his own meritorious
blood, Heb. 10.20. And his flesh stands as a skreen betwixt us, and those
everlasting burnings. Isa. 33.14.

There are the ways of Gods 1. Counsel, and Decrees; past finding out. Romans
11.33. 2. Providence, and outward administration. Psalm. 145.17. Psalm. 77.19. 3.
Commandments, or rules of life; of two sorts, Ways of 1. Worship. 1. Practice.



Furthermore, the way of a man in his walking with God, is twofold; 1.
Internal, there is a secret path which the soul treads in converse with God,
which no eye has seen. 2. External, an outward way of walking. That speech of
God to Abraham takes in both, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect.

Thus if we speak metaphorically, that is not only a way, which we tread with
our feet, but that is also a way, which we tread with our actions. A right
course of life, is a right way. Go here (says God) it is a way of holiness;
go there, it is the way of justice; Come hither, this is the way of truth; Thus
God beckens and invites man into his way. And surely there is no safety out of
Gods way; many have died in Christ's way, but no man ever perished in it.

God knows the way that I take. Job. 23.10.
Quality.
Worth is valued by the quality, not by the greatness of a thing. Pro. 30.25,
26.
Some feeble creatures have a notable forecast. And others, what they want in
strength, they have in wisdom.

The least measure of true faith, if exerted and exercised, will bring a man to
heaven, though he have not this or that faith, to rely upon God without
failing, without feeling; as resolving, that nevertheless God will hear him,
in that very thing that he prays for.

Verily I say unto you if ye have faith, as a grain of mustard seed; Mat. 17.20.
ye shall -- Experience.
The requisites for a City or Incorporation, are, One to judge, a law to rule,
power to defend, wisdom to order, and riches to communicate. Man (the City of
God) at his creation had these; will for the King, reason for the law, freewill
for power, for wisdom knowledge, for riches obedience, and cogitations for
Inhabitants.

But man triumphed gloriously in a chariot of glass, which was broken with an
Apple. And now man is deceived by Satan, infected with sin, banished from
Paradise, sweating in labor, living in sorrow, continuing in war, and
fearful of death.

I have read of a monster, having a head like a man, teeth like a Lion, wings
like an Eagle, tail and nails like a Dragon, and breathed fire like a Devil:
The wicked man has reason for his head, presumption for his wings, stiffnesse
in wickedness for his teeth, temptation for his nails, and envy for his breath.

Some sparks of the Deity were created in man in the beginning, which he
striving to blow into a flame, blew them out. And now, what gets man in the
Devils service, but death? what comfort in his conscience, but horrors? eyes
flaming, nostrils fuming, ears glowing, hands burning, and heart trembling.

As the body of Cerberus supports three heads; so the stem of sin sends forth
three arms; The concupiscence of flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life.

Delilah deceives Sumpson, and the Philistines pull out his eyes; Delilah is
the flesh, the Philistines bind him, when reason yields to sensuality; and pull
out his eyes, when sin persuades him to iniquity.

Fas est ab host doceri.

Lay thine hand upon him, Job 41.8.
remember the battle; do no more.

Aeconomical Order.
Natura.
AS Galaton painted Homer vomiting, Reliquos vero Poems ^a quae ips^ ^^muisset
haurientes; To signify (says Aelian) that he was the first Poet, and all the
other, as well Greek as Latin, but his Apes: In like manner Moses is called,
Oceanus Theologus, from whom all other Writers, as Arms are derived. Aristotle
was called, Vltimus conatus naturk.

Nature the common mother breeds diverse effects; according to the
constitution of each body. Many times by events and accidents, diverse
deformities and blemishes appear, which by nature were not decreed to be.

There is greatest cold in the bosom of the earth, when the Sun with greatest
vehemence shines on it, to heat it; even so our corrupt nature does never show
it self more rebellious and stubborn, than when the Law of God begins to
rectify it; as an unruly and untamed horse, the more he is spurred forward,
the faster he runs backward; Romans 7.
so the perverse nature of man, is so far from being reformed by the Law, that
by the contrary, sin that was dead without the Law, is revived by the Law, and
takes occasion to obey its concupiscence.

When we speak of sins against nature, our meaning is, against the light of
nature; not against the corruption of nature.

Naturally, Homo est inversus Decalogus; whole evil is in man, and whole man in
evil; And there is never a better of us: Therefore Christ came to dissolve the
old frame, and to drive out the Prince of darkness, who has there entrencht
himself.

We were by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
even as others. Marriage.
It is called, In scripturis, (...) conjugalis (...) tur.
Conjugium, a conjungendo, i.e. a jugo communi q^o vir and (...) simul in unam
carnem, and veluti in unum hominem junguntur. Matrimoniam, quasimatrem monens,
nam a matre dictum est. Conubium, and numero plurali Nuptiae, a nubend^, i. e.
tegends vel obtegendo; quia sicut coelum interdum nubibus obtegitur; sic
untiquitus virgins, dum ad vires dactbantur, G^dw. Anti^.
belamine tegebantur: idque ad testandum. 1. Pudor^m and verecundi^m: 2.
Subjectionem and obedientiam, sen alterius potestatem in se.

Some honor marriage too much, as the Papists, that make a Sacrament of it.
Sacramentum hoc magnum est, Ephesians. 5.32. yet the Greek word is (...); and if
every mystery should be a Sacrament, there should not be seven; but seventy
Sacraments, and more. Neither does he speak of marriage, but of the conjunction
of Christ and his Church, in that place.

A number there be also, that have exceedingly disgraced it. So Epiphanius
records o^ him.
Mar^^on called Matrimony, Inventionem diaboli. Saturnius and Basilides blushed
not to affirm, that Nubere and generare were a Satana. And Hierom with
Tertullian wrest some sentences of St. Paul, to the disgrace of marriage. But
let them all say what they will; The very first work God did after the very
first creation, was his marrying of man to woman: and one of the first Miracles
Christ wrought, was in honor of marriage. Here Bellurmine also toys with a
triple distinction, such as that in his Treatise for Purgatory, where Peter
Martyr non-plust him; A great scholar; but were he as great as his
great-Grandfather, that came to our Savior with scriptum est, his greatness
were nothing, because it is against God, who only is great without quantity.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, yet nothing because an Idol.

Before marriage, let us begin with God, as Abraham's servant did, Dos non Deus
makes such marriages. Forma bonum fragile est. (...) Res est forma fuga^. Senec.
send me good speed this day. And make a Christian choice; let not red angels
and ruddy cheeks be the loadstones (though the one is not wholly to be
contemned, and the other is an ornament much to be commended) But, rather grace
and virtue: remembering what the wise man says, Prove. 31.30. Favor is
deceitful, and benn^y is vanity, but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall
be praised.

And being married, let us arm our selves against the crosses of it. Dulciter
amarum.
It is (...); a sweet bitter thing. Saint Paul has read the destiny of married
folks, 1 Cor. 7.28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh. If we have not
Christian patience in some measure to bear them, Conjugium turned into
conjurgium.
we shall dishonor this honorable estate; instead of honorable, we shall
make it onerable, burdensome to our selves and others.

Take heed of matching with one of the daughters of Heth; for he that graffs
into a crab-stock, is like never to want verjuice An hard adventure it is to
yoke ones self with any untamed heifer, that bears no^ the yoke of Christ.

Marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.4. (...).
and the bed undefiled. Husband.
A number of Nabals there are, that tyrannize over, Vxor admonenda persaepe,
reprehendenda (...), verberanda uunquam. Aurelii vox est.
and trample upon their wives, as if they were not their fellows, but their
footstooles, not their companions and copes-mates, but their slaves and
vass^ls. Many that live as Lamech, like lions in their houses; quarrelsome,
austeere, discourteous, violent, with high words, and hard blows; fitter indeed
to live in Bedlam, than in a civil society.

These are together in the house, no otherwise than as two poisons in the
stomach; their houses being more like kennels of hounds, than families of
Christians; Or as so many fencing-Schools, Mr. Trapp.
wherein the two sexes seem to have met together, for nothing, but to play
their prizes, and to try masteries. Job was not more weary of his boyles, than
they are of their bed-fellows; cursing their wedding day, as much as he did his
birthday; and thirsting after a divorce, a^ he did after death* which, because
it cannot be had, their lives prove like the sojourning of Israel in Marah,
where almost nothing could be heard, but murmuring and mourning, conjuring and
complaining.

I confess, Febris Hectiea uxor mala, and non nisi morte avellenda. Scal.
it were better to be married to a Quartan-ague, than to a bad wife (so said
Simonides) for there be two good days for one bad with the one, not one with
the other. But that should have been looked to aforehand. If men by leaping
unadvisedly into the marriage estate, have drawn much misery upon themselves;
Vxoris vitium aut tollendum, aut tollerandum est. Varro.
know, a wive, faults must be either cured or coverd, mended, if we can; made
the best of, if we cannot: If the first she is made better, if the second, we
Qui tollit hanc, sibi commodiorem praestat: qui tolerat, ipse se meliorem
reddit. Gellius.

Husbands, Col. 3.19.
love your wives, and be not bitter against them. Wife.
Vxor, quasi unxor: domum enim viri deducta, oleo posts in ungebat.

We must not choose wives, by dancing or playing under an Oak: for then we shall
sooner light upon a wild wanton, than a ^ild Matron, which will become rather a
g^dding Dinah, running abroad to see the Country, than a sage Sarah, keeping
her self within the doors of her tent; which will become rather a careless
Grasshopper, than a careful Ant; yea, we shall sooner win an whorish Harlot,
Helen, as did Paris; than a virtuous Electra, as did Phylades.

Nature makes a woman, A good wife is the beauty and ornament of the house.
Election a wife: but to be prudent, wise and virtuous, is of the Lord, Prove.
19.14. A good wife was one of the first real and royal gifts bestowed on Adam:
Not a gift of industry, but of destiny; for Marriages are made in heaven.

Sylla had been happy, if he had had no wife. All evils, as Elements, are most
troublesome when out of their proper place; as impiety in Professors,
injustice in Judges, discomfort in a wife. This is like a tempest in the Haven,
most troublesome, most dangerous, Prove. 19.13.

In a great battle between the Persians and the Turks, Turk. Hist. fol. 512.
in which the Turks had victory, some which were present reported, that amongst
the heaps of them that were slain, were found the dead bodies of diverse
Persian women, who being armed, and following their husbands, died with them in
the battle; whom Selymus the first caused to be honorably buried.

But what a woeful wife was Jesabel to Ahab? of which wretched couple, it is
said, that Regina erat rex, Rex vero regina. It never goes well when the hen
crows. How many have we known, whose heads have been broken with their own
rib? Satan has found this b^it to take so well, that he never changed it,
since he crept into Paradise.

Wives have a double advantage in persuading with their husbands. 1. In regard
of nearness, a wife has opportunity and freedom to improve that opportunity.
2. The motions or persuasions of a wife, whether to good or evil, are very
taking upon a husbands heart. Bajazet the fourth, King of the Turks, marrying
Despina the fair daughter of Lazarus the Despot, she allured him to drink wine,
Fol. 207.
forbidden by their Law, and caused him to delight in sumptuous banquets, which
his predecessors Othoman, Orchanes, and Amurath never used.

The deadly difference that fell out betwixt those two noble Seymours, in
Edward the sixth time, Sir John Heywood in the life of K. Ed. 6. p. 84.
was through the instigation of their ambitious wives; which caused our English
Historian passionately to cry out, O wives! Woman wat first given to man for a
Comforter, (says he) not for a Counselor, much less a Controler and
Director. And it is remarkable that in the first sentence against man, this
cause is expressed, Because thou obeyedst the voice of thy wife, Genesis 3.17.

A wife is made for a help to man, and never so much need of help, as in
affliction. That which is good at all times, is at some times better. A wife
should ever be a help to her husband, but then most, when he cannot help
himself. The virtue of some wives has appeared gloriously at such times; True
conjugal love ou^ lives all changes both of time and state.

The story is famous of Prince Edward, wounded with a poysonad knife, Speeds
Chron. page 630.
by a treacherous Assassine; to whom when other means of cure proved
ineffectual, his wife the Lady Eleanor sucked out the poison, and gave him both
case and healing. A rare pattern of conjugall fidelity.

The woman was not made of a bone of the head, nor of any anterior part, nor of
the foot, nor yet of any hinder part; to show, that she must not be Domina, nor
Praelata, nor serva, nor yet Post-posita: But she was made of a bone of the
side, of a bone under the arm, and not far from man's heart; to show that she is
socia to be protected and defended by the husband, and that he must affect and
love her. And if at any time she prove hard and unkind to her husband, or
crooked and perverse; he must remember whereof she was made, of a bone,
therefore hard; of a rib and therefore crooked: Os quod in sort tua cecidit,
rodas. Drus.
But howsoever she prove, whether kind or unkind, there is no putting of her
away; but as the Rabines Proverb is, The bone that is fallen to our lot we must
gnaw.

Let every one of you in particular so love his wife, even as himself; Ephesians.
5.33.
and the wife see that she reverence her husband. Poligamy.
It is, when a man or woman couples himself or her self in marriage to more
than one. Qui primus unam costam in duas divisit. Hierom.


The first author of Polygamy we read of, was Lamech, noted for a profane and
wicked person: As was also Esau another Polygamist.

Some of the fathers were herein faulty, as Abraham, Jacob, David, etc. And
this was not their privilege; (as some would have it) But whether it were
their ignorance, or incogitancy, or mistake of some text of Scripture, or the
commonnesse or long custom of the sin, (it having so long continued, was
(perhaps) grown so fashionable, it seemed to be no sin) or however; sure they
could not, as to this, (though otherwise good men) wash their hands in
innocence.

It is a sin against the light of nature, and against the first institution of
marriage.

He that made them at the beginning, Mat. 19.4, 5.
made them male and female.

Therefore they twain shall be one flesh.

Jealousy.
It concerns our own proper good, whereof we fear another does partake. It
is the gall that corrupts all the honey of our life.

It is a mixed affection of zeal, or fervent love, Non amat qui non zelat. Aug.
and carries wrath and rage with it, also anger and grief.

More properly, it is a fear or doubt, Cum metuimus ne amatae rei exturbemur
possessione.
lest any forraigner should participate or share with the lover, in the thing
possessed or beloved.

It has these properties, 1. It is exceeding watchful, and quick sighted: a
wanton glance is soon noted. 2. It is violent; it puts a man into a feaverfit
of outrage, he is ready to take any revenge. 3. It is irreconcilable,
implacable* It will not regard any ransom, etc.


Jealousy (says Vives) begets unquietness in the mind night and day: Nature
not more able of an acorn to make an oak, than some men of a surmise to make a
certainty.
he hunts after every word he hears, every whisper, and amplifies it to
himself, with a most unjust calumny of others; he mis-interprets every thing is
said or done, most apt to mistake or misconstrue, he pries into every corner,
follows close, observes to an hair.

Turks, Spaniards, Italians; Mulierum conditio misera, nullam honestam credunt,
nisi domo conclusa vivat.

The truth is, Mala men's, malus animus; ill dispositions cause ill suspicions.
It may be they have been formerly too blame themseves; Burt. Melanch. page 602.
and they think they may be so served by others. He that turned up the trump,
before the cards were shuffled, expects therefore Legem talionis, like for like.

Jealousy is the rage of a man, Prove. 6.34, 35. Cant. 8.6.
etc.

Jealousy is cruel as the grave.

Divorce.
Amongst the Romans, if after the marriage any discontent had fallen out
between the man and his wife; Godw. Antiq.
then did they both repair unto a certain Chapel, built in the honor of a
certain Goddess, called Dea viri placa, a viris placandis; whence after they
had been a while there, they returned friends.

But upon just causes divorcements were permitted. There were two manner of
divorcements, the one between parties only contracted, the second between
parties married. The first was properly called Repudium, in which the party
suing for divorcement, used this form of words. Condition tua non utar. The
second was called Divortium; wherein the party suing for it, used these words,
Res tuas tibi habeto, or Res tuas tibi agito. Both these kinds were termed
Matrimoniis renunciationes, a renouncing or refusal of marriage.

This, Moses permitted amongst the Jews, merely for the hardness of the men's
hearts, and for the relief of the women, who else might have been misused by
their cruel husbands. The Athenians were wont to put away their wives upon
discontent, or hope of greater portions. Solon their Lawgiver (who permitted
it) being asked whether he had given the best Laws to the Athenians? Answered,
the best that they could suffer.

Picus est imago ingrati mariti, the Pyanit is an emblem of an unkind husband:
for in autumn he casts off his mate, lest he should be forced to keep her in
winter: afterward in the spring, he allures her to him again, and makes much
of her.

The Lord, the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away.

Whosoever shall put away his wife, Mal. 2.16. Mat. 5 32.
saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery.

Parents.
Beneficia natura aentur, primo domesticis, deinde extraneis: Agentia naturalia
agunt semper in propinquiora, deinde in remotiora; si calefacit ignis, si
frigefacit aqua, si scindit gladius, si dividit serra; in parts propinquiores,
deinde in remotiores agunt. 1 Timothy 5.4.
Hence the Apostle, let children learn first to show piety at home, and to
requite their parents; for that is good and acceptable before God.

The Storks feed their ancient parents: Kites expel them. Boughs bend toward
their root. Obed was to Naomi a restorer of her life, and a nourisher of her
old age. Cornelius was the staff of his fathers age, and thereby merited the
honorable name of Scipio among the Romans. Epaminondus rejoiced in nothing
more, than that he had lived to cheer up the hearts of his aged parents, by the
report of his victories.

The blessing of Parents is highly to be regarded. Praerogativa parentum, Ambr.
disciplina filiorum* Though there be a difference between our blessing of our
children, and of the Patriarchs: Our benedictio is but bona dictio, or bona
praecatio; theirs was an actual and real bestowing of things on them: yet the
curse or blessing of Parents, is in all ages to be respected: Whom they curse
justly, God curses; and whom they bless, God blesses.

Therefore let children so behave themselves, that they may have their parents
blessing, especially at their departure out of the world.

Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Ephesians. 6.1.
Father.
The fifth Commandment requires honor to Fathers.

1. Oeconomical, viz. 1. Parents. 2. Husbands. 3. Masters.


2. Political, viz. 1. Betters in office. 2. Elders in years.


3. Ecclesiastical, viz. 1. Tutors. 2. Pastors.


Ambrose reports a tragical accident, how there was a poor man in extreme
necessity, constrained to fell one of his sons into perpetual bondage, that he
might thereby save the rest from a present famine: who calling all his dear
children unto him, and beholding them as Olive-branches, round about his table,
could not resolve which he might best spare. His eldest son was the strength of
his youth, even he that called him his father, and therefore not willing to
part with him; his youngest boy was his nest-chick, whom he dearly beloved; A
third resembled his progenitors, having his fathers bill, and his mothers eye;
and for the rest, one was more loving, and another more diligent, a third more
manly, etc. Therefore he could not afford to part with any.

Like as a Father pitieth his children -- Psalm. 103.13.
Mother
The Greeks commonly called their children (...); the Latin Chari, (...).
darlings; and so they are, especially to mothers, which usually are most
tender of them. There is an Ocean of love in a parents heart, a fathomlesse
depth of desire after the child's welfare; in the mothers especially.

I was my fathers son, Prove. 4.3.
tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother. Widow.
It is a calamitous name. The word by which a widow is expressed in the Hebrew,
as well as her condition, calls for help and pity. It comes from a root that
signifies either, 1. To bind, and indeed the widow may be so called, both
because she is (as it were) bound about with afflictions and sorrows; As also
by the rule of contrary speaking, bound, that is, she is not at all bound, but
free and loosed from her husband, (...)
Romans 7.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 7.39. Or, 2. To be silent; death having cut off her
head, she has lost her tongue, and has none to speak for her.

When the Apostle says of the widow indeed, that she is desolate; he seems
to allude to the Greek word for a widow, (...) desolor, destituo
which comes of a verb, that signifies to be desolate, and deprived. So the
Latin Vidua a viduando.

God therefore pleads for such as his Clients, and takes special care for them:
The Pharisees are doomed to a deeper damnation, for devouring their houses,
Mat. 23.14. And Magistrates charged to plead for them, Isa. 1.17. And all sorts
to make much of them, and communicate to them. Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20, 21.

-- Plead for the widow. Isa. 1.17.
Fatherless.
These two desolate names are often found alone, but oftener as one in
Scripture; the widow who is dis-joyned from her husband, and the fatherless,
who are bereaved of their parents, Per viduam and Pupillum omne genus miserorum
hominum significatur. Pined.
are commonly joined together. And in a large sense these two names signify
any that are in distress, and need out charity.

(...) ab (...), tenebrae, orphans are (as it were) darkling.

We are orphans, and fatherless, says the Church, Lam. 5.3. And we are all
Orphans, said Queen Elizabeth (in her speech to the children of Christ's
Hospital) let me have your prayers, and you shall have my protection.

-- Judge the fatherless. Isa. 1.17.
Infant.
As a tree by the roots is fastened to the earth, and by the fibrae the little
strings upon them draws nourishment from the earth; so is it with an infant in
the womb, the Navel fastens it to the mother, and by the vein and arteries in
the Navel, it fetches in nourishment and spirits. Hence Plutarch likens the
Navel to the roap and Anchor, which stays the Infant in that harbor of the
mothers womb: and when it is cut, the Infant goes from harbor to the sea, and
storms of the world.

Hence some make the Infants tears a presage of sorrows, as if he wept to think
upon what a shore of trouble he is landed: or rather into what a sea of storms
he is lanching, when he comes into the world; such storms as he shall never be
fully quit of, till he is harbored in his grave.

Infants are not innocents, Infantes non sunt insontes.
but estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born, Psalm.
58.3. The first sheet wherein they are covered, is woven of sin and shame, Vt
u^tlea statim urit, and cancri retrecedunt, and ^^hiuus asper ell.
Ezekiel. 16. Infants have sin, though unable to act it^ as Paul's viper, stiff
with cold, might be handled without harm, yet was no less venomous. But no
sooner can they do any thing, but they are evil-doing; as young nettles will
sting, young crab-fish go backward, and as the young urching is rough.

Therefore an Infant, as soon as he lives, has in him the seeds of death. Not
only is man acting sin, but nature infected with sin, the subject of, and
subjected to the power of death, Romans 5.14. Sin is the ^eed of death, and the
principle of corruption. God does Infants no wrong when they die, their death
is of themselves, for they have the seed of death in them.

The Macedonians being to conflict with the Grecians, took their young King in
his cradle, and brought him into the field: thinking, either they could not be
beaten, their Sovereign being present; or that none would be so inhumane, as to
hurt an helpless infant.

Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; Luke 18.16.
for of such is the kingdom of God. Birth.
The first woman was (in a sense) born of a man, Mulier dicitur virago, quia de
viro sumpta.
from which she receives her name; but since, all men are born of a woman. That
is, the formation and production of man is from the woman, in her the body of
man is framed by the mighty power of God, and all the pieces of it put
together, and in her man receives his life and quickening. Hence it was that
Adam, who at first called his wife woman, because she was taken out of man,
calls her afterward Eve, because she was the mother of all living.

And upon this ground some Nations have made a Law, that all descents should be
reckoned by the mother, because the mother gives the greatest contribution
toward the bir^h and bringing forth of man. Plut. de clar. Mul^er. cap. 9.
Apud Lycios siquis percontetur, qua familia ortus, etc. A matribus genus suum
repetere solebant, quod plurima substantia qua constamus materna sit.

The birth of man speaks two things, his 1. Frailty. 2. Faultiness.


For he is born of a woman, the weaker vessel, who both breeds, bears, and
brings forth in sorrow, a weak sorry man; And is ante partum onerosa, in
partu dolorosa, post partum laboriosa, every way calamitous; neither is the
child in a better condition.

And as that which is weak, cannot produce that which is strong, so neither can
that which impure, send forth that which is clean. An Heathen could say, cum
primum nascimur, in omni continuo pravitate versamur; Damnatus home antequam
natus.
As soon as ever we are born, we are forthwith in all wickedness. And Austin,
man is condemned, as soon as conceived.

Our great Grandmother Eve, did not bring forth, before she had sinned,
therefore corruption is conveyed by the impurity of the seed, being in it
incoative, as fire is in the flint. Therefore man is at his birth, overspread
with sin, as with a filthy morphew.

In ancient times (and the custom in some places remains to this day) great
men and Princes kept the memory of their birth-dayes with feasting and triumph,
Genesis 40.20. And Herod's birthday was kept; Origin, in his fragments upon
Matthew, affirms, that the Scripture gives no testimony of any one good man
celebrating his birthday; I say, an ancient and commendable custom, if in
honor of God, for his mercy in our creation, education, preservation, etc. But
indeed, Our sospitator.
while we reflect upon our birth-sin, we have little cause to rejoice in our
birthday: The birthday of Nature should be mourned over every day, the
birthday of Grace is our joy and glory, and is worthy to be rejoiced in.
Eternity, which is the day of glory, is one continued triumph for our birthday
in grace.

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin did my mother conceive me. Bastard.
The Greeks call such children (...), because they are subject to contumelies;
The Hebrews call them brambles, (...)
(such a one as Abimelech, Judge. 9.14.) as growing in the base hedge-row of a
concubine.

Nothus, (...), Spurius.
quasi ignotus, Judge. 11.1. It is an ignominious thing to be a bastard.
Bastards are despised by all, many brands of infamy are set on them by the Law.

1. A bastard properly is not a son, Qui nati sant ex prostibulo, plane incerto
patre, sed certissima infamia
Abraham was Pater, when he had Ishmael; but not filii Pater, till he had
Isaac; so that he cannot inherit his fathers lands, unless he be made
legitimate by Act of Parliament. 2. A bastard may be advanced to no office in
Church or Commonwealth, without special license, favor and dispensation.
A bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
even to his tenth generation. Children.
Children if good, are a great blessing, what can more rejoice our hearts, than
to see our children, It is (...), a blessed misery says he.
the work of Gods hands, framed and fitted for Gods building? But if otherwise,
to be childlesse is a mercy, says Euripedes; and Aristotle concludes, that
(...) is no blessing, unless it be (...), that is, to have a numerous issue,
unless they be virtuous. It is said that Pasiphaes issue, were ever a shame to
the Parent.

None are so ready to drink in false Principles, and corrupt practices, as
young ones. Plato reports of one Protagoras, that he gloried of this, that
whereas he had lived sixty years in all, he had spent forty of them in
corrupting of young people.

What a wretched child was that, who when his father complained, that never
father had so undutifull a child as he had; F^l. Holy state.
answered, yes, my g^ardfather had.

That regenerate men may have unregenerate children; Regeneratus non regenerat
^ilios ^arnis, sed generat. -- ut Oleae semina non Oleas generant, sed
Oleastros. Idem. Mat. 19.13.
Austin illustrates thus, 1. As corn that is never so well winnowed, brings
forth corn with chafe about it; 2. And the circumcised Jew begat uncircumcised
children; so holy parents do beget unholy children; begetting their children,
not according to Grace, but according to Nature; for grace is personal, but
corruption is natural.

It is our duty to present our little ones to Christ, as well as we can; 1. By
praying for them before, at, and after their birth. 2. By timely bringing them
to the Ordinance of Baptism with faith, and much joy in such a privilege. 3.
By training them up in Gods holy fear.

A populous posterity, is the blessing of God. Let us not take too much thought
for providing for them. God has filled two bottles of milk against they come
into the world. He that feeds the young ravens, will feed our children, if we
depend on him.

Lo, Psalm. 127.3.
children are an heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his reward.
Boy, Girl.
Si puellam viderimus moribus lepidam atque dicaculam, laudabimus,
exosculabimus; Haec in matrona damnabimus and persequemur. Puerilitas est
periculorum pelagus. -- childhood and youth are vanity. Eccles. 11.10.
Education. Erasm. de vita, etc. Origenis page 1.

Refert nonnihil ubi nascaris, sed magis refert a quibus nascaris, plurimum
vero a quibus a teneris instituaris.

Education consists in three things, viz. 1. Religion. 2. Learning. 3.
Manners.


David and Bathsheba joined together to season the tender years of Solomon,
with sweet liquor of celestial Piety. Chrysostom. Hom. 2.
By the means of Hanna, Samuel came presently from the corporal, to the
spiritual Dugge. Evince taught Timothy the holy Scriptures from his childhood.
Hierom would have L^ta to teach her daughter Paula the Canonical Scriptures, Ad
Letam.
beginning with the Psalms, and ending with the Canticles; the Psalms as the
easiest and sweetest, the Canticles as the hardest. To this end catechizing is
very requisite.

Pharaoh's daughter trained up her adopted son, in all the learning of the
Egyptians. Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. Aristippus, that famous
Philosopher was (...) taught by his mother. The eloquent tongue of Cornelia was
a great means of the eloquence of the Gracchi her two sons. Philip procured two
Schoolmasters for his son Alexander, Plu.
Aristotle for his Teacher, and Leonides for Directer and Informer. And
Constantine procured three several Tutors for his three several sons; One for
Divinity, Eusebius.
the other for the Civil Law, the third for Military Discipline.

formare mores, frame their manners, and put a good mind into them, as the word
imports.

Let not these things be delayed. Thou may be taken from thy children, or
they from thee, who then shall teach them after thy departure? Moreover, Quo
semel est imbuta recens servabit adorem, Testa diu.
great trees will not easily bend, and a bad habit is not easily left. Besides,
dye cloth in the wool, not in the webb, and the color will be the better, the
more durable.

Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old; Prove. 22.6.
he will not depart from it. Espousals.
Contracts or espousals before marriage, were a very ancient and laudable
custom; both amongst the people of God, Adam took his wife the first day of
their creation, but knew her not till after the fall: Lots daughters were
espoused, yet had not known man: And Mary was betrothed unto Joseph, and yet a
pure Virgin. And amongst the Heathens they had their espousals.

The custom was for the spouse to be brought to her husband, Virginem magis
laudando quam v^uperando, consundas. Ter.
her head being covered, in token of her shamefastness and chastity; Thus
Rebekah, Genesis 24.65. Herein (says one upon that place) that of the Poet held
not, Fastus inest pulchris, sequiturque superbia formans.

Contracts amongst the Romans were called sponsalia a spondendo, because in
them each did promise other to live as man and wife. Godw. Antiq.
The manner of contracting was commonly thus; They did for the greater security
write down the form of the contract upon tables of record, as appears by
Juvenal.

Si tibi legitimis pactam junctumque tabellis Satyr. 16.

Non es amaturus --
Conscience is to be made of contracts. Nuptias facit consensus, non
concubitus, says the lawyer: And in Scripture the bethrothed virgin is called
a wife, and the violation of it, punished as adultery. Deuteronomy. 22.23, 24.

The Lord is witness between such, Mal. ^.14.
and it is the Oath of God: therefore let such take heed how they deal
treacherously. Servant.
Servus est nomen officii.

Esse dominos and servos, introductum est in orb propter peccatum. Dixit Deus,
dominamini piscibus maris, volatilibus coeli, and bestiis terrae; non vero
dixit, dominamini hominibies. Genesis 9.25.
Si enim non esset peccatum, non esset servus nec subditus. Nec Scriptura
meminit de servis nec dominis usque ad tempus Noe, cum injecit maledictionem
Chamo; Maledictus Cham, servus servorum erit fratribus suis. Hinc maximus
peccator Papa, cujus titulus est, Servus servorum: In which title (not without
the providence of God) he will needs be Cham's successor.

Sin brought in servility, Peccatum ubi intravit libertatem perdidit, and
cor^upit potestatem naturae datam. Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in Genesis
and the subjection of man to man. In the state of innocence, there was a
dominion granted to man over the beasts, but there was no dominion granted to
him over man: In the state of integrity relations should have continued, but
subjection should not have been found, only that natural subjection of children
unto parents; but as for civil subjection, there had been no such thing in the
world. Before man forsook the service of God, he needed none to serve him;
Service comes in by sin, and the increase of it by the increase of sin: As we
see, when Cham was so vile as to forget the duty of a son, he is set below, or
in the worst condition of a servant.

A servant is one that is not at his own dispose, but at the call and beck of
another. So the Centurion describes a servant, Mat. 8.9. Servants are not sui
juris, in their own power, (...).
but at the word of another. Therefore Aristotle calls servants living tools or
instruments, to be used and employed at the discretion of their masters.

Bernard observes, that Inferiors duties are first described in Scripture;
because, 1. They are less willing to subject themselves. 2. They should be
readier to perform duty, than to expect it. 3. Hereby they shall win upon their
Superiors, who will lie the heavier upon them, if there be strife who shall
begin.

Servants must be subject to their Masters three ways; To their 1.
Commandments. 2. Rebukes. 3. Restraints.


It was a bad saying of him in Plautus; Ego non servio libenter; herus meus me
non habet libenter, tamen utitur me ut lippis oculis.

Apelles painted a Servant with Hinds feet, to run on his Masters errands; with
Asses ears, and with his mouth made fast with two locks; to signify that he
should be swift to hear, slow to speak. But too many servants are contrary,
having heavy ears, lazy hands, and long tongues.

The Apostle giving rules (among other relations, to servants) charges them,
Tit. 2.9. (...).
to be obedient to their own masters, and to please them well in all things,
not answering again. But is it a fault for a servant asked a question, to make
an answer? No, it were a fault not to answer: Silence is sometime a sign of
consent; but such silence is rather a sign of contempt. Not to answer when
called, is incivility in most, and it is undutifulness in some: If a servant
answer not when he is called, he forgets what his calling is. The Apostle
forbids servants some kind of answering. There is a twofold answering; 1. By
way of submission, or an answer of obedience. When masters give lawful
commands, servants must give answer by submiting: And indeed, Coming, and
Going, and Doing, are the best language of servants: It Is most comely when they
speak with their feet, and make answer with their hands. 2. By way of
contradiction, or an answer of reluctance: When a servant being reproved for a
fault, his spirit does rise and return against his master: Or if he be directed
to do any warrantable work, he contradicts or murmures at the orders he has
received, chatting or thwarting, in stead of addressing himself to the
fulfilling of them. This is the answering again, reproved as a fault in
servants, which is rather gainsaying than answering.

Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh: not with
eye-service, Colos. 3.22.
as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God. Steward.
A man may play the bad Steward three ways, viz.

By 1. Getting wrongfully. 2. Keeping basely. 3. Spending unlawfully.


Stips pauperum thesaurus divitum, Non enim tuum fortun^ quod fecit tuum.
was the saying of the good Emperor Tiberius Constantius; The rich man's
treasure is the poor man's stock.

He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: Luke
16.10.
And he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. Friend.
A true Friend admits no change, except he whom he loves change from himself.
Extremity does but fasten him, D. H.
whiles he (like a well-wrought Vault) is the stronger, by how much the more
weight he bears. When necessity calls him, he can be a servant to his equal,
with the same will wherewith he can command his inferior; And though he rise to
honor, yet he forgets not his familiarity; And when his friend is dead, he
accounts himself but half alive. He hates to enjoy that, that would do his
friend more good: His bosom is his friends closer, where he may safely lay up
his complaints, doubts, fears. He is so sensible of another miseries, that
when his friend is stricken, he cries out as one affected with a real feeling
of pain. He steals the performance of a good office unseen; Dimidium animae.
the conscience of his faithfulness herein being more sweeter, as it is more
secret. In favors done his memory is frail, in benefits received never
failing. He is the joy of life, the treasure of earth, and no other than a good
Angel clothed in flesh.

It is said of Augustus, that he was ad accipiendas amicitias rarissimus, ad
retinendas vero constantiss^mus.

Euripides says, that a faithful friend in adversity, is better than a calm
sea to a storm-beaten Mariner. The world is full of Jobs comforters and
friends, miserable ones; who instead of comforting, reproach; vizarding
themselves under the cloak of amity, when their hearts are no better than lumps
of hypocrisy.

But true friendship is Hercules knot, indissoluble. And like Mercuries sta^^e,
whereon are placed two snakes, both the male and the female, always clipping
and clasping together.

One asking a poor man how he would prefer his children? his answer was,
Zenophon.
Cyrus is my friend.

But O happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: Psalm. ^46.5.
and whose hope is in the Lord his God. Kiss.
To kiss notes 1. Worship and service, 1 Kings 19.18. 2. Duty and obedience,
Psalm. 2.12. 3. Love and affection. As a sign of unity and oneness.


Salute one another (says Paul) with an holy kiss, Romans 16.16.
As it is the fashion among us, for men meeting with their friends, to shake
hands; So was it among the Jews as appears by many places in both Testaments)
for men to kiss men at meeting and parting. The Apostle intends a true
conjunction of minds and affections, forgetting all former offense. This Peter
calls the kiss of charity, and Austin Osculum columbinum, the Dove-like
kiss.

But there are unholy kisses; The unchaste kiss of the Harlot; The idolatrous
kiss of the Israelites to Baal; The flattering kiss of Absalom; and the
traiterous kiss of Joab and Judas.

Above all its good to kiss him, in whose lips grace is seated.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: Cant. 1.2.
for thy love is better than wine. Enemy.
Wisdom tells us it is good to keep a bit in the mouth of an enemy, but much
more of our spiritual enemies. Fury fights against the soul, like a mad Turk;
Fornication like a treacherous Joab, it does kiss and kill; Drunkenness is
the mastergunner, that sets all on fire; Gluttony will stand for a Corporal;
Avarice for a Pioner; Idleness for a Genleman of the company; And Pride must
be a Captain. Let us therefore put on our spiritual armor.

To love our enemies, is a hard task, but Christ commands it, and it must be
done, be it never so contrary to our foul nature. The spirit that is in us
lusts after envy, but the Scripture teaches better things, and God gives
more grace.

This is our Saviors Precept, and this was his practice. He melted over
Jerusalem, the slaughterhouse of his Saints and himself; Called Judas friend;
Prayed Father forgive them; And did them all good for bodies and souls. And all
his children in all ages of the Church, have resembled him. Abraham rescueth
Lot, that had dealt so discourteously with him; Isaac forgives the wrong done
him by Abimelech and his servants, and feasteth them; Jacob was faithful to
Laban, who changed his wages ten times, and always for the worse; Joseph
entertained his malicious brethren into his house; Elisha provides a table for
them, that had provided a grave for him; And Stephen prays heartily for his
persecutors; Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; and prevailed (as Austin
thinks) for Paul's conversion.

In doing some good to our enemies, we do most to our selves; for God cannot
but love in us that imitation of his mercy, who bids his Sun to shine on the
wicked and unthankful also.

Love your enemies, Mat. 5.44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you, and persecute you, etc. Read Romans 12.20, 21.

Money.
It was and still is a common medler. It is the worlds great Monarch, and bears
most Majesty. What great designs did Philip bring to pass in Greece by his
gold? The very Oracles were said (...), to say as Philip would have them.
Antipater non tenuis fuit pecuniae, and ideo praevalidae fuit potentiae, says
Egesippus, he was a well-monyed man, and therefore a mighty man.

But what security is in money? Does the Devil balk a lordly house, as if he
were afraid to come in? Dares he not tempt a rich man to lewdness? Let
experience witness, whether he dare not bring the highest gallant both to sin
and shame; Let his food be never so delicate, he will be a guest at his table,
and perhaps thrust in one dish at his feast, Drunkenness; Satan will attend him
though he have good servants: Wealth is no charm to conjure away the Devil;
such an Amulet and the Pope's Holy Water, are both of a force; An evil
conscience dares perplex Saul in the throne, and a Judas with his purse full of
money: Can a silken sleeve keep a broken arm from aching? then may a full barn
keep an evil conscience from vexing. Hellfire does not favor the rich man's
limbs more than the poor's; Dives goes to hell out of his purple-robes, to
flames of the same color; The frogs dare leap to King Pharaoh's chamber, into
his sumptuous palaces. The rich Worldlings live most miserably, slav'd to that
wealth whereof they keep the key under their girdle; Esuriunt in Popina, They
starve in a Cooks shop. The Poet tells us, that when Codrus his A little
cottage in the forest.
house burns, he stands by and warms himself, knowing that a little few sticks,
straw and clay, with a little labor, can rebuild him as good a tabernacle: But
if this accident light upon the Usurers house, distraction seiseth him withal;
he cries out of this Chamber, and that Chest, of this Closet and Cabinet, Bonds
and Mortgages, Money and Plate.

Strabo says, That Phaletius feared, lest in digging for Gold and Silver,
Effodiuntur opes, etc.
men would dig themselves a new way to Hell; and Plutonem brevi ad superos
adducturos, And bring up the Devil among them.

Gold is that which the basest yield, the most savage Indians get, servile
Apprentices work, miserable Muckworms admire, and unthrifty Ruffians spend.

Yet the danger is not in having gold and silver, so as these metals have not
us, Minut. Octav.
so as they do not get within us: But that is too often verified, of which an
Ancient complains, (and not without cause) Divites facultatibus suis
alligatos, magis aurum consuevisse suspicere qu^m coelum; That rich men mind
Gold more than God, and Money more than Mercy. If wealth be wanting, they sit
down in a faithless sullen discontent and despair; And if they have it, they
rise up in a corky frothy confidence that all shall go well with them.

Money answers all things. Eccl. 10.19.
Clothing.
Decor corporis, It has parts civil, and parts effeminate: For, Neither gold,
nor precious stone so glistereth (says Plato) as the prudent mind of a pious
person. Nothing so beautifieth as grace does.
cleanness of body was ever esteemed to proceed from a due reverence to God, to
society, and to our selves. As for artificial decoration, it is well worthy of
deficiency, being neither fine enough to deceive, nor handsome to use, nor
wholesome to please.

Behavior seems to me, as a garment of the mind, and to have the conditions
of a garment: It ought to be made in fashion, it ought not to be too curious;
It ought to be shaped so, as to set forth any good making of the mind, and hide
any deformity; and above all, it ought not to be too strait or restrained for
exercise or motion.

Too much outward neatness (says one) is a sign of inward nastiness.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45 13.
-- Food.
Animantis cujusque vita est in fuga: Were it not for the repair of nutrition,
the natural life would be extinguished.

The Latins call Bread Panis, of the Greek (...), because it is the chief
nourishment. In pane conclusus est quasi baculus, qui nos sustineat; therefore
called the staff of bread; yet without Gods blessing it can no more nourish us,
than a clod of clay.

God can out of stones raise up children unto Abraham; yea, God out of Christ
Jesus the Cornerstone, has raised up the children of Abraham. And whereas
Satan said to Christ, Command these stones to be made bread; He himself the
chief Cornerstone of his Church, is the bread of life that came down from
heaven.

Meat does not nourish by its own power, but by Gods appointment; Else it would
be more likely to choke than to feed: But his word of command is able to soften
stones, Fides famem non formidat.
and make poison to be both meat and medicine. Therefore if bread fail, feed on
faith. Daniel and his fellows their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in
flesh, than all the children which did eat the portion of the Kings meat, Mat.
4.4.

God has given us the creature, Beza.
not only for necessity, but for delight. Deus multa plura condidit, quibus
facile carere possemus, quam quibus necessario nobis opus est. Our Savior
Christ himself was at a feast in Cana of Galilee, where, when wine failed, he
supplied it by miracle.

But have a care we turn not this liberty into wantonness, being the most
wicked, when we should be most thankful; and grieving God most, when he gives
us both occasion and means of rejoicing. And let us mind our selves, ab ovo ad
mala, that our hearts be not drowned in the creature, and that we make not our
belly our God.

It is said, Aves propter viles escas gratias agunt; t^ preciosissimis opulis
pasceris, and ingra^us es? Tettul.
the Elephant turns up the first sprig toward heaven, when he comes to feed.
God is the great Housekeeper of the world, providing sustenance for all, from
the greatest to the least; from the Elephant to the Mouse, from the Eagle to
the Sparrow, from the Whale to the Shrimp. He carves them out their meet
measures of meat, and at sit seasons. Of him they have it, per causarum
concatiuationem.

The eyes of all wait upon thee, Psalm. 145.15, 16.
and thou give them their meat in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

Sleep.
A certain Commander finding the Sentinel asleep, slew him, saying, Mortuum
inveni, and mortuum reliqui.

The Night and Sleep are well called, Malorum domitrices, the conquerors of
evil, and victors over sorrow. Hence Christ, Mat. 6.34. Take therefore no
thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it
self; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Sleep is the sweet
Parenthesis of nature, a medicine for all diseases.

They are likeliest to sleep, who together with their clothes can put off their
cares: And say as Lord Burleigh did when he threw off his gown, Lie there Lord
Treasurer.

Sweet sleep is not from a soft bed, or an easy couch, but from the especial
blessing of God; therefore let us bless God for it, and not our beds. A good
nights rest is the good gift of God, and deserves daily acknowledgments by man.

-- So he gives his beloved sleep. Psalm. 127.2.
Dream.
When men are plunged in sleep, and are (as it were) neither in the number of
the living, nor the dead; Then many times the Reasonable soul comes into the
shop of Fantasy, and there does strange works, which are vented in our Dreams.

A Dream is an imagination, which the mind of man conceives in sleep.

For the causes and kinds of Dreams, they are either, 1. Natural, from the
temper or distemper of the body. Or, 2. Moral; as a man works in the day, his
fancy works in the night. Or, 3. Divine; The Scripture is full of instances.
Or, 4. Diabolical, permitted, the Devil causes sometimes filthy and sinful
Dreams. Aug. confess. l. 10. c. 30.
It is conceived by some, that the Dream of Pilat's wife, Mat. 27.19. was from
the Devil, because thereby he would have hindered the work of man's Redemption.

Richard the Third, after the murder of his two innocent Nephews, and Charles,
the Ninth of France, after the Parasian Massacre, had such dreadful Dreams,
that they became a terror to themselves, and to all about them.

But to instance in better men: Calvin being sick of the Gout, dreamed, Bez. in
vit.
that he heard a great noise of Drums beaten up most vehemently, as they use to
be in warlike marches, Pareus, that he saw all Heidelbergh on a thick smoke,
but the Prince's Palace all on a light fire. Phil. Pa^. in vit. David Par.
operib. ejus praefixd:

The Ancients funcied, that a Dream had wings like a bird of the air, Antiqui
somnium Deum fingebant volatilem, etc.
it is so speadily gone. Hence a wicked man's joy, is but the joy of a Dreamer,
which quickly vanishes. A beggar dreameth of gold; but he awaketh, and his
purse is empty. The prisoner dreameth of liberty; but he awaketh, and finds
himself in irons. Such is the wicked man in his prosperity.

As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shult, Psalm.
73.20.
despise their image. Eccl. 5.7. Isa. 29.8. Life present
Our life is David's span, seventy years, half spent in sleep; so thirty five
remain: Abate then days of youth and childhood, which Solomon calls, vanity; in
some old age, in which we take no pleasure; with our days of grief, which we
wish had never been: Deduct these, the time of sleep, youth, age, sorrow; and
only a span remains.

Prosper said to them that wept about him, The life I have enjoyed, was but
given me, upon condition to render it up again, not grudgingly, but gladly.

Gods child watches, stands, sits upon thorns while he is here, O mihi ^am
long mant^at pars ultima vitae.
because he pants and desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

We may desire life upon a threefold account; To 1. Bring more glory to God. 2.
Get more grace. 3. Do more good to others.


Epaminondas says aptly: We may salute Young men with Good morrow, or welcome
into the world; Old men with Good night, because they be leaving the world;
Only those of middle age, with Good day.

Our pilgrimage on earth is called a Day, for 1. The shortness of this life. 2.
That after this our day is spent, we shall no longer work.


Magna vitae pars elabitur male Senec. Epist. 1.
agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus. Similis an ancient
man, who lived seven years well, caused this to be written on his tombstone,
Hic jacet Similis cujus aetas Diu vixi, diu peccavi.
ipse

Many and great are the miseries of this life, Cogita unde veneris, et
crubesce, ubi sis, et ingemisce, quo vadis, et contremisce. A man's life when it
declines, casts of the lees Qui been latuit been vixit. Vivere est been valere.
Non anto ^illam fortunam rude^^vi^^ aptam. Aurum sitisti, aurum bibe.
Bernard speaking unto man, says Think from whence thou came, and be
ashamed; where thou art, and sign for sorrow; whither thou go, and themble
with anguish. Like unto him says Austin, Intelligas ergo in quantum sit
ingressus tu^^ flebilis, progressin tune debilis, and egress^ (...) horribilis.

The mere natural man's life is comforted in three things especially. 1. Quiet
rest. 2. Liberal diet. 3. Good apparel.


When one bragged unto Lacon, of the multitude of his ships and shipping, he
answered, he little esteemed that felicity that hanged upon ropes, and depended
on cables; But such is all mundane prosperity; Crassus, that so greedily hunted
after the Pa^^^^ans gold, perishing miserably, had his head cast into a vessel
of gold, with this inscription or Motto, Thou that have thirsted after gold,
now drink thy fill. Tertullian reports of the Indians and Ethiopians, that they
made no more account of gold than dirt.

Wise Solomon says, there is a time to be born, and a time to die; you do not
hear him say, a time to live; Death borders upon our birth, and our cradle
stands in our grave; We lament the loss of our Parents, how soon shall our
(...) bewa^le ours? Out of those words of Job, c. 1.21. N^ked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; It plainly appears, the life of
man is nothing else but a coming and a returning; here is nothing said of
staying or ^^^ding? We have here no continuing City; while we are here, we can
hardly be said to continue here; and after a few days we shall not be here at
all. It is but a coming and going, Natura hic nobis diversorium commorandi
dedit. But this riddle passes the worlding, as the fisher man's did Homer, Quae
cepimu^ reliqu^mus, quae non cepimus, nobiscum portamus. Mat. 10.39. Con^es. ^.
Vita is^a in corpore, umbra est vitae, et imag^, non veritas. Ambr. in Psalm.
118. Jam. 4.14
it is but a ^^oud and an ebb, and then we are carried into the Ocean of
eternity.

It were well if the world were as our Tent, yea, as our Inn; if not to lodge,
yet to bait in. What shall a wicked man say, when death comes fiercely, and
pulls him by the throat, and summons him to hell? Who can but tremble, the
messenger being terrible, but the message worse? Then the raging despairs of an
evil conscience, finding no peace within, less without! Contrariwise, the
gracious soul has no leisure to care for sufferings, that beholds her crown,
which if she were enjoined to fetch it through the flames of hell, her faith
would not stick at the condition.

Austin doubted whether to call it a dying life, or a living death; Nescio an
^icenda sit vita mor^alis, an vitalis mors. The whole course of life is but a
flying shadow; a little spot of time between two eternities. So that it is
improper to ask, when we shall die? but rather when we shall make an end of
dying; for first the infancy dies, then the childhood, then the youth, then
age, and then we make an end of dying. This life in the body is a shadow, and
an image of life, not the truth of it.

What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away. Age of Man.
De dinturnita^e vitae humanae bifariam loqui^ possumus,

Viz. 1. Ante Diluviam. Zanard, de genesis et corrup. cap. 29. (...) Disceptabis,
^rem.
2. Post Diluvium.


Loquendo de ea ante diluvium, notum est multos per multa secula vixisse, ut
sacra nos docent historia. At loquendo de vita humana post diluvium; jam
audivimus dominum dicentem, non perma^abit spiritus meus in homine, quica^o
est, suntque dies hominis centum viginti annorum.

But since then, Scripture makes mention of seventy years. So Solon in
Lacresus, and to the same sense speaks Macrobius also, saying, Septi^s dein
Anni (...) Physicis creditur meta vivendi, and hoc vitae humanae perfectu^^
spaoium termi^ nature, etc.

The Fathers lived longer; but as man's wickedness increased, so their days
decreased; and now their lives are daily shortened; the generations dispatched
away, that the world may sooner come to an end.

Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; Psalm.
39 4.
that I may know how frail I am. Old age.
This once come (says the Philosopher) youth is no more to be expected; as
when once winter is come, no more of the past summer,

As in an house, Stillicidi^ praecedunt r^inam, so in a man, gray hairs
sore-signify dea^l^. Therefore when the Palm Tree is full of blomes, the map of
age is figured in the forehead, and the Calenders of death appear in the
furrows of the face; then it is high time for a man to be think himself of
death. Annus octogessimus me admonor, ut sarcenas colligam, (said Varre) It is
high time for me to pack up, and to be gone out of this life.

Cleanthes was wont sometimes to chide himself: Ariston wondering ^hereat, Qui
canos qui^^^ habet, sed mentem non habet.
asked him, whom chidest thou? Cleanthes laughed, and answered, I chide an old
fellow, who has gray hairs in deed, but wants understanding and prudence
worthy of them. Such are sick of Ephraims disease, Hos. 7.9. Quo magis
sen^scunt, co ma^is stult^s^unt.
Or of our near neighbors disease, (if that of Erasmus (who conversed among
them) be true) The elder they are, the foolisher they are.

There are some who have attained the last degree or step of old age, who have
not attained the first degree of wisdom. And this is sad upon a double
account, 1 Because it is the duty of old men to show forth wisdom. 2. They
have had a great opportunity to gather wisdom; a price has been in their
hands, though possibly they have not had hearts to make use of it. How much
time every one bath had, such a talent he has had, and he shall be reckoned
with answerably. Time is not an empty duration. God has filled time with helps
to eternity, Turpis et ridiculus esi (...) clementacius.
and with means to know him the only true God, which is life eternal. An old
man ignorant, is more childish than a child. It is bad enough when children and
young men are ignorant, but to see old men ignorant of the things of God, with
what tears should we lament it!

Old men are to be reverenced, 1. Propter ipsam atatem. Levit. 19.32. 2.
Propter prudentiam. Job 12.12. 3. Propter Experientiam. 4. Propter Pietatem.
Pro. 16.31.


Canities tunc venerabilis est, quando ea gerit quae canitiem decent, etc.
Cgrysost.
Else it is mucor potius q^am canities; As Manna, the longer it was kept
against the command of God the more it stanke. S^epe nigium cor est, cap^t
album Mult a (...) c^mveniunt in commoda. Horat.


The white rose is soonest cankered, so is the white head soonest corrupted.
Satan got great advantage against old Solomon, Asa, Lot and others, whom when
young, he could never so deceive. The Heathens can warn us to look well to our
old age, as that which comes not alone, but is infected with many diseases,
both of body and mind.

To live long, and dye in a full age, is a blessing, yet it is infinitely
better to be full of grace, than to be full of days; but to be full days, and
full of grace too, a venerable spectacle. To be full of years and full of
faith, full of the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ, this is
comely and beautiful, beyond all the beauty and comeliness of youth. Such may
be truly said to have filled their days, for those days are filled indeed
which are full of Goodness. Semper aliqrid novi ad po^ta^.


Solet sen^ctusesse deformis, infirma, obliviosa, edulenta, lucrosa, indocilis
et molesta, says Cato in Plutarch. As Africa is never without some Monster; so
never is old age without some ailement. Old age and misery are never separated.
Therefore let no man be so besotted, as to make that ^he talk of his old age,
which should be the trade of his whole life.

I have been young, Psalm. 37.25.
and now am old. The evil days, the years when it will be said, I have no
pleasure in them. Eccl. 12.1.
Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. Psalm. 71.9.
The World.
Mundus.
THE great body of the world, Heil. Geog. l. 1.31.
like the body of man, though it have many parts and members, is but one body
only. A body of so exact a form, and of so complete a Symmetry in respect of
the particular parts, and all those parts so beautified and adorned by the God
of Nature, (...) ab ornatu, mundus a munditie.
that from the Elegancy and beauties of it; it was called (...) by the
Grecians, and Mundus by the Latins; both names declaring the composure of it
to be full of ornament; and all those ornaments conducting mankind of the
knowledge of God.

There is 1. Mundus mundanus, Act. 17.24. 2. Mundus immundus, 1 John 5.19. 3.
Mundus mundatus, 2 Cor. 5.19.


There are two sorts of men in the world, 1. Of the world, Psalm. 17.14. 2. Not
of the world, John. 17.16.


The former are opposed to the Citizens of the new Jerusalem, Terrigena fratres
animam habentes triticeam.
such as have incarnated their souls, are of the earth, speak of the earth, and
mind earthly things; as if they were born for no other purpose. The latter
indeed have their commoration on earth, but their conversation is in heaven.
Pearls, though they grow in the Sea, (...).
yet they have affinity with the heaven, the beauty and brightness whereof
they resemble. That which the soul is in the body, that are Christians in the
world; Chrysostom.
for as the soul is in, but not of the body; so Christians are in, but not of
the world.

Two things occasion fashion in this world. 1. Multitude. 2. Greatness.


For as Cyprian said, Insipit esse licitum, quod solet esse publi^um. Quod est
consue^um, praesumitur esse justum.
custom is not only another nurture, but another nature. What is done of many,
speak the Lawyers, is at length thought lawful for any.

It is an Axiom in the Bible, that amity with the world, is enmity with God: He
that is a Parasite to men, is not the servant of Christ: it is an unhappy thing
to converse in the tents of Kedar.

As in a Chess-play, so long as the game is in playing, all men stand in their
order, and are respected according to the place; First the King, then the
Queen, then the Bishops, etc. But when once the game is ended, they are all
confusedly tumbled into a bag; and perhaps the King is lowest: Even so it is
with us in this life, the world is a Stage or Theater, V^iversus mundus exercet
Histriouem.
whereon some play the part of sicut supra, but when our Lord shall come with
his Angels to judge the world, all are alike; great men and mean persons in the
same sin, shall be bound together, and cast as a faggot into hell. Let us not
then conform our selves according to the greatest, for Ego and Rex meus is no
good plea; when God shall reckon with us at the last dreadful day.

The world is both 1. Transitory, and 2. Unsatisfactory.


The fashion of this world passes away. One of the Kings of Egypt, minding one
day to ride in pomp, caused his Chariot to be drawn with four captive Kings,
the hindermost of which looking back; nodded his head at one of the wheels;
which the King observing, asked him his reason; he answered, it did resemble
the changable fortune and affairs of the world; which the King seriously
considering, set them at liberty and restored them.

In mundo nihil constat, in orbem vertitur orbis, Quidmirum? recti quod sit in
orb nihil. Yea, the ruin of the goodliest pieces in the world, Arist. Polit.
foreshews the destruction of the whole. How ill beseeming and unworthy a thing
is it then for a Christian to set his heart on the things of this world, Omnia
praetereunt, praeter amare Deum.
considering that they are vain and transitory; rather shows and shadows of
things, than true things themselves.

Neither do they fill and satisfy the mind of man; Pleasure is like
lightning, simul oritur, and moritur; sweet and short. And dolor est etiam
voluptas; Men first itch, then scratch, then smart. Learning, the more we know,
the more we would know. Honor contents not; the poor labourer would be written
Yeoman, the Yeoman a Gentleman, the Gentleman a Knight, the Knight a Baron, the
Baron a Lord, the Lord an Earl, the Earl a Marquess, the Marquess a Duke,
the Duke a Prince, the Prince a King, the King a Caesar, Aut Caesar, aut nullus.
Caesar an Alexander, and Alexander would be a God.

Vnus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis.
Aestuat infoelix augusto limine mundi.
All the worlds army consists of two wings, 1. Prosperity on the right hand. 2.
Adversity on the left hand.


And prosperity assaults more dangerously than adversity; for as Anstin, Homo
victus in Paradiso; victorim stercore, Job.

Gregor. Mundum oomparat nuci cassae quae si cultro veritatis aperiatur, nihil
intus invenire quam vanitatem and inanitatem. Et D. Johannes, (...); in quo non
aliter atquae in Medeae sinu versamur. Orbis hic nihil aliud est, quam scelerum
officina Publica, in qua vel Lycurgum ad nequitiam commoveri posse vide^tur.
The world is so full of evils, as that to write them all, would require another
world as great as it self. Nam quid longa dies, nisi longa dolorum colluvies?
Initio vitae cecitas and oblivio possidet, Progressu labor, dolor exitu, error
omnibus. It may be said of an old man, as one of a mariner, Nec inter vivos,
nec inter mortuos. Epictetus spoke more like a Divine than a Philosopher, Homo
calamitatis fabula, infelicitatis tabula. Though a King should conquer all the
world, yet he gets but a needle-point, a mote, a mite, a nit, a nothing.

The world promises many things, but performs nothing. All that is in the
world, is, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life;
That is pleasure, profit, preferment; the worldlings Trinity. To the same
purpose the Christian Poet, Ambitiosus honos, and opes, and foeda voluptas,
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet.


Every sin we commit in this world, will be as a fury to torment us in the
next, It was a clear heart that gave so bold a forehead to that holy Bishop,
who durst on his deathbed profess, I have so lived, as I neither fear to die,
nor shame to live.

Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. 1 John 2.15.
Kingdoms.
Remota justitia, quid sunt Regna, nisi magna latrocinia? quia and ipsa
latrocinia, quid sunt, nisi parva regna? It was the Pirates answer to the great
Macedonian Alexander, who had taken him; the King asking him, how he durst
molest the seas so? he replied with a free spirit, how durst you molest the
whole world? But because I do it with a little skip only, I am called a thief;
thou doing it with a great Navy art called an Emperor.

It is reported that it was a custom among the learned Nations, Clem. Alex. l.
7.
that he who should be King, must also be a Priest, so much they adjudged
Religion to import the felicity of Kingdoms: Hence the Persians counted them
most happy that were most godly, 8 Pa^.
as testifies Xenophon. We may well say with Cicero, why should we be
inamoured with our selves, since we have neither overcome the Spaniards with
numbers, the French with strength, the Carthaginians with craft, nor the Greeks
with art, but only with Piety and Religion.

The Poets all acknowledge that the gods all forsook to succor Troy, Dii multa
neglecti d^de^e Hisperiae mala lactuosae. Plutarch lib. ^e Exilio.
for the adultery of Paris. The neglect of God brings many sorrowful evils to
mankind. The Lacedemonian Ambassador commended his country to Ptolomy,
because that with them there was no envy, for all were equal; nor
covetousness, for all were common; nor idleness, for all did labor. Which
three will or may be in time the wrack and ruinous downfall of any land.

Kingdoms, after the manner other things, have but their time to flourish in,
and so again decay. For no Kingdom or Empire upon earth (were it never so
flourishing or great) was ever yet so assured, but that in the revolution of
time, after the manner of other worldly things, it has (as a sick body) been
subject to many strange innovations and changes, and at length come to nothing.
Yea, and all the States in the world have their critical days, and
Clymacterical years, beginnings and dissolutions at Gods appointment.

Ruins of Kingdoms may be known beforehand, Junius Quast. Pol. 5.
not by Apodictical and demonstrative necessity, but by Topical probability. A
skilful Physician by the cause of the disease, does fore-judge of the death of
a sick Patient, what sort it shall be; and why then should not a wise Governor
of the republic foresee the Sunsetting of a Kingdom? yea, in every City there
are certain pulses, from whose faint and languishing motions, Su^^onius.
we may divine fearful fates to hang over them. Since Seneca himself says, that
the luxury of banquets and garments, are the tokens of a sick City.

It is reported, that before the death and destruction of Domitian, a crow
cried in the Capitol, (...), All things are evil. So also that vultures renting
in pieces the young unfeathered Eagles, portended death to Tarquinius superbus.
It is good for Kingdoms to have their eyes opened, that they may see the
daybreak before the Sunshine, and dark night before the cockcrow.

The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, Rev. 11.15.
and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Not for a thousand years only, as the Millenaries.

Jews.
Upon their Nation is that fully verified, Ingentia beneficia, flagitia,
supplicia. They were a people signally prosperous, incorrigibly flagitious, and
God has made them in public judgments most notorious. Abused mercy turns
into fury. Their dispersion for this sixteen thousand years and upwards is
such, as that one of their own Rabbines concludes from thence, that their
Messiah must needs be come, and they must needs suffer so much for killing him.
O the severity of God! and O the obstinacy and misery of this hard-hearted
people!

Such is their stubbornness, that they curse us Christians in their daily
prayers. Maledic. Domine Nazaraeis.
They stick not to say, that rather than we should have any benefit by their
Messiah, they would crucify him an hundred times over. Yea, they have been
ever such bitter enemies to Christians, (and so they continue) that among the
Turks every Vizier and Basha of State uses to keep a Jew of his private
counsel, Blunts Voyage. p. 114.
whose malice, wit and experience of Christendom; with their continual
intelligence, is thought to advise most of that mischief, which the Turks put
in execution against us.

I omit what Authors report of them, concerning the judgment of God upon their
bodies; that they are to this day a nasty people, much addicted to the
leprosy. Hence that fable in Tacitus, that the Israelites were driven out of
Egypt, Symma D^i bonitate id factum est, ne populos ad lepram proclives, animal
leprosissimum magis, ac magis infestaret. Theat. Not. p. 354.
for that loathsome disease. Mind Bodinus his observation, He observes it for a
special providence of God, that in Arabia (which bordereth upon Judea) there
are no swine to be found, lest that most leprous creature, says he, should
more and more infest and infect that people, who are naturally subject to the
leprosy.

And therefore some have thought they were forbidden to eat Swines-flesh, and
Hares-flesh, because in diseased bodies it easily turns to ill humors.

They are so despicable a people for their unexpiable guilt, in crucifying
Christ; that they are therefore banished (as it were) out of the world, by a
common consent of Nations. Yea, the very Turks themselves so hate them, Iudaus
sim si fallo.
that they use to say in detestation of a thing, I wish I might die a Jew, if
so and so.

But chiefly Gods judgment for their unbelief, is upon their minds, as may be
read at large, Romans 11. -- Whence we may observe, Note.
that God in his just judgment, gives over such as are enemies to the Gospel,
to the Devil, to be blinded, that they cannot convert. This is a fearful estate.

But yet for all this, before the end of the world, they shall be called. That
Nation lies under many promises. Therefore it is our duty, not to despise them,
nor despair of their conversion; but to pray for them, as they did for us,
when we had no breasts, Cant. 8.8.

-- The natural Branches. Romans 11.21.
Gentiles.
Great was the knowledge of the Heathen sages; witness the seven wise men of
Greece. Archimedes of Syracuse, who had a name and fame, says Plutarch, (...),
not of humane, but of a kind of divine wisdom. So had Socrates, so had
Apollonius of whom Philostratus says, Non doctus, sed natus sapiens.
that he was not taught, but born a wise man. These all were the worlds
wizards, but what came they to? Lactantius truly tells us, in the name of the
whole community of Christians; That all the wisdom of a man consists in
this, Instit. l. 3. c. 30.
to know God and worship him aright. But this they never attained unto.

The Tyrians had an hand in building the Temple; the molten sea stood upon
twelve oxen, which looked toward East, West, North, and South. The new
Jerusalem has twelve gates: A. (...). D. (...). A. (...). M. (...).
To show that there is every way access for all sorts to Christ; who is also
fitly called the second Adam; the Greek letters of which name (as Cyprian
observes) do severally signify all the quarters of the earth. He was born in
an Inn, to show that he receives all comers; His garments were divided into
four parts, to show, that out of what part of the world soever we come, Christ
is willing to entertain us. Jether an Ishmaelite, may become an Israelite; and
Araunah the Jebusite, may be made an exemplary Profelyte.

The Gentiles (says one) were converted by virtue of this prayer, Genesis 9.27.
as Paul was by Stephens. But this text, Mal. 1.11. the perverse Jews could
never abide to hear of: nor can they to this day. And therefore it is that they
have in their expositions basely depraved it, (...)
and corrupted the true sense of it: Calling us still Goi Mamzer, bastard
Gentiles.

Let us pity and pray for them, as Isa. 25.7, 8. And let us praise God who has
made us Gentiles meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, Col. 1.12. And take heed we sin not away our light, causing God to take
his Kingdom from us, and give it to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

God shall persuade Japhet, Genesis 9.27.
and shall dwell in the tents of Shem. Country.
A man's native country is pleasant and sweet to all. Nos patriae fines, and
dulcia linquimus arva, Nos patriae sines --
Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos ducit, and immemores non sinit esse
sui. Ulysses was very desirous to see the smoke of his country. Shall I leave
my countery, that has been as a mother to bring me into the world, and to
nourish me in it? A man in conscience by the law of Nature is bound to his own
country.

But this world is not our country. Socrates is highly commended for his
answer, Omne solum sorti patria est.
being demanded what country man he was: he answered, (...), mundanus, the
world is my country, all countries are alike to me. Yet in truth we have no
country in the world; Heaven (properly to speak) is our country, and we must
seek it.

Desire a better country, Heb. 11.16.
that is an heavenly. Signs.
Signum est quod seipsum, seu sui and praeter se, aliquid animo repraesentat.

There are signs, 1. Of Gods wrath, such are prodigious events. 2. Of his
power, such are Miracles. 3. Of his grace, such are Sacraments.

For irreverent using of good means, Vzziah was smitten with leprosy. Fifty
thousand Bethshemites for looking irreverently into the Ark, (which was a sign
of mercy.) These signs of mercy proved means of misery.

Signa sunt triplicia, 1. Memorativa, quae praeteritum aliquid in memoriam
reducunt; Hujusmodi voluit Deus esse Irieum. 2. Demonstrativa, quae praesentia
monstrant; Vt fumus ignem. 3. Prognostica, quae futura praenunciant; ut varius
solis color dum occidit; Juxta illud Poetae,


Caeruleas pluvias denunciat igneus Eurus. As God has given us signs and
foretokens of a tempest, so has he also of an ensuing judgment; and blames
those that take not notice thereof, sending them to school to the Stork and
Swallow, Jerem. 8.7. If Elias see but a cloud as an hand, arising from Carmel,
he can tell that great store of rain will follow, that the whole heaven will
anon be covered.

Many prodigies there were before the last desolation of Jerusalem. A terrible
tempest at Rome, the same year that Luther began to stir. Blood raining at
Brixia in Italy, in the year 874. for three days and three nights, etc. Gods
signs have a voice and words, speaking both to our eyes and ears.

A prudent man foreseeth the evil; not by divination or star-gazing; but by a
judicious collection and connection of causes and consequents: As if God be the
same that ever, as holy, just, powerful, etc. If sin be the same that ever,
as foul, loathsome, pernicious, etc. Then such and such events will follow upon
such and such courses.

Ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the
times? Mat. 16 3.
Judgments.
We must reverence the judgments of God. When Daniel pondered in himself the
fearful fall of Nebuchadnezzar, that such a fair and beautiful tree that
reached to heaven should be cut down, he held his peace by the space of one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him.

When the Angels were to blow their trumpets, there was silence in heaven; they
were stricken with a kind of astonishment, and could not speak. The wicked
that have no portion in Christ may tremble, but the holiest men of all must
fear and reverence the judgments of God. Does the lion roar, and shall not the
beasts of the forest quake?

And the consideration of these temporal judgments inflicted on sinners,
should scare us from sin. The water wherewith the old world was drowned; the
fire and brimstone that consumed the Sodomites; the casting of Jesabel that
filthy strumpet out of a window, and the eating of her by dogs; the hanging of
Absalom by the hair of his head; the fall of the Tower of Siloam upon eighteen
persons; and the falling of the carcasses of the Israelites in the wilderness.

Though we fear not Hell, because we see it not; yet let us fear the arrows of
Gods wrath, which he may shoot a^ us in this world, and pierce us thorough. If
we will not fear him, because he can kill the soul, which is the greatest: yet
let us fear him, because he has infinite ways to destroy our bodies. He can
make the Pox to eat up the body of a whoremonger: He can make the body of an
ominous and malicious person to consume away to the very bones: He can wash
away the flesh of a drunkard, etc.

Arrius the Heretic, as he was casing nature, all his entrails came forth,
whereupon he immediately died.

The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes. Psalm. 9.16.
Tumult.
The word in the Hebrew, which is sometimes used for tumult, (...) strepitus
belli, vel strepitus aquarum inundantium.
signifies an inundation or multitude of waters, which overrun their banks
with violence and roaring, Hos. 10.14. The people are a most dangerous and
heady water, when once it is out.

Siditious tumults do soon bring all into a miserable confusion. Intestine
commotions may undo a people, as a man may die of an inward bleeding.

When the multitude is in a rage, they are like unto a tiled house that is on
fire, there is no coming near the house, the tiles do so fly about your face:
so it is in tumults; there is no coming near to talk to them, to convince them;
but they are ready to fly presently upon you.

What havoc made the seditious in Jerusalem, Josephus. Speed.
a little before the last destruction of it? The Guelfs and Gibellines, in
Italy? Wat Tiler and his accomplices here?

Ac veluti in magno populo cum saepe coorta est, Virgil. Aen. l. 2. -- Vbique
pavor, and plurima mortis imago.

Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus,
Jamque faces and saxa volant, furor armae ministrat.
For the avoiding of this, remember that rule, Prove. 24.21. subjects may
(doubtless) signify what is good for the State, and what is amiss; but to
make any alteration in the State, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, belongs to
the supreme Magistrate.

But none so insolent and cruel as the vilest of the people, when they are got
together in a head.

It is God alone that can assuage these tumults, others may stir striefe, but
God only can stint it.

Qui terram inertem, Horat.
qui mare temperat
Ventosum, and urbes regnaque tristia,
Divosque mortalesque turbas,
Imperio regit unus aequo.
As God alone has the sea it self, that brutish creature, at his beck and
check; so also has he Devils and masterlesse men, who seek to subvert
Government, and to lay all level.

He it is that stilleth the noise of the seas, Psalm. 65.7.
the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people. War.
Mars the reputed God of War, was feined to be the son of Juno, only without
company of her husband; Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur.
Lucan. l. 10.
for when Juno was greatly displeased with her self, that Jupiter by streining
his head without company of a woman, did bring forth the Goddess Minerva; she
by the counsel of the Goddess Flora touched a certain flower in the field of
Olexius, by virtue whereof she immediately conceived the god Mars. The Romans
painted him fiery, sometimes in his chariot, Rosin. Antiq.
sometimes on horseback, with a Javelin in one hand, and a scourge in the
other. He was called Gradivus a gradiendo, from his furious marching.

The Jews within the City of Jerusalem fought one against another, they had
civil wars; Joseph. de Bell. Iud.
but when the enemy approached, they both joined forces against them, and came
out very peaceably; Nevertheless when they had repelled their enemy the Romans,
they came to the City, and fell presently to war again among themselves; so
that there were more slain by civil wars, than by their foraign enemy.

Signs and tokens are Pranuncia bellorum, Gods messengers to forewarn a sinful
Nation of ensuing wars. As in Rome, before Sempronius went out to war against
the Picents; aedes salutis, the Temple of health and safety was dissolved by a
thunderbolt. Three wolves brought a dead carcass half eaten, with hideous
cries into the Marketplace. Before Hannibal vanquished Flaminius, the sun
seemed to be lessened. At Arpi bucklers were seen in the heavens. At Sardinia
the Sun fought with the Moon. To Jerusalem before the destruction thereof by
Titus, the Moon was eclipsed twelve nights together. The Angels (Templi
Praesides) with a loud cry left the Temple. A star like a sword appeared over
the City, Chariots running in the sky, armed men fighting in the air. To
Italy, when Lodowicks force procured Charles the Great to enter into Puglia,
three Suns appeared environed with clouds and horrible thunder. And in Arosso
were seen images sweating, drums and trumpets, men and horses in the air. The
Lord preparing us by these, either for present repentance, or speedy
destruction.

One of Xerxes men boasting, the Persians would let fly such a flight of
arrows, as should darken the Sun; It was answered by one of the Grecian
Captains, it was well, for then they should have the benefit of fighting in
the shadow.

Non quaeritur Pax ut belium geratur, Aug.
sed bellum geritur ut pax acquiratur. Yet Peace betwixt ambitious Princes and
States, is but a kind of breathing: Sir W. R.
For the rusty sword and empty purse do only plead performance of Covenant.
And surely its good to hold that weapon in the scabbard, that has no good edge.

When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? Job 34.29.
and when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done
against a Nation, or against a man only. Peace.
Epiphanius used to say, that he never let his adversary sleep; not that he
disturbed him, but agreed with him presently, not suffering the Sun to go down
upon his wrath.

There is peace, 1. External, 2. Internal, 3. Eternal,
of the 1. World, 2. Mind, 3. God.


Or more plainly, peace between 1. Man and man. 2. Man and himself. 3. God and
man.


Christ both procures us peace by his blood, and keeps peace by his
intercession. He both makes and maintains peace.

Pax nostra bellum contra satanam. For as Aulius Fulvius when he took his son
in the conspiracy with Catiline, said, Ego te non Catalinae, sed Patriae; so
God has not begotten us in Christ, that we should follow the arch-traitour
Satan; but serve him in holiness.

Est pax peccatorum, pax justorum, pax temporis and pax eternitatis. Pax
temporis interdum conceditur bonis and malis, sed pax eternitatis nunquam
dabitur nisi bonis; quia non est pax impiis. De pace peccatorum, inquit Psalm.
Nalla salus bello, pacem nos possumus omnes. Drances.
Zelavi in peccatoribus, pacem peccatorum videns; De hac dicit Christus, non
veni mittere pacem, sed gladium. De pace justorum, dicit Apostolus, fructus
spiritus est Charitas, gaudium, pax, paientia; hanc reliquit Christus
Apostolis, pacem relinquo vobis. De pace temporis, inquit Propheta, Orietur in
diebus ejus justitia, Innocens. 3. l. 3. De sacr. Alt. mist. c. 11.
and abundantia pacis; Hanc incessanter petit Ecclesia, Da pacem in di^bus
nostris. De pace aeternitatis, Dominus dixit Apostolis, pacem meam d^ vobis,
non quomodo mundus dat, Ego do vobis; De hac inquit David, In pace dormiam, etc.

Dona nobis pacem, ut de pace temporis, per pacem pectoris, transeamus ad pacem
aeternitatis.

It is observable, that amongst these seventeen sins, Omnia pace vigent, and
pacis tempore florens.
which are called works of the flesh, Gal. 5. eight of them are of the adverse
party to peace; and that all the nine fruits of the spirit there reckoned up,
are peace, and the assistants thereof. Which shows, what a concourse of evils
is in strife, Pausanias in Atticis. p. 13.
and that all good things which we can expect from the Spirit, are in peace.
Hence even the heathens feigned Eirene (Peace) to be the nurse of Pluto, their
god of riches.

The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
Isa. 32.17.
quletnesse and assurance for ever. Tamerlane after a great battle with, and
victory over the Muscovit, Turk. Hist. fol. 212.
beholding so many thousands of men there dead upon the ground, was so far from
rejoicing thereat, that turning himself to one of his familiars, he lamented
the condition of such as commanded over great armies, commending his fathers
quiet course of life; (who being now well stricken in years, and weary of the
world, delivered up unto him the government of his Kingdom, retiring himself
into a solitary life, the more at quiet to serve God, and so to end his days in
peace.) Accounting him happy in seeking for rest, and the other most unhappy,
which by the destruction of their own kind, sought to procure their own glory;
Protesting himself even from his heart to be grieved to see such sad tokens of
his victory.

Yea, Fol. 216.
the stern Bajazet marching with his great army against Tamerlane, and by the
way hearing a country shepherd merrily reposing himself with his homely Pipe,
as he sat by the side of a mountain feeding his poor flock, standing still a
great while listening unto him, to the great admiration of many, at last
fetching a deep sigh, brake forth into these words: O happy shepherd, which
had neither Orthobulos nor Sebastia to lose: bewraying therein his own
coffeehouse. And yet withal showing, that worldly bliss consists not so
much in enjoying of much, subject unto danger; as enjoying in a little,
contentment devoid of fear.

Better is an handful with quietness, Eccles. 4.6.
than both the hands full with travel and vexation of spirit. Famine.
It is the want of bread, and bread is the stay and staff of life. When this
stay is gone, our lives fall quickly; when this staff is broken, the thread of
life breaks too.

Famine within has fought more eagerly than sword without. Xenophon reports of
one Anaxalaus, accused in the Spartane judgment, for delivering up the City of
Bizantium to the enemy, when he saw many die with famine; he answered, he knew
difference between warring with an enemy and Nature.

It is numbered among the sore judgments of God, if it be not the sorest; 1.
Causing faintness and madness, Genesis 47.13. 2. Hunger burns, Deuteronomy. 32.24. 3.
It causes pining and languishment, Lam. 4.9. 4. Shame and howling, Joel 1.11.
5. Rage and cursing, Isa. 8.21. 6. It breaks all the bonds of nature, Deuteronomy.
28.53, 54. Lam. 4.10. Isa. 9.20. But yet this famine of the body is a light
judgment, to a famine of the Word, which dries up the soul, and brings with
it eternal death, Amos 8.11, 12.

Miserable was the famine amongst the Jews in Jerusalem, besieged by the
Romans; some chewing the grains of raw wheat; wives snatching the meat from
their husbands, ^useb. l. 3. c. 6.
children from their parents, and (that which was most miserable) the mothers
from the infants mouths, etc. Many seeing no way but one, went and and laid
them down upon the Beers to welcome death. So miserable was the sight, that
Titus himself sorrowed and sighed, and stretching forth his hands, called God
to witness, Turk. Hist. fol. 1^09.
that he was not the cause of this calamity. In Transylvania they ate up all
the dogs, cats, mice, and rats that they could get; dead horses, loathsome
carrion of other hunger-starved beasts; One man did eat another; A woman having
six children, did among them eat one another, until they were at length all six
devoured; yna, thieves and malefactors hanged for their villainies, were by the
poor and miserably hungry people cut down from the Gallows, and devoured. At
Athens the father and son fought for a dead mouse, which dropped down between
them from the top of the house.

God can cause a famine, either by immoderate drought, Joel 1.10. Or by
immoderate moisture, verse. 17. These are usually the natural causes of famine:
but it is good to enquire after the supernatural, as Jacob enquired who stood on
the top of the ladder, and sent the Angels to and fro, Genesis 28.13.

I behold, and low a black horse. Pestilence.
The word in the Hebrew, Ezekiel. 14.19. comes from another word, (...) Loqui.
which signifies to speak: And indeed in this judgment the Lord speaks aloud.

One calls it, Bellum divinum. Homer says, that the Plague is the arrow of
God: And Hyppocrates, That a great Plague among them, was the Divine disease,
(...).
because a punishment sent from God more immediately, as an evil messenger. And
indeed, it has less of man and second causes in it, than others.

Though second causes are not wholly denied, yet they are hard to be found out;
Quicquid asseratur, omnis pestilentiae caeca et delitescens est causa, et
aliunde quam ex primis qualitatibus, aut ex putredine perfecta. Fern. De abd
it. rerum cause.
it puzzles the learned Physicians clearly to express them; some referring it
to the indisposition of the air; others to malignant occult qualities in the
air, body or diet; some to corruption in the blood; and others to hunger and
surfeit: But Senertus concludes very honestly; Qualis sit pestilentialis veneni
natura, and qua ejus in qualibet pestilenti constitutione differentia, nemo
hactenus satis explicavit. Lib. 4. cap. 10.

Gods hand is seen much in this noisome disease: Some Pestilences kill cattle,
and not men; some kill men, and not cattle; and some kill one sort of men, and
not others, as the le^rded have observed.

A certain Historian calls it, (and aptly) A scourge of the greatest
multitudes, and the handmaid of Famine. For this deadly disease lays heaps upon
heaps, (as many places have had lamentable experience,) and scarce leaves
living enough to bury the dead; As in the days of Decius the Emperor. In David's
time, Seventy thousand were consumed by it in three days, 2 Samuel 24.15. In
Vespasian's days, at Rome, Eusebius. in Chronico.
there died Ten thousand a day, for many days together. And in the year 1345.
it was so general through the Christian world, that it destroyed half mankind.
Where God gives it a commission, it runs as fire in a corn-field.

Experience clears it, (however some have questioned it) that a godly man may
die of the Plague; As did Oecolampadius and others. Psalm. ^91.
Hezekiah is thought to have had it: So had reverend Beza, (his family was four
several times visited herewith,) who was much comforted under it, and other
heavy afflictions; by that sweet Psalm, as himself witnesses.

The Arrow that flies by day; the Pestilence that walks in darkness. Psalm.
91.5, 6.
Political Administration.
Vulgus. The Common people.
I Do not regard (says Seneca) to please the Vulgar: for, the things that I
know, the people do not approve; and the things that the people approve, I know
not. Nunquam volui populo placere, nam quae ego scio, non probat populus; quae
probat populus, ego nescio. Epist.
Yet it is good for Princes to know, that if the common people be a beast of
many heads, it has more hands, and therefore not to be despised.

A good Horsman must sometimes use the reins, not always the spur.

Some are to their Country, as the worm in wood, or moth in cloth; not
Commonwealths, but rather Common-woes men.

Grievous was the disorder, when Herod cannot be wrought with, but by Herodias;
nor Pilate, but with his wife underhand.

It is also hard with the whole body, when the stomach which should feed all,
and concoct nourishment, is foul and distempered.

The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. Isa. 1.5.
Magistrate.
A good Magistrate is a faithful Deputy of his Maker: B. H. Magistratus
descrip^^^.
His breast is the Ocean whereinto all the cares of private men empty
themselves; which as he received without complaint, so he sends them forth in a
wise conveyance, by the streams of Justice: His doors his ears are ever open to
suitors; and not who comes first, speeds well, but whose cause is best: On the
Bench he is another from himself at home; all private respects of blood,
alliance, amity, are forgotten; and if his own Son come under trial, he knows
him not. Pity, which is the praise of humanity, and the fruit of a Christian
love, is by him thrown over the bar: As for Favor, the false advocate of the
gracious, he allows him not to appear in the Court; there only Causes are heard
speak, not Persons: Truth must strip her, and come in naked to his bar, without
false bodies or colors; A Bribe or a Letter on the Bench, or a word of a Grate
man, are answered with an angry repulse: Displeasure, Revenge and Recompense
stand on both sides the Bench, but he regards them not, only he looks at Equity
right before him. His hand is flower than his tongue; but when he is urged by
occasion, either to doom or execution, he shows how he abhors merciful
Injustice; his forehead is rugged and severe, able to discountenance villainy. I
know not whether he be more feared or loved, his affections are so sweetly
tempered; The good fear him lovingly, the mild sort love him fearfully, and
only the wicked man fears him slavishly. If he be partial, it is to his enemy:
His sword has neither rusted for want of use, nor surfeiteth with blood, but
after many threats is unsheathed, as the dreadful instrument of Divine revenge.
He is the Guard of good Laws, the Refuge of Innocence, the Recompencer of the
Guilty, the Paymaster of good Deserts, the Champion of Justice, the Patron of
Peace, the Father of the Country, and as it were another God on earth.

Magistratus vocantur ab Aristotele, 3 Pol. c. 21.
(...). Qui enim legi concedit imperium, ille videtur Dei permittere imperium.

Amongst the Romans, Godw. Antiq. l. 3. c. 1.
the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice might not keep Court and administer Justice
upon certain days, without the speaking of these three words, Do, Dico, and
Addico: Dabat actionem, dicebat jus, addicebat tam res quam homines.

The Magistrate has not to do in sacris, but circa sacra; He may not do
Vzzia's work, but Hezekia's. The Minister has vim admonendi, the Magistrate
vim coercendi.

Heathens pictured Magistrates by a Fountain, because it conveys water all
about.

Bad Magistrates are as a Briar, Ut t^i inveniatur dolor, ubi sperabitur
auxilium. Hierom. Mic. 7.4.
or as a Thorn-hedge; a man that takes hold with his fingers is pricked, and
glad to let go: Or as the silly sheep, that flying to the bush for defense in
weather, loses part of her fleece. So that a man shall have grief, where he
hoped for help and succor. Or like unto Oaks, which are strong, but bear no
other fruit but acorns for swine.

A good Magistrate (like thunder) fears many, Poena ad paucos etc. Psalm. 101.1.
hurts few. He sings of mercy and judgment, which are the brightest stars in
the sphere of Majesty. He bathes the sword of Justice in the oil of mercy. A
well-tempered mixture of both these, preserves the Commonwealth.

Cujus and potestas, ejus est actus: People are but the Magistrates shadow.
Good Rulers we must obey as God; bad, for God.

Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake. Superiors and Inferiors.
It Is good for all, that all are not alike; The Universe could not be either so
beautiful, or so orderly, if every particular had the same beauty, or were of
the same order. And he that cannot be content to have less, and to be lesser
than another; is altogether unfit not only to be as great, or to have as much
as another; but to be, or to have any thing at all. Nor is any man fit to be
more than he is, than he that can rejoice that another is more than he.

Look up to heaven, and there are stars of diverse magnitudes; though they are
all great, yet not all of a greatness; they are all glorious, but not all alike
glorious, for star differs from star in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. Look also down
upon earth, there we may behold Hills and Valleys, Rocks and Pebles, Cedars and
Shrubs, etc. So that the very natural state of the Creature, confutes Levelling
principles.

Nay, look upon our selves; and if we consider the faculties of man's soul, and
the diverse members of the body, we shall find, they are composed and disposed
of parts more noble and ignoble; And yet in their use and situation, there is a
most comely and useful order. So some to be rich, some poor; some high, some
low; some of one quality and aptness, some of another; and so to be arranged
together, that they should mutually respect, second and strengthen one another;
must needs be from a Divine beginning.

Both low and high, rich and poor together. Psalm. 49.2.
Titles.
It has been an usual thing to give fair titles to foul acts. Thus would the
Jews of old persecute godly men, and molest them with Church Censures, and then
say; Let the Lord be glorified, Isa. 66.5. The like did they to the poor man
that was born blind, whose eyes Christ had opened, Joh. 9.24. Give God the
praise. (Which expression (as is conceived) was some solemn form, in use among
that people, when they required an oath of delinquents.) This the Hypocrites
made use of, Act. and Mon. In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. Luth.
as when the Devils adjured Christ by the living God, not to cast them out. The
Conspirators in King Richard the 2. time here in England, endorsed all their
Letters with -- Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men.
But well answered Robert Smith the Martyr, when Bonner began the sentence of
death against him, In Dei nomine; You begin in a wrong name, said he.

It has also been an usual thing, to speak unto great persons with
circumlocution, soothing and smoothing them up in sinful practices. Semper
Augustus, is a Title still given to the German Emperors. But Sigismund, once
Emperor, In vita Alphon.
(when a fellow flattered him above measure, Eusebius. in vita Constable. l. 4. c. 4.
and extolled him to the skies) gave the Flatterer a good box on the ear; And
when he asked, Why smite you me? he answered, Why clawest thou me? Likewise a
Preacher called Constantine the Great, Blessed, to his face; but he went away
with a check. Antiochus Epiphanes is called a vile person, Dan. 11.21. And yet
Josephus reports, that the Samaritans writing to him, because he tormented the
Jews, to excuse themselves that they were no Jews, styled him, by flattery,
Antiochus the mighty God. And the Jews by their Orator, Most noble Felix! Act.
24.3. when in truth they worthily hated him for his oppression and cruelty.

I yield (against the unlearned Anabaptists, who use that place, Gal. 3.28. as
an hammer to beat down all the seats of Superiority,) that men and women are to
be respected according to those places of Honor whereunto God has advanced
them in the world. Christ makes an honorable mention of the Queen of Sheba:
Luke dedicates his writings to Noble Theophilus: To the most Noble Governor
Felix, says Claudius Lysias: Most Noble Festus, says Paul: And John gives the
virtuous woman the title of a Lady. Whom God has honored, let us honor too:
Yea, though the Persons be bad, yet the Places are to be respected; and they in
regard of their places.

But empty Titles without Realities, are but as ciphers without figures; or
empty sounds, that signify nothing,

Let me not, Job 32.21, 22.
I pray you, accept any man's person; neither let me give flattering titles unto
man.

For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my Maker would soon take
me away.

Tyrant.
Formerly Kings were called Tyrants: But because many Kings oppressed their
people, therefore now oppressing Princes are only called Tyrants.

Tyrannica vis est, Joseph, de Macabaeis. Pol. l. 4. Eth. 1.
ad illa quenquam cogere, quae l^x recusat, and ad justitiae non consentan^ae
imperioso sermon compellere. Aristotle defines a Tyrant thus: Tyrannus est,
qui ita dominatur ut ad proprium commodum and utilitatem omnia conferat; He is
one that rules so, as to turn all to his own private benefit and profit. He
that governs so, governs for himself; whereas true Government seeks and
respects the good of others. Just Governors are a general blessing; and their
aim is the common, not their private wealth. For any man to oppress another, is
very wickedness: But for a Governor or Magistrate, who is set up to be a
reliever of others, a helper of the friendless, and a Judge of the widow; for
him to oppress and grind the faces of the poor, is most Tyrannical.

Agathocles the Tyrant, caused a Frame of brass to be made, wherein he might
both scorch men, and satisfy his eye with seeing them tormented. I have read
in Dr. Hall's Decads, that a Martyr going to be burnt, sung Psalms along the
way, in an heavenly courage and victorious triumph: The cruel Officer envying
his mirth; and grieving to see him merrier than his tormentors, No storm more
fierce than the indignation of an impotent great person.
commands him silence; He sings still, the view of his aproaching glory bred
his joy; The enraged Sheriff causes his tongue drawn forth to the length, to
be cut off near the roots; the poor Martyr dies in silence, rests in peace: Not
many months after, the butcherly Officer has a son born, having his tongue
hanging down upon his chin, like a Deer after long chase, which never could be
gathered up within the bounds of his lips O the Divine hand, full of justice,
full of revenge!

It Is storied, Macr^b. l. 2. Saturn. cap. 4.
that among those babes of Bethlehem, Herod slew his own son also: Which
Augustus Caesar hearing of, said, Melius est Herodis esse percum, quam filium;
It were better to be Herod's swine, than his son. Attilus King of Swedeland,
made a Dog King of the Danes, in revenge of many injuries received. The like
did Gunno King of the Danes, he made a Dog King of Norway, and appointed
Counselors to do all things under his title and name. Sir Rich. Berkley's Sam.
Pon. p. 387.
Did we but live a while (says one) in Turkey, Persia, yea, or but in France; a
dram of that Liberty we yet enjoy, would be as precious to us, as a drop of
cold water would have been to the rich man in hell, when he was so grievously
tormented in those flames.

Tyrants are hated. Xerxes gathered money, the sinews of war; but lost the
affections of his subjects, Non cadem de illo homines secreto l^quuntur, quae
palam. Senec.
the joints of peace: He became hereby ill beloved of all sorts, and far a less
King, by striving to be more than he was. Yea (how terrible soever) they have
their fears, that curb and keep them in for a time at least, from many
notorious outrages. Dionysius was so afraid of his life, that he durst not
suffer his Brother unstript or searched to come into his chamber; nor any
Barber to trim him. Mat. 14.5.
Herod durst not kill John, though he much desired to do it, lest the people
should move and mutiny: He knew himself hated by them already for his cruelty
and other crimes. Something to like purpose may also be read in the beginning
of Q. Mary's Reign, Act. and Mon. fol. 1281.

Tyrants, Sir W.R.
by popular laws, ( viz. oppressing the great, and dividing their goods amongst
the poor rescality) have assured themselves of the Vulgar for a time. Thus did
the Tyrant Nabis, after he had possessed himself of the City of Argos.

Yet Tyrants are of a short continuance: They may bear themselves up for a
time, but in the end they find, that though Divine justice has leaden feet,
she has iron hands; though slow in coming, she strikes home.

Sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus. There are three principal accusers that
ring loud Alarms in Gods cars; 1. Conscience neglected; 2. Creatures abused. 3.
Poor oppressed.
It is wisely observed by Aristotle, and from him by Diodorus Siculus, That the
whole family of those Tyrants, who in their government used cruel Counselors,
seldom or never remained in that Kingdom an hundred and twenty years; but were
either utterly abolished of God, or of their Subjects basely dethroned.
Maximinus (that Mastive-Tyrant) after he had raised the sixth Persecution, and
exercised all his cruelties against the Christians, was told to his teeth,
Elephas grandis est, and occiditur; Mimus in theatro.

Leo fortis est, and occiditur:
Cave multos, si singulos non times.


And it befell him accotdingly; for at the siege of Aquileia in Italy, he was
slain as he slept at noon in his tent, by his own soldiers. The Roman story
tells of Nero, Ad generum Cereris, sine cade and vidnere pauci Discendunt
reges, and sicc^ morte Tyranni. Juven. Sat. 10.
That perceiving himself a lost man, by the revolt of some Provinces, and the
general complaint of the people against his insolent government; he wandered up
and down, and crept first into a thicket, by and by into a cave, with Sporus
his filthy Favorite; and at last when he heard of the sentence of death given
against him by the Senate, and that their officers were hasting to attach him,
he with a little help of one of his servants, cut his own throat.

Richard the Third, obtained the Crown by the murder of his Nephews: And having
Tyrannized two years, two months, and one day, Speed.
he was slain in a battle at Bosworth Field, his naked body was laid upon an
horse like an hog or calf, his head, arms hanging on the one side, and his legs
on the other; and being all besprinkled with mire and blood, he was brought
into Leicester, where for two days he lay naked and unburied: After, his body
was buried, but without solemnity; and the Stone-chest wherein his body lay, is
since made a drinking-trough for horses at a common Inn.

Let us not think it strange, that God does suffer Tyrants sometimes miserably
to afflict his Saints: For he does it partly for their great good, that they
might not grow wanton, but that their says and prayer might be exercised under
the cross; and partly according to their just desert: For if examination be
made, we shall find, that for the most part, as contention, covetousness and
ambition among the officers, so profaneness and the security of the people draw
down common judgments upon themselves. See Cyprian de lapsis; and Eusebius. l. 5.
hist. cap. 2.

After Phocas, that bloody Tyrant, had slain his Master Mauritius, and reigned
in his stead, there was an honest poor man, says Cedrenus, who was earnest
with God to know a reason why such a thing was suffered: To whom it was
answered, That a worse man could not be found; and that the sins of Christians
required it. That which these men do spitefully and cruelly, God sometimes does
righteously; setting up Tyrants for a punishment to those that were unthankful
for better Government, and would not have Him to reign over them.

My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: 1 King. 12.14.
My father also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you wioh
scorpions.

Read Genesis 10.9. cap. 25, 27. Exodus 1.11.13, 14, 15, 16, 22. 1 Samuel 8. from 10.
forward to 19. Mat. 2.16. Act. 23.3.

King.
King, say some, a (...), valere, or viribus pollere, propter summam a Deo Regi
concessam potestatem; as Rex a regendo. And (...), quasi (...), fundamentum
populi. Aquinas (however the Schoolmen defend him) was far out in that Paradox,
Dominium and praelatio introduct a sunt ex jure humano: For Government is Gods
ordinance in respect of its institution, though for the manner of its
constitution it is of man.

Princes are said to have many eyes, (...). Xenoph. Paed. l. 8. Princes words
bear their own stamp.
and long arms; because their understanding is enlightened by many, and their
power is exercised afar off. Yet had they need to be careful what speeches they
let fall from them; for wary Courtiers do as warily weigh their words, as the
cunning Goldsmith does his finest gold, and will easily guess their intentions.

Then do the soldiers of the Church militant triumph most victoriously, when
Religion and Piety are the Generals of their Army. How did Constantine over the
bloody Maxentius? Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 25. Theod. hist. l. 5. cap. 24.
Even as Moses did over Pharaoh. How did Theodosius obtain many noble
Privileges? In like sort Theodosius the younger, when the Saracens came to the
aid of the Persians, against whom he fought. The Angels from Heaven (like the
stars against Sisera) so troubled the Saracens, that in the river Euphrates
were drowned an hundred thousand; That it might be sung, O nimium dilecte Deo,
Claudian.
cui militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.


And did not Julian while he was religious, make Italy and Africa stoop to the
Roman Empire? When suddenly after his revolt, he perished. Socrat. l. 7. c. 18.
Thus did Heraclius conquer the Persians, till he became a Monothelite, viz. An
Heretic, Regi menda maxim ^egum est salus. Sen.
holding there was but one will in Christ. Piety and humility will make a
Prince more famous than Hannibals incursions through the Alps into Italy; than
Scipio's great conquests; Caesar's miraculous victory, or Alexanders sole
Monarchy. Besides, as it shall magnify him on earth^, so shall it felicitate
him in Heaven; Aug.
for as one says truly, Qui non tumet vento superbiae, non cremabitur igne
Gehennae.

Henry the first, (...) in Adva^^. of Learning, Epist.
his Emblem was, Rex illiteratus, Asinus coronatus. It Is said that in King
James, there met a rare conjunction as well of divine and sacred literature, as
of profane and humane; so that he stood invested of the triplicity, which in
great veneration was ascribed to the ancient Hermes; therefore called
Trismegistus; the power and fortune of a King, the knowledge and illumination
of a Priest, and the learning and universality of a Philosopher.

There have been Princes (says he) and that in this Land, which (as the
Heathen Politician compared his Tyrant) have been like to ill Phy^icians, that
have purged out the good humors, and left the bad behind them: Or (as
Nazianzen) like unto flies, that light upon those parts which are sore, but
over-passe the parts which are whole: With whom any thing has been lawful, but
to be religious: some of your gray hairs can be my witnesses. Paulus Quintus
Thus said he of whom one says, that for his Religion and learning, he might
dispute with that infallible Pope for his triple crown.

Ferdinand the son of Alphonsus King of Naples, Turk. Hist. fol. 455.
a Prince of rare perfection, and singularly graced with all the virtues of
true Nobility; yet by the good fortune of the French against him, and
mutablenesse of the Neapolitans (framing their fancies according to the
condition of the time) beginning to be had in contempt of them; and receiving
an unsufferable affront from an ungrateful and disloyal Captain of his own,
unworthily named Justus, keeping him out of his own Castle, and after all means
used, admitting no more than his single person; At his very entrance he stabbed
the unworthy wretch to the heart with a dagger, insomuch that he was slain in
the midst of his armed soldiers. Which was done with such a countenance and
majesty, that the Warders with their weapons in their hands, dismayed with his
look, forthwith at his commandment opened the gate, and received him in with
all his followers. Whereby it appears, that in the countenance of Princes
rests a certain Divine Majesty, in all fortunes above the common course of
Nature; which is of power to daunt the hearts of most disloyal Traitors, in the
performance of their unnatural Treasons.

The Royal Scepter belongs to the King, to stretch ou^ in mercy to Hester; and
the Sword to strike Haman in justice. Non minus Principi turpia sunt multa
supplicia, quam Medico multa funera, says Seneca. However it is storied of
Henry King of France, the fourth of that name, called also Henry the Great;
that he vanquished all them that opposed themselves to his just pretensions;
Grimst. p. 101.
and afterward vanquished himself, in pardoning them that had banded against
him: And yet it is said, France had never the like, and they that come after may
justly desire to see the reign of so mighty and so good a Monarch, who made his
people live in peace, his neighbors in assurance, and his enemies in continual
fear. Da^. Hist.
Our Henry the sixth, being indeed coursly used in a tumult, and wounded for
that he was at an under, yet being restored, he freely pardoned the offender,
saying, Alas poor soul, he struck me more to win favor with others, than of
any ill will be bare me. A rare example of patience in a Prince.

In the Fable that Achilles was brought up under Chyron the Centaure, part a
man and part a beast, is ingenuously (but corruptly) expounded by Machivel,
That it belongs to the education and discipline of Princes, to know as well
how to play the part of the Lion in violence, and the Fox in guile, as of the
Man in virtue and justice. To be distrustful, is the sinew of wisdom. Yet Queen
Elizabeth, Fide, sed cu^ vide.
she would not believe any thing against her Subjects, which a Mother would not
believe against her children: She said, she would have her Subjects shorn, but
not devoured. Trajan constituting a Ruler of the Praetorium, gave him a sword
with this mandate: Hoc ense utaris pro me, just faciente; contra me utaris, si
injusta fecero. Alphonsus the Neapolitan King, had a Standard with the sign of
a Pelican, piercing her breast with her beak, to let out her blood to her young
ones to feed them, with this inscription, Pro lege and grege.

As in bodies, so in the Republique, Pliny.
the most grievous disease is that which comes from the head. A sin, though it
be fearful in all; yet in a King is more eminent and cause of example: Rex, si
bonus, muritor est tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est.
Therefore the sins of Kings are more dangerous than in the Plebeians. However
that is a good rule Austin gives: Is he a good King? he is thy Nurse, receive
thy nourishment with obedience: If evil, he is thy Tempter, receive thy trial
with patience.

The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over
men, 2 Samuel 23.3.
must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Court.
The proverb is, Exeat Aula qui velit esse pius. Yet that is a rare commendation
that is given by Xenophon of Cyrus his Courtiers; That though a man should seek
or choose blindfold, he could not miss of a good man. And of George Prince of
Anhalt, of whom Melancthon writes, That his Chamber was Ecclesia, Academia,
Curia; a Church, an University, and a Court. And doubtless such a one was
David's Court, Psalm. 101.

Therefore let us not shoot our fools bolt rashly, and say of such places, as
Nathanael did of Galilee, Can any good come out thence? Scripture affords us a
Catalogue of many and pious good Courtiers, in the Courts both of good and bad
Princes, whose hearts have not been puffed up with preferment; As Joseph,
Obadiah, Nehemiah, Mordecai, Daniel, etc. Yea in the Court of Caesar himself.

All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household. Phil.
4.22.
Subjects.
Submission which we owe unto Rulers, has in it these six things; 1.
Obedience, Tit. 3.1. 2. Honor, Romans 13.7. 3. Loyalty, endeavoring their
preservation. 4. Piety, in praying for them, 2 Timothy 2.1. 5. Maintenance,
tribute must be paid, Christ himself submitted, Romans 13.7. Lastly, subjection
to their punishments, Romans 13.4.

We must obey them in things lawful only, for else we must answer as those
Apostles did, Acts. 5.29. We ought to obey God rather than men. And as
Polycarpus, who being commanded to blaspheme Christ, and to swear by the
fortune of Caesar; peremptorily refused, and said, We are taught to give honor
to Princes and Potentates, but such honor as is not contrary to Gods Religion.

The Popish Clergy are greatly to be blamed, who from the highest unto the
lowest of them, hold themselves not bound and subject to the Civil Magistrate;
but in all criminal causes appeal to their Ordinary, Si omnis anim^, et vestra:
quis vos excepit ab, universalitate, si quis tentat excipere, tentat decipe^e.
Ad Henric. ^p. Sen. Epist. 42.
and are not punishable, unless they be first degraded, and so delivered to
the Secular power. But the Apostle says, Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers, Romans 13.1. And Chrysostom expounds it, If thou be an Apostle, an
Evangelist, a Prophet, or whatsoever thou art, thou must be subject, etc.
Bernard also to a Bishop, writes of this matter thus, If every soul, then
yours; who excepted you from this universality? He who attempteth to except
you, attempteth to deceive you.

The Donatists, Brownists and Anabaptists, do duly merit reproof, together
with the froward perverseness of many; who under a pretense of conscience,
refuse to submit unto the reasonable constitutions of Authority; hereby causing
the Gospel to be disgraced, as a profession denying obedience to Magistrates;
We had need to be subject, that we may win due credit to the Religion we
profess.

Render therefore unto Caesar, Mat 22 21.
the things which are Caesar's. Reward.
There are some can speak no other but the horse-leeches language, Give, Give:
Like the Ravens of Arabia, that full gorged, have a tunable sweet record; but
empty, Quis^se mutuo ad messem aur^am invitare solebant. Plutarch in Politic.
screech horribly. Plutarch reports of Stratocles and Dromoclites, a couple
of corrupt officers, who where wont to invite one another to the golden
harvest, thereby meaning the Court, and the Judgment Seat. Such are no other
than Latrones Publici, public robbers, as Cato calls them.

We ought to shake our hands from bribes; as Paul shook off the viper: And be
so far from saying, Give ye, that we should rather say to them that offer it,
Thy money perish with thee.

Olim didici quid sint munera. Rain is good, and ground is good, sed ex eorum
conjunctione fit lutum, Stapleton.
of the mixture of these two is made dirt; so, giving is kind, and taking is
courteous: yet the mixture of them makes the smooth paths of justice foul and
uneven. Nec prece nec pretio, should be the Magistrates Motto.

That which is sinfully gotten, shall be miserably lost. Many give bribes to
undo others, and all who receive bribes, undo themselves. What is the advantage
of any sinful gain, when the fire of Gods wrath consumes the gainer?

Bribery never brought any lasting materials to build with; De male part is,
non gaudit tertius hae^es. Stratagema nunc est Pontisicium, ditare multos, ut
Pii esse desinant.
either the actour of injustice or his heir shall find a fire in the
foundation, a fire in the stones and timber of his house, and down 'twill come.

A public person should be above all price, or sale; As he should have
nothing to lose, so he should have nothing to get.

Some are bribed out of their Religion. The Papists propose rewards to such as
shall relinguish the Protestant Religion. Thus they tempted Luther, but he
would not be hired to go to hell.

Thou shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise, Exodus 23.8
and perverteth the words of the righteous. Nobility.
A Nobleman stands not upon what he borrowed of his Ancestors, but thinks he
must work out his own honor; greatness does not make him scornful or
imperious; but rather like the fixed stars, the higher he is, the lesser he
desires to seem; Neither cares he so much for pomp and frothy ostentation, as
for the solid truth of nobleness: None can be more pitiful to the distressed,
or more prone to succor, and there most where is least means to solicit,
least possibility of requital; he is equally addressed to war and to peace;
he is more careful to give true honor to his Maker, than to receive civil
honor of men; he knows it is but vain to hunt after glory and applause of the
world, he knows that the body of Nobility consists not in blood.

The Turks never respect the birth or quality of any man in their advancements.

Christian Nobility is the best and truest; where God himself is the top of the
kin, and religion the root; in regard whereof all other things are but shadows
and shaps of nobleness.

Virtue is instead of a thousand Eschucheons. Isa. 43.4. Nobilitas sola est
atque unica virtus.
Since thou have been precious in mine eyes, thou have been honorable.

Good Nobles are black swans, and thinly scattered in the firmament of a state,
even like stars of the first magnitude. We may say of such as Luther does of
Elizabeth Queen of Denmark, a pious princess, Scilicet Christus etiam
aliquando voluit Reginam in Caelum vehere.

-- Not many noble are called. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Judge.
Bonis nocet qui malis parcit.
Antiquity reports, there were certain images of Judges set up at Athens, The
less interest, the more is the eyesight cleared.
having neither hands nor eyes; implying that such persons should, neither be
affected with relations, nor bribed with gifts.

Those were happy days in the time of Basil Emperor of Constantinople, who,
whenever he came to his judgment seat, found neither party to accuse, nor
defendant to answer.

An Heathen could say, Non e^im colorem vestium, quibus pretexta corpora sunt,
Senec.
aspicio oculis de homine non credo, habeo melius certiusque lumen, quo a
falsis vera dijudicem, animi bonum animus inveniat.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just: Prove. 17.15.
even they both are abomination to the Lord. Humane Council.
Counselors have great power, to hurt or to do good among Kings and Princes.
It is therefore a happy conjunction when good Kings and good Counselors meet
together. Yea, many times bad men are good Kings, when they are attended with
good Counselors; whereas bad Counselors often make a good man a bad King, and
by their poisonous whispers and instillations at the ear, corrupt the hearts,
and taint the spirits of the best Princes.

In the multitude of Counselors there is safety (says Solomon) then they must
needs be unsafe, It was said of a Prince of Orange, that when he sat on
horseback, he had all his Counselors with him.
who neither have none to give them counsel, or refuse wholesome counsel when,
it is given.

Good counsel directs how to judge of things, how to speak, and how to act.

Counsel is to a man without wisdom, as bread is to a man that is hungry, or
as clothes to a man that is naked.

A good Counselor may be an Angel, nay a god to another, as Moses was to
Aaron. Hence one special thing the Primitive Christians prayed for the Emperor
was; that God would send him Senatum ^idelem.

To give counsel is a work of the wise, and they who are most unwise have most
need of counsel, though they seldom think so. And it may be a very disputable
question, who is the wiser man, he that gives good counsel, or he that readily
receives it, and makes good use of it.

However, as we ought to do nothing unto others, but what we would have done
unto our selves; so we should advise nothing unto others, but what we our
selves would do: It puts strength into a rule, when he that gives it, is ready
to enliven it by his own practice.

He that hearkeneth unto council is wise. Pro. 12.15.
Policy
What ever is framed without Policy, Grimst. Preface to Hist. of the world.
is like unto a building, which is in the air without any support or foundation.

The actions of Princes (says the Historian) are like unto strange lights,
appearing by night in the air, T. H. f. 1206.
which hold men's eyes busied with the intentive beholding of them; some thereof
divining well, and some others evil, according to the diversity of the
beholders conceits and humors.

Nothing is more Politic, Bacon.
than to make the wheels of our mind, consentrick with the wheel of fortune.

It Is another point of policy, Necessity gives a larger latitude and freer
scope, to the managing of great affairs
never to engage a man's self peremptorily in any thing, though it seem not
liable to accident; but ever to have a window to fly out at, or a way to
retire. Like the fable of the frogs, which consulted when their plash was dry,
whither they shauld go; one moved to go down in a pit, because it was not
likely the water would dry there; to whom another answered, true, but if it
do, how shall we get out again?

It is the Turks Policy, to be in league with them that are farthest and
remotest, that so he may the more easily conquer those that are nearest him;
for then they that are remote may not join with his neighbors; and by this
means, by little, and little, he may come to conquer the most remote, and
circumvent them, who are forsaken of the other.

When the whole body Politic is sick, it behooves them in place to mind
particulars, and foresee where the soar is like to break out.

Great bodies have strong reluctations, Pellem vulpinam Lcon^ assuere.
and dye not with one fit, or by one blow.

It was the counsel and practice of Lysander, to eek out the lions hide, with
the foxes skin, if need were. And that Arch-arch presents strange patterns to
Princes, telling them, Machiavel.
that justice it self should not be sought after, but only the appearance;
because the credit is an help, the use a cumber.

But when all is done, true Piety will prove the best Policy.

And the Lord commended the unjust steward, Luke 16.8.
because he had done wisely: for the children of this world are in their
generation wiser than the children of light. Stage Play.
Ludi prabent seminanequitia.
Austin tells us how Alipius was corrupted by them. Plato complains, how the
youth at Athens. One of our Contrymen professes in Print, that he found
Theaters to be the very hatchers of all wickedness, the brothels of bawdry,
the black-blasphemy of the Gospel, the Devils chair, the plague of piety, the
canker of the Commonwealth, etc. He instanceth on his knowledge, Citizens
wives confessing on their deathbeds, that they were so impoysoned at
stage plays, that they brought much dishonor to God, wrong to their
marriage-beds, weakness to their wretched bodies, and woe to their undone souls.

It was therefore great wisdom in the Lacedaemonians, to forbid the acting of
Comedies or Tragedies in their Commonwealth, and that for this reason,
Plutarch.
lest either in jest or earnest any thing should be said or done, contrary to
the laws in force among them.

-- Fornication, and all uncleanness, -- let it not be once named amongst you,
Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
as becomes Saints:

Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient. Much less acted, as in Stage Plays.

Reformation.
There is a 1. Formation. 2. Deformation. 3. Reformation.


The formation was at the first creation of the world; then God put all things
into a ^ood form and order: He beheld all that he had made, and lost was good,
exceeding good. After that came a deformation; by the fall of man, and that put
all out of order again. Upon that a Reformation was made, Principally by Jesus
Christ. So that the time of the Gospel is the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10.
And now ought Christians especially to endeavor it. But know, The way to make
the whole street clean, is, every man to sweep before his own door.
that true Reformation must begin at our selves. He that will repair an house,
must begin at the foundation. So, if we will have a Reformation, we must reform
our selves first; and therein begin with the heart, and cast out the unclean
lusts; afterward reform our members, else we shall be but whited. Tombs and
painted Sepulchers, as the Pharisees were. In the next place, let us reform our
Families; after that, let every one in his place labor to reform the Town in
which he dwells: and so proceed; This is the best order in reforming.

To reform, Alsted propounds three rules, 1. Deplorandum. 2. Implorandum. 3.
Explorandum.


Reformation is a work, that has ever gone heavily on, and has met with much
opposition. Luther compared the Cardinals and Prelates that met at Rome about
reformation of the Church, to Foxes, that came to sweep an house full of dust
with their tails: and instead of sweeping it out, swept it all about the house,
and made a great smoke for the while: but when they were gone, the dust fell
all down again.

Public respects should be the rapt motion to carry our hearts contrary to the
ways of our own private respects, or concernments: For consider, as it is not
the tossing in a ship, but the stomach that causes sickness; the choler
within, and not the waves without: So, the frowardness of men that quarrel
with Reformation, and not the work it self, which is Gods commandment.

Magistrates are to have the main stroke in Reformation of Religion, but
Ministers must also move in their own orb, and do their part too.

Ejusdem non est invenire and perficere. There have been many renowned
Reformers, as Luther, Farellus, etc. abroad: and many here at home, who did
(for their time) worthily in Ephrata, and are therefore famous in Bethlehem:
But yet many things were left unrectified, which either they did not see, or
could not help. All which may show us, that it is a praise proper to Christ
only, to be Alpha and Omega, Author and Finisher of that he sets about.

Behold, Rev. 21.5.
I make all thinks new. Read Isa. 65.17, 18.2 Cor. 5.17.

Mutability.
Princes are like the Sun, and great Subjects are like the Dials; if the Sun
shine not on the Dial, no man will look on it. Wicked purposes are easily
checked, not easily broken off; Saul's sword is scarce dry from the blood of the
Philistines, when it thirsts anew for the blood of David; Saul rent Samuels
garment, now David Saul's; both were significant; the rending of the one,
signified the Kingdom torn out of those unworthy hands; the cutting of the
other, that the life of Saul might have been as easily cut off. Both signs and
symptoms of mutability.

The greatest changes are incident to the greatest persons. Rulers of times
become captives, and they who sat on Thrones, live in Prisons. Nebuchadnezzars
goodly image did degenerate and gradually abase from a head of gold, to a
breast and arms of silver, thence to belly and thighs of brass, to legs of
iron, and feet of iron and clay. All these represented some Kings and Kingdoms
falling, and others rising upon their ruins, till a Kingdom do arise, which
should never fall.

The most durable creatures are changeable; the heavens are an emblem of
continuance, yet in a perishing condition; and shall be (if not totally
annihilated, yet) much altered from what they are; as will amount to this; They
are no more. The mountains and rocks change ordinarily by the power of time,
every mixed body has the seed of corruption in it, and therefore must corrupt
naturally, though God should not destroy it providentially or judiciarily.

Man is a very mutable creature; In his body, suffering every day an
alteration, perfective or corruptive; yea, while he is growing stronger,
hasting not only to weakness, but to dissolution. Farther, consider him in
reference to his mind, we use to say of several men, so many men, so many
minds. And for his civil state, Quot homines, tot sentcutiae.
of honor, power, riches and relations; day unto day makes report, that it is
of little continuance.

Man has three great changes 1. In his outward condition, a change from
weakness to strength, from poverty to riches, from sorrow to joy. 2. Death is
the great change of mankind: The Saints change for the better, wicked men for
the worse. 3. At the Resurrection; for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.


Only mortality is the stage of mutability: for beyond this world there are no
changes. Heaven and Hell a state of eternal blessedness or wretchedness, have
no changes in them, nor anything that is Heterogeneal, or of another kind.
Heaven which has light and joy in it, has no darkness, no sorrow at all in
it; Hell which has darkness and sorrow in it, has no light nor joy at all in
it: Mixtures and changes are made here on earth, when our last change is fully
come, we shall go beyond all changes.

All the days of my appointed time will I wait, Job. 14.14.
till my change come. Help, Aid or Assistance.
Many men's helps are like that of Hananiab to Jeremiah, cap. 28.13. They break
some yokes of wood, that they may have the better occasion to make for them
yokes of iron.

There is a two fold help God gives, 1. Common; And this Gods people have with
the rest of all the world. 2. Special; Carrying them forth to do gracious acts,
and to perform good completely. Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.


Far were the Romans from helping the oppressed Britains, Dan. Chron.
when they sent for aid; they complained, that betwixt the barbarous enemy and
the Sea (as two kind of deaths) they were either murdered, or drowned; but
their implorations prevailed not. But the Saints comfort is, that where humane
help fails, divine begins.

Give us help in trouble: for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 60.11.
Desolation.
I will utterly consume all things from off the land, says the Lord, I will
consume man and beast, I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes
of the sea; This is a threatening against Juda, by the Prophet Zephaniah; Cap.
1, 2, 3.
the strangest devastation and destruction that ever was; for in the plague of
Egypt, there was the death of the firstborn, the death of beasts, and of the
fishes, by water turned into blood; but I find not that the fowls of heaven
were destroyed. In the drowning of the world, although the beasts of the field,
and fowls of the air perished; yet cannot I collect the destruction of the
fishes: But in this, man and beast, and fish and foul, all things are
threatened to be destroyed.

Hierom affirms the like of his native Country, wasted so with war, Vt,
prater calum et canum, et crescentes vipres, et condensa si^varum, cuncta
perierint. In mea patria. deus venture est, et in diem vivitur and sanctior est
ill^ qui ditior.
that besides air and earth, and briars, and forests, all was destroyed. And
that we may not wonder at this severity of God, here what he elsewhere says;
In my Country their belly is their god, their glory is in their shame, and
they mind earthly things: And so their end has been destruction, and utter
desolation.

True it is, that desolation is the fruit of sin, witness Sodom, which was
once as Egypt, yea as Eden; but is now a place of Nettles and Salt Pits Judea,
that once Lumen totius Orbis, now laid desolate: And Babylon a place if we may
believe Strabo) of incredible fertility and increase; yet suffering destruction
by thy Medes. It were easy to instance in the seven Churches of Asia, the
Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, etc. Yea, such is the hatred God
bears to sin, that his hand is upon the insensible creatures for man's sake.

A fruitful land turns he into burrennesse for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein. Psalm. 197.34.
Arts and Sciences, commendable and cursed.
Ars.
NEmo est quin aliqua art praeclarus est.

Art is twofold, of 1, Body. 2. Soul.


Either 1. Cosmetick, Amongst other History is much to be conunended, as
Antedating time, and bringing experience without gray hairs.
Art of Decoration. 2. Medicinal, Art or Cure. 3. Athletick, Art or Activity.
4. Voluptuary, eruditus luxus, as Tacitus calls it.


It is storied, that about Astreds time, King of England, before his
instauration, there was not a Grammarian sound in his Kingdom to teach him.

Nulla ars doceri praesumitur, nisi intenta prius meditatione discatur.

Artisicium est judicare de art; is a maxim of infallible truth; and yet
ignorance begets confidence.

He that teaches man knowledge, Psalm. 94.10.
shall not he know? Ingenuity.
The wit and mind of man, if it work upon matter, which is the contemplation of
the creatures of God; works according to the stuff, and is limited thereby:
but if it work upon it self, as the Spider works his web, then it is
endless; and brings forth indeed cobwebs of learning, admirable for the
finenesse of thread and work, but of no substance or profit.

Socrates said of a Scholar, Tute vincas in geniosus.
he must be studious. Concerning Origin, he had this commendation, Origeni
nulla pars aetatis periit a studiis. Again, Origenis ingenium sufficiebat ad
omnia pardiscenda, Again, Qui ex scriptoribus qui post Originem vixere, non
insigniter est ab eo adjutus? And Jerome styles him, Magistrum Ecclesiarum post
Apostolos. Cyprian when he called for any of Tertullians works, used to say, Da
Magistrum.

Of Daout Bassa the new Viser to Mustapha Emperor of the Turks, Turk. Hist.
fol. 1412. Simia videbitur, non sapiens. 1 Cor. 1.25. Quantum dilatatur
insensibus, tantum constringitur in sermonibus. Brevitati studendum, et sensum
magis s^ctandum ^^e quam verba. Sapienter not ad^oriatur, ut studia salutaria,
prec^pta f^ciliora, ^ractu perennia iis anteponamus, quorum infinita est
investigatio, ne^ alius demum exitus quam labor and aeru^. De plorare possumus,
compensare non possumus Ch^ysostom^ Commentarium in Matthaeummallem.
this character is given; he was Audax, ferox, ac prout animum intendit, pravus
aut industrius eadem vi. So those that are studious, are such as from whom men
may expect much good, or much ill.

Yet Heraclitus (as Plato relates it) said very well, The wisest man compared
with God; he will appear to be an Ape, rather than a wise man.

The foolishness of God is wiser than men. Books.
No Book to be studied like the Bible; which by how much it is enlarged in the
deep and copious sense and meaning of it, by so much it is straightened in the
sewness of the words, and brevity of the speech. As teaching (says Jerome) that
brevity is rather to be studied, and that sense and matter are rather to be
sought for, than many words.

Well said Reinolds, citing those words of Solomon, Eccles. 12.12. The Preacher
does wisely exhort us, that we preser saving studies, which are easily
perceived, lasting in their benefit; before those, the search whereof is
infinite, and the end whereof at last is no other than weariness and misery.

There are many precious pieces which are now not to be had; As the Chronicles
of Media and Persia; The Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah; The book
of the wars of the Lord; the book of Jasher, Origens Octapla,) the loss of
which work, says one, bewail we may, but make up we cannot.

Chrysostom upon Matthew (of which Aquinas when promotions were offered, I had
rather have Chrysostoms Commentary upon Matthew); and many other. That we have
the Book of God so perfect and entire, preserved safe from the injuries of
time, and rage of Tyrants, seeking by all means to burn up and abolish it; must
be acknowledged as a sweet and singular providence.

For other Books, while one resutes what another wrote, another vindicates what
his adversary disliked; thus book begets book: So that if happiness were to be
sought for in humane writings, the volumes are so infinite, the opinions so
endless and various, that it would be impossible for any man to find it out of
them; When a man had with much curiosity, and continual reading, wearied
himself, and pined his flesh away, he would find it all an unprofitable and
impertinent labor, weariness to the body, without any satisfaction to the
mind.

-- Of making many Books there is no end, Eccl. 12.12.
and much study is a weariness to the flesh. Learning.
Pragmatical men may not go a way with an opinion that learning is like a Lark,
that can mount and sing and please her self, and nothing else: But may know,
that she holds as well of the Hawk, that can soar aloft, and can also descend
and strike upon the Prey.

It is said of Varro, that he was a general Scholar. Of Albertus Magnus, Nihil
penitus fugit, omnia perfect novit. Yet all other skill into
Scripture-learning, is but straminea Candela.
Of Tostatus (otherwise called Abulensis) Omnium scientiarum doctrinarumque
arca fuit and emporium. Lactantius of Tertullian, he was in omni genere
doctrinae peritus. Jerome says of him, that his works contained Cunctam seculi
doctrinam. And Bellarmine being blamed for keeping Whitakers picture, answered,
Quod quamvis hereticus, and adversarius esset, esset tamen doctus adversarius.

Aeneas Silvius was wont to say of learning, that Popular men should esteem it
as silver, Noblemen as gold; Princes prize it as pearls.

Yet, as none more often miscarry in the waters, than your most skilful
swimmers; Sapientes sapienter in infernum descendent
so neither do any sooner fall into the condemnation of Hell, or lie deeper
therein, than the most knowing men, and those of greatest parts; which they
usually overween, and are to well conceited of.

Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
-- See 1 Cor. 8.2. Cap. 13.2. and Cap. 2.2. 1 Cor. 1.20.


Music.
Lord I am a musical instrument (says Nazianzen) for thee to touch, Orat. de
Basilie.
that I may sound thy glory and praise.

When Aristotle was asked, what he thought of music, he answered, Jovem nec
canere, nec Citharam pulsare; Thinking it an unprofitable art to men, that was
no more delightful to God. And Plato told the Musicians who pressed into his
company, that Philosophers could do well enough without them.

Yet there is (no doubt) a lawful use of Music, and great power it has to
move men's minds one way or another. King Theodorick writing to Boethius in
Cassiodore, Cassiodor. 1.2. var. 41.
says, Haec quum de secreto naturae tanquam sensuum regina, tropis suis ornata
processerit, reliquae cogitationes exiliunt, omniaque facit elici, ut ipsam
solummodo delectat audiri. Tristitiam jucundat, furores attenuat, saevitiam
blandam effi cit, ignaviam excitat, vigilantibus reddit requiem, vitiatem turpi
amore revocat ad castitatem, and (quod heatum curationis genus est)
perdulcissimas voluptates, expellit animi passiones, and per insensibilium
obsequium praevalet sensuum exercere dominatum.

I have heard of one, that when he sat and heard a sweet consort of Music, he
seemed upon th^s occasion carried up for the time before hand to the place of
his rest, saying very passionately, What Music may we think is there in heaven?

But wanton and unseasonable Music, tends to the emasculating, dissolving and
drawing out of our spirits; this is an abuse of Music (given to men for better
purposes) and is condemned. God made not man more avium minurire, nor to sport
on earth, as Leviathan does in the Sea: And when he is cast out of one
Paradise, to make himself another. It is charged as a foul fault upon those
Sensualists, Jam. 5.5. That they had lived in pleasure on the earth, and been
wanton.

Musical instruments are called, The delights of the sons of men, Eccl. 2.8.
because the Music of instruments is proper unto men, whereas the music of
voice is in birds also. But it is good to remember that old age will come, and
then All the daughters of music shall be brought low. Eccl. 12.4. Nam quae
cantante voluptas? Juvenal.


Devil.
Quasi do evil: Or, a Divellendo, for he would pull men from God: Or, of duo
two, and bolus a bit, because he makes but two bits of man, one of his body,
the other of his soul; Or, (...), a trajiciendo, because he strikes through
with his darts. Or, because he is the Calumniatour Accusing 1. God to man. 2.
Man to God. 3. Man to man. 3. Man to himself.


The Devil is Leo (...) a roaring lion, and lies in wait for the Church; but
Christ her invincible champion, Diabolus in pace subdolus, in persecutione
violentus. Cypr. Eos quaerit dejicere, quos videt stare.
is ever at hand for her help, who is Leo (...), the lion of the tribe of
Judah, that delivers us from the wrath to come.

The first Adam was conquered of the serpent by gluttony, pride and avarice. By
gluttony, when he did eat the forbidden fruit; by dride, desiring to be as God;
and by covetousness, being discontent with his present estate. So the second
Adam is assaulted by the same serpent, with gluttony; If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be made bread; With Pride, the Devil takes him
up into the holy city, and sets him on a Pinnacle of the Temple, and says,
cast thy self down, etc. And with Avarice, for he takes him up into an
exceeding high mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them; and says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if
thou will fall down and worship me.

Whereas Scripture says, the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, Joh.
8.44. We are not to understand from the first absolute beginning, for then he
had no being; nor from his own beginning, for at his creation he was good: But
so soon as ever man was, he was resolved to destory him, and so with reference
to the intention, he is so called.

As the Vulture feeds best upon the most stinking carrion, so the Devil upon
the most corrupt hearts. Hence he is called the unclean spirit, Mat. 12.43.1.
Affectione, because he loves uncleanness. 2. Persvasione, because he persuades
men to it. 3. Habitatione, because he inhabits unclean hearts; he finds them
foul, he makes them worse. Wheresoever the great Turk sets his foot once, no
grass grows, they say, ever after: Sure it is, no grace grows where Satan
dwells.

Christ casts the Devil out of the poor sinner where he did possess, for these
causes especially justified by law, viz.

Because 1. He pays not the rent. Jacobs de Vorag.
2. He suffers the house to decay. 3. He imploys it to base uses. 4. God
himself will dwell in it.


A Conjurer expels the Devil, not by constraint, but by consent; and therefore
when he is cast out by wicked men, it is by compact, and he will be sure to
gain by the bargain: But Christ is stronger than he, and therefore casts him
out by main force.

The Panther has a pleasant smell, and beautiful skin, but a foul face; and
when she would prey upon beasts which come to gaze on her, she hides her head:
Mentitur ut sallat, vitam pollicetur ut perimat.
So the Devil; he is also a very turn-coat; At Lystra he appeared like a
Comedian, At Athens like a Philosopher, At Ephesus like an Artificer, to Saul
like the old Prophet; who could have spoken more gravely, severely, divinely
than the fiend did? But, as when one commended the Popes Legate at the counsel
of Basil, Sigismund the Emperor answered, Tamen Romanus est: So when Satan
comes commended to us, under what name soever, let us cry out, yet he is a
Devil.

The Devil is restless in mischief. Non dormitat (says one) Semper-vigil ille
Synagoge sua Episcopus; he is vigilant and diligent, restless, and unquiet, as
Cain. As Pliny says of the Scorpion; that there is not one minute wherein it
does not put forth the sting.

Bernard in a rapture, was before the judgment seat of Christ, Est leo si
fugias, si stas quasi musca^recedit.
and Satan impleading him. Says he, Thou have been so and so -- Answ. It Is
true, vile I have been, but Christ has a double title to Heaven, both as heir,
and meriting, the one of these he keeps to himself, but the other he has given
me.

The readiest way to kill the serpent, is to break his head; The Devils head is
cut off, if we resist his first assault: For as David slew Goliath by hitting
him in the forehead, so we must gather stones out of Gods brook, that is, his
holy book, and sling them at the Devils head. And know, if the Devils without
Christ's leave, had no power to enter into the Gaderens swine, much less over
Gods own sheep.

Satan is so vexed at man's devotion, that Origin says, In Number. Hom. 27.
there is no greater torment to the Devils, than to see man addicted to the
Scriptures: In hoc eorum omnis slamma est, in hoc uruntur incendio. Chrysostom
says, we may lash or scourge him by sasting and Prayer; And indeed the Prophet
calls it a charm, or enchantment. Isa. (...)
26.16.

When the Devil would assault a poor soul, the best way is to imitate Christ;
Inhoneflum enim est, bonestam matronem cum meretrice litigare.
who stands not arguing the case with him, but cuts him off short with a
vehement check and reproof: turning him over to his Father, to give him his
du^; Saying, The Lord rebuke thee. Zech. 3.2. It is not fit* says Chrysost^m)
for a Matron to scold with a Strumpet.

Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walks about, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9.
seeking whom he may devour:

Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Salt.
It is observed, that Nature has prudently mingled salt with all things, that
they may not easily putrify. Greges enim pecorum urinam salsissimam essundere
videmus; and in omnes stirpes salem infusum, says Bodin. Yea, Theat. Not.
there is indeed in every thing we eat, a natural and concealed salt, which is
separated by digestions; Dr. Brown. B^eud. Epid.
as does appear in our tears, sweat and urines, although we refrain all falt,
or what does seem to contain it.

Certainly the Spirit (as salt) must dry up those bad humors in us, that breed
that never-dying worm; and (as fire) must wast our corruptions, which else
will carry us on to the unquenchable fire. And we must also make out
mortification, and holy discretion; as also sincerity of doctrine and
discipline, whereby the Saints are seasoned and preserved from the putresaction
of sin and orrour. Else we shall be in danger to run Ecebolius his course, of
whom it is said; Ecabolius Sophista qui legebet Rhetoricam Julian^, discipuli
fortunam secutus, a christianis ad ethnicos descivit, tandemque Juliano
extincto ad Christianos rever su^, Prae foribus Templi prostratus clamitabat,
Calcate me salem insipidum.

What intolerable blasphemy in the conjuring of salt among the Papist^ It is
thus; I conjure thee, O sals, by the living God, etc. that thou may be made a
conjured salt to the salvation of all them that believe. And that unto all such
as receive thee, thou may be health of soul and b^dy: and that from out of
the place, wherein thou shall be sprinkled, may fly away and depart all
fantasy, wickedness or craftiness of the Devils subtilty, and every foul
spirit, etc.

Have salt in your selves. Mark 9.50.
Poison.
It is subtle and spiritful, and therefore incorporates with that which is most
subtle in man, his spirits; flat, gross and dreggish liquor, will not quench
the fiery thirst of poison; it drinks nothing but pure spirits: drying them up,
and corrupting the blood in which the spirits are.

Yet God is said to have made all things double, and if we look upon the works
of the most high, there are two and two, one against another; that one contrary
has another, and poison is not without a poison to itself. So, nor poison, but
has its Antidote in Nature.

The Scythians and other Nations, used to dip their darts in the blood and gall
of Asps and Vipers, the venomous heat of which, like a fire in their flesh,
killed the wounded with torments, the likest hell of any other.

The poison of Asps is under their lips. Romans 3.13.
Lottery.
The Heathens used to cast Lots, to find fit and seasonable times, as they
thought, for effecting such things as they desired with good success. The
manner was this, There was a Pitcher into which papers, with names of the
several months written on them; and rolled up were cast; yea, also papers with
the names of every day, and every month were cast in; then one blindsolded put
in his hand, and pulled out a paper, and according to the marks which they had
set down, such a month proved lucky, Hest. 3.7. with cap. 12.1.
and such a day in the month; And by Gods providence it so fell out in Hamans
time, that their supposed lucky day (as they called it) was on the twelfth
month; whereby it came to pass, that their plot was deseated, before the time
of accomplishing thereof.

The Providence of God extends to the disposing of all things, Disponit Deus
membra pulicis and culi^^s. Aust.
even those things also, which in regard of us, are merely contingent and
casual. Chance-medly is Providence; Cambyses lighting off his horse (after he
had been showing great cruelty to them of Athens) his sword flew out of his
scabberd and slew him. Prove. 16.33.


The lot is cast into the bosom^; but the whole disposing thereof is of the
Lord. Sooth-Sayer.
Although the word Augur (being not taken in his own proper sense and
signification, Godw. Antiq.
but generally by the Trope Synecdoche) signifying all sorts of divining
whatsoever; yet Roman Antiquity delivers to us three principal kinds of
foretellers in former times, namely, Aruspices, Anspices, and Augures; All
which we english Scothsayers, though the latin word do import a main
difference worth our observation.

The Aruspices did divine or foretell things to come, by beholding the entrails
of beasts sacrificed: whence they had their name, ab Aras inspiciendo. These
were also called Extispices, ab exta ospiciend^. And they observed whether the
beast did come to the Altar willingly, whether he died without much struggling
or loud bellowing, at one blow, or many; Again, whether the bowels were af an
unnatural color, or ulcerous: Moreover, whether the flame of the fire were
smokie, whether it rolled or tumbled in the air, or were of any continuance,
etc. All which were unfortunate Presages, as the contrary did betoken a good
and fortunate issue to their designments.

Auspices, which did foretell things, by beholding the flight of birds: Auspices
quasi avispices, ab aves aspiciendo.

Augures did divine from hearing the chatting or crowing of the birds: whence
they are called Augures, ab aviam garritu.

The two last kinds have occasioned such like Phrases as these; With good or
evil luck.
bonis avibus or aspiciis and malis avibus; And because they would begin
nothing inauspicato, without the counsel of the Augures: hence Auspcari rem
has been translated, to begin a matter.

The Ephesians were much addicted to such like wicked practices, Called also
Nebulones undertaking to foretell future things ex nebulis.
as likewise to Judiciary Astrology, Necromancy, etc. Hence the Proverb, (...)
for the black Art. The Samaritans also, and hence that malicious slander of the
Jews, Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan? that is, one that deals
with the Devil.

There shall not be found among you any one that -- or that uses divination or
--. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12. etc.
Vision
Visions were once a special way of divine revelation; a principal means, by
which God broke his mind, and unlockt the secrets of his counsels.

Of visions, some were more open, 1 Samuel 3. and some more private, Judge. 13.
Some were without any trance or ravishment, Genesis 15.1. and others were
accompanied with trances, Numb. 24.16. Dan. 10.9. 2 Cor. 12. Paul's soul had so
much acquaintance with God, as he became a stranger to his own body.
Furthermore, some visions were presented only in bare naked words, others were
clothed in types and figures, in the shapes of beasts, souls, trees, stones,
etc. As to Ezekiel and Daniel in their prophesies, and to John in his
revelations. Lastly, Scripture hints another difference, there were visions of
the day, and visions of the night. And after this manner God sometime made his
mind legible to his servants.

Take we notice of our Privilege under the Gospel, Heb. 1.2, 3. We have a
vision which outshines all the visions that ever the Prophets or Patriarchs had
from the beginning of the world. Their light was darkness, at most, but a
shadow, their visions were obscurities, and their Revelations concealments,
compared with ours.

We read in the Roman History, of a vision that Brutus had, the night before
the unhappy fight at Philippi, calling him into Macedonia too, but for his
utter ruin. This was a vision from the Devil (doubtless,) that old man
slayer. Many more I might mention. We had need to prove the spirits whether
they be of God. Many have pretended instincts, inspirations, Revelations
immediate and extraordinary; Montanus had his Paraclete; Cursed Mahomet called
the dead fits of his falling sickness, his ecstasy and ravishment at the
appearance of the Angel Gabriel; and his Dove inured to fetch food out of his
ear, is pretended no less than the Holy Ghost, sent whisperingly to intimate
what he should enact for the people. Heathenish Politicians had like pretenses
to win credit to their laws, Numa Pompilius receives his from the goddess
Aegeria, Lycurgus his from Apollo. And how many have we now adays (our Modern
Enthusiasts) that dream their Midianitish dreams, and then tell it for Gospel
to their neighbors (as wise as themselves) leading men into the lions mouth
(that roaring lion) under pretense of a Revelation, as that old Impostour did
the young Prophet. 1 King. 13.

This we may be sure of, that many illusions have come in the likeness of
visions; and absurd fancies under pretense of raptures; and what some have
called the spirit of Prophecy, has been the spirit of lying; and contemplation
has been nothing but Melancholy and unnatural lengths; and stillness of prayer
has been a mere dream and hypochondriacal devotion, and has ended in pride or
despair, or some sottish and dangerous temptation.

Much like unto Heron the Monk, of whom it is reported, that having lived a
retired and mortified life together for many years; at last the Devil taking
advantage of the weakness of his Melancholy and unsettled spirit, gave him a
transportantion and an ecstasy, in which he fancied himself to have attained so
great perfection, that Angels would be his security (so dear he was to God)
though he threw himself into the bottom of a well, he obeyed his fancy and
temptation, did so, bruised himself to death, and died possessed with a
persuasion of the verity of that ecstasy and transportation.

It is more healthful and nutritive to dig the earth and eat of her fruits,
than to stare upon the greatest glories of the Heavens, and live upon the beams
of the sun: So, though all violencies and extravagancies of a religious fancy
are not illusions; yet, they are all unnatural, little secure, little
reasonable, little consisting with humility, and so unsatisfying to the soul;
that they often distract the faculties, seldom advantage piety, and are full of
danger in their greatest luster.

Be not soon shaken in mind, 2 These. 2.2.
neither by spirit, -- Apparition.
(...) of (...), to appear or seem. It is that which either a man sees, or
vainly imagines that he sees.

If any say, how has a spirit a form, or an image, or how can that be seen?
Answ. It is not a Spirit abstracted or naked in it self, but a Spirit joined
with a form and a shape that is seen. So Angels or Spirits did usually appear
to the Ancients, taking a body or some form upon them, and those Apparitions
when a body was assumed, were called spirits. When therefore it is said, that
the Disciples beholding Jesus after his resurrection standing in the midst of
them, they were terrified and affrighted, supposing that they had seen a
spirit, Luke 24.36, 37. Know, the Apostles were not so absurd as to believe a
spirit, in it self a spirit abstracted, could be seen; but they called it a
spirit, because they thought it only the representation of Christ's body, and
not the true body. So a spirit may assume some outward shape, in which it is
clothed to the eye.

Some observe, (...) Haec vox significat sic aliquid praete^irae, ut ^tiam
mutetur. Schind.
that the motions of spirits clothed with bodies in their Apparitions, is not
like the motion of men, who move lifting up their feet one after another; but
it is a passing as a ship moves with a gale of wind, rather a gliding than a
going. Job, 4.15.

Among the Heathen this was made the chief difference, to distinguish a Numen,
or spirit coming in any shape, from a natural body. The steadiness of their
eyes was one, Pedes vestis desluxit ad imos Et vera incesses patuit Dea. Virg.
l. 1. Aen.
the not transposing their feet was another, and a cleerer evidence. So says
Heliodor. Numina venientia ad nos, in homines se transformant; Ex oculis autem
notari possunt, cum continuo obtuitu intueantur and palbebras nunquam
concludant. Et magis, ex incessus, qui non ex dimotione pedum neque ex
transpositione existit. Sed quodam impetu ^^rio and vi expedita findentium
magis auras quam transeuntium. Quamobrem statuas quoque Deorum Egyptii ponunt
conjungentes illis pedes and quasi unientes. In Aethiopicis. l. 3.

A spirit passed before my face, Jo^ ^.12.13, 14, 15, 16.
-- Witch.
Witchcraft in general signifyes all curious arts, wrought by the operation of
the Devil. The ground is a league or compact with him; Either, 1. Open, when
men invocate the Devil in express words, or otherwise make any manifest
covenant with him. Or, 2. Secret, when men use means, which they know have no
force, but by the operation of the Devil.

Of Witchcraft there are three kinds. 1. Superstitious Divination, of which
before. 2. Juggling, to work feats beyond the order of nature, as did the
Magicians of Egypt. 3. Charming or enchanting, which is by the pronouncing of
words, to procure speedy hurt, or speedy help.

A Witch is one, that wittingly and willingly uses the assistance of the Devil
himself, for the revealing of secrets, working of some mischief, or effecting
of some strange cure. There are indeed other superstitious persons, who use
charming, and by it do many cures, persuading themselves, that the words which
they use have force in them, or that God has given them to do strange things:
Such in a natural honesty may detest all known society with the Devil, and in
that respect are not the Witches which the Scripture adjudgeth to death; yet
are they at the next door to them, and are to be admonished to relinquish their
superstitious practices: Because, 1. The efficacy of things that comes by any
other means than the ordinance of God, (which efficacy was either put into the
thing in the Creation, or since by some new institution in the Word,) is by
Satanical operation. 2. Charms, Enchantments and Spells, have no force, unless
we believe they can do us good; which faith is false, and the service of the
Devil; for we must believe, hope, do nothing, without, or against the Word of
God.

To discover a Witch, is very hard; for they do their feats in close manner;
not only by soul and open cursing, but also by fair speaking, and by praising
of things. Nevertheless there are five special things for discovery: Viz. 1.
Free confession of the accused and suspected. 2. Confestion of the associates
with the suspected. 3. Invocation of the Devil; for that is to renounce
Baptism. 4. Evidence of entertaining a Familiar spirit. 5. Evidence of any
action or actions that necessarily presuppose a league made with the Devil.


There are besides these, other signs, but they are either false, or uncertain;
therefore I mention them not.

Witchcraft is fitly called the Black Art, for there is no true light in them
that use it, Isa. 8.19, 20. They depart from God and his testimony, and so
tempt the Devil to tempt them. And they which in case of Loss, or Sickness,
etc. make Hell their refuge, shall smoke and smart for it in the end. Satan
seeks to them in his temptations, they seek unto him in their consultations;
and now that they have mutually found each other, if ever they part, it is a
miracle. He is an unspeakable proud Spirit, and yet will stoop to the meanest
man or woman to be at their command; (The Witch of Endor is twice in one verse
called the Mistress of the Spirit, because in covenant with him, (...) Dominam
Pythonis.
1 Samuel 28.7.) whereby he may cheat them and their clients of salvation. Every
one that consults with him, worships him, though he bow not, as Saul did:
Neither does that old Manslayer desire any other reverence, than to be sought
unto.

Some have thought Witches should not die, unless they had taken away the life
of Mankind: But they are mistaken, both for the act of the Witch, and the
guilt; as also because of the league and confederacy with the Devil, which is
high treason against God, because he is Gods chiefest enemy. And therefore
though no hurt ensue this contract at all, the Witch deserves present and
certain death for the contract it self.

Thou spalt not suffor a Witch to live. Exodus 22.18.
Vocatio Particularis.
EVery one ought to be a man of Employment: Every one ought to have some
business to turn his hand unto. It was said to Adam, and in him to Mankind, not
only as a curse, but as a command, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, Genesis 3.19. Not that every man is bound to labor in such an employment
as causes the face to sweat; But thereby is meant serious labor and
employment in some honest Calling.

Consider, 1. The law on Adam binds all his posterity; None may eat the bread
of idleness, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2. The state of Innocence endured not idleness. 3.
God who is the Author of our Being, is the Author of our Calling. 4. Not to
live in an honest Calling, is to live unjustly, Ephesians. 4.28. 5. Christ himself
submitted to the law of Creation, for our example. 6. The blessing of God on
honest labor, and his curse on idle persons.


Yea, it is a great blessing when we freely enjoy the exercise of our Callings.
It is our duty to have a Calling; and it is a mercy to go on profitably and
peaceably in it.

The Emperor and the Pope being sained by the smart invention of a Satyrist to
be reconciled, and both placed in their Majestic Thrones; The States of the
World are brought in before them: First comes a Counselor of State, with this
Motto, I advise you two. Then a Courtier, I flatter you three. Then a
Husbandman, I feed you four. Then a Merchant, I cosen you five. Then a Lawyer,
I rob you six. Then a Soldier, I fight for you seven. Then a Physician, I kill
you eight. And lastly a Priest, I absolve you all nine.
This was his Satyr of his Times.

Diligence in a lawful Calling, is the best remedy against Poverty, which often
prompts a man to Theft. Seneca said, He had rather be sick in his bed, than
idle.

That Jonah had a Calling or Occupation, it is plain they took it for granted,
cap. 1.8. At Athens, every man was once a year at least, to give account to the
Judges, by what Art or Trade he maintained himself. By Mahomet's law, the Grand
Signior himself must use some Manual trade: Solomon the Magnificent made
Arrow-heads; Mahomet the Great, Horn-rings for Archers, etc.

A Kinsman of the Bishop of Lincoln begging of him to bestow an Office upon
him: He answered, Cosen, if your Cart be broken, I Will mend it; but an
Husbandman I found you, and so I leave you.

Let every man abide in the same Calling wherein he was called. 1 Cor. 7.20.
Husbandman.
Great men were anciently much addicted to husbandry, (as Vzziah, 2 Chronicles.
26.10. and Job, cap. 1.3.) which Socrates called, the horn of plenty: And the
Romans reckoned, that Corn was never so cheap, as when men were fetched from
the Plough, Plin.
to govern the Commonwealth; Quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere, and aratro
trium phali.

But now the case is otherwise, as Beza complains, that Husbandry and
Shepherdry are left for the basest and simplest men, and for such as all others
might prey upon. Which brings to mind, says he, that which once I saw
painted in a table, where the Nobleman had this poesy, By my sword I defend
you all; The Clergyman, By my prayers I preserve you all; The Countryman, By
my labor I feed you all; Lastly, the Lawyer, I devour you all.

Issachar is a strong ass, couching down between two burdens. Genesis 49.14.
Physician.
Physic is either 1. Curative, Or, 2. Preventive.


Curative Physic we term that, which restores the Patient unto sanity,
Physicians hold, that in every two years there is such store of ill humors and
excrements engendered in the body, that a vessel of one hundred ounces will
scarce contain them.
and takes away Diseases actually affecting, whether chronical or acute, of
long or short duration and danger.

Preventive we call that, which by purging noxious humors, and the causes of
diseases, preventeth sickness in the healthy, or the recourse thereof in the
valerudinary.

The medicine must not be in the power of the sick, but of the Physician.

The Remedy not fitted to the Malady, it increases daily.

The disease being inveterated, it is necessary to proceed slowly in the cure;
for he that desires to do all together, confounds all.

Paracelsus, glorying that he could make other men immortal, died himself at
forty seven.

They say, there are some Diseases are Opprobria Medicorum; Mali mediciest,
desperare ne ^^ret. Sen. Mat. 9.12.
they do puzzle the most learned Physicians, and put them to a stand: But
Christ cures all; for, Omnipotenti Medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus.

They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. Merchant.
Merchandise well managed, is of great use to Kingdoms and States, for many
reasons: viz. For 1. Descrying the counsels and strength of other Nations. 2.
Procuring the love and friendship of foreign Princes and people. 3. Exchanging
of commodities: for, Non omnis fert omnis tellus. 4. Gaining experience of many
great matters. 5. Occasioning the building of many fair Cities.


Let Merchants take heed how they fell by small measures, and for great rates;
Quorum oculos culpa clausit, pana aperut.
neither let their measure want of its due proportion, lest God sill it up with
his fierce wrath. Those that have lived unconscionably, shall di^
uncomsortably; at which time, their treasures of wickedness shall leave them in
the lurch; as the Devil leaves Witches, when they come to prison.

And above all, Trade for that Pearl of price, that Gold tried in the fire:
For, Godliness is profitable to all things; and one grain of Grace is far
beyond all the Gold of Ophir, What is Gold and Silver, but the guts and garbage
of the Barth? And what is all the pomp and glory of the world, but dung and
dogs-meat? Paul esteemed them no better, that he might win Christ.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man, Mat, 13.45, 46.
seeking goodly pearle^

Who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he
had, and bought it.

Soldier.
Creatures of an inferior nature to Man, Malo miserandum, quam crubescentlum:
Pulchrior est miles in pugna praelio amissus, quam in fuga salvus. Tertul.
will be courageous in the presence of their masters. Xerxes was wont to pitch
his Tent on high, and stand looking on his Army when in sight, to encourage
them. The Prince of Orange said to his Soldiers at the Battle of Newport, when
they had the Sea on the one side, and the Spaniards on the other: If you will
live, you must either eat up these Spaniards, or drink up this Sea.

King Ferdinand's Ambassadors, being conducted into the Camp of the Turks,
wondered at the perpetual and dumb silence of so great a multitude: Neque enim
idoncus potest esse miles ad bellum, qui uon exercitatus in campo prius fuit.
Cypr.
The Soldiers being so ready and attentive, that they were no otherwise
commanded, than by the beckning of the hand, or nod of the Commanders.

Tamerlane (that warlike Scythian) took such order with his Soldiers, that
none were injured by them: If any Soldier of his had taken an Apple or the
like from any man, he died for it. One of his Soldiers having taken a little
Milk from a Country-woman, and she thereof complaining, he caused the said
Soldier to be presently killed, Turk. Hist. fol. 216.
and his stomach to be ripped, where the Milk that he had late drunk being found,
he contented the woman, and so sent her away; who had otherwise undoubtedly
died for her false accusation, had it not so appeared. Severe discipline! Yea,
he had his men at so great command, that no danger was to them more dreadul,
than his displeasure.

Do violence to no man, Luke 3.14.
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages. Prosperitas.
FElix scelus virtus vocatur, Tully de divin. 1.2.
(says the Orator:) Prosperous wickedness is accounted Virtue.

Leah, because fruitful and successful, rejoiced in that whereof she had
greater reason to repent. So did Ephraim, Hos. 12.8. Dionysius, after the spoil
of an Idoltemple, sinding the winds favorable in his navigation; Lo, said he,
how the Gods approve of Sacrilege! So diverse, because they are prosperous, and
the world comes tumbling in upon them, therefore think their ways are good
before God. This is an ordinary Paralogism, whereby wicked worldlings deceive
their own souls; hardening and heartning themselves in their own practices,
because they outwardly prosper. But a painted face is no sign of a good
complexion. Seneca could say that it is the greatest unhappiness to prosper in
evil.

Ambrose reports of the Oister, lib. 5. Hexam. c. 8.
whilst she is tossed by the Crab, she so claspeth her shell, that then she is
in least danger of devouring: But when without fear she lays open herself to
the Sun on the shore, then comes her enemy, and putting a stone between the lips
of her shell, thrusts in safely his claws, and picks out the fish. Even so,
whilst Gods children are tossed to and fro in the brinish waters of the Sea of
this World, by crabbed men, and regredient backsliders, they shut the door of
their lips: whereas in the sunshine of Prosperity, they lay open themselves,
and by that are many times undone.

Bernard interprets that place, Psalm. 91.7. thus: A thousand fall in Adversity,
which is as the left hand; but ten thousand in Prosperity, which is the right
hand. In Adversity we are humble, (...) seek God: In Prosperity we are proud,
play, forget God. David in persecution and wars, was a chaste man: When he came
to take his ease, he was caught in the snare of adultery. Who did swim in such
a sea of riches and honor, as Solomon? and who did sink so egregiously as he?
Solus in divitiis suit, and solus egregie corruit. Hier.
Such stand upon slippery places, and slide ere they be aware. Yet if
Prosperity hurt, the fault is not in it, nor in God that sent it, but in our
selves that abuse it: As if a friend should give a man a brave and excellent
sword, and he should kill himself.

Vbi uber, ibi tuber. It is the property of Prosperity to swell the heart. Pro.
30.
This Agur knew well, and therefore prayed for a mediocrity. Solomon's wealth
did him more hurt, than his wisdom did him good. Vespaslanus unus accepto
imperio me^lor factus.
David's first ways were his best ways; neither ever was he so good and tender,
as when he was hunted like a Partridge on the mountains. Indeed of Vespasian it
is storied, that he was made the better man, by being made Emperor. But he was
a rare bird, and had scarce his fellow again.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis. Pride compasses prosperous persons
as a chain; their hearts are lifted up with the same, as a Boat that rises
with the water.

God tries man three ways: By 1. Examination, Psalm. 17.3. 2. Affliction, Jam.
1.12. 3. Prosperity.


A full estate discovers a man, as well as a low and empty estate does. To know
how to abound, is as high a part of grace, as how to want. God tries in a right
hand way, as well as in a left hand way. Poverty endangers grace much; but
Riches more. To be great in the world, is a great temptation. Many when they
grow rich in temporals, grow poor in spirituals. As their outward man
increases, so their inward man decays: And as they flourish in the flesh, so
they wither in spirit.

Glass or other metals cast into the fire, shine most, when ready to melt.
Aphor.
H^ppocrates says, The uttermost degree of bodily health, is next unto
sickness. A Carpenter comes to a wood, and with his axe marketh out the
fairest trees for selling. What can be more fair and flourishing than a
Corn-field, or Vineyard, a little before the harvest? Even so, the Sunshine of
Prosperity does but ripen the sin of wicked men for Divine vengeance.

The prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Pro. 1.32.
Health.
It is mainly applied to the Body, and Mind.


Vivere est been valere. Health is the Prince of Earthly blessings. Yet, a
timus sanitatis gradus est morbo proximus, say Physicians.
He lives miserably, that lives by Medicines; who to uphold Nature, is in the
continual use of Art. Yet is it quickly blasted: Such as Storms and Temposts
are in the air, such are Diseases in the body. Storms make (as it were) a
confusion among the (...) ments, and are the distemper of nature: Diseases make
a confusion among the humors, and distemper the constitution and spirits of the
body. And if the humors be a little stirred, they quickly turn to ^disease; and
this house of day is ready to dissolve and fall.

The body is not to be neglected, that thou may have a good wagon for thy
soul; Mons sana in corpore sano. Ex te bona pr^nia Deus, and ex Deo mco, salus
mihi univrrsa. Aug.
but thy soul is far more to be respected: Otherwise thou art like a man, that
sets forth his maid bravely, and suffers his wife to go basely.

And truly, the soul is in health and prospers, when it has close communion
with God, and enjoys the light of his loving countenance; preferring his
favor, before the worlds warm sun.

Beloved, 2 John 2.
I wish above all things, that thou may prosper, and be in health, even as
thy soul prospers. Strength.
Lysimachus being commanded to be cast to a Lion, valiantly thrust his arm into
the Lions mouth, and pulling forth his tongue, killed him. The like did
Sampson, Judge. 14.16. David, 1 Samuel 17.36. Benaiah, 2 Samuel 23.20. But yet we by
faith may do more, even stop the mouth of that roaring Liou, Heb. 11.33.

One Hebrew word signifies both Strength and Pride; (...) vel (...) Elatio,
superbia, robur, fortitudo. (...) Psalm. 90.10. Robur aut superbi a eorum.
Leigh. Hence the proper name (...) Aegyptus, ob fortitudinem and fastum. Psalm.
87.4. Bithner.
I think because men are usually proud of their strength: Any kind of strength
is apt to make men proud, strength of purse, strength of parts, strength of
body, strength of wit and understanding, (which is the highest and noblest
natural strength;) yea, (so strange are the ways and methods of temptation) the
very strength of grace or spiritual strength has blown up some with pride: For
though humility properly flow from the strength of grace, and the more grace,
the more humility, yet upon a presumption of the greatness and strength of
their graces, some have been proud and high-minded; that is, they have not
lived in such dependence on Christ as they ought.

Our strength lies much in the sense of our weakness, because then we go out of
our selves for strength to Christ: whereas they who are strong in themselves,
must needs be weak, because the strength of God goes out against them.

There is no strength of the creature that can protect it from the wrath of
God. Job 41.27.
Zenacherib thinks himself a Leviathan, who (as he is described) esteems iron
as straw, and brass as rotten wood; Yet the Lord will deal with him, as if he
were but a Sprat, 2 King. 19.28.

Neither is Strength any desence at all against Death. There are no sons of
Zerviah too hard for it, nor does it stay to take men at an advantage, when
they are weakened with age and sickness, as Simeon and Levi did the Shechemites
when they were fore. Death can do its work as easily in health as in sickness,
in strength as in weakness.

Let not the mighty man glory in his might. Jer. 9.23.
Swiftness.
A Horse is so swift, Terram prae cursus celeritate ebibere, and epotare
videtur. Merc.
that Job says, he eats up the ground, cap. 39.24. And the Persians
dedicated him to their god the Sun, as the swistest creature to the swiftest
Power divine. A Dromedary is said to be a very swift beast; hence a slow body
is called a Dromedary, per Antiphrasin. The Panther also is a swift creature;
whence the Proverb, Panther a velocior.

But let a man be as swift as Asahel or Atalanta, yet he cannot escape what
Gods providence has appointed: God can easily overtake him, his sin will find
him out; and he shall but, in running from his death, run to it. As the Sun in
heaven can neither be outrun, nor stopped in his race: so neither by men nor
means can God be frustrated, or his anger avoided.

As the Cony that flies to the holes in the rocks, does easily avoid the dogs
that pursue her; when the Hare that trusts in the swistness of her legs, is at
length overtaken and torn in pieces: So those that trust in God, shall be
secured; whereas those that confide in themselves, or the creature, shall be
surprised.

The race is not to the swift. Eccl. 9.11.
Victory.
Gods children shall tread on the necks of their enemies, as the Captains of
the Israelites did on the necks of the five Kings, Josh. 10. If we make God our
shield with David, and the Lord our defense with Moses, Deborah shall be too
strong for Jabin, Judith for Holofernes, Moses for five Kings. Semiramis
vanquished the warlike Scythians; Iphicrates conquered the
thought-unconquerable Agesilaus; Plus val^t unus Sanctus orando, quam mill
peccatores praliando.
and young Scipio renowned Hannibal, etc. The Lord will cast them out before
you, (says Moses;) Only pray, and God will deliver. Prayer is like Ajax
shield, to defend young Telemon: It was Samuels armor against the Philistines;
Hezekiahs defense against Sennacherib: yea, a godly man's prayer prevails more
to save a Country, than the swords of a thousand sinners to hurt the enemy.

It is said of Hannibal the Carthaginian General, That he knew how to get, but
not how to use a Victory.

A Christian soldier may die, but never be overcome.

Those (says one) are indeed the true Victories, which neither draw blood out
of the veins, nor tears out of the eyes. I suppose his meaning to be, when
great and glorious Conquests are got with small change, only gained with
resolution without peril.

It was the saying of Valentinian the Emperor, upon his deathbed, That among
all his victories over his enemies, this one only comforted him, viz. That by
the grace and power of Christ Jesus, he had got the better of his corruptions,
and was now more than a Conqueror, even a Triumpher.

And truly, what shall it profit a man to conquer Countries, and yet be
vanquished of Vices? To tread upon his enemies, and yet be taken captive by the
Devil at his pleasure? To command the whole World, and yet be as those Persian
Kings, that for all that, were themselves commanded by their Concubines: So
they by their base lusts, by yielding whereunto, they give place unto the very
Devil, and receive him into their very bosoms.

Latius regnes avidum domando
Spiritum, Horat.
quam si Lybiam remotis
Gadibus jungas, and uterque Poenus
Serviat uni.
None was to triumph in Rome, that had not got five Victories: Isidor.
He shall never triumph in Heaven, that subdueth not his five Senses, himself.

He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; And he that rules his
spirit, Prove. 16.32.
than he that takes a city.

See I Cor. 15.57.

Gain.
An argument from profit is very forcible, This was Hamans cozenage, Hest. 3.8.
It is not for the Kings profit to suffer the Jews. Why are men so desirous of
sheep? because they are profitable creatures. Why do men give so much money for
an office? because it is profitable, and brings great gains with it. Why do
men strive to make their sons Lawyers? because the Lawyers go away with all the
profit. Godliness of all things is most profitable; to procure us the peace of
conscience in this world, and to save us in the world to come.

Hope of profit will turn some spirits into any posture. Some men will be in
any action, so they may gain by it, they will mourn for hire, and curse for
hire; So did Balaam. When he was sent for to curse the people of God, Number. 22.
He made many delays, and seemingly conscientious scruples, yet at last goes
about the work as black and bad as it was. What overcame him, and answered all
doubts? He loved the wages of unrighteousness. Nay, (which is the highest
argument of a mercinary spirit) some act holiness for hire, and are godly for
outward gain.

But ill gain in a little time becomes heavy to the conscience, as heavy as
Judas his thirty pieces. He sed his thoughts with the hope of the money before
he had it, and pleased his eye with it when he had it; but now in a few hours
in the sight of the money he sees his sin, the sight of his hateful sin works
horror of conscience, horror of conscience brings in despair, despair causes
self-murder.

Godliness it self is great gain, if we have no more; but godliness brings in
gain in abundance besides it self. Whatsoever drops out of any promise of the
Gospel, falls into the lap of a godly man. When the promises open at any time,
and give forth their virtue, they must needs give it forth to him that is
godly, for golinesse has the promises. Hence godly persons are said in Latin,
Deum colere, because they are sure by sowing to the Spirit, to reap of the
Spirit life everlasting, Gal. 6.8.

Godliness is great gain. 1 Timothy 6.6.
Riches.
Antiquus quidam Philosophus execratur cos, Indivitijs capid^tatem reprehendit,
non facultatem.
qui primi utilitatem ab hontstate sejunxerunt. Riches in themselves are not
evil. Ne putcutur mala da^tut and bonis, ne putentur summa bona, dantur and
malis. Therefore we tell you from him whose title is rich in mercy, that you
may be at once rich and godly.

Yet it often comes to pass, Difficile est opibus non tradere mentem.
they are irritamenta malorum. Divitiae and superbie sunt inseperabilia, sicut
Jonathan a Davide. It is as hard for a rich man to be proud, as for a choleric
man to be angry.

The Duke of Venica showing the Emperor of Germany his house, Haec nos faciunt
invitos mori.
he made him this answer, These things even make us unwilling to die.

Riches unto the covetous are thorns, in this life and the next life; their
pricks are threefold in this life, Namely, Punctura 1. Laboris, in
acquisitione. 2. Timoris, in possessione. 3. Doloris, in amissione.


Cyprian speaking of possessions, show me (says he) all the stately edifices,
and tell me what they exceed the Swallows nest, which may for a time endure,
but in winter even of themselves they fall down. What does he here mean by
winter, but the day of judgment? when as these our houses of clay will sail us,
to whom they have been nests, all this summer and sunshine of the Gospel: But
what then? shall we like the Swallows take the wing, and so fly into some
hotter Country? No alas! we have been so bewitched with the flesh, the nest of
our soul, that we cannot part from it, but even die with it; and if we happen
(as we shall) into some hotter place, it shall be into fire that shall burn,
not that shall aford any moderate heat to comfort us.

Search if you can find any ill-gotten wealth amongst your heaps, and away with
it as you love your selves; else know (as Chrysostom says) ye have locked up a
thief in your Counting House, Omnis mihi Copia quae Deus meus nen est, agestus
est. Aug.
which will carry away all, and if you look not to it the sooner, your souls
with it.

Oh that this could be our ambition (as Nazianzen reports of Philagrius) Lutum
contemnere, to scorn this base and (pardon my homely word) dirty God of this
world.

Ambiant terrena. Consider, that Coin which passes in Foreign Countries,
serves but for Counters with us. All our pieces of Coin are but current to the
brim of the grave, there they cease: We justly laugh at the folly of those
Eastern Pagans, which put coin into the dead man's hand, for his provision in
another world. Therefore if we will be wise Merchants, thrifty and happy
Usurers, part with that which we cannot keep; that we may gain that which we
cannot lose. For those are true riches, which being once had, cannot be lost.

Riches are not 1. Distinguishing. 2. Satisfying. 3. Sanctifying.


But they are 1. Deceiving. 2. Defiling. 3. Perishing.


If it were fatal for Gehazi, to take what the Prophet refused; then much more
to us, to gather up what Christ rejected.

Lay not up for your selves treasures up on earth; but in heaven. Matthew. 6.19,
20, 21.


For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Odours.
Of Odours there is a lawful use (why else were they created?) to please the
sense, refresh the spirits, comfort the brain, etc. But the excess and abuse
of them is utterly unlawful, and has been justly punished.

Posthume, non been olet, qui been semper olet. Says Martial; And another
says, That woman smells best, that smells of nothing. Spiret antem soemina
Christum.
Let women learn and labor to smell of Christ, (says Clemens Alexandrinus)
who is the royal unction, and let them ever be anointed with chastity, that
chiefest ointment.

Aristotle writes of a parcel of ground in Sicily, that sends forth such a
strong smell of fragrant flowers, that no hound can hunt there: Labor we so to
resent heavenly sweetness, that we may have no mind to hunt after earthly
vanities. Alexanders body is said to be of such an exact constitution, that it
gave a sweet sent where it went. However Christ (the true Carcass) smells so
sweet to all heavenly Eagles, that being now lifted up, he draws them after him.

All thy garments smell of Myrre, and Aloes, and Cassia. Cant. 1.3. Psalm. 45.8.
Protection.
A shadow in Scripture, being taken properly, is that darkness which is caused
by the interposition of a thick body, between us and the Sun: But by a trope
any thing of defense is called a shadow, Judge. 9.9, 15.

In the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, says David, Psalm. 57.1. By
this he does understand Gods safeguard, protection and Providence. The metaphor
is borrowed from the Hen, whose wings in three things especially resemble Gods
high and holy hand.

1. The wings of the Hen nourish and brood her chickens; Even so the Lord said
unto Jerusalem, How often Would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a hen gathers her chickens under her wings! Matthew. 23.37. 2. They serve to
defend them from tempest and storm; So God is a refuge against the tempest of
affliction, and a shadow against the heat of persecution. Isa. 25.4. 3. They
serve to protect the chickens from the Kite, that hovereth over them, and would
fain devour them: even so God delivers his children, from the share of Nimrod
the great hunter; that is from the subtle temptations of the Devil, who walks
about seeking whom he may devour.
The Hen fears not only the Eagle, and the ravenous sowles, but she runs away
if she see so much as the shadow. We must take care and shun even the very
shadow of sin, the least occasion of being caught with those wicked fowls of
the air.

He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, Psalm. 91.1.
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Pleasure.
As in the immoderate use of all things, Voluptates commendat ratior usus.
Horat.
there is a satiety, which breeds a disliking and distaste of them; So it is
in pleasures, being not by any means more commended, than by their novelties
and seldom use; otherwise they are glutting.

The pleasures of the body are continual sorrow, one ever does accompany the
other: When Jupiter (as the Poets fain) could not accord pleasure and sorrow,
in a difference that they brought before him, he bound them together with an
adamantine chain, and indissolveable knot; There is a species of this pleasure
called affection, which oftentimes starves the mind to feed the senses (as
being too impartial) yea oftentimes starves some of the senses themselves to
glut others.

The Antidote against this, Generatio unius corruption alterius.
is to curb by ver^ue this breeder of pleasures, affection; Pleasure and profit
are the two bodies that man labors to adorn, and what is pleasure but the
adulterate brat of the senses, so sading, that she will not last while her
picture is a drawing, if memory did not preserve her? What lasting is that,
which at longest is but an Ephimerides, one days age? And what excellency is
that, which the most excellent do abhor and discard? The pleasures of this
world are full of the stain of sin, and sting of guilt.

It is wittily fabled by the Ancients, Voluptas and dolor* ideo conjungantur,
quia sunt and finguntur saltem Gemellos Hippocratis esse.
that Mars was then taken by Vulcans entrapping nets, when he gave himself to
pleasures with Venus. Hannibal and his soldiers being entangled by the beauty
of women, were enfeebled by the pleasures of Capua; Antonius with Gleopatra;
both most valiant Captains, but by reason of their lust, lost most admirable
a^chievements. Lust is the bane of Kingdoms.

Non tan^um ab hostibus armatis periculum est, quantum a circumfusis
voluptatibus. Scipio ad Amicum.
The Heathens acknowledge the first place to be given to pretty. A wise
Politician, amongst the things that are required to the felicity and integrity
of a Republique, gives the first place to the care of Religion and Piety. For
it is true that Mercurius Trismegistus affirms, (...), Godliness and Religion
is the foundation of all public things.

God did not cast man out of one Paradise, that he might make himself another.
To live like the people of Tombutum in Africa, who are said to spend their
whole time in singing and dancing. Voluptas pecudibus summum bonum. It is not
good for men to take pleasure in pleasure.

The heart of man is not so much quieted in those things which it has,
Sapi^nti vera voluptas est v^luptatis contemptus. Non tantum gaudet in iis quae
habet, quantum tristatur ob ea quae desunt. Greg. Nys. in Ec. Hom. 5.
as it is tormented for those things which it has not. For pleasure is not a
thing belonging unto them who are quiet, but to those who are tossed and
tumbled, and full of disquietnesse; and as a flame is continually moved, and
never suffers the soul to rest, but rather like a madness carries it
uncessantly from one thing to another.

Tully enveig^ing against Verres, says, Vix extra tectum, vix extra lictum. He
was ever whoring or drinking. Mention is made of a Gallant addicted to
uncleanness, who having enjoyed his fleshly desires of a beautiful dame; found
her in the morning to be the dead body, of one that he had formerly sinned
with, which had been acted by the Devil all night; surely he had but a cold
armsul of her at length, and if God had given grace, it might have brought him
to better courses.

Pleasures are Sirens that deceive us all; we are all too greedy of them; yet
there be two sour sauces, that may make us loath them. Heb. 11.27.

1. For the most part they be sinful, the Pitch and Tar of sin cleaves to
them. Riches seem pleasant things to us, yet they be thorns to prick us, and
snares to entagle us. Meat and Drink, Corn and Wine are pleasant things, yet
they often breed surfeiting and drunkenness. Silver and Gold are pleasant
things, yet are they as thieves to steal away our hearts from God; and as
plummets of lead to drown us in perdition, if we look not about us. 2. We can
enjoy them but for a season. And who would live in all jollity here for an
hour? and fry in hell world without end? Let us rather make Moses his choice;
its better to have Lazarus his pains, and go to heaven; than all Dives his
pleasures, and go to hell.
Damned Satan! that with Orphean airs and dextrous warbles, Quicqnid feceris
honestum cum labor, labor abit, honestam Manet. Quicquid feceris turpe cum vo
luptate, voluptas abit, turpitudo Manet. Cato. Jam. 5.5.
leads poor souls to the flames of hell I and then with contempt derides them.
How infinitely are men abused? with what Masks and triumphs are they led to
destruction? Foolishly besorted, degenerate and mad; that having often
experimented his juglings, will yet believe his fictions. He in his baits hides
all he knows will scare them, and presents whatsoever may delight them: But
alas! the punishment that follows this, is far more grievous than the pleasure
was delightful.

Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished
your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Vanity.
Austin speaking of Homer, says of him, that Dulcissime vanus est. Cocfes. l.
1. c. 14.
And delivering his judgment of what Virgil writes of, in comparison of
Scripture, faith, Nonne illa omnia fumus and ventus? the like may be said of
all worldly things.

Sin has hurled confusion over the world, and brought a vanity on the
creature. This our first parents found, and therefore named their second son,
-- (...) Conflitutus, firmus and fixus i^ hac vita. Trem. Annot.
Abel, or Vanity. And David comes after and confirms it, Psalm. 144.4. Man is
like to vanity; yea, Omnis Adam est totus Abel; every man when he is best
underlaid, or settled upon his best bottom, is altogether vanity. When God
cursed the ground, it was, thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee:
Even so there is nothing but pricking vanity and vexation in all worldly
enjoyments.

Vanity has two things in it, whereof the one may seem quite contrary to the
other; It has emptiness in it, and it has fullness in it; It has emptiness
of comfort, and fullness of vexation. That is vain, 1. Which is unprofitable.
2. Which has no solidity in it. 3. Which is always moving, varying and
unsettled. But that is the right vanity, vanity with vexation of spirit.

There is Vanitas 1. Mutabilitatis. Hug. de Sanct. Vict. in Eccl.
2. Curiositatis. 3. Mortalitatis.


Prima vanitas naturalis est, and apta sive congrua. Secunda vanitas culpabilis
est, quia perversa. Tertia vanitas Penalis and misera. Prima causa est peccati;
Secunda peccatum; tertia pana peccati.

Vanity is gradual (says one,) There is vain, and a vainer vanity, and there
is the vaniest vanity; according to that, Eccles. 1.2. upon which Chrysostom
faith, Hune versiculum si saperent, qui in petestate sunt, in Parietibus
omnibus and in vestibus scriberent, in foro, in domo, in januis, in
ingressibus, and an^^ omnia in conscientiis suis, ut semper eum oculis
cernerent, and cord sentirent.

The things here below, Non esuri^ntes animas, sed esuriem ipsam pascunt
animarum Bern. Quemadmodum amygdalae dicuntur inanes, non in quibus nibil est,
sed in quibus id quod inest est inutile, etc. Clem. Alex. Epist. Psalm. 4.2.
they do not feed our hungry souls, but rather the hunger of our souls. They
are said to be vain, Quia possidentes non ad juvant: And vexation of spirit,
Quia quaerentes affligunt.

Almonds are said to be empty, not because there is nothing in them, but
because that which is in them is unprofitable and to no use; So likewise the
things of this world are said to be vanity, are said to be nothing; because how
great soever they may be in their earthly magnitude, how glorious soever in
their temporary bravery; yet they are of no use for the procuring of true good
unto man; no way profitable for the establishing of man's happiness.

I conclude with Bernard, Appetitus vanitatis, est contemptus veritatis; Quid
vanius quam deligere vanitatem? Quid iniquius quam contemnere veritatem?

O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing?
Perfection.
A man may be said to be perfect 1. Comparatively. 2. Conceitedly.


A man in this life cannot be perfect; the flesh will war against the spirit,
and we (like Jacob) all the time of this pilgrimage halt of one leg; though
there be one member in us mundum, there will be another mundandum. The Ark of
the Covenant, was but a cubit and an half high, so were likewise the wheels of
the Caldron. Now we know that a Cubit and an half is but an unperfect measure:
which shows, that no man in this life is perfectly perfect.

We cannot climb up to the highest stair of perfection in this world; we must
be climbing all the days of our lives; Paul was wrapped into the third heaven,
yet he professes he was not yet perfect. Though with Moses we have been
brought up in all the learning of the Egyptians, though we be as perfect
Scribes in the Law of God, as Ezra: as eloquent and mighty in Scripture as
Apollos; though we have as many tongues as Paul; who spoke with tongues more
than they all did; yet we are but scholars, and must be learning of our part,
so long as we live; we must be carried on still to perfection. We must be as
travellars, that are ever walking and going on, never resting till we come unto
our journey's end, which will not be till death it self come, Our Savior
himself, as he was man, did grow up in wisdom.

Nazianzen observes of them that were famous among the Heathen. Solonis (...),
Nostra siqus, ^umilis justitia, recta so^sitan, sed non pura.
covetousness: Socratis (...) loving of boys: Platenis (...), gulosity:
Diogenis (...), scurrility. So we may say of all Christians, they have one
blemish or another. Noah had a stain of drinking. Abraham of dissembling, Peter
of denial of Christ, Paul and Barnabas of contention. As the Psalmist says,
Aug. Contr. duas Epist. Pelag. 1.3. c. 7.
there is none good, no not one; so there is none perfect, no not one. The
virtue that is in a just man, Hactenus perfecta nominatur, ut ad ejus
perfectionem pertineat etiam ipsius imperfectionis and inveritate agnitio, and
in humilitate confessio.

There is not the best man or woman on the face of the earth, but it is an easy
matter to spy an hole in their coat. All those worthies cited, Hebr. 11 had
their blemishes, never a one of those Roses but had their pricks. Gideon beside
many wives had a Concubine; he made an Ephod that was an occasion of idolatry,
and made Israel to sin. Barac was a saint-hearted soldier; Sampson defiled
himself with many strumpets. Jepthe was very rash and inconsiderate. David was
tainted with two horrible sins. Samuel (as it seems) was something negligent
in looking to his children. No Prophet but had some weakness, being all (as
James speaks of Elias) subject to the same infirmities that we are: yet they
were faithful men, greatly honored by God Almighty. Show me a garden without
weeds, and a man without imperfections. If ye will have perfect men, ye must go
to heaven for them; there be none to be found upon earth, Peter, Paul; Thomas,
all the Apostles had their imperfections. Yet some profane wretches there be,
like Cham, if they find never so small a slip in a godly man, they are ready to
laugh at it: Scatent ipsi luneribas, objiciunt illis Sicatrices. Whereas there
is not the best man but treads his shoe awry: We should rather weep, than
rejoice at it.

Therefore when any of the Saints of God, are said in Scripture to be perfect,
Comparate, non abso^e.
it is spoken, not (...), but (...), not simply and absolutely, but
comparatively: As an old beaten soldier may be said to be a perfect warrier,
in comparison of a fresh water soldier. Voto and conata.
Or they may be said to be perfect in respect of sincerity. Or lastly, in
desire and endeavor; Tanquam viatores and cursores; non assequutione; tanquam^
comprehensores.

There was a noble Matron called Florentina, that wrote to Austin, Haec
s^ripsi, non ut Doctor persectus, sed cum docendis perficiendus. Epist. 132.
to be resolved of her doubts, presuming that he could teach her any thing.
That holy man was angry with her for it, and in the winding up of his Epi^lle,
concludes, These things have I written, not as a perfect Doctor, as it pleases
you to term me, but as one that is to be perfected with them, that are to be
taught.

Some of the Papists say, they can perfectly fulfill the Law of God; they can do
more than the Law commands, they can do works of supererrogation; therefore
they may challenge, not only a perfection, but a superperfection to themselves.
It Is well if they prove not like those young Students, who at their first
coming to the University at Athens, seemed to themselves to be (...) wise men:
after awhile, Flut^.
when they looked better into themselves, (...), lovers of wisdom; in process
of time they became a peg lower, (...), but verbal Rhetoricians, no foundnesse
in them; in fine, that they wore (...), mere sools. So would it be with us in
Christ's school, if we had a true sight of our selves, and our imperfections.

Semper hic Deus doceat, semper hic ho^o discat. Let this be as an hammer to
crush in pieces the pride of us all. We may think highly of our selves,
Chrysostom.
but Gods bright eye beholds many blemishes in our best actions. We are like
unto imperfect buildings, something is wanting. The holiest of all are like the
picture of Venus begun by Apelles, but not perfected.

Let us therefore labor to aspire to perfection daily more and more, let every
grace have its perfect work; usus promptos facit, use legs and have legs.
Milo by using to carry a calf when he was young, did bear it when it was old.
So let us use our selves to good works from our youth; to pray as Daniel did,
morning and evening, to reading of the Scriptures, as the Bereans; to give to
the poor and needy, as Cornelius and Dorcas, etc. At length we shall attain to
some perfection in them.

It is Christ that perfecteth the Saints. 1. The number of them. and 2. Graces
of Gods Spirit in them.


Pray we therefore with Be^a, Domine, quod caepisti, perfice, ne in portu
(...)fragium accidit.

Not as though I had already attained, eithor were already perfect: Phil. 3.12.
but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus.

Read 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. Heb. 6.1. Phil. 3.13.

Felicity.
It is not in worldly 1. Pleasure, nor 2. Treasure.


For herein is no 1. Satisfaction, but 2. Increased expense. 3. Restlesnesse.
4. Want of fruition. 5. Uncertainty. Quid enim m^j^^i Cathinno excipitur vulgi,
uam pauper Api^^us? Juven. Sat. 1.



Et quanta est infelicitas fuisse faelicem. Craesus sending for Solon (esteemed
the isest man in Greece) to see him placed in his pomp; demanded of him, Whom
he thought to be the happiest man in the world? O Solon! Solon! vera sunt quae
dixisti, Ante obitum nemo, etc.
Solon answered, Neminem ante obitum faelicem esse arbitror. Craesus demanded
further, Whom then alive? He answered, Tellus, and Cleobis, and Biton, such
died in paternal obedience, without once mentioning Craesus felicity; which
Craesus (though reservedly offended) found afterward most true.

The Philosophers discourses of this subject, are but learned dotages: Put them
all together, and they only beat about the bush, but catch not the bird. Seneca
comes the nearest, l. de brev. vit.
calling it an immunity, from the mutability of fortune. Quid enim supra eum
potest esse, qui supra fortunam est?

Beatitudo 1. Bellar. d^ gratia hom.
Per gratiam inchoata. 2. Per gloriam consummata.


Whether we look ad extra, (...), q. (...), vel (...). Arist.
ad intra, ad supra, or any way; it is the heaped up happiness of eternity,
sitter to be believed, than possible to be expressed.

The depth says, it is not in me; and the sea says, it is not in me.

O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee:
Job 28.14. Psalm. 31.19.
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men.

Adversity.
Crux.
Magis urgeut sava in expertos. Grave est tenerae cervici jugum. Ad suspicionem
vulneris Tyropallescit, Sedul. Minorit. in lib. de praescript. advers. hares.
prascr. 1. Paragra. 17.
audacter veteranus cruoren; suum spectat, qui scit se saepe vicisse post
sanguinem; hoc itaque Deus, quos amat, indurat, recognoscit, exercet. Dum
nescientes, divitiis fluunt, honoribus florent, pollent potestatibus. Miseri,
in hoc altius tolluntur, ut decidant altius: hi enim ut victimae, ad supplicium
saginantur, ut hostiae ad panam coronantur; abundat ille divitiis epulo, micae
panis negantur Lazaro.

The way to the Crown is by the cross. Let us attend Christ on Mount Calvarie,
in his Crucifixion: And we shall be with him on Nount Tabor, to behold his
glorious transfiguration.

If any man will be Christ's Disciple, Mat. 16.24.
he must take up his cross, and follow him. Danger.
Nature out of the rich treasure of her storehouse, has furnished many armies
of the creatures, with armor of defense; but to all in general she has given
a care of their preservation, and some small means to avoid (if not resist)
danger. To man, liable to more dangers, she has been more plentiful of her
means, to escape them more specially; And that is directed by the Author of
nature.

It is said of Alexius, President of the counsel to the Emperor of
Constantinople, that he ruled all things at his pleasure; Turk. Hist. fol. 43.
in so much that nothing done by any of the great officers of the Empire, or by
the Emperor himself, was accounted of any force, except his approbation were
thereunto annexed: Whereby he was grown to such an excessive pride, having all
things in his power, as that no man could without danger (as upon the venomous
Basilisk) look upon him.

The way to honorable ends, is through passages exceeding dangerous.

Great was the peril the Israelites were in, Exodus 14.
when they had the Philistines Garison-Tower of Migdol on one side, Mountains
on the other, the Sea before them, and Pharaoh and the host of the Egyptians
behind them: And yet their extremity was Gods apportunity, who loves to help at
a dead lift; for says Moses, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord.

Man cannot be safe in any place without Gods protection; In 1. Field.
Witness, Abosolom and Saul. In 2. House. Witness, Pharaoh. In 3. Bed.
Witness, Ishbosheth. In 4. Chamber. Witness, Jezabel. In 5. Church. Witness,
Senacherib, Joab.


God snatched Lot out of Sodom, David out of many waters, Tutus sub umbra leonis.
Paul out of the mouth of the lion, Jonah out of the belly of hell, etc. Cur
timeat hominem homo in sinu dei positus?

He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil touch
thee. Job 5.19.
Affliction.
Water properly is that element cold and moist, contrary to fire. Psalm. 42.7.
Fluctus fluctum trudit.
But frequently signifies (amongst many other things) afflictions and troubles
which threaten dangers, as waters threaten drowning. Often in the Psalms and
elsewhere it is so used: And I conceive that ever after Noah's flood (that
dismal destruction) great and grievous afflictions were set forth by the
rushing in of waters, and overwhelming therewith.

Afflictions are that Sea, that all the true Israelites in their journey to the
everlasting Canaan must go through. But yet these rivers of Marah are sweetened;
they are to the godly pleasant, and they going through the vale of misery, use
it for a Well, whereout they draw living water. Psalm. 84.6.

There are light crosses, which will take an easy repulse; Others yet stronger,
that shake the house sides, but break not in upon us; Others veliement, which
by force make way to the heart; Others violent, that lift the mind off the
hinges, or rend the bars of it in pieces, Others furious, that tear up the
very foundations from the bottom, leaving no monument behind them, but ruin.
Anton. Pius.
The wisest and most resolute moralist that ever was, looked pale, when he
should taste of his hemlocke.

Christ went to Jerusalem (the vision of peace) by Bethany (the house of grief)
so must we to heaven. God uses to lay the foundation low, when he will build
high: afflict much, when he will destinate to some excellent end. As in the
creation, first there was darkness, then light. Or as Jacob, first God makes
him halt, and then the place becomes a Peniel.

Therefore take knowledge of the low deeps into which Gods Children are
brought. That soul that feels it self hand-fasted to Christ, though it meet
with a prosperous estate in this world, it easily swells not; and if it meet
with the adverse things of the world, it easily quails not: for it has the
word of Christ and Spirit of Christ residing in it; Whereby you shall behold
their faith victorious, their hope lively, their peace passing all
understanding, their joy unspeakable and glorious, their speech always
gracious, their prayer full of fervor, their lives full of beauty, and their
end full of honor.

Apollonius writes of certain people that could see nothing in the day, but all
in the night. In mirabil. Histor.
Many Christians are so blinded with the sunshine of prosperity, that they see
nothing belonging to their good; but in the winter night of adversity they can
discern all things.

Christians are never more exposed to sins and snares, than in prosperity.
Though winter have fewer flowers, yet also fewer weeds. And fishes are sooner
taken in a glistering pool, than in a troubled Fen.

Besides, while the wind is down, we cannot discern the wheat from the chafe;
but when it blows, then the chafe flies away, only the wheat remains. Witness
that masculine resolution of him, Full gentius.
who in the midst of his sufferings used to say, Plura pro Christo tolleranda.

Here we live in the valley of Achor, from Achan, that was troubled that day
wherein he was stoned, Lorin. Cap. 2. Prolcgom. in Eccles.
Josh. 7. Petrus Tenorius Archbishop of Toledo, having a long time considered
the weighty reasons on each side, whether King Solomon were damned, or saved;
and not knowing how to resolve the houbt, in the end caused him to be painted
on the walls of his Chapel, as one that was half in heaven and half in hell.
The darker the foil, the lighter the Diamonds. Fealty.
A child of God in respect of his manifold afflictions he meets with here,
seems many times to himself and others to be in hell: But having also tasted
the first fruits of the Spirit, and the consolations that accrue unto him
thereby, he seems to be half in heaven.

Our light affliction, 2 Cor. 4.17.
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. Hurt.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt (says Laban to Jacob, Genesis 31.)
though indeed it never was, farther than given him from above. Rideo, dicebat
Caligula, consulibus, quod uno nutu meo jugulare vos possim, and Vxori tam bona
cervix, simul ac jussero, demctur. And Caesar told Metellus, that he could as
easily take away his life, as bid it be done. But these were but bravado's; for
that is a royalty which belongs to God only, to whom belong the issues of death.

Wicked men do not only pull manifold miseries upon themselves, but are many
ways mischievous to others, and have much to answer for their other men's sins.
How many are undone by their murders, adulteries, robberies, false testimonies,
blasphemies, and other rotten speeches, to the corrupting of good manners? What
hurt is done daily by the Devils factors, to men's souls, bodies, lives,
estates? Besides, that they betray the land wherein they live into the hand of
divine justice, whiles they do wickedly with both hands greedily.

When Christ gave his Disciples a commission to preach the Gospel, he promised,
that they should take up Serpents, and if they drank any deadly thing, it
should not hurt them. No more shall the deadly poison of sin hurt those that
have drunk it, if they belong to God. Provided that they cast it up again
quickly by confession, and meddle no more with such a mischief.

Foolish and hurtful lusts drown men in destruction and perdition. 1 Timothy 6.9.
(...).


Ita demorgunt ut in aqua summitate rursus non ebulliant.

Loss.
What tell you me of goods in heaven, (say many) let me have my goods on earth.
A bird in the hand, is better than two in a bush.

The Grecians comprehend both life and goods in one word [(...)] to show
(perhaps) men had as lief lose their lives, as their goods. (...), front
nubila, Mat. 19.22. He came hastily, but went away heavily.
This is an hard thing, it made the young man go sorrowful away, that Christ
should require that which he was unwilling to perform. If heaven be to be had
upon no other terms, Christ may keep it to himself. Many now adays must have
Religion to be another Diana to the Crafts-masters; however are resolved to
suffer nothing. Jeroboamo gravior jactura regionis quam religionis. The King of
Navarre told Beza, that in the cause of Religion, he would launch no further
into the Sea, than he might be sure to return safe to the Haven.

Yet if we were right Christians indeed, we will be content, and that with joy,
to part with all we have in the world, for Christ and his Gospel. He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: much less is he worthy of
Christ, that loves his goods more than him. Consider, 1. God gave us all; why
shall he not have all, if he require it? Cun they be bestowed better, than on
him that gave them? 2. We shall have better in the room; Who will not change
for the better? Heb. 10.34. Those goods tarry but a while, we may lose them by
casualties in this life, at least when Death comes: these endure for over.


He makes his bargain ill, that buyeth a future hope, Certa amittimus, dum in
certa petimus. Plaut.
with a present loss; and parts from a certain possession, to make an uncertain
purchase.

What was once spoken in a witty and fit comparison, made by a Turk, to show
that the loss of Cyprus, was greater than the loss of the battle of Lepanto, in
these words, viz. That the battle lost, was unto Selymus, as if a man should
shave his beard, which would ere long grow again; Turk. Hist. fol. 885.
But that the loss of Cyprus unto the Venetians, was as the loss of an arm,
which once cut off, could not be again recovered: declaring thereby the great
inequality of the loss.

This is very applicable to man's spiritual condition; All outward losses, by
labor and leisure may be recovered, for the world has its ebbings and
flowings; But a soul once lost, can never be recovered; It Is a loss 1.
Incomparable. Vestigia nulla retrorsum.
2. Irreparable.


Out of Hell there is no Redemption.

Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, Heb. 10
34.
that ye have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. Poverty.
Pauper ubique jacet. Poverty is both an affliction, Nihil habet infalix
paupertas durius in se. Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. --
and makes a man to be afflicted and trodden upon. Men go over the hedge where
it is lowest: The weakest go to the Wall. As frost strikes Valleys, when higher
grounds escape free: so famine, and the misery of disorder, is first felt by the
poorer sort.

Yet poor men are not to be contemned. Great men (says one) are but the
greater letters in the same volume, and the poor the smaller: Now though those
take up more room, and have many times more flourishes; yet they put no more
matter nor worth into the word which they compound, than these do. Furthermore,
a poor man may be a rich Christian, and a rich man may have a poor soul. Grace
will make a poor man rich, sin will make a rich man poor, Rev. 2.9. compared
with Chap. 3.17.

The Lamb and the Dove are chosen for Sacrifice, when the Lion and Eagle are
passed by. Levi that had no portion among his brethren, had the Lord for his
portion. Lazarus is taken into Abraham's bosom, when Dives is hushed down into
Hell. Yea, whereas among men, Divitum nomina sciuntur, pauperum nesciuntur;
Sine nomine tur ba. Or (as l^vy) Ignota capitae. Et saepe and virtutis fortnna.
however men forget the poor, they will be sure to remember the rich man's name
and title: yet with God it is otherwise, for the poor man is known to God by
name, he has a proper name, Lazarus; whereas the rich man is called only by an
Apellative name, Dives. Therefore let not the Eunuch say, I am adry tree; for I
will give him an everlasting name: Be not discouraged, though outwardly mean.

And let not the rich be contented with common bounty, until they have the
tokens of special mercy. You may have an estate, and others may have higher
privileges. This is not the favor of Gods people. You may be rich in this
world, but poor in the world to come. Though here you swim and wallow in a Sea
of wealthy pleasures, yet there you may want a drop to cool your tongue.

Ye have the poor always with you. Matt. 26.11.
Debt.
When the Prophet Elisha multiplied the Widows oil, he bade her Go, sell the
oil, and pay the debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest. To show unto
us, debts must be paid.

The Persians reckoned these two very great sins, Viz. 1. To tell a lie. 2 To
be in debt.


By the twelve Tables of Rome, Gell. l. 1. c. 1.
he that owed much, and could not pay; was to be cut in pieces, and every
Creditor was to have a piece of him according to the debt. This was harsh.

But certainly, if we would set our affairs in order with men, we might
consecrate our selves more freely to God; and prevent a world of intricate
troubles to our posterity we leave behind us. Obligations do mancipate the most
free and ingenuous spirit.

A certain Italian Gentleman, being asked how old he was? Answered, that he was
in health: And to another that asked how rich he was? Answered, that he was not
in debt. Intimating, he is young enough that is in health; and rich enough that
is not in debt.

Ow no man any thing, Romans 13.8.
but to love one another. Wound.
Antiquity reports, Illad.
in the Heroique times, they used Weapons of Brass, as in the encounter betwixt
Diomedes and Hector. Which seems to proceed from a willingness to avoid deadly
wounding; for from a styptique faculty in this, more than in Iron, Arist.
the cure of what it hurts, is affirmed more easy, and the metal it self.

As a Surgeon makes an incision, to let out the imposthumed matter, and then
heals up the wound again: So God lanceth us not except need be; and he has a
salve for every sore, a medicine for ever malady; being both a Father, Ah quam
velim alios amare, ^on me^ Luth. in Genes.
and a Physician. And yet most people are of that countrey-mans mind, who being
on his sickbed advised by his Minister to take in good part his present pain,
as a token of Gods love; answered, If this be his love, I could wish he would
love ^hers, and not me.

God never makes a wound too great for his own cure. The power of God to save,
it as great as his power to destroy. His healing power, and his wounding power,
are of the same extent. His justice cannot out-act his mercy, both are infinite.

Nay, the woundings and smitings of God, are preparatories for our care and
healing. It is said of Christ, that with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5.
And it is in this sense a truth, that we are healed with our own stripes. We
are healed with the stripes of Christ meritoriously, by our own stripes
preparatorily: the stripes of Christ heal us naturally, our own stripes heal us
occasionally: Or his in the act, ours in the event.

Dejicit ut relevet, premit ut solatia praestet:
Enecat, ut possit vivificare Deus.
How healing then are his salves, whose very sores are a salve?

For he makes sore; and binds up: he wounds, and his hands make whole. Job
5.18.
Sickness.
Health; in it self; is an invaluable jewel. We know not how to prize it,
Carendo magit quam fru^nde.
but when we want it.

1. When a man is sick; he can do nothing so well as in his health; we cannot
pray so well, pain draws us away; we cannot read so well, follow the works of
our calling so conveniently, attend upon the means of grace, visit our friends,
etc. 2. Sin pulls sickness upon us; because all have sinned, all are sick at
one time or other; in some measure or other; Behold, he whom thou love, is
sick, Joh. 11. 3. A sick man is a Prisoner confined to his bed or house; a man
in health is at liberty to go where he will, yet in the Lord. 4. What is wealth
without health? Nec domus, aut fundus, Horas.
non aris acervus and auri: Aegroto Domini deducunt corpore fabres. Though thou
have the riches of Craesus; yet they could not rid thee of an Ague. So
displeasing is sickness, so pleasing is health.
Bernard tells us of a brother of his; that when he gave him many good
instructions, and he, being a soldier, minded them not: he put, his finger to
his sides, and said, One day a spear shall make way to this heart of thine, for
instructions and admonitions to enter. Read, Job 33.16, 19. Psalm. 107.17, 18.
Mic. 6.13. A promise contrary to those threatenings, is that, And the inhabitant
shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein, Isa. 33.24.
shall be forgiven their iniquity.

Imbecility.
This is imbecility in a man, either 1. To assume too much on himself without
his own merit. 2. Or, to presume too much on Gods mercy.


Sorry man is like Simon Magus the Sorcerer, counting himself for some great
man. As Martin Luther said, All of us have a Pope bred in us, an opinion of our
own works; albeit there be in us no real virtue, nor true substance; yet (
Narcissus-like) we are enamoured with our own shadows; and this is the Serpents
head, the beginning of evil. Wherefore we must labor every day, to dig this
huge Mountain down; we must descend, that we may ascend; as we fell by
ascending, so we must be raised by descending.

Vide te magnum miraculum, says Austin, Lo here a great miracle, God is on
high, and yet the higher thou liftest up thy self, the farther thou art from
him. The lower thou humblest thy self, the nearer he draws to thee. Low
things he looks close upon, that he may raise them; proud things he knows
afar off, that he may depress them. The proud Pharisee pressed as near God as
he could; the poor Publican not daring to do so, stood aloof off: yet was God
far from the Pharisee, near to the Publican.

Whosoever shall exalt himself, Mat. 23.12.
shall be abased: and he that shall humble himself, shall be exalted. Infirmity.
The best of Saints have their infirmities. They are of two sorts, Viz. 1.
Natural. 2. Sinful.


We must so distinguish; for when Christ took our nature into the unity of his
person; with it he took upon him all our infirmities, but not our sinful ones.
For he was like man in all things but sin.

Sins of infirmity, Noe fuit aliquando ebrius, qumvis absit, ut fucrit
abriosus. Aug.
are usually, 1. Sins of incogitancy, Mat. 26.35. 2. They have commonly for
their ground, some strong passion in nature, as fear, shame, disgrace. 3. The
consent is not without some reluctation. 4. They end in mourning, Psalm. 6.6.
Mat. 26.27. 5. They are no sins of custom, if gross sins, seldom or never
iterated.

James (sir-named the just) affirms both of himself, and other sanctified
persons, Triste mortalita is Privilegium.
In many things we offend all. This is the sad privilege of mankind (as one
phraseth it) to have leave to offend sometime: And it is the honor of God
alone to be perfect.

It is wittily and well observed, that Nicodemus, who came to our Savior by
night, was a Disciple, though a dastard; infirmities, if disclaimed, discard us
not. Vzziah ceased not to be a King, when he began to be a leper. Christ did
not abhor the presence of Jehoshuah the High Priest, though ill-clothed, but he
stood before the Angel. The Church calls her self black, but Christ calls her
fair. And under the Law, in peace offerings they might offer leavened bread, to
show that God will bear with his peoples infirmities.

Calvin says of Luther, that as he excelled with great virtues; so he was not
without his great sailings. Arque utinam recognoscendis suis vitiis plus operae
dedisset. Ep. Bulling.
And I would, says he, that he had spent less time in declaiming against
others, and more in Recognizing his own faults.

Hence in our carriage toward the Saints, we should avoid two extremes.

1. The one is, we must not have such high thoughts of them, as above
infirmities. We may over-act this way, as they of Lystra did in overestimating
Paul and Barnabas, when they said, The gods are come down to us, in the
likeness of men. We may have no man's person in admiration, though in a due
estimation. 2. And the other is, neither must we traduce them as hypocrites,
because of infirmities; but afford them their grains of allowance. If we will
have Saints made perfect, we must seek them in heaven, not on earth.
An accomplished man, and well accoutred, yet in wrestling may be overcome, so
as to take a fall, because upon slippery ground; Or a strong City with a
treacherous party in it, may soon be surprised; Even so is it with the best,
while we have flesh as well as spirit.

And I said, This is my infirmity. Psalm. 77.10.
Contingency.
Casus est inopinatae rei eventus. Arist.
Imperitia casum fecit. Therefore it is good judiciously to ponder things past,
Hierom.
prudently to order things present, and providently to foresee and prevent
dangers like to ensue.

The wise man's eyes are in his head. Eccl. 2.14.
Will of God.
Operienda cum patientia divina voluntas. The Will of God is twofold, 1.
Secret. 2. Revealed.


His revealed Will is fourfold, 1. Determining, Ephesians. 1.5. 2. Prescribing, Ephesians.
1.9. 3. Approving, Mat. 18.14. 4. Disposing, or the Will of his Providence, 1
Cor. 1.1. Romans 1.10.


Now we should resign our selves over to his determining Will, as the highest
cause of all things: Rest in his approving Will, as our chiefest happiness:
Obey his prescribing Will, as the absolutest and perfectest form of holiness:
And be subject to his disposing Will, being patient in all trials and troubles,
because he did it, Psalm. 39.9.

There is no bound to the power of God, but only his own Will, Psalm. 115.3. He
will not endure to have any Articles put upon him, nor any limit-lines drawn
about him. A great Prince once said, That he had a circle indeed about his head
(meaning his Crown) but he would not bear it to have a circle about his feet;
he must go which way himself pleased, and do whatsoever his soul desired. Yet
there are circles drawn about all the powers of the world, only God has none.
That which is most sinful in man, is most holy in God, to act according to his
own Will.

Gods Will is sometimes done against man's will, he compelling the Devil and his
limbs sometimes, though against their wills, to serve him and his servants.
Thus Haman must cloth Mordecai in royal apparel, etc. full fore against stomach
be sure; he could rather have torn out his heart, and eaten it with salt; but
how could he help it? Saul pronounces David more righteous than he; Judas and
Pilate give testimony to Christ's innocence: These are the servants of the high
God, which show unto us the way of salvation, said the Pythonisse, concerning
Paul and his Companions, Acts 16.17. Canes lingunt uscerd Lazari.

It Is the duty of man to submit himself unto, 2 Samuel 3.36. Placet mihi quod
regi placet
and acquiesce in the mind of God. The mind of God rests, and we ought to rest
in his mind. Whatever pleases God, should please us. A gracious heart tastes
sweetness in Gall and Wormwood, considered under this notion, as it is the
Will of God he should drink it, or feed upon it.

Thy Will be done in earth, Mat. 6.10.
as it is in heaven Persecution.
Gods people are most fitly resembled unto sheep: 1. Because they are humble.
Herba trabit ovem.
2. Harmless. 3. Profitable. 4. Ruled by their Shepherd. 5. Led into pastures
and folds. 6. And they are obnoxious to many dangers: to Wolves, Briars,
Thieves, Dogs. So, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all. Many can be content to be Gods sheep, provided
they may wear golden fleeces. However, happy are the sheep that have such a
Shepherd.

Excellent things are spoken of the Church of God; a woman clothed with the
Sun, crowned with the Stars, treading upon the Moon; yet traveling in birth,
pursued with the Dragon, ready to be devoured, both her self and little babe;
But heaven sung her triumph against the accuser of the brethren, and he was
cast down, which accused them before God both day and night. To accuse before
men is much, but before God, -- Now and then to be accused is much, but day and
night, -- Thus it happens to the children of God, while nature disrobe us of
corruption.

Quater luctatus est Jacob, in utero cum Esau, in via cum eodem, in Mesopotamia
cum Laban, in Bethel cum Angelo: To teach us, if we will be true Israelites, we
wust arm our selves against all assaults, at all times, places, persons. For
speaking against sin, Elias was hated of Ahab, Isaiah (as they say) was sawn
asunder of Manasses Jeremiah stoned by Tahaphanes, Stephen stoned of the Jews,
John beheaded of Herod, Ignatius delivered to lions, and Chrysostom hated of
the Clergy.

De persecutione in Hybernia, Epist. l. 2: Epist. 36.
de qua omnes ejus Episcopi Gregorio scripserunt; rescripsit Gregorius, Quod
dum non rationabiliter sustinetur, ne quaquam proficit ad salutem; nam nulli
fas est retributionem praemiorum expectare pro culpa debetis scire; Sicut
beatus Cyprianus dixit, quod Martyrom non facit poena sed causa; Dum igitur ita
sit, incongruum nimis est de ea vos, quam dicitis persecutione gloriari, per
quam vos constat ad aterna praemia minime provehi.

The Jesuits have always boasted of their bonds, imprisonment and Martyrdom;
Luke 23.41.
but it would be good for them to know, there be vincti Diaboli, and vincti
Christi. That speech delivered by him on the Cross, would better befit them; We
indeed suffer justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds. And yet I
find that very few (if any at all of latter times) have been imprisoned or put
to death simply for Religion; if they could have kept their fingers out of
treason, De fimpl. Praelat
they might have kept their necks out of the halter. I wish they may listen to
that of Cyprian, Ardeant licet flammis, etc. What though they give their bodies
to be burnt, though they be cast to wild beasts, Non erit illa fidei corona,
sed poena perfidiae; non religiosae vi^tutis exitus gloriosus, sed
desperationis interitus.

The Donatists likewise complained of their persecution, as the Brownists,
Sectaries, Quid laudas panam, at nou ostandiscausam?
and Bedlam-Quakers (upon slight occasions) have done and do amongst us: But as
Austin told them, Ye suffer, Non propter Christum, sed contra Christum:
Persecutionem patimini, non a nobis, sed a factis vestris. Christ was whipped,
that was persecution; Christ whipped some out of the Temple, that was no
persecution. Ishmael mocked Isaac, and that the Apostle calls persocution;
but Sarah beat Hagar, and that he calls no pesecution.

It is said to be the custom of a certain people in Ethiopia, called the
Atlantes, Solin. Plin.
frequently mentioned in diverse Histories, who living under the torrid Zone, in
an extreme hot climate, used to curse the Sun when it arose, because it
scorched them with vehement heat: This made them in love with the night, and
hate the day. Many (says father Latimer) will follow Christ, usque ad ignem
exclusive not inclusive.

Against a great battle in Greece, Xerxes would sit in presence, to the
encouragement of his soldiers, and caused scribes to sit by him, and note down
how each one played his part. It is a glorious thing to say with Paul, for the
hope of Israel am I bound with this chain. (...), says Chrysostom, there can
be no greater thing to glory of than this. The Apostles themselves gloried in
it, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

It was the Queen of Bohemiah's Motto, Intra fortunae sortem, extra imperium.
Persecutors may kill, but cannot hurt, says Justin Martyr. The more we are
mowen down by you, the more we rise up, said Tertullian.

Believe me (said Philpot Martyr) there is no such joy in the world, Act. and
Mon.
as the people of Christ have under the cross; when our enemies imprison our
bodies, they set our souls at liberty with God: when they cast us down, they
lift us up; yea, Siccur se victum gaudeat, hostis habet. Ovid. Trist. l. 2.
when they kill us, then do they bring us to everlasting life: And what greater
glory can there be, than to be at conformity with Christ, which afflictions do
work in us? I praise God (said another) that ever I lived to see this day, and
blessed be my God and merciful Father, that ever he gave me a body to glorify
his name.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy
3.12.
Censuring.
Momus reliquorum omnium irrisor, and reprehensor, qui cujusque vitia carpit,
turpitudinis, infamiae, and dedecoris notas, ut maculas, accuratissime
observat, ob^icit, and reprehendit; hinc (...) dedecus (...), reprehensibilis,
(...), ridicule loquor. Erat autem nocte matre, and somnopatre progenitus, ut
docet Hesiod. Cui nihil placet. quamvis exactum decies castigetur ad unquem.

What a rash thing it is, when any thing dislikes us, to blame the whole body
for one blemish or wart?

Intemperate tongues cause God many times to take away the Word; but wisdom is
justified of her children.

Those that have a blemish in their eye, think the sky to be ever cloudy; and
such as are troubled with the Jaundise, see all things yellow; so do those who
are overgrown with malice and hypocrisy, think all like themselves. Curiosi ad
cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendum suam. Aug.
Caligula did not believe there was any chaste person upon earth. The greatest
censurers, are commonly the greatest hypocrites. Those that are most
inquisitive about other men's manners, are most careless of their own.

As any one is more wise, he is more sparing of his censures. And a gracious
heart is always ready to cast the first stone at it self.

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; Mat. 7.5.
Detrahere, aut detrabentem audire, (audit^ scilic^t placentiae) quid horum
damnabilius sit non facile dixcrim; Uterque diabolum habet, iste in lingua,
ille in aure.
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
Reproach.
Plato commends the Law of the Lydians, that punishes detracters, as they
did murderers. And indeed there is a murder of the tongue, as well as of the
hand.

How many clip the reputation of others (as coin) to make them weigh lighter in
the balance of men's esteem? this is no better, than to bury them while they
are alive.

It is a mavelous great grace to be disgraced for Christ. Tom. 2. p. 323.
Quanto plus contumeliarum pro Christo tulerimus, tanto nos manet gloria major,
said Zwinglius. To suffer for Christ (says Latimer) is the greatest promotion
in this world.

Speak not evil one of another (brethren.) James 4.11.
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, etc. 1 Pet. 4.14.
Mocking.
There are tongue-smiters, (...), a ladendo and inquinando famam alterius probr
is and maledictis. Haec ^ritur ex cordis ira and malitia: Corenim fell livoris
amarum, per linguae instrumentum spargere nisi amara non potest.
as well as hand-smiters; such as malign and molest Gods dearest children, as
well with their virulent tongues, as violent hands. This is collateral
blasphemy, blasphemy in the second table, and so it is often called in the New
Testament. God, for the honor he bears to his people, is pleased to afford
the name of blasphemy to their reproaches; as importing, that he takes it as
if himself were reproached.

Religion was long since grown, as it is also at this day among many, not more
a matter of form, than of scorn. In our wretched days, as the Turks count all
fools to be Saints; so many with us account all Saints to be fools. He is a
fool we say, that would be laughed out of his coat; but he were a double fool,
that would be laughed out of his skin: that would hazard his soul, because loath
to be laughed at.

A man that is mocked, is under the meanest estimation, and greatest contempt.
It is fundamentally opposite to the fundamental laws of love. It is an
addition to affliction, yea one of the greatest afflictions, wounding not only
the name, but the Spirit. It was one of the greatest afflictions, amongst the
sufferings and cruel persecutions that the Saints endured: yea, it was one
great part of the sufferings of Christ; he was mocked and used like a fool in a
play: they put a robe on his back, a reed in his hand, and crown upon his head:
And when he hung on the cross finishing the work of our salvation, they (in
highest scorn) bid him save himself.

Haefamae leniter volant, non leniter violant. We have various examples of Gods
hand upon mockers; Ishmael mocking Isaac, is punished with ejection, Genesis 21.
Reditus ecclesiis eripuit. sacrasmis additis, se Christianos expeditiores
facere ad regnum caelorum, qui^ Gali^aeus magister ipsorum dix erit, beatos
esse pauperes, etc. Pezel in Sleid.
Machiavel that scoffing Atheist, rotted in the prison at Florence. Jearing
Julian had his payment from heaven: he was in his time counted, and stands upon
record to this day among the greatest of sinners, an Apostate from Christ;
Whose Apostasy brake out chiefly at his lips; and the very spirit of his
malignity against the Gospel of Christ, appeared in mocking the Christians:
When we had taken away their estates, he said, it should not trouble you to be
poor, your Master was poor, and he said, Blessed are the poor. And when he had
caused them to be smitten, your Master (says he) has taught you: That
whosoever shall smite you on the right cheek, you must turn to him the other
also. Thus he turned the holy counsels of Christ into profane jests. Sir Thomas
Moor (qui scoptice and scabiose de Luthero and religione reformata loquebatur)
lost his head. One mocking at James Abbes Martyr, as a mad man; for that having
no money, he gave his apparel to the poor; some to one, some to another as he
went to the stake: he lost his wits for it. Act. and Mon. fol. 1904.
What Is truth? said Pilate to our Savior, in a scornful profane manner; not
long after which, he became his own deaths-man. And Appian that scoffed at
Circumcision, had an Ulcer at the same time, and in the same place. Surely God
is the avenger of all such.

A scoffer (says Chrysostem) is bomine pejor, worse than a man; as the scoffed
that bears it well, is Angelis par, says he, an Angels peer.

The favourablest persecution (says one) of any good cause, is the lash of
lewd tongues; whether by bitter taunts, or scurrilous invectives: which it is
as impossible to avoid, as necessary to contemn; But let us bravely contemn
(says another worthy) all contumelies and contempts for conscience sake,
taking them as crowns and confirmations of our conformity to Christ. If
Demetrius has testimony of the truth, that is enough, let Diotrephes prate what
he pleases.

And others had trial of cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36.
-- Resolution in Persecution.
A Spanish Cavalier, who for some fault was whipped through the principal
streets of Paris, and keeping a sober pace, was advised by a friend to make
more have, that he might the sooner be out of his pain; but he half in choler
replied, that he would not lose the least step of his gate, for all the
whipping in Paris. That which in Christians deserves greatest commendations, is
an unmoved patience in suffering adversities, accompanied with a settled
resolution of overcoming them

Bishop Hooper seeing a Pardon lying by him to be given him, if he would
recant; Act. and Mon.
cried to them that stood by, If you love my soul, away with it. His answer to
Master Kingston, advisinghim to save his life by recanting, is worth noting;
Life indeed is sweet, and death bitter; But alas! consider, that the death to
come is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet: Therefore for the desire
and love I have to the one, and the fear and terror I have of the other; I do
not so much regard this death, nor esteem this life; but have settled my self,
through the strength of Gods Spirit, patienly to pass through the torments and
extremities of the fire now prepared for me, rather than to deny Gods Word and
Truth. 'Twas resolutely spoken of Bishop Ridley, to Latimer at the stake, Be of
good comfort, brother, for God will either assuage the fury of the fire, or
else strengthen us to abide it. News being brought to John Philpot, of his
burning the next day; he answered, undauntedly, I am ready; God grant me
strength, a joyful resurrection. I might add abundantly.

Who puts to Sea for a long Voyage, and at a great charge, must resolve to hold
on his course, against all winds and weather, or accidents that may offer to
stop him. So we in Christianity must wrestle with all difficulties, rather than
quit the enterprise. Being once embarked, on we must, with a Caesarean
confidence, and a Spartan resolution; to go on with the sword, or fall on the
sword.

I am ready not to be bound only, Acts 21.13.
but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Vox vere Christianorum.

Martyrdom.
We must expect persecutions here, for how should God wipe away tears from our
eyes in heaven, if on earth we shed no tears? How can Heaven be a place of
rest, if on earth we find it? How could we desire to be at home, if in our
journey we did find no grief? How could we so often call upon God and talk with
him, if our enemy did sleep all the day long? How could we elsewhere be made
like unto Christ in joy, if in sorrow we sob'd not with him? If we will have
joy and felicity, we must needs feel sorrow and misery. If we will go to
heaven, we must sail by hell. If we will embrace Christ in his robes, we must
not think scorn of him in his rags, If we will si^ at table with Christ in his
Kingdom, we must first abide with him in his temptations. If we drink of his
cup of glory, forsake not his cup of ignominy. Can the head-corner-stone be
rejected, and the other more base stones in Gods building be in this world set
by? We are of his living stones, be content then to be hewn, thereby to be
fitted to be joined to your fellows that suffer. We are Gods corn, fear not
therefore the flail, the fan, miln-stone nor Oven. We are all Christ's lambs,
look to be fleeced and slain.

Ignatius qui Apostolorum temporibus proximus fuit, Quid hoc mali est, cujus
reus gaudet, cujus accusatio votum est, and cujus poena feli citas? Tertul.
cum ex Syria usque Romam ad bestias duceretur, inter alia scribebat, O
salutares bestiae, quae preparantur mihi, quando venient? quando emittentur?
quando eis frui licebit carnibus meis. De eodem scribit Irenaeus, Frumentum
Christi sum, dentius bestiaerum molor, ut mundus Dei panis inveniar.

King Henry the fourth, deposer of King Richard the second, was the first of
all English Kings, that began the unmerciful burning of Christ's Saints, for
standing against the Pope; And William Sawtree was the first of all them in
Wickliff's time that was burned; he suffered Anno Dom. 1400. says Fox.

Bishop Hooper in a Letter to Mistress Warcope: Dear sister, take heed, you
shall in your journey toward heaven meet with many a monstrous beast; Paul
fought with some at Ephesus. If there be any way (says Bradford) to heaven on
horseback, it is Persecution. Should we look for fire to quench our thirst?
Even as soon shall Christ's true servants find peace in Antichrists regiment. It
was likewise his saying: At God sent for Elijah in a fiery chariot, so sends
he for me; for by fire my dross must be purified, that I may be fine gold in
his sight.

Queen Anne (wife to King Henry the 8.) led to the Tower to be beheaded, said,
The King was constant in his course of advancing her; For, from a Private
Gentlewoman to a Marchioness, then to a Queen, and when he could no higher,
then to a Martyr.

Cansa, non poena Martyrem facit, ait Cyprian. Nam ut dixit Gregor. Cum Christo
crucem and periturus latro suscepit, sed quum reatus proprius tenuit, pro
crucifixo non absolvit. Aug. Diverso fine and fato. Bucholc.
It is one thing to suffer as a Martyr, and another thing to suffer as a
Malefactor. Ibi erat Christus, ubi latrones; Similis poena, dissimilis causa.
Sampson died with the Philistines, by the fall of the same house; but for
another end, and by a different destiny.

Martyrdom is the lowest subjection that can be to God, but the highest honor:
It brings death in the one hand, and life in the other; for while it kills the
body, it crowns the soul. When one said to a certain Martyr, Take heed, it is a
hard matter to burn: Indeed, said he, it is for him that has his soul linked
to his body, as a Thiefs foot is in a pair of fetters.

-- And they loved not their lives unto the death, Revel. 12.11.
Spiritual Warfare.
Our life is compared to a warfare. The chief Captain General on the one side,
is the Mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Prince of Peace, the Conqueror of
death, hell and sin. The grand Captain on our enemies part, is the great red
Dragon, the old crafty Serpent, the Governor of Darkness. The Lieutenants of
the fields, are Fleshly Sensuality against Spiritual Reason, The Sergeants of
the Band, are the cursed children of Darkness, against the faithful children of
Light. The common soldiers are the Law of our Members, warring against the Law
of our Mind; the effects of the Flesh, against the fruits of the Spirit.

Satan's soldiers handle such like arms as these; The Breast Plate of Injury,
the Girdle of Falsehood, the Shoos of Discord, the Shield of Insidelity, the
Helmet of Mistrust, the piercing Darts of Cruelty, the Canon-shot of spightful
Reproach^s, the Arrows of lying Slanders, the Sword of the Flesh, etc. On the
contrary, Scripture shows us the armor and weapons of a Christian soldier,
Ephesians. 6. Add, the Cannon-shot of deep sighs, proceeding from a penitent heart;
the Arrows of bitter Tears, and the two-edged sword of the Eternal Word, Heb.
4.12.

We are not to encounter with flesh and blood, nor to fight with the Unicorns
of Assyri^, nor the Bulls of Bashan, nor the Beasts of Ephesus; Neither
absolute Atheists, nor dissolute Christians, nor resolute Ruffians: But we are
to war with Principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses that are in
high places.

Let Christians gather courage, and be of good comfort. What if the Serpents
brood do bite? the Beasts of Ephesus yell? the fat Bulls of Bashan push, gore?
and the Red Dragon rage, storm, march in hellish fury? Christ is thy Captain,
and stronger than they all; He can charm the old Serpent, take away his sting,
and grind all our enemies to powder.

Put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11. (...).
that ye may be able to stand against the wile^ of the Devil. Temptation.
There are three things wherein the greatest exercise of a Christian life
confists: 1. Prayer, wherein man is seeking unto, and working his heart toward
God. 2. Meditation, wherein he is preparing himself, by holy thoughts and
divine considerations, for his nearer addresses unto God. 3. Temptation,
wherein he wrestles and strives with those enemies of his soul; And truly, man's
life is a continual temptation. Yea, sometimes the violence of Satan's, and the
Worlds temptations are such, that a child of God is weary of life, (instance in
Job. 10.1.) (...) Fastidit, tanquam (...).
His soul would gladly be rid of the body, that it might be beyond the reach
and assults of the Devil and his assistants.

While we breathe in this Pilgrimage, our life cannot be without sin and
temptation, because our progress is made through temptation.

Temptation is nothing else but, Exploratio per experientiam, says
Parisiensis. Aug. (...), to pierce through. Tentare est prop ie experimentum
sumere de aliquo, Diabolus semper tentat ut noceat in peccatum praecipitando,
and secundum hoc dicitur proprium officium ejus tentare. Aquin.


Temptations are either 1. Good, or 2. Ill.


Of the good there are two: 1. Men tempt and prove themselves. 2. God tempts
and proves men, by sending afflictions.

Of ill temptations of suggestion, there are three. 1. Men tempt men. 2. Men
tempt God. 3. Satan tempts men. There are also temptations of, 1. Affliction, 1
Jam. 3.12. 2. Persecution, Mat. 13.21. Luke 8.13. 3. Concupiscence, Jam. 1.14.

The temptations of Concupiscence, and the temptations of Satan differ thus:
1. The temptations of Satan are usually to things against Nature, or against
the God of Nature; as Blasphemy, Self-murder, Sodomitry, etc. 2. They are
usually sudden and fierce, and violent like lightening; leaving not a man time
for deliberation. 3. Those evils that are instantly disliked, and in no measure
assented to or approved: So that a man does not sin in the temptation, till he
be in some degree drawn away by it.


Again, the Deviltempts, 1. Either by way of seducement, in which he excites
our concupiscence, rubs the firebrand, and makes it send forth many sparkles,
carrying us away by some pleasing object; in this our concupiscence carries
the greatest stroke, Jam. 1.15.2. Or by way of grievance, injecting into us
horrid and hideous thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, Self-murder, etc. And
herein himself, for most part, is the sole doer, to trouble us in our Christian
course, and make us run heavily nowards heaven.

In every temptation there is an appearance of good, whether of the body, Omnis
tentatio est assimilati^ boni. Schoolm.
mind or state. The first is, the lust of the flesh, in any carnal desire. The
second is, the pride of the heart and life. The third is, the lust of the eyes.
To all these the first Adam is tempted, and in all miscarried. The second Adam
is tempted, and overcomes. The first man was tempted to a carnal appetite, by
the forbidden fruit; to pride, by the suggestion of being as God; and to
covetousness, in ambitious desire of knowing good and evil. Satan having found
all the motions so successful in the first Adam, in his innocent estate; will
now tread the same steps, in his temptations of the second. 1. The stones must
be made bread; here is a motion to a carnal appetite. 2. The guard and
attendance of Angels must be presumed on; here is a motion to pride. 3. The
Kingdoms of the world must be offered; here to covetousness and ambition.

Satan usually keeps his greatest and most violent temptations unto the last.
He tempts most at death. One coming to visit a sick friend, asked, Has Satan
been with you yet? The party answered, No: To whom the other replied, Look to
it, he will have a bout with you, ere you die. When he thinks we are at the
weakest then he comes with his strongest assaults.

The Lord by Jeremy says unto Jury, c. 4.14. How long shall wicked thoughts
harbour^ in thee? He asks not wherefore they come, but wherefore they stay:
For many good men are oftentimes overtaken with evil thoughts, but yet will not
yield their consents thereunto.

Yet let a Giant knock while the door is shut, Turpius ejicitur quam non
admittitur hospes.
he may with ease be still kept out; but if once open, that he gets in but a
limb of himself, then there is no course left to keep out the remaining bulk.
Intorto capite, sequetur corpus. We may admit (if not pull in) more with one
finger, than after thrust out with both shoulders.

Let us therefore be sober and vigilant, 1 Pet. 5.8. Put on the whole armor of
God, Ephesians. 6. and resist him, Jam. 4.8. Comforting our selves, both in the
example of Christ, Heb. 2.16. 4.15. and of Christians, 1 Pet. 5.9. in Gods care
for us, 1 Cor. 10.13. and promises made to us in temptations, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.
Isa. 27.1. Romans 16.20.

And let us be earnest in prayer, Tactu qualitativo.
that either Satan may not tempt us, or that he may not touch us, at least (as
Cajetan expounds it, 1 John 5.18.) with a deadly touch; so as to alter us from
our gracious disposition.

Simon, Luke 22.31, 32.
Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may fifth you as wheat:

But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Demoniack.
If God chastise us with his own bare hand, Lunaticus speculum miseriae
humanae, and malitiae Satanae. Pareus in Mat. 17.15. Act. 16 16. (...) Vteres,
Pytlones.
or by men like our selves, let us thank him, and think our selves far better
dealt with, than if he should deliver us up to the public Officer, to this
Tormentor, to be scourged with scorpions at his pleasure.

The Seventy Seniors usually call those who are possessed (...), because the
Devil spoke out of their bellies. For which cause also the Hebrews called them
Oboth, or bottles; because the bellies of those women that were thus made use
of by the Devil, were swelled as big as bottles.

In the year of Grace 1536. a certain Damsel at Frankfort in Germany, being
possessed with a Devil, and stark mad, swallowed down pieces of money with much
gnashing of her teeth: which moneys were presently wrung out of her hands, and
kept by diverse. Bucholc. Chr.
Luther's advice being requested, it was this, To pray hard for her.

Vrbanus Regius, in a Sermon of his at Wittenberg, made mention of a certain
Maid possessed by the Devil; and when she should have been prayed for in the
Congregation, the Devil made as if he had been departed out of her. But before
the next public meeting, Satan returned, and drove the Maid into a deep water,
where she presently perished.

Melanchton tells a story of an Aunt of his, that had her hand burnt to a coal
by the Devil, appearing to her in the likeness of her deceased husband. And
Pareus relates an example, of a Bakers daughter in their country, possessed and
pent up in a Cave she had dug, as in a grave, to her dying day. Much like
unto that poor creature mentioned, Mat. 8.28.

It is to be feared, the Devil that was cast out of the Demoniacks bodies, is
got into many men's hearts; often casting them into the fire of Lust, and water of
Drunkenuess.

Athanasius had a conceit, that the Devil may be driven out of a body, by
repeating the 68. Psalm.

-- Possessed with Devils, Mat. 4.24.
and lunatic. Sorrow.
Secundum Deum, 2 Cor. 7.10. Mundum. 2 Cor. 7.10.


For the first, Sin bred sorrow; and sorrow being right, destroys sin; as the
worm that breeds in the wood, eats into it and devours it. So that of this
sorrow according to God, we may say, as the Romans did of Pompey the Great,
Plut.
(...), That it is the fair and happy daughter of an ugly and odious mother.

But the sorrow of the world, is that which carnal men conceive, Act. and Mon.
fol. 1901.
either for the want or loss of good, or for the sense or fear of evil. Thus
Queen Mary, who died (as some supposed by her much sighing before her death) of
thought and sorrow, either for the departure of King Philip, or the loss of
Calice, or both. Thus Nabal sorrowed.

To these may be added a third; An hellish sorrow, a desperate grief for sin,
Virtus nolentium nulla est.
as was that of Judas. Fained or forced grief is nothing worth: He grieved, and
yet miscarried; It was squeezed out of him, as verjuice out of crabs. But Peter
went forth to weep bitterly.

Gods people are commanded to afflict themselves with voluntary sorrow. Some
shadow of it we have in Epaminondas the Theban General, who the next day after
the Victory and Triumph, went drooping and hanging down his head: And being
asked why he did so? He answered, Blur.
Yesterday I found my self too much tickled with vainglory, therefore I correst
my self for it to day. But we have a better example in holy David, whose heart
smote him, and made him smart inwardly, (says the text, 2 Samuel 24.10.) after
he had numbered the people.

The soundness and sincerity of sorrow is showed by the secrecy of it. Ille
dolet ver^, qui sine test dolet.
He grieves with a witness, that grieves without a witness, Zech. 12.12.

Sorrow is a breaker; It breaks no bones, but it breaks the heart. Worldly
sorrow breaks the heart to death; Godly sorrow breaks the heart to life.

Sorrow shortneth the spirit of man; that is, Sorrow over-acted, weakens the
whole man, and leaves him unable to put himself forth in action. Joy is the
dilatation or widening of the heart; much joy makes the spirit free to act: So
sorrow is a straitner of it, it makes a man narrow-hearted, and narrow-handed;
it stops him in his actings, or stays him from acting.

We commonly say, Sorrow is dry: It Is so, because it is a drier. A broken
spirit dries the bones, Pro. 17.22. Aristotle in his book of Long and short
Life, assigns Grief for a chief cause of death. All immoderations (says
Hippocrates) are great enemies to health.

We have heard of some, whose hearts being filled with vexing cares, Quia
spiritus tristis exiceat ^ssa.
have filled their heads with gray hairs in a very short time. As some have an
art to ripen fruits, before nature ripens them; so the Lord has a power to
hasten old age, before nature makes us old. Many troubles in one year, may make
a man as old as many years.

Grief is like Lead to the soul, heavy and cold; It sinks downward, and carries
the soul with it. Man's Mind is like the stone Tyrrhenus, which so long as it is
whole, swimmeth; but being once broke, sinketh. David was decrepit with much
grief at seventy years of age. Jacob attained not to the days of the years of
the life of his fathers, as being a man of many sorrows. And this some think
was the reason our Savior Christ, at little past thirty, was reckoned to be
toward fifty, Lam. 3.1.
Joh. 8.57. He was the man that had seen affliction.

Mention is made of a German Captain, at the Siege of Buda, Anno 1541. Turk.
Hist.
who seeing the dead body of his unfortunate (but valiant) Son presented to
him; a sudden and inward grief did so surprise him and strike to his heart,
that after he had stood a while speechless, with his eyes set in his head, he
suddenly fell down dead.

The Casuists and Schoolmen affirm sorrow for sin to be the greatest of all
sorrows, In 1. Conatu. 2. Extensione. 3. Appreciatione. 4. Intensione.
Though other Mourning (coming down hill, having Nature to work with it, and
nothing to hinder it) make more noise.

Mine eye is consumed because of grief. Psalm. 6.7.


Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop. Prove. 12.25.


When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, etc.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: Mine eye is consumed with
grief, Psalm. 42.4.
yea, my soul and my belly.

For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: My strength
fails because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. Psalm. 31.9, 10.

Desire.
It is a passion which we have to attain to a good thing which we enjoy not,
Est voluntarius affectus, ut res quae bona existimatur and de^st, vel existat,
vel possideatur.
that we may imagine is fitting for us.

There is a threefold desire, 1. Natural. 2. Reasonable. 3. Spiritual.


And every one of these by their order are subordinate to another, and there is
no repugnancie amongst them.

In Fevers we desire to drink, and yet we will not; And so in Apoplexies to
sleep, and yet we will not. A man's hand is gangrened; a Chyrurgeon comes to cut
it off: The natural desire shrinks and pulls back the hand, because Nature
seeks the preservation of it self; But the reasonable desire says, rather than
the whole body shall be consumed, he will command the Chyrurgeon to cut off the
hand. Here is no repugnancie betwixt the natural and reasonable desire, but a
subordination.

Again, A Martyr is carried to the stake to be burnt; the natural desire
shrinks, but yet it submits it self to the spiritual desire, which comes on
and says, Rather than dishonor God, go to the fire and be burnt.

The Schoolmen say, Nam pereunte uno desiderio, suceedit alterum.
that Desires are not actually infinite; because Nature tends always to some
finite thing; for no man desires infinite meat: Yet his desires are infinite
by succession, because these bodily things which we desire, are not permanent.
Thus, one desire being gone, another comes in place of it.

It is better to moderate Desire at the first, than afterward to prescribe it
a measure.

Let Desire be conversant about right objects. He that pants after the dust of
the earth, shall always be indigent; crying continually (with the two daughters
of the Horse-leech) Give, give. But he that truly desires after Righteousness,
shall be satisfied.

Whosoever shall drink of this water, John 4.13, 14.
shall thirst again:

But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst.

Desertion.
It Is said of the Lioness, that she seems to leave her young ones, till they
have almost killed themselves with roaring and howling; but at last gasp she
relieves them, whereby they become the more courageous. And Mothers use to
leave their children, (or turn their backs upon them) till they mourn and make
moan after them. Even so the Lord withdraws sometimes from his people, and goes
from them, that (with the Prodigal) they may come to themselves; and seems to
forget them, that they may remember themselves.

In Christ's desertion, there was not Divulsio unionis, but Suspensio visionis.
He cried not out of Men or Devils, why they did so and so unto him: But, My
God, my God, why have thou for saken me? Oh! that came near his heart.

In such a forlorn condition as this, a poor Soul, for regaining of his God,
can do no more than 1. Bewail the want of Gods gracious presence. As Reuben for
Joseph: Heu! quid agam? I cannot find my God; and I, whither shall I go? 2. Cry
after him in fervent prayer: As Elisha after Elijah, My father, my father!
Return, O Lord: how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servant. 3.
Wait his leisure, if he please to hold off longer: Sustaining himself with
cordial places of Scripture. Isa. 50.10. cap. 64.4. cap. 30.18. In which estate
should he be taken away by death, his condition is like to be comfortable;
because the Spirit of Truth says, Blessed are all they that wait for him.


Epiphanius tells of a bird Charadius, But what joy at the breaking forth of
the Sun after an Eclipse!
that being brought into the room where a man lies sick, if he look with a
steady and fixed eye upon the sick man, he recovereth. Certainly, in Gods
favor is life; but, Aversio vultus Dei, the turning away of Gods pleased
countenance, is the cause of all sorrow and sadness.

When he hides his face, Job 34.29.
who then can behold him? Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Psalm.
30.7.
Calamity.
It was an easy thing (said Bishop Hooper) to hold with Christ, Calamita^
virtutis occasio est.
whiles the Prince and the World held with him; but now the World hates him,
it is the true trial who be his. Let us not then run away, when it is most time
to fight. Remember none are crowned, but they that fight manfully. You must now
turn all your cogitations from the peril you see, and mark the felicity that
follows the peril; either victory of your enemies in this world, or else a
surrender for ever of your right in the inheritance to come.

He calls the World the Miln and Kitchen, Idem.
to grind and boil the flesh of Gods people in, till they atchieve their
perfection in the World to come.

The World (says one) is not a Paradise, but a Purgatory to the Saints: It may
be compared to the straits of Magellan, which is said to be a place of that
nature, Heyl. Geogr.
that which way soever a man bend his course, he shall be sure to have the wind
against him. They may not here dream of a delicacy.

In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, Joh. 16.33.
I have overcome the world. Quatuor Novissima.
Mors.
DEath, Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are the Quatuor Novissima.

Discrimen inter beatos post resurrectionem, and primos parents in statu
innocentiae, and homines in statunaturae lapsae, in quo nunc sumus, est; Quod
beati nunquam mori poterunt, primi parents poterant nunquam meri, hemines in
statu nature lapsae, non possunt non mori.

The decree is out, Fort^sse in omnibus si me rebus bumanis, s^d non in morte
locum habet. Bellarm. Resistitur ignibus, undis, serro, resistitur regibus,
imperi^s venit una m^rs, and quis eiresistit? Aug. Non torquate genus, non te
sacundia, non te restituet pietas. Horat. l. 4. Lex universa jubet n^s^i and
mori. Senec.
All must die. Belshazzar's Emblem is upon every wall, Mean mean tekel
upharsin: Yea, this impress is upon all flesh; Numeravit, appendit, divisit;
God has numbered thy days, he has laid thee on the balance, and thou art
found wanting, thy Kingdom is divided.

Say Princes, say Pesants, say all, Corruption thou art my father, Worms ye are
my sisters, Grave thou are my bed, Sheet thou art my shrine, Earth thou art my
cover, Green grass thou art my carpet: Death demand thy due, and thou
Gatheringhost-Dan, come last and sweep all away.

Epictetus went forth one day, and saw a woman weeping for her Pitcher of earth
that was broken; and went forth the next day, and saw a woman weeping for her
son that was dead, and thereupon said, Heri vidi fragilem frangi, hodie vidi
mortalem mori. Life is but a sleep, a shadow, a bubble, a vapor, and as a tale
that is told.

Aristotle spoke these words at his death: I rejoice that I go out of the
World, which is compounded of contraries: Because each of the four Elements is
contrary to other, therefore how can this Body compounded of them long endure?
Plato treating of the Souls of men, could say, The merciful Father made them
soluble and mortal bands; meaning indeed, they should not always be held with
the miseries of this life.

Death reigned from Adam to Moses: And though Death shall not reign, yet it
shall live, fight and prevail, from Moses to the end of the world, for then,
and not till then, shall be brought to pass that saying that is written, Death
is swallowed up in victory.

We may easily perceive, Mill modis laethi, miseros mors una fatigat. Et tum
quo que cum crescimus, vita decrescit. Sencc.
how all this our Contexture is built of weak and decaying pieces. Tully
writes of Hortensius, that after his Consulship, he decayed in his rare
faculty of Eloquence; though not so sensibly, that every auditor might perceive
it; yet in such sort, that a cunning Artist might observe, that he drew not so
clear a stroke in his pieces, nor cast on them so rich and lively colors, as
before.

Mors hominis and pecudum differt? In pecudibus perit anima cum corpore, and
redit in nihilum quod fuit ante nihil: Non vero ita homines, anima rationalis
non perit cum corpore, sed corpori tandem adjungetur anima, unde domicilium and
templum aeternum Dei erit.

Death (Serpent-like) meddles with nothing but a godly man's dust. When death
takes hold of the Body (as Potipher's wife did of Joseph's cloak) the Soul
leaves it (as he did that) and flies to God.

One reason of dying is, God will have our Bodies to be new cast, and come out
beautiful and bright; This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. Under the Law persons were unclean till the
evening, so are we till death; because we shall never utterly lay by our body
of corruption, till we lay aside our earthly body.

Omega nostrorum mors est, Owen. Epigram. Nec dignus est in morte accipere
solatium, qui se non c^gitavit esse moriturum. Cypr.
mors alpha malorum; is true of wicked men. And sad it is for any to say at
death, Omnia fui, nihil sum. Yet, as the Vipers flesh is made a preservative
against her poison; so from the bitter cup of Death, arises to a child of God,
health, joy, salvation. Who is afraid to die (said Bradford) but such as hope
not to live eternally? Death, once a curse, is now turned into a blessing; as
Levi's curse of being scattered, better fitted them to teach the Tribes in
every City.

The godly, Cautator Cygnus Funcris ipse sui.
at their death, knowing that out of their labor they must receive a plentiful
harvest, they rejoice to see the troops of Angels, and are so much the more
ravished with joy, as they draw nearer to their death; by which they are
delivered from the prison of the flesh, the floods of misery, and the deceits
of the Devil; drawing nearer to the Crown of glory, and fruition of eternal
rest and felicity, with the Saints of God.

Bolton said on his deathbed, He hoped none of his Children durst meet him at
the great Tribunal of Christ, in an unregenerate estate.

Satan tempts forest at death: The Coward, when we are at weakest, when entering
into Heaven, though he cannot hinder us, yet he will be treading upon our heels
and troubling us. But be of good comfort, Serpens nunquam nisi moriens in
longum est.

Meeting two Boats on the water, we think the other moves, ours stands still:
Even so, we are usually more mindful of the mortality of others, than our own.
But there are two rules never to be forgotten That the Son of God died for
thee; And that thou thy self (though thou live long) must die, nay, art
shortly to die. Nihil sic revocat hominem a peccato, quam frequens meditatio
mortis. Aug.
If thou should live in the utmost part of Ethiopia, where men so long live
as are called Macrobians, yet die thou must, nor can thou know where, when,
or how. The death of the Son of God, who did acquit thee from eternal death,
and thy own death being so certain, must be as two spurs of love, to drive thee
through the short race of this momentany life, unto the goal of eternal
happiness.

Consider, 1. The time we have to live, is less than a Geometrical point. 2.
How wicked the Enemy is, who promises us the Kingdom of this World, that he
might take from us a better. 3. How false Pleasures are, which only embrace us
to strangle us. 4. How deceitful Honors are, which lift us up, to cast us down.

It is the sublimity of wisdom to do those things living, Hic est apex summae
sapientiae, ea viventem facere; quae morienti essent appetenda.
which are to be desired and chosen by dying persons. Let every man in the
address to his actions, consider, whether he would not be infinitely troubled
that death should surprise him in the present dispositions, and then let him
proceed accordingly.

Austin with his mother Monica was led one day by a Roman Practor to see the
Tomb of Caesar. Himself thus describes the Corpse: It looked of a blue mould,
the bone of the nose laid bare, the flesh of the nether lip quite fallen off,
his mouth full of worms, and in his eye-pits two hungry toads, feasting upon
the remanent por^ion of flesh and moisture; and so he dwelt in his house of
darkness. This meditation might be a means to allay our sinful appetites, make
our spirits more sober and desires obedient.

But some are as unwilling to meditate of Death, as a child to look into the
dark: If they make their Will, they think they are nearer to it. But let us
acquaint our selves with Death; as when a horse boggles, we ride him up to the
object. Yea (as Christ said, when the Disciples were afraid,) let us handle it
and see. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
And let us always be ready, in what corner soever we are, that when God calls,
we may with Abraham say, Behold, my Lord, here I am. Death, like the stream of
Jordan between us and our Canaan, runs furiously, but stands still when the Ark
comes. Blessed is the death of those, that have part in the death of Christ.

Death every where expects us: If thou therefore be wise, Mors. ubique nos
expect^^; tu, fi saplens cris, ubique illam expectabis. Senec. Heb. 9.27.
do thou expect Death every where. To this end, remember Austins admonition; Be
afraid to live in such an estate, as thou art afraid to die in.

It is appointed unto men once to die. Purgatory.
Lo, say some, (quoting Heb. 9.8.) Heaven was not opened in the time of the
Law, till the passion of our Savior Christ: therefore the Patriarchs and
others that died then, went not to Heaven, but were in a place of Rest distinct
from Heaven. This is their Limbus Patrum, which they have forged.

But quickly to stop their mouths: It is not (...), but (...). A gate in the
Kings Palace may be opened, though not known. The way to the Holiest of all,
that is to Heaven, prefigured by their Sanctum Sanctorum, was not yet
manifested; it was obscured under Types and Figures, darkly revealed to them.

That one place of Scripture following, puts out the very Fire of Purgatory:
For if all Believers die in Christ, and are blessed, and that presently; then
none are to be purged.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.
from henceforth. (...), i. e. e vestigio, ab ipso mortis tempore; a modo, a
modo jam. Burial.
It is the last office of love, to bring the deceased Saints honorably to their
long home; to lay them in their last bed, to put them into the grave, as into
an haven and harbor, where they may rest from their labors. This is to deal
kindly with the dead.

In hoc peccatur bifariam. Lavat.
1. Si prorsus contemnatur, ut Diogeniani fatiunt, jubentes se in aquis, aut in
sterquilineum projici. 2. Qui nimium tribuunt sepultura, ut illi qui miris
ceremoniis consecrarunt, ut afficere dixerunt animam, nisi in consecrato
corpora fuerint sepulta. Media tenenda via: Si possimus habere honestam
sepulturam, ne contemnamus eam: Si corpus avibus aut feris projiciendum
intelligamus, rem Deo committemus, cujus (ut Psaltes dicit) terra est and
plenitudo ejus.

It has been ever the fashion, to be careful of Burial. The Jews anointed
their dead bodies, wrapped them in Syndon, laid them in covered Sepulchers hewed
out of stone: The Egyptians embalmed and filled them with odoriferous spices,
reserving them in Glass or Coffins; the Assyrians in Wax and Honey: The
Scythians carried about the cleansed Carcasses to the friends of the deceased,
for forty days, with solemn banquets: The Romans used Funeral honors and
ceremonies with ointments, images, bon-fires of most precious woods, sacrifices
and banquets, burning their dead bodies; wherein they were excessive, until
about the time of Theodosius, laws were enacted to restrain the excess. None
neglected it, but savage Nations, In the womb a foot contents us, three foot in
the cradle: though betwixt the cradle and the grave, a whole world not contents
us. (...) Sepulchrum domus mea. (...) Eccl. 12.5. Domus saculi, sive
aeternitatis.
as Bactrians, which cast their dead to the dogs; some varlet Philosophers, as
Diogenes, who desired to be devoured of fishes; some dissolute Courtiers, as
Mecoenas, who was wont to say, Non tumulum curo, etc. And as another said, De
terra in terram, and quavis terra sepulchrum.

The place of Burial is called by S. Paul, seminatio, in respect of the assured
hope of Resurrection: Of the Hebrews, The house of the living; As a Churchyard
is called of the Germans, Gods acre or field, in the same respect. In the like
sense Tombs were called Requietoria, Ossuaria, Cineraria domus aternae. Of
Lucian, Camps and Cottages of Carcasses, scoffingly.

It is remarkable, that the first purchase of possession mentioned in
Scripture, was a place to bury in, not to build in. Joseph of Arimathea had his
Tomb in his garden, to season his delights (very like) with the meditation of
his end. The Egyptians had a Deaths-head carried about the table at their
feasts. The Emperors of Constantinople had a Mason came to them on their
Coronation-day, with choice of Tomb-stones, and these verses in his mouth.

Elige ab his saxis ex quo (Invictissime Caesar)
Ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare velis.
Our first Parents made them garments of fig leaves; but God misliking that,
gave them garments of skins: And such did the austere Baptist wear, to discover
our mortality.

Want of Burial, Senec. ad Martiam.
the Jews accounted worse than death; the Romans, extreme cruelty. Immanitatis
est Scythicae non sepelire mortuos.

Alexander the Great lay unburied thirty days together: His Conquests above
ground, purchased him no title for habitation under ground. So Pompey the
Great; of whom Claudian, Nudus pascit aves, jacet en qui possidet orbem,
Exiguae telluris inops --


Of Tiberius the Emperor it is storied, That he was so hated for his Tyranny,
that when he was dead, some of the people would have had him thrown into the
river Tiber; some, hanged up in an ignominious manner; others also made prayer
to mother Earth, to grant him now dead, no place but among the wicked.
Contrarily, when Dio died, the people of Syracuse would have gladly redeemed
his life with their own blood; which because they could not, they buried him
very honorably, in an eminent place of their city.

The Romans of old, after the Funeral solemnities ended, (which were very
many,) used to take their farewell of the dead body in these words; Vale, vale,
vale: nos te ordine quo natura permiserit sequemur.

To have a comely burial, is a great blessing. It was threatened upon Jehojakim
the son of Josiah, as a curse, that he should be buried with the burial of an
Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem, Jer. 22.19. It is
like, that man had lived like a beast; and God threatens him by name, that when
he died, he should be used as a beast. True it is, they whose souls are with
God in heaven, Facilis jactura sepulchri.
may be without a burying place on earth; The bodies of many of the servants of
God, have been, and may be scattered upon the face of the earth, like dung,
according to that, Psalm. 79.2. Yet even then unto them, there is this blessing
reserved, beyond the blessing of a burial, They are laid up in the heart of
God, and he takes care of them; yea, He imbalms them for Immortality, when the
remains of their Mortality are trodden under foot, or rot upon a dunghill.

Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was; Eccl. 12.7.
and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. Resurrection.
It was not possible that Christ should be holden of death. Act. 2.24.
This impossibility sprang chiefly from an utter inconsistencie with the
righteousness and goodness of God, to suffer a Person so innocent and holy as
Christ was, and withal, having fully accomplished what he undertook by dying,
to remain any longer in the bands and prison of death. For, this act of raising
of Christ, is to be looked upon as an act of righteousness and equity, as well
as of power.

Again, there was necessity for it on Gods part too, by way of design or
wisdom, viz. to accommodate the great end of glorifying himself, in the
salvation and condemnation of men. They that are saved, could not be saved (at
least on such terms) without being justified: Justified they could not be,
without believing: Believe they could not, but by and through the rising again
of Christ from the dead. Hence, 1 Pet. 1.21. Romans 4.25. Thus the righteousness
and wisdom which together shine forth in it, give as it were a gracious luster,
and set off, to the Power that appeared in it.

Basil says, that the Resurrection of the body is a Creation. And he shows
that there are three sorts of Creation: 1. When a thing is made of nothing, as
in the first Creation. 2. When a thing of evil is made good, as in
Regeneration; Create in me a clean heart. 3. When the bodies shall be raised
out of the dust, at the Resurrection. The first is called (...); and the
Resurrection is called (...), or a new creation.

There be several Pillars for the Resurrection to lean upon. Resurrectio
mortuorum, fiducia Christianorum.
1. The Power of God; Idoneus est reficere qui fecit. 2. The Justice of God,
Psalm. 58.11. 3. The solemn Funerals that be in all Nations: When we go to a
Burial, we go to a lowing of seed. 4. The Resurrection of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.20.
Facilius est restituere quam constituere.
The First Fruits, the Head, the Husband is in heaven; therefore the second
fruits, the members, the Wife shall be there also.

Add hereunto, 1. Bonitas Dei; Absit ut Deus, manuum suarum operam, ingenii
sui curam, afflatus sui vaginam, libertatis suae haeredem, testimonii sui
militem, Tertul.
Spiritus sancti templum in aeternum destituat exitium. 2. Exempla
resurgentium, in the Old and New Testament. Christ raised up three: The one in
demo, the daughter of Jairus; the other in feretro, the Widows son of Naim; the
third in sepulchro, which was Lazarus, when he began to stink. These are
praeludia nostrae resurrectionis. 3. Dulcis titulus mortis; 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14.
Joh. 11.12. The dead are but asleep.

Quaedam parts ab animantibus divulsae, Zanard. de genesis and corrup.
art medici iterum reliquis uniuntur: Imo D. Aug. super Psalm. 101. Refert a
quibusdam traditum, Pelicanum restro pullos suos occidere, sed post seipsum
sauciando sanguinem effundere, eoque super pullos effuso, eos ad vitam
revocare. Deus pari modo nuntium nobis mortem mittit, ut ad vitam restauraret.

In Ireland there are birds called Martins (as some write) which if they be
hung in a dry place when they are dead, Grimst. p. 34.
they renew their feathers every year. The husbandman prizeth as much the corn
sown in the field, as that which is in the garner. Tertul.
Dies moritur in noctem, and tamen rursus cum suo cultu, universo orbi
reviviscit. Hinc, Job 17.12. Post tenebras spero lucem.

Fear not (says God to Jacob, Genesis 46.4.) to go down to Egypt, for I will go
down with thee, and I will also surely bring thee up again. The like may be
said to every godly person, going down to the grave.

All shall rise again, good and bad. Cain shall rise with the same hand
wherewith he slew his brother: Jezabel with the same body that was eaten up by
the dogs: Rabsekeh with the same tongue wherewith he railed on the God of
Israel: Judas with the same lips wherewith he traitorously betrayed our Savior
Christ. Such like as these shall rise with horror of conscience: But the godly
that have stuck to Christ, shall rise with comfortable consciences.

Sive comedo, Hierom.
sive bibo, sive aliquid aliud facio, semper vox illa terribilis sonat in
auribus meis; Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium.

Marvel not at this; Joh. 5.28, 29.
for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice,

And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

Judicium Vltimum.
After the Resurrection comes Judgment. Death were nothing, if there were no
Judgment. The Assizes were nothing, if there were no Execution.

Dies judicii exinde probatur; Si non sit judicium, tum non est Deus justus; Si
non est Deus justus, tum non est Deus; si non Deus, tum non est mundus; si non
sit mundus, tum nulli sunt homines. Sic ratione probatur.

Then shall be signs in the Sun. The Sun of Righteousness appears in three
signs, Viz. 1. Leo, Roaring in the Law, as the people could not endure the
voice thereof. 2. Virgo, Born of a Virgin in the Gospel. 3. Libra, Weighing our
works in his balance, at the last and dreadful Audit.


Which Bernard uttered elegantly, saying, Christ comes three manner of ways,
Viz. 1. Ad homines. 2. In homines. 3. Contra homines.


Christ ha tha fourfold Exaltation; and the last is the greatest, Viz. In 1.
Mount Tabor, his Transfiguration. 2. Jerusalem, his Resurrection. 3. Mount
Olivet, his Ascension. 4. The Clouds, his coming to Judgment.


If the Queen of Sheba condemned the men of that age, how shall she condemn us?
She was a Queen, and we but Subjects: she left her kingdom and country; we sit
under our own vines, under our own fig trees, in our own soil, in our own
country: she came from the farthest part of the earth to Solomon; but Christ
comes from heaven to see us: she was moved only by his fame; we both hear
Christ in his Word, and see him in his Sacraments: she coming to Solomon,
brought presents; Christ coming to us, gives us rewards: she came to behold
Solomon a mere man; but we may behold Christ God and Man: A greater than
Solomon, greater in wisdom, for never man spoke as he did; He did all things
well, therefore greater in might, He made the deaf to hear, the blind to see,
the lame to go, etc. never man did as he did; Greater in Majesty, for Solomon
in all his royalty was but a type of our King coming in the clouds. Without
repentance surely this Queen shall arise up with a witness in judgment against
us, and condemn us, at the dreadful day.

Poena damni poenalior est quam poena sensus. If Esau, Erugiit clamore magno.
to see his younger brother Jacob to have got the blessing, roared with a great
cry, out of measure; how loud will the Reprobate roar, when he shall behold the
Saints (figured in Jacob) to have got the benediction of the Heavenly Father?
Venite benedicti, --

If Belshazzar, at the sight of an handwriting against him, which only
concerned the losing of his temporal Kingdom, was so changed in his look, and
troubled in his thoughts, that the joints of his bones were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another; how shall the Reprobate be perplexed in his
wits, and crossed in his will, when he shall see and hear Christ thundering out
against him, Ite maledicti, -- Memento, 1. Peccati, ut doleas. 2. Mortis, ut
desinas. 3. Divinae justitiae, ut timeas. 4. Misericordiae, ne desperas.


Above all, remember those four last things, viz. 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3.
Heaven. 4. Hell.


But the chiefest is Judgment; for all the rest attend it: Death is usher to
Judgment, going before; and Hell the execution, following after. Death would
not be so fearful, if Judgment did not follow; Hell would not be so painful, if
Judgment went not before.

Italians, in great Thunder, use to ring their Bells, and discharge their
Canon-shot, that the roaring of the one, may lessen the terror of the other. In
like sort, Satan hangs tinkling cymbals in our ears, and delights us with the
music and vanities of this world, that we may forget the sonnd of the last
Trumpet.

There is a threefold Judgment, says Aquinas; 1. Discussionis. 2.
Condemnationis. 3. Absolutionis.


It Is good for every man to judge himself in the two first; He must examine
himself, and upon examination, condemn himself.

The certainty of Judgment may teach us, not to be too curious, or careless: It
is a kind of sacrilege, to pry into Gods holy place, his secret Sanctuary. Non
judicium luti, sed figuli.
To determine who shall be saved, and who shall be damned, is not belonging to
the Clay, but the Potter; in whose power it is to make of the same lump one
vessel of honor, another to dishonor.

Austin desired to see three things especially, viz. 1. Rome in her glory. 2.
Paul in the Pulpit. 3. Christ in the flesh.


So let us desire three things, 1. The conversion (or else confusion) of Rome
and Babylon. 2. The consolation of Israel and all Gods chosen. 3. The coming of
Christ, not in the flesh, but unto Judgment.


Oh that happy and merry Day! Act. and Mon.
said Robert Samuel Martyr.

It is called Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. Because, 1. It is of things eternal,
Eternal life, or eternal death. 2. The Sentence of that Judgment is eternal;
Elect and Reprobate go eternally to the place appointed. 3. The Judge is
Eternal. 4. The persons judged are eternal; some to enjoy eternal happiness,
and some to suffer eternal punishment. The Judgment it self is not eternal, it
lasts not ever; but the fruit and event of it is eternal. Oh that the
cogitation of this Judgment were deeply fixed in the hearts of us all!

Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat. What shall the
Fornicator get; enduring an ocean of torture, for a drop or dram of pleasure?

The total sum is, The breach of all the Commandments. If these Accounts be not
crossed in this life, we shall never have our Quietus est in the life to come.

The times of ignorance God winked at, Act. 17.30, 31.
but now commands all men every where to repent:

Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Eternal Life.
Electra in Senec. movet hanc quaestionem, Mortem aliquid ultra est? Cui
respondet Aegisthus, Vita, si cupias mori. Ethnicus resurrectionem, vel saltem
vitam aeternam agnoscit.

Contemnenda est omnis injuria praesentium malorum, Cypr.
fiducia futurorum bonorum. We that have received the first fruits of the
Spirit, sigh and sob by these waters of Babylon, because we cannot sing the
Lords song in a strange land; but then we shall sit and shine in the Kingdom of
Heaven, with Albs of innocence on our backs, Palms of victory in our hands,
Crowns of glory on our heads, and Songs of triumph in our mouths: Then shall we
enter into the Holy of holies, then shall we celebrate the Sabbath of Sabbaths,
then shall we sing the Song of songs, which none can learn, but those that are
redeemed from the earth.

Vita aeterna est vita vera. Prima vita, primum bonum, and ultimum malum:
Secunda vita, primum malum, and ultimum bonum habet. Hug^ de sanct. vict.
The first life, has first good, and afterward that which is evil: The second
life, has first evil, and afterward good.

This life, Christus 1. Promisit, Luke 12.32. 2. Promeruit, Romans 6.23. 3.
Praeparavit, Joh. 14.2. 4. Inchoat, Joh. 6.47. 5. Reddet, Joh. 11.25.


This is the promise that he has promised us, Dav. in Coloss. 1 John 2.25.
even eternal life. Caelum
Heaven is threefold, where 1. Fowls are, the airy heaven, Genesis 1.30. 2.
Stars are, the firmament, Genesis 1.17. 3. Souls are, the glorious, or heaven of
heavens, 1 Kings 18.27.


Heaven is not obtained by chance, as the Milesian fisherman got the golden
tripos.

Assurance of heaven is to be got three manner of ways, 1. By faith, 1 Pet.
1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. 2. By
conformity to Christ, Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be made conformable to the image of his Son. 3. By the sealing
work of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. After that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise, cap. 4.30. unto the day of redemption.


In the world if a man purchase a Lordship, his heart is always there; he
pulls down, he builds, he plants. Christ has bought the Kingdom of Heaven for
us, and has paid for it at an high rate, even with his most precious blood;
Anselm.
where he has prepared mansions for us, that are Denisons; All our joy
therefore should be there: Corpore ambulantes in terra, cord habitantes in
Caelo.

Nonius chose rather to lose all his honors and fortunes, than to quit his
Opal Ring to Anthony: But a far fairer Jewel is the Kingdom of God; so sweet
and precious, that it deserves the selling of all we have, and running into any
hazard for it.

Luther gave his opinion the day before his death, that in heaven we shall know
one another; because Adam knew Eve at first sight.

Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, Mat. 6.20.
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt; and where thieves do not break
through, nor steal. Heavens Glory
The Christalline walks of that new City, are not for muddy feet; nor shall
lust-infected eyes look within those holy doors, Rev. 21.27. There is a room
without for such, cap. 22.15. a black room for black works, God will not set a
golden head on earthen feet; give the glory of heaven to him that delights in
the glory of earth; The Angels, those Caelestial porters, that carry the souls
of the Saints, as they did the soul of Lazarus to Abraham's bosom, have no
commission to pull a wicked man's soul to heaven.

Trajane erected many monuments and buildings, insomuch that Constantine the
great in emulation was wont to call him Parietaria the Wall-flower, because his
name was upon so many walls. Babels Tower raised an head of Majesty 5164, Heyl.
Geog.
paces frow the ground, having its basis and circumference equal to the height:
the passage to go up went winding about the outside, and was of an exceeding
great breadth; there being not only room for horses, carts, etc. to meet and
turn, but lodgings also for man and beast; and (as some report) grass and
cornfieldsd, for their nourishment. Pharos a watchtower in Egypt, was built by
Ptolomie Philadelph, all of white marble. Plin. l. 36. c. 12.
The work of those famous Pyramides (though it do not appear who were the
founders) was stupendous and admirable, and is remembered by many ancient
writers. Yea, the seven wonders of the world were wonderful, being made merely
for a name; But well did Agathocles, who caused his statue to be composed on
this manner, Caput de auro, innuendo regis dignitatem, brachia de ebore,
Plutarch.
intimando ejus venustatem; Caetera linimenta de aere, denotando strenuitatem;
Pedes vero de terra, indicando ejus fragilitatem; showing, man has no firmer
foundation than mutability, here to ground upon; Only heaven is a City which
has foundations, whose Maker and builder is God, Hebr. 11.10.

Beautiful for situation was Jerusalem, in the midst of Judea, and Judea in
the midst of the earth; Sananturilli, qui illic infirmi convenient.
the very center and navel of the habitable world, say the Fathers. Moreover,
in a cold, dry and clear air; insomuch as they who come thither weak, are made
well, says Kimchi. Called not only the joy of the whole land, because thither
the Tribes went up three times a year; nor only of the East, whereof Jerusalem
was held and called the Queen, Vrbium totius Orientis clarissima; but also of
the whole earth, Psalm. 48.2. Lumen totius orbis, as one calls it: But what is
this to the heavenly Jerusalem, whose pavement is pure gold, and her walls
garnished with all precious stones?

Some define the perpendicular altitude of the highest mountains, to be four
miles; others fifteen furlongs. Not far from Geneva, is the mountain Jura,
whose top is much above the clouds. The Church also is resembled to a mountain,
Propter 1. Altitudinem. 2. Securitatem. 3. Ascendendi difficultatem. 4.
Immobilitatem.


Mons a movendo, by Antiphrasis, quia minime movet. The Church is as mount
Zion, that stands fast for ever, and cannot be removed. What then is the
excellency of the Church triumphant? When Saint Peter was on mount Tabor; where
he saw but a glimmering of the joys of heaven, he was so ravished with it,
that he cried out, Master, it is good for us to be here, let us here make our
Tabernacles.

When the Emperor Severus soldiers, were for greater pomp in a triumph, to put
on Crowns of Bays; one Christian soldier wore his on his arm, refusing to
put it on his head; and being demanded the reason, answered, Non decet
Christianum in hac vita coronari. Upon this occasion Tertullian wrote his book,
De corona militis.

Eternal life is called a Crown, for its 1. Perpetuity; for a Crown has
neither beginning nor ending. 2. Plenty, as the Crown compasses on every side,
so there is nothing wanting in this life. 3. Dignity, eternal life is a
Coronation-day.


What a rise is here, for dust and ashes to be raised to the glory of heaven?
As the Disciples said, did not our hearts burn? Do not your hearts leap to
think of a Crown? Si tanta, If the soul (says Austin) be content to suffer so
much; to enjoy things that are made to perish; how much more should we be
content to suffer, for that that cannot perish? If men will suffer so much for
the flesh, what should we suffer for the immortality of the soul? for the
gaining of heaven? for the Crown?

That was the Motto of the Emperor, when he had one Crown upon the sword, and
the other Crown was on his head; Tertiam in Caelis. The Sain's may have the
Crown of tribulation here, but the other Crown, the Crown of life, that is for
another world. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is
tried, Jam. 1.12.
he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.

Wicked ones may have many times some flashings of joy, but when in the height
of it, they are then big-bellied and ready to travel of some sorrow:
contrariwise, Christ's servants have many griefs and qualmes come over their
heart; but it is then with them, as with women near their time of bringing
forth; they are in travel with some joy. And yet our joy will never be full,
till we come to enjoy the beatifical vision. Our joy here, is only in hope and
expectation; nor can it be full, till we come to the fruition of what we expect.

Hence it is, that all we have here is but a taste, then we shall drink deep of
the river of pleasure: Now we have only the first fruits, hereafter our joy
shall be as the joy of harvest: Now the joy of the Lord enters into us, but
then it is, we shall enter into the joy of the Lord: and be, as it were,
swallowed up in the boundless ocean of that joy.

The place of Celestial glory, in space is most ample, in matter most
sumptuous, in show most glorious; whose foundations are precious stones; and
the whole City of most pure gold, the gates of Smaragds and Saphires, the
streets of no less price and beauty: There is no darkness, for the Sun of
righteousness, which knows not to be hid, does ever send his beams into it.
Now if the fabric of the earth, which it but a stable for beasts, an exile and
valley of tears, has so much beauty, that it strikes him that contemplates it
into admiration and astonishment; if the Sun, the Moon and Stars shine with
such brightness, what shall then our heavenly Country do, not the habitation
of servants, but of sons; not of beasts, but of blessed souls?

How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of hosts! There is nothing present that
offends, nothing absent that delights. Quicquid amabitur, aderit; and nihil
desiderabitur, quod aberlt. Bern.
In which place or Quier sit Angels, Archangels; Principalities, powers,
Dominions, Virtues, Thrones, Cherubims and Seraphims, whereof there is such a
multitude, that Daniel says, Thousand thousands serve him, ten hundred
thousand assist him; Where are all the Patriarch, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Virgins, Innocents; so many, that John said, they could not be numbered.

Prefer not then the pleasures of this life, which are momentany, before
eternal; Bern.
What delights us in this world is transitory, but the sorrow that shall ensue
upon it, is to all eternity.

The mark at which the Saints should shoot, is to be configured to Christ's
transfiguration. Tum Deus implebit animam rationalem lute sapientiae,
concupiscibilem justitiae, irascibilem perfecta tranquilitate.

Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, 1
Cor. 2.9.
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Gehenna.
That there is an Hell, is not only clear from testimony of Scripture, Deuteronomy.
32. Psalm. 9.18. Psalm. 11.6. Matthew. 23.33. 2 Pet. 2.3, 4. Jude 6. Facilis
descensus Averni, etc. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6.
But also of very Heathens themselves, who, though they could not tell
distinctly; (as never being acquainted with the Word) yet by the glimmering
light of Nature, they had some fancies and apprehensions of this place of the
damned.

Hence they had one called Pluto, the chief person in hell; and Charon the
ferryman of hell; And Aetua, which they fancied to be hell; Saxum ingens
volvunt alii.
And hell it self to be a continual rolling of stones upon dead bodies, with
many other fancies. -- Inque tuo sedisti Sisyphe saxo. Ovid. Metam. l. 10.

But to let them pass; such a woeful place there must needs be. 1. That so the
wicked may receive proportionable punishment both in soul and body, That of
Jerome was not true, Infernum nihil esse, nisi conscientiae horr orem.
to the sins they committed here upon earth. 2. Therefore of necessity there
must be an hell, to keep men to all eternity; that by their everlasting
torments Gods justice might be satisfied, which otherwise it could not be, 2
These. 1.5. 3. The very tetrors of conscience, that are in wicked men (at least
when they are dying) declare there is a hell, a place of torment provided for
them.

There are many words in Scripture by which hell is expressed: 1. Sheol, (...)
or the grave, (...)
we lie buried there in a second death. 2. Abaddon, all are there in a
perishing state. 3. Tsalmaveth, or the shadow of death; death never triumphs so
much in its strength, as it does in hell. Its the strength and power of death.
4 Etachtithrets, signifying both the lowest and most inferior earth, whence
hell is called the bottomless pit: And also it imports fear, vexation and
trembling; hell is a land of trembling, (...)
it is a land of fear. 5. Bor shachath, that is, the pit of corruption, though
the wicked shall be raised immortal, yet filthiness shall be upon them. (...)
6. Erets Nesciah, the land of forgetfulness; God will remember them no more
to do them any good; but to their torment and confusion, he will remember them
for ever. (...)
7. Erets choscec, a land of darkness, Darkness was their choice in this
life, and it shall be their curse in the next. 8. Gehinnom (whence the Greek
(...)) from the valley of Hinnom, in which the Idolatrous Israelites did
sacrifice their children with horrible cruelty.

There are other terms which set out Hell this place of the damned; As,
Unquenchable sire, Dicitur stagnum quia ut lapis mari, ita animae illue
immerguatur. Anselm. (...) 2 Kings 23.10.(...)
Luke 3.17. A Furnace of sire, Matthew. 13.42. A Lake of fire, Rev. 19.20.
Eternal fire, Jude 7. Utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13. The blackness of
darkness, Jude 13. Chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. Damnation, Mat. 23.33. A
place of torment, Luke 16.28. Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. A Prison, 1 Pet.
3.19. Tophet, Isa. 30.33. A bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1. The second death, Rev.
2.11. Destruction, Matthew. 7.14. Everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25, 46.
Corruption, Gal. 6.8. So that Hell is a place of torment ordained by God for
Devils and reprobate sinners, wherein by his justice they are deprived of his
favor, and confined to everlasting punishment both in soul and body.

If any ask, whether Hell were created of God? I answer, Consider Hell as a
place simply, And it is very probable, that Angels falling, and hell making was
both together.
it was created at first by God, when he distinguished all places; but as it is
Hell, a place of torment, it was not so by creation: Satan and man's sin brought
that name and use unto it; And thus Tophet may be said to be prepared of old,
as a punishment for sin, and a place for justice to be inflicted upon sin
committed against God.

For the locality of Hell; all agree in this, that there is such a place; only
where that place of the damned should be, Omnia entia sinita necesse est in
aliquo ubi.
there are variety of opinions about it.

Gregory Nyssen and his followers hold it is in the air, groundlesly grounding
on Ephesians. 2.2. and cap. 6.12. Isidore (but nothing probable) will have it under
the Globe of the earth. A third (confutable enough) in the valley of
Jehoshaphat, from Joel 3.12. A fourth opinion (owned of many learned men, but
without foundation from the Word) is, that Hell is in the very center of the
earth. Others with Keckerman, that Hell is in the bottom of the Sea, this they
build upon that phrase, Matthew. 8.29. Luke 8.31. Aug. lib. 2. Retract. c. 24.
This indeed seems to carry some show of reason, but cannot be the sense of the
place.

Those that write with most sobriety, say only in general, Gehennam esse locum
subterranenm.

The truth is, Scripture does not relate the very particular place where Hell
is, and perhaps it is concealed, to prevent curiosity in many, to keep faith in
use and exercise, as also to rouse men from security, and to make them fearful
of sin in every place: yet there is warrant enough for the belief of two things
in general. 1. That there is such a place as Hell, that is, a place distinct
from Heaven. 2. That this place wherever it is, it must be below Heaven, Prove.
15.24. Luke 8.13. Rev. 14.11. Job 11.8. Deuteronomy. 32.22. Psalm. 55.15. If any should
ask any farther, I answer in another words, Vbi sit, sentient qui curiosius
quaerunt.
where it is, they shall find one day, who over-curiously enquire. At least, I
may say as Socrates did, I was never there my self, nor spoke with any that
came from thence.

Let us labor more to avoid Hell, than endeavor to find out the place where
it is; else Hell (wherever it is) will find us out. Though we know not the
place for certain, yet we may certainly know this, that sin is the very high
road to Hell, and the direct way thither, Prove. 7.26. And let us take heed of
sin in every place, seeing we know not where the particular place of Hell is.
Hell follows sin at the heels. If we sin against God, God knows how near Hell
we are. A guilty and galled conscience, joined with a profane wicked life; is
the lively picture of Hell it self. Gebenua nihil grovius sed ejus me^^ nibil
u^^lius.


Hell is called by the Latins, Infernus, ab inferendo, from the Devils
continually carrying in souls to that place of torment.

I conclude with Chrysostom, There is nothing more grievous than Hell, but
nothing more profitable than the fear of it.

Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the King it is prepared, Isa. 30.33.
he has made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it. Hells Torments.
We silly fishes, see one another jerked out of the pond of life, by the hand
of death: but we see not the drying pan and the fire that they are cast into,
that die in their sins, and refuse to be reformed. Cast they are into utter
darkness. Vtinam ubique de Gebenna dissereretur, non enim sinet in Gehennam
incidere, Gebennae meminisse.
Oh that men knew more of it! and did believe in any measure that eternity of
extremity that is there to he endured! Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Oh that they would
be forewarned to fly from this wrath to come! He that does but hear of Hell
(says Nyssen) is without any farther labor or study taken off from sinful
pleasures. But if a man had but once a glimpse of it, it were enough (says
Bellarm.) to make him not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and
Monk; to live after the strictest rule that can be. But alas! we cannot get
men to think of it, till they be plunged headlong into it.

Esse aliquos manes, etc. --.
Nec pueri credunt nisi qui nondum are lavantur. Juvenal.

No, though one should come from the dead to testify unto them, they would not
be persuaded, Luke 16.31.

What the torments of the damned in Hell are, Non mihi si centum linguae, si
ferrea vox, non Omnia. poenarum percurrere nomina possum.
is a Quaere may make any heart tremble. If a man had the tongue of men and
Angels, he is not able to unfold the extreme misery of a tormented soul. To say
something, the torments of the damned, they are twofold, Viz. 1. Privative. or
2. Positive.


Either punishment of loss, or punishment of sense (as the Schoolmen call it.)

For the first, great is their loss; they lose, and are deprived of, 1. The
favorable presence of God, which is more than a thousand worlds. 2. The
company of Saints and Angels for ever, Matthew. 22.13. cap. 25.41. 3. Heaven the
place of blessedness, Luke 16.20. 4. All pity from God and Christ, and the
Saints of God, Prove. 1.16. Psalm. 52.8. Rev. 14.10. Nec Creator nec creatura
ulla erga damnatos afficientur sympathia. 5. All hope of recovery.

And for the second, Consider but 1. The variety of the torments, ten thousand
ways. 2. Universality, to afflict both body and soul in all the parts and
powers thereof. 3. Extremity, lying under the guilt of sin but an hour or two,
made the Son of God sweat drops of blood. 4. The society with whom tormented,
Devils and damned souls, 5, The continuance of these torments, without
intermission, Rev. 20.10. 6. The quality of the place, a prison of darkness,
etc. 7. The cruelty of the tormentors, Mat. 18.34. 8. The eternity of all this.
These make the torments of Hell to be dismal indeed.

That the torments of Hell are eternal, Scripture speaks it, Matthew. 18.8. Jude
7. Matthew. 25.6, 2 These. 1, 9. Dan. 12.2. And Reason confirms it; Because,
Quamdin calum, erit caelum, inferi erunt inseri. quadiu caelum beablt sanctos,
tamdiu improbostorquebunt inferi.
1. The justice of God, which they have wronged, can never be satisfied. 2.
Wicked will sin to all eternity. Sin is like oil, and Gods wrath like fire,
Rev. 14.11. cap. 16.9, 11, 21. 3. The godly shall be in everlasting joy, and
their torments shall last as long; for their condition shall be quite contrary
to one another. 4. Every thing that is conducible to the torments of the damned
is eternal; 1. God that damns them, Isa. 33.14. Romans 16.26. 2. The fire that
torments them, Isa. 30.33. cap. 66.24. 3. The Prison that receives them, Jude
6. 4. The worm that gnaws them, Mark. 9.44. 5. The sentence passed against
them. Add hereunto, the body and soul that is the subject of torments, is
eternal, Rev. 9.6.

Concerning the punishment of sense, Paena damni poenalier est quam poena
sensus. Aquin.
and punishment of loss; many dispute which of these is the greatest, and most
determine that the punishment of loss is greater than that of sense. This
loss is a great punishment in this life; not to enjoy God by says in
Ordinances, promises and dispensations; Cain complains chiefly of this, Genesis
4.14. But how woeful to be excluded the presence of his glory!

If any ask, why eternal punishment in hell, can be just for sin committed in
time? I answer, Peecare si velis tu in aeterno tuo punire aequam est te Deum in
aeterno suo.
True it is, the whole time of a man's life, in which sin is committed, is but a
short time, a nothing to eternity; yet this is a rational demonstration of the
justice of God, in awarding eternal punishment for sin committed in time,
because if they could have lived to eternity, they would have done evil to
eternity. Did not the grave stop such a man, his heart would never stop him
from sin. Wicked men do evil as they can, and as long as they can. Seeing then,
there is a principle in man to sin eternally, it is but just with God if he
punish him eternally.

O quam diuturna and immensa est aeternitas! Vbi mors semper vivit, finis
semper incipit, spe sublata sola manet aterna desperatio. Drexel.
A child with a spoon may sooner empty the Sea, than the damned accomplish
their misery. A river of brimstone is not consumed by burning.

There is punishment without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor,
crying without compassion, mischief without measure, torment without end, and
past imagination.

The torments in hell are all the same, 1. Ratione durationis. 2. Ratione
privationis. 3. Ratione expectationis. Yet this is certain, that one shall
endure more pain and torment than another; By Scripture, Mat. 10.15. cap.
11.22. Luke 12.47, 48. Mat. 23.14, 15. And Reason, Because 1. Some men commit
greater sins upon earth, Aug.
than others do, John 19.11. cap. 15.22. Mat. 7.4. cap. 23.24. Tanto gravior
singulis poena, quanto gravius quisque peccavit. 2. There are degrees of glory
in heaven. As those that are most eminent in grace, shall have the greatest
degrees of glory in heaven; So those that are most vile in sin, shall have most
torments and punishments in hell, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Pleasure has bought complexion, and has painted her face a damask Rose in a
field of Lilies; but her end (like the whorish woman) is bitter as wormwood.
Whereunto shall I liken her lovers? they are like to thieves, that go through a
fair flowred meadow to the Gallows: they are like to rivers that run fresh and
sweet (or fishes sporting) but fall into the salt Sea: Or like to travelers,
laid along to sleep under the shade; but awaking, find themselves scorched with
the heat of the removed Sun. When they have ended and lavish't all, at last
comes conscience and calls for a reckoning; then comes death, with a napkin on
his sleeve, and his trenclier-knife in his hand, and with his voyder takes all
away. If the wrath of God once smoke against you, he will set all your sins in
order before your eyes; that though you turn your back, yet like furies they
shall haunt you, and like the Ghost in Jeronimo, cry for revenge; they shall
haunt you, and set no color before you, but red and crimson; yea, and throw
bowls of blood upon your faces, never leaving you, till they have brought you
from a dying life, to a violent and cursed death; like the poor fish, that
feeling the heat of the water, thinks to mend her self, and leaps into the fire.

Would not our hearts bleed within us, to see an army of men marching against
the mouth of a Canon, to be wounded, discomfited; some groaning and crying out;
some slain outright, and cut off by the middle; some crawling on the ground,
with their lungs peeping out through their sides; some stooping with their
bowels in their hands; some sliced down their legs; some cloven down the chin;
some their brains dashed out, and besprinkled on the drum: All these, and
thousands such, are but as fleebitings, to that horrid slaughter, and horrible
bloodshed of the damned in hell fire.

And when all is done we must dye. A grave only remains to receive us. Three
cubits are allotted to us. None telluris tres tantum cabiti te expectant?
A little quantity of ground has nature proportioned, though sometime thou
did possess as much as ever the tempter showed Christ. The remainder of
mighty Hercules, will scarce fill a little pitcher. When certain Philosophers
intentively beheld the tom be of Alexander, Heri fecit ex auro thesaurum, hodie
aurum ex eo facit thesaurum; yesterday the world did not content him, to day
three cubits contain him. Alcibiades bragging of his lands, Socrates carried
him to the Map of the world, and bid him demonstrate them, but he could not
find them, for alas, Athens it self was not discernable. This earth would serve
the wicked still; had they not better lie in rottenness than combustion? were
not a cold grave more welcome than a hot furnace? Now they beg not a city,
though a little one, a Zoar; nor a house, though poor and bleak, as Codrus; nor
an open air, though sharp and irksome, scortched with the Indian sun, or
frozen with a Russian cold; for of such favors there is now no hope: Give them
but a mountain to fall on them, or rock to hide them; and they are pleased.
Here is a strange alteration for the wicked, when they shall go from a glorious
mansion, to a loathsome dungeon from a table of surfeit, to a table of
vengeance; from fawning observants, to afflicting spirits, from a bed of down,
to a bed of fire, they that commanded all the earth, cannot now command a piece
of earth to do them service.

God will wound the hairy scalp of him that goes still in his wickedness,
there remains for impenitent sinners, a worm that knaweth the conscience;
and there is prepared for the wicked a fire, which never goes out; where is
horror, terror, weeping, wailing, wringing of hands, gnashing of teeth,
continual death, yet those that are there never dye. Tantalus his Apples,
Sisyphus his stone, and those ravening Harpies whereof the Poets do speak, are
nothing in respect of those torments, whereof the wicked shall taste; unless in
this world they do repent, and cast their accounts a fresh.

The pains of Hell (as a reverend father of the Church observes) make a
fourfold impression in the souls of men; 1. A careful fear, that declineth
them. 2. A doubtful fear, that conflicteth them. 3. A desperate fear, that
shrinketh them. 4. A damned fear, that suffers them.

Then the will shall be a hell in it self; the memory shall be continually
troubled with a fixed recordation of things passed, which it once possessed;
the understanding shall be darkened, with innumerable waves of imaginations; the
light shall be affirighted with ugly Devils and darkness, the hearing, with
odious and hideous outcries; the smelling, with noisome stinkes, the taste,
with raging thirst, and ravishing hunger; the feeling afflicted in every part
with intolerable pains; in comparison whereof, our earthly fires are no more
but painted flames.

Depart from me, is a cursed condemnation, viz. from my Quire of glorious
Angels, from the communion of blessed Saints. Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors:
from me, from my holy hill: Well may the wretched soul ( Esau like) weep and
howl.

To be secluded from the presence of God, is of all miseries the greatest; in
so much that a father on Matthew says, Many do abhor hell; but I esteem the
fall from that glory, to be a greater punishment than hell it self. Better to
endure ten thousand thunderclaps, than be deptived of the beatifical vision.

O the madness of most; that will rather lose God and Christ, and heaven and
all, than lose a lust! Lysimachus King of Lacedemonia, being forced to
surrender himself, his Army and his Kingdom into his enemies hands, for a
draught of water; (they being all ready to die for thirst) when he had drunk
his water, he breaks out, O how short a pleasure is this, that for one draught
of water, I have lost a glorious Kingdom! Truly infinite greater cause will
the damned have to complain of their loss.

Somethings do perfect a good feast; viz. Good company, good cheer, good place
and good time. But all those good things are awanting, Varro apud Gelljum.
at the black banquet in the nethermost hell: At other feasts, the more the
merrier; but that is a sorry supper, where the more the more miserable.

Oh! do not, do not run the hazard of these eternal torments, for enjoying the
pleasure of sin for a season. He that plays the thief is a very fool; it may
be, he may not be an hour in stealing the commodity, and yet he may lie a whole
year in the Goal for it, and have hanging when all is done. But oh! how many
greater fools are there than these; that will happily for an hours pleasure, or
at the most for a lifes-time; lie in the Goal and prison of hell, not for a
year, but to all eternity? Suppose that by your unjust gain, you increase your
estate, and get large revenews; if you lose God, what get you? if you lose a
soul, what gain you? if you lose Christ, what advantageth it you.

We read of a certain salt in Sicilia, Aug. de civit.
the which if it be put into the fire, swims as water; and being put into water
crackles as fire. Among the Garamantes, a people dwellidg in the middle of
Lybia, we read of a fountain, the which in a cold night is hot, and in the hot
day so cold, that none can endure to drink it. And we read of a stone in
Archadia, the which being once made hot, can never be cooled. Certainly the
fire into which the damned souls are cast, Cupient mori et mors fugit ab illis.
and tormented, is without all intermission of time or punishment; They shall
desire to die, and death shall she from them. Rev. 9.6.

Propound to thy self a bottomless gulf, hideous to behold, in darkness
dungeon-like, in torments horrible, to the smell most odious, breathing out
flames and smoke, which the horrible mountain of Aetna does in part represent;
with that sulpherous Vesuvius in Naples, As Cassius reports.
which belcheth out the inward bowels of the earth, with stones, flames, fumes
and ashes; and that in such sury, as if it imitated the Giants war, and meant
to overthrow the God of heaven, and all his Saints, to draw the sun down to the
earth, and turn the night into day. The burning ashes of this hellish place,
with the smoke thereof, are reported to choke the birds that fly in the air,
and with the stones thereof has overthrown many neighbourting Cities whilst
the people sat in the Theater.

The variety and acerbity of hells torments cannot be conceived, much less
uttered; where there is no order, but eternal horror; and horrid blasphemies,
which the unhappy souls break our, against God, as an enemy; against Christ, as
a Judge; against the Saints, as Par^iall. There will be such a noise and
tumult, that if we here could but hear it, it would deprive us of all our
senses and strike us as dead as stones. Think with thy self, that thou must be
amongst serpents, Draggons, Basilisks and other Monsters; compast in with
horrible forms of Devils, who with a perpetual hatred against the damned, heap
sorrow on sorrow.

Thomas Bilney a godly Martyr; did use before his burning, to put his finger
into the candle, Act. and Mon.
to feel how hot the fire was; It were good if the desperate sinner, who
imagines lewdness upon his bed, would consider how he shall endure to dwell in
that unquenchable lake, with everlasting burnings.

I conclude with that savory speech of Bernard, Let us go down to hell while we
are alive, that we may not go to hell when we are dead. Let those things seize
upon our hearts; If we will think of hellish torments while we live, it is the
way to keep from these torments when we dye.

Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Mat. 10.28.


Where is the place of torment, Luke 16.28. Where is everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Where is outer darkness, and shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12.

Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark. 9.44. Where
men seek death, and shall not find it: desiring to die, and death flees from
them, Rev. 9.6.

Be warned to flee from the wrath to come. Mat. 3.7.


Eternal joy makes eternity but as a moment, as eternal pain will make every
moment an eternity.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Eccl. 12, 13, 14.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

FINIS.
EXERCITATIONES THEOLOGICAE: OR, Divine Discourses.

Carefully extracted, and orderly digested into XII. SECTIONS.

Wherein these HEADS are handled: 1. The Express Character of Christ our
Redeemer. 2. Gloria in altissimis, or the Angelical Anthem. 3. The Necessity of
Christ's Passion and Resurrection. 4. The Blessed Ambassador, or, The Best sent
into the basest. 5. St. Paul's Apology. 6. Holy Fear, the fence of the Soul. 7.
Ordine quisque suo, or the Excellent Order. 8. The Royal Remembrancer, or
Promises put in suit. 9. The Watchmans watchword. 10. Scala Jacobi, or, St.
James his Ladder. 11. Decus Sanctorum, or the Saints Dignity. 12. Warrantable
Separation, without breach of Union.


By HENRY HIBBERT, Preacher at S. Alhallows the Less, London.

Holding fast the faithful Word.

Tit. 1.9. Ama Scripturas Sacras, and amabit te Sapientia.

Aug. LONDON, Printed for, and sold by John Clark, at Mercers-Chappel in
Cheapside near the Great Conduit. 1662.

THE EXPRESS CHARACTER OF CHRIST Our Redeemer.
HEB. 7.26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens.
THis small parcel of Sacred truth, is the Express Character of Christ our
Redeemer; as he is in another sense, of his Father our Maker. Cap. 3.
The brightuess of his Fathers glory appeared in him; the brightness of his, in
this. He is Lux munds, Gloria coeli; the Light of this world below, the glory
of that above. Among the whole world of men from Adam until now, none arose
like him; like him shall none arise till he come again. His Conception was
without sin in the womb of his Virgin Mother; so was his Nativity. His whole
Conversation upon Earth was holy, harmless, undefiled; He was separate from
sinners, and made higher than the heavens.

Of none of the sons of men may thus much be said, because proper unto him, who
being the Eternal Son of God, was by Divine dispensation and the power of the
most High, made the unspotted Son of Man: None but such a one could possibly be
an High Priest to procure a perfect peace for us sinners with our justly
incensed God. The first Man was the first ordered Priest; who for his
disobedient disorder in going beyond his Commission, and violating the sacred
League betwixt God and him, was with shame enough degraded. It Is the constant
practice of Divine justice, what is recorded 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me,
I will honor, says the Lord; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed.

Neither was this Adam's case alone; All mankind whose person and cause he did
undergo, feel the smart of that extreme loss: This lost the Priestly dignity,
and that Covenant ceased by reason of transgression: So that God was no more
their God, their King; nor they his people, or a Kingdom of Priests to him. The
Priesthood ended; there being not any found in the whole world, of ability to
discharge that function, according to the primitive obligation. The sacrifice
of Praise and Thanksgiving failed; Man forgetting his due respects to his
Infinite Creator. Invocation on the Name of God by devout Prayers proceeding
from a pure heart, vanished, through the corruption wherewith the heart of man
was miserably infected. In fine, the gracious communication which was, and to
be betwixt God and man, received a period, by Adam's ejection out of Paradise
for his grand apostacy. As things then went, Mankind was then in a most
deplorable state; if that People be truly reported blessed, whose God is the Lord.

To hope for a change into a better, was but vain; unless God did open the
bowels of his mercy, to recelve us into favor and enter into a new Covenant,
(the former being abolished,) a Covenant of Grace: wherefore the Lord
commiserating our distressed condition, did set his wisdom on work to find out
a way to free us from lamentable perplexities: To this purpose, a Mediator is
appointed by our Judge himself to follicit him, as an Advocate for sinners,
whereby to make up the breach^ whose part was not (as the case then stood) to
present an Eucharistical sacrifice for benefits conferred on mankind; nor an
oblation of prayers for an augmentation of them; but to offer up an Expiatory
sacrifice for the wrong God received, and a sufficient price for the
impetration of our sins remission. To this end, another Priesthood (as was
necessary) was ordained in mercy; by the effectual execution whereof, sin
committed should be expiated, and an access made for transgressors unto the
Throne of grace. And this is the Priesthood only of Jesus Christ the Righteous,
who knew no sin, and in whose mouth was found no guile; Being holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separate from sinners.

Before this high Calling should be actually executed by Christ in person, it
was the will of our Heavenly Father, 1. That men should be apprehensive of the
want thereof, by the conviction of conscience of the multitude of sins, and
gravance of them. 2. That the minds of men should be thoroughly touched with a
longing for it, are it came to the real performance; yet so, as that in the
interposing time, their hopes might be supported against despair, that might
spring out of the remorse of conscience for their sins, which would not be
taken away, but by that High Priest which takes away the sins of the world:
Hereupon a Typical Priesthood was instituted for a time, till the fullness of
time, called the time of reformation, Heb. 9.10. determined by the most prudent
Dispenser of times and seasons, should come: Men of infirmities and subject
unto sin, were then by the Law of a carnal precept appointed to offer up for
the sons of men, innocent beasts; in whose death, by the effusion of their
blood wherein consisted their life, they did contemplate their own merit. These
creatures did not any thing worthy death, as was rightly conceived; neither
could these Sacrifices cleanse the Sacrificers from sin to perfection, as
pertaining to the conscience: This was understood; wherefore then, they could
not but conclude, that being they did offer such, they did but give to God
under their hands and seals, an acknowledgment of their errors, and a
confession of a due debt. Yet seeing God was the Author of the institution of
them, and accepted them at their hands, as sacrifices of a sweet smelling
favor; they conceived a lively hope of grace and pardon; framing with
themselves the like discourse to that of Samson's mother, Judge. 13.23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not receive a burnt-offering and
a meat offering at our hands. Heb. 10.1. Bona gratia and gloria.
These Figures then being but the shadows of good things to come, not the very
image of the things; did bear up their hopes, and in some measure establish
their confidence in him, by whom they expected good things to come. This is the
ground of the Apostles reasoning, Heb. 9.13. If the blood of bulls and goats
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; there is the shadow: how much more
(see the substance) shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God?

Here then I am to entreat of my Savior's Priesthood, whereby eternal
Redemption is obtained, that they who are called, may receive the promise of
eternal inheritance: A Subject challenging most reverent devotion and care. Now
that I may not rove from the Apostle's intended scope, Three things should be
handled: 1. Of him, as he is a Priest befitting us; Such an High Priest became
us. 2. Of his personal qualities, related in the concrete; Who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. 3. Of his dignity, to which he is
advanced; Made higher than the heavens.


How deep are all men in the guilt of sin, all men enlightened with the
knowledge of the truth, easily perceive; who, when brought to the
acknowledgment of this, cannot be so ignorant, as not to know the depth of
their misery. The depth of their misery, without the successful Mediation of
the Son of God, is their abiding under the wrath of God, which comes upon the
children of disobedience. For the removal whereof, the Supreme Moderator that
dwells in the Heavens, ruling all things, has anointed his Son High Priest,
to deal in things concerning men: To whom, as he gave the nations for his
inheritance, Psalm. 2. Psalm. 110.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession; so has he confirmed
him to be an High Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec: From whom,
by an heavenly decree, he expected the full discharge of the Priestly function
imposed upon him, Sacerdos, q. Sacer dux.
the intent and purpose whereof was to bring men to God. And this being the act
of Mercy, according to the good pleasure of his will, willing to pass by
offenses; his Justice, whose rigor is inflexible, ever loving righteousness,
and haring iniquity, steps in to claim satisfaction: This must have been given
for the sins of the sons of men, before they could have vouchsafed them any
perfect hope of a gracious reconcilement. To join therefore Mercy and Justice
together, whereby to end the difference; the Divine Wisdom concluded, That the
punishment due to sin, should be converted into an Expiatory sacrifice; and
this should appease and quiet the one, and make an easy way and entrance for
the other. At quarendum Sacrificium, But such a one was to be sought for; and
such a one too as might be, and Sacerdes and Sacrificium, both Priest and
Sacrifice.

Here was a work fit only for the scrutiny of the Sacred Trinity, infinitely
surpassing the imagination of Man, though never so vast. All the Creatures
could neither afford the one, nor the other: An Angel could not be Priest; Man
must, to plead the cause of men with God. Neither could the Sacrifice for man
be an Angel, because it was not meet that the death of an Angel should be the
expiation of a crime perpetrated by man. Nay further, might it be so, we should
(I believe) be hardly induced to believe, that an Angelical oblation offered by
that Spiritual nature, would profit us: The nature that offended, ought in all
equity to purge away the offense, and to suffer for it.

Among Men therefore must the search be made; but there was little hope to find
out one that could, that would sufficiently, effectually undergo so great a
task: All were sinners, terrified with the horrid guilt of their accusing
consciences, and held captive in the chains of sin, under the tyranny of the
Prince of darkness: None of these durst approach to present an offering unto
God, who is pure Light; neither were any of them able, were any willing, to
sustain or endure the severe countenance of an angry God, before whom he was to
appear. Yet a Man must have done the deed, if ever the deed were done: Hereupon
it was agreed upon, that the Son of God, God over all blessed for ever, should
be made the Son of man, to be made the Savior of man; the worlds Creator
should become one of the creatures of the world, to redeem the rest; framed
after the similitude of sinful flesh, yet without sin, to take away sin: Heb.
2.17, 18. Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco.
In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people; who being tempted, might be able to
succor them that are tempted.

Now to participate of the nature of Mankind by propagation, he was (as was
requisite) born of a Woman, an unspotted Maid; whose womb was the seminary of
our happiness; according to the prediction, Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall
break the serpents head. And not to participate of Man's sin, but to be Holiness
to the Lord; Armin.
He was conceived by the Holy Ghost; Quo nativitas (says one) qua erat supra
naturam, sed pro natura mirabili excellentia, naturam superans, eandem virtute
mysterii repararet: Whereby the Birth, which was above the sphere of Natures
activity, yet for nature surmounting Nature, through the excellence of a
miracle, might repair the same by the unparalled virtue of an admired Mystery.

Thus the Word was made flesh; by whose powerful word, Flesh and all things
visible and invisible, in Heaven and Earth, were made. To him the Father of
Heaven gave the order of Priesthood; determining to have no other consideration
or price for the ransom of transgressors, but his flesh; His righteous soul
poured out for them, should save theirs. This was the reason why the Angel
named him, by command from Heaven, JESUS; At which reverend and holy Name,
carrying in it an intimation of our Redemption, we the redeemed of the Lord, in
remembrance of the benefit purchased for as by him, 1 Cor. 6.20.
with a religious lowliness ought to bow to him the soul, the body; for the
Lord Jesus has bought both. So that I may justify, with a foreign Doctor, Quod
faelix videri culpa possit, quae talem meruit habere Redemptorem; That sin may
seem somewhat happy, that stood in need of, and obtained so prevalent, so worthy
a Redeemer.

To make good what hitherto has been said of the Lords Messiah, I must pitch
my thoughts upon two points: 1. Upon the manner of ordering Christ Jesus our
High Priest. 2. Upon his efficacious execution of this office.


He was ordered our High Priest, by covenant, by oath. The first was usual in
the ordination of the Levitical Priests; Cap. 2.5.
My covenant (says the Lord by the Prophet Malachy) was with Levi of life and
peace. This other is peculiar to the Priesthood of the Son of God, after the
similitude of Melchisedeck's: For those Priestwere made without swearing of an
oath; but this by an oath, by him that said unto him, The Lord swear, and will
not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck.

In the covenant on Gods side with Christ Jesus our High Priest, there are two
things: The demand of an act to be performed; and the promise of a liberal
remuneration. The thing demanded of him, was the laying down of life, for the
life of the world; a voluntary submission to the death of the Cross, to free us
from the cross of the second death. The thing promised upon performance, was,
He should see his seed, Isa. 53.10.
he should prolong his days, the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his
hand: He should remain a Priest time out of mind; and that, according to the
order of Melchisedeck; that is, by the punctual exercise whereof, he should be
advanced to the Regal dignity.

The covenant again on our Saviors side with God, consisted also in other two
things, answerable to the former: A free promise of yieldance to the demand of
his Father, and the acceptance of the promised reward. See his reply, Heb.
10.9. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Which done (being the shedding of his
blood for the remission of sins) to the lowest step of humiliation and exact
obedience; God did highly exalt him unto glory, to be King of righteousness,
and Prince of peace; Mutus fit oportet qui non laudarit Herculem.
giving him a name, which is above every name, that at the name of JESUS every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, etc. Such was his heroic spirit, anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, that He endured the cross, and despised the shame, for the
joy that was set before him. Of this joy, we with others that believe in him,
shall one day have an exuberant fruition; For to this very end, such an
High Priest became us.

To this Covenant of grace and peace, God adds an Oath; which has its use in
this blessed Contract. It tends, 1. To the ratification of this Priesthood, to
make it sure. 2. To the demonstration of the immutability and dignity of it.

For the first, Albeit no word of God coming from his mouth, can be taxt of the
least inconstancy; yet is he pleased to imitate men in their manner of
contracting in matters of moment; 1. To raise up our weak hopes to a sublime
pitch of assurance in him. 2. That our High Priest trusting to a double Anchor
that cannot be removed, the one of Promise, the other of an Oath; might with an
undaunted confidence slight the reproach, and undergo the pain that was to
befall him.

For the second; Gods oath exempts both this Priesthood and the second Covenant
from all immutability, containing in it a peremptory implicit decree for their
eternity. Quicquid juramento confirmat Deus, id aeternum est and immutabile;
Whatever God confirms with an oath, is perpetual and unchangeable. The reason
why the Lord did not establish Levi's Priesthood, and the first Covenant of
Works, with the sacred religion of a solemn oath, was, because he intended it
an alteration in time, to make the Lord Jesus a Surety of a better Testament;
not after the Law of a tarnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless
life. By my self have I sworn (said Abraham's God to him) in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. This Seed is Christ, proceeding from him
after many successions of ages and generations; this Blessing is the Redemption
of Mankind by that seed, termed the Son of Man in the execution of his
Priestly Office; which is irrecoverable, A Savior in solidum.
by which he is able to save them, (...) to the uttermost, that come unto God
by him. Faelices nos quorum causa Deus jurare voluit, miseros si ne juranti
quidem credimus: Happy are we for whose sakes God would swear; Most unhappy we,
if when he swears we believe him not, but be disobedient.

It makes also for the dignity and honor of this Priesthood: it is of an higher
estimation than that of Levi; for unto that were sinners called; to this only
the most Holy, the Son of God. The sacrifices of that, though many, and
frequently iterated, purified not the conscience, did not abolish trespasses,
merited not celestial blessings: But the Word of the Oath after the Law, Heb.
10.14.
did constitute Christ for ever a Priest, to purify the conscience, to abolish
trespasses, to merit celestial blessings; For by one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified. As one therefore said to David, Thou art
worth ten thousand of us; so we may say of Christ our High Priest (because God
did swear) Thou art worth ten thousand worlds of the other. And such an
High Priest became us.

Thus much for the manner of Christ's taking the holy order of Priesthood, which
was by Covenant, by Oath, both binders. His executing of this place, is in the
next place to be considered, which (as the former) deserves our most reverend
regard.

Fidelity and assiduity both commend the undertakers of a weighty matter; and
both are met in Christ, for the important work of our Redemption by grace; All
his force was ever bent that way, to ruin our adversaries, and raise us. In
the administration of his Priestly office, he practiced it, offerendo,
intercedendo, by Sacrisicing, by Interceding; which were the two things that
held most of that Order in continual employment: He stood our friend without
the least flinching usque ad aras, to the very death; when we stood in
opposition to God, to him, to our selves. Before he presented himself an
Oblation to the Father of Spirits, he prepared himself for it, by a most
submissive humiliation, a most sincere obedience, by most zealous
supplications, and a most exquisite sense of humane infirmities; all which
out-stretch the limits of all thoughts of man. He suffered the brightness of
that glory which he had with the Father before the world was, for a time to
suffer an eclipse; He was without form and comeliness, and when men saw him,
Isa. 53.2.
there was no beauty that they should desire him. His entertainment in the
world was but discourteous and poor: At his first entrance he was laid in a
manger; and after, though he was Lord of Heaven and earth, yet had be not
whereon to lay his head: Necessity forced him to fly, and often to hide himself,
(because his hour was not yet come) to save his life: Uncivil language,
slanderous reports, extreme indignities were heapt upon him; These were the
several styles wherewith the wicked world was pleased to honor him, A
Samaritan, a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Seducer, a Traitor, a Friend to
Publicans and sinners, a Devil, at least one possessed of a Devil: yet all this
made him not tread one step awry from the hallowed paths of a filial obedience;
for notwithstanding he was a Son, Heb. 5.8. Schola crucis, schola lucis.
yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. He suffered the
first part of his Passion in a Garden, for sin, where sin was first committed;
where he offered up prayers and supplications; with strong crying and tears, to
him that was able to save him from death, and was heard, in that he was raised
up by the unresisted power of his Almighty working. Soon after was he betrayed,
apprehended, bound and forsaken: Betrayed, to expiate our treason in Adam;
Apprehended, to restore us Captives unto liberty; Bound, to dissolve the chains
of our sins; Forsaken, to perform the work of satisfaction and redemption all
alone by himself. He was arraigned, condemned, whipped, and crowned with
thorns: Arraigned, by Jew and Gentile, He stood there for both their sakes, to
exempt them from the Tribunal of the Judge of all the world; Condemned, to
justify us in the sight of God, by his incomparable innocence; Whipped, to
deliver us from the spiritual, corporal and eternal scourge which we deserved;
Crowned with thorns, to 1. Signify his pacification of God, for our ambition
in Adam. 2. His meriting for us an eternal crown. 3. His collecting a Kingly
people out of the most thorny and burtful nations, which as a crown should
compass God about, in serving and honoring of him. 4. His bearing of our thorny
cares, that we might quietly repose our trust in him. He was clothed with a
Purple garment, and in his hand was there put a Reed; both intimating he was a
King, though both done in derision: Isa. 63.
The first shows he was that Warrior forespoken by the Prophet, Who is this
that comes from Edom with red garments? The other, that he was he that should
break the Serpents head: For it is the observation of some learned, that a Reed
is most mortal to a Serpent, and therewith were men used to kill them. Besides,
that by it as by a Pen, he did obliterate the handwriting in the Lords
Debt-book that was against us. He suffered in Golgotha, and naked too; in
Golgotha, a place of dead men's bones, where malefactors suffered; to raise up
the banner of righteousness and salvation, even in the place of death and
condemnation: But he suffered there naked too, to satisfy for our first
parents transgression, who were spoiled of the garment of Innocence; and
perhaps to show how we should enter into Heaven, as Adam into Paradise, naked
in body, but clad in soul, with innocence, with immortality: In a word, 'twas
to expiate our shameful nakedness, to which our first sin exposed us. And this
is the naked truth of the Truth.

This done, all was not done for which Christ came into the world; for 'twas
but preambulatory to a greater work ensuing, what was hitherto done; for hereby
was he completely sitted to give himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.2.
There did therefore succeed this, 1. The offering up of his Body, by the
effusion of his precious Blood, upon the high Altar of the Cross, where he
suffered the loss of his life, the price of our Redemption; without blood there
being no remission, Heb. 9.22. View him there, and he is just as the Prophet
did describe him, Isa. 53.
A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. Here he was lifted up, to answer
the elevation of the Sacrifices of the Old Law, all types of him: Isaac
represented him in umbra, in the shadow, when the substance followed even in
this point; so did the Brazen Serpent; they are the words of our Savior, As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, There it was, Vide and vive:
here, Creed and vive.
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3.14. He was lifted up in the
air, that he might overcome the Prince of the air, and the Spiritual
wickednesses in high places, triumphing over them in it: He was lifted up in
the air to hang on a tree; that as death by a tree entered into the world, so on
a tree it should be destroyed, and life brought back again; and besides, that
he might bear the curse of the Law, Col. 2.15.
being made a curse for us, according as the Apostle writes, Gal. 3.13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it
is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

Being thus lifted up, in the very gall of bitterness, there was given him gall
and vinegar to drink his last; that so the second Adam might bear the
punishment of the first Adams offense, in tasting the juice of the forbidden
fruit. Neither did the malice of men fix it self here, till they fixed both his
hands and his feet to the Cross with nails; which assures us of the blotting
out of the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, both of the
dissolution of all Ceremonial pactions, and of the full cancelling of the Bond
Moral, for so much as concerns the forfeiting that lay upon us. This did not
satiate their cursed humors, Col. 2.14.
but a spear must be thrust through his side; that we might find an open
passage to the Heavenly Jerusalem, for our selves, cleansed with his blood,
that cleanses from all sin; and washed away with the water of Regeneration,
flowing from him as from a bottomless Fountain of eternal life. Thus was our
Savior roughly handled in his last gasp, till he gave up the ghost: Therefore
did he come, That mundus ex mundo.
that he might minister and give his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. A
ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. To be a Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. even of them that
deny him who bought them, and bring justly on themselves swift destruction, 2
Pet. 2.1. And such an High Priest became us.

When this Oblation was finished, 2. He made another, of the same Body revived
and raised from death, but sprinkled with his blood: This he did in the
Heavens, in the glorious presence of the Divine Majesty, to be a perpetual
remembrance and token of the payment of our Ransom, of the impetration of our
Redemption: For Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of
this building; neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood,
he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for
us, Heb. 9.11, 12. So that he offered up himself first here below, after above:
The first being done, ceased; For in that he died, he died once to sin, Romans
6.10. The second is perpetuated, Because he continues for ever, he has an
unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7.24. He accomplished the first, ut Agnus
mactandus, as a Lamb to be slain; This he does always, at Agnus mactatus, as a
Lamb slain, but quickened again by the Spirit. That was consummated in the state
of his Humiliation; this continues in the state of his Exaltation; both
prosecuted in the height of his love, for the glory of God, and the benefit of
man. For the first, He was sanctified with the unction of the Spirit; For the
last, He was consecrated by his manifold passions, anointed with his own blood.
So that upon Earth, he provided himself by the first, to do the last in the
Heavens, being made higher than the Heavens. And certainly, such an High Priest
became us.

As this our High Priest made himself an Offering for sin, 1 Timothy 2.5.
so made he also and ever makes intercession for transgressors, Isa. 53.12. If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.2. S. Paul calls him the Mediator betwixt God and man, who speaks a
good word for us, that we might be where he is, and as he is, free from
condemnation; Romans 3.34. Tam recens m^b^ nu^c Christus est, acsi ^ac bora
fudiffet sanguinem. Luth.
For (says he) Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, making intercession
for us; and to that end ever lives. Hence will he never fail to do it in all
ages, because consecrated to i^ for evermore. All accusations are here hereby
nonsuited and removed, which either men or devils may make against us.

But lest some should vainly surmise, that Christ intercedes for all
promiscuously; To prevent all such misconception, remember what he says, I
pray not for the world, Joh. 27.9.
but for them which thou have given me. Unbelievers and disobedient are
excluded from the benefit of his Intercession, as well as the merits of his
Passion; only the Elect, faithful that are constant to the death, and continue
to the end, shall be partakers of both.

And this is the second part of his Priesthood, practiced by him in the
execution of it: which is not done in the anguish of his soul, or humbly
bending of the knee, or kissing of the hand, as if he were prostrate at the
feet of his Father; but in confidence of his bloodshed, which speaks better
things than the blood of Abel, which he presents to his Fathers aspect, as a
never to be forgotten spectacle of a cursed death, voluntarily suffered for the
sins of men; upon the value and worth whereof depends the whole efficacy of
his function, by which we have admittance to the Throne of grace, and entrance
into the place of the blessed. Heb. 10.19.


Hence Gods favor is established upon us, and he not provoked against us, Gods
compassion is vouchsafed us, in the times of distress; the Devils power is
restrained, that he cannot hurt us; our faith kept, that it may not fail us;
our sins forgiven, he pleading for us; protection granted us, against the
worlds hatred; our supplications and suits obtained; our imperfections by
degrees abolisht; our hope of the heavenly glory within the vail, made sure
unto us; needful blessings in the interim conferred upon us; for the Father
always hears the Son, and rests wellpleased in him, and through him in us.

I could wish the men of Rome would rest well pleased in him with whom the
Father is well pleased; would hear of no other meriting Intercessor, but of him
whom the Father hears always; nor of any other Redeemer, than of him only,
whom the Father appointed to bring us to him. But such is their Sacrilegious
bounty, that in that office which is bestowed only on the Kings Son, they most
injuriously would employ the Kings servants: A greater blurr cannot be put upon
our Savior to disparage him, nor any thing sound more harsh in the ears of
wellinformed Christians; they may not think they may put this off with honor,
with allowing him to be the only Mediator of redemption, but not of
intercession; their practice contradicts their speeches, for they do not only
beg the prayers of the Saints, but their merits too, to purge away their sins,
and supply their wants. So they part the whole mediation betwixt God and man,
betwixt Christ and the Saints, the Son of God and the sons of men. But says
Bernard, Offenso Dee, etc. Bern, Jer. 17.5.
When God is offended with me, Who shall pray for me? to make man my refuge, I
am inhibited, under the pain of a dreadful execration, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. To commit our cause to the blessed heavenly Courtiers, that are indeed
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1.14. We have no such warrant, etc. Therefore his conclusion
it, Talis ergo requirendus ad orandum, qui sit idoneus ad placandum; we must
therefore seek to such a one to pray for us, who is of a competent ability to
make God propitious to us. And such alone is the Angel of the Covenant, the m^^
Christ Jesus. For none comes to the Father, but by him; none are reconciled to
God, but by his passion, by his intercession. And such an High Priest became us.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood
of the everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight.

Christian Religion has for its object, Christ and him crucified, which to
know, is in the end life without end. All our happiness is enwrapt in him, for
in him alone, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and by him shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed; he is made to us of
God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Hence he became our
High Priest, to reveal to us the will of the Father, whereby we may become
wise unto salvation; thus he is our wisdom: To bestow upon us everlasting
righteousness, whereby we may be justified in the sight of heaven; thus he is
our righteousness: To infuse into our hearts the saving graces of his
quickening Spirit, whereby we may be holiness to the Lord; so our
sanctification: Lastly, to pour out his righteous soul a sacrifice for sin,
whereby to redeem us from the power of our enemies, and from the hand of all
that hate us; thus our redemption. So that of this fullness we do all receive
(...); John 1.16.
and grace for grace; Gratia N.T. pro gratia V. the grace of the new Law, the
Law of faith, for the grace of the old Law, Theophil.
the Law of works, says Theophilact; that is, the grace by which we receive
the remission of sin, next the grace by which we receive at last everlasting
life (says August.) which is the free gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. August. Romans 6. ult.
First, the grace of God toward his Son, after the grace of the Son toward us,
to make us the sons of God, say Divines; But with Musculus I say, Musculus.
that our receiving of grace for grace, is of grace upon grace; intimating the
pouring out upon us an overflowing measure, and a copious multiplication of
supernatural gifts, without discrimination. First, we receive one, then
another, than to that, with an augmentation of all, according to the divine
dispensation; wherefore the Father of mercies is said to bless us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; Ephesians. 1.
electing us in him before the foundation of the world; adopting us in him his
Son, to be his sons in him; making us uccepted in him, as in his beloved;
redeeming us through the precious blood of him, as of a Lamb without spot;
vouchsafing us the forgiveness of our sins for his sake, according to the
riches of his grace; unfolding unto us by the divine illumination of his
Spirit, the secret mysteries of salvation; and sealing us by the same Spirit to
the glorious day of our full and perfect redemption: John 14 6. Sequemur,
Demine, te, perte, ad te; te, quia veritas, per te, quia vita, ad te, quia
vita. Bern.
Our High Priest himself tells us, that He is the way, the truth and the life;
whereupon Saint Agustine, Ambulare vis, est via; falli non vis, est veritas;
mori non vis, est vita; will thou walk uprightly? He is the way: will thou not
be deceived? He is the truth; Will thou not die? He is the life. The like says
Saint Ambrose, Si Caelum desideras, via est, si errorem fugis, veritas est, si
mortem times, vita est; If thou desire heaven, He is the way; if thou
declinest error, He is the truth; if thou fear death, He is life; He has
laid open the gates of heaven, for them to enter that believe in him, that walk
in him; He is the way, he has dispel'd all the clouds of ignorance and mists
of error, that we might see the truth and embrace it; He is the truth, he has
swullowed up death in victory, that we might in him triumph over death and the
grave, and live in him, with him, and by him: and He is the life: All these is
our High Priest to us, the way, truth and life, in whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily. He is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, Davenant in Colos. 2.
and made higher than the heavens. For such an High Priest became us. Which
leads me to his gracious qualities.

Thy gracious assistance therefore my blessed Savior deny me not; but supply
my wants out of the largeness of thy bounty; fill my heart with heavenly
meditations; then guide my pen to set forth thy praise, being holy harmless,
etc. Quo major est cujusque virtus, eo difficilius est de ipso dicere; Bertius
in Oraf
by how much more eminent are the good parts of any man, by so much the more
difficult is it to report exactly of his deserved commendations. The glorious
shine of my Saviors worth (the Sun of righteousness) does so dazzle (I
profess) my weak understanding; that as I cannot fully comprehend his admired
worth; so I cannot but be defective in delineating his matchless qualities;
wherefore foreseeing I shall come short (perhaps of the Readers expectation,
but certainly) of a perfect decyphering of such a Highpriests character, as
the Spirit has expressed; be so charitably affected, as either to pass it over
with a friendly connivance; or, to tax it with an easy censure. In confidence
therefore of Divine assistance, and Christian good will; I proceed (under
correction, because of polluted lips) to treat of the holiness of our
High Priest.

He is holy as he is God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, James 1.13.
There is no unrighteousness in the holy one of Israel. Hearken unto me, says
Job, cap. 34.10. ye men of understanding, far be it from God, All sin is
offensivum Dei, and adversivum a Deo.
that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity. Hither tends that part of David's prayer, Psalm. 5.4. Thou art not a
God that has pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.
Either therefore we must confess him to be the chief good, or deny him to be
God.

He is holy too as he is man; time was when he stood at defiance with the
world, John 8.46. Which of you convinces me of sin? He did (as every
Minister should do) vivere conscionibus, concionari moribus; live Sermons, as
well as preach them: What an ancient Monk said of Saint Dunstane, sometimes
all Englands Metropolitan, is more true of him; he is vir totus ex virtutibus
factus, a man wholly composed of grace: who, according to Saint Peter's report,
did no sin, 1 Per. 2 22.
neither was there guile found in his mouth. The Devil, who is Antonomastically
styled (...), the Tempter, Matthew. 4.3. with all his black Art could not infect
his righteous soul; he was free from yielding to his temptations, not from his
tempting; for (as says the Apostle) We have not an High Priest, which cannot
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Hebr. 4.15. (...).
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. He was holy,
not only legally, as were the Leviticall Priests, consecrated to the sacred
services of the most high, but morally too, in a most absolute and exact
conformity to the Divine Law: hence is that speech of Russinus on the Creed,
Russinus Aquilei, in Symbol. Apostal.
Nil ibi turpe putandum est, ubi sanctificatio spiritus inerat; we must not
have so much as a thought of any foulness of evil to be there, where the holy
Ghost took full possession, by a total sanctification: Where the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily, Acts 3.14.
'twere impiety to imagine, that the least unholinesse had any being there.
It Is his peculiar title to be called the holy one, and the just.

To make this his holiness clear as the Sun, free from any cloud of black
aspersion, that a captious spirit might raise; the Apostle adds three other
Attributes, which serve as a demonstration not to be contradicted; he is
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. The first quits him of all natural
pravity, wherewith the sons of Adam are originally infected, the other of all
blemishes of actual trespassing, which defile the man; the last, of that guilt,
which through the transgression of the Law, sinful men are subject. In his
conception he was without sin, so was he in his nativity, thus harmless; in
his conversation upon earth, he was blameless and unreprovable in the sight of
God, thus undefiled; every way guiltless, not incurring the least displeasure
of his heavenly Father; thus separate from sinners. For such an High Priest
became us.

He was harmless and innocent, Aug.
and that in his conception; in his birth; wherefore Saint Augustine speaking,
says, that Genus humanum Christus assumpsit, non autem crimen humanum; Christ
in being the Son of man, assumed the nature of man, not the sin of man; for his
untainted Virgin Mother blessed among women, highly favored of the most high;
was overshadowed with the power of the highest, by the coming of the holy Ghost
upon her; by which power she so miraculously conceived beyond the course of
nature in her sacred womb, that therein the Son of God became the Son of man,
the Word was made flesh. But that son of man, that flesh was without contagion,
that body which was prepared for him to be Domus divinitatis, the house of the
divinity (as it is termed) must needs have been sanctified for that holy use:
It was the work of the Spirit to purify that selected substance, thereby to
make it fit to be united to the second Person of the Trinity. Sent. l. 3. D. 3.
A.
Wherefore, says Lombard, that flesh which God vouchsafed personally to unite
unto himself of the immaculate Virgin, Sine vitio concepta, sine peccato nata
est; was conceived without any pollution, and born without any sin. Yet was it
not of an heavenly, or of an aerial nature, or of any other, save of that same,
Cujus est omnium hominum care, (says the same Author) whereof is that flesh of
all men: But it was not so framed in the woman as ours, it was sanctified by
divine power; ours is infected by natural Propagation; Nam corporis nestri
habuit, pollutionem peccati non habuit, said Origin, his flesh had the nature
of our body, not sin the corruption of our nature; Origin in Romans 8.
the Apostle averres that he was made in the likeness of man, Phil. 2.7. Like
unto us in all things, sin only excepted. That man (to use Saint Hilaries
phrase grounded on the Apostleo words) Non fuit caro peccati, Hilar. in l. 10.
de Trinit.
sed similitudo carnis peccati; was not the flesh of sin, or sinful flesh, but
the likeness of sinful flesh: Great is the difference betwixt similitude and
identity; it is true, that as he took our nature upon him, so our infirmities,
wherein he was like to us; but they were such as were void of evils; none of
them in him being defectus culpae, Aquin. Sum.
as the Schoolmen speak, Criminal failings, or weaknesses worthy blame; but
necessary consequences of our nature. Whereupon Aquinas notes out of Gregory
the great upon that part of the Angels discourse with the blessed Virgin, That
holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God; That to
distinguish betwixt his and our holiness, it was foretold Christ should be born
holy; as for us, we are not born holy, but of unholy made holy; but he is not
made holy of unholy, but born holy; hence called, Acts 4.27. The hely child
Jesus.

In conclusion, should any now demand of me, in what manner I conceive the Word
was made flesh without sin, in what manner precisely the conception, the
assumption, the union was effected; whereby our nature in Christ was elevated
to the perfection it attained unto in him: With Chrysostom I ingeniously
profess, Chrysostom. in Romans 1. Hom. 5
I know not; it is a mystery to be adored, to be believed; not to be curiously
searched into. This much I know, that there have been four ways of making man;
One was the making man without either man or woman, so was Adam made; the
second was to make man without a woman, so was Eve made; the third was to make
man both by man and woman, so we their posterity are made; the last way was to
make man without man by woman only, and so was Christ made man; who
notwithstanding was not polluted by being in the Virgins womb, no more than the
Sun in the firmament receives infection from any place it shines upon here
below.

From this transcendent purity of our Highpriests conception and birth,
whereby he is harmless; there is aforded us a double comfort; 1. By it, the
faithful are justified from the unholinesse of their impure conceptions, Tales
nos amat Deus, quales futuri sumus ipsius dono; non quales sumius nostro
meritro. Council. Arausican. secund. Canon, 12.
and from the guilt of original sin. 2. They are confirmed in the joyful
expectation of a perfect holiness: he that was so careful to have his natural
body so exquisitely fitted, will not certainly neglect his Mystical body the
Church, being bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; but will sanctify and
cleanse it, that he may present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wricnkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without
blemish, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Therefore to make us so, such an High Priest became
us, who is holy, harmless.

As our High-Prie.st was thus in his original innocent; so was he in the whole
course of his life undefiled. Men and Devils did indeed conspire to bring him
within their compass, but could not prevail; their gilded Pills of
corruption, plausible to flesh and blood, could not be swallowed down of him;
his unblemisht foul was of a purer condition, than that it should be infected
by those foul spirits: The Master of Sentences gives a double reason for it,
Lomb. Sent l. 3.
1. Because it was hypostatically united to the eternal Son of God. 2. Because
the Spirit was given unto him sine mensura, without measure; he was full of
grace and truth; John 1.14.
Now it is a rule delivered by Romes Angelical Doctor, that Quanto aliquid
receptivum propinquius est causae influenti, tanto abundantius recipit; Aquin.
by how much any that receives is more near to the flowing cause, by so much
does it the more plentifully receive.

Wherefore the holiness of our gracious Mediator is such, as being God and
man inseperably; that he could not possibly be defiled by actual sin: The
Apostle says directly, that he knew no sin; that is, experimentally in his own
person; he is called a Lamb undefiled and without spot; Pilate, that gave him
over into the hands of sinners to be crucified, ingeniously confessed, he could
find no fault in him at all; that good thief (as a father calls him) that was
crucified with Christ, made a good confession, when he said, We receive a due
reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss; hence there is
added to his sacred name the title of [ righteous] Jesus Christ the righteous;
1 John 2.1.
for the end why he came into the world, was to fulfill all righteousness,
thereby to save sinners: Qui caeteros salvos faceret, debuit ibse peccato and
vitio carere, says Augustine. Wherefore, August.
Daniel 9. he is said to be the most holy, and to have everlasting
righteousness. So that he gave most complete and perfect obedience to the Law
of God in every point; applauded by a voice from heaven, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.

This actual righteousness void of all tincture of evil, was not only for
himself, but was efficacious for us; for as many as believe in him to the end
of the world; for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4. For this cause did the Prophet Jeremy foreshew the
name whereby he should be called, and that is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Legis finis interficiens, and perficiens. Aug. Jer. 23.6.
This makes good that Apostolical assertion we read, 2 Cor. 5.21. That he was
made sin for us (that is, a Sacrifice to expiate our sin) who knew no finne,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So that we have as
solid justification to life by his obedience, as ever we were subject to death
by Adams disobedience; for as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners;
so by the obedience of one, Romans 5.19.
shall many be made righteous. From this Fountain of grace do flow those
streams of peace (like those in Paradise) that make glad the City of our God.
Peace with God, with our selves, with men, with all the creatures; haven and
earth are met together in a blessed league. For in him it pleased the Father
should all fullness of divine graces dwell; and by him to reconcile all things
to himself; by him I say, whether they be things in heaven, or things in earth,
Col. 1.20.

This serves also for another purpose, to be a pattern for our imitation, to be
holy as he is holy; to be undefiled members of that body, whereof he is the
head; to walk before him and be upright, with Abraham, that believed in him.
The title of Christian which we all have by him, should make us so to adhere to
him, in a conformity to his life, Vt quia sine ipso nihil esse possumus, per
ipsum possimus esse quod dicimur; that because without him we can be nothing,
by him we may be in truth what we are said to be; the words are Bernards. I
must tell you what Saint Peter told them to whom he wrote his first Epistle;
Bern. 1 Pet. 2 9. Vilelatens vi^tus; quid ^^m subme^sa t^vebris. Proderit? etc.
Claud.
ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people; that ye
should show forth the virtues or praises [(...)] of him, who has called you
out of darnesse, into his mavelous light. They are the words of Gregory the
great, in his Epistle to Theodorus Duke of Sardinia, Justitiam quam mente
geritis, oportet coram heminibus luce operum demonstretis; the integrity or
righteousness ye bear in your mind, ye ought besure to express and show it
before men, by the light of works; which does justly accord with our Saviors
mind, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

The greatest light in the firmament of the Church, which is the heaven upon
earth, Hierom said that he did deligere Christum habitantem in Augustino.
is Christ himself; the light of the lesser lights is but borrowed from him,
not to be concealed, but to be seen to the eyes of the world; after the
example of the greatest light, who has lest us an example, that we should
follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. And believe me, none are blessed, but they
alone, that with our undefiled High Priest, are in some measure undefiled in
the way, who after him walk in the Law of the Lord. Ye shall hear how Saint
Bernard on the Canticles, Censures him that does not frame his life to the
obedience of the Gospel of Christ, Dignus plane est morte, Bern. in Cant.
qui tibi Christ vecusat rivere; he is without all doubt worthy of death, who
denies, O Christ, to live to thee. Good reason then it is, that we who are the
redeemed of the Lord, washed in his blood, should in an honorable respect of
our potent Redeemer, conform our selves to the like strickt godly life he did;
and not to wallow in the sordid sins of the damned crew; from which that we
might be withdrawn, according to the working of his mighty power; Such an
High Priest became us.

For our better assurance of our Highpriests original and actual
righteousness, whereby he was harmless and undefiled; he was, being planted in
a noble height, separate from sinners; not but that he did communicate of the
same common nature with all men, but not of their guilt, which is a necessary
consequent of the violation of the heavenly law; for where there is no
transgression, there is no guilt, which is a binding over the offender to
receive a deserved puishment: It Is true, One of those natural notions the Devil
could never blot out of man's mind. (...).
the punishment due to sinners was transferred to him; but by his own voluntary
submission thereunto; as not for any sin of his own committing, so without any
guilt of his own contracting; for had he been guilty before God, the just Judge
of all the world, he could never be a propitiation for the sins of the whole
world; he could never satisfy the provoked justice of the Almighty, thereby to
appease his wrath, and effect an eternal reconciliation betwixt him and us; he
could never obtain the free remission of our sins, whereby to bring us into
grace again; neither were his intercession for transgressors any way available,
being subject to the same condemnation. As he could not give a sufficient
ransom for the redemption of mankind, by the sacrificing of himself, were he
conscious of those crimes, whereof sinners are; So neither would his
supplications prevail to benefit us; for we know that God hears not sinners,
Joh. 9.31. Wherefore to remove all rubs out of the way, that might hinder his
faithful execution of the Priestly function, in all its parts; and that there
might no question be made of an absolute impetration and procurement of
salvation: to be conferred upon as many as do beleave in him, and obey him; to
the end he was as in respect of sin, so in respect of guilt, separate from
sinners.

This separation was not local, or in regard of place; he dwelt among us, and
came to call sinners to repentance, but vertuall, in relation to his unstained
condition, and those divine qualities where with be was replemisht, and whereof
sinful men during their abode in the flesh, are altogether incapable: By this
means all his moral actions done in obedience to the supreme authority, which
were infallible tokens of his inwrad pureness, were meritorious for us: Such is
their unparalleled worth, that though them, for the Authors lake, the father is
become propitions unto men: Insomuch, as for our everlasting comfort I may
speak it. Christ Jesus our High Priest is able to save them to the utmost, that
come unto God by him.

Now there remains no more, but that with David we betake our selves to him,
q. d. abseis ergo ut de isl^s quisquiliis sim anxius. Beza.
with the words of the same King, Now, Lord, what wait we for? our hope it even
in thee. Psalm. 39.7. Our hope is in thee, to take off from us the weight of our
sins; our hope is in thee to suppress the dominion of death; our hope is in
thee, to deliver us from the Tyranny of the Prince of darkness, and to bring
us reconciled into the highest place, where thy honor dwells, where thou are
made higher than the heavens.

Thus am I happily devolved to the speculation of the dignity, to which our
High Priest, as became both him and us, is above all heavens advanced.

After our Saviors humiliation, there followed his exaltation; for as he
descended from heaven to earth, so, when he had finished what he came for, he
ascended from earth to heaven, returning to the place whence he came. Albeit he
endured many a fierce combat here, yet, having at length obtained the victory,
be went in triumph, leading captivity captive, to the place of his glory.
Ascendit ad Calo^, Ruffin in Symbol. Apostel.
non ubi verbum Deus ante non fuerat; sed ubi verbum care factum, ante non
sederas. Says Ruffinus, he went up into heaven, not where the Word that was
made God never was before; but where the Word made flesh never sat before.
Something was to be done above, by the man Christ Jesus, when glorified; as
well as here below, when humbled. This was the place for oblation specially,
but that for perpetual intercession. Here he died for our sins, but rose again
for our justification; Ephesians. 4.10.
and ascending up on high, fitteth in Majesty at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us; that, so he might fulfill all things; all things requisite
for the salvation of man, that were to be expected from a Mediator: So that
now he is declared mightily, not only to be the only Son of God; but to be
our High Priest for ever; In being made higher than the heavens.

Earth which is his footstool, was no fit place for his glorious presence;
but his throne which is heaven. For had he taken up his rest here for ever,
then had he not entered into the holiest of all, not of this building, but
eternal in the heavens. Now that he entered but once for all unto this, whereas
the Priests of Aarons order entered once annually into the sepond Tabernacle,
which was within the veil, called the most holy place; it is an argument of the
perfection of his Priesthood, of the imperfection of theirs; for as it is, Heb.
9.24. Christ is not entered into the holy place made with hands, which are the
figures of the true, but into heaven it self to appear in the presence of God
for us, having obtained eternal redemption. What Priest of what order soever
beside him, ever came to this height? Who, as he has done, ever paid such a
price as the eternal redemption of the wicked is worth? Or by their own power
passed into heaven, to appear as an Advocate, to plead in the be half of
sinners;) we find none; but this we find,

earth, Mat. 2.18.
to be given to him, So that better may this King of Kings say, than the King
of Spain, Sol mihi semper lucet: for he is Catholic Monarch.

Hebrews; Cap. 8.4.
for if he had not gone before us, it is impossible sin lying so heavily upon
us, we should have admission into his presence, in which there is fullness of
joy for evermore, but now he is there to prepare immortal mansions for them
that come to him, whereby they may dwell with him in happiness. There, says
Anselme, Infirmitas Anselm. de similitudin bus. cap. 44.
nulla, sanitas indefessa, nihilancommodi, omnia ad voluntatem; there is no
infirmity, there is health without weariness, there is no discommodity, there
all things fall out to our own hearts desire. This is that to which our Savior
does invite us, Come unto me, Mat. 11.
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Tot habet and linguas pro nobis lequentet, quot vulnera pr^ nobi^ accepit, Fr.
Joh. de Combis l. 4. ^sp. 24.
he has also so many tongues speaking in our behalf, as he received wounds for
our sakes. He is never from the sight of God, but always in action before him,
pleading for us by the mystery of his holy incarnation by his holy nativity and
circumcision, by his baptism, fasting and temptation, by his agony and bloody
sweet, by his cross and Passion, by his precious death and burial, by his
glorious resurrection and ascension: So that as Johannes de Combis a Friar
Minorite does observe, Ibi nulla potest esse repulsa, ubi tot concurrunt amoris
in signia; there can be no denial given, where so many tokens and pledges of
true love are met together. Wherefore considering our misery was extreme great
and universal, our enemies exceeding strong and maliciously bent; and that the
blessings we desire, were above our reach, in the highest heavens;
Questionless, such an High Priest became us.

Of all debasements that of our Saviors was the lowest; of all advancements,
that of him the highest: He bowed the heavens, and came down to the earth,
where he was a worm, he left the earth and became higher than the heavens; he
descended into hell, the lowest of all places, and now sits on the right
hand of God, the highest of promotions; We have such an High Priest, who is set
on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty, in the heavens; It Is St.
Ambrose assertion, that this sitting on Gods right hand, Heb. 8.1.
intimates no other thing, nisi honoris aqualitatem, than an equality of
honor, of authority; that he has an equal stroke with the Father in the
government and administration of all things: God himself gave him this place in
heavenly places, far above all Principality and power, and might, and dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this world; but also in that which
is to come. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Quantum inter flellas luna minores. Cap. 1.3, 4.
When he had by himself, (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) purged our sins, he
sat down, on the right hand of the Majesty on high, being made so much better
than the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than
they: Those heavenly spirits are subject unto him, who at his incarnanion was
made a little lower than they, so in his glorification he is made far higher,
even in that nature wherein he was made low: So that now being Crowned with
glory and honor, all things are put under his feet, all rule is put into his
hand. This is the reason why all the Angels of God worship him, and why we
ought in the service of our spirit and subjection of our consciences, devoutly
adore him; adore him who is God, adore him who is man; which adoration, in the
judgment of acute Zanchius, is not to be directed simply to the humane nature
considered in itself, a^ essential unto it, Zanch. l. 2. de tribus Elohim. c.
1. page 38.
but as it is personally united to the Godhead; through which union, together
with the Godhead of the Son, it is adored and worshipped with Divine honor;
Says that famous English Divine, if any misconceiving this doctrine, Mr.
Perkins.
shall charge us with an Idolatrous worshipping of the creature, I say with
Athanasius in his Epistle to Adelphius cited by Matthias to this same purpose,
Athanas.
they shall know at length, Nos qui deminum in carne adoramus, nen creaturam
adorare, sed createrem corpere creato indutum; that we who do worship the Lord
in the flesh, worship ^ot the creature, but the Creator clad with a created
body. That honor then and homage which we give him in the humblest manner,
tendit in infinitum, looks unto him that is infinite, as the proper object that
bounds our divine service; to whom it is due in the highest respect, being
higher than the heavens.

For the greater glory of our Saviors manhood, some from these words do
attribute unto it an Vbiquity; a being in every place at one and the same time,
and not in heaven only; as if in his glorification there were a transfusion of
the proprieties of the Godhead into the humanity. How far this is from truth,
may be easily judged; Sceundum esse natural Christus non est ubique secundum
esse Personale Christus est ubique. Pract. of Piet. P. 15.


1. By this, that Omnipresence is a proper attribute of the divinity, no way at
all communicable to corporeal substances; which as they are limited with terms
of essence by their definition; so of place by circumscription: for although
our Saviors body be highly promoted, and come to the height of so much
perfection as it is capable of; yet has it not lost the nature of a body, he
is still as God, so man whom as man, according to St. Peter's doctrine, must the
heavens contain, until the times of restitution of all things. Act. 3.21.

2. By this, that hereupon does follow an abolishment of all inferiority, and
an equality established between the creature and Creator; as if either there
were an erection of another Deity; or as if the essence of the humanity were
converted by an unheard of Transubstantiation, exceeding that of the Papists in
their Mass into the essence of the Deity; so that now they remain no more
distinct matures in him, but one and the self-same; and Christ is supposed to
be no longer man, but altogether God: for where there are the properties of any
thing, there of necessity must the essence be supposed to be, they are
inseparable. Wherefore seeing the gross, nay blasphemous absurdities of this
erroneous position, grounded upon the misinterpretation of this and the like
texts; we may not conceive because Christ is made higher than the heavens, than
the Angels themselves in glory, according to the humane nature, that presently
that nature must be Deified, and fill all places at once; as if the glory of
Christ as man, did not exceed that of Angels; unless as man, he did partake of
the ubiquitie of the Godhead.

But to let this go, as no ways affected with unnecessary wrangling, whereby to
disquiet men's Christian thoughts; my intention is to endeavor the elevation of
our affections, to the seeking of those things which are above; and above all,
of Christ, who as he is as man in heaven, so he is, as man, higher than the
heavens: O praeclarum diem cum ad illud animorum concilium caetumquae
proficiscar, et cum ex bac turbd et colluvione discedam. Cicer. de sencetute.
Hebr. 12.24.
higher than the heavens which are visible to the eye of man; yet in part of
the heavens where the God of glory is pleased to make the most ample and
immediate manifestation of his glory; it is called the habitation of the
highest, a new world, the new heaven, Paradise, the heavenly Jereusalem, the
City of the living God; where there are an innumerable company of Angels, the
general assembly and Church of the firstborn, and God the Judge of all, and
the spirits of just men made perfect. There is (I say) Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant, and the blood of sprinkling; that speaks better things than
the blood of Abel.

There our High Priest presents to the Father, the propitiatory sacrifice of
himself, and sprinkles upon us his purifying blood: that is, by his powerful
mediation he applies unto us, who are faithful, the saving merits of his never
to be forgotten passion; by which our mortal sins are freely remitted, and we
destined to a Crown incorruptible, that never fades away, in the highest
heavens. Thus are we through him had in perpetual remembrance, and accepted of
God in the beloved, as righteous, as if we had never offended. When a man
indeed looks on things directly through the air, they appear in their proper
forms and colors as they are; but if they be looked upon through a green
glass, they all appear green: So when God beholds us, as we are in our selves,
we appear vile and squallid; but when as presented before his throne in heaven,
in the person of our Mediator, our High Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck, approved of for his merits; then we appear before him as Christ
himself, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; and in some respect
and measure made higher than the heavens; for those that overcome by faith and
a good conscience, being Kings and Priests by him, shall be so honorably
esteemed of, Revel. 3, 21.
as to be made sit down as coheirs with him in his throne, as he sits down
with his father in his throne. As he vouchsafes us to partake of his merits, so
of his glory; Cap. 5.10.
making us unto our God Kings and Priests.

In lieu whereof, let, us in all humility with the four and twenty Elders, fall
down before him thut sits on the throne; Cap. 4.10.
and worship him that lives for ever and ever. And with those ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands celestial spirits, Cap.
5.11.12, 13.
let us say, (for of him it is said) worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing. Unto thee therefore O our loving Savior, Christ Jesus our
High Priest, who art holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher than the heavens: be ascribed by us; as by every creature which is in
heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and in the sea; blessing, honor,
glory, and power, for ever and ever. Amen.

GLORIA IN ALTISSIMIS; OR, THE ANGELICAL ANTHEM.
LUKE 2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men.
THis is the sacred Anthem, which by the heavenly quire of Angelical spirits
was most melodiously sung, as a pregnant expression of exceeding joy conceived
in them, at and for the so much desired nativity of our blessed Savior. These
ministering spirits I propose, as the fittest and compleatest pattern for our
pious imitation: to whom seeing we are made but little inferior in regard of
the lively image of God imprinted in our souls; so be we also but little
inferior to them, in expressing the joys conceived in our hearts.

I may safely averr, without the least smack or touch of Popery, that the
Angels of God in heaven, rejoice at the good of Gods Church, whereof they
themselves are apart: for such is the spiritual sympathy of their holy
affections with ours (whose conversation is in heaven, though our selves on
earth;) that they bear a part with us, in solacing themselves for our
happiness. The heavens could not hold these Angels from coming to the earth in
have upon the wing, to bring the glad tidings of peace and great joy, that
shall be to all people, the sun was anticipated in his course, for the Angels
proclaim a Savior, ere the sun (the worlds eye) did discover him.

That we therefore may not come short of affection, if it be possible of them,
let us in a joyful sense of felicity, Psalm. 103. Incipit a superieribus, and
sinlt in infinis.
coming unto us, by our Saviors coming unto us, sing Hallelujah unto God, and,
with David call upon all creatures from the highest to the lowest, to publish
the praises of the highest. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel in
strength, that do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word: Bless
ye the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless
the Lord, all his works, in all places of his Dominion. Bless the Lord, Kimchi.
O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name. Elevate your hearts
and voices, good Christians, in harmonical strains with these blessed spirits,
setting forth in some measure the exceeding greatness and glory of the love of
God, extended unto us without all measure. Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will toward men.

This Song does consist of three parts.

viz. 1. Glory. 2. Peace. 3. Mercy.


The 1. is, Glory be to God on high;] there is the honor, the reverend
obedience, the admiration, and the divine worship, which we ought to give to
God. The 2. is, And on earth peace;] this is the effect of the former, working
in the hearts of men, whereby the world appears in its most glorious splendour,
and transporting beauty, being an entire chain of intermutual amity. The 3. is,
Good will toward men;] this is Gods mercy, reconciling man to himself, after
his perfidious apostacy, and ungrateful dissertion from his Creator.

Glory, peace, and mercy then, must be the welcome subject of my discourse.
Glory to God, Peace to the Kingdoms of the earth, and mercy unto sinful men.
Gods mercy appears in our Saviors appearing to the world, which brought peace
on earth; for which men and Angels glorify the Lord of glory. Glory be to God
on high.

The first part comprehends what ought to be the first and principal aim, both
of our Christian intention and pious execution; wherein, if we behave our
selves well, we shall have a part and portion in that inheritance, which Christ
with his blood purchased for us. Glory be to God on high.

Gods glory is either divine or humane. Gods divine gloty is that which is
proper to the divinity, incommunicable to any creature. Which again is twofold,
1. Essential; 2. Personal; Gods essential glory, is that infinite majesty
which is common to the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, in the unity of the
divine essence: This glory is no other than God himself, which the most
profound or delicious Oratory of men or Angels cannot sufficiently express:
Which Moses earnestly desirous to behold, (but a thing impossible) directed his
suite unto God in these words, I beseech thee show me thy glory. The Personal
glory of God, Exodus 33.1^.
is that which is proper to each person of the Deity. For example; It is the
Fathers glory, to be from no other, to beget a Son from eternity, which is
Jesus Christ the Righteous. It is the Sons glory, that he is coessential with
the Father, coeternal with the ancient of days, without beginning, without
ending: that he assumed our humanity, to make us partakers of his divinity. It
is the glory of the holy Ghost, that he proceeds from the Father and the Son,
that his majesty is equal with theirs, that he is the sanctifier of the elect,
that he is the sole supporter and comforter of afflicted soul^, and that he is
with the Father and the Son one and the same God over all blessed for ever.
Amen.

The humane glory of God, I call that which is ascribed and rendered to him by
men, with a strong concurrence of all the powers and faculties of soul and
body; and especially on this ground, as a Savior to sinners, a Physician to
the sick, a Redeemer to the Captives, a perfect way to wanderers, a Pastor to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, life to them that were dead, and
salvation to them that were condemned; was sent from heaven in compassion of
our wretched condition, appointed the Son of God to be all these unto us. For
as many saviors were sent from God to save the Israelites from bodily
oppression, so was Christ from his Father to ease us of the unsupportable
burden of our inquities, wherewith we were heavily laden; As the Prophet was
sent with a bunch of figs, Physician-like, to cure Hezekiah's malady, Isa. 61.
so was Christ with the comfortable ointment of his ever blessed Spirit, to
mollify our bruises, to close our wounds, to cleanse our putrefying sores, to
bind up our broken hearts, and with his saving righteousness to heal all our
mortal infirmities. As Moses was sent from God to deliver the children of Isr
ael from the Egyptian bondage; so Christ from his Father to proclaim liberty
to the captives, the opening of the prison to them that are bound, and with his
stretched out arm to redeem mankind from Satan's servitude. As the Lord made a
way through the red sea, to bring his People to the land of Canaan; so has he
appointed Christ to be the living way, through the red sea of whose blood, we
that wandered in the labrinth of our own wicked imaginations, must pass into
the land of the living. As God sent David to be a shepherd to his people of
Israel; so did he Christ the Son of David, to be that good shepherd that
should lay down his life for his sheep, the Israel of God. As Elisha was sent
of God as an instrument to put life into the Shunamites dead child; so Christ
came to be our, life through whom by faith we who were do^d in sins and
trespasses, shall live everlastingly. As Jonas was the Lords messenger of
Ninevies salvation, if they did repent, though condemned; So Christ the Angel
of the Covenant, is Gods messenger of eternal salvation to mankind condemned
for sin, if we believe in him. All which the Angels knowing, and men obtaining;
the Angels sung, and men may prosecute what they have begun; Glory be to God on
high: If we return not glory to the highest for this unparalled and
incomparable love of his, we may be justly censured for ungrateful miscreants,
and for ever debarred of the grace of God; and deservedly shut out of the Court
of heaven. Hazard not therefore your Christian reputation and hopes of glory,
through neglect of God; but be as the glorious Angels making melody in your
hearts, and giving glory to God on high.

This glory due to God by man, imports two things; 1. Pious admiration. 2.
Religious honor.


The sending of the Son of God to be manifested in the flesh, for our
redemption, must work in us an admiration of the infinite wisdom of God, of his
infinite power, and of his infinite goodness.

Admire, 1. Gods infinite wisdom; who could find out a means to work our
salvation, when men and Angels saw none: it came not into the apprehension of
man's shallow brain, to contrive how possibly an infinite satisfaction due to
God by man, Ephesians. 1.8.
could by man be given unto the infinite justice of God. Yet his unsearchable
wisdom has brought it about; wherein (according to the Apostolical verdict) he
has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence. For, says Anselm, God was
made man, that both he which had sinned might satisfy, and he which was
infinite might pay an infinite price.

Admire, 2. Gods infinite power; who of two things (the divine and humane
natures) most distant and different in themselves, could make one so nearly,
that one and the same should be God and man. Others may admire our Creation,
but let us admire our Redemption; though both acts of infinite power. It is
admirable that our flesh and our bones were formed of God, but yet it is more
admirable that God would become flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones: It
is a mystery out-reaching our capacities, wherein is contained the greatest
sublimity and the greatest humlity, the greatest power, and the greatest
infirmity, the greatest majesty, and the greatest frailty. What is higher than
God, lower than man? more powerful than God, weaker than man? more glorious
than God, more frail than man? Yet God by his alsufficient omnipotency has
conjoined them together, that we might be conjoined to God for ever.

Admire, 3. Gods infinite goodness; in promising a Savior to us, when in Adam
we had lost all goodness. And in performing his promise in the fullness of time,
without the least shadow of variation, when yet we were enemies, God was then
manifested in the flesh. See, see God himself, whose pure eyes cannot endure to
behold iniquity; did descend to us; because we by reason of the weight of our
ponderous sins, could not ascend to him. In which extraordinary act, he made an
exact demonstration of his unlimited goodness.

1. In his mercy. 2. In his Justice.
In his mercy; The Creator that was offended, assumed the flesh of the creature
offending. Man had forsaken God, and turned to Satan; and yet God that was
forsaken, makes diligent search after the forsaker: is not this infinite mercy,
far exceeding the limits of the finite understanding and thought of man? Our
nature is become more glorious by Christ in the union, than it was deformed by
Adam, in the transgression. We have received more in the second Adam, than we
lost in the first. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. Rom 5.20.
In Adam we lost our native innocence, in Christ we receive absolute perfection
and integrity; in Adam we lost Paradise on earth, in Christ we receive the
Kingdom of heaven, the true Paradise of God, at whose right hand are pleasures
for evermore. How then can that infinite mercy repel us from him when we come
unto him; being now made partakers of his nature; much rather being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life. Romans 5.10.
And this is called the glory of his grace, whereby we are made accepted in the
beloved; in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.

Gods goodness appears in his justice, worthy of admiration for the God of
mercy as he was inclined, so was he content to pardon sinners, if it might
stand with the unblemisht reputation of his exactest justice. That therefore
his justice might not suffer, his mercy brought to pass the incarnation of his
Son, thereby to satisfy his justice and appease his wrath. Romans 3.25. (...).
Him has God set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past: hence he is
said to die for us, that is in our stead, which takes away condemnation, Cap.
8.34. and brings peace to undoubted salvation, Cap, 5.10. Here is plenary
satisfaction to God for us, and a peaceful reconciliation betwixt God and us.

Hence it is said that he was made sin for us, that is, a sinner; 2 Cor. 5.21.
which cannot be but either interna pollutione, by an inward infection, which
was impossible to him, vel externa reputatione, by an outward repute and
estimate, which was no otherwise than by undergoing the punishment due to us,
which he has done as was meet; by which Gods justice is everlastingly,
immutably and fully satisfied, and we perfectly saved. Hence he is said to bear
our iniquities, Isa. 53.4.
which is not tollerantia, patientiae, the bearing of patience, though he did
bear them patiently; but by bearing them, he took them away, behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world: neither is it sola poestas
auferendi peccata, 1 Pet. 2.24. (...).
only an authentic power or authority of taking away our sins; but (which is
far more) he actually bare our sins, in his one body on the tree; that is,
submitting himself to divine censure and justice, did suffer the punishments of
our offenses, by which we pass from death to life; for by his stripes we are
healed, by his death we are saved. Hence he is said, to have paid for us the
price of our Redemption, we are bought with a price faith the Apostle, whereby
is intimated our captivity and subjection unto the just vengeance of the
Almighty; We were debtors unto him, and were broke like bankrupts upon the
matter, despoiled of all good we had, and disenabled to pay the price of our
redemption; which the Son of God undertaking, says of himself, Mat. 20 28.
(...). 1 Timothy 2.6.
that he came to give his life a ransom for many; whereof the Apostle making
use, says, that Christ our Mediator gave himself a ransom for all: The
Apostles, All, are those Many, mentioned by the Evangelist. Hence he is said to
be an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
Such a one as has wrought a perfect reconciliation and an eternal peace
betwixt God and us: his justice satisfied, our sins pardoned, our souls saved.
Such a one, as all sacrifices before him were but his shadows, and for any to
be after him is but needless, and most unlawful; for he after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; and by
that one offering has. perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Thus to
satisfy the justice of God, and secure us, Heb. 10.12.14.
the Son of God is sent from God into the world, and went stitch-through with
the work of our redemption. So that it is complete, and cannot admit the least
exception; nothing in it being defective, nothing superfluous.

To close up this point, admire the wonderful temper of Gods mercy and justice,
which no creature could find out, before God did manifest it; and none now it
is made manifest, can fully apprehend it. In sending us a Savior, God was
merciful, that he might be just, and just, that he might be merciful. For in
his mercy he sent him, he gave him to us; in his justice he made him a curse;
he punished him with death for us, which he triumphantly overcame; he made him
sin for us, that knew no sin, to the end that through his mercy again we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. Cor. 5.22.
Wherefore with holy David, unto thee O God do we give thanks, unto thee do we
give thanks; for that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare, Psalm. 75.1.
The works of thy mercy, the works of thy justice, are exceeding wonderful in
our reparation. Thy Name, thy nature is near unto us in thy Son, Nomen i.c.
Num^n.
who being the true IMMANVEL, God with us, has wrought and accomplished our
deliverance. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory.
Tibi gloria, nobis lucrum, let the glory be thine, now the gain is ours. Glory
be to God on high.

Thus much concerning the first thing imported in this Glory, which is a pious
admiration of Gods infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness.

The second thing imported in this Glory, is a religious honor due to God,
which is evermore the necessary consequent of pious admiration. We honor our
Benefactors the best we may, as the benefit bestowed and the love of the
Benefactor does require; and the greater the benefit, the greater is the
Benefactors love; and the greater his love, the greater honor is due to him
from the receiver. Great out of doubt is the Gift God sent to us, freely
conferred upon us; it is a Gift of an heavenly nature, of the highest vain; his
own only begotten Son, him has God given; that a^ many as believe in hi^
should not perish, but have everlasting life: Seeing then that he graciously
vouchsafed to honor us so highly, so lovingly; we cannot in modesty, in
honesty, in piety, but highly honor him again, who is the highest.

Being then upon the point of honor, I must fix upon those two points wherein
this honor does consist; which are, 1. Obedience, not fained, but real. 2.
Divine worship or adoration of him.


First then, because God has sent a Savior into the world, to visit us his
people from on high, and to redeem us from below the nethermost hell; we are to
render all sincere obedience to him: Our creation, our preservation do both
plead for, and challenge it at our hands, a regular conformity to his will, for
we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture; but much more our redemption,
the end whereof is, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
might serve him without fear, Luke 1.74, 75.
in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

This obedience is, 1. Internal, wrought and seated in the heart. 2. External,
professed and made conspicuous by outward expressions. For the former, it is
internal, wrought in the heart; for the outward motions of our service and
observance to God, have their proper dependence upon the good operations of the
heart, as it is affected, moved and ruled by the Spirit of grace. In nature the
heart is primum vivens, the first part in man that lives, and communicates
natural life and motion to the rest: So in grace, the heart is the very first
that receives new life from above, according unto which all the other parts
become instruments of righteousness and Gods glory, from being instruments of
sin and Gods dishonor. The heart then once subdued to the obedience of God,
the rebellion of our nature being suppressed, and the love of God shed abroad
in them by the holy Ghost which is given unto us; there is by the effectual
working of the power of the most High, begotten in us an ardent love of God,
which is that spiritual flame of pure heavenly fire, that makes us zealous of
good works, that actuates the whole man in piety, putting us awork in the
serious disquisition of the affairs of heaven, and making us fiery hot in the
Christian pursuit of Gods glory and our eternal quiet. The Apostle defines it
to be the fulfilling of the Law, so that upon it depends our obedience, there
being no obedience without it.

Wherefore to conclude this with S. Bernard on the Canticles: Dilexit nos Deus
dulciter, sapienter, fortiter: dulciter, quia carnem induit; sapienter, Bern.
quia culpam cavit; fortiter, quia mortem sustinuit: Sic nos diligamus Deum,
dulciter ne illecti, sapienter ne decepti, fortiter ne compressi, deficiamus.
God loved us sweetly, wisely, sirmly: Sweetly, because he assumed our nature;
wisely, because he eschewed and declined our sin; firmly, because he sustained
death for us: In like manner, let us love God sweetly, lest allured; wisely,
left intrapped; and firmly, lest constrained and fore urged, we revolt and
apostatize from him. Let our affections then be once heartily endeared unto him
as they ought to be, and the whole world shall not remove our standing, nor
make us forsake our obedience due to God.

For the latter; This honor consisting in obedience, as it is internal,
wrought in the heart, and seated there by love; so it is external, professed by
outward expressions. It must not be locked up in perpetual silence, nor buried
in endless obscurity; but our lips must be open to show forth his praises, and
our light must so shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may
glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

This honorable obedience is expressed two ways, 1. By good language. 2. By good
actions.


First it is expressed by good language. The heavenly host of Angels be assembled
together to give the good time of the early day to the Son of God, now made the
Son of Man: Sing and rejoice, not only because the vacant places of Apostate
Angels were to be filled up and supplied with the redeemed Israel of God; but
also because we are by his most happy Incarnation made most happily the sons of
God, of the sons of wrath; and partakers of their happiness, of being partakers
of great misery. Wherefore joy was proclaimed from Heaven in the sweetest
dialects, by the Divine Heralds of Honor, because the Author and Giver of Joy
was come then into the world, which was the best day that ever than beheld,
made more glorious by the glorious rising of the Sun of Righteousness. Joy
again is commanded, because enmity betwixt God and man (the just cause of
sorrow) is removed. Questionless, Glory in the highest degree and largest
extent is to be rendered unto God; which our first Parents by their unlawful
transgression would have taken away. And if the Angels thus sing and rejoice,
how much more are we engaged in the performance of the like, since he took not
upon him the nature of Angels, but the nature of Man? since unto us that Child
was born, and for us that Son was given? Sing and fear not then, as the Angels
said, because he was born who has taken away all cause of fear. The Israelites
did lift up their voices with Jubilee, 2 Samuel (...).
when the Ark of the Covenant was brought unto them, which was but a shadow or
figure of the Lords Incarnation: how much more ought we to rejoice, unto whom
the Lord himself is come, and has honored us with the assumption of our flesh
unto him? Abraham rejoiced when he saw by faith the day of the Lord afar off:
how much greater ought our rejoicing to be, now that he was Immanuel, God with
us? He rejoiced when he saw the Lord in an humane shape assumed for a time,
appearing unto him: what should we do now, that Christ has coupied unto
himself our nature by an everlasting covenant and inviolable union? Our souls
ought to magnify the Lord our God, and our spirits to rejoice in God our
Savior. A new song is expected of us, being the old things are passed, and all
things become new. With the Heavens ought we in a more special manner to
declare the glory of the God of Heaven, and sound forth in the choifest
language and with most cheerful heart, from generation to generation, the
everlasting praises of our God, for the wondrous work of our Redemption. God
commands us, Good Angels invite us, all things prompt us to make our tongues as
pens of ready writers, to set forth that good matter is indicted in and by our
hearts concerning the King of Kings; Psalm. 45.
whereby we may make his name to be remembered in all ages, and the people to
praise him for ever and ever.

Secondly, This honorable obedience is expressed by good actions. To speak well,
and do ill, is simulata sanctitas, counterfeit sanctity; deliver^d by some to
be duplex iniquitas, a double iniquity. Being that the true Light is gone into
the world from the Father of Lights, who dwells in that Light which is
unaccessible; We who are the Children of Light by profession, ought not to be
employed in the works of Darkness by dissimulation. Our behavior and
conversation must be candid and unstained, if our souls have received the true
stamp and character of goodness: For this purpose God gave Christ, and Christ
gave himself, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Enoch walked
with God; and Abraham pleased God; David did run the pure path of Gods
commandments; and Christ did all things well. We are to have respect to all the
divine ordinances of the God of Truth, that in none (if it be possible) we may
be sound faulty. Forsake evil, and do good, (says the Prophet;) and so the
Lord shall crown our desires above what we are able to ask or think, says the
Apostle. Let your Covetousness be turned to Liberality, that the Saints of God,
those of the household of faith, may be the better for you: Let your Ambition be
turned to Humility, that ye think not of your selves above that which is meet:
Let your Adulteries be turned to Chastity, that your bodies may be fit temples
for the Holy Ghost to dwell in: Let your Idolatries and Superstitions be turned
to the zealous and Primitive service of God, that God may dwell in the midst of
you: Let your Wantonness in attires and habits be turned to Gravity, whereby
the Heavenly graces of the Eternal Spirit may be enlarged in you, and
manifested by you, as becomes Saints: Let your hideous Blasphemies and horrid
Oaths be turned to a reverent naming of the Lord, that his Name may be hallowed
by you. In conclusion, let all the Intemperance, Profaneness, and Corruptions
of our lives, be turned to Holiness; whereby all our actions may favor of
grace, goodness and obedience.

This obedience in actions, whereby we glorify God, must be -- 1. Speedy. 2.
Cordial. 3. Ever augmenting. 4. Resolutely constant.


To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Dilatory
procrastinarions beget difficulties, and augment our miseries. Wherefore to
keep a Field from overgrowing with weeds, is to pluck them up in the Spring;
and to preserve ones Body from overcharging with diseases, is to purge the bad
humors betime. Thus sin and disobedience must be nipped in the bud, or else
they bring forth much sour fruit of trouble and danger. It Is the Politicians
observation, That a parvis veniunt summa mala principiis; The greatest evils
have but small beginnings.

My son, give me thy heart, says the Wise man; says the wiser God. If
obedience be wrung from us, it is not acceptable; A cheer(...) giver obtains
acceptance at Gods hands, Abraham's obedience in offering to offen up his son
Isaac upon Divine command, was cordial; So were David's services, being a man
after Gods own heart. Christ's obedience was cordial, both in fulfilling every
tittle of the Law, and suffering the punishment due to our sins: So was Paul's,
when in his conversion he consulted not with flesh and blood, but immediately
obeyed the Heavenly vision.

obedience is not compassed in a moment, which is but a point of time, but by
degrees and many previal dispositions. Were it not that we are too much
indulgent to our corrupt affections, our obedience would never leave growing,
until by Divine assistance and pious endeavors, we increase the quantity
thereof. I know, the desire of enjoying the home-pleasures of this sinful life,
has the more favorable audience and powerful persuasions in a mind captivated
to his own passions, and prevails more: But where the heart is set at liberty
from the bondage of sin, there Piety bears sway, and obedience abounds.
Hence proceeds the Apostle's elegant Climax; Add to your faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Acti agamus.
and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience
godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness
charity: If these things be in yo^ and abound, they make you that ye shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Galatians, to begin in the spirit, and to end in the flesh, is a deep apostasy
from the truth of obedience, and from obedience to the truth. It is manifest
cowardice in Soldiers to forsake their Colors when they are upon service: Our
whole life is no other than a continual warfare; If our resolution be not fixed
in our Christian enterprises, if we fail (after the military oath is solemnly
taken by us in our Baptism) in obeying the Captain of our salvation, the Lord
of Hosts; we cannot avoid the bafest imputation of coward^se, nor be accounted
other than dastardly fugitives. We know, Satan and the World lay strong siege
to take us, and to draw us by head and shoulders from our obedience: But we may
learn from Job this point of valor, that though God should kill us, (much less
then if Satan should) yet we should not upon any terms forsake him. For the
crown of life and diadem of glory, Rev. 2.10.
shall be given unto them alone, that are faithful to the death.

Thus much concerning the honor of Obedience, which this Glory in the Text
imports. Now follows the other honor imported by it, which is the honor of
Divine worship or adoration; whereof there are two degrees: 1. Internal. 2.
External.


The first is the internal affection or serviceable submission, which is as the
soul or life: The other is the external note or sign of such submission, (as
bowing, kneeling, supplication) these are the body or material parts of it. Now
this worship, when divine, and opposed unto civil, is proper unto God, and
incommunicable to any creature: For the glorious prerogative of our Creation
and Redemption, in these works he admits no instrumental service, much less can
brook a Partner in the glory redounding to them; My glory will I not give unto
another. Psalm. 95.6.
In consideration of the works of Creation, the Princely Prophet invites all to
adore God: O come, let us worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our
Maker. In consideration of our Redemption, God speaking of Christ, says, Let
all the Angels of God worship him; much more men. Besides, the seeds of grace
and true religion, are sown immediately by Gods sole powerful hand; and their
native off spring, (acts of faith especially) must be reserved entire and
untouched for him. Prayers intrinsecally religious, or devotions truly sacred,
are oblations which may not, which cannot without open sacrilege be
consecrated to any others honor, but only to his who infuseth the spirit of
prayer and thanksgiving into men's hears. Bowing the body and kneeling, as used
to express a religious and divine worship, must not be directed to honor them
which are no gods; but the Only wise and Immortal King. Never had any man
juster occasion to worship an Angel, than S. John; or a Saint, than Cornelius
and his company had. The reason why the Lord in wisdom would have as well their
willingness to worship, as the Angel's and S. Peter's unwillingness to accept
their proffered submission, so expressly registered, was, to imprint the true
meaning of that Law in the hearts of all that should read those stories, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Now if any Anabaptistical Humorist, who has a company of Phanatique toys
whiffling about his understanding, should censure me for enforcing Bowing and
Kneeling; I have no more to say to him than this: Being that God is the Creator
and Redeemer of soul and body, that therefore as well with the body as the soul
we are to worship him, by kneeling, bowing; and that especially when the act of
our Redemption is presented unto us by visible signs, as it is in the Lords
Supper.

I conclude this with the Apostle: 1 Timothy 1.17.
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible and only wise God, be honor
and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

I follow still the Angels strain, and pitch my thoughts on the second part;
the words are these, And on earth peace.

From the time of Man's capital apostasy effected by the cunning project of the
subtle Serpent, all the creatures of God were at odds with Man, affected with
reciprocal enmity. The fiery Dragon had set the world on fire; Combustion and
Confusion, the two extremities of distempered Passion, came on after. Hence by
reason of the perpetual opposition of the creatures, Iniquity did abound, and
the love of many waxed cold. The burden of these disturbances was so ponderous,
that all things did groan under it: So many blustering storms did succeed one
upon the neck of another, as that the world seemed to despair of peace. Man's
wicked disobedience was taken so ill at Gods hands, (as well he might) as that
he was incensed against him and his posterity, and for their sake cursed the
earth. Here then we find Man in hostility with God, with himself, with his
brethren, with all Gods creatures both in heaven and in earth: So that he is
excluded felicity, whereof he was before possessed; environed with that
deplorable misery, which he then could not, and we now cannot without Christ
Jesus avoid. His rebellion against God, caused the creatures to rebel against
him: He neglecting his Creator, is both by the Creator and creature neglected:
His falling from the Lord, made the Lord and the servants fall out with him.
Because the sons of Adam had such aspiring minds, as to seek after that which
is proper unto God; Peace is therefore departed from the sons of Adam. Now
there was no peace within, none without; until the Prince of peace, Jesus
Christ, by grace, put a period to the mutinous disposition of ill-affected
humors; until he had so salved the matter betwixt God and us, as that all
things might work together for the good of us that are the elect of God.

Wherefore as the Dove, after the ^sswaging of the waters of the Deluge,
brought an Olive branch into the Ark of Noah; so Christ, as innocent as a Dove,
came unto the world, and brought Peace and Reconciliation with him into the Ark
of God, which is his Church, floating in a restless Ocean of intestine
troubles. Who was no sooner come, but the Heavenly Courtiers invite us men on
earth, to give glory unto God in Heaven; because that the God of Heaven did by
his own Son send peace on earth to men. For when he came, he brought peace to
us; when he departed, Zanch.
he left his peace with us. Qui pacem dicit, dicit uno verbo omnia bona, says
Zanchius; Who names but peace, comprehends in one word all that is good. And
indeed, all that is good did in and through Christ descend to us from the
Infinite Good, out of the inexhaustible treasures of whose uncomprehended
fullness we have all received. Since then (O my God) that my soul and discursive
faculty must now be fixed upon all that is good; refine I bese^ch thee my diviner
thoughts, and let not all that is good be in any wise tainted by any unhallowed
imperfections of mine. Assist with thy Divine power, in setting out this
Olive Branch of Peace fetched from Heaven, that may in time spring up unto
eternal life.

Our Savior, the Everlasting Son of the Father, and blessed Peacemaker of
Heaven and Earth, wrought for believing men, such as shall receive him by faith
(for whose sake he came into the world) a foursold inviolable Peace;

Viz. 1. Peace with our God. 2. Peace with our selves. 3. Peace with one
another. 4. Peace with all the creatures.


First he wrought our peace with God. What befell Adam for his insolent
behavior and disobedience against the Author of his life; no son of Adam that
has but the least sense of misery, can be ignorant of. Upon the apprehension
of the transgression, he found himself, and we since our selves miserably
plunged in a depth of inselicity; for by the offense of that one man, that
first man, all became enemies to God, and God an enemy to all. Thus God and man
stood off at a distance, never to come together but by a mediation. Whereupon
the God of mercy, that delights not in the death of a sinner, unwilling to see
so noble a creature perish everlastingly, provides and sends a Mediator, that
Son of his who was in his own bosom, to reconcile us unto himself, to bring us
unto the bosom of his Father; ratisying such a league as may (if it were
possible) outlast Eternity. Hence it was he took our flesh upon him, whereby
being God and Man, he might bring man to God. Oh the hardness of my stony
heart! says Bernard, in a heavenly ecstasy; Bern.
Vtinam, Domine, sicut Verbum caro factum est, ita and cor meum carnem fiat! I
would to God, my God and Lord, that as the Word was made flesh, so were my
heart, hereby to be seelingly apprehensive of thine infinite mercy, in granting
pardon to my sin, and peace unto my soul, through the Lord Jesus! It is the
Apostles speech, (...), He, that is Christ, is our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14.
our Peace in the very abstract; By him our eternal quiet is procured, Gods
consuming wrath appe^sed, and by his light are our feet guided into the way of
peace. A Jesuit spoke it, and to speak truth, it is Gods received truth: Ex
inimicis amicos, ex servis filios, ex filiis irae haredes regni fecit nos per
Christum Deus: God, the God of peace, has made us through Christ, that of
being his enemies, his friends; of being his servants, his sons; of being sons
of wrath, heirs of a Kingdom not subject to mortality.

Bu^lest an headstrong credulity arising out of a flattering misconceit, should
draw some into a precipitate presumption of concluding themselves to be
reconciled to God, and restored to favor, though they persist in sin and
infidelity: Learn this Orthodox truth, grounded on that of the Apostle; That
they only who are justified by faith, and sanctified by his Spirit, have peace
with God, Romans 5.1.
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Happy is that soul alone, that has faith; it
has Christ: Happy that soul alone that has Christ, it has the Spirit of
Christ: Happy that soul alone that has the Spirit of Christ, it has God:
Happy that soul alone that has God; it has all things. The sins of true
Believers, and all their imperfections, do (like the Morning-dew at the Suns
approach) vanish away and dissolve into nothing by the beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, by whom we have access by faith into his grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Here Is a remedy to stanch a bleeding
heart; here is rest for a troubled spirit; here is a Cordial restorative for a
Christian soul, that aforetimes did surfeit with the luscious bewitching
pleasures of a sinful life, and after trembled at the killing fears of the
pangs of Hell.

To say something more how our peace with God was wrought; (which is worthy of
all observation.) Know, the condition of the Obligation of the first Covenant
was this, Do this and thou shall live; the transgression whereof by necessary
consequence must have brought death. To reduce us then into grace with God
again after our desertion, Doing and Suffering was requisite; the one serving
to give us life, the other to save from death, both for expiation of our
offenses, and satisfaction of the offended Justice. Our peace then is made by
Christ's 1. Doing, and 2. Suffering.


By Christ's doing. For if by our ill doing we undid our peace, our peace must
be m^de up by well doing; which we being unsufficient for, Christ whose grace
is abundantly sufficient for us, performed in our stead. His conversation i^
the days of his flesh (besides his unspotted and pure Conception) was
unblemished. He came to fulfill all righteousness, and did so: In the volume of
the book it is written of me, Heb. 10.9.
(says our Savior) Lo I come to do thy will, O God. I can quickly impannel a
sufficient Jury out of the three Kingdoms, the Kingdom of this World, the
Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory; some friends, others foes, by their
just verdict given up already, to justify the Innocence of our Blessed
Redeemer. An Angel, in the 9. of Daniel, calls him The most Holy; And the same
Angel tells his Virgin Mother, that, That Holy thing which should be born of
her, should be called the Son of God. The Prophet Isaiah by Divine inspiration
says, That he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. S. Peter
says, He was a Lamb without blemish and without spot. The Apostle to the
Hebrews, describes him to be Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
S. John insorms us, that We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. He is said by the Spouse in the Cantieles, to be white and ruddy;
Ruddy in respect of his bloody Passion, and whire in regard of his unstained
Innocence. Pilate (though Christ's enemy) ingenuously professes, that he could
find no fault in him. Traitorous Judas, when the fact was done, confesses,
that he did betray the innocent blood; Habemus consitentem reum. There was
Herod's action in causing him to be arrayed in a gorgeous white robe, as an
implicit testimony of his innocence. Pilate's wife bids her husband, sitting
on the seat of Judgment, to have nothing to do with that Just man. The Thief
upon the Cross, condemning himself and his fellow, makes this his last and his
best confession; This man has done nothing amiss. The Centurion, when he saw
what fell out upon the death of Christ, concluded with himself, Verily, this
was the Son of God; Luke 4.34.
or as S. Luke has it, Of a truth, this was a just man. The Devil too; I know
thee who thou art, the Holy one of God. For more evidence, I can produce from
heaven a cloud and innumerable company of witnesses; as that, Rev. 15.3. Part
of the Saints heavenly song is, Just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. Lastly take with us the sentence of the just Judge of all the world,
uttered from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. I need
to say no more in it, it is a plain case: here is a threefold cord, Vox Dei, vox
populi, vox populi Dei; The voice of God, the voice of the people, the voice of
the people of God.

Now for our comfort, know thus much: Christ's active righteousness was
meritorious for our salvation, for our peace; wherefore Christ is said to be
made to us of God, righteousness and sanctification; and that he knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. By Adam's fatal
disobedience, the peace was broken; by Christ's perfect and absolute obedience,
the peace is renewed. As by the disobedience of one man, the first Adam, many
were made sinners, and so enemies to God; so by the obedience of one man, the
Man Christ Jesus, the second Adam, many are made righteous, and so reconciled
to God. Our peace then is made by Christ's doing, in fulfilling the Law in every
point, which in every point we did unrighteously violate. He did work upon the
Earth, to work our peace in Heaven. Which in like manner he did by suffering,
as well as doing: Which I will by Divine assistance also briefly prosecute.

Were we not sinners, Christ had no need to suffer; Had he not now suffered, we
should not be saved because sinners. All our deaths could not have wiped away
one sin, much less all our sins; and therefore not made our peace. Eternity of
torments is satisfaction indeed to Gods Justice; but then what hope of mercy,
of peace, of life? What we therefore could not do by suffering eternally,
Christ has effected for us by a timely death: Romans 5.10. Act. 20.28. 1 John
1.7.
We being sinners, Christ died for us; and being enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son. Hence he is said to have purchased his Church,
that is, the peace of his Church, with his own blood; and his blood to cleanse
us from all sin. Divine Truth terms him, The Lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the world. The sin of the world, that takes away the world from God; the
removing where of out of the way, makes way for grace, and so for peace for a
world of men. Princeps vitae est interfectus, ut nos ad vitam restitueret;
Dominus gloriae crucifixus est, ut nos ad gloriam exaltaret: The Prince of life
was put to death, to restore us from death of life; The Lord of glory was
ignominiously crucified, to exalt us unto glory. He was content to be for saken
of his Father, and to bear his indignation; to make peace for us through the
blood of his cross, to reconcile us who were sometimes aliens and enemies (in
the body of his flesh through death) to present us holy and unblameable, and
unreproveable in his sight. Col. 1.21, 22. Ephesians. 5.2.
For this very purpose he became a Peace Offering for us. Christ loved us, and
has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet
smelling savor.

Oh the unsearchable depth of my loving Savior's love, and the infinite value
of my Redeemer's death; upon whom fell the chastisement of our peace, and on
whom the Lord laid the iniquity of us all! Oh who would not in a full eareer
run and leap out of himself into the bosom of my crucified Lord, in whose arms
we may receive the solacing embracements of his infinite love! None but he can
bring us unto God; for none but he can grant rest unto our souls. As I live, I
will never seek any other Peacemaker among Angels or Saints in heaven or
earth, to make my peace with Heaven, than him that is the King of the Saints:
Who, though he accounted it no robbery to be equal with God, yet for our sakes,
for my sake, did humble himself to death, even to the death of the Cross;
whereby having made our peace, be has freed us from all that is ill, and has
made us partakers of all that is good.

He has freed us from all that is ill. The blessed fruit of an happy peace, is
a well grounded security; which whosoever is at peace with God, enjoys; Number.
17.23.
enjoys a safe protection under his wings. Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel. Subtilty cannot
prevail against those whom the Lord has resolved to bless; nor power overcome
whom the Lords stretched out arm will support. What forces of arms of the
mightiest man, can resist the powerful arms of the Almighty? or what wisdom of
the wisest worldling can oppose the wisdom of the wisest God? And if all these
fail, what can the Accuser of the brethren invent, whereby to bring us into
condemnation? The Serpents head is bruised by the Woman's Seed, and Sin has
lost its sting; for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
Condemnation? nor separation from the love of God. Satan and the world may
assault, but with little good success: The flesh and sin may labor to entice
us, but to little purpose: Death and the grave may seize upon us, but it is but
for a short time. In all these things we are more than conquerors through him
that loved us; And thanks be to God that gives us the victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Forasmuch then as that the Lord has trodden the wine press of his Fathers
wrath alone, to free us from all ill; Be ye, oh be ye who are the Lords
redeemed, cautelous and circumspect in your conversation; that by the errors of
your ways, and continual transgressions, you incense not his wrath against you,
nor provoke the eyes of his glory. Sudden destruction will assuredly surprise
that soul that sin keeps at odds with God; and Hell gapes wide open for such as
will not be reclaimed. It was Joram's proposition to Jehu, Is it peace? And it
was Jehu's reply to Joram, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jesabel and her witchcrafts are so many? Out of doubt, while we persist in
wickedness, adultery, idolatry, pride, avarice, sacrilege, extortion,
oppression, bribes, perjury, (I might be endless;) we cannot be at peace with
God; and therefore lie ever open to the shot of general dangers. As we are
unfit through our obliquities to press into Gods presence here, so is it
impossible for us, keeping the same path, to be admitted into his glotious
presence hereafter; or to escape that deserved vengeance that comes swiftly
from him to whom vengeance belongs; that drives more furiously than did Jehu
the son of Nimshi. Break off then your sins to be at peace with God, and Gods
peace be with you. So shall you receive large immunities, as to be free from
all ill, so to be partakers of all good; which is the second effect of this
peace.

The largeness of my Gods bounty, and my Saviors merits, are not to be
comprehended by humane capacity, it is infinite. Ponder the Apostles reason for
this ample favor extended unto us; and then let our souls rejolce. Gods
liberality is propounded in this wise: He that spared not his own Son, Romans
8.32.
but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? It cannot enter into my head to conceive, how that the Lord will
withhold what tends to our felicity, being he gru^g'd not to give us what he
loved best, his only Son. He gave him without our demand, and will therefore
give all things without our desert. What Paul said to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.
I say to you that are reconciled to God; All things are yours, whether things
present or things to come, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. The Lord
gives grace and glory, says the Psalmist; Grace here, Glory elsewhere.

In a peaceable Commonwealth all things flourish; men do plentifully enjoy
themselves, and plenty of all things, without interruption: whereas the discord
and dissentions of factious Licentiates by rebellion against their Prince, lays
a gap open for ruin to enter upon them. So when upon our address to God, we
have obtained a peaceable condition; when we have laid down our arms or
weapons, intending no more to sight against Heaven; when the Mediator of the
New Testament, by interposing himself betwixt God and us, has concluded an
everlasting and unchangeable peace; then, then in very deed, no good thing will
be denied us; There is no want to them that fear him. Psalm. 34.
This is most true: For by this peace we are adopted the sons of God and heirs
of glory; whereby there is conveyed unto us by the eternal constitution of the
Possessor of all things, a just title to all things, to blessings both temporal
and eternal; the treasures of his graces are conferred upon us, the storehouse
of his riches is ever open to us, and the pure crown of immortality and royal
diadem of glory is laid up for us; For us who shall depart in peace according
to Gods word, and whose eyes shall see his salvation.

One word to you, to whom a sinful life is far more pleasing, than that that
befits a Christian's: Your iniquities separate between your God and you, and
deprive you of all that is good. I call you from Isaiah, what he did from the
Lord, Children of transgression, and a seed of falsehood; whose end cannot be
good, whilst you walk in those crooked paths, wherein whosoever goes shall not
know peace. Rectify your ways, alter your wild courses, conform your selves to
the will of God your Creator, accept the Covenant of peace, and live
accordingly; so shall your souls live. Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Then blessed shall ye be in the city, and blessed
shall ye be in the field, blessed shall ye be in the fruit of your body, and
the fruit of your ground, and the fruit of your cattle, Deuteronomy. 28.
the increase of your kine, and flocks of your sheep; blessed shall be your
basket and your store: And in heavenly places ye shall be blessed with those
joys which are at Gods right hand, world without end.

And thus much concerning the first peace wrought for Believers by Christ's
coming into the world, The peace of Reconciliation unto God.

The second peace which the God of peace grants us by our Saviors coming in
the flesh, is peace with our selves, called The peace of a good Conscience.
For, sin that did at first put God and us at variance, continues in the
children of wrath not yet reconciled to God, a perpetual disquiet; Their
conscience finding no rest, brings in despair and ruin. But the apprehension
of Gods favor, and sense of reconciliation by Christ, calms the conscience of
the child of God, and stops the passage to despair and ruin. The ground of
this peace is Justification, whereby we have peace with God. Condemnation is a
terror to the heart, and the thought of it able to shake the very foundations
of the soul: But when a man by the demonstration of the Spirit finds himself to
be in Christ Jesus, and so free from condemnation, having his conscience washed
in his blood from the guilt of sin, and the saving benefits of his unvalued
Passion attributed unto him; then he takes his rest; no turbulent passion shall
disturb his quiet condition, but will lay him down in peace, and dwell for ever
in safety. This leavenly tranquillity of the Christian heart is excited and
effected in us, by Gods Spirit rightly informing our understandings of the glad
tidings of peace, and assuring us of the adoption of sons, by the remission of
all our sins. Phil. 4.7.
Hence it is called, The peace of God that passes all understanding. The peace
of God, 1. Because none can confer it upon us but God alone; it is his proper
gift, and his alone work: My peace I give unto you, Joh. 14.
says our Savior. 2. Because it is not carnal nor humane, but divine; not
consisting in external matters, but in the heart, the mind, the conscience, and
Gods graces in them, which are all internal. Again, it is said to pass all
understanding, that is, all created understanding; because that no created
understanding can express it, no, not conceive it, if it be destitute of the
Spirit of Christ, if it receive no Divine spiritual illumination from above. No
wonder then, that being it is ens transcendens, of a transcendent nature, it is
hid from the world: I assure you it is out of the sphere of the worlds
activity, and too too remote from the compass of worldlings capacity: It Is a
secret which the glimmering light of nature cannot discover, but is made
apparent in Converts, and to Converts, by the refulgent rays of the Spirit of
grace. I will briefly describe it, for better satisfaction, from the Agents and
operations, or effects of it in man.

From the Agents. Then is the Conscience truly possessed of peace, says one,
Quando caro animo judici regitur, and animus Deo praesidi gubernatur: when the
Mind as Judge rules the flesh; and when God as President or chief Ruler,
rules the mind. God ruling the mind, and the mind the flesh, comes to work
this peace in man: For the Conscience, by the perfect operation of God, and the
good mind, is as the Apostle says, (...), 2 Timothy 1.3. (...), Heb. 13.18.
(...), Act. 24.16. Pure, good, or without blemish, void of offense; which is
the glory and the consolation of the Saints, whereby an entry is made for
peace, there to take up an abode for ever, for ever to stay, because it cannot
be taken from them. For it is not possible that that conscience which is
purified with the blood of Christ, and wholly practiced in the works of Gods
commandments, can be customarily subject to the infestuous distractions of a
troubled spirit.

From the operations or effects of it in man. The peace of conscience produces
in a Christian these four things: Viz. 1. Confidence. 2. Security. 3. Liberty.
4. Joy.


This peace makes us confident in going to the Throne of grace, of obtaining
our requests, and fearless of the assaults of our greatest adversaries. It Is
the wise man's judgment of the righteous man, that he is as bold as a lion; and
righteousness is never without peace; where righteousness and peace kissing
each other at their joyful meeting, augments and strengthens the confidence of
the just man. No power shall block up his passage, but upon all urgent
occasions he will unto his God: Sin, the greatest impediment bringing shame and
confusion, is quite removed from reigning in him, and the guilt thereof taken
away from condemning of him: Satan, the principal and malicious tempter, is
trodden under foot, the world is overcome, the strongholds of Satan demolished;
so that no perplexed evils shall alter his resolutions in the ways of holiness,
or make him falter in the solemn services of God.

This peace secures us. He that keeps within distance of his enemies reach, and
lies open without good guard, may find that his enemies malice and revenge
straight take the advantage and ply their parts; making the Act tragical, and
the Scene bloody. But that man that is at peace with God and himself, may stand
upon terms of greatest defiance against his opposites: For as he comes not
within the list of their reach, nor is destitute of safest protection; so
neither can their malice or revengeful minds gain the least advantage against
him; for their greatest power is ever curbed by the awful power of the
Omnipotent. What can Satan do? what can sin? what can the world? They may
thwart us, and that is all; Phil. 4.7. Sat mediis tranquillus
and all that in vain too; for as the Apostle says, (...); The peace of God
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus; (...), shall keep like a
warlike garrison, for that is the emphasis of the word) with watch and ward,
that the enemies shall not invade or surprise the soul; and through Christ,
that neither impatience against God on one side, not diffidence and despair of
Gods favor on the other side, shall make us fall from him, but we shall
persevere unto the end. Quis usqnam excidit, quem Deus pacis custodit? Tell me,
what man has ever perished, to whom the God of peace vouchsafed protection?

The third work of this peace, is Christian liberty. Liberty from the yoke of
the Moral law; and that in a double regard: In regard of the perfect fulfilling
of the Law; an exact obedience without any error or obliquity, is not of
absolute necessity, but to be proportioned according to the measure of grace,
which he that accepts the will for the deed gives unto us. Joh. 8.36.
For Christ has freed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.
If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And liberty from the bondage
of sin: Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin, says our Savior,
Joh. 8.34. But he that has the peace of a good conscience, is not in
subjection to the dominion of sin, but is servant to righteousness, having
obtained the liberty proper to the sons of God, to which he is called. Liberty
from the burden of humane traditions and superstitious inventions of men,
either crept into the Church through the subtilty of Satan, or neglect of the
Pastors; or impiously imposed by the Antichristian Hierarchy, under the show of
piety and Religion. 1 Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. Liberty from the
fear of Tyrants, in matters concerning the solemn worship of God, or fear of
danger in matters indifferent. The conscience of a man rightly informed and
guided by discretion, is apt to undertake all that may make for Gods glory, the
Churches good, and his own salvation. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a kingdom.

The last effect of this peace, is Joy; and it is called Joy unspeakable in the
Holy Ghost; such an excess of joy, as we want utterance to express it. A good
conscience, that is, a pacified conscience, says Solomon, is a continual
feast; it frollicks and merries the heart in the very prease of adversity; it
encourages a man to alacrity of spirit, and a certain hope of victory; and it
admits no bitter invective to be cast out against us to deject us, nor
produces any clamorous accusation to ruin us: Am^s.
but being calm and quiet, excusat, absolvit, consolatur, says Amesius; it
pleads our excuse, it frees us from condemnation, it brings in an ebullition or
a springtide-like overflow of all sovereign comforts.

Balaam did wish that he might die the death of the righteous: I for my part
wish to live the life of the righteous. None under heaven can live a more truly
jocund life, or at greater hearts ease, than he that has an upright conscience
toward God and toward man. His soul in the midst of tribulation is full
ballasted with rejoicing, which the world cannot take away. Hab. 3.18.
It was Habbakkuk's resolution, that notwithstanding all misery, he would
rejoice in the Lord, he would joy in the God of his salvation.

But is it so with the wicked? can they participate of saving consolation? It
cannot be. Yet my charity forces this good wish for them, I would they did!
for then would they bid adieu to all sinful courses, which in the end prove
dismal. I am sure I have seen the wicked rejoice in their wickedness; yet that
rejoicing, as it is like crackling of thorns under a pot, of short continuance;
so it is never hearty: And wot you why? surely because their conscience can
never be at rest; There is no peace, Isa. 57.21.
says my God, unto the wicked. For their consciences tell them that the Lord
has a quarrel unto them for their sins; they see their condemnation printed in
their soul, as it were with red letters in an Almanac. How can it be
otherwise? Where there is no zealous reluctation to evil, but a constant
gliding into mischief, and study to transgress: when sinners, confident in the
imagination of their giddy heads, like Tumblers that stand upon their heads,
kick against Heaven; what expectation of peace or joy, or what hope of Divine
solace can they have?

On the contrary, They that war against the flesh, and will not admit any
composition th Satan; they that spend themselves to please God, and to be in
league with heaven: It cannot be, but being that all your aims bend at peace,
Isa. 57.2.
you shall end in peace, and rest in joy and glory everlasting.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever.

There remains yet two other kinds of peace to be treated of; peace with one
another, and with the creatures.

Sin the cause of all confusion, has so distempered the whole fabric of man,
and bred such malignant humors in our nature, that unless the God of order
take us in hand, we are apt upon the least occasion to lay violent hands one
upon another; or else by secret contrivances to work one another downfall. If
unbridled passions once get but an head in man, nothing unless Gods
restringent grace stop him, shall hold him from breaking out into outrageous
disorders. Wherefore to cure this malady, this running sore; it seemed good to
the God of peace, to send his beloved Son the Prince of peace into the world:
Part of whose function was, not to put men together by the ears, Sacrosancta
(...) nobis committitur, non (...).
but to combine their hearts together by a loving union. He came and preached
peace to you that were afar off, and to them that were nigh. My peace (says
Christ) I give unto you. And this is my commandment (says love it self) that
ye love one another, Ephesians. 2.17. John 14.27. cap. 15.12, 17.

History reports that the Temple of Janus in Rome Paynim, at the time of
Christ's Nativity had all the gates thereof laid open; Histor. Romans
which was interpreted to be a manifest intimation of a general peace over all
the world. And out of doubt, in whom the Spirit of Christ bears rule, they
are ever addicted to a peaceful life: for peace, whereof the turbulent spirit
makes no reckoning, is reckoned among the fruits of the blessed spirit. Seeing
then that Christ brought it, preached it, gives it, commands it; I shall
therefore briefly press it.

This kind of peace is twofold, Civil and Ecclesiastical. As Religion is the
King upon which the Government of the Political State depends and moves; so
Peace is the Rail that keeps both close together. Truth has aver'd it, that
Kingdoms, Cities and houses, divided against themselves, cannot stand. Factious
spirits in the Commonwealth, and schismatical hot-brains in the Church, by
their unhappy divisions, lay a gap open for destruction to enter in by. For the
preventing whereof, be ever observant of the Apostles wholesome advice, which
is, 1 These. 4.11. and 5.13.
to study to be quiet, and to be at peace among your selves. We must not let
loose the raines to precipitate passion, or let fly distastful language,
unbeseeming the professors of the Gospel of Christ; but ever by a sanctified
discretion moderate our minds in love, and keep our selves within the precise
circuit of Piety and Religion. Reason it self pleads for a civil behavior
toward all, which in reason cannot be denied; And therefore we will begin with
Civil Peace.

The Heathen Philosopher tells us, that man by nature is a sociable creature,
Arist. Polit.
because reasonable; who indeed is rather so when guided by Religion: for that
labors to preserve unity, which being broken, society is dissolved. Hence it
is the speech of a Father, Debemus ut corpori sanitatem, puritatem cords; sic
and fratri pacem; We are indebted as to our bodies for health, to our hearts
for purity; so for peace to our brother. The noblest weapon man can conquer
with, is love and gentlest courtesy; it gets the victory without ere a blow
given. Geometricians teach, that Sphaerical bodies touch not, but in puncto, in
a point; Ram. Geomet.
and therefore more subject to fall: Thus haughty spirits sweld up with
overweening self-love, when they meet together by a proud touch, soon
over-turn one the other. Whereas all of us, great and small, should be like
hollow spheeres, the one within the other; the greater in love embracing the
lesser.

Without peace, the frame of nature cannot stand; Mundus amissa pace, Gregor.
Nazian.
mundus esse desinit; (says Gregory Nazianzene) the world which is chained
together by intermingled love, would all shatter and fall to pieces, if charity
would chance to die; if peace were always disturbed, by discords, Monarchies
degenerate into Anarchies or Tyrannies; Cities lie level with the ground,
Kingdoms are depopulated, Nations wasted, whose memories lie buried in the
dust; families consumed, whose names are perished and glory rotted: Whereas
Peace that brings prosperity, Salustius.
would have preserved all. Concordia res parv^ crescunt, discordia res magnae
dilabuntur (says Salust.) It is the inscription of the Dutch coin verified in
them; little things by concord increase and grow great; by discord great things
become little, and decline apace. Scylurus the Scythian lying on his deathbed,
knew well the power of Peace, by giving unto his sons a bunch of arrows to
break, which being bound fast together, they could not do, but being taken
asunder, they did with ease; a witty Emblem of the strength of Peace, wherewith
the Gentiles were so much enamoured, Cicero.
as that the Heathen Orator could say Iniquissimans pacem justissimo bello
antefero, in his opinion, the unjustest Peace is to be preferred before the
justest war. But I am not of his mind, I know the Apostles limiting
condition, Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. There
must be nothing wanting that is good on our part, whereby either to procure or
preserve Christian Peace. Herein the Serpents wisdom and the Doves innocence
are to be inseparable. We may not consent with any wherein they dissent from
God, for in so doing we do (...), fight against God, and work our selves to
nothing. Wherefore the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.14.
joins in his holy exhortation Holiness and Peace, follow peace with all men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Melior est talis pugna
quae Deo proximum facit, Gregor. Nazian.
quam pax illa quae separat a Deo; infinitely better is that dissension which
makes a man near to God, than that Peace that separates from God for ever. It
is not the Peace the world gives, but that sacred Peace that God gives, we
must embrace. Wherefore says the Apostle, let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, (...). Sit certaminis Moderator.
to the which also ye are called in one body, Colos. 3.15. Out of which words
we may collect, That a godly Peace is to be entertained. Where we have the
office of Peace, to which we must submit our selves, and that is to rule in our
hearts; and the motive thereunto, which is twofold, Gods Ordination, and our
spiritual affinity, to which we are called in one body.

First, It must rule in our hearts. The heart is the proper seat of the
affections; Arist. de Generet. Corrups.
and if the Philosopher be to be credited, it is the Metropolis of the soul. If
there be any combustion in man raised, by the tumultuous passions of anger,
hatred, malice and revenge; it is begun in the heart, there they have their
habitation. To aswage therefore the impetuous sury of these rebellious humors,
and to prevent the fearful mischief that comes by their unrulinesse, the peace
of God must bear sway there; the whole man will be the better brought into good
order, when the heart is well governed, and never till then. Many may make a
fair pretense of friendship, but it is never unfeigned, unless hearty: the
words of their mouth may be, Psalm. 55.21.
as the Psalmist speaks, smoother than butter, but war may be in their
hearts; their words may be softer than oil, yet may they be drawn swords,
Erasmus.
that cut smoothly: Aliud cord, aliud ore, hypocritically and basely, they
think one thing, they speak another. Of this smooth-faced malice Nazianzene
complains in his twelfth Oration, Pax ab omnibus laudatur, a paucis servatur;
Orat. 12.
all praise peace, but few keep peace. Wherefore did peace but rule in the
heart, all heart-burnings and sullen contention would soon come to a final
Period; and all outside dissimulation would be quickly all out of fashion.

As we have seen the office of Peace, note now the motive thereunto; You are
called unto it in one body.

When Christ came into the world, he became the cornerstone that joins Jew and
Gentile together, who before were divided; for now both by him making up one
mystical body, according to that, Ephesians. 2.14. He is our peace, who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partion between us; so that
by this act Christ has bound us all to the peace and to good behavior, that
so we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is no member
of the body that will do any ill office to any of his fellow members; so we
being called to be members of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.25.
should make no division in the body, but should all have the same care one of
another. This was Prophetically foretold by a pithie Emblem, by beating of
swords into ploughshares, Isa. 2.3.
and spears into pruning hooks, in the time of the Gospel. And it is notably
prefigured by the peaceable habitation of wild beasts and tame together; Isa.
11.6.
as the Wolf and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calfe and the young
Lion, the Cow and the Bear: It is a sweet harmony that the sympathy of
affections, and peace begets in us, whom the Spirit unites together. And in
whom this sympathy and peace is not, Aut stupida sunt membra, Daven. in
Colosens.
aut ne omnino quidem membra hujus corporis, cujus caput Christus, says
Reverend Davenant; either they are senceless and stupid members, or no members
at all, of that body whereof Christ is the head.

Be we then exhorted (as sensible of being in the presence of God) to the love
one of another; which as learned Scaliger defines it, Appetitus unionis,
Scaliger. Exercitation.
a desire and inclination to a quiet union. Charity is the sovereign
preservative of peace, and nothing makes us more like God than it (says one.)
As all things are filled with his goodness, so the universal is partaker of the
good man's spreading love.

Let me also dehort from malice and envy, which is a grand enemy to peace.
Invidia siculi non invenere Tyranni, majut tormentum; the Sicilian tyrants
never invented a more cruel, a more cursed torment. Give it no countenance, no
harbor, for it ever thirsts after revenge; and attributes to it self what
belongs to God, vengeance. It is like Vipers wine, which being drunk, will
never leave working until it discover it self, and those intestine humors that
depend upon it, by stirring up strifes, for hatred stirs up strifes, Prove.
10.12, Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 28.
Mark the monstrous nature of this unnatural humor; whereas all plants and
other creatures have their growth and increase to a period, and then their
declination and decay, except only the Crocodile, Dalington. in his Aphorism.
who ever grows bigger and bigger even till death (as Pliny did observe.) So
(says ingenious Dalington) have all passions and perturbations in the mind of
man, their intentions and remissions, increase and decrease; except only
malicious revenge; for this the longer it lasts, the stronger it waxes and
works still, even when the malign humor of avarice and ambition are settled
or spent.

And would you know how this Crocodile-like sin grows bigger and bigger? I
will tell you. It is Galens observation, Galenus.'
that when a humor is strong and predominant, it not only converteth his
proper nutriment, but even that which is apt for contrary humors, into its own
nature and quality. Of like force is this strong and wilful vice, it not only
feeds upon agreeable motions, but makes even those reasons which are strongest
against it, to be most for it; and so swells immeasurably big. If therefore any
one be troubled with this malady, whereby this peace of Christians is
disquieted; I will give him a receipt of a medicine taken out of St. Cyprian,
which will cure him. Venena fellis evome, Cypr. lib. de Zelo and livere.
discordiarum virus exclude, purgetur men's, quam serpentinus livor infecerat;
amaritudo omnis qua intus insederat, Christi dulcedine leniatur; Disgorge thy
self of the poison of thy gall, cast out the venom of discords, purge thy mind
which is infected with serpentine envy, and let all bitterness which settled
in thy heart, be gently mittigated with the sweetness, with the meekness of
Christ Jesus. It is the voice of God, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart; Levit. 19.17. 1 John 3.15. Ephesians. 4.31, 32, Homo (...), nec minum (...).
Tremelius of Cranmer.
he that hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. This may somewhat satiate and allay the boiling
heat of a revengeful mind. Lest then this sin kill your souls, following the
Apostles counsel, let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even at God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you.

For Christ's sake then in the bowels of compassion, forgive and forget all
offenses. Cyprian.
1. Forgive. Demittentur tibi debita, quando ipse dimiseris; accipientur
sacrificia, cum pacificus ad Deum veneris, says Cyprian; Thy sins shall be
forgiven thee of God, when thou forgivest other; thy sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving shall be acceptable to the Almighty, when thou shall come
peaceably before him. Xenophon.
No mercy shall be showed to them that show no mercy. 2. Forget. Xenophon
reports of Trasibulus, that after he recovered his country, he ordained (...),
a forgetfulness of all injuries, as indeed not worth keeping in mind: the part
truly of a generous spirit and heroic disposition, which may well befit the
best Christian to imitate. O let Abraham's speech to Lot beget in every one of
us ever hereafter a well grounded resolution of preserving peace: Let there be
no strife between me and thee, for we be brethren, says he. Religion ties us,
beside reason, to keep and maintain the Kings peace on earth, if we will have
the peace of Kings in heaven. I have read of one Archidamus. being chosen to
decide a controversy between two that disagreed, being sworn to stand to his
judgment, I lay this injunction upon you, that neither of you depart this
place, until ye be reconciled to each other. The like charge I lay on all
Chistians by authority from heaven, that (at least) ye depart not this life but
in peace, having your hearts cleansed from the leaven of malice and hypocrisy,
and filled with Christian amity and brotherly love. I charge you as Joseph did
his brethren at their departure from him, see that ye fall not out by the way.
Ye are in the way to heaven, go close together, as hand in hand, so heart in
heart, until you come to your journeys end, heaven. Now for a conclusion of the
point, I will use the same prayer for you, which Paul did for the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.12.
The Lord make you to increase, and to abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men. And thus much concerning Civil peace.

The second is Ecclesi;astical, the peace of the Church, which is interrupted
either by Heresy or Schism; Gal. 1.8, 9.
the one breeding dissension in Doctrine, the other disorder in Discipline.
Against the authors and upholders of the first, Saint Paul has pronounced an
Anathema, If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have
received, let him be accursed. Against the abettors of the second, it is his
judicial and Apostolical sentence, separate them from among you. As faction
divides, so infection devours the Church of God, if not prevented. We who are
Messengers of peace, ought to walk like Paul and Titus, Eodem spiritu; iisdem
vestigiis; in the same spirit touching faith, in the same steps touching good
life. Acts 4.32.
It was reported of the Believers, that they were all of one mind and one
heart; Oh! I would to God that all of us that bring the message of peace in our
mouths, who should be the sons of peace and brethren of unity; were so affected
as to suppress all pragmatical dispositions in us: Believe me (my brethren)
fiery spirits, apter for innovation than administration, become not the
servants of Christ Jesus. The principles of Religion which Heretics call into
question, are infallible grounds where on we should build our faith; not
disputable points whereon to found our Phanatick and furious alterations of
hare-brain'd opinionists. Deuteronomy. 27.17.
They are like the fixed landmarks in the fields of our earthly inheritance,
the removing whereof is held accursed. The Church of Christ is not to be reputed
a common School for Sophisters to wrangle in, but for Christ's Disciples (the
faithful) to be instructed in. The Cannons also and constitutions of the Church
concerning matters that are ceremonial, and in themselves indifferent, are not
things to be slighted, but to be obeyed. God has enabled the Church with
authority to ordain what may tend to good and decent order, which none ought to
resist; and shall any go about to disable it?

Let the Seperatist, who upon such simple reasons as are alleged by him,
spurrs at the grave authority of the Church; take heed that he deprive not
himself of the communion of Saints, through his sullen segregation, and out of
a needless nicety (as one speaks) be a thief to himself of those benefits
which God has allowed him. (...).
Let him take heed be have not a bare show of piety, and deny the power
thereof. Nothing is more pestilent to the Church of God, than froward
wilfulness covered with fained holiness; the one in disturbing Religion; the
other in deceiving the professors thereof (especially the vulgar sort) who
judging according to the outward appearance (which sometime beguileth the most
prudent) do verily think the most zealous in profession, to be most religious
in conversation; when alas, it is not so. We may remember what Christ said of
Wolves being in sheeps clothing, and what the Apostle too of Satan's
transforming into an Angel of light. For mine own part, I have ever vowed my
study to be to study to be quiet, and to submit my self to reverent order. I
know how dangerous a thing it is to be a Church-rebel. The Lord speaking of the
Church of the Gentiles, Cap. ult. 12.
said by the Prophet Isaiah, I will extend peace to her like a river. Who now
should dare to stop the current which the Lord has made, and to instinge the
peace that the highest has decreed? But to let this pass.

Besides this, the Papists insult and triumph, to see those those that profess
themselves brethren, to be at such deadly fewd among themselves; Manasses
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses, but both against Judah; that is,
in their sense, the Puritan against the Protestant, the Protestant against the
Puritan, and both against the Papist. Thinking our dissension a sufficient
grace to their Church, which makes unity a special mark of verity. I find that
the end of Schism is Heresy; commonly the end of Heresy Atheism; the end of
Atheism utter desolation and destruction of soul and body. And lastly, when
men through discontent (because their brain may not rule) cut themselves off
from the Church, and so transgress the sacred Laws of Christian sosciety, they
are spiritually dead. It is S. Aug assertion, Spiritus humanus nunquam
vivificat membra, nisi fuerint unitd; Aug. de Civ. Dei.
sic Spiritus sanctus nunquam vivificat membra Ecclesiae, nisi fuerint in pace
unita; The soul of man never quickens but those parts that are united; so
neither does the holy Ghost, but those members of the Church that are at peace
together.

Wherefore, as in Solomon's material temple all was covered with gold within and
without; so in Gods spiritual temple (which temple we are) let all be
beautified with love and peace within and without. Remember, Christ's coat was
seamless, let us not rent it in pieces; the soldiers did, and what they did in
it, they did against Christ; so, Qui pacem Christi and concordiam rumpit,
adversus Christum facit, In lib. de unitat. Eccl.
says Cyprian, he that breaks the peace and concord of Christ, opposes Christ
the author of it. I have read a speech of Cassiodorus worth noting, Non
inveniri potest expressior forma conversationes Angelieae, quam unitas
socialis; Cassiodor. in Psalm.
There cannot be a more express form, or a more perfect resemblance of an
Angelical conversation, than friendly unity. Far be it then from any of our
thoughts to fill the Church of Christ with destraction, or in the least measure
to oppose the peace thereof; Lib. de cur^ Pastorali.
for it is most certainly true, what Gregory the great says, Si Dei vocantur
filij qui pacem faciunt, proculdubio Satanae sunt filii qui pacem confundunt,
If they be called the sons of God that make peace and keep it; Osiander.
questionless they are the sons of Satan that break it, that confound it. It
was Osianders motion, which I now make mine, we are all one spiritual body, let
us therefore have all one spiritual mind; It is unmeet that they should live at
variance on earth, who hope at last to meet and live together in heaven.

To conclude this whole point; As those States are likely to flourish, where
execution follows good advice; so is man when contemplation and attention are
seconded by good action. Contemplation and attention do generate, Bernard,
action does propagate; without the first, the latter is defective, without the
last, the first is but abortive. Barnard compares contemplation to Rachel,
which was more fair; but action to Leah, which was more fruitful.

Let me therefore for the mercies of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.10.
exhort men to practice what I have now propounded. With Paul I will beseech
you to do it; I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye all speak, the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
With the same Paul I will pray for you, Romans 15.5, 6.
that ye do it; Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like
minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that we may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus much concerning the third kind of peace, that by Christ's coming came
into the world; which is peace one with another.

The last kind of peace comes now to be treated of, which is peace with all
Gods creatures; of which succinctly.

After Adam had disobeyed God, the creatures began to disobey Adam; Enmity
attends ever at the heels of sin. Romans ^.
The very creatures were sensible of man's apostasy, being made subject by his
offense unto vanity; and therefore did they take their Creators part, and turn
enemy to rebellious man. But as Christ our powerful Mediator has by his ever
effectual obedience made our peace with God, so by the same has he made our
peace with the Creatures: All things work together for the good of those that
are elect, according to Gods purpose.

The Angels themselves, who are the highest eminency and purest quality among
creatures, are reconciled to them that are reconciled to God. St. Chrysostom. on
those words in Colos. Chrysostom. in Cap. 1. Epist. ad Cosos.
(it pleased the Father by him, that is, by Christ, to reconcile all things
unto himself, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven)
understands by things in heaven, the holy Angels of God; who, says he,
became enemies to all men by reason of their universal rebellion against the
Lord their God: But now bear good will to us, after we are reconciled to God
by Christ, and are of the household of faith. Hereupon it is (as our Savior
says) that the Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner unto
God; Heb. 1, 14.
and the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, says, they are all ministering spirits
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. They guard
such, as their proper charge (says devout Perkins) that be in Gods favor, and
carry them as a nurse does a child in her arms, that they dash not their foot
against a stone; Perkins on Revel. 1.
Psalm. 91.11. Wherefore some Christian Philosophers (out of Act. 12.15. (where
speech being made of St. Peter, it is said, it is not he, it is his Angel;)
collect that every elect man of God has his good Angel, to protect him, to
guide him in all his ways; and upon occasion, when it seems good to God many,
as Elijah had.

Thus we are at peace with good Angels; as for the bad, we must have no peace,
with them; Origin on^ Romans 5.
for then we shall have no peace with God. Origin on the 5. of the Romans
tells us that, Ipse supra omnes cateros pacem habet apua Deum, qui impugnatur a
diabolo, etc. he above all others has peace with God, who is ever combating
with Satan. War against Satan, procures peace with God. Wherefore, being he
will do us no good; the Lord so works, as that he shall do us no hurt.

As for the other creatures, all of them are in league with a good man; their
lesive faculty is restrained by the supreme power from doing violence to the
Lords redeemed; whereas the wicked are still exposed to the danger of their
power.

The stars in their courses fought for Israel against Sisera. Judge. 5.20.
The fire did not hurt the three children in the fiery surnace. The hungry
lion preyed not upon Daniel in the den, Isa. 11.6, 8, 9.
lying at the mercy of that ravenous beast. A little child, says the Prophet
Isaiah, shall lead the young lion; the sucking child shall play on the hole of
the Aspe; and the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cocokatrices den;
neither these nor any of the rest shall hurt or destroy in his holy mountain,
in his holy Church.

It was a most comfortable promise which God made to Judah and Israel, and in
them to his peculiar people; that he would make a covenant for them with all
creatures, Hos. 2.18.
the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the creeping things of the
ground; heaven, earth, corn, oil and all. Yea the child of God shall tread
upon the lion and the serpent, and they shall not hurt him. Thou shall be in
league (says Eliphaz the Temanite to Job) with the stones of the field, Psalm.
91.13. Job 5.23.
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.

Thus Gods Children in Christ Jesus, shall receive no detriment by any thing
that God made; but by his blessed providence they shall find assistance and
comfort from all his creatures.

Now the God of peace that sent his Son with the Gospel of peace, and his
messengers with the glad tidings of good things; grant that we may live in
peace, and depart in peace according to his word; to lead an everlasting
Sabbath of rest in the highest heavens.

Great men's births are commonly celebrated with the joyful acclamation of their
dependants; every one being in a readiness to noise abroad the news that
includes happiness: whereby others might be partakers of their joys, and
excited to do the like in imitation. Thus the glorious and blessed Angels the
inhabitants of heaven, and the immediate attendants of the most high, do the
birth of the Son of God, the King of Kings; like wel-bred Courtiers in
significant terms divulge the birth of so great a Prince, and melodiously
express what good, what great benefits, come by the birth of so good so great a
person. Which ought to be a forcible incentive unto us, after their example to
render due honor unto God, and ^o worship that day star which from on high
has visited us with everlasting comforts. All the holy Angels of God are
obliged to praise him, but we much more; he restored not them to any felicity,
for they lost none; we lost the primitive goodness of our unblemished creation,
and yet restored he us. He redeemed not them, they needed it not; nor the
wicked Angels that needed it: but wrought our redemption when we were enemies
worthy condemnation. O then let us praise the Lord for his peace and merce, for
both endure for ever. What the Angels sung, will serve our turn, Glory be to
God on high, etc.

The parts of our discourse are, 1. The glory we owe to God. 2. The peace God
sent on earth. 3. Gods good will toward men. Concerning the two first, I have
no more to say, than what I have already; but proceed unto that last and maine
point whereupon depend all our future hopes of eternal bliss; which is, Gods
good will and mercy.

I confess that the very name of peace is a sweet word, and sweeter the work,
but sweetest that of mercy, which is the cause of it. Being then that mercy
must be the subject of my present meditations, first I betake my self to thee,
O God of mercy, and eternal Spirit of truth; humbly beseeching thee to enable
me by thy gracious illumination, and to rectify the retired cogitations of my
soul, that whilst, I display thy mercy, thy goodness, thy salvation, and when
all is done; there may be in men's hearts a deep impression of true joy, and a
perfect sense may be obtained; of thy loving kindness and good will toward them.

To behold God sitting in his throne of justice, is to a sinner most full of
dismal horror; but to view him seated in his throne of mercy, is to a
distressed soul most full of heavenly consolation. If there be any that
obstinately forget God, and carelessly cast behind their backs his sacred
ordinances; let them expect to be torn in picees of him, and none to deliver
them; let them look to be consumed of that God whose Jealousy burns like fire.
If there be any that are heartily submissive and sincerely penitent in the
sight of our all-seeing God for their enormities; let them joy up in abundance,
for in him there is mercy and plenty of redemption; although all of us have
highly offended him, and multiplied our transgressions above measure; yet if we
can heartily cry in a low strain of humility Pecoav^, against thee, thee (...)
O Lord have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, If we can confidently
set up our whole rest in our Redeemers alsufficiency: we may presume that
according to his promise, he will extend his mercy and his favor unto all of
us.

For this very purpose did he send his Son unto us, that he might be well
pleased with us, in him, in whom alone he is well pleased: and was content from
all eternity with the death of his Son, to manifest in the fullness of time his
good will toward men. This is the reason why the Prophet Isaiah calls the year
of Christ's Nativity, Isa. 61.2.
or the whole time of the Gospel, The acceptable year of the Lord; for the Lord
accepts of us in him, and no otherwise than as we are in him; and being in him,
he gives us of his good will a secure conduct through all the various
casualties of mortality: wherefore says the holy singer, Thou Lord wilt bless
the righteous, Psalm. 5.22.
with favor will thou compass him, as with a shirld.

To make good this his good will further unto us, he has together with his Son
made us a deed of gift of all things. Romans 8.32.
For he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, would not
but with him also freely give us all things. Should I go about to describe the
immense amplitude of my Gods liberality, my words would rather extenuate than
enlarge it; not being able to reach to so holy a slrain, as the excellency and
worth thereof requires. His love (beside his gifts) is boundless, without all
limits of time, from eternity to eternity. I use the Apostles words (as wanting
of mine own for a fit expression) he did praedestinate us before the foundation
of the world unto the Adoption of Children, Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7.
by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved; in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. Whereupon it is to be inferred, that
without Christ there is no hope of mercy; God in him expresses his good will to
us; in him we are elected, by him called, through him saved. In solo dilecto
suo Jes^ Christo, Robertus Stephous in glos.
Deus charos sibi reddit, quotquot in hoc selegit, (faith Stephanus in his
gloss) as many as God has selected out of the world, to be a peculiar people
to himself, are indeared unto him in his dear Son. So that every one that
belongs to the election of grace, according to the dispensation of his immortal
riches, may truly say, as Abraham did to Sarah, it may be well with me for thy
sake, and my soul shall live because of thee. The Lord, when he looks upon his
Son, and on us in him, remembers mercy. You may be pleased to call to mind what
use the rainbow serves for which is a pregnant figure of Christ our Savior,
whereby we are informed (to use the words of a reverend Prelate) that when
either the dark blackness of ugly sin, Dr. Babington Bish of Worcester in Genesis
9.
or the thick clouds of grief and adversity, do threaten unto us any fearful
overthrow, we should clap our eyes upon our rainbow Christ Jesus, and be
assured, that although that blackness of sin be never so great, yet in him and
by him, it shall be done away, and never have power to undo us. Although those
mists and fogs of adversity be never so thick, yet shall they by him, as by a
hot and strong sun, be dispersed, and never able to drown us. The greatest rain
we know shall end ere it come to such a flood again; and so shall these things
before we fall. Ecce signum, behold Christ is put for a sure sign and token of
Gods good will toward men.

But now I will close nearer, and show what in his good will he has done for
our souls.

I can pass by Gods sending of his Son, as presupposed being the occasion of
this blessed ditty; but I can never pass by our restitution unto grace by him,
the greatest act of good will that ever was: for when sin had overblackt us
with such deformities as left no part clear, when we stood in direct point of
diameter to his holiness, and could not avoid the sentence of condemnation;
through his tender mercy the dayspring from on high did visit us, and the
light of his countenance did shine upon us; to give light unto us that sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the ways of
peace. Whereby we now stand on firmer and fairer terms of happiness and
prosperity, than before our first declination. There is a more established
safety in the condition, we have by Christ, in Christ; than in that first
wherein we were lest unto our selves. For we fell from that first, from this
last we cannot; and being fallen from that, a better a surer cannot be
compassed but by him. Soul and body were so debilitated through the corruption
of our degenerated nature, and we so desperately praecipitate in sinful
deliberations, as that we could not help our selves in this time of need. Potui
per me, sancte Pater; offendere, sed non valui per me placare, says Aug. in
his Manual; O my God, I could easily offend thee, Aug. Manuale. cap. 8.
by my self; but by my self never appease thee, nor expiate my offense. God
therefore unwilling to strive with man for ever, who for ever without his mercy
he found inclined to mischief; in a relenting affection (remembering we are but
dust) Pathetically pities our case, and in his good will sends us a Redeemer,
for which the Angels sing. Believe me O ye servants of my God, believe me, my
God can as soon cease to be God, (which is impossible) as cast away his eyes of
pity and mercy from us; but like as a father pitieth his children, Psalm. 103.
so does the Lord the Workmanship of his hands. Bless the Lord, O my soul,
(says David) and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O
my soul, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
who heals all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who
crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. Boys Postil. Ephesians. 3.
The love of God (says one in his Postils) is like a Sea, into which when a
man is cast, he neither sees bank, nor seeleth bottom. Accordingly says the
Apostle, The length, the breadth, the depth and the height of this love,
passes all humane knowledge. And as his love is thus without all measure,
greater by infinite degrees than that of Jonathan to David; so are his favors
innumerable. It was a Martyrs speech, worthy registring to posterity; To number
the mercies of God to me in particular (says he) were to number the drops of
water which are in the Ocean, the sands on the shore, the stars in the sky.
Mirror of Martyrs.
This one act of his good will (his Sons mission) exceeds the capacity of a
whole world of men to give it a due value. He would not destroy us being his
enemies, when he might in justice destroy us; but to save us inglorious
miscreants, sent his Son from glory; and did (as Abraham would have done with
Isaac his only and beloved darling) offer him up to death, to redeem us from
it. As King Solomon said to Abiathar the Priest, Thou art worthy of death, but
I will not at this time put thee to death: So said the Sovereign of Sovereigns
to us. His Son is destined to what we deserved, to make us partakers of his
deserts. Salvator noster natus est nobis, crucifixus and mortuus est pro nobis,
ut morte sua mortem nostram destrueret, Aug. Man. cap. 27.
(says an uncertain Author:) Our Savior is born to us, crucified and dead for
us; that by his death lie might destroy our death for ever. Wherefore the Lord
Jesus upon the Cross giving the foil to our malicious enemies, Sin, Satan and
Death; Sin, Satan and Death have lost the day, to our endless comfort, and the
glorious manifestation of Gods good will toward men.

I may not smother in thankless silence, the blessed consequences of my
Saviors life and death, tendered for our restoration; how happily they took
effect with the Father in our behalf, and accorded in every point of his decree
with the good pleasure of his will. For first there followed the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, for the remission of our sins. And then the
Sanctification of us by his Spirit, sent into our hearts, for the suppressing
of the dominion of sin in us. Both which show (as speaks the Apostle) the
exceeding riches of his grace, in kindness to us, Ephesians. 2.7.
through Christ Jesus.

First, it pleased the Father, that the fullness of the Spirit should dwell in
him, and that of his fullness we should all receive. His righteousness then is
made over unto us, by the goodness of a righteous God: whose purity, as it
admits no mixture of imperfection; so neither without Christ's perfection, any
justification of a sinner: For none are justified, but such to whom God imputes
no sin; and such are they only to whom God imputes righteousness without
works. Which righteousness, Romans 4.6, 7.
being without our works, and imputed, must proceed, not from our selves, full
of the soul stains of ugly sins; but from another, even from him alone in whom
dwell all perfections, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Thus, and thus alone is God in his Son, the Author and finisher of our
salvation, not imputing our sins unto us, but reconciling us unto himself, by
the imputed righteousness of his Son; by whom we have access unto the Father,
and are no more counted strangers, forreiners and exiles, but are
reimpatriated, and made fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God. Whereupon it is, that by the grace of God (to use the Apostles speech) we
are what we are. And if by the grace and good will of God, then surely not of
debt, not of merit; for grace excludes both. To him that works is the reward
not reckoned of grace, Romans 4.4. Cap. 11.6.
but of debt.

And here I could wish with all my soul, that this and other infallible Oracles
of highest Truth, could heat our adversaries from Humane Merits, and bring them
to the Divine Mercies; from Free Will and Possibilities of Nature, to the Grace
and Good Will of God. To merit Heaven by all we can do, is a fetch beyond all
power of Nature; and to aver it, a strain as of excessive pride, so beyond all
true Divinity. Merits in us are no such props to our faith, as Mercies in God.
The first grounded upon self-conceit and fond opinion; the last upon the
demonstration of the Spirit: The first all of the Romish faction receive for
Orthodoxal truth, which we reject for false; the last they reject for false,
which we embrace for truth. That Italian-Priest, who Achan-like troubles all
Israel, the festered Head of an infected Body, has so distempered the world
with this plausible assertion, as that all his Abettors from the most learned
Dogmatist to the meanest Papist, stand rather to their own strength for their
Justification, than fly to Gods mercy; as having more confidence in their own
abilities and pretended merits, than in the alsufficiency of Christ's Mediation
and Redemption; or at least as much. Who, whilst they stand thus affected, what
do they, but detracting both from the Lord and from his Anointed, ascribe the
honor of the day and glory of our salvation, as well to the Free Will of Man,
Saunders his Petition.
as Good Will of God. But O my soul come not thou within their secrets, neither
be partaker of their defections; Choose rather than combine with them, ever to
pray with that zealous Martyr in this wise: O my heavenly Father, look upon me
in the face of Christ, or else I shall not be able to abide thy countenance,
such is my filthiness. The best of us may confess with the leprous person, We
are unclean, we are unclean; and therefore without him, no blessedness to be
obtained by the best of us. Joh. 14.6.
No man comes to the Father but by me, says Christ; And no man comes unto me
(says Christ again) except the Father draw him.

Thus betwixt the Father and the Son we are well provided for; without whom,
who thinks to be saved, Plaut. Merca.
does take his mark amiss. Vbicunque putant vivere, runnt maxim, (as the
Comedian speaks;) Where they think to live most happily, they die most
wretchedly. Wherefore, for us to repose any confidence in our own imperfect
works, or to seek a shelter under the Merits of Saints recorded in the Pope's
Calendar, or wheresoever else; is utterly to renounce the Merits of Christ, and
the good will of God. Neque enim qui habet virtutem, amplius opus habet; neque
qui valet viribus, Clem. Alex.
eget instauratione, (says Clement of Alexandria:) For he that is perfect,
needs not to be beholding to another; neither needs he any reparation, his
proper strength is already complete. They that are whole, need not the
Physician, but they that are sick; says the Physician of souls.

Let then the swollen Pharisees of the Roman Court, in humility of spirit learn
here to check their insolent boasting of their natural goodness, and
meritorious actions; referring all to the goodness of the Chiefest Good: Let
them march under Christ's colors, as the Captain of their salvation: Let them
set up their rest in him, as the securest Sanctuary for distressed souls. O
worthy Elizeus, how affectionate were thine Obsequies! You may remember that he
could neither be persuaded nor beguiled, nor forced from Elijah, when he should
have been taken from him; but left all other thoughts, and did cleave to his
masters side with an inseparable resolution; As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives, I will not leave thee: So must we be to Christ, in whom God has
manifested his good will to us; and say as Peter did, To whom should we go?
thou have the words of eternal life.

Gods Mercy is like Daniels goodly tree, Dan. 4.
whose height reaches unto the heavens, and the sight thereof to all the
earth; whose pleasant fruit all mortal men do taste and eat, and under the
shadow of whose fair leaves they take rest and comfort. To the defense and
succor of this tree must we run in storms and extremity, and not then only,
but at all times; lest with ungrateful Popelings we go about in the fairest
sunshine to lop the branches. Of pions memory is that last speech uttered with
the fierce zeal of a dying Martyr, burnt in a Tun in Smithfield in the presence
of Henry the Fourth King of England; Mercy, Lord Jesus Christ, mercy! And of
him, that with lifted-up hands and singers flaming with fire, cried to the
people, None but Christ, none but Christ, for ever.

Cry then ye braving Merit-mongers, and say not with the Laodicean Church, We
are rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; when as your
consciences tell you, as theirs did, Ye are wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked. Learn with the Prophet Jeremy to say, It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. Make it the
height of your ambition, with the Apostle, to be found in Christ, Lam. 3.22.
not having your own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And since
the bowels of Gods compassion and good will to us, do yearn upon us; and the
merits of our blessed Savior are so effectual as to justify in his sight; let
all the world conclude with David, Thy loving kindness is better than life:
Psalm. 63.3.
And with the Angels here acknowledge our salvation to proceed from Gods good
will.

Our Justification thus effected, (a main work of Gods goodness toward man)
there follows upon the very neck of it our Sanctification. And here we find the
Well of Gods Mercy to be (like Jacob's) deep; to which whosoever comes with a
thirsting soul, may freely drink of the water of life.

Since then, O God, thy Mercy and thy Goodness is of that depth, that no Mortal
is able to found it, and it able to satiate all with thy good Spirit, that as
by thy Son we are justified in thy sight, so by thy Spirit we may be
sanctified; for Holiness becomes that house wherein thou dwell (O Lord.)

Know then, that by an eternal constitution of Gods predestinating will, some
were ordained to be vessels of dishonor, some of honor: Those of dishonor are
Reprobates and c^st-aways, who spend their days in profaneness, and end in
neverending pains: But those of honor are the Elect, who being made to be
perpetually glorified among the blessed Angels that kept their first station,
have here their conversation tanquam in coelo, as in heaven; and following the
conduct of that sanctisying Spirit that makes them holy and acceptable to the
most Holy, end in neverending happiness. The first are passed in silence; our
speech must be of the latter, whom God by special grace vouchsafes to grace
with such endowments, as fit them for glory.

There are none begotten by a natural generation, exempted from the contagion
of sin; neither can any in truth glory of a pious conformity of their wills.
Papists presume upon a natural ability to gain acceptance at the hands of God;
and Pelagians have given that goodness to remain in our wills which does not;
both which, whilst the wheel is turning, and the sum of all their misfortunes
is cast up; sleep supinely in carelessness, and boast vainly in security. Divine
truth has discovered our nakedness and shame, so that the naked truth without
all contradiction is, that what characters of goodness were imprinted in our
nature by the hand of our Creator, were by the hand of man that caught hold of
the forbidden fruit, quite obliterated and blotted out; insomuch that unless
the same power take us in hand again, and put upon us the stamp of a new
creation; we shall never alter those crooked and wry dispositions which by our
offending disobedience we have contracted. The life of a Christian does
challenge an higher parentage than from earth, when the beauty thereof is
marred, and the emoluments departed,

And here the Lords good will has not been deficient, but superabundant, above
what we are able to ask or think: for out of the plentiful treasures of his
grace has he supplied our defects. First he sent his Son, and behold now he
sends his Spirit: His Son to free us from condemnation, from which otherwise we
cannot be free, his Spirit for our regeneration, which is an act of Divine
power, whereby (being born of God) we are reduced to the obedience of his Name,
Isa. 63.18. 1 Pet. 2.9.
and made like unto him, Holy as he is holy; hereby becoming the people of his
holiness, as says the Prophet; and as that Saint of God the Apostle Peter
speaks, A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people. What was written upon the plate of the holy Crown of pure gold,
belonging to the Priest in the Levitical law, is by the singer of God engraven
in Capital letters in the hearts of his Saints; HOLINESS TO THE LORD. Exodus
99.30.
Which inward holiness makes them zealous of good works, that are like to
Pearls (as one says) found here below, but carry a resemblance of Heaven in
their brightness and orient colors. To which end our Savior gave this
precept; Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works,
may glorify your Father which is in heaven. Those sacred actions of obedience
that have their original dependencie upon the Divine operation of Gods Spirit
in the heart, please God wonderfully; He is glorified by them, and in them his
soul takes great pleasure. Cui prius non beneplacitum erat in hominibus,
Theophil.
nunc pro beneficiis and refocillationibus hominum habet opera, in quibus and
quietem habet; faith Theophilact on these words: God, who at first was highly
offended with men for their apostasy, accepts the good deeds of men (though
himself be the Author of their good) for favors and refreshings, wherein he is
well pleased. As I breathe (Christians) I cannot but admire the good will of
God, who dwelling in that light unto which there can be no access, would
vouchsafe to shine upon us, who are darkness in the very abstract; or would
lift up the light of his countenance upon us, whom sin had made so
contemptible. In good earnest, I am transported much more, with the thought of
his dwelling in our hearts; whereby whatsoever Satan or our own corruption has
erected there, is pulled down, and whereby all cursed temptations and
suggestions are powerfully vanquished. When I consider, how of impure he makes
us pure; how of the sons of wrath, heirs of an incorruptible crown; and how
that he takes delight in our imperfectly holy actions, wherein if he do but
mark what is done amiss, they can never endure the trial. Our lame and limping
Holiness goes for the current with God in Christ Jesus, who in his good will to
us, accepts the good will for the deed, the sincere desire for the pure act.
Wherefore it was a devout Soliloquy of a retired man, Aug. Soliloq. cap. 15.
turning himself to his gracious God in this meditation; Quod cecidi, fuit ex
me; and quod surrexi, ex te: My falling from thee, O God, proceeded from my
self; but my rising again to newness of life, from thee. My unlucky sins make
me partaker of great misery; but thy mercy and good will, of unvaluable
felicity.

The children of Adam, after the fall, deserve no more to be called the
children of God; than that famous weather-beaten Bark of Athens, to be called
Theseus his Ship; which at first was built by him, but in process of years was
so often repaired, that it had never a plank the same remaining which it had at
first: So when God did create us upright, we were his whilst we so continued;
but when our iniquity did compass us about, and changed our good disposition
into an execrable studiousness to work wickedness; when the importunate
instigations of the Tempter did set our hearts on fire with the impetuous fury
of following sinful resolutions; then ceased we to be Gods children.

But seeing the same hand does repair us, that first made us; and the same
power make us new creatures, that made us creatures; we again receive the title
of Gods children: whose inheritance of his good will, is Heaven; whose
attendants here, and companions there, blessed Angels; whose glory, God the
glory of his Israel. Oh then, that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and his mercy toward the sons of men.

I have something to say yet, touching some particular acts, whereby God does
express his good will toward men. His good will is expressed, in matters
Temporal. Spiritual.


In Spiritual, by a twofold act: 1. By preventing us. We never mind the Author
of our good, until himself work us to it: As we are gone out of the way, so do
we run on, until the Lord convert us. To seek Christ, or in his name to call on
the Father of mercy and God of all consolation, never came into our thought,
until the Son of God came to seek and to save those which were lost; neither
now does come, until he by the gracious call of his blessed Spirit invite us,
by the strong virtue of his magnetical love draw us. Aug. Soli^^q. eap. 33.
Idem in Psalm. 59.10.
It was the confession of a religious man to God in private, Non te quarebam,
tu me quasivisti; non te invocabam, tu me vocasti: I sought not thee, O Lord,
thou did seek me; I called not upon thee, but thou on me. My merciful God
will prevent me, faith David; that is, says Austin, of unwilling, he will make
me willing to do his will. Sic semper, Domine, sic semper gratia tua pravenit
me, liberant me ab omnibus malis, salvans a prateritis, suscitans a
praesentibus, muniens a futuris; Thus always (says one) O Lord; thus always
does thy grace anticipate me, freeing me from all mischiefs, saving me from
dangers past, upholding me against dangers present, protecting me from all
future.

Again, 2. By following us; After that God has altered the perverseness of our
wills, and restrained the corruptions of our inordinate nature; his Spirit
leaves us not there, but prosecutes what he has begun in us; not only
inclining us to what may win his favor, but directing us, and as it were,
leading us by the hand to Christ, Psalm. 23.6.
and in him to do righteous things. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
all the days of my life, says David; it follows us close, being willing,
lest we should will in vain, says Austin on that Psalm. It is by the
activity of the holy Ghost that new hearts are created in us, whereby we will
good; and new strength conferred upon us, whereby to walk in righteousness.

This following or subsequent good will of God, is spiritually discerned, by.

1. Preparing of us. 2. Working in us. 3. Coworking with us.
By preparing of us. Disobedience is so engraffed in our very nature, that none
but a metaphysical and transcendent power can moderate our headstrong humors.
To temper us to Gods hand whereby to obey the holy Ghost, there is requisite
and necessary a superior agency, that must keep us in from breaking out without
fear or wit into exorbitant abominations. In our natural generation there are
many proevial and antecedent dispositions and alterations: so there are many in
our regeneration to be born of God; there is a restriction of our unbridled
appetites, from pursuing things unlawful and prohibited; an illumination of our
dark minds in things mystical; a flexibility of our obstinate hearts to the
love and practice of piety, and an inclination of our rebellious wills and
affections to embrace all that is good, as the Spirit shall direct: all which
proceeding from the good will of God following us for ever, are in them, in
whom they are discernable; and discernable to proceed alone from Gods good will
above the course of nature.

By working in us. Of all Agents, as God is the most orderly in proceeding; so
is he the most perfect in working. He brings us not into a possibility to be
his children by adoption, to be holy, to be new creatures; and so abruptly
breaks off: but makes us in time actually to be so. He does dwell in us, and
there works a reformation. What in his good will he does begin, in his good
will he finisheth. He gives us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
Our freedom then from the dominion of sin, the renewing of our minds, wills,
affections and actions, and our assiduous and indefatigable endeavors in Gods
services, are the peculiar works of the chiefest good, without whom we can do
nothing; and are special expressions whereby to discern Gods following good
will toward men.

By coworking with us. Philosophers do ascribe the motions of inferior bodies,
to the heavens motion. Alsted. Physic.
Inferiora moventur ad motum superiorum, (says Alsted) these bodies which are
below, are moved according to the motion of those above. Insomuch that if they
should cease to move, so would these. Even such (if not greater) is our
reference to God. God sets us a moving in the way to heaven, Acti agimus: yet
such is the debility of our weak and mortal frame insufficient for matters of
such difficulty, that if he withdraw the supporting assistance of his active
Spirit from us, we cannot hold out. Do we preach? it is as the Spirits gives us
utterance; do we pray? the Spirit helps our infirmities; do we believe? he
increases our faith and helps our unbelief; do we live the life of grace?
Christ lives in us by his Spirit; Are we constant in our profession and holy
exercises of Religion? that constancy comes from above, by the effectual
working of the divine power. In all these his grace is sufficient for us, and
in doing them his Spirit works with us.

Thus much concerning Gods good will toward men, expressed in spiritual
matters.

As for his good will in temporal; it is as clear as the sun, we need no
demonstration. But because the extraordinary favors of God may not slip out of
our memories; think upon our deliverance from that intended invasion in eighty
eight, how that part of the invaders became as weak as water, and part were
over whelmed in the depths of the sea alive, like Pharaoh and his host. Think
upon that horrid work of darkness the Gunpowder plot, how vain the
conspiratours were in their imaginations. The Lords stretched out arm overcame
the one, his all-seeing eye discovered the other; See thy Regina Dierum.
and by his Providence were both brought to nothing. Think upon the Stupendous
works of Divine Providence, in the wonderful safegarding and happy restoring of
our gracious King, to which I have abundantly spoken upon occasion. Without
doubt, all these, and infinite more, are sensible tokens of Gods good will in
Christ toward us.

Wherefore, 1. We may with comfort confidently approach to the throne of grace;
where we may receive of the Father whatsoever we ask in his Sons name: for, for
his sake he will deny us no good thing; seeing that in him he bears good will
toward us. Thus much the occasion of this text may assure us of, which is the
incarnation and birth of our Savior. It being the foundation of all our joys,
and all good things we enjoy. By it, God comforts Adam, the seed of the woman
shall break the serpents head. Jacob is comforted by the vision of a ladder
reaching from heaven to earth, and the Angels ascending and descending by it;
the mystery whereof may be this, The ladder is Christ, the foot of it on earth
notes his humanity, man of the substance of his mother, born in the world, the
top reaching to heaven notes his divinity, Job 19.25.
God of the substance of his Father, begotten before all worlds, perfect God
and perfect man; by which union of natures he has joined earth and heaven
together, that is, God and man. The going up and down of Angels by the ladder,
shows how by Christ the service of Angels is purchased unto us; all which
accords with that in Joh. 1.51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, (faith our
Savior) hereafter ye shall see the heaven open, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of man, Job again comforts himself in
this, that his Redeemer (of his own flesh, as the word signifies) lives. In
the Old Testament they which sought to God came to the Ark or Propitiatory, and
there were they heard, and received Gods blessing: Now Christ God and man is
instead thereof, his Godhead being the fountain of all good things, and his
flesh or Manhood a pipe or conduit, to conveigh the fame unto us. Wherefore let
us rejoice in God our Savior, and comfort our selves in his good will toward
men.

Moreover, 2. We may the better bear temptations and afflictions, and slight
the assaults of the world. That which in Spaniards deserves the greatest
commendations, is an unmoved patience in suffering adversity, accompanied with
a settled resolution of overcoming them. This if we attain unto in
Christianity, will shield us from despair and distrust: for we may be well
assured, that God to his distressed servants, is the nearest, when he seems
furthest; then sweetest, when he seems sowrest; and then up in wrath to
revenge our wrongs, when the world does think he has forgot us. For still he
bears goad will toward us.

Lastly, we must acknowledge Gods good will through Christ, to be the sole
cause of all our happiness. It is a true Maxim in Divinity Published in Austins
time, Vniversa salus nostra, Aug. Ned. Cap. 34.
magna miserecordia tua; Our safety on earth, our salvation in heaven, proceed
from thy abundant mercies (O Lord.)

Thus the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, do all join together in one
immutable resolution to prove their good will toward men. The issue whereof
cannot be but exceeding good. For as Astronomers do well observe, that when
three of the superior lights do meet in conjunction, it brings forth some
admirable effects. So now, seeing that these three infinite lights of the
world, three persons of the Deity are met together in one good will toward
men; this benevolous aspect produces this admirable effect, that all true
believers shall be hereby exalted into glory. For which, with thankful hearts
we ought ever to pay the tribute of obedience. And in assurance whereof, to
rest in Gods promises, which can never fail. In his name I end, as I did
begin; To whom, as the Angels did before us, and duty ever binds us; be rendered
all honor and glory both now and for ever. Amen.

The Necessity of CHRIST'S PASSION AND Resurrection.
ACTS. 17.3. Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead.
I Am induced by these words to relate the greatest wonder of the world;
wherein is comprehended the profoundest Mystery of our salvation. That the Son
of God should become the Son of man; that the Lord of glory should come in the
form of an humble and dejected servant; that the Sun of righteousness should
be deprived of light; and then that the sole Author of our life should be put
to death: Weigh but the reason, and the wonder is the greater. It was for our
redemption all this was effected; and can there be a greater wonder, then that
he that knew no sin, would (putting on mortality) suffer unutterable tortures
both in soul and body, and be content to die; to save those that knew nothing
but sin: certainly there cannot be a greater wonder. The most professed enemy
to sinners, herein did become to sinners the most professed friend. He is ready
to save, who might be more ready to destroy: But mercy binds the hands of
justice, and justice is overcome of mercy.

The eternal wisdom beholding from above with the gracious eye of pay the
forlorn estate of mankind after their apostasy, and treacherous violation of
the sacred Covenant; contrived a project, not to be contrived by the Art of
man, whereby our Redemption should be wrought, and liberty obtained. Gods love
to us did exceed our sins. Our sins are not so great, are not so many; but his
love can cover them, and his mercy pardon them. And where men come short of an
invention how to escape his sury and obtain his favor, how to satisfy his
justice and redeem our lives from hell and death: Behold, before the foundation
of the world was laid, he resolved to send his own only Son, begotten by an
eternal generation; who should quell the power of our afflicting enemies, stop
the mouth of the roaring lion, overcome the world, sin, death, the grave and
hell; and lay open a plain passage into the Kingdom of heaven. Which eternal
resolution, was in the fullness of time perfectly effected; for God then sent
forth his Son into the world to assume our nature, that we might assume his
grace; to suffer for our sins, what we should of merit suffer; to be obedient
to the cursed death of the cross, that we might escape the curse of God, and
not be subject to the second death.

And albeit hereby he made himself of no reputation, who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God; yet by this means he did make way to be highly exalted,
to get a name which is above every name; and to be glorified with the glory
which he had with the Father, Ne Jesum quidem a^ias gloriosum, nisi videris
crucisixum. Luther to Melanchton.
before the world was. This he himself in a conference with some of his
Disciples after his resurrection, wherein doubtless he did recapitulate his
several sufferings; certified to the world. Ought not Christ to have suffered
those things, and to enter into his glory? Luke 24.26.

This Scripture points at Christ, considered in part of his twofold state; 1.
His state of humiliation quoad mortem, as touching his death, Christ's
suffering or passion. 2. His state of exaltation quoad resurrectionem, as
touching his resurrection. In his humiliation, we find him ignominiously
crucified and made a curse for us. In his exaltation gloriously raised, that he
might be supereminently glorified, and our selves blessed in him for ever. In
this he shall judge, as in the former he was judged.

My pen is now conversant about the first part; Wherefore assistance, O my
souls Savior and Sovereign, (I entreat thee) that in all humility of soul, I
may declare what for our salvation, thy Majesty did suffer in all humility.
And first of my Saviors humiliation in general.

Of all the works of God done for and to the children of men; Some are Opera
potentiae, works of power; Some opera pietatis, works of mercy; Some opera
justitiae, works of justice; all righteous works. Yet if we seriously fix our
thoughts upon the humiliation of our alsufficient-Redeemer, we shall find it to
be a work of 1. Power. 2. Mercy, 3. Justice.


All these that otherwise are dispersed in his several works, are compacted and
meet together in this one. First then, it is a work of power, 1. In it self. 2.
Toward us.


In it self it is a work of power. God was made man, but not sinful man; which
none could bring to pass, but God that first made man without sin. The Creator
of all made himself a creature, which none could do, but the Creator of all.
Whereupon it was, that at the conception of the Son of God in the Virgins womb,
Luke 1.35.
the holy Ghost came upon her, and the power of the most high did overshadow
her. Hence, says one, after God had made man, he left nothing but to make
himself man. A dignity to which the Angels are not called, wherewith our nature
above all is blessed. Tom. 10. Page 595.
It is Austins speech, In creatione mundi, homo factus est, ad imaginem Dei; in
nativitate Christi, ipse factus est ad imvginem hominis; when the world was
created, man was made in the image of God; when Christ was born, God was made
in the image of man: Both which are to be referred to divine Omnipotency. For
that God and man might be one in Covenant, Lib. 2. Institut.
Ood used his power to make himself and man both one in person; Non
communicatione gratiae, fed naturae veritate; non consusione substantiae, sed
unitate personae, says Trelcatius, not by communication of grace, Epiphanius.
but by reality of nature; not by an undistinct confusion of substance, but by
a personal unity. So that, as Epiphanius speaks, Christ was homo in veritate
natus, Isa. 7.14.
Deus in veritate existens; true God and true man in one and the same person:
which is implied by the Prophet, calling him Immanuel that is, God with us, or
God in our nature: Luke 1.35.
Expressed by the Angel, calling him the Son of God, that should be born of the
Virgin Mary: And manifested by the Apostle, averring him to come of the Fathers
as concerning the flesh, Romans 9.5.
and yet to be over all God blessed for ever. This might seem exceeding
strange; yet it proves not more strange then true. God and man, who stood at an
infinite distance, are now everlastingly linkt together in one person,
according to the mighty working of his power. Thus Christ's humiliation in
being incarnate, is a work of power in it self.

It is likewise a work of power toward us. Since Adams rebellion we were all
captives unto sin and Satan, until God incarnate did vindicate our liberty: We
were extremely weakened, our spirits failed us; until the Lords anointed; the
mighty God of Jacob, did infuse into our hearts the strength of his Spirit. His
Incarnation made way for our salvation; and his taking unto him our humanity,
makes us by faith to partake of his Divinity. Anselme moves three questions,
Anselm. Meditat. c. 8.
to which he gives one solid resolution; the questions are these, 1. What
offense could man commit, which the Son of God made man, could not exprate? 2.
Who could be so much swelled up with that uncharitable vice of pride, which so
great humility could not pull down? 3 What dominion could death have over us,
which the death of the Son of God could not destroy for us? The answer's this;
Certainly, if the iniquity of sinful man, and the grace of my unspotted Lord,
were wigh'd in an even balance; the East is not so much distant from the West,
nor the lowest hell from the highest heaven, as my Redeemers goodness (in his
humility) does exceed the wickedness of a sinner. To this I add, he has
shown greater power in this act for our redemption, than the malice of all the
Devils in hell could put in practice for our confusion. Thus Christ's
humiliation is a work of power toward us. And so much the rather, he being
after this sort humbled; was once offered to bear the sins of many.

Again, it is a work of mercy. Deus propter hominem sactus est homo: ut esset
redemptor qui est and Creator, ut de suo ridimeretur homo; says Austin, Aug.
Manual; c. 26.
God for man's sake was made man, that he might be our Redeemer; who is our
Creator, and so we have of our own wherewith to be redeemed. All of us lay
miserably pressed under the grievous weight of sin, surrounded with extreme
miseries; the foiles that Satan gave us, and the wound that sin made in us; put
us into such perplexities and streights; that did not that good Samaritan the
Lord Jesus raise us up, did he not pour oil into our wounds and bind up our
killing sores, we had perished everlastingly without hope of recovery. Which
that he might perfectly effect, he took part of our flesh and blood, whereby
being capable of death, he might through death destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14.15.
and deliver them that through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject
to bondage. To this, accord Epiphanius his words, Chistus seipsum exinanivit
forma servi assumpta, non ut quod liberum erat in servitutem redigeret,
Epiphanius.
sed ut in forma quam assumpsit, obedientes servos liberaret; Christ being in
the form of God, equal with God, made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
but took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man,
wherein he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
cross; not that he might bring into servitude, what before was free; but that
in that assumed form, he might free from base servitude, obedient servants.

You may remember what Zacheus said to Christ; Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof; yet he did. So might we say; Lord, we are not
worthy that thou should dwell among us, and become flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bone; yet Christ neglecting the Apology, came unto us, in our
nature united to himself; which the Postiller calls Divinitatis domum, the
house of his Divinity. Aug. Medit.
Upon which Saint Austin grounds this comfortable meditation (if the book be
his) Desperare potuissem propter nimia peccata mea, nisi verbum tuum Deus caro
fieret, and habitaret in nobis; I could despair (O my God) by reason of the
multitude of my sins, were it not that thy Word were made flesh, and dwelt in
us. Wherefore his coming into the world, and that in mercy, to save sinners
that could not save themselves; may keep our hearts from distrust, from
despair; and cause us to set up our rest and confidence in him alone; who has
suffered for sin, the just for the unjust.

Lastly, Christ's humiliation is a work of justice. For it is just with God to
put in execution, what before all times he did determine should come to pass.
All mankind stood guilty and forlorn before the bar of Gods exact justice,
until our Advocate, who is the propitiation for our sins, did fetch us off;
which could not be so fairly, so conveniently done; unless he were made like
unto us his brethren. The supreme wisdom therefore to preserve his justice
unspotted, and withal to manifest the riches of his grace, upon the vessels of
his mercy; made his Son in the fullness of time, the Son of man; that so his
justice (as was right and meet) might receive a plenary satisfaction, from that
nature that had offended. Hence it was the Lords resolution, in bringing many
Sons to glory, according to his determinate counsel; to make the Captain of
their salvation perfect through sufferings. This was in equity requisite, Heb.
2.10.
Quod per eum homo redimendus erat, in quo redemptio nostra ab aeterno
paedestinata fuerat; For that by him we were to be redeemed, in whom from all
eternity our redemption was decreed. Trelcatius Institut. cap. 2.
By him we were to be made up again, by whom we were first made. We ought to be
partakers of the love of God in him, who was the only Son of Gods eternal
love. In a word, we were to receive the right of adoption and liberty of sons
through him, who by nature was the everlasting Son and heir of the Father.
Hence, says the Apostle, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4, 5.
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons. Wherein, that we might have a sure interest and
just claim without any strife; Christ must needs have suffered.

Thus was Christ fitted in power, in mercy, in justice, to be made a sacrifice
for sin; whom we will now consider more particularly according to the parts of
the text; and first of the person humbled, which is Christ.

Christ was designed from all eternity to be the sole Mediator between God and
man; and to this end was both God and man, to reconcile both God and man
together.

Because both stood at an infinite distance, Adam dispel the cloud of our sins,
or make way for Gods grace to descend to us, or for us to ascend to God? there
could not. We have all erred with our first father, and cannot endure the
presence of the Almighty. Fear and trembling seize upon soul and body, upon the
apprehension of his presence. But could any of the Angels work our peace with
heaven? there could not. For they being creatures mutable in their wills as
well as men; stood in need of an Head, by whose near union unto them, they
should inseperably be joined unto God. For ever then most lamentable had been
the condition of man, did not Gods infinite Majesty vouchsafe to descend to us;
ascendere nostrum non erat, it was not in our power to ascend to him. Hence is
he called Immanuel, God with us, which name imports thus much, that as he has
joined his Divinity with our nature; so has he coupled our nature to his
Divinity; that so he might be a perfect and sufficient Mediator, according to
that, 1 Timothy 2.5. One God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. For did he not participate of both natures, had he not been man
as well as God, he had been a stranger to us, and therefore unfit for the
office of Mediator. To bring us therefore unto God, he united our manhood to
his divine nature; by which union we are made partakers of the divine nature,
whereby our peace is for ever concluded upon.

The great acts and worthy designs, his subjection the Forces of the world, and
the Powers that rule in the air; and who could do this, but he that is the
Power of God? And who is this Life, this Righteousness, this Power of God, but
Jesus Christ very God of very God, and yet the Son of Man?

Christ was God and Man: Man, Adam, sin entered into the world; so by the
obedience of him who is the second Adam, righteousness should bring
justification to life: And as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners;
so by the obedience of one, many shall be made righteous. By the righteousness
of his obedience Active and Passive: Active, in perfecting all the duties
injoined by the Law; Passive, in suffering the wrath of God, the punishment of
our disobedience: Thus our confusion is taken away, and life and righteousness
are restored unto us. And he was God withal, that the Justice of God might
receive complete satisfaction, by a punishment that should be infinite, or
equal to infinite; which none but God could give: And therefore Christ is said,
as God, to have purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20. 1 John 3.16.
and to lay down his life for us. And though his punishment was not so
infinite, but that it was finite; yet it was only finite for time, but was for
value, as it ought to be, infinite. Thus the Son of True God did bear the
burden of his Fathers wrath in our nature; which no other Nature ought to do,
but the soul that sinned; which no other but God could do, because God is a
consuming fire, and his wrath unquenchable by any creature.

Forasmuch as God alone could not die, because not subject to passion; nor Man
alone overcome death, because too weak: O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? But thanks be to God, Sarcasmo conflat and hostili
derisione, qua mors ridenda propinatur, says one.
that has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus much
of the Person humbled, which is Christ, God and Man. The next point to be
discussed, is, Wherein his Humiliation did consist; that is, in general, He
suffered.

From the time of his nativity, to the very hour of his death, was he not free
from suffering. He was no sooner born, but Herod sought his life. He was
subject to the infirmities of our nature, sin excepted; He was hungry and
thirsty, weary and faint, sorrowful and discontented; his poverty was extreme,
though Lord of all, and Possessor of heaven and earth, he had not so much as
whereon to lay his head: Grievous was the temptation he suffered by Satan's
onset; infinite were the injuries that were offered him by the cursed brats of
Satan, both in word and deed; In word by false calumnies and forged
accusations, by contumelious detractions and cursed blasphemies; In deed, by
framing of projects and laying of plots, how to take away his life. He was
despised, and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief,
and we hid, as it were, our faces from him. Isa. 53.
He was despised, and we esteemed him not; surely he has borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: Yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten of God and
afflicted. His whole life was a perpetual passion; He was never let alone,
until upon the Cross he gave himself a ransom for all; and his enemies never
ceased, until they drew out his hearts blood, which he for our redemption in
his loving kindness was willing to part withal. He had power in his own hand
to lay down his life, and he had power to assume it again: For albeit his life
lay at the stake, yet could he (were he so disposed) command legions of Angels
(beside his own power which was alsufficient) to deliver him, either by putting
his enemies to flight, or by repressing their violence, that either they would
not, or they should not hurt him; or by utterly subverting them. But being that
he came into the world to the end to suffer, to compass for us a world without
all end; he withdrew not his neck from the yoke, but set himself forward to
bear the iniquity of us all laid upon him.

Thus Christ was subject to passion, but not according to his divine, but
humane nature: For as he is God, he is Actus purissimus, and cannot suffer; but
yet he being God, suffered in the nature assumed, which was capable of
suffering, that is, in his Manhood. So that here we have the highest Person,
and the lowest Humiliation met together. Wherefore in this suffering of our
Lord, there are three things according to Bernards observation specially noted;
Bernard.
Opus, modus, causa: In opere patientia, in modo humilitat, in causa charitas
commendatur; Patientia singularis, humilitas admirabilis, sed charitas
inestimabilis: There are the work, the manner of performing, and the cause: In
the work, which is suffering, his patience is commended; in the manner, his
humility; in the cause, his charity; for charity moved him to suffer with
patience and humility: His patience is singular, none like it; his humility
admirable, none ever came, never shall come near it; his charity inestimable,
for it is incomparable. All which may appear unto you, by presenting to your
view his special sufferings immediately preceding his death.

In these sufferings of our Savior, you may see the foulest act of Treason
that ever was committed, the greatest Cruelty that was ever heard of; both
hatched in the pit of hell. Judas, his familiar friend, comes and betrays him
with a false-hearted complement, a Kiss; his love was only from the teeth
outward, deceit was in his heart, and the poison of asps under his lips; but no
wonder, the Devil was in him. Peter his Disciple, than whom none more forward
in times past to confess him to be the Christ the Son of God, is most forward
to deny him; his former protestations were forgotten, his present commodity
only thought upon. And when the rascal multitude came forth with swords and
staves, and brought him to the Council, all his friends forsook him; the
Shepherd smitten, the sheep were scattered. Friends and foes, Jews and
Gentiles, men and women, high and low, rich and poor, Prince and people, added
something to his Passion, to augment his woe. The Kings of the earth took
counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed. The Elders of the
people, the chief Priests and the Scribes, beat their brains together to take
away his life: They send him to Pilate, Pilate sends him to Herod, Herod sends
him to Pilate again, and Pilate sends him to his death. Thus was he tossed from
post to pillar. In all these places he suffered in his good name, by
blasphemous speeches uttered against him, in numbering him amongst
transgressors, placing him betwixt two thieves: In his honor and glory, by
opprobrious terms and scandalous irrisions and mockings: In his substance, in
that they took away his garment: In his soul he suffered sorrow and anguish,
and great fear surprised his heart: In his body he suffered wounds and stripes.
Insomuch that it may be said, Was ever any sorrow like his sorrow? Were you
present to behold the whole passage of his Passion, you might see his head
compassed about with a crown of sharp thorns, instead of a crown of pure gold;
you might see his glorious Visage, which the very Angels admired,
contemptuously spitted upon; and his cheeks smitten with the palms of their
hands: You might see his hands and feet fast nailed to the Cross, which he
himself did carry; and his sides thrust through with a spear: You might see his
blood trickling down to the ground; and himself, through the pangs of death,
and apprehension of the Fathers wrath lighting upon him for our sins, crying,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Hereupon says Bernard, O bone Jesu,
quid tibi est? nos peccavimus, and tu luis; opus sine exemplo, gratia sine
merito, charitas sine imo: O blessed Savior, what ails thee? We sinned, and
thou by thy blood do expiate our sins; here is a work without example, grace
without merit, and love beyond all measure. He felt the wrath of God upon his
soul: he felt the hand of a sin revenging Judge, taking vengeance for the sins
of the world, upon him, then taking away the sin of the world. Where you might
see also no sense free from passion: As for his Touch, he was smitten, and
nails thrust through his flesh; as for his Taste, he drank unpleasant vinegar
and gall; as for his Smell, he was in an infectuous place, the place of dead
men's skuls; as for his Hearing, he was vexed with the uproars and hideous
blasphemies of those that blasphemed and derided him, as for his Seeing, he
beheld with grief his Mother, and the Disciple that loved him, shedding tears
for him; and observed (no noubt) in the anguish of his spirit, the madness of
the actors of his death: Hence proceeded that heavenly prayer, Father, forgive
them, they now not what they do. This was the lamentable case he was in, until
he gave up his Ghost. They gave him no rest; no rest in his body, nor in his
soul, until his soul departed. Thus he suffered, and thus in suffering he died;
died the most ignominious and cursed death. 2 Cor. 5. ult.
God made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us; for cursed it every one that hungeth on a tree.
Gal. 3.13.
Nothing could appease the wrath of the Father, but the death of his Son. Who
died,

First, to satisfy the justice of God, for the sin of mankind; for he once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; 1
Pet. 3.18.
being put to death in the flesh. 2. To manifest the truth and reality of the
nature assumed, to wit, his manhood; that he was true man and no phantasme. 3.
That by his death, he might free us from the fear of death. Forasmuch then as
we are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is
the Devil; and deliver them who through the fear of death, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage. 4. That by dying corporally for sin, and unto
sin, he might give us an example of dying spiritually to sin; for in that he
died, he died unto sin once; Heb. 2.14, 15.
but in that he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise reckon ye also your selves
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Romans 6.10, 11. Crux pendent is Cathedra docentis.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow is
steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.5. That by rising from the dead, he might make known the
power whereby he overcame death; and give unto us a lively hope of our
resurrection from the dead.

And thus much for the sufferings of Christ, generally expressed, and specially
implied.

The next point is the necessity of the sufferings and death of Christ; Christ
must needs have suffered. It was necessary that Christ should suffer, and in
suffering die.

Necessitate decreti, by the necessity of Gods Decree, and infallible
prescience. Truly, Luke 22.22.
the Son of man goes as it was determined. Which determination is more plainly
expressed, Acts 2.23. Him (that is Christ) being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. In which respect it was inevitable. And albeit he prayed,
Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; yet he submit shi^ will
to the will of his Father, in saying, yet not my will, but thy will be done. It
was the eternal will of God, and his unchangeable Decree, that Christ should
suffer for us; it was foreordained before the foundation of the world. 1 Pet.
1.20.
And although his will was that that cup might pass over him, that so his life
might be prolonged; yet consider this, vitam appetit ut homo, says
Theophilact, Theophil. in Luke 22.42.
he desired life as he was man, yet as an obedient child ever correspondent to
his Fathers desire, adds this withal, not my will, but thy will be done, which
is not separate from my divine will, says the same Father.)

necessitate obligationis, by the necessity of a promise, whereby God was
obliged and bound to see it actually performed. Promises are a due debt.
Promissa cadunt in debitum.
That God promised, this it is apparent by that speech of his, the seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head; and speaking unto Abraham, he says That
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

It was necessary, necessitate praecepti, by the necessity of precept. Abraham's
offering up his son Isaac; the brazen Serpent erected in the Wilderness,
according to that, John 3.14.
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; even so must the Son of man
be lifted up. The Paschal Lamb was a type hereof, for Christ is called the Lamb
of God, John 1.29.
that takes away the sins of the world. Besides this, the Prophets did
precisely foretell the particulars of his suffering; how his familiar friend
should betray him, Psalm. 41.9. What price he was sold at, for thirty pieces of
silver, Zech. 11.12, What became of these thirty pieces, ver. 13. What time he
should suffer, Daniel. How his Disciples forsook him, and Peter denied him,
Psalm. 38.11. Zech. 13.7. It was foretold that he should be falsely accused,
Psalm. 41. That the great ones of the world should plot his fall, Psalm. 2. His
silence is noted, Isa. 53. So are the spittles wherewith they defiled his face,
Isa. 50. And the buffettings and smitings that he suffered at their hands, Isa.
53. The Reed in his hand, the mockings and reproaches, the Vinegar and Gall,
the parting of his raiment, the piercing of his hands, and feet, and sides, the
staring upon him, and wagging their heads; his crucifying betwixt two thieves,
and his last parting, with the very words he used then, were precisely revealed
by God to the Prophets, and set down by them in Scripture. Our Savior himself
says, Luke 9.22.
that the Son of man, that is himself, must suffer many things, and be rejected
of the Elders and chief Priests and Scribes, and be slain. Caiphas being high
Priest, prophesied as much, John 11.50. That it is expedient for us that one
man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. And as the
Poet speaks, Vnum pro multis dabitur caput.

It was necessary, necessitate indigentiae, by the necessity of our want. We
stood in need of his sufferings, without which we could not be saved; for
without the shedding of blood, Hebr. 9.22.
there is no remission. It was the ordinance of God from eternity, that by
blood we should be redeemed, and no otherwise. Not that he could not redeem us
otherwise; but that he would not otherwise; deeming this way the most
convenient. And therefore lastly,

It was necessary, necessitate commoditatis, by the necessity of commodiousness
and conveniencie. There was no better away to free us from sin, to work our
salvation, to reconcile us to God; than by the sufferings and death of the Son
of God. I doubt not, but God in his infinite wisdom might have used another
means for the saving of our souls, besides this; but lest we disparage Gods
judgment, we cannot say, but this was the most convenient and best; because it
was the determination of his will before all time. Which was the reason that
Saint Cyprian aver'd this, Non reconciliare Deo potuerit exules and damnatos
quaelibet oblatio, nisi sanguinis hujus singular sacrificium; not every
oblation could reconcile such unto God as are banished from the presence of
God, and worthy of condemnation; but only the peculiar and only propitiatory
sacrifice of the blood of Christ.

The necessity of this conveniencie consists in these respects, beside freedom
from sin and reconciliation to God.

1. In that it serves for the manifestation of the love of God to us; according
to that, Romans 5.8.
God commended his love toward us, in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. And herein is the love of Christ also commended; greater love can
no man show, than to lay down his life for his friends; but Christ did his for
his foes: Now it was necessary for us to have assurance of the favor of God,
which is given us by the death of his Son.

2. In that it serves for an example to us, of obedience to the pleasure of our
heavenly Father. Of humility, of constancy of righteousness; and of other
virtues and graces manifested in his Passion. 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

3. In that it served to procure for us, with a great deal more conveniencie,
Hebr. 10.20.
justifying grace and eternal glory; by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh.

4. In that there is brought upon man a greater necessity of keeping himself
free from sin; being that he understands that he is redeemed with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 6.20.
The Apostle says, that ye* are bought with a price, therefore glorifle God in
your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. The consideration of Christ's
death should be a means to deteine us from transgressing the Divine Ordinances,
and to keep us within the compass of his Law. Pass the time of your sojurning
hear in fear, for as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold from year vain conversation; but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.17,
18, 19.

5. In that it serves for the greater dignity of man. That as man was deceived,
seduced and overcome of Satan; So Satan might be overcome by a man. And as man
deserved death, so death might be overcome by a man; the man Christ Jesus. 1
Cor. 15.57.
Thanks be to God, says the Apostle, which gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. And thus much of the necessity of the sufferings of Christ;
of the necessity of Gods Decree, of his Promise, of precept, of our want, and
of conveniencie.

Here is no coactive necessity, whether he would or not to suffer; for he
says, I lay down my life for my sheep. He did suffer willingly; yet his
sufferings were not so voluntary, as that they became arbitrary in his choice,
that is, he might choose to suffer, or not to suffer: for, Am^s.
Si Christi passiones nulla fuissent lege impositae, nihil pertinerent ad
satisfactionem.

Now listen to the effects that these sufferings of his wrought for us.

By them we are freed from sin. For, He loved us, and washed us from our sins,
in his own blood, Rev. 1.5. And the blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. And from the power of Satan. We meritted to be delivered
up unto Satan, the justice of God did so require it: The Devil himself
endeavored to stop from us the way to life; but the death of Christ opened the
way for us, and did exceed that power that was given to Satan of God; by the
righteousness of Christ he was overthrown. Now, says our Savior, shall the
Prince of this world be cast out; And, John 12.31. 1 John 3.8.
for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, to destroy the works of the
Devil. The works of the Devil are sin and death; for by him came sin into the
world, and death by sin.

Again, we are hereby freed from the punishment of sin, which is death. He did
bear our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Isa. 53. He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his striper we are healed. He poured out ^is soul
to death, and bare the sin of many. Now we are freed from the punishment of
sin, two ways; 1. Directly, because his passion was a sufficient and
superabundant satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. Wherefore,
Thomas-Aquin.
Exhibita satisfaction^ sufficienti, tollitur reatus paenae (says Aquinas)
upon the exhibition of a sufficient satisfaction, the punishment is quite taken
away. So that God cannot punish that again in his servant, that he has already
punished in his Son. 2. Indirectly, Ambros. super Beati immacalati.
in as much as the passion of Christ, is the cause of the Redemption of sin,
which is the cause of punishment. Ille suscepit mortis servitutem, ut tibi
tribueret aternae vitae libertatem.

Moreover, by the sufferings of Christ, our reconciliation with God is wrought,
and our peace is made with him for ever. We were reconciled to God, by the
death of his Son, Romans 5.10. and that two ways, 1. By removing of sin, whereby
we were made his enemies. Ephesians. 5.2.
2. By offering up himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a
sweet smelling savor.

Lastly, hereby the gate of heaven is open for us. We have boldness to enter
into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, Hebr. 10.19. for he went before us, to
prepare a place for us; that where he is, we might be also. So that now he has
obtained for us eternal salvation. By way of desert; he has deserved, that by
him we should be saved. By way of satisfaction; for the greatness of his love
out of which he suffered; for the dignity of his life which he laid down for
us; it was the life of God and man: and for the generality and weight of
sorrows and pains that he suffered for us: hence he is a sufficient
satisfaction, called the Propitiation for our sins, Heb. 9.26. Verse 15. At
Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus cogi posse negat. Hor. Epist. 1.
1 John 2.2. By way of sacrifice; which was meritorious deserving life for whom
he suffered death; In the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin, by
the sacrifice of himself. And by way of redemption; for he was engaged for us,
and paid the utmost farthing for which end he was sent into the world. God sent
not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through
him might be saved. Joh. 3.17. Saved from sin, from the power of Satan, from
death. Hence called our Redemption, and we come to be at peace with God; and in
that peace we enter into heaven, to be partakers of those joys that are at
Gods right hand for evermore.

Having waded thus far, I seal up this discourse with a pathetical
conclusion, in way of application.

O how far is the love of God extended to us miserable sinners! He was
provident before our fall, to find out away, whereby to be saved after we fell.
His Son must die, to save us from death. He must fall into the hands of
sinners, that we may not fall into the hands of Satan. And if he have thus
given us his Son, how shall he not with him give unto us all things? We may
conclude for certain, we shall want nothing for the furtherance of our
salvation, since that he withheld not his only Son from us. Let this love of
God to us, extract love from us to God. As he bought us dear with the loss of
his Son, so must we think nothing too dear to part withal to gain our God. We
must be content to lose our life and all; than to lose our God who is all in
all, for the gaining of life and all.

Seeing that Christ ought to have suffered for our sins, we may well grieve
that we should be the authors of his death; and yet rejoice that we have
escaped Gods fearful vengeance by his sufferings. Grieve then, my beloved, for
your sins, for which Christ died; Royard in Postill
and go and sin no more. And let your souls magnify the Lord, and rejoice in
God your Savior. Non gaudere ingratitudinis est, non dolere crudelitatis,
says Royard; not to be glad for Gods mercy and Christ's love in redeeming us,
is a point of ingratitude; not to grieve that we gave occasion of his death, is
a point of the greatest cruelty. Let us then grieve together with him, that we
may reign and rejoice together with him.

Gods decree is unutterable; he ordained that Christ should die, and Christ did
die. He promised it, and it is fulfilled. He revealed it, and it is so come to
pass. He is as good as his word. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not
the least tittle of his word shall go unfulfilled. What therefore soever God
has determined concerning any one, shall certainly fall out so; there is no
avoidance. What he has denounced against sinners, let them expect it, for they
shall surely have it. Our God is a God of truth.

You may collect out of this discourse, that Christ is a perfect and sufficient
Redeemer, Heb 10.14.
on whom alone depends our salvation. For by one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified. As Moses said to the children of Israel, the
Lord shall fight for you, and you shall hold your peace; So I may say, that
Christ only fought for us; we did nothing whereby to acquire a life that is
endless. Wherefore if we will be perfectly saved, rely upon the Redeemer of
Israel; for he is only the Captain of our salvation. Look up (as sometimes the
Israelites on the brazen serpent) upon him stretched out upon the cross, where
he is ready to receive all, that come unto him, and believe in his name. Caput
Christi inclinatum ad osculandum, cor apertum ad diligendum, brachia extensa ad
amplexandum, totum corpus expositum ad redimendum; August. lib. de virginit.
he has his head bended down to kiss you, his heart opened to love and affect
you, his arms stretched forth to embrace you, his whole body exposed to redeem
you.

Consider of what great consequences these things are, that Christ has done
for your souls; weigh them in the balance of your hearts, Vt totus vobis
figatur in cord, qui totus pro vobis fixus fuit in cruce; that he may be
wholly fastened to you in your hearts, who was wholly fastened for you on the
cross. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his
reproach; for here we have no continuing City, Heb. 13.13, 14, 15.
but we seek one to come; by him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise
to God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name;
who is the Author and finisher of our salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all honor, glory,
power and dominion, in heaven and in earth, by men and Angels, both now and for
ever, world without end. Amen.

The Necessity of CHRIST'S PASSION AND Resurrection.
ACTS. 17.3. Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead.
GLory, which is the proper scope of a noble disposition, and the intended end
of honorable intents; did Christ make to be the necessary consequence of his
fore-running passion. His life seemed to the worlds eye inglorious, in that he
affected not popularity; so did his death, to those that knew not the mystery
of our Redemption. By general judgment he was reputed the most unhappy
breathing; he was rejected and despised of men. Yet in this his rejected and
contemptible condition, was sown his immortal happiness; which indeed was
sown in weakness, but was raised in power; sown in dishonor, but raised in
glory.

For as by the eternal constitution of the Almighty, he ought to have been
brought to the lowest degree of misery, by suffering diverse and fearful
punishments; so ought he not perpetually to abide in that state; but at length
to be elevated thence, to the highest pitch of glory. In order to which, as
Christ must needs have suffered; so also must he rise again from the dead.

The point now by divine assistance to be discust, is part of Christ's
exaltation; a theme of an high nature. And herein, first of the person
exalted; Christ.

Christ was exalted according to both natures, 1. In regard of his Godhead. 2.
In regard of his Manhood.


The exaltation of the Godhead of Christ, was the manifestation of the Godhead
in the Manhood; mightily declaring therein that he was the Son of God. Which
manifestation, was altogether active, no way passive; the effects produced by
him having no other proper agent but God. For who could overcome Satan, death,
the world, the grave; but God? And albeit the Divine nature be thus exalted,
yet it is without all manner of alteration. For to speak properly, in it self
it cannot be made the subject of exaltation; but as it is considered joined
with the Manhood, into the unity of one person. For albeit Christ from the very
time of the assumption of our nature, whereby he was incarnate, was both God
and man, and his Godhead all the time he lived dwelt in his Manhood; yet from
the hour of his Nativity, unto the hour of giving up the Ghost, and a while
after; the Godhead did little show it self. The glorious majesty of his Deity
whiles he was in the for me and low state of a servant, lay hid under the veil
of his flesh, as the soul does in the body, when a man is sleeping. And in the
time of his passion, the brightness of the glory of the sun of righteousness
was obscured; as the sun running in the height of heaven, oftimes over clouded
or eclipsed by a darker body; thereby in (...) humane nature to undergo the
curse of the law, and perfect the work of our redemption, in subjecting himself
to the death, even the cursed death of the cross. But as soon as this work
was finished, and happily accomplished; he began by degrees to make known the
power of his Godhead in his Manhood; And so to rise again.

Secondly, Christ was exalted in regard of his Manhood; which consists in
these two things.

In depositione servilis sua^conditionis, (except sin) so long as he remained
in the state of a servant; he was subject to weariness, to hunger, to thirst,
to fear, to death; from all which in this state of exaltation he is perfectly
delivered: his natural body is a glorious body; those wounds and stripes which
in his body he suffered for our sins, remain not in him, as testimonies of that
complete conquest to be obtained over his and our enemies. But are rather quite
abolished, because they were a part of that ignominious condition, wherein our
Savior was upon the cross; whereof in his glorified state he is not to be
partaker. Yet, if they still remain (as some think they do) they are no
deformity to the glorious body of the Lord; but are in him, in some unspeakable
(and to us unknown) manner glorified.

In susceptione donoxum,

As for his soul, look upon the intellectual part; you shall find a mind
enrich with as much knowledge and understanding, as well in respect of the act
as the habit; as a creature can possibly be capable of: the measure of it being
more than all men and Angels put together have. Look upon his will and
affections, you shall find them furnished with the fullness of grace, and
completely adorned with the invaluable riches and incomparable gifts of Gods
holy Spirit.

As for his body, it is not now subject to dissolution; from being natural, it
is become spiritual; not by the destruction of the essence, but by the
alteration of the qualities. Aquinas.
Est ejusdem naturae, sed alterius gloriae; said Thomas; for God would not
suffer his holy one to see corruption. The nature and essential proprietles of
a true body, as length, breadth, thickness, locality, still remain in him; (the
addition of glory and brightness not changing the nature of it) so that it is
free from all bodily imperfections, and made bright and glorious; a resemblance
whereof, was his transiguration on the mount, Matthew. 17.
where his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was as white as the
light; the purity whereof is unblemished, the agility whereof, such as is
indifferent to move upward or downward; the brightness thereof cannot be
obscured, nor the strength thereof matched by any creature. For by his power he
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body; Hhil. 3.21.
according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself.

These gifts of glory in Christ's body are not infinite, but bounded within
limits; because his humane nature being but a creature, and therefore finite,
could not receive infinite graces and gifts of glory. To make then
infiniteness, ubiquity and omnipotency, incommunicable attributes of God,
attributes of Christ's glorified body; is to destroy the nature of a body, and
say that the body of Christ is transformed into the Deity, or Deified; and that
he is all God, no man, all spirit no body; And besides, it argues an
impossibility, for no creature can be changed into the Creatonr, no finite body
into an infinite and eternal substance. It suffices us to know, that Christ's
soul and body were conditioned according to the description given, when he
entered into his glory.

And thus much of the person exalted, Christ; who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, Hebr. 12.2.
and is set down on the right hand of the throne of God.

We are next to consider Christ's exaltation, the degrees of which are
threefold; the first degree is his Resurrection; answering to the first degree
of his humiliation, which was his death. The second degree is his ascension,
answering the second of his humiliation, which was his burying. The third
degree (which is the height of his exaltation) is his sitting at the right hand
of God; opposed to the lowest of his humiliation, which was, his desc^nt into
hell, his remaining in the state of the dead; By these degrees Christ entered
into his glory.

My text limits me to the first degree of his exaltation; which is his
Resurrection from the dead.

It was a cruel conflict that Christ had upon the cross; he had his own Father
against him, taking vengeance upon him, for the sins of the world; he had Satan
against him, who out of a malicious disposition plotted and attempted his
ruin; he had the world against him, in bruing their hands and their hearts in
his blood; his blood be upon us and our children, say the Jews. The chief
Priests, the Scribes, the common people, the soldiers bandied themselves
together against the Lord, and against his anointed. So close was their
pursuing of him, that indeed he received the foil; they pierced his hands and
his feet with nails, and his sides with a spear; in the end, they ended his
days, the height of their malice. But not long after, he revived, for the
third day he rose again; which he did for his own greater glory, for his and
our enemies more shameful overthrow, and for his disciples firmer consolation.
This was foretold by himself, this was testified by men and Angels, and is
believed, that he rose the third day.

Our faith in this is underpropt, not only by the testimony of Angels and men;
Luke 24.46.
but also by Scripture and Arguments. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. By Arguments
containing manifest demonstrations of the truth of his resurrection, drawn
from, 1. His body 2. His soul^


In that which is drawn from his dody, Christ does declare three things; 1.
That his body was a true, real, substantial and sollid dody: And not framed
only in the imagination, or composed all of an airy substance. Feel and see
(says he) a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. 2. That his
body was a humane body, by showing how that he had the true and perfect
effigies and expressions or a man, to be seen by the eye. 3. That it was the
very same numerical body, which he h^d before; by laying open to the view, the
grievous wounds which he suffered in his body. Behold my hands and my feet,
that it is my self. The wounds in his body, discover the naked truth of his
resurrection.

In the Argument which is deducted from his soul reunited to his body, his
resurrection is proved, and that by the operations and works of the threefold
life proceeding from the soul, whereof man is partaker. 1. By the works of the
nutritive life; in that he did eat and drink with them. 2. By the works of the
sensitive life; his answers to his disciples; giving evidences of his hearing;
his discerning them from others, of his seeing. 3. By the works of the
intellective life; in his discourses and explications of the profound mystery
of the cross.

Moreover, the time when he rose was the third day. He lay not dead in the
grave three complete days, under the dominion of death; for then he should not
have risen till the fourth day. So that he was but one day and two pieces of
two days in the grave; for he was buried in the evening before the Sabbath,
and rose in the morning the next day after the Sabbath. The Friday evening he
was buried, the sunday morning he rose again; which was the first day of the
week, and is now our Sabbath, observed in memory of his glorious rising, who is
the Sun of Righteousness, from death unto life. And as in the first Day of the
first World, Light was commanded to shine out of darkness, upon the deeps: So
in the first Day of this new World (made new by Christ) this glorious Sun
(after its Eclipse come to its period) appeared in the brightness of his glory,
and gives light for ever to those that sit in darkness; and dispels those
clouds of obscurity that were under the Old Testament, from the Christian
world. So long he rested in the grave, as three days, yet not full; for a
demonstraiton of the truth of his death: And no longer, that his body might not
see corruption. For had he risen presently, we might doubt of the truth of his
death: Had he remained longer in the grave, or unto the end of the world; his
body would according to the course of nature be corrupted; and we might doubt
of the truth of his Divinity, which required for the manifestation of his
power, a quick resurrection of his body, and a reuniting of the soul thereunto.
To confirm therefore our faith in both, He rose the third day from the dead, to
enter into his glory.

As for the power by which he was raised, it was not by any other than his own.
Though this act be attributed to the Father, Act. 2.24. yet, it is his power
too. For, whatsoever is the Father's, is his, because He and the Father are
one. It was the power of his Divinity, Superas evadere ad auras, Hic labor, hoc
opus est.
that effected this great work. Destroy this temple, and within three days I
will raise it again, Joh. 2.19. I have power to lay down my life, and I have
power to take it again, cap. 10.18. Secundum Divinitatis virtutem, and corpus
resumpsit animam quam deposuerat, and anima corpus resumpsit quod dimiserat;
and sic Christus propria virtute resurrexit, says Aquinas: According to the
mighty working of the Godhead, his body reassumed the soul which it did
resign, and the soul that body out of which it parted; and thus Christ by his
own proper power did rise from the dead. For indeed, it was not possible that
he should be holden of it, Act. 2.24. for then should he not enter into his
glory.

Here come two points, occasioned by these words, to be treated of;

Viz. 1. The Necessity of Christ's Resurrection. 2. The Ends thereof.


Of the Necessity of his Resurrection: As it was necessary that Christ should
die, so was it necessary he should live again.

1. In regard of Gods Decree, Isa. 53.10.
revealed in his Word, promising that He should see his seed, that is, the
Just; and that He would prolong his days. Peter in his Sermon on the day of
Pentecost, averrs, That David in the 16. Psalm spoke of Christ's Rising by way
of prediction, the knowledge whereof came unto him by Divine infusion, Act.
2.31.

2. It was necessary, for the instruction and settlement of our Faith, (we
being naturally prone to infidelity:) And that, 1. Concerning the Divinity of
our Savior Christ, the glory and truth whereof had not been made sufficiently
apparent, had he not used his power in rising again: But in that he is risen,
he has mightily declared himself to be the Son of God, i.e. Ex afflicto ejus
statu, as Gal. 4.14.
very God of very God. Who although he was crucified through weakness, yet he
lives by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13.4. If Christ be not risen, says the same
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. then our preaching is in vain, and in vain our faith. By
his Resurrection therefore we obtain (...) fidei, a full measure of faith, in
this, that there is no place of doubting left us; but that we firmly may
believe, that Jesus Christ is true God; for whom to be held bound in the strict
chains of a powerful death, is a matter of the greatest impossibility.

Again, it was necessary for the settlement of our Faith, 2. Concerning the
victory Christ has gotten over death. The weaker is overcome of the stronger;
so that if Christ had not risen, he had been weaker than Death; had not been a
sufficient Redeemer, we had been still in our sins; we could not have been
persuaded, God had received perfect satisfaction: But being that he is revived
by the same Power, that gives life unto all; Death has no longer dominion
over him; Gods justice is satisfied, and we remain no longer in our sins.
Wherefore we may well in the language of triumph proclaim, O death, where is
thy sling? O grave, where is thy victory? And we continuing the same note, may
add by the virtue of a lively faith; Thanks be to God; who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. It was necessary, for the comforting assistance of our Hope; lest it should
be converted into a Desperate humor. Our propensity to Desperation, is by
woeful experience too well known: But inasmuch as our Savior, our Head,
Clarissima fidei conf^ssio. Brentius. Brevis and longa, totaque aurea, est haec
Apologia, says another.
had a glorious Exit out of the grave, and an absolute conquest over death; it
is forcible enough to make us hope that we his members united unto him by the
indissoluble bond of the Spirit, shall also rise again after death. Upon this
hope was that speech of Job grounded; I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin,
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for
my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be
consumed within me. Job 19.

Were it not for Christ's Resurrection, hope herein might have failed both him
and us; for his is the cause of ours; therefore is he styled Primitiae
dormientium, The first fruits of them that sleep.

4. It was necessary, for the complete and perfect consummation of our eternal
happiness: For in that he was humbled to sustain great evils, by dying for our
freedom from all evil; so was he glorified by his Resurrection, for our
promotion to all, ^ood. He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for
our justification. Romans ^. ult.
And as it is Heb. 7.25. He is able to save them to the uttermost; that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

5. It was necessary, in regard of the complete discharge of his office of
Priesthood; to which he was from all eternity anointed of the Father. If he had
not risen again, he had not performed the full duty of that calling, which
required that he should make satisfaction for the sins of people; which he did
by offering up himself an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling
favor, upon the Cross.

And further, that calling required also, that he should apply the virtue of
this Sacrifice, the merit of his death, to every true Believer; which could not
be performed without his Resurrection. So that as he died; to satisfy the
justice of God; so was it requisite he should rise from death; to make to us a
particular application of the virtue of his Passion; by his effectual
Intercession unto his Father in heaven, for us upon earth. Whereupon comes the
Apostles Quaere and Answer; Romans 8.34.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. Thus much of the Necessity of Christ's Resurrection.

The second point is concerning the Ends of his Resurrection, which are diverse.

Viz. 1. In regard of himself. 2. In regard of the Law. 3. In regard of us.


In regard of himself, the end of his Rising was twofold: 1. To declare that he
himself, (that Holy and Just one, whom the Jews had by wicked hands crucified
and slain) was the Prince of life: Who at his pleasure as he could give life to
others, so unto himself; Act. 3.15.
though he were brought to the lowest step of an humbled state, though death
held him in its hands. For if at his Crucifying, the shaking of the earth, the
rising of some dead bodies, the obscuration of the Sun, (not hap'ning within
the compass of the course of nature, because not at the usual time of the
conjunction of those two Planets, the Sun and Moon,) wrested a confession out
of the spectators, that He was the Son of God; much more may his Resurrection
evict thus much, that He is the Prince of life; who might lay down, and take up
his life when he pleased.

And, 2. That having finished and perfected the great work of our Redemption,
he might reign thenceforth for ever in glory. ^^n. 7.14.
Whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away; and
whose Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. Albeit he seemed for a time to
be deposed from his Royalty, whilst he submitted himself to death; yet it was
but a short cessation, that he might come off with the greater honor, and so
to enter into his greatest glory.

In regard of the Law; the end of his Rising was to ratify the truth of that
Promise of life, which was pass d unto man, upon the performance of that
Covenant passed betwixt God and man; Do this, and thou shall live. It could not
be, but that in equity Christ should live again, being that he did fulfill
exactly and precisely the ordinance of God; for, He did all things well.
Wherefore to show that God keeps his word, and that the truth of his promises
is infallible; He rose again from the dead.

In regard of us, the end of his Rising is threefold:

Viz. 1. For our Example. 2. For our Justification. 3. For our Faith, etc.


First, for our Example, tending to the information of us in the ways of
righteousness, in the paths of life. That like as Christ was raised up from the
dead, by the glory of the Father; even so, we also should walk in newness of
life, that the body of sin might be destroyed, Resurectione Domini configuratur
vita, quae hic geritur.
and that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6.4.6. The Resurrection of
Christ from the dead, should be a pattern for us, wherein there is some
effective vigor, to raise us from the death of sin, to a gracious life. The
power of effecting both, is in God: A D^o est quod unima vivat per gratiam, and
corpus per Animam: That the soul lives by grace, and the body by the soul;
comes from God, Aquinas.
who is the Author of life. And, says Ames, Christ rising from death, is tum
demonstratio quam initiatio; as well a demonstration, as the initiation or
beginning of our Rusurrection; by whom we pass from death unto life.

Secondly, for our Justification. They are the express words of the Apostle, He
was raised again for our justification, Romans 4. ult. For now that he has
gotten the victory over death, by reviving; he applies by the virtue thereof,
all the benefits of the Gospel unto us, to the exceeding great consolation of
our souls.

Lastly, for the establishment of our faith, concerning the obtaining of life
everlasting. For indeed if the Head be risen, the members may be sure to rise
too; and if the Head receive life and glory, doubtless the members which have
their proper dependunce of him, shall receive the like perfection: for a
glorified Head cannot be without a glorified body. Now Christ is the head of
the body, the Church, Col. 1.18. who is the beginning, the firstborn from the
dead, that in all things he may have the pre-eminence. Of the fullness of whose
glory, in the day of our perfect redemption; we shall all receive a full
measure.

For a Conclusion. Communi naturae lege moriuntur homines; The sons of men
composed of dust and ashes, die, by the common law of nature: Eternity is
proper to another world, not to this; to this Inconstancy. The Son of the most
High himself, when he became the Son of man, was subjected to Mortality; He
pleaded no Prerogative royal, to be exempted from that end, which God settled in
the course of nature. Our times upon the Earth may be said to be lasting, but
not everlasting; though in the hands of God. Heaven decreed a period to our
Lives, which we cannot prevent; and to which Christ at the appointed hour did
submit himself with all obedience, not able to avoid it. Necessity was laid
upon him to pay the dubt to Nature, which might serve for a payment of our debt
to God; yet, not respectu peccuti, W^ems. Protralcture of Gods image in man.
page 43.
but respectis poenae; this necessity was not in respect of sin, (He was a Lamb
without blemish and without spot,) but in respect of that punishmen^ which he
did oblige himself to undergo for the sins of men. Est illata necessia^ Adamo,
innata necessit as nobis, and assumpta necessitas in Christo: Necessity of
death was laid upon Adam for his sin, necessity of death is imbred in us, and
by a voluntary assumption there was a necessity of death in Christ. A man
willingly gives his word for such a sum for his friend, but when he has
willingly given it, he must of necessity pay it; So Christ willingly took this
debt upon him, and in the fullness of time when 'twas exacted, paid it down,
even his life to God and nature.

But albeit he thus parted from the world, yet God has raised him up, Etiam
animalula quaedam typ^ Resurrectionis sunt. Lavat. in Job 14.12.
having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should
be holden of it. So, though the hand of fate by Natures unconfused order,
reduce us to our first principles; yet shall we rise again, by the mighty power
of our eternal Maker.

The Judge of all the word has appointed a day wherein to judge the world, to
which all must rise. And as all must die, and after death come to judgment, so
Christ was once offered to bear the ^ius of many; and unto them that look for
him, shall be appear the second time without sin, unto salvation.

THE BLESSED AMBASSADOR; OR, THE Best sent into the Basest.
GALATH. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father.
GODS love wherewith he has embraced the sons of men in his only Son, is of
such large extent as cannot be limited, as cannot be measured: the breadth, and
length, and depth and height thereof, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
does pass our knowledge. Does pass our finding out. The length the breadth,
the depth, of the earth; the sea, the heavens, Mathematicians by their
speculations do conjecture; but the love of God, the most ingenious and
judicious cannot (it so exceeds) so much as conjecture, much less perfectly
know, because infinite. Would a man part with his only son, and alone darling,
and he content he should die a most ignoble and ignominious death, to ransom
his servants, his cantives, his slaves, rebels that would cut his throat; I
cannot be persuaded the world affords such a man, such a Phoenix; there was but
one in all the world; Abraham, found willing, to slay his son, to rip up his
bowels that spruug out of his own, when God commanded it. Yet the Lord of
heaven and earth (whose mercies are over all his works) sent his only Son to
save sinners; to dye, that by his death we may live: Though servants, Cantives,
slaves, rebels; yet by his Son made Kings, Priests, Prophets, sons and heirs of
an eternal inheritance; O the depth, the height, and length and breadth of Gods
love! He sent his Son forth from him, to bring us to him, he freely gave him,
to redeem us from the insulting power of Satan, from the captivity and
dominion of sin; from the oppressing tyranny of the world, to bring us into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. This liberty, this sonship is obtained by
faith; for to as many as believe in his name has he given power to become the
Sons of God. All ye then that believe, are no more servants, but sons; not sons
of wrath, but sons of God; not sons by nature, but sons by grace. And because
sons, behold the Lords bounty is en^arged toward you, the treasures of his
graces are open for you, the storehouse of his riches is not shut against you,
his fatherly providence is tendered to you, he withholds no good thing from you;
he sent first his Son, and now that his Son is ascended to him, he sends the
Spirit of his Son to you, into your hearts; that by that means he may abide
with you for ever.

But why compared ^ the love of God to the love of man, man's love in respect of
Gods not being so much as a grain of mustard seed to the whole earth, or the
whole earth to the vast heavens, or the smallest drop of water to the whole
Ocean? I answer, for my (...) thus; that by the marvellons defect and
straitness of the one, you may in some, though in the smallest measure,
conceive (survey you cannot) the infinite greatness of the other. He sent his
Son, but his Son returned, in his presence was joy, in his absence grief;
wherefore God bereaving us of his Sons bodily presence, in his tender love sent
the Spirit of his Son to raise our dead spirits, to comfort us, without him
comfortless: he adopted us sons, being his enemies, by his Sons coming; now for
farther confirmation and stronger assurance, he signs it, he seals it, by
sending the Spirit of his Son into our hearts.

Because sons: [Not natural, but elected, adopted sons, such as many justly
challenge the prerogatives and liberty of sons. God;] That is, the Father, Has
sent forth;] As Kings do their Ambassadors to signify their pleasure and
desires: they neither add nor diminish from their Commission; so the Holy
Ghost, what he receives from the Father, shows to them to whom the Father sends
him; he speaks not of himself, but what he hears he speaks; what he receives he
delivers. The Spirit;] That is, John 16.13, 14
the Holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity. Of his Son,] To wit, of the
natural Son of God, Jesus Christ Gods Son, begotten by eternal generation time
out of mind. (...) your bear ts^;] Into your (...). Crying;] Making you with
confidence and assurance to cry; the Spirit properly cries not, for then it
should cry and pray to it self; Sic ipse Spiritus postulat, i.c. ad
postulandum cos quos replevit, inslammat.
but it is said to cry, when it works that effect in us; according to that,
Romans 8.15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry Abb^ Father.
We are said to cry by the Spirit, as a man to see by the eye. Abba Father;]
Abba, it is an Hebrew word derived from (...) which signifyes to be willing,
here it is translated Father, and the reason of that name is rendered to be,
because of the propensity of the will and desire of a father toward his
children, being their chiefest wel-willers and wel-wishers.

The intention then of the words is this; The adoption and free election
thorough Jesus Christ into the right and liberty of sons, pertains not to the
Jews alone, but to the Gentiles also, to the Galatians: by the redemption
wrought by the Son of God, for this purpose anointed by the Father, ye receive
the adoption of sons; God thus making you sons, sent his Spirit to you; his
Spirit sent to you, dwells in your hearts; and dwelling in your hearts, makes
you cry with an assurance of his good will, Abba Father.

Of the words there are these parts, 1. A person sent, the Spirit of the Son.
2. A person sending, God. 3. The sending it self, sent. 4. The place whither
God sends the Spirit of his Son, into your hearts. 5. The office or effect of
the Spirit, Crying Abba Father. 6. The reason moving and prevailing with God to
send his Sons Spirit into your hearts, because sons.

Of the first, the person sent, the Spirit of the Son, the Holy Ghost.

It will be judged in me to be but a labor in vain, to endeavor to prove that
there is such a Spirit; except there be some (as I hope there are none) so
grossly ignorant as those disciples spoken of in the 19. of Acts; who professed
they did not so much as hear whether there were an Holy Ghest or no. This is a
Principle of Religion to be taken of all for granted; not to be called in
question, not to be proved; to spend words and time in the demonstration
hereof, is to no more purpose than to prove it is day, when the sun shines; this
being sufficiently manifest in the works of nature, that sufficiently apparent
in the effects of grace. Divine truth contained in the sacred Word of God;
stops all gainsaying proceedings in this point. None, but who will oppose God,
will oppose it; if any man teach otherwise, or doubt of the verity hereof, he
is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words; he
is a man of a corrupt mind; and destitute of the truth; carried away with the
spirit of giddiness and of error. I will therefore spare my pains, in
convicting such rude and giddy-headed spirits (for I direct my lines to
Christians well instructed in this Article of our faith; not to Turks and
Mahumetans;) and by Gods assistance teach and write, what shall be more fit,
(all things well weighed) for them to learn, and me to deliver.

1. Why the Holy Ghost is called a Spirit. 2. Why he is called the Spirit of
the Son.
The third person is called a Spirit, because, 1. He is a spiritual,
incorporeal and invisible essence; whose being is not like that of Angels;
though spirits, they are but ministering spirits of Almighty God, finite; but he
is infinite; whom the world cannot contain, whom the most piercing eye cannot
see, whom the most sublime wit cannot conceive. The re^ulgene glory of those
heavenly spirits dazzles our understanding in our meditations and discourses of
them; our imaginations cannot reach their transcendent and Metaphysical nature,
far distant from our sphere: much more are we unable to fix our bodily or
intellectual eye upon that spiritual being, whose being and glory is absolutely
in comprehensible; dwelling in that light, to which there can be no access;
and in that height, to which no created nature can aspire.

He is called a Spirit, 2. Nescis torda m^li ^^ina gratia Spiritus Sancti.
Ambros.
In regard of the mighty power and unresistible efficacy it has in operation,
employed in the rushing wind on the day of Pentecost, and the fiery tongues. His
wonderful activity is made sufficiently manifest by the creation of the world,
and well known in the hearts of sinners, by their conversion and new creation;
a work not of small importance; Act. 2.
a concurrence of all the powers of nature cannot effect it. Men and Angels can
do much, but not so much: let men of the rarest parts, most eminent endowments,
and of the best quality, (laying grace aside) do what they may, say what they
will, they shall find themselves scanted of ability to begin, much less to go
thorough with so great a work. The wind blows strong, and fire is very active;
so the Holy Spirit blows down the strong holds of Sat an erected in the hearts
of sinful men, disperseth all chaffy cogitations of wickedness, and fills
every corner of the soul with heavenly inspiration, with transporting thoughts
and meditations of an higher than an earthly nature; and as fire it inflames
the heart with the love of God, whence proceeds zeal of Gods glory, that fire
of heaven, and a fixed resolution (as in Martyrs) to suffer fire and fuggot for
the profession of his name. By reason or the working thus of his mighty power,
the Scripture styles him by the name of the power of the most high; E^ operante
creabatur homo, eo operante recreatur; As by his working power man was created,
by the same renewed and born again! As by his power he gave life, Luke 1.
so he gives newness of life by his power. Spiritus est qui vivificat, it is
the Spirit that quickens us, before dead in sins and trespasses.

He is called a spirit, 3. Because he is breathed from the Father and the Son;
that is, he is that person by whom the Father and the Son do immediately work
heavenly motions, and saving graces in the hearts of the elect. Spiritus a
spirando, wherefore when Christ breathed on his Disciples he said unto them,
receive ye the Holy Ghost. Job. 20.22. These I conceive to be the reasons why
the third person in Trinity is called a Spirit; Now must I show the reasons why
he is called the Spirit of the Son; they (as I Imagine) are these;

First, because he proceeds from the Son, by an eternal procession, and
intelligible emanation, the essence of the Son is communicated to him; hence
coeternal, coessential, consub^antial with the Son; he is called the Spirit of
Christ, Contra Arianos.
Romans 8.9. not (as one says) by way of allenation, nor by way of
multiplication of the divine essence, which can be but one; but by communcating
the very same numericall essence wherein the Father and the Son subsist unto
him in an incomprehensible manner, whence he is termed also the Spirit of the
Father, Galat. 3. for the essence of the Father is the essence of the Son, and
the essence of them both, the essence of the Spirit; he proceeds from both; not
simply as from two persons, but in that they are one in essence; not more
principally from the Father, less principally from the Son, as Lombard and the
schoolmen of this age affirm; but from the person of the Father and the son in
the unity of essence, without any such distinction; for upon the admission of
this distinction, we may justly infer an inequality of the persons of the
Deity, a thing without blasphemy not to be admitted; the Spirit of holiness
equally proceeds from both as from one beginning, against the definition of the
Greek Church, but non voluntate sed natura, seu necessitate naturae licet
secundum voluntat is modum; not by the act of the will, but by the act of
nature, or by the necessity of nature, according to the manner of the wills
working, which I cannot conceive in other terms than these, that is, God
willing it.

He is called the Spirit of the Son, 2. Because he is in the Son, and the Son
in him; as the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son; to wit, by
their eternal essence. And besides this, the Spirit dwelt in him in the days
of his flesh, enriching his humane nature with all fullness of grace. And at his
baptism, the heavens opening, Mat. 3.16.
John saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

He is called the Spirit of the Son, 3. Because the Son sends him to seal our
adoption to us, Joh. 15.26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father,
he shall testify of me. He sends that which is his, and gives it too, Joh.
20.22. receive ye the Holy Ghost. And not only the Son; but the Father also
sends him, but in the Sons name whom the Father will send in my name, says
Christ, Joh. 14.26. Which shall testify of me; Royard in Joh. 14.
says he, Joh. 18.26. the Father sends him in his Sons name, that is, says
Royard, to the glory of his name, in which respect he is termed the Spirit of
the Son.

He is called the Spirit of the Son, 4. Because he receives the wisdom and
knowledge of the Son, who is the wisdom of the Father, and reveals it unto us.
He guides us into all truth, Joh. 16.13. for (as it follows) he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he
shall show you things to come. Verse 4. He shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. Verse 15. All things that the
Father has are mine, therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall
show it unto you. All saving knowledge and divine graces coming from the Son,
in whom the hidden treasures of pure wisdom do rest, are conferred upon us the
sons of God by adoption, by the Spirit of the Son of God by eternal generation.

From which discourse may be deduced three conclusions, 1. That this Spirit of
the Son is a Person; he proceeds from the Father and the Son, not as an
accident, but as a Person. It was the gross conceit of some heretical mistaken
spirits, erroneous in their judgments, that this Spirit of the Son, is only a
motion or quality wrought by God in the hearts of his children, or some divine
inspiration infused from above by divine grace into the souls of them whom God
had chosen out of the world, to be more eminent than others. Those conceits may
seem plausible to corrupted reason, not discerning the things of God, which are
spiritually discerned: yet they contradict that which by Infallible consequence
may be deducted out of the sacred truths of Gods word and right reason. Laying
therefore these two, Gods word and right reason as two sure foundations and
uncontrolable Principles, which may justly sway our judgments: I will press
the truth of this conclusion against all opposites.

The Spirit of the Son is a person. Because he appeared in a visible shape. The
Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon Christ: and he appeared
like cloven tongues of fire, and sat upon each of the disciples, and they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as the
Spirit gave them utterance. What motion, what quality, what inspiration, can
appear in such or any visible similitudes or bodily shapes, or give utterance
to men?

He is a person, because called God. When Peter ta^t Anani^s of his double
dealing, he told him he had lied to the Holy Ghost; and in lying to the Holy
Ghost, Act. 5.
thou have (said he to him) not lied unto men, but unto God. The Essence of God
is Tota in qualibet persona Deitatis, whole in every one that is called God:
And forasmuch as the Essence and the Persons are inseparable; whatsoever is
properly called God, is a Person. What Motion, what Quality; what Inspiration
can be called God?

He is a Person, because we are baptized in his Name. He is the Author of this
institution, He is the Director of the whole act; by his authority; by his
command, by his power, the water is sanctified, the baptized are renewed, the
whole work is happily accomplished: For all is done in the Name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; not in the name of a Motion, of a Quality, of
an Inspiration.

He is a Person, because the properties of a Person are attributed to him. Luke
11.12. Joh. 16. Joh. 14.1 Cor. 12.11: Act. 13.2.1 Joh. 5.7. Romans 8.
He is sud, to teach us heavenly knowledge; to lead us into all truth; to
comfort the afflicted members of Jesus Christ; to distribute gifts and graces
according to his good pleasure; to call and send Apostles; to bear witness in
heaven, with the Father and the Son; to bear witness with our spirits that we
are the sons of God; to cry in our hearts, Abba Father; to make intercessions
for us with groanings that cannot be uttered: These are not effects proper to a
Motion, or a Quality, or an Inspiration. Lastly, He is distinguished most
manifestly from the Gifts of God: Dona honoraria.
There are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit; the same Spirit
distributing these gifts so diverse, where it will. Thus it is apparent that the
Spirit of the Son is a Person.

And as he is a Person; so is he, 2. A distinct Person from the Father and the
Son. Non aliud, sed alius? Not essentially differing, noted by the first word;
but hypostatically, noted by the last.

And as he is a Person; so is he, 2. A distinct Person from the Father and the
Son. Non aliud, sed alius? Not essentially differing, noted by the first word;
but hypostatically, noted by the last.

And that, because he is the Spirit of the Father and the Son: He cannot be
said to be his own Spirit; as the Father cannot be said to be his own Father,
or the Son his own Son; that is as absurd as this.

Again, because he is said to be another from them both. I will ask the Futher,
Joh. 14.16.
and he shall send you another Comforter. Christ, whilst he was on earth, was a
Comfort unto his Disciples: wherefore, lest diffidence and despair, by reason
of the great persecutions they should suffer after his departure, should break
their hearts, and sorrow ruin them; he prays the Father to send them another
Comforter, and promises he will see it done for their assurance; cap. 15.26.
He will send him from the Father.

Furthermore, He has a relative property and characteristical note several
from theirs, putting a difference betwixt them and him: He only proceeds from
the Father and the Son; He only appeared under the form of an innocent Dove,
and of fiery cloven tongues; By his immediate operation, Christ was conceived
in the womb of the Virgin: and by his immediate operation, Gods children are
thoroughly sanctified and furnished unto every good work.

Last of all, The Father sends him, that so sends him, whence he is neither the
Father nor the Son, but one from them. It is a mavelous impropriety of
speech, that a man should be said to send himself; but proper it is to say, he
comes of his own accord. Forasmuch therefore as the Spirit is said to be sent
from the Father and the Son; and as here, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son;
He is a Person distinct from them both. Which is the thing I intended to
demonstrate.

As he is a Person, so is he the third and last Person: not last in time, nor
last in nature, nor last in dignity; but last in the order and manner of
subsisting, and of performing such works as are common to them all, called
works ab extra, as Creation, Redemption, Preservation, Justification,
Sanctification, etc.

Having briefly gone over these two points, I shall endeavor by Gods grace to
do the like in the next, which is this, 3. That there are Three Persons in the
Deity, to whom the Divine Essence is communicated; The Father, the Son; the
Spirit.

For humane Reason fully to conceive so high a mystery, is impossible: What
therefore we must learn hereof, the Scripture teaches, Faith receives, and
Reason must not contradict: Rather embrace those depths of knowledge with
admiration, than by an overcurious inquisition to dive into it and return
unsatisfied, and sore troubled. Yet because Ignorance needs information, and
Curiosity requires confirmation; I will say somewhat (though little) of it.

The Platonists acknowledge in God (...), a Mind or Understanding, a Word, a
Spirit. By Understanding, they understand the Father; by the Word, the Son, who
by S. Joh. 1.1. is expressly called the Word; by Spirit, the Third Person
proceeding from the Father and the Son, called The Love of God. Hence Divines
conceive the matter thus: The Father is quasi Deus intelligens, God
understanding: The Son, who is the express Image of the Father, is quasi Dens
intellectus, God understood; called the Wisdom of the Father, the Image of the
Father, the Word of God, as a word is but the image of the understanding: The
Spirit breathed and proceeding from the Father and the Son, is quasi Deus
dilectus; God is Love, says S. Lombard.
John; hence by Lombard said to be that Love wherewith the Father loves the
Son, the Son the Father. So the Text reckons up three, the Father, the Son, the
Spirit; God sent forth the Spirit of his Son. This is indeed a deep mystery:
Yet as abstruse as this Divine mystery of the Trinity is, Nature can give us
some insight (by similitudes, though imperfect) of the possibility and truth of
it.

We see that in the Sun, there is an indesinent fountain of light, a brightness
and splendour springing out of it, and a quickening and reviving heat proceeding
from it; yet none will be so foully mistaken, as to conclude out of these
three, that there are three Suns, there being still but one: So though the
Essence of the Godhead be but one, yet we must know, it is communicated unto
three Persons; and though communicated unto three Persons, yet still the
Essence is but one. We see that in Man there are two diverse and far different
natures, a Body and a Soul; yet these two make not two Men, but one, these
reteining the unity of one Person: If two diverse Natures met together make one
Person, why may not one Nature and Essence be communicated to Three, and those
Three having one and the same Essence, still remain one God? We see that in the
Soul of Man there is a Will, which is the immediate beginning ab intra of every
act proceeding from our selves, commanding this or that to be done, sic volo,
sic jubeo; then there is Reason that thinks of the means to compass the intent
of the Will; which being found, there is a Power which is still in action, till
the Will (as I may so say) gets its will and obtains its end: whence is drawn a
similitude to express the profound mystery of the Trinity: The Father is
compared to the Will, for he is the beginning of the action; the Son to Reason,
for to him is given the dispensation of all things, and he is the Wisdom of the
Father; the Holy Ghost to the Faculty or Power of effecting it, who is the
Perfecter of every act, called The Power of the most High. These three
saculties are in the soul of man, yet one soul, not three; and it is a question
never satisfactorily decided since first moved, Whether these essentially and
really differ from the soul, or no: If then these three faculties of the soul
be one soul, and one soul these three faculties; why may not the Essence of the
Godhead be communitated to three Persons, and these three Persons remain one
only God?

Thus the glimmering light of Nature has given us some light in this matter;
Lombard. lib. 1. did. 12. E.
which, as the Master of Sentences says, Etsi sensu non percipiam, tamen teneo
conscientia; Though unperceptible to mine outward sense, yet in my conscience I
hold for true. Rules of Divinity exceeding our capacity, are to be embraced by
Faith, not to be discussed by Reason. And thus much for the Person sent, the
Spirit of the Son.

I proceed to the Person sending, which is said to be God: God the Father, by
his Son, sent forth the Spirit of his Son. In which discourse, as much
compendiousness as may be.

All that we enjoy in the time of our pilgrimage here on Earth, are sent us
from God the Giver of every good and perfect gift. What Earth cannot afford us,
Heaven supplies: The mission or donation of the Holy Ghost, comes not within
the reach of any mortal or immortal creature: Wherefore the Father considering
we cannot have a we being in this life, but our condition should be without him
miserable; He sent us the Holy Ghost, the only Comforter of our distressed
souls; the only Supporter of our future hopes of happiness, to strengthen us,
and fill our hearts with joys unspeakable. O the wonderful mercy of Almighty
God! Qui misit unige^^tum, immisit spiritum, promisit vnltum; quid tandem tibi
negaturus est? B^rn. de temp. Nihil unquam ei negasse credendum est, quem ad
vitull bortatur esum. Hierom.
He sent his Son to save us, and his Sons Spirit to comfort us. God sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts: He denies us nothing that may further
our good, but sends us all things, even his Spirit, who deserve a denial of all
things: It is (believe it) it is his Mercy, that is over all his works. He
makes our misery the object of his goodness, our necessities the object of his
bounty: hence the Apostle discourses thus; God gave us his Son when we were
enemies, and how shall he not with him give unto us all things, even to the
Spirit of his Son? God sent forth the Spirit of his Son.

It is counted a great gift, that Jacob sent by the hands of his servants, to
paci^ie his brother Esau, Genesis 32.14, 15. It is counted a great gift, that
Joseph sent to Jacob his father, Genesis 45.22, 23. and that he gave to Benjamin.
It is counted a great gift, that Pharaoh gave to Joseph, giving him rule over
all the land of Egypt, Genesis 41.43. It was a Princely gift, that Hiram King of
Tire sent to King Solomon, 1 King. 9.14. and that the Queen of Shtha gave him,
1 King. 10.10. It was a Princely and magnificent gift, that King Ahasuerus sent
to Mordecai by the han is of Haman; it is registered, Esth. 6. It was a gift
royal, that the three Wisemen presented to our Savior Christ, Gold, Myrrh,
and Frankincense, Mat. 2. But it is a far greater and more magnificent gift,
that the God of Heaven sends into the hearts of the children of men, the Spirit
of his Son. Those are but poor gifts in respect of this; for infinite is the
difference betwixt them and it: They are subject to mutability, loss and
corruption; but God sends forth the immortal and eternal Spirit of his Son,
very God of very God, into our hearts: They could not sanctify them to whom
they were sent and given; but this does cleanse those souls from all pollution
of sin, to whom God sends him: They only made them great in the eyes of men;
this makes men great in the eyes of God. Who (but a blind man) cannot discern
the tender affection and exceeding care of Almighty God our heavenly Father
toward us, who gives us all things to the utmost of his power, he thinks
nothing too good for us; He gives us his Spirit, and in giving him he gives
himself, God over all blessed for ever.

What greater gift can God give to the sons of men? what greater gift can the
sons of men expect of God? Enough, enough Lord; thou art God Alsufficient, we
can ask no more; and thou can send no greater than the Spirit of thy Son into
our hearts.

I will not part from this point, till I clear one doubt. In that God sends the
Spirit of his Son; some infer, that God and the Holy Spirit are unequal; the
Sender must ever be greater than the Messenger, the Giver than the Gift.

But by their leaves, 1. This is a Principle under^^able, That there is no
inequality in the Deity. 2. Common experience in Civil affairs, is able to
demonstrate this, That equals may send forth equals; it is usual. 3. S. Cyril.
Cyrils rule is most forcibly true, That Missio and obedientia non tollunt
aqualitatem; Mission and submission nullify not equality. The Father sent his
only begotten Son into the world, in the form of a servant, and was obedient
unto death, even the cursed death of the Cross; Yet equal to the Father, He
thought it no robbery. Phil. 2.
So the Holy Ghost in equality is not a jot diminished, nor his authority any
thing abated, though sent of the Father. The Father is not greater than the
Son, nor the Holy Ghost less than either, because all three are one and the
same God, Infinite in Essence and Lord of all; and in Unity there is no
Inequality.

Here I put a period to my discourse of this point, and proceed to the next, to
wit, to the Mission or sending of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Son, God
sent forth the Spirit of his Son.

The sending of the Spirit, is either in a visible or invisible manner. Visibly
he is said to be sent, when there are significant signs of his presence: Not
that the Spirit in its own nature is visible to the eyes of man: When he
confers his saving graces by the use of external Symbols, working Faith and
Repentance in his Church; when by his powerful operation he converteth the
souls of sinners from the errors of their way; in an outward apparition, then
is he said to be sent visibly: the Dove appearing at Christ's Baptism, did
intimate the presence and the efficacy of the holy Ghost; the cloven tongues
like fire in the Primitive Church, in the times of the Apostles, were a
demonstration of his presence and power. The manifestation of his graces in
Christ and his Apostles at those times, discovered his presence. But he is not
sent thus always, but at appointed times, and upon special occasions; thus
that Prophecy of Joel 2.28. was fulfilled.

He is sent invisibly, when no signs are used to declare his presence in our
hearts; only he that has him knows he is there. Thus was he in the Prophets,
for he spoke by them: And every Christian that belongs to the election of
grace, has the Spirit sent him thus invisibly; he that has not the Spirit of
Christ is none of his, Romans 8.9. And cum gratia Spiritus sancti datur
hominibus, profecto mittitur, Spiritus a Patre, when the grace of the Spirit is
conferred on men, of a truth the Spirit of grace is sent then of the Father.
Christ's Spirit comes not to us by a temporal motion, but by the temporal
motion of the creature is signified the spiritual and invisible sending of
Christ's Spirit.

Again, he is sent unto us by the Ministry of the Word, the power of God to our
salvation, and by the administration of the Sacraments. By the Word
illuminating our understandings, before darkened; enabling us to judge of
spiritual things, our judgment before restrained to carnal: working says,
love, hope, peace, patience, temperance, with a reformation of our lives and
all other virtues in our hearts. By administration of the Sacraments,
confirming our faith in the promises, sealing unto us our adoption, perfecting
in us the assurance of our reconciliation with God, and assuring us that we
shall be made partakers with the Saints in glory, of the full fruition of the
presence of God, and be put into the possession of that immortal and eternal
inheritance in the highest heavens prepared for Gods children, before the
foundations of the world were laid.

This sending of the Spirit of the Son, either visibly or invisibly, by the
Word or Sacraments, is not a local motion, a going from one place to another,
descending from heaven to earth; but his operation and effectual working in the
hearts of Gods Saints. He is every where filling heaven and earth, and
therefore not movable from heaven to earth, but ubi operatur ibi est, where he
works, there he is, and is said to be sent thither.

Let us now learn how to conceive of God; and be assured of his love, had he
not loved us, he had not sent his Spirit to us. He sends his Spirit to us, and
gives us the best things; we must not deny any thing unto him, thanklesse
creatures then we should be. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby we
are sealed to the day of redemption. And prepare we our hearts to entertain and
receive him; sweeping clean the secret chambers of our souls; making our bodies
also fit temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in.

The firm ground of all Christian comfort, and steadfast foundation of all the
heirs of eternal bliss, is to be the sons of God, Men of this world are ever
ambitious of honorable titles, and use all means to insinuate themselves into
the favor of their Prince, aiming hereby at a worldly happiness. Thus men of
the world to come (so I may term the faithful, for they are not of this world)
are ever in action, and the bent of their endeavors ever tending to obtain the
honorable title of the sons of God. What means God has ordained for them to
win his favor by; as obedient children use, aiming hereby at an eternal
inheritance, and at the crown of immortality that never fades away: which, that
as sons, they by the grace of God their heavenly Father, may compass; they cry
and pray without ceasing unto him, who is willing to hear, and able to fulfill
their holy desires to the utmost, even above what they ask. And that they may
be the better able to hold out unto the end, and to profecute their earnest
intentions in righteous things; God, because they are sons, sends forth the
Spirit of his Son into their hearts, whereby they cry, Abba Father.

There remains now these three Parts to be treated of; The place whither the
Spirit is sent; the effect of the Spirit there; and the reason of all this.
Now, that you may receive with pure hearts, and blameless affection, the
sincere truth of Gods holy word; whilst ye are reading these lines, sequester
your senses and your souls, from all wandering and evil thoughts, and cast away
from you all misdeeming conceits, as Elias did his Mantle to the earth, when he
ascended into heaven; or as Moses took off his shoes, when he trod on holy
ground.

The next Subject of our Meditation, is the place whither God sends forth the
Spirit of his Son, which is our hearts. God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts.

The estate of every true Christian and child of God in this life, is partly
carnal, partly spiritual; they have flesh, they have spirit; the first state
comes by nature, called the state of nature; the second by the free and
undeserved grace of God, Non habeo domine quodignosc^s. Donatus.
called the state of grace. Hence we may consider them two ways conditioned,
1. They are carnally minded. 2. Spiritually minded. Their purity is not totally
and fully unblemisht, he that says he has no sin is a lydr, and there is no
truth in him, 1 John 1.8. For they are subject to a twofold Law, 1. To a Law in
the members, which none can put off until they put off their flesh, and thus
far they are unregenerate. 2. To the Law of the mind, which is the Law of God,
called the Law of the mind regenerate and illuminated, converted unto God by
the Spirit, wherein the godly do delight. Hence arises a mortal war, and an
unsppeased enmity within man. I see, faith Paul, another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind; the good that I would do, I do not; but the
evil which I would not do, that do I, Romans 7. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17.
and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other,
and draw like Sampsons Foxes contrary-wayes.

The Maxim grounded then upon these words, to which my former discourse has
relation, is, that by nature we are destitute of the Spirit of God, and by
consequence prone to all evil.

Had there not been a reflection of Gods goodness and mercy upon us, did he
not by sup^rlour causes and transcendent means work our regeneration, and
caused us by a second birth, (which exceeded the capacity of Nico^, Cum primum
nascimur, in omni continuo pravitate versamur. Tully.
though a Master in Israel) to become like him; did not he mould out hearts
anew, and fill them with the invaluable riches of his mercy, and the treasures
of his graces, we had been of all creatures the most miserable. Sinful was our
conception, sinful was our birth, and striful is all our life. Nature makes us
sons of wrath, being deprived of the life of grace, as soon as we are sons of
nature; Damnatus homo antequam natus. Aug.
there is none that does good, no not one. All are sold under sin, whence the
Apostile upon his own experience, averreth, that in him, that is, in his flesh
or natural estate, dwells no good thing, Romans 7. We are born dead, as soon
as we come into the world alive; spiritually dead, naturally alive.

Now in whom no good thing dwells by nature, they are by nature void of
grace; and who by nature are void of grace, do not by nature participate of
spiritual life, whereof whosoever is not partaker, is by nature spiritually
dead; and who by nature are spiritually dead, are destitute of the Spirit of
grace, who is the sole Author of life, and finisher of our salvation. All
saving graces and heavenly benedictions flow from him, in whom the fullness of
all graces dwells; and all return to him again, as rivers come from the sea,
and to the sea return. U^lesse therefore God sends forth the Spirit of his Son
into our hearts, to sanctify (...), to cleanse us, to put new spirit and life
into us, which is a work of the highest power, to which nature can never
actain; we shall come short of performing the least act, that may be any ways
advantageous for our falvation. A dead man^s not in action, has no living
motion, neither is there in his power any possibility of regaining life a so is
every one spiritually, whose heart is not quickened and moved by the holy
Ghost, to whom it is alone possible to raise from the death of sin, whose
property it is to infuse grace, and make the hearts and souls of men beautified
with the richest furniture, and most precious (...) of divine (...) Tomles for
himself to dwell in.

And thus the passage is clear and open for another observation, grounded on
these words, which is this; That the heart of the child of God, is the seat or
dwelling place of the holy Ghost. Of all things in man, God desires the heart
of man; My son, give me thine heart; for as naturally evil actions proceed from
it; so must all good, being first set awork by the first mover unto all good,
the good Spirit of God. It is in man by nature, according to the dictates of
natural Philosophy, Primum vivens, the first in man that lives; and divine
Philosophy informs us, that it is so in grace too. For the convernon of the
whole man depends upon the conversion of the heart to God; there new life is
begun, Nature gives it a vital faculty, distributing to all parts the vital
spirits, whereby they are embled to work; and so does grace; for in what good
soever any part of the body is employed, the power of effecting it is derived
from the heart; which, as it is called Principium vitae in the body of man; so
it is made by the grace of God the original of a holy life, and the first
subject of grace; without which, all our best services are but glittering sins:
for with the heart we believe, and with the heart we work out our salvation.

The Chymicks compare the heart to the Sun, called by them Cor mundi; the Sun
is in the midst of the great world, this in the midst of the little world man;
The Sun is the sountain of heat in this, wherewith all sublunary creatures are
cherished and quickened; so from the heart (to apply things otherwise than they
do) wholly taken up with the sanctifying Spirit, does proceed such a heat; and
fervent zeal, as that every part is made nimble in the execution of what God
commands us. It makes the feet swift in running to the house of prayer, the
hands pliable to minister to the necessities of the poor, the tongue voluble in
uttering the praises of Almighty God, ^ 1. (...)
the ears ready to hear with joy the Gospel of peace preached, the eyes to be
busied in looking up to heaven, from whence comes our salvation, the whole man
to be wholly taken up, in heavenly contemplations of God and his works, and
holy exercises of devotion. Hence the heart may challenge a principality over
all the members of the body; all are at its service; and it exercises dominion
over them all, Arist. in lib. de gederatione.
tanquam rex in regno, as King in his Kingdom, says the Philosopher, and it is
ruled by the Spirit, say Divines: Naturalists raise a large discourse and ample
dispute upon this Argument, and as yet the controversy lies undetermined; but
this one principle of Divinity, alotting the heart to the holy Ghost for his
chief mansion in man, does end the controversy; for in what part of man the
holy Ghost does principally reside, and on what part of man, man's conversion
does principally depend, must of necessity be the principal part of man.

But to return more particularly to the rule hitherto amplified, that the heart
of man is the seat of the Spirit; my discourse shall be limited, 1. To the
proof here, of by Scripture; 2. To a declaration of those circumstances,
whereby the being of the Spirit in our hearts may be discovered, and by
necessary consequence, without all peradventure coucluded.

It is the general voice of the Scripture, which is without exception, that the
Spirit dwells in the elect, Romans 8.9. Ye are not in the flesh, but i^ the
spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you; And in ver. 11. it is
thus written, That if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies, by his Spirit which dwells in you. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 3.16.
propounds this question, the ignorance whereof is reputed gross absurdity;
Know ye not that ye and the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? It is part of Paul's divine prayer for the Ephesians, in Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ may dwell in their hearts by says; that is, that Christ may
possess their hearts, and the whole man by his Spirit, working saving faith in
them.

This dwelling is an admirable good expression of the being of the Spirit in
us, which is not in regard of substance, (which the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, being infinite, much less can the body or soul of man bounded within
strait limits, comprize) but in regard of a special operation, out of the reach
of a created power. It carries with it an intimation of the holy Ghost abiding
in us, not for a time, but for ever; for the Word dwelling, notes a
perpetuity, and is opposed to sojourning. And also that he has the full
disposition and absolute command of the heart, as a man of that house whereof
he is Lord. Which disposition consists in these six notable benefits which are
sure evidences of the Spirits being and dwelling in our hearts; every one
whereof is worthy our serious speculation.

The first is the illumination of our understandings, with a certain knowledge
of our reconciliation to God in Christ Jesus. This is obtained by the special
information of the Spirit; he shall teach you all things, he shall guide you
into all truth, John 14.26. and 16.13.
says the Savior of the world. This knowledge is not of Generals, but of
particulars, that God is our Father, Christ our Redeemer, the holy Ghost our
Sanctifier; the Spirit of God (faith the Apostle, Romans 8.16. Bears witness
with our spirits, that we are the sons of God. Works in us a sure knowledge
of the remission of our sins, of our reconciliation and peace with God, of
our adoption into the liberty of the sons of God; and faith the Apostle, 1 Cor.
2.12.
now have we received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things
that are given to us of God; that is, the righteousness of Christ assuredly.
It is not in man to know assuredly what great things God has done for his
soul, without the special instruction of the Spirit, called the Spirit of
truth; And the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, Isa. 11.2.
the Spirit of knowledge.

The second benefit of the Spirit, which discovers his being in our hearts, is
regeneration; whereby our hearts are renewed by receiving newness of life and
grace. The coruptions of our nature are expelled, by the Spirits infusion of
supernatural qualities into us, whereby we are made new creatures; and of the
servants of sin and limbs of Satan, are made the members of Christ and sons of
God. Hence he is called the Spirit of life. Except a man be born again by water
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, says our Savior,
Ezekiel. 36.25.
and Ezekiel does Prophecy, that God would sprinkle clean water upon them, and
they should be clean: and from all their filthiness would he cleanse them. It
is the Spirit that does regenerate us, who is here compared to clean water, for
these two causes, 1. As water mollifies dry wood, and puts sap into dry trees,
so does the Spirit supple and mollify our hard hearts, and put sap of grace
into them, whereby we are made trees of righteousness, and bring forth fruits
of eternal life; Christ says, John 7.38, 39.
that he that believes in him, as the Scripture says, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water; this (says the text) spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believed on him should receive. 2. As water does purify the
body from all filth, so does the holy Ghost wash away our sins, and our natural
corruptions; John 4.14.
hence called a Well of living water, springing up to everlasting life.

Again, John the Baptist says, that Christ baptizeth with the holy Ghost and
with fire; where the Spirit is (by consent of Interpreters) compared to fire,
and that, 1. As fire does warm the body being benumbed with cold, so does the
spirits our hearts frozen in sin; and though dead in sins and trespasses, yet
by his reviving heat, he quickens our hearts, and brings us to life again. 2.
As fire does purge and take out the dross from the good metal; so does the
holy Ghost separate and eat out the putrefying corruptions of sin out the
cankered and drossie heart of man. And thus regeneration is wrought by the
Spirit, and therefore said to be born of God.

The third benefit of the Spirit, in them to whom he is sent, is an union or
conjunction with Christ, whereby we are made his members, Hine baptismus
dicitur (...).
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; and partake of his
benefits; hereby his graces are in a plentiful manner and an abundant measure
distilled upon us, which were in him above all measure; hence it is compared to
effusion, Joel 2.1 John 3.24.
I will pour out my Spirit: hereby we know (says Saint John) that we dwell in
him and he in us, because he hathi given us of his Spirit. The Spirit is the
bond of our conjunction, descending from Christ the Head to all his members;
and begetting Faith, that extraordinary virtue, whereby Christ is apprehended,
and made our own by special application.

The fourth benefit whereby the Spirit is known to be sent of God into our
hearts, is the Spirits governing of our hearts. For in whom he is, be is
Master, ordering and disposing the understanding, the will, the memory, the
affections, and all parts of the body, according to his good pleasure; for as
many as are the sons of God, Sam 8.14. Certum est nos facere quod sacimus, sed
illi (...) ut faciamus.
are led by the Spirit; The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm.
37.23. in token whereof, they that are of the Spirit, do savor the things of
the Spirit, Romans 8.5. that is, they affect and prosecute those things that are
good. And this called spiritual regiment, it consists in two things, 1. In
repressing all evil motions, arising either from within, as from evil
concupiscence, corruption of our nature; or from without us, by the in^icement
of the world, or suggestion of Satan. 2. In stirring up good affections and
holy motions upon every occasion; hereto belong those excellent titles given to
the holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Lord, Isa. 11.2.
the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and of strength,
the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord: he has these several
attributes, because he stirs up in the godly these good motions, of wisdom, of
knowledge, of strength, of understanding, of counsel, and of fear of the Lord.
In Galat. 5.22. the fruits of the Spirit are recorded there to to be love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance;
where oever these be, the Author, which is the holy Ghost, of necessity must be.
As for love, whose object is God and man, God for himself, man for God, it is a
testimony of the Spirits presence in us, and rule of us; he is sent into our
hearts, says Lombard, when he is so in us, as that he makes us to love God and
our neighbor, whereby we remain in God, and God in us. As for joy, it is a
main work of the Spirit, making us to rejoice for the good of others, as for
our selves; whereas carnal men pine away and grieve expressively for others
prosperity. As for peace, it is that concord, which must be kept in an holy
manner, Immane verbum est ultio. Senec.
with all men as much as possibly may be, If it be possible as much as in you
is, have peace with all men, Romans 12.18. hereby are we known to be the happy
subjects of the Prince of peace. As for gentleness, it is that whereby we
behave our selves friendly and courteously to every man, showing all meekness
unto all men, Tius 3.2.
whether they be good or bad; It stands in these points, 1. To speak friendly
and lovingly to every man. 2. To salute courteously without dissembling, not
according to the common fashion of the world, full of courtesy, full of craft.
3. To be ready upon all occasions to reverence and honor every man in his
place, Non menti^ntis astu, sed compatientis assectu; non qui^ fall^t illum,
sed qui se cogitat illum. Aug.
to which God shall call him. As for goodness, it is, when a man is
serviceable to all men, at all times, upon all occasions; thus Job was eyes to
the blind, and feet to the lame, a father, unto the poor, Job 29.15. Thus good
Paul was made all things to all men, that by all means he might save some, 1
Cor. 9.22. Observing his own rule delivered to the Galatians, cap. 5.13. By
love serve one another; hereby condemning that profane, perverse and graceless
practice of the world, every one for himself, and God for us all. As for faith
or fidelity, it performs these two duties, 1. It makes conscience of a lie,
and speaks not one thing, and thinks another, like Machiavels scholars, but
utters the truth without the least dissimulation. 2. It makes a man keep his
lawful promise, though it be to his own hurt. For mine own part, I shall never
desire a firmer obligation of an honest man so reputed, than his lawful and
serious promise; which if he do not perform, he cracks his credit before men,
and sins before God. As for meekness, it is, when by injurious and rash
dealing a man is provoked, and yet he neither intends nor attempts a revenging
requital. As for temperance, it is a bridling of our appetite in meat, drink,
or apparel. 1. Our eating and drinking must be joined with fasting, not riot;
lest with overmuch pampering our selves, we prove unfit for Gos service. 2. Our
attire must be decent, both for fashion and matter, as that it may express the
graces of God in the heart, as sobriety, Zeph. 1.8.
gravity, humility; we must not be strangely attired, for, faith the Lord, I
will punish all such as are clothed with strange apparel. Consider this, O ye
daughters of Jerusalem, and men of Israel, that ye fashion not your selves
strangely according to the world, and incurr the heavy displeasure of the most
just God; such covering is a discovering of your nakedness, whereby it is made
most apparent to the world, that instead of sobriety, intemperance; instead of
humility, pride; instead of gravi^y, wantonness does reign among you, so that
you are not led by the Spirit of God, whose government and direction ye should
follow, but rather by the spirit of error. Expostulate then, can you find in
your hearts an utter dislike of sin, because it is sin, and a godly sorrow for
it? Can you find in your hearts, a forsaking of sin, seconded with a fixed
resolution of yielding obedience to the Divine Ordinances of God? Can you find
in your hearts, an avoiding of all occasions, that may minister matter of
offending God, with an unsatisfied desire to be at peace and unity with him?
then the Spirit of his Son is sent into our hearts.

The fifth benefit conferred on those, on whom the Spirit is conferred, is that
unspeakable comfort, which none can take away from them, conceived in them in
the time of their greatest extremity; hence the Spirit is called the Comforter:
John 14.16.
Our Savior told his Disciples, that he would send them another Comforter that
should remain with them for ever. Hence again he is called Oleum laetitiae, the
oil of gladness, he cheareth the heart of man, by raising up his dead
spirits, and making him to rejoice in the Lord. The causes of our sorrow are
either outward calamities, or a troubled conscience, in both which the
Comforter takes away our sorrow, and begets joy. We read of the Apostles,
that after Christ ascended, they fled from place to place, and hid themselves
for fear of the spiteful Jews: But as soon as they received the holy Ghost,
they were as bold as Lions; they preached Christ crucified in public, they
impartially reproved sin to the full, and taking heart of grace, did rejoice
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. Hence did
proceed that heroic spirit that History reports to be in those Martyrs, which
spilt their blood for him, that spilt his blood for them. It Is not the face of
man could daunt them, their inward comfort did far exceed their outward
tribulation; and though their bodies perished by external violence, yet so great
was their spiritual consolation, that they felt no pain. In like manner, when
any of the faithful are through extreme poverty brought low, and thereby
brought into contempt in the world, yet they comfort themselves in the
providence and promises of God that can never fail; insomuch as that all
calamities he what they will, cannot deprive them of their inward comfort. Nor
yet a troubled conscience altogether, though an unsupportable burden, for then
when their consciences are troubled, the Spirit labors to restore them to the
joys of their salvation, by stirring up faith in them apprehending Christ, and
with him the remission of sin, purisying their hearts and consciences from dead
works, assuring them that their reconciliation is made in heaven, and that
there is now no condemnation unto them; than which, there cannot be a greater
comfort in this world.

Physicians have observed in the heart two motions, the one is (...), a
dilatation or enlargement of the heart, the other is (...), a constriction or
closing up of the heart: Spiritual Physicians may observe the same in their
hearts, where the Spirit of God takes up his mansion. My heart, says David, is
enlarged, enlarged with those comforts and joys, which the Spirit that
inhabits there begets there, and none else: And the heart is closed up again
against the receiving or entertaining all worldly sorrow, which, as the Apostle
says, causes death; and keeps within it self the joy of the holy Ghost; hence
the hearts of the faithful may be said to be full, full of joy, full of the
holy Ghost, full of life; for God sends forth the Spirit of his Son into their
hearts.

The last benefit whereby the Spirits presence is noted in our hearts, is, the
strength, valor and livelihood, whereby we go on in the Spirit, fighting a
good fight against the enemies of our salvation, and finishing our course with
joy. We hear of an order of Knights, called Knights of the holy Ghost; of this
order are all the faithful, that undertake Christian warfare, and fight the
combats of Jesus Christ; all that maintain the profession of the truth in
sincerity and uprightness of heart; all that with hearty resolutions begin and
prosecute the ruin of the Romish Synagogue, the dissolution of their
superstitious worships, wheresoever, within the limits of their jurisdiction.
Of this order are all those Christians, that beholding their sins, lay hold on
Christ's merits and Gods mercy, by an unmovable faith; for this hold is taken by
the strength of Gods Spirit, wherewith he does endow us. Of this order are all
those who resist the temptations of Satan, the provocations of the flesh, the
alluring vanities of this perishing world; these are all vanquished by the power
of the most high, that rules in our hearts. Of this order are all those who are
content to sacrifice their lives for the Name of Christ, that so they may be
found in him; stout hearts have they and full of spirit, that spurn at the
present pleasures and commodities, dignities of this world; and are content to
part with all hopes of these and all that he has, for the glorious hope of
eternal life, purchased unto them with the precious blood of the Son of God.

Such a spirit as this, no worldling can be partaker of, and such a spirit as
this, we read to have been in Martyrs, even at the stake. To conclude this
point, Of this order are all such, as in their greatest necessities and most
desperate extremities, acknowledge and rely on the gracious protection and
fatherly Providence of Almighty God, who against all hope rest in hope, which
is as much (as one says) as for a man to shake the whole earth, and is as hard
a work. Hence by reason that the Spirit does communicate this strength unto us,
he is called the Spirit of strength; thus his strength is shown in our
weakness, Isa. 11.2.
whereby great and difficult matters beyond expectation, or the reach of our
nature, are brought to pass.

All these are sufficient restimonies, whereby we may undoubedly and safely
conclude, that where they are to be found, Gods Spirit it is to be found; God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts.

Wherefore (my dearly beloved, into whose hearts the Spirit of God has entered)
make it appear by his holy conversation that he is in your hearts: if ye live
in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25.
ye must walk in the Spirit: if by the potent operation of the Spirit ye
berdead unto sin, and raised up unto newness of life; you must express it by
serving in holiness and righteousness before him all they days of your life;
it cannot be said flatly there is any life in him, in whom there is no
expression of life; so unless you forsake and abandon your ways of
wickedness, your adultery, your pride, your extortion, your grinding of the
faces of the poor, by your oppression; your cheating, your bribery, your riot,
your unjust dealing, and whatsoever Gods pure eyes cannot endure to behold, by
hearty and unfeigned repentance and sincere obedience unto all that God
commands; it cannot be truly affirmed, that the Spirit of God is in your
hearts, or that he has as yet breathed upon you the breath of supernatural or
spiritual life. Vita animalis probat animam esse in corpore, vita spiritualis
spiritum in anima; Your natural life is an infallible demonstration of the
soul's presence in the body, your spiritual life of the spirits presence in the
soul. As they that have no soul, have no natural life; so, they have not
spiritual life, that have not the Spirit. Let therefore your life be such, as
that all may take notice of what spirit ye are, and that the Spirit is in your
hearts; that so you by your works, and others by your example, may glorify
your Father which is in heaven.

Again, 1 These. 4.4, 7.
if any of you be persuaded of the Spirits dwelling in your hearts; let it be
your principal care to possess your vessels, your hearts in sanctification
unto the Lord; for God has not called you hereby unto uncleanness, but unto
holiness. Christ could not endure in the Temple of God profane Merchants that
defiled it, Remember that ye are the temples of God, and if any man desile the
temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17. Justitia, verccundia, and observantia legum
communitum. Contra Aristog.
him shall God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are;
Demosthenes could say, That man's heart was Gods best temple. Cleanse therefore
your souls from all pollutions of sin, that ye may be fit to receive and
entertain the Lord of glory. If an earthly Prince were to come and lodge in
your houses, what labor would you take to sweep them clean? What provision
would you make for him? What care would you have of ordering all things
decently, that your houses may be answerable to his slate? And shall your care
and provision be less in entertaining the King of heaven? Let it not be said
of you, but purify your hearts, and the King of glory shall come in and abide
with you to the end of the world. Cast off all the works of uncleanness, that
ye may be blameless in the sight of God. Saint Paul bids us not to grieve
the holy Spirit; that is, Delicata res est Spiritus Dei. Ephesians. 4.30.
seeing that he is pleased to tak up his habitation in us, we ought not in any
case by our sins to disquiet and vex him; but with an awful reverence show him
all service and dutiful respect; lest by abusing our selves, we make him to
depart from us, and unclean spirits come in his room.

The graces of the Spirit are likened to sparks of fire, which a little water
may soon quench; take heed that ye quench not the Spirit in you, by drinking
up iniquity like water; for hereby as ye deprive your selves of the Spirit, so
of all spiritual blessings and heavenly comforts, which redound unto us by his
comfortable fellowship; by which, as we are guided into all truth in this life,
so after this life, go into the joys of our Master, which is in heaven.

When I do seriously consider with my self the great love of God, extended
without all desert unto the sinful sons of men; I am carried away with a strong
admiration thereof. I see men plunged in the depth of misery, I see God viewing
them in the height of mercy; the extremity of our misery moving God to pity.
Our captivity unto Satan had been endless; had not God of his infinite goodness
sent forth his Son to bring us forth. We were for ever sold under sin without
redemption, had not God sent forth his Son to redeem us, to have bought us with
his precious blood. Sin and Satan had made us their servants, their slaves
eternally: had not God in the fullness of time sent forth his Son, that by him
we might receive the Adoption of sons. Thus of Captives, of bondslaves, of
servants to our enemies, God in Christ Jesus his Son has adopted us to be his
sons. And because thus sons, behold a further pledge of his never
failing-favour to us, he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
Crying, Abba Father.

So that upon the Spirit of God conferred, is conferred the gift of prayer: for
in whose hearts he dwells, he is not idle, neither is he as that spirit that
Christ did cast out of the man in the Gospel, dumb, a dumb spirit; but a
crying spirit: not that the spirit properly cries Abba Father, for God the
Father is not the Father of the spirit, but of the Son, and the beginning or
fountain from whom as also from the Son the Spirit does proceed; but that it
makes them in whom he ever is, to be ever crying, Abba Father.

Wherein is to be observed, 1. An act, Crying. 2. The Object, Abba Father.


This crying, is praying; and not every kind of praying, but a vehement and
ardent praying, with all the affections and powers of the soul assembled
together, whereby the desires of our hearts are made known unto the God of
heaven; the souls voice is drawn up to the height. Thus our Savior in the
days of his flesh is said to have offered up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, Conqueror tibi lachrymis Jesu Christi, said one
unto him that was able to save him from death, Hebr. 5.7. We read how Jacob
wrestlest with the Angel, and would not let him go until he had blessed him:
Even so the spirit of prayer makes us to strive and wrestle with God, and never
cease crying, until he hear us, until he grant us our requests. It is so with
us, as it is with children, that cannot relieve themselves, without the aid of
others; they raise the strong cry, and so continue without intermission, until
their wants be contented and supplied; so do we who are the children of God cry
continually unto him who is the giver of every good and perfect gift, until our
desires be accomplished: And forasmuch as we are compassed about with a world
of infirmities, so that sometimes we have not the heart to cry, or at least cry
not with all our hearts; Quom do enim non exauditur spiritus a Patre, qui
exaudit cum Patre? Aug.
then the Spirit helps our infirmities: And seeing our ignorance is so great,
as that we know not what we should pray for as we ought; the Spirit it self
makes intercession for us, informs us what we should ask for; or ^od knowing
the spirits intentions, grant us what indistinctly and indirectly we beg by the
Spirit. Hence he is called the Spirit of Supplications, Zech. 12.10. I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace and supplications. Hence he is called again an Intercessor, for
he makes continual intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God;
Romans 8.27. and in the 15. verse. of that chapter, the Apostle certifies the
Romans, that they have received the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba,
Father. Wherefore when the sons of God perceive the fiery darts of Satan,
flying about their ears on every side, and themselves subject to infinite
perils; they fall a praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
and watching thereunto with all perseverance. When the children of Israel (as
is reported in the book of Judges) were in the heat of Gods anger sold unto
their enemies, many a time oppressed, many a time in desperate cases, many a time
vanquished for their revolting from God and forgetting his loving kindness;
they are said then to cry for life unto God, whose ears were ever open to
receive their hearty prayers. Psalm. 40.1.
Thus says David, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me,
and heard my cry.

This crying is either mental, only conceived in the heart or mind alone and
only; or vocal, published by the mouth alone. The mental cry, only conceived
in the heart by the spirit, is that (...) that confidence and assurance which
the Sons of God have, that they are the Sons of God, and that all things are
theirs in Christ Jesus; or more plainly, it is the elevation of the heart to
God, in a secret manner preferring their petitions unto him, with confidence
that he will grant them what they humbly and earnestly sue for according to his
will altogether; this crying is internal; Moses egit vacis silentium, ut cord
clamaret
yet God, to whom all hearts are open, hears it as a cry: when Moses spoke not
a word to God, but only desired in the secret cogitations of his heart, his
aid and protection at the red sea, against the Egyptians, the Lord sard unto
him, Wherefore cryest thou unto me? Exodus 14.15. When Hannah prayed unto God
for a manchild, she spoke with her heart, only her lips moved, but her voice
was not heard. 1 Samuel 1.13.
When Nehemiah made request unto King Artaxerxes concerning the City, which was
the place of his fathers sepulchers, he had not at that instant any time to
pray to God with his voice, to prosper his suit; yet, says the texts, he
prayed to the God of heaven. Such indeed may be the sorrow and anguish of the
heart, as that the tongue shall not be able to utter the intentions of the
soul, and this doubtless was the case wherein Moses, Nehem. 2.4. Curae leves
loquuntur, tngentes stupent.
Hannah and Nehemiah were: David professed as much, Psalm. 77.4. I am so troubled,
that I cannot speak; bodily infirmities may cause this silence, for we see that
men at the last gasp when the soul is ready to fly out of the body, and they
in a manner by reason of the weakness of the Organ of speech not able to utter
one syllable, they lift up their eyes to heaven: thereby signifying the hearts
raising of this crying unto God. Hence proceed those groans in the children of
God when their speech fails them, which are the only messengers of their
thoughts, and they are said to be the spirits groanings in their hearts,
whereby intercession is made for them. They are called unspeakable groans;
unspeakable (say some) for their greatness, and so indeed they are; great in
the ears of God: unspeakable (say others) by reason of their weakness, caused
either by outward crosses, or inward pressures of the soul; expressions they
are certainly of a good heart, listed up to God; and though weak, proceeding
from the special instinct and proper motion of the Spirit of prayer. And albeit
they be weak and confused in the hearts of Gods children, so that they
themselves can hardly discern or utter them in themselves; Romans 8.27.
yet God, who is the searcher of the hidden things of the heart, knows the mind
and meaning of the Spirit: so that by the cries, sigh's or sobs to God never so
small, and in a manner insensible and seeble like the saint pulse at the hour
of death; yet if they thereby, by the Spirit make requests unto God, it shall
be heard of him: and albeit those things which they sigh after be not always
manifestly and (the Spirit moving thereunto) distinctly seen of them; yet God
who is infinite in knowledge does perceive their desires, or rather the desires
of the Spirit in them. This mental crying is not common to all, but proper to
the children of the regeneration; 1 Cor. 12.3.
without which, none can hardly call God Father; as none can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

The next kind of crying is that which is only vocal, consisting only of words.
Thus Hypocrites cry and pray, for fashion, not for conscience sake, Vox and
praeteria nihil, all voice, no hearts; they can cry loud enough in a
Pharisaical pride, Lord, Lord; and none shall stop their mouths, but such
heartlesse Christians shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. These are
they that draw near unto the Lord with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor him, but have removed their heart far from him, as he complains, Isa.
29.13. This is (says one) Precationis inane simulachrum, and in truth that
prayer or cry which is only a lip-labor, not proceeding from the heart, is but
as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymbal; it is like the Play called the
Motions; wherein though there is motion, yet no life; and although there be
never so glorious and pompous observation of outward ceremonies, and in that
complemental manner only come before God, and offer up their prayers unto him;
yet shall they have the repulse for their vain ostentation. Thus Isaiah the
first, the Lord speaking of the hypocritial Jews, that were curious in the
external worship and service of God, and would seem to pretermit nothing,
therefore professes unto them (because their services were not performed with
the heart) that when they made many prayers he would not hear them. And the
same Prophet, Cap. 64.7. in effect calls such prayers no prayers, when as be
says, There is none that calls upon the name of God; he that cries not to
God with his whole heart, cries not at all to God; for he that worships God,
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; not in bare formalities. This kind of
crying is but a vain beating of the air, is anothing available, whereof the
Spirit is no author; and unless the Spirit cry in the heart, there can be no
true, but a false crying, Abba, Father.

There remains yet a third kind of crying or praying, viz. both mental and
vocal; wherein both the heart and the voice are directed to God; the mind and
the mouth both consonant, both jump together; here out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks: And this is that pure language which the Lord
speaking by the Prophet Zephany, said, that he would turn to the people, that
they might all call upon the name of the Lord. The Prophet Hosea advertiseth
the Israelites, Cap. 3.7. Cap. 14.2. Nec lecta, nee neglecta. Psalm. 77.1.
to take to them words, and to turn to the Lord; that is, such words as may
make a true report unto God, of their hearty conversion to him, and lively
says in him. Thus says, David, I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God
with my voice, and he gave ear unto me. Such a cry as is this, is no false
alarm, but a true testimony of a sanctified soul, of our confidence in him,
and is ever powerful with God. The prayer of the faithful avails much, says
St. James, for it is framed and composed by the admirable Art of the Spirit of
God in their hearts, ere it be uttered with the tongue: The voice then
reflecting on the heart, the heart is made more zealous; and then what is said
of fame, may be said of it, Vires acquirit eundo; it gathers strength in the
uttering. Let your voice therefore in prayer be conformed and correspond to the
affections and wishes of your hearts, that they may run together, and let the
affections and wishes of your hearts be guided by the Holy Ghost which if ye
do, it is without all contradiction a most certain Argument, that God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

From the act of crying, I pass to the object, Abba, Father.

The Spirit, says the Apostle, bears witness with our spirits, Romans 8.
that we are the sont of God. This testification of the Spirit in our hearts,
who is an infallible informer of the things that are given us of God, makes to
cry, Abba, Father: For we can never call God Father, except we be first
informed and persuaded by the Spirit that we are the sons of God.

The Hebrew or Syriack word Abba, and the Greek word (...), being in the
Original here together, gave occasion to some to observe, that hereby is
intimated the calling and union of Hebrews and Greeks, of Jews and Gentiles
into one Church, whereof Christ is the head: But though this be true; yet, this
Text is no sufficient warrant for this observation, and therefore not to be
insisted upon.

The gemination here Abba, Father, which is Father, Father, notes the earnest
affection and vehement zeal of Gods children in crying and praying unto the
Father of Spirits; their prayers are pressing and urgent cries, and never
satisfied until heard; which ardency of theirs is grounded, 1. Upon the sense
of their wants; necessity constrains them to use all earnestness in their own
behalf; they must knock hard, they must seek hard, they must cry hard, Father,
Father; ere they shall be heard, or their suits obtained. 2. Upon the knowledge
of their own insufficiency and disability of furnishing themselves with
corporal necessaries pertaining to the body, or spiritual blessings and
habiliments pertaining to the soul: They know, that the blessings of this life
and the life to come, must come from their Father which is in heaven. 3. Upon
Gods willingness and readiness to do them all the good he can. He is faithful
in promising, and as faithful in performing. The word Abbah, signifies to be
willing, from whence God has this Appellation: a father is willing to protect
his child from all dangers, and to relieve him upon all occasions; and although
just cause of anger be offered him, yet nature in time will work it out: Even
such is the tender affection of our heavenly Father, known to his beloved sons,
that they are hereby the more emboldened to prosecute what they would have
brought to pass. They have his heart to be set upon them, his ears always to
be open unto them, his eyes continually watching over them, his best wishes
ever with them, and all his blessings reserved for them. These are
encouragements for them to approach unto him, who is more forward to give unto
themall things, than they themselves to demand any thing.

Hence it comes to pass, that coming unto him, as unto our Father, we come
boldly, we may come confidently; there is nothing more requisite than to put on
a good face, and a good courage, when we sue to God No denial must be taken at
the first entrance, for this were too dejected pusillanimity. The widow in the
Gospel, through her importunate solicitation obtained what by a slight
entreaty she could not compass. O let us therefore, says the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 4. ult.
come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we obtain mercy and find grace in
time of need. God has erected a throne of grace, where he sits to receive and
to hear all suits directed unto him for mercy: He has a Court for mercy as
well as for justice; where humane merits must not be pleaded, but Gods mercy
above all advanced: if then any child of God who has been prodigal in
mis-spending what God has given him, come but to him in the time of need,
modestly bold; he shall return with a contented mind, and shall find rest
sufficient for his soul. This may be termed a holy presumption.

Upon whom should children presume, if not upon their parents? Upon whom should
we be bold, if not upon our provident Creator? What father of the flesh will
give his children a stone for bread, or for fish a Serpent? If our fleshly
parents know how to give good things to their children when they ask of them,
how much more knows our heavenly Father to confer good things to them that
rely upon his Providence and cry to him? Since therefore we have free access
to God, cry with all boldness unto him, who will prosper our endeavors, and
like an indulgent father fill us with good things, and will not return us empty
away.

We may come confidently with assured persuasion of his favor and lenity; the
very name of Father is of force enough, to repel out of our minds all
diffidence. Christ has obtained this boon for us at the hands of God, that we
shall have what we ask in his Name: What things soever says our Savior
Christ, Mark 11.24.) ye desire when ye pray; believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them. The Lord, Qui exprobrat, reposcit. Tacitus
He gives liberally without upbraiding, to them that ask in faith, nothing
wavering, James 1.5, 6. The hope of children must rest on the parents care, so
ours on God. And when we come unto him, we come not to him, as to a severe
revenger of sin, and rigorous Judge; but as unto a most compassionate Father.
The Spirit teaches us, and makes us to cry, Abba, Father.

Wherefore learn hence upon all occasions, Apage terra, quod utinam Deus in
Caelo jam and tecum essem: quid enim est in terra quod me vel tan tillum
retineat? Bern.
whether in prosperity or adversity, to have recourse unto him. Whom have we in
heaven but thee (says the Psalmist, and says every Christian) and whom in
earth do we desire beside thee? Do we offend? he forgives our iniquities; are
we sick? he heals all our diseases; are we in danger of destruction? he
redeemeth our life, and crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies;
are we bitten with hunger? he satisfies our mouth with good things; Provoke we
him to anger? He is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy, he will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever, he
deals not with us after our sins, nor rewandeth us according to our iniquiries,
but as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
Psalm. 103.
Then having such free entrance to him, and so great hopes of compassing our
defires; if we come not boldly, we come not confidently, we are justly worthy
to lose our labor, and return with shame. Let nothing therefore dissuade us
from calling upon him at all times. Remember our Saviors counsel and
comfortable promise, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you: And if our leisure will not serve us to
pour out our souls, and to make known our intentions in humble supplications
unto the most high, in a continued and ample speech, we may use a short
ejaculation of mind, Crebras habere orationes, sed brevissimas and raptim
ejaculatas.
which is a Prayer short and sweet, wherein proceeding from Faith, we shall be
certainly heard. For if we cannot speak, we may sob, sigh, groan and weep, unto
which God will have a gracious respect. The efficacy hereof depends upon the
operation of the Spirit in our hearts; by whose power we are made to sob, to
sigh, to groan, to weep, and to cry: of whom, none are partakers but sons; and
by whom none but sons cry, Abba, Father.

And thus much for the effect of the Spirit, in the hearts of the sons of God.

The last part that remains to be treated of, is, the ground of the Spirits
being in our hearts, crying thus. Because sons.

There are sons by nature; and so there are no sons of God, but one, Christ
Jesus, called the only begotten Son of God; and though the regenerate be
said to be born of God, it is spiritually to be understood of a new creation
called regeneration, not of any natural descent. There are sons of God by
creation; so Angels and men are called the children of God. There are sons of
God by Participation; Thus Kings and Magistrates are sons, to whom he does
communicate some part of his power and Majesty. There are sons of God by
ageneral Profession of Religion; so they who live in the visible Church of
Christ, professing the true worship of God in Christ Jesus, are called sons of
God. And the^e sons of God by adoption or special grace, of which sort are all
they into whose hearts God sends forth the Spirit of his Son.

Herein we are to note two things, 1. The ground of our Adoption. 2. The
benefits that redound unto us thereby.


The ground of our Adoption; as of our salvation, through the tender mercy of
our God is Christ Jesus, for, for this end came he into the world, for this end
by his precious blood did he redeem us; whereas before we were his enemies, and
sons of wrath. This is expressed in the fourth and fifth verses of this Chapter,
where it is said, that God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, John 1.12.
(...). Nonnu.
to redeem us, that so we might receive the adoption of sons. As many as
received Christ by faith, has he given power (or as Nonnus renders it,
heavenly honor) to become the sons of God. We must first have spiritual being
in Christ, which is done by faith; ere we can be reputed sons. The Apostle
tells us, Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7. that our sonship was decreed in heaven, from all
eternity; God did predestinnte us (says he) unto the adoption of children, by
Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us.

The benefit that redounds to us by this, is this in general; that hereby we
are made the brethren of Jesus Christ, which principally consists in our
conformity with him in righteousness and true holiness. Hence it is that we
are (...) with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance; called the Spirit of adoption, and the Spirit of the Son, because
sons only are capable of it; Talis Spiritus non datur servis, sed solis filiis,
sons, not servants are partakers of this Spirit, sons, not servants use to cry,
Abba, Father. There is a spirit of bondage which servants receive, which Spirit
ye have not received again to fear. There is a Spirit of adoption, assuring us
of the liberty of sons, by which we cry, Abba, Father, Hence it is again, that
the righteousness of Christ is made ours, Romans 8.29.
made ours by predestination by imputation on Gods part, made ours by faith in
apprehension in application on our parts: for whom he did foreknow he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the
firstborn among many beethren; moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he
also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified,
them he also glorified. And thus it comes about that we receive an inheritance
in the heavens; whereof, albeit we are not as yet complete possessors; yet out
title is good, our interest firm; in that the possession was purchased for us,
unto the praise of the glory of God, and shall be given to us in the day of our
full and our perfect redemption.

Stand fast therefore, my beloved, in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free; children of the freewoman, Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, heirs
of an eternal Kingdom. Great is our dignity over that it was; by nature ye were
limbs of Satan, servants to sin, enemies to God, sons of wrath; but by the
grace of adoption, we are the members of Christ, servants to righteousness,
friends, nay more than friends, the sons of God. Be thankful therefore unto
him, honor him as sons; let your obedience be joined with all faithfulness,
unto the fulfilling of his will, who has in his infinite goodness made you
his sons; and taking from you the spirit of bondage, has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us; unto him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without and. Amen.

SAINT PAUL'S Apology.
GALAT. 1.18. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and
abode with him fifteen days.
THere is no child to Gods Child, no man to the man of God; look what he says,
what he does, he will make good, maugre the hearts of his enemies. Thus Moses
resisted Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16. Thus Elijah opposed Ahabs and
Jezabels bawsing Prophets of Baal, 1 King. 1.18. Thus Micajah withstood four
hundred false Prophets, 1 King. 22. Thus our Savior confounded the Scribes and
Pharisees; the Apostles the Jews; and Paul here false Apostles, and all by the
same Spirit.

As there is a Spirit of truth, so there is a spirit of lying. God is said to
put a lying spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets. But here spirits of
lying lie in the very hearts of some imaginary Apostles, that blatter out they
know not what against Paul; but he graced and strengthened with the Spirit and
grace of God, would not be nonplust or put to silence with such facility, he
had spirit enough to oppose the false allegations of these deceitful brethren,
who endeavored to pervert the Churches of Galatia, to bring them from
Christianity to Judaisme; maintaining that circumcision and other ceremonies of
the law were to be retained, as necessary to salvation. Alleging also that
Paul's doctrine was no true doctrine in all points; and what he had, he had
received from the Apostles at the second hand as well as they; and therefore
they teaching one thing, and he another quite contrary to what they taught,
what reason had they to believe him more than them; more in number? But the
Apostle in this chapter clears himself from the scandalous imputations of these
insinuating Cavillers, as we may see by taking a brief survey of the chapter
which may guide us unto Paul's journey.

First, he was an Apostle himself. The people said of King Saul, is Saul also
among the Prophets? So said the people of this Saul, now Paul, is not this he
that persecuted the Church of God extremely? what? is Paul also among the
Apostles? But now no more persecuting Paul, but Paul an Apostle, not of the
Apostles making, not of men, neither by man; why? by whom then? but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, verse. 1. First then, he was an Apostle of Gods
making.

As for his doctrine, it was the Gospel, he spoke nothing but Gospel, that
which in time past he persecuted; no other than that the Apostles preached, and
Christ taught the Apostles. Hence he comes with a curse, anathematizing them
that offer to preach any other Gospel, be he man or Angel. verse. 8, 9.

As for his teachers who they were, that he answers in a word, not man but God;
I received it by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, verse. 12. Again, he shows how
he was converted, it was by Gods good pleasure, calling him by grace verse. 15.
And to what end was he called? that is, briefly, to reveal his Son in him,
that he might do the like unto others; To reveal his Son in me, that I might
preach him among the Gentiles. verse. 16. When he was thus called, he conferred
not with flesh and blood, as too too weak to teach him, he would not build on
the sandy foundations of man's brain, that shakes like a quagmire; he would
surer, or none at all; I conferred not with flesh and blood. I, but some might
except against that, that he went up to Jerusalem, and was conversant with the
Apostles, and so learned the Gospel by hearsay. Nay, that is a lie; neither
went I up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me, but I went into
Arabia and returned into Damascus. He went not up to Jerusalem indeed so
suddenly, but three years after his conversion he went thither to see Peter,
and abode with him fifteen days. In the first three years space of his
conversion he saw not an Apostle, but when three years were past, which was the
matter of five or six years after the Passion of our Savior, the last year of
the reign of Tiberius, or the beginning of Caligula's, he went up to Jerusalem.

Here then in this part of the History we have set down unto us, 1. The time of
Paul's journey; Then three years after. 2. His journey; I went up to Jerusalem.
3. The end or purpose of his journey; To see Peter. 4. The time of his
residence there; fifteen days; I abode with him fifteen days.

All these prove manifestly, that the Gospel was not revealed unto him by flesh
and blood, whether those of his own Nation or the Apostles; but only by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Then after three years] that is, when three years were expired after his
inspiration. Not seeing so much as an Apostle, much less hearing, in preaching
the Gospel up and down Damascus and Arabia, he went up to Jerusalem. In Arabia]
If Arabia the happy, made now more happy by the Gospel; if Arabia the stony,
mollifying the stony hearts of the inhabitants; if Arabia the desert, Christ
takes possession of it by Paul his messenger. Three years did he continue
preaching the Gospel in Arabia and Damascus, ere he came to Jerusalem.

The Apostle we see yields an account of his time spending, both of years and
of days; to teach all, especially the Ministers of Gods Word, to keep an
account of their time. This is the doctrine in general drawn from the example
of the Apostle, That we must have a care how we spend our time; that it be not
consumed in trivial affairs, matters of no weight, of no consequence; but on
high and profound matters; such as well as belong to our everlasting salvation,
as those of our ordinary calling. God has appointed that every man should have
a double calling, one respecting God, another man. The first without the last
cannot be, the last without the first may be, but miserable. Our service unto
God sanctifies the creatures service unto us. And as we cannot be without the
first, except we turn Atheists; so not without the last, except we turn beasts.
A Christian, of all other has most to do, he having so many improvements of
reason, so many reasons of faith, which is above reason; had he no other
calling, he of all other has least reason to be idle. And that for these
reasons.

Tempore (says Simonides) fiunt sapientes, Simonides.
in time men are made wise men; and Thales makes time to be omnium
Sipientissimum; therefore precious time. It learns, it teaches, it alters all
things: In the fullness of time was our Redemption wrought, and in the end of
time shall be accomplished. Head and hands make a perfect natural man, counsel
and action a perfect civil man, faith and good works a perfect spiritual man;
for all these things there must be a time: Therefore precious time.

The book of nature does furnish with a knowledge of the power and wisdom of a
most powerful of a most wise God, in time: hence time makes a perfect humanist.
God gives us a head for contemplation, hands for action, and time for all
things. In this book of nature there are delivered unto us Principles of
morality, God gave us time enough to learn them; but we through sin made it
short, and our selves forget him, his and our selves; and therefore he writ the
moral law rather in tables of stone, than in the table of our hearts, as more
faithful registers of his Law, and withal to show that our hearts are harder
than stones. Stones suffering ravings in time, our hearts never; therefore our
hearts being so hard, God must raise himself children out of stones. Hence
comes counsel, and action, and an understanding heart, all in good time.

There is a book called the book of God, out of which Ministers are to preach
the Word, and to be instant in season and out of season: To preach with Paul;
to pray daily with Cornelius, Centurion of the Italian band; to confer like
Philip with the Eunuch, Treasurer to Candao^ the Ethiopian Queen; and to be
always in action. The calling teaches them, to be still calling of men to
repent and believe. The Prophets are called Seers and Watchmen of Israel, to
show that Ministers should have their spiritual eyes always open, ever in the
act of seeing. Neither is this book made for Ministers only, but for all with
David to meditate upon day and night, God gives time for this also.

Another reason is, if we consider our brittle estate, the shortness of our
lifetime. Job. 14. Martis habet vices quae trahitur vita gemitibus. Genesis 47.
Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live, yet uncertain; our
life is but little enough. Jacob was an hundred and thirty years old, when his
son Joseph set him before King Pharaoh; yet like a good old man did he say, few
and evil have the days of the years of my pilgrimage been. We are but poor
pilgrims in this world, Pilgrims remain not long in one place; no more do we,
no more can we in this world. Our life is but a vapor, Jam. 4.14. so is death,
soon come, soon gone. How like then unto death is our life, and a vapor is the
Hierogliphique of both.

This should animate us, and set us forward to lay hold on eternal life, Josh.
10.
in time while time is. Time will stay for no man. Joshuah could command the
sun and moon, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou I soon in the valley
of Ajalon, but he could not command time to make a stand. Hesekia by his prayer
unto God, 2 King. 20.
made the sun run back ten degrees in the firmament; but time runn'd on
forward. We have as much to do; as we can do while we live.

Another reason is, if we consider what advantage the grand enemy of our
salvation, A time to be born, Eccles. 3.
a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a
time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build
up; a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to
embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; a time to get, and a time to
lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away; a time to rent, and a time to
sow; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; a time to love, and a time to
hate; a time of war, and a time of peace: here time is not lost, but all
these times well used in their time, the Devil has no time to tempt us, sin
has no time to overpower us.

Now then, we must make account of our time; By 1. Numbering our days. 2.
Redeeming the time.


For the first; Lord (says David) teach me so to number my days, that I may
apply mine heart unto wisdom. God gives a number of days, but few number them,
or make account of them; but I fear it is because few know how to number them;
this therefore I show briefly; To number our days, is to consider the misery
which we purchased to our selves by the evil of sin, the evil of guilt, the
evil of punishment. It is to make a recapitulation, or take a just account or
sum of all the ungodly acts we have committed, as near as we can, in
thought, word and deed. It is to look narrowly into the crooked passages of our
lives, to see what we have omitted in Gods service, and what we have committed
against him, that we may mend what is amiss. We must come to our trial every
day, which is called Examen Pythagoricum; thus we become more wise every day
than other.

Hence we must take a note of all our impious acts, and summom them up in the
Court in our hearts, to appear before conscience as Judge; which if it play the
honest Judge, condemns us, racks us. This done, we are pincht with a sense of
our misery, causing us to run with all speed to God for his mercy. Hard and
stony are their consciences that make no conscience, no reckoning of numbering
their years or days; they cast up one gross sin on another in gross; they
add, they multiply; never subduct, never divide: But he that learns David's
Arithmetic, which is Ars been numerandi, the Art of numbering well all his ill,
is a good Artist, divides, subducts and casts away all sin; reserves nothing in
his mind; but adds virtue to virtue, multiplies one good deed on the head of
another: he remembers Gods Ordinance Crescite and multiplicamini, increase and
multiply, as well in grace as in other businesses. Make we but a due
computation of our daily actions, we shall find a tincture of sin that cannot
be separated: Pry we into our thoughts, the imaginations and purposes of man's
heart are only evil continually: Genesis 6.
Examine we our words, we shall find that our tongues ost overrun our wits,
our wits wisdom: Observe we our habitual sins, whereby we get a kind of
dexterity in Rhetorical repetition of the same sins; we shall smell out in our
hearts a den of thieves. Habits are acquired by continual actions; so that
sinful actions make rank sinners. Those that continue this custom of sinning,
without numbering their days, that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom, are
like to make a fair reckoning at the years end, the end of their days: but he
that would prevent all mischief, must make a profession of making a daily
inquisition, and casting up all those fractions of the Law of God, that God may
make him whole upon confession. This should be our daily work thus to number
our days; neither is it to any end, except it be continued to the end of our
days.

Secondly, We must redeem the time, for the days are evil, says the Apostle.
A forcible reason, Ephesians. 5.
I promise you: We are to make the best we can of our time, because the days
are evil. In evil days, we must do good d^y-deeds; and out of evil draw good,
as God out of darkness drew light. If we redeem not the time, we cast away our
selves like Cast-aways without redemption. Now would we know what it is to
redeem the time? It is only to take time while time serves, to serve our turn.
Austin was a Manichee nine years; he took his time to turn bias another way for
the good of Gods Church. Luther was a Monk a long time; but he shortened the
time by redeeming it; he found after that he had done nothing, when he thought
he had done something worth the doing. Paul was a blasphemous Persecutor of the
Christian Church; but he in time redeemed the time, and proved a faithful
Minister of the Gospel of grace. Titus the Vespasian never thought the day well
spent, wherein he had not done some work of charity. Theodosius the Younger
conferred daily with the learned Bishops of his time, whereof his Court was
full. Sigismund the Emperor did delight always to do good works of piety and
religion. Idle creatures think the time tedious; but those that are taken up in
serious affairs, especially of Salvation, think the time to pass away too soon.
No time too soon to do good; for to do good, is always high time. Therefore to
pretermit no occasion, (which once past, there is no looking for it after) no
time of performing what God requires, and avoiding what God disallows, is to
redeem the time, and to make evil days good days for us; our best days.

Those then may justly be reproved, who neither number their days, nor redeem
the time: They run on the score till the day of payment come; then they
impoverished through sin, and found unable to satisfy or pay God; God pays
them home with a witness. And these are such as betake themselves to no lawful
Calling; but calling for alms, they live rambling up and down like catholic or
universal men, upon every man's devotion, or at every man's elbow; who scarce
ever call upon God, but for Gods sake on man. These are Common Beggars. But I
pass by these without any more ado.

Again, They are worthy to be reproved, who neglect the affairs of their
general or particular Calling, or both, to follow their Pleasures altogether.
God gave Adam a Garden, as well for action as for contemplation; as well to
busy himself about the dressing of it, as to recreate himself in it. Praestat
otiosum esse, quam nihil agere; it is true, it is better indeed to do something,
though it be nothing to the purpose, than to do nothing at all: What needs
either? Nero will cage himself up in a Closet to catch Flies, rather than do
nothing; but, hoc aliquid nihil est, this doing is as good as do nothing; for
happily they are acting that which the Devil would tempt them unto, had they been
with Solomon's sluggard altogether wrapped up in idleness. This cannot excuse
them. The fellow that we read of in the Gospel, that married newly, he was
busy at home with his wife, he could not come to do what he should have done;
I am married, I cannot come; but that excused him not: The company that were
invited to a feast, were otherwise employed; but that excused them not. No
pleasure, no business should keep us from performing what God requires. When
God bids us do one thing, what have we to do, to do another? He will come upon
us, as he did on the Jews, with a Quis rogavis? Isa. 1.
Who required this at your hands? Do what God bids; and what is done at Gods
bidding, cannot be done amiss.

There is another sort to be reprehended, Those that do nothing but plot
mischief, that watch their opportunity to catch men napping: These are the
limbs of the Devil, scholars of his own bringing up. They take time, but it is
to do evil; They watch, but never pray to God; They are always doing, but it is
iniquity. No more of these Gains, who are all upon the point of eternal
condemnation.

Others are to be condemned, who softer and cocker up themselves in Idleness;
that do not so much as the Israelites in Egypt, as pick straws. God breathes
into men the breath of life; Idle men, Prodigi temporis, unthristy husbands of
Time, make a shift to breathe it out again, and care not how. God gives life;
so that life is the gift of God; and he that spends not his life well, shall
answer well for it. God allows them no mear, that labor not for it: He that
labors not, shall not eat. First sweat, then eat. But many call daily for
daily bread, who seek not how to deserve it.

And here I come to our selves. It is not for us to sit all day long in our
Studies, like Diogenes in his Tub, for fashion sake, to keep up our credits,
and to get unto our selves the name of painful Students, except we apply our
studies in good earnest: They that use that trick, do not so much keep their
Studies, as their Studies keep them. Our brains should sweat in contemplation,
our hands in action; and not like the sluggard, hand over head or under. A
little more sleep, expecting the good time of the day to be told them by the
Bell. I may say more truly of them, than Pharaoh said of the Israelites, They
are idle, they are idle. It is as great folly in them, who because they cannot
be idle at home, they will gad abroad (like Dinah) and there he idle, and lose
their virginity, I mean the flower of their youth; and so for a Six days
something, they will bring you home a Six days nothing, except it be a full
belly and an empty brain, like Epicures; as for the Seventh day, they may rest
by Law. I speak no more, but their case is miserable. They may know, and know
much; but this is all they can attain to know, to know that they know nothing.
And for this improficiencie, God will say, as it was said of Judas, Let another
take his place. I speak in way of prevention: Dii talem nobit averti^^ pestem.

Here I may tax such Ministers as neglect their function: They are content to
take a place in the land of the living, but never labor to build up the Israel
of God; That take Duties, but never do their Duties. If they preach four times
in a year, or now and then, they think that fair; whether they be there, or no,
any other time, it makes no matter: When they should be present among them
always, teaching by their own Example, as by dumb Sermons. Or if they get
others to supply their turns, all is hushed up, as if all were well. But Paul
preached, as it is probable, three years in Arabia and Damascus, and lived
there all that while. Be ye (beloved Brethren) O be ye, when God calls you unto
that Calling abroad, followers of him, as he was of Christ Jesus! I may tax
more sin; but this is enough for a taste of so four sauce.

As for you that count Time precious, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people. You
that number and redeem your days and years, with S. Paul here; I do say, you
are happy for making use of your time, in searching out your sins, and
repenting for them when you have done. God considered his created Light, and
saw that it was good; to teach us to consider our offensive Darkness, and see
that it is naught. We must search every corner of our hearts narrowly, as God
is said to search Jerusalem with a candle.

All that I have hitherto spoken tends to this, To teach us to forsake our
sins, and to give our selves to the works of our Vocation. Romans 12.21.
Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; that we may
work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Therefore we need not to
trouble our selves with things unneedful, as to be prying into Gods secrets, to
study to find flaws in the Patent of our salvation, (Gods Will and Testament;)
Syrach. Eccl. 19.24.
They may be exquisite subtilties, quirks of wit; but unrighteous. But to apply
our selves to sound doctrine, and to avoid vain bablings, as the Apostle
exhorts us. Suffer therefore (Ye sons of Light) the words of exhortation. I
doubt not but some are troubled with the question, Viri fratresque, quid
faciemus? Men and brethren, what shall we do? Number and redeem your four
years, your seven years time, all your time more or less, that none may find
holes in your coat. Do something every day; go from one point to another, and
stand not upon points with others. Run with the Time; Apelles like, Nulla dies
sine linea, Let no day pass thy head without some line. Let the line of thy
Calling run parallel along with the line of the Day. Thus may you learn line
upon line, precept upon precept, until you be perfect men in Christ Jesus. This
remedy will cure the symptoms of ignorance and sin, (My life for yours.)
Idleness is the worst thing of a thousand; Inficit, interficit; Affect it not,
lest it infect you, it kill you. God set Adam to dress the Garden, not allowing
man Idleness in Innocence; how much less in the state of corruption? Honest
minds will not seek for that now, which was unlawful then.

I need press this no further, but take example by Paul's preaching three years,
that ye may give the like account of your time with a safe conscience. Do as S.
Hierom's Matrons were used to do, contend who should get most Scripture by
heart. Again, Satan we know will besiege us: therefore as we victual our selves
twice a day, or oftener, to gather strength against bodily death; the least we
can is twice (if not oftener, the oftener the better) to victual our selves
against our spiritual enemies, that threaten death to our souls. This is our
comfort, that we know the best of our defenses, (God;) and the worst of our
enemies power, (Satan's) Let us not therefore fear the worst of our enemies
power, (Satan's,) while we know the best of our defenses, (God.) Let us so
carry our selves, that none carry us away. Quid statis otiosi? said the Lord of
the Vineyard, Why stand ye idle? So say I, Quid stamus otiosi? To what end
stand we idle? as if we had nothing to do. Let our first time be our worst
time, our last the best. Think that time lost, wherein we do not think on God.
Thus may we carry an upright Conscience, made able and at all times ready to
yield a good account of our years, months, days and hours, to friend or so.
If to friend, to comfort them; if to foe, to confute them, as Paul did here the
false Apostles. And thus much for the first part of these words, Then after
three years.

It follows, I went up to Jerusalem. This is his journey: He grants here that
he went up, not commanded, not sent for, but of his own accord unbidden. Here
the moral and natural action agree together in the intent of the Agent; He went
to Jerusalem, not to learn any thing, but to see Peter. That which Luke makes
mention of in the 9. of the Acts, when Barnabas presented him to the rest of
the Apostles, acquainting them with Paul's passages in and since his conversion,
how he saw the Lord in the highway to Damascus, and how he had spoken with
him, and that he had preached in the name of Christ with audacity there unto
them, whom he went with letters to apprehend; shows plainly that he received
not the Gospel of the Apostles, neither was he compelled to teach the Gospel
according to prescript of the Apostles. They were afraid of him at the first
sight, until after a further and more deliberate trial.

I will not insist hereon; but I proceed to the intent, or the impulsive cause
of this his Peregrination; which was, to see Peter. Actions of reasonable
creatures, are to be allowed or disallowed, according to the intents of the
Agents. Therefore I join all three in commission; I went up to Jerusalem, to
see Peter.

The whole marrow of the matter lies in these words, [to see Peter:] showing
most expressly, that he came not to Jerusalem to better his knowledge; for he
had before received the Gospel fully from Christ. Peter was not his master, nor
he Peter's scholar; he only came to see him, to salute him, or congratulate
him, as his Coadjutor in the Gospel; as also to manifest unto the company of
Apostles what he was, and to clear himself for a false opinion that some put of
him, Hierom.
and how for the matter of doctrine there was no disagreement between them and
him.

And here Hierom wittily flouts at the flim-flams of Pope Clement; who said
that Paul went to Jerusalem, to behold Peter's eyes, cheeks and countenance, to
see whether he were macilent or fat, whether his nose were crooked or even set,
whether his forehead were covered with hair, and whether he had a bald pate or
no. Certainly (says Hierom) he thought to find Peter a God, not a man. This is
but bald stuff, all Popish foppery.

But here we see what love should be betwixt the Ministers of the Gospel, to be
careful of one another health. The love he had to the gospel, made him to
visit Peter. Religion and love joins hearts together; and that is a religious
love: And where Religion makes an opposition, hearts must not admit a
conjunction. Both in this are fearful aspects. I went up to Jerusalem, to see
Peter.

This was a good deed of him; therefore I make this collection, That some kind
of Peregrination or Pilgrimage is lawful. So Jacob with all his family went
down to Egypt, to see Joseph. So the Israelites through fire and water, to take
possession of Canaan. So the Queen of Sheba went to see King Solomon. So Paul
Peter, to Jerusalem.

The reasons may be these: Because that their love may be seen, by greeting
with a holy kiss. And because it increases joy. Hearts meet with mouths, at
the meeting of friends. It dispels all mists of conceived sorrow. John leapt in
his momothers womb, at the salutation of the Virgin, because Christ was there.
And without all doubt, this bred a great comfort in Peter, to see Paul
converted to

Now in that I said, that some Peregrination is lawful; it follows that there
is another unlawful, and that is Popish Pilgrimage, by Vow, or imposition of
Popish Impostors. Papists out of these words collect a twofold doctrine, viz.
1. That Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and other such devoted places, is a
religious work, and merits heaven. They ground upon this example of the
Apostle; I went up to Jerusalem. Their second doctrine, a main pillar of their
Religion, is this; That Peter had the supremacy of Paul: Their reason is,
because Paul here went to see Peter. But I hope it was not (as one says) to
kiss his feet, as if he were Pope.

The first argues but a piece of poor Papistical Logic; out of one particular
act of one man, to draw a general rule. Secondly, to make a rule of Religion,
in a thing where there is no such thing intended. Here Papists take their mark
amiss, and therefore miss the mark of truth.

I confess, in the Old Testament there was an appointed place, whither the
Israelites were bound to resort to worship God; as we may see Deuteronomy. 16. They
were to hold three feasts; they were to go to one certain place three times in
the year at these three feasts, ver. 16. Three times in a year shall all thy
males appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose; In the
feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of
tabernacles; that is, the feast of the Passover, the feast of Weeks, and the
feast of Tabernacles. Now this place was first where the Tabernacle of Moses
was; and so we read how Elkanah with his two wives went out of his city to
Shiloh, where the Tabernacle then was, to offer sacrifice: 1 Samuel 1.
This continued for the space of four hundred seventy eight years, or
thereabouts, unto the time of King Solomon. Then after the Temple was built at
Jerusalem, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord; all came thither. Yea,
Josephus says, that they came from all places to the feast of Unleavened
bread; then all of them were killed to the number of Eleven hundred thousand
Jews; they came when they should not come. But now the Sun is come to the
Meridian, there is no shadow; that Law is abolished, the places then appointed
are quite brought to ruin; these were only types of Christ.

Again, God commanded that for his honor; the Pope (in his own and Papists
conceit, a little diminutive god, but a great man) commanded this for his
profit. But God gave an Item for this, Deus non superstitione coli vult sed
pictate.
Mat. 15. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men. Frustra me colunt, In vain do they worship me: It is not commanded in
any part of the New Testament, and therefore no part of Gods honor. More than
this, It is against the Scripture, being mere Idolatry: For whatsoever is
undertaken for Religion sake, as an honor unto God, beside the command of God,
is plain Idolatry; therefore altogether unlawful.

Again, All religious distinction of place is taken away, once Christ is come.
The Veil of the Temple is rent in the midst: Worship God in holiness, and it is
now no matter where we worship God. Paul and Silas prayed and praised God at
midnight in the prison, 1 Timothy 2.8.
Act. 16. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands
without wrath or doubting. Pray every where; for every where where thou
prayest, God is present by his grace; He is over thee, he is under thee, he is
before thee, and behind thee, he is on every side of thee. We cannot say now as
once Jacob said, Surely God is in this place, and I knew it not; but, Surely
God is in this place, and every place, and I know it; and I know that therefore
I must worship God in this and every place. He that thinks otherwise, is procul
a Jove, far from God. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there will I be in the midst of them, says our Savior; In medio virtus, The
power of the most High will stand in the center of them, that are gathered in
his name, be where it will. God will not contend for place; Bring him a good
heart any where, and it is all he requires at our hands. My son, give me thy
heart.

It is likewise unlawful in the End; because going to the earthly Jerusalem, or
Rome, or other places ordained for the like Superstition by Antichrist, they
think to merit the Heavenly Jerusalem. But I am assured they are never the
nearer it, by going thither, or any other the like place. These Vagabonds (for
so I may term them that run from place to place in that manner) steal from
Christ, to add to Superstition. Life eternal is in the hands of Christ, and
therefore his gift: And they going another way to foot out their salvation,
foot it the wrong way; for Christ is the only way; Joh. 14.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life.

Furthermore, It is unlawful, because it is done to the Relics and Images of
dead men. They think to live by the dead; they shall have but a dead life on it.
Thus while they go to do homage unto the dead, they rob the living God of his
honor by the way; For they expect a remission of their sins, by the
intercession and merits of those dead, whose Relics or Images they trudge so
to adore. And whereas they run to the custom of the Church, it is very false;
the true Church of God never used it: For, Pilgrimage undertaken to the
Relics of the Dead, was not used in the Primitive Church, until three hundred
years after Christ; and that unto Images, six hundred years, only by some; but
both condemned for dead services.

Lastly, It is unlawful, because it is profitable neither to body or soul;
neither of them that wander thus with aching heels, nor others; it tends no way
to Christian edification, there is no goodness in it: Therefore such fruitless
trees are to be rooted out of Gods growing Temple. And thus much for the false
doctrine of Papists grounded on these words, (but falsely, but idly,) I went up
to Jerusalem.

Their other doctrine is, That Peter had the Supremacy of Paul; because the
Text says, he went to see Peter. Here we may observe the absurd dealing of the
Adversary; who to patch up their ragged coat of Popery, do fain quidlibet ex
quolibet; as if to be visited, does argue a Primacie. And here the Rhemists (as
one calls them) [Gagling Geese] make a distinction of Visitation: He went not
up, say they, to see him in a vulgar manner; but for respect and honor of his
person, and of duty; and (as Chrysostom notes the Greek word (...) to import)
to behold him as men behold a thing or person of name, excellency or majesty.
Chrysostom.
These are their very words. Indeed, that he came of honor and reverence to
him, may be easily granted; but every reverence argues not a superiority; for,
reverence (saving their reverences) may be done to equals.

They say again, he did it as his duty; but there is no such matter: This can
be as soon denied, as affirmed. He came about his office and authority in
preaching: For he was equal in honor unto him, says a Father; and again says
the same, Chrysostom.
That blessed man went not to learn any thing of him, nor to receive any
correction; but only to see him, and honor him with his presence. Ambrose
tells us, Ambros.
he went to see Peter, for affection of Apostleship; that Peter might know that
the same license was given unto him, that he himself had received; and hence he
is called his Fellow-Apostle, and had a Fellowship in the College of the
Apostles, as well as Peter.

As for that place so often quoted by them, Mat. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock, etc. It proves not a superiority in another above the rest of the
Apostles: For, as one says of that place; All the Logicians in the world
cannot conclude in lawful Syllogism out of the words of that Chapter, That any
greater authority was granted to Peter, than to every one of the Apostles. A
primacie of order and promptness of faith cannot be denied him: but none of
dignity. And here the Rhemists again play upon the name Peter, signifying a
Rock; a Stone; hence they make him to be the Foundation of the Church, and
therefore the Principal Apostle. If they mean his Person, they are far
deceived: If his Confession, (Thou art Christ the Son of the everliving God) we
agree. Hence says one on these words, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church; calling a Rock, as I think, (says he) the unmovable
Faith of the Disciple. Again, If they say that he is the whole Foundation; away
with that blasphemy; they take away Christ the only Foundation for
stedfastness; (I say, for stedfastness; for this Foundation, Peter, did shake
fearfully when he denied Christ; and he had been ground to powder, and fifted
as wheat, had not Christ prayed for him:) and make the rest stand for ciphers.

The Apostles are pillars of the Church; and what dignity has one pillar in a
Church more than another? Not only Peter, but James and John were called
pillars of the Church; Gal. 2.9. And when James, Cephas (that is Peter) and
John, who seemed to be pillars. Again, the twelve are called twelve
foundations. Rev. 21.14.
Speaking of the new Jerusalem, the wall of the City had twelve foundations,
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Hence says
Tertullian, Tertul.
all the Apostles were stones: So might Papists say, were they not stones? Thus
we see that Peter had not a Monarchical pre-eminence of honor above the
Apostles. Therefore not above Paul; albeit he was his senior Apostle: Both of
them are called Eodem titulo, fundatores Christiani nominis, founders of the
Christian name; Peter among the Jews, Paul among the Gentiles. And one presumes
to call Paul maximum or summum Apostolum, the greatest or highest Apostle. The
reason may be this, because he had more revelations than all of them. And here
the Rhemists because they would not have their foundation pulled down upon such
terms, grow to that malapertness, that they affirm; that the greatest
sovereignty in Gods Church, Revel. 3.7.
attributed unto Christ, is given to Peter, in these words, I have the key of
David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens:
Whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose
in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. It in truth, is such blasphemy (as a godly
man of our Church says) as Peter would have rent his clothes, if he had heard
any man attribute so much unto him. For Christ has the key of David, as the
only true Messiah, which opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens. This Key can no man have, except he were a Messiah. Besides, the words
are in the Plural number, whatsoever ye bind, whatsoever ye loose.

And thus you have the true doctrine concerning these two false doctrines to my
poor ability; wherein you see not only the absurdity of the doctrines, but
also the absurd grounding of them on these words; I went up to Jerusalem to see
Peter. I would not be curious, because says the Philosopher, Accurate
refellere stultas sententias, stultum est.

It serves first to teach us not to build our faith on a staggering foundation,
such as man is; Christ was feign to pray to God that Peter's faith fail him not.
Other foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. To it let us cleave, and not
cleave it.

And secondly, whereas Peter is called a rock, and the Apostles rocks, as they
have the true rock in them, Christ Jesus; It teaches us to put no difference
in respect of authority between them, but to give equal respect unto all of
them.

Thirdly, all of us are rocks as long as we make this confession; Thou art the
Son of the ever living God. Aug.
Sweet was St. Austins Application upon Peter's confession, which I apply unto
every one; Endeavor that thou may be a rock, therefore seek the rock; not
without thee, but within thee: thy act is thy rock, thy mind is thy rock; Let
thy house be builded upon this rock, that it may not be beaten with any storms
of spiritual wickedness. Faith is this rock, faith is the foundation of the
Church; if thou be a rock, thou shall be in the Church, because the Church is
upon a rock. All Apostolic and Christian men are rocks, says another. This
Papists might see (were they not rockt asleep on Peter, and had not dreamed as
a Pope had, aut Caesar aut nihil) for these words, I went up to Jerusalem to
see Peter. To see him as a friend, as a companion; not as his Master, not as
King of the Apostles, as Papists would have it, but not as God would have it.

The last part and point here, is the time o^ Paul's residence with Peter, he
adode with him fifteen days.

Fifteen days to be better acquainted with him. Ipse aspectus boni viri
delectat. Senec. Hierom.
Gods children the children of light, should delight in the company of one
another. Cursed is their company, that takes pleasure only in the company of
the cursed. But godly is their company, that loves the company of the godly.

Fifteen days? to confer with him; he had no need of great instruction, and
therefore tarried but a short time with him, fifteen days. Hence we learn,
that the most learned may not despise to confer with any of his rank, albeit he
should excel him in gifts. This is a fault, and must be mended.

This conference argues also a mutual consent. That both of them were of the
same mind and agreement. This teaches the Ministers of Gods Word, to be always
at an agreement in their opinion, and albeit there may arise some difference in
matters indifferent; yet cleave to the foundation, be sure that be not shaken,
or called into question; for the foundation of God is sure. How should their
people ever be at quiet, when their shepherds are at variance and ods? No
strife, no wrangling must take place in Christian hearts; lest their hearts be
consumed in strife and wrangling. Ministers, as they are messengers of peace,
so Ministers of peace; and therefore never to fall out. Pulchrum est concordia
cordis and oris.

Moreover, he sets down how long he stayed, fifteen days; to show the
absurdity of those false Apostles, that thus vexed his soul. For how was it
possible that he could learn the Gospel of them, in so short a space. Where we
may observe, That it is no easy matter to be a Minister of the Gospel. This
learning is not so easily attained unto. Therefore it is a gross error of
some, that no sooner put off the name of Sophister, but puts on the name of
Minister. If they can reckon up Aristotle's five Predicables on their fingers
ends, presently they fall to predication or preaching. It were better wait a
while; have makes wast, says the Proverb (...) longer, and fare better. Rome
was not built in a day, no more can it be (...) down in a day. Thou may
thunder against it e Rostris, but it is not so soon wasted, except thou come
well provided. Thy fourteen years, and thy seven years, is time too little to
furnish thee: be not therefore high-minded, but fear; but labor, but wait a
while.

Fifteen days? Hierome observes a mystery in the fifteen days: and if it can
be found out in fifteen days, or in fifteen years, it is a mystery. These are
his words; Hoc mysterio hebdomadis, and ogdoadis, futurus Gentium Praedicator,
instruendus erat; This mystery is comprehended under the number of seven and
eight; Seven indeed is called numerus sacer, quietarius; sacer, because it
consists of three, which is numerus Dei, and four, which is numerus mundi, and
numerus virtutum cardinalium: quietarius, because the seventh day is the
Sabbath day, the day of rest; the seventh year, the year of rest; so in the
seventh month the trumpet was to sound to the Jubilee, after so many Sabbaths
as make up seven times seven years, Levit. 25.
which makes forty nine years.

So eight is called primus numerus, and summus in harmonia. Thus I have
spelled, put together who can; I cannot. And therefore rather than I will be
vainly curious in seeking out a mystery, where (under correction) I think there
is none; I leave this seven and eight at six and seven; For all mysteries are
wrought by Gods extraordinary and special providence. But Paul's abiding here
with Peter fifteen days, was only guided by an ordinary providence; as men now
a days undertaking journeys stay with their friends at their pleasure, guided
ordinarily by Gods hand.

Holy Fear, THE FENCE OF THE SOUL.
GENESIS 28.17. And Jacob was afraid.
AS Esau was coming into the world, Jacob had him fast by the heel: Rebecca
received blows within her by their struglings; which, that acted, ended. But
here ended not their strife; that presaged, as a future supplanting, so a more
inveterate quarrel. Esau was first born, so he obtained the birthright of
nature; Jacob came after, yet got the birthright of grace. The mother was glad
to be well rid of both: she was much joyed to see them set at liberty, who
enclosed in the prison of her bowels pained her. As these agreed not in the
womb, so not in the world: There the division began, when together in
restraint; here it continued, and by their enlargement was enlarged. The divine
Oracle told Rebecca, that the elder should serve the younger: 'twas his love to
the one, his hate to the other, both free. This prediction must have been
accomplished, but not without some difficulty. First, Jacob upon an advantage
buys the Birthright, which Esau in a necessity scornfully deemed unprofitable.
Grace made Jacob lay about to purchase, what Nature denied him: It was
inevitable; the God of Nature determined it that way, not the other. Thus
Jacob, though a plain man, got the start of Esau, though a cunning hunter. A
gracious simplicity ever outstrips worldly craft in the affairs of piety. Now
having got thus far, there wanted nothing to make good his bargain, to confirm
his interest, but his Fathers blessing; which he by his Mothers direction
hunting after, obtained by subtilty; whilst Esau hunting after venison, came
short of through his pleasure. The Mother (says Reverend Hall) shall rather
defeat the Son, and beguile the Father, than the Father shall beguile the
chosen Son of his blessing. Jacob must have been blessed; God decreed it, and
was. Who no sooner went away full of the joy of his new blessing, but in comes
Esau, who sweating for his reward, finds nothing but an unexpected repulse.
Hereat Esau's blood is up, and storms; he hates Jacob in his heart, as Cain did
Abel; in his hate vows his death, nothing hinders it but lack of opportunity.
Yet Jacob needed not to fear the wrath of an earthly brother, whilst sure of
the love of his Heavenly Father. None needs to be terrified by Man, that is in
league with God. However it behoved the Mother to be as sollicitous in
preventing mischief from falling on her beloved Darling, as in surreptitiously
procuring him a blessing. Had he miscarried, all her hopes had perished. Jacob
therefore must go one way or other; if he stay till his Father die, he must die
with him, and go the way of all flesh: 'twas Esau's resolution. If he go
whither his Parents would, he is secure; this way (as well it might) is
preferred. To this purpose a new project is set on foot; Jacob must have a
wife, not of the daughters of Heth, as Esau; these made Rebecca weary of her
life; but of his own kindred. Isaac forthwith calls Jacob to him, blesses him,
gives him a charge, and commands him away to Laban his mothers brother, where
the Lord did destine him a mate meet for him. Away he hyes, doubtful and
comfortless; in the way the earth he made his bed, the stone his pillow; after
this fort he rested his wearied limbs: The sun was set, his eyes were bound up
in the chains of sleep; yet there a Vision of Angels is presented to him,
through the glass of his imagination, and Gods promise renewed in a true dream.
Never was Jacob's heart so light with joy, as when his head was heaviest with
sleep. At length he awakes, his thoughts are summoned up together, fear creeps
apace on him; the place seems dreadful; the presence of Divine Majesty, whereof
he was sensible, adds luster to the place, which adds affrightment to his
heart. The premises considered, his conclusion of the Place is this; This is
none other but the house of God; and this is the gate of heaven. Hitherto have
I followed Jacob in his way; and with him here will I rest a while.

This holy Patriarch, upon mature deliberation, could not but conceive himself
happy, that he happened on this holy place. Here the demonstration of Gods joyful
presence with him, and gracious providence over him, together with the free
promise of safe conduct to him, abated the swollen discontents of his suspicious
thoughts; it never came into his head he should have here that familiar
manifestation of the God of Isaac, as was vouchsafed him. But Gods goodness
ever was, ever is beyond man's expectation. How easy were it for Jacob to
miscarry in his way, did not the Supreme Power protect him? how open did he lie
to infinite dangers, lying in the open field, did not the Lord secure him?
'Twas the work of that same Mercy that guided him to that place, to preserve
him safe there: where although he was afraid at the first sight, after his
sleep was over; Musculus, Buxtorf. Heb. Radix.
yet was his fear without distraction The clearness of his judgment discerning
Gods intention in that mystical vision, sentenceth the place venerable. So
Musculus renders the Hebrew text, Quam venerandus est iste locus! and Buxtorf,
How reverend is this place!

Here I might treat, 1. Of Jacob's Fear. 2. Of the Dreadfulness or reverence of
the place, where he was partaker of the Heavenly vision. 3. Of the Titles Jacob
assigned the place. All meriting points; but the first is only intended.

The Soul which by nature is disfurnished of grace, is exposed to dangers, as
disposed to evil; by reason whereof it is subject to fears within, to fears
without. Perils like a circle compass us about; we stand tanquam in centro, as
in the center of this world; every line drawn from the circumference, strikes
us to the heart, and so affrights us. Turn which way we will, terror meets us,
fears encounter us. Hereat the naked soul appal'd, yields; unless informed of a
better friend than our own wits, which always are not about us. But Gods
gracious presence apprehended in our deepest agonies of fear, brings us off
undaunted; by the light of whose grace we discover things in their native
colors, which whilst unknown, amaze us, disturb us. Some things trouble us
more than they ought to do, some which not at all; for the anticipating or
avoiding whereof, that rule holds infallibly true, Rebus est demenda persona,
pull off the masque of things, then we shall not so fear them. To be quite rid
of this passion while we live, is impossible: Christianity or regeneration
qualifieth its force, takes it not away; Some impression will be left in the
mind, yet not so deep as will make us despair of succor. For all the variety
of Creatures, Casualties, Changes that appear dreadful, there is variety of
Aid, flowing from One unchangeable God; on whom if we rest contented, not
overruled with prejudicate opinions, never shall fear distract us. Plura sunt
quae nos terrent, Senec. ep. 13.
and saepius opinione laboramus, quam re: I borrow this from Seneca; Many
things terrify us, and we are oftener vexed and pained in opinion by furmises,
than in very deed by truth. But it is otherwise with the well-inform'd
Christian, who ponders all events and examineth the causes; the defect whereof
sets some at their wits end. It Is ignorance and rashness that makes way for
misprision, and misprision for fear. The best things sometimes scare us: Gods
merciful goodness, not understood, puts us to a stand; his very favorable
presence, which should move joy, did and shall move fear in some. I do not
think there lives that man this day on earth so resolute; did God appear, not
in flaming fire, in thundering and lightening to render vengeance; but in a
soft wind as to Elijah, or as here another way to Jacob, in every respect full
of respect, but would be sore afraid. Devout Jacob, whose dream portended
nothing but happiness, at the end of his Divine rapture was afraid. What he saw
and feared, was no other but a welcome prediction of his future glory and
perpetual safety; and yet was afraid. That magnificent greatness and blessed
eminency, to which the Lord promised to advance him, left him not undaunted.
Yet this must I needs say, he was more afraid than hurt. It Is a certain truth,
though God terrify his children, yet he harms them not: No disadvantage is
taken to undo them by it, but to raise their spiritual fortunes. After the fall
of their courage one way, at the brightness of his Majesty; he puts spirit into
them another way, to further their exaltation, thorugh a sense of his mercy.
Thus he does with this religious man, whose fear gave the occasion of my
writing.

Here men may admire, so good a man would be taken napping, and then fear, when
he had most reason to rejoice. The Father of Heaven did from Heaven look upon
him with a benign aspect, yet he trembles. Observe what ensues, and cease to
wonder.

Religious hearts are in a continual awe of God, yet not bereft of comfort.
It Is their blessedness, Pro. 28.14.
that they always fear; Happy is the man that fears always: So it is to be
referred, the well ordering of our conversation aright. Piety puts all things
straight in us, that rectifies all the passions of the soul, directs our
hearts to the fear of the Lord, which brings in time a crown of rejoicing.
Hence he requires it of us upon our Allegiance to his Supremacy Royal, which
should we deny, (...), timor.
were no less than Rebellion, than Atheism. The Greeks therefore derive the
Name of God, from a word that signifies fear; intimating that God above all
must be feared of all, as well as acknowledged. Hereupon the Heathen Latin
Poet grounded his invention, Primus in orb Deos fecit timor; Fear first made
Gods on earth. Divine Truth sometime calls God by the name of Fear: Jacob
swear by the Fear of his father Isaac; Genesis 31.53.
that is, by that God, whom his father Isaac feared.

If any desire to know what kind of fear this of Jacob's was: I dare not
entangle better thoughts, in the perplexing briars of School-niceties, sprung
out of the rank grounds of acute Philosophers; but will use my endeavors to
satisfy expectation, by painting out a smoother way, of far less danger, and
of more profit.

This holy Pilgrim, as he was decked with the ornaments of Grace, so was he
clogged with the infirmities of Nature. As he was of a good heart, so withal
(without disgrace) of a timorous disposition. His fear might well consist with
his goodness: It was not carnal or worldly, arising out of an afflicting
distrust of Gods providence; Nor yet humane, begotten by an excessive desire to
this fugitive life; Nor servile, as proceeding from self-love, so from the
threatened judgments of an angry God, for the violations of his pure sanctions:
This, with the rest, is severed from grace. Gregor. Mag.
Ignorant men's gratiam libertatis, quam ligat servitus timoris, says Gregory in
his Pastorals; The grace of liberty proper to the sons of God, is unknown to
the mind tied to the slavery of a base fear. A Divine calls it Esau's with
which Jacob had no meddling; he bought his brothers birthright, not his vices.
Jacob's fear was natural, initial, filial: Natural, whereby he declined hurtful
objects when presented to him; initial, whereby for the love of God, he
rejected all desire of sinning; filial, whereby his obedience to the Highest
Power was kept sound and entire.

None of the sons of men are exempted from the first, since the first man. The
first man had it not actually in his Integrity, because there was nothing to
hurt him; his Apostacy gave it a being in time. Our blessed Savior the Lord
Jesus had it, but without sin: 'twas long of sinful men, he was so weak, so
infirm: Who foreseeing the bitter Cup he was to drink to the Worlds health,
Aug. Enchir. cap. 24.
his heart drew back, his soul was heavy even unto death. Austin defines it,
Fugitantis animi motum, the motion or passion of a yielding mind, which is no
more separable from us than our nature. This makes good that expression of it
in the Book of Wisdom, A betraying of the succors which Reason offers. Wisd.
17.12.
So powerful is our weakness above the strength of Reason, that the very
suspicion or conceit of approaching evil, puts us often out of heart. Nothing
almost lays open our imperfections to the worlds eye, more than it. Faintness
of heart at the sight of unavoidable mischiefs, seifeth upon our choicest
metall^d men, upon our most heroic spirits. Wherefore Origin upon the Book of
Judges notes it to be. Humanae fragilitatis indioium, Orig. in cap. 7. lib.
Judic. Hom. 9.
a bewraying note of humane insufficiency. Take it in the excess, it unmans a
man, and makes him like a Sword-fish, to which Themistocles compared a Coward,
which has a weapon, but wants a heart. Take it in the mediocrity and just
temper; it subscribes to what Reason dictates, and then does us good. If
Religion moderate it, as it allays the ^orce of its corruption, so it gives it
a purer essence, and brings us off with a greater grace. This I believe in part
was Jacob's case, who frightened with the suddenness of such an unaccustomed
spectacle as was presented to his view, gave place to fear, which be knew not
speedily how to shun.

Yet without doing Jacob wrong, we may not say, this was his only fear: but as
he was by nature thus inclined, so was he by a spiritual emanation of grace
above nature, endued with initial fear. All that are born of God, have by the
transcendent working of his Almighty power, all that is old in them renewed,
and their defects out of the largeness of his bounty copiously supplied with a
proportion of grace. Old things are past, behold all things are become new. 2
Cor. 5.17.
Among which [ All] there is a new Fear, by the secret influence of Mercy at
the conversion of a sinner, diffused into the heart, (that Fear of the Lord,
the beginning of wisdom.) Psalm. 111.10.
By it all our desires are cast into a new mould; so we frame our dispositions
to a cor^e^ spondency to the rule of justice, Gods will: whereof, as there is
some part reserved in his own bosom from the knowledge of man, not to be prayed
into; so there is a^ much as concerns us both for faith and fact, in acquiring
a future everlasting blessed state, Divino afflatu, by Divine inspiration
revealed, lest to us in writing. To this an hearty obedience is expected at our
hands, which is effected in us, by us; not by the strength of Nature, that is
corrupted; but by the power of the Holy Ghost, that is purely vigorous. When we
are thus wrought upon, we become so f^ in good, that worldly pers^sions, be
they never so plausible, cannot without much reluctation work us to evil. Gods
elect, when called, are so altered, by spiritual irradiations in their
intellectual part, by unresistible motions in their concupiscible) that the
whole bent of their desires, of their thoughts, through begun fear, looks
directly at the glory of their Maker. Heavenly considerations do so affect them
and an actual sense of Gods goodness does so transport them; that the Serpent
like insinuation of the World, the Flesh, the Devil, fastens not on them,
without oppugning what disple seth God. Sin is loathsome, as making them
abominable to him; Piety delectable, as procuring favor from him: His love
rightly conceived of them, and their expectation of highest preferment in the
Heaven of heavens, makes them fear (lest they should lose both) to offend him
that dwells there. So zealous is their care, through a sense of misery; so
affectionate their fear, through a sense partly of mercy, and of justice
partly; that they become Argot eyed to look about, lest they be foully
overtaken with the pollution of sins running source, What through infirmities,
which make them incapable of perfection in this life they cannot accomplish,
they through this holy fear compass in desire; which of God is graciously
accepted, accepting the good will for the good deed. After this manner was
Jacobs mind first moved with a multitude of ambiguous thoughts, surprised,
fearing he had offended through an unreverend incivility. His rushing into that
place without requisite preparation, where he received an heavenly Oracle, and
of which he held a reverend opinion, as being the House of God, begat in him
such a strong suspicion of respassing, that he was afraid. Yet not so, as to
have been diffident of Gods mercy, or in an academical suspense of his favor,
to have grown desperate; but his fear was prudently tempered with three pure
Ingredients, growing in the Paradise of God; Faith Hope, and Love. That fear
therefore which was in him at first imperfect and initial, by the mixture of
these graces with it, acquired perfection in him and became filial.

Comparatively alone are things on Earth perfect; Absolute perfection is not
here (no not in cases spiritual) to be aspired unto; that is for Heaven. What
the Apostle writ to the Corinthians, comes to pass as well here below, as
there above; When that that is perfect is come, 1 Cor 13.10.
then that which is imperfect shall be done away. So initial fear, which by
multiplicity of acts proves in time habitual, comes to that height of
excellency, that it is made filial; which also ushered in by servile and
initial causes them to cease, and does all it self: Not unlike the Dictator in
Rome, who ruling, 1 John 4.18. Timorem scilice^ servitem illum, non amicalem.
other Officers did nothing. Divine John seeing the Saints love to be full of
confidence, concludes it perfect, and that perfection to exclude fear; Perfect
love casts out fear. This perfect love is coincident with filial fear, which
is of the children of the Freewoman: The fear that it expels, is servile
proper unto vassals, and is but of Hagars brats. Romans 8.
We have not received (says the Doctor of the Gentiles) the spirit of fear to
bondage, but of freedom. They that are the freeborn of Heaven, Denizens of the
New Jerusalem, are free from pannick terrors; whereunto, through the thundering
threats of the Law, slaves alone are subject, and for which Devils tremble.
That ignoble brood of the Bondwoman, who have no heart to serve God, have no
heart to come boldly to him; base spiteful fear captivating their senses, makes
them flinch and decline his presence, who allotteth to the slavishly fearful,
Rev. 21.8.
(...), their part as the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death. But whose hearts are planted in a noble height, being
descended from the most High, ravished with a loving fear of Divine Majesty,
scorn baseness, and through fire and water, neglecting themselves, run to do
him service.

Glorious are those attributes, where with this above all other Fear is
honored. It is said to be filial, where of Bernard gives the reason, Quia non
timet Deum, quasi servus crud^lem dominum, Rern^ de timore Dei.
sed quasi filius dulcissimum patrem; Because who has it, fears not God as an
offending servant a severe master, but as a gracious son a most indulgent
father. Not without Apostolical authority is it reputed Evangelical; because
wrought by the Gospel the law of liberty, and subject to the Spirit of freedom.
For good cause it is reported chaste, as is observed by learned Zunchy, Zanch.
lib. 1. de Relig.
Quia, qui sic timent, castum habent cor; For who are so given, have a chaste
heart toward God, they fear him as a good wise her loving husband, only out of
love, faith one. Weemse. In Psalm. 18.
Hierom graceth it with the title of holy, for that it is a sacred quality
peculiar unto Saints, through the propitious infusion of the Most Holy One of
Israel. Spiritual vigilancie over all our ways in our Christian deportment
toward God and toward man, springing from it; moved a conceited Friar to call
it, Ostiarium anima, the soul's Doorkeeper. As it admits not the Malignant
spirit to break into the soul, as it expels all unruly motions and
unmannerly behaviors, in the sight of God; as it beats back and shuts the
doors against all importunate suggestions of the black Prince of darkness, and
impious practices of malecontented sinners: so it opens the everlasting gates
of the immortal soul, for the King of Glory to come in to take possession.
'Twas truly spoke of Siracides; They that fear the Lord, will keep their
hearts, to wit, to receive him. To express what happy security we enjoy by it
in the state of Christianity; it is compared to things made for strength and
defense: Timor nihil aliud est qu^m murus, and munimentum, and turris
inexpugnabilis^ Chrysest. Cypr.
It is only a wall, a bulwark, an invincible tower. To descend lower; Cyprian
makes it fundamentum and firmamentum spei and fidel, the basis, the stability
of hope, of faith, There is good ground for this assertion; Take but it away,
faith and hope fall. I appeal to Bernard; Omne virtutum aedificium, etc. Let
the building that consists of all Virtues, want it, and ere long 'twill shatter
into pieces. Airship without an anchor on the Ocean, Bern.
is in danger of being overwhelmed with the proud waves; so the soul without
this fear. If a Pope's word be of any value, a^i^ is when he tells truth,
Gregor. 22.
then shall that of Gregory pass, An^hora mentis est pendus timoris, The souls
anchor is the weight of fear. Wherefore Sirach's son did not amiss, in
allotting the highest place to them that fear God: Oh how great is he that
finds wisdom! yet there is none above him that fears the Lord.

I know not how true it is, that fearful-natur'd men are the most witty; But I
am sure, the filially-fearful are the best religiously affected, the most wise;
for they walk surely to the height of Heaven, where they are crowned Kings
without end. Here Jacob is to be found to his immortal praise; who while he
lived, lived in awe of God like a son; now being dead, has a sons portion in a
better country. And thus Jacob was afraid.

Aquinas, Rome's Angelical Doctor, gathers out of Philosophical traditions,
Aquin.
two causes of fear, Amorem and Defectum, love and weakness. Love in it self is
strong where true, but withal fearful; if fixed upon an object not yet
obtained, but hoped for, though upon good presumptions, it is in fear of being
croft; If fully possessed of what it did greatly desire, it is in fear of losing
it. The more violent this affection is, upon the least appearance of a
succeeding cross, the more perplexities it raises, and works the soul into
many rending and jealous cogitations. Infomuch that good men, because somewhat
inclined to evil, are afraid of missing their he avenly purposes wherewith they
are deeply enamored; and when they have found God here beneath, whom above all
they love, yet because they are not free from provocations, they fear to be
deprived of him. Never did Heathen Poet sing any thing more truly, than did he
that left this behind him in this, Ovid.
Res est solliciti plena timoris amor, Love is a thing full of vexatious fear.
Hence issue those careful thoughts wherewith the heart is cumbred, in plotting
a perpetuity of that union love has wrought.

Weakness again, and inability to resist and overcome what may hurt us, lays us
open under sundry fears. Infinite are the events, which because not usual,
prove inductions unto error. And such is the impotency of frail man, that
through the consciousness of his natural defects, he is soon dejected. Let him
have what his heart can wish on earth, yet is he heartily afraid he shall not
keep it long. The thought of a greater Power than is in him, raises such a
dusky cloud of doubts, that he is not so well pleased with the sight of his
present happiness, as troubled with the expectation of a dismal change. So
variable are our earthly courses, that as they afford us no sure footing, so
neither can they establish unto us any permanent content. 'Twas the royal word
of a wise King inspired of God; Eccles.
All is but vanity and vexation of spirit. And the King his father delivers it
as the property of the wicked, to fear where no fear is. Psalm. 53.
When the understanding is infatuated with carnal delights, when the judgment
fascinated with sinful pleasure; what marvel though man become pusillanimous?
This is the condition of transgressors; A glimpse of danger is able to make
them stagger like a drunken man; or like a Prodigy, put them to an amazed
stand, with a Ne plus ultra. The regenerate themselves are subject to the same
passion, though not in the like measure, nor the like manner: They commonly
stand upon their keeping; into whose hearts fear enters not so suddenly; yet
enters, but daunteth not, deads not; clear Reason and sure Religion preserve
them from astonishment. Let Satan's fiery darts of temptations fly in their
face, they fear, but little, (flesh and blood will a little tremble) but their
hearts are not wounded. Hence therefore are they so ready to encounter them,
Zanch.
because confident of a glorious issue. Let the Chiefest good, God, appear to
them in unaccustomed forms, and manifest his propitious presence in an unwonted
manner, they cannot but fear; so awful is his Majesty, so weak their nature:
But when once well acquainted with the ways and courses of the most High, grace
fortifieth their hearts, and makes passages extraordinary proceeding from him,
seem familiar, at least to them not so full of dread as to others.

Briefly, to be more distinct, Love and weakness beget fear: The love of God,
sear initial, filial; the love of our selves, and weakness, fear natural;
weakness and love of the world, fear carnal, humane, servile. So then, Jacob
being strong in love with God, which was the act of grace; weak in himself,
which was the propriety of his nature; was naturally initially, filially afraid.

Tender is the disposition of men sanctified; their affections, thoughts,
actions, are for the most part carried in a constant motion, within the verge
of a religious Providence. If peradventure things, though good, happen out of
course beyond expectation, they suspect their own indignity in a fear of
offending. The issue at first sight they see not, yet hope the best, and in
that ^ope are afraid. Just Jacobs case.

He was afraid, Musculus.
faith Musculus, because he lodged there that night without a religious regard;
He dreamed not of the sanctity of the place, before he was in it. Little did he
think that God was there, as he was; but as he was there, Jacob knew that
honor was due to him, which was not vouchsafed him, whence proceeded his fear.
Which may warn us, that wheresoever we are, we be religiously behaved, as in
Gods eye; more especially where in token of his love, he favorably shows
himself. Calv. in loc.
This demeanor of this holy Father (as one says) condemns him of rashness;
(if not, why should he fear?) but extolleth the goodness of his gracious God,
who was found of him, where he sought him not. One renowned for learning,
judged that Jacob hereby modestly intimates, more was got than in modesty his
hope durst to aspire to; which as I take it, was the judgment of ingenious
Bernard: Bern. in dedic. Eccles.
Miratur Jacob, and dignationis magnitudinem expavescit; Jacob admires, in his
admiration is abasht at the greatness of Gods loving kindness. 'Twas strange to
him, that the Supreme Majesty would hold him in such reputation, as so friendly
to reveal himself to him, or to make such large promises of grace, as he did;
which his best endeavors could never compass to merit. I think, Jacob thought
not the news to be too good to be true, God told him; but too great for a
sinful creature to receive from a spotless Creator. However, beside the glory
and largeness of the Promise, the rarity of the Apparition did put him into a
religious ecstasy, being unacquainted with the Lords designs, or with his
manner of working.

But soft a while; Should not Jacob, (the Almighty thus freely opening his
heart unto him) rather rejoice, than be afraid? Is it fit he should be muffled
up in a pitchy cloud of dejecting fear, who ought to be clothed with the bright
garment of refreshing joy?

Surely, did the dead ashes of this grave Father revive, his reply (I believe)
would be to no other purpose, Paraeus in lot.
than that of that famous German Divine, whom the best learned honor in the
dust: Sancti quidem laetantur patefactionibus Dei, sed cum timore and tremore;
The Saints indeed rejoice at the gracious presence of the Lord of glory, but
it is with fear, with trembling. When the Majesty of God, who is a consuming
fire, approaches near; although his mercy raise up their spirits to an height
of joy; yet the experience of their unworthiness, and the exquisite sense of
their manifold infirmities, beget in them a shivering fear, and that fear
humility. Cicero.
Cicero, Pagan Rome's chiefest Orator, averred as much of that fear Nature did
possess him of. And by the best Divine France ever bred, the fear bred by
Religion, Calv. in loc.
is entitled, Piae submissionis magister, the master of a pious lowliness.
Neither is it without reason, God makes his servants to rejoice (as the Prophet
speaks) with trembling; but that in an obedient subjection and denial of
themselves, Psalm. 63.3.
they might embrace and depend upon his favor, better (as King David says)
than life it self.

Thus having vindicated good Jacobs credit, from the unjust tax or hard
censure of the severest Critics; I may make this Application, To the Perverse
Malefactor. Penitent Delinquent. Settled Christian.


children of disobedience, because of their obstinate rebellion; so, because
thereby they make themselves liable to his eternal indignation, Ephesians. 2.3.
are they called by the same Spirit, (...), children of wrath; whereupon the
Lord challenges vengeance unto himself, Nemo crimen gerit in pectore, qui non
idem Nemesin in tergo. Nemesis dicitur, (...), quod (...).
Vengeance ^elongeth unto me, and I will recompense. As sure as he is in
heaven, if sinners will not filially fear him for his mercies, he will for his
justice make them slavishly fear him with a vengeance. Look then to your
tacklings, ye that without fear or wit hurry into manifold impieties: Ye heap
up wrath against the day of wrath, when not a glimpse of comfort shall be
vouchsafed you. Let the loose Epicure glory in his joyous voluptuousness; let
the licentious Libertine exult in his ungodly courses; let the miserable
Wordling rejoice in his Idol-god of Gold; let the luxurious Adulterer whose
wandering eye sparkles at the sight of a fond Beauty, prostrate himself at the
shrine of his bewitching goddess; let the revelling Drunkard beset his soul
with continual exhausting of intemperate Cups, let the light-finger'd Pilferer
and deceitful Tradesman, with sleight of hand in false weights of measures,
enrich himself, to the impoverishing of others, let the debaucht Blasphemer,
who with execrable oaths tears God and the Son of God in a thousand pieces,
triumph in his unrighteous dealing; let the sacrilegious Sabbath-breaker, who
makes that day the only day of his repast and unlawful dalliances, cheer up
his heart the best he may; let the irreligious Prophaner of the sacred Temple
of the Lord, who buys and fells within the holy limits, cheer up himself with
his ungodly gain; let the griping Officers, whose unjust exactions had wont to
creep in under the modest cloak of voluntary courtesy or fair consideration of
a befriended expedition, now come like Eli's sons, Nay, but thou shall give it
me now, and if not, I will take it by force, Hall, in conscion. in Act. 2.37.
--
1 Samuel 2.16. In a word, I should be infinite, should I insist upon
particulars; Let the legal Thefts of professed Usurers, the crafty Compacts of
sly Oppressors, the connived at Idolatry of superstitious Papists, dare throw
down the gantlet to Justice, and insolent disobediences do so to Authority,
without the fear of God: yet for all this shall these come to judgment, when
base fear shall so seize upon their confounded souls, that they shall in vain
cry to the hills to hide them, to the mountains to cover them, from the
presence of the Lord. Jeer not at this, ye obdurate sinners; Ask not in
derision the Disciples question, in a worse sense, Domine, quando fient haec?
Master, when shall these things be? Believe (Christians) the time's at hand,
when all impenitent offenders, and fly fellows, void of Jacob's fear, shall
receive their doom, to be sent as into utter darkness, so into unquenchable
fire.

Next, Penitent sinners must fear the Almighty, (hence a token of their
conversion;) Chrysoft.
to the fear of Sons. Hence faith Chrysostom, (doubtless upon this gradation)
Geheunae timor Regni nobis adfert coronam; The fear of Hell, which is servile,
brings us at length a Diadem of glory. Be not ye therefore in a melancholy mood
dismayed, ye afflicted souls, humbled in the sight of God for sin; The true fear
of God, it advances you to perfection. Doubt not to be encountered by a strong
opposition; yet fear none but that God, that can cast both soul and body into
hell. A truly Noble spirit reported, That who fears the most High, fears
neither flesh nor blood, principalities nor powers, the rulers of the darkness
of this world, nor spiritual wickedness in high places. Origin gives the
reason; Origin.
Non corporis robore, sed fidei virtute pugnatur; non jaculis ferreis, sed
orationum telis victoria quaeritur: We fight not by the strength of body, but
of faith; we conquer not with darts of steel, but of prayer. Let not your heart
be troubled, neither let is be afraid, said Christ to his Disciples, say I to
you. The worldlings fear disturbeth the souls quiet, and puts the conscience
in a manner out of frame: But Jacobs fear, which is the fear of God, is that,
to which with David we must be ever devoted, Psalm. 119.38. For take it upon the
word of a King, Holy and reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111.9.

Adam, he must not fly and quiver. It Is for a godless heathen Emperor, through
the horror of a guilty conscience; to run under a bed at the noise of thunder,
Gods voice: It Is for a proud Felix to tremble, when the last Judgment is urged:
It Is for a Simon Magus his heart to quake, when rebuked for the desire of a
Simoniacal purchase: It did well enough become desperate Judas in an humor to
hang himself out of the way, for his treachery to his innocent Master; fear and
despair did drive him to his wits end. But he that is confirmed in
Christianity, is of a far better resolution, and more gracious temper. If he
offend (as who does not?) he is not, as are some ungodly, high-minded, but has
learned of the Apostle, rather like a good child to fear; Nor as others
hopeless, but is both an importunate suitor unto Heaven for mercy, and withal
zealously addicted to Paul's exercise, Act. 24.16.
which is, to have a good conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men.

In one word, From Jacob's fear in coming unprovided into that place, which he
imagined to be the house of God; Learn we when we come into the house of God,
Eccl. 5.1.
as the Preacher warns us, to keep our feet from rushing unadvisedly into it,
our ears from listening to what does not become it, our tongues from uttering
any thing rashly in it, our heart from hastily conceiting either
superstitiously or profanely of it, the whole man from unreverently abusing
it; it is the gate of Heaven.

And here I make a stand. God in mercy grant us his Peace to settle our unquiet
minds, his Spirit to rule our untamed hearts, his Joy to solace our afflicted
souls, his Grace to rectify our disordered passions, his Fear to restrain our
unruly wills; That by his Peace we may rest in quiet, to his Spirit we may
yield obedience, with his Joy we may be ever cheered, in his Fear we may live,
and die to live with him for ever. To whom, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all honor and glory, by Angels, by men, in heaven, in earth, world
without end^ Amen.

ORDINE QVISQVE SVO; OR, THE Excellent Order.
1 COR. 11.3. But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ;
and the head of the woman is the man, and the bead of Christ is God.
GOD is the God of order, and he will have not only some things, but all things
done in order; he commands order, commends order, delights in order, and will
have order both in Substantials and Circumstantials, in Reals and in Rituals.
It Is the Devil who is the Author of disorder and confusion; he knows if order
go up, his Kingdom must go down, and therefore he does his utmost to hinder it.
Omne ordinatum pulchrum. Cant. 6.10.
Order is the glory of all Societies: A well-ordered Family, Army, City, are
comely sights. It makes the Church fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and
terrible as an Army with banners, Hence God has set an Order in heaven, an
Order in Hell, an Order amongst Angels, an Order amongst the stars, an Order
amongst Rational creatures, an Order amongst sensitive Creatures, the very Bees
have a King and ruler over them. And as it is the glory; so it is the safety;
Take away this, and we shall be all in confusion; if there were not an Order in
the Sea, it would over flow the land, and drown all. The air would poison us,
the creatures destroy us, and every man would destroy another. Its good then or
every man to be bound, the best are but in part regenerate, and being left to
themselves, may fall into dangerous sins and errors. shall therefore insist
upon that which is here by the blessed Apostle propounded, viz. A pattern of
the most excellent Order.

This Portion of Divine truth is divided into three heads 1. The head of every
man, which is Christ. 2. The head of the woman, which is the man. 3. The head
of Christ, which is God.


For the First. The head of every man, which is Christ; No man is excluded from
subjection unto him, in regard of his universal dominion, and that imperial
power, by which he rules all creatures; after which manner he is the head of
every wicked man also, and of the Devils themselves; which thing they do
believe, and at which they tremble. But yet in a more peculiar manner and
crytical sense, he is the head of every man that is elected to life, in regard
of his special dominion; called Dominium officii, the dominion of his office,
whereby he rules in the Church of God, in which manner he is the head of every
man only, that is a lively and real member of his mystical body, inseperably
united unto him, by the inviolable bond of the spirit of grace, whether he be
Jew or Gentile, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, rich or poor.

Whereupon issues this consequence, that Christ being the head of every true
member of the Church. He is also the head of the whole Church. Concerning
which, these two points are to be handled; 1. According to what nature. 2. In
what respect Christ is the head of the Church.


As for the first point, Christ is the head of the Church according to both
natures, both his divine and humane, both which are two springs, whence do flow
several Observations. In that Christ as God is head, I Observe, 1. The
perpetuity of the Church, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 2.
That with all reverent respect, obedience is to be rendered by us to Christ in
all things. 3. That albeit Christ be ascended to his Father and our Father, to
his God and our God, yet is not the Church left destitute of an head on earth;
for heaven and earth is filled with the glorious Majesty of his Deity, and the
Church with the special presence of his Spirit

In that Christ as man is head of the Church, I Observe, 1. That his affection
to us is intimate, the sense of our miseries in him accute, and he most prompt
and inclind to help us in all extremities. 2. That we may solace our selves,
wipe away all tears from our eyes, and banish all sorrow from our hearts; for
that nothing is left Satan to triumph for over us, being that Christ in our
nature has overcome Satan.

As for the second point, In what respects Christ is the head of the Church; My
meditations are grounded upon the relation which the head has to the members,
and this consists, 1. In a discrepancy and distinction from the members. 2. In
a congruity or agreement with them.


The relation of a natural head to the members, does consist in a discrepancy;
which is fourfold, 1. The natural head differs from the members, in regard of
eminence and dignity; so Christ from the Church and every single member
thereof, for he is God over all blessed for ever. 2. In regard of perfection;
so of Christ's fullness do we all receive. 3. Thirdly, in regard of Government;
so Christ by his Spirit rules in the hearts of the faithful, and they are at
his service. 4. In regard of influence; so there are infused in the souls of
the elect, the divine and heavenly motions of grace from Christ, through whom
they are able to do all things.

It consists likewise in a congruity and agreement; which is threefold, 1.
The head has a natural conformity with the members; so Christ as man with
every one of the Church, we are of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 2.
The head and members do agree in ordination to the same end, conspiring
together for the preservation of the whole entire; So Christ is now in glory,
and the Church presses forward to that eternal blessedness, which in the day
of perfect redemption, they shall with Christ be actual possessours of. 3. The
head and the members do agree in contiguity; so there is a spiritual contiguity
effected by the supernatural operation of Gods Spirit, betwixt Christ and his
mystical body, whereby they are made one; they that are joined unto Christ are
one spirit: 1 Cor. 6.17.
And hence those supernal graces, whose original is God, are with the more
facility more copiously diffused, and the life of grace with heavenly
inspirations, the more amply distributed to each part; the power of which
diffusive distribution, principally resideth in Christ the head, from whom the
prime act of all transcendent information does proceed.

For further illustration of this first; Christ is the head of the Church. 1.
In all places. 2. At all times. 3. In every state and condition considered. 4.
In all Authority.


He is the head of the Church in all places; for he is every where; the Deity
cannot be excluded, neither yet included. All places are full of him, and yet
all places do not comprehend him; he is free from the limits of local
circumscription, and yet every where present. Go from his Spirit we cannot,
Nocte latent mendae, sed non Deum. Dco o scura clarent, muta respondent,
silen^um con^^it^tur. faith an Ancient.
we cannot fly from his all-filling presence: if we ascend into heaven he is
there, if we descend into hell be is there, if we take the wings of the morning
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall his hand lead us,
and his right hand shall hold us; darkness shall not cover us, darkness shall
not hide us, the night shall be light about us; for to him the night shines as
the day, Psalm. 139. An uncontrollable demonstration of this ubiquity and
special presence of Christ in Spirit, is the universality of the Church, which
is not comprehended (as heretofore) within the narrow bounds of Jury; or the
circumference of one Kingdom; but the uttermost parts of the earth are his
possession; his call has been heard in all Lands and all Nations. The sound of
the Apostles Doctrine concerning the Kingdom of Christ, Romans 10.18.
went into all the Kingdoms of the earth, and their words into the ends of the
world. Vitra Garamantas and Indos protulet imperium, all sorts of people are in
subjection to his dominion. This was intimated to Peter in a vision (as is by
some wittily observed) Act. 10. Where he saw heaven opened, and a certain
vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet, knit at the four
corners, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. The vessel knit at the
four corners, did denotate the universality of the Church, the four corners of
the vessel answering the four corners of the world, East, West, North, and
South. The several kind of creatures in it, called by Peter unclean, but by God
cleans'd, signifies the Church of God collected out of all Nations and
conditions of men, purified with the blood of Christ, and sanctified by his
Spirit. Wherefore, pious was that conclusion which Peter hence deducted, that
in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, without respect
of persons, is accepted with him. We read, Mat. 24.31. that at the end of the
world, Christ will send forth his Angels to gather together his Elect from the
four winds, from one end of heaven to the other; which infallibly is a
significant expression of the dispersion of Gods Church through all the
quarters of the world. We may yet ascend higher, Christ is not head on earth
alone, but in heaven also, every sainted and glorified man is a triumphant
member of this body of Christ. Thus Christ is the head of the Church in all
places.

He is also the head of the Church at all times. 1. Before the law; for then
the Patriarchs our forefathers enjoyed the benefit of the same glorious
promises made in Christ Jesus; that we now do; only the circumstance altered,
they believing that Christ should be incarnate, we that he was. 2. Under the
Law; for all the ceremonies, services and sacrifices, at that time, had
reference unto him, without whom they could do nothing. It were through Christ
they were vigorous, and for his sake acceptable to God; and the persons for
whom the sacrifices were offered, were not respected so much for those
sacrifices, as for the Principal intended by them, Christ Jesus. So that his
Spirit was in the faithful then, elevating their souls to more sublime objects,
than there presented to the outward view; and guiding their actions to an
higher end, than there appearing. 3. He is the Churches Head after the Law,
under the Gospel. For by the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation, and by
his holy Spirit leading us into all truth, and filling us with all eminent
graces and Celestial benedictions; he governs the Church Gods flock,
conducting them to that Kingdom, which for them he has purchased with his
precious blood. And having since his manifestation in the flesh, conferred upon
his people a more ample proportion of gifts: the assurance of these days in
Christ, and happy communion with him, is more apparent than ever before. By him
we have access unto the throne of grace; by him we are made partakers of the
divine nature.

In brief, he is the head of the Church, by an unrevokable constitution from
all eternity, and so unto eternity shall last. No Pontifical competitour can
put him by it; no proud Prelate of Rome can partake of this honor proper to
himself, and which he will not give unto another. Thus he is the head of the
Church at all times.

And he is the Churches head in every state and condition; whether we consider
his state, or the state of the Church. 1. If his; he was head in the state of
his humiliation, whilst he was conversant among us here on earth; so is he now
in his state of exaltation unto glory, sitting at the right hand of God the
Father. 2. In the state of the Church, let it be in what state it may be,
Christ is the head thereof, who will be with it even to the end of the world;
in prosperity, in adversity, in plenty, in poverty, in a wastful persecution,
in a flourishing peace Christ rules it, Christ protecteth it. And it being
collected out of diverse nations, sects, vocations and conditions of men, Christ
does respect them all equally, not for any sinister or worldly respect
preferring one before another, but receiving all in the bowels of mercy into
one mystical body. For of a truth, he has no respect of persons; the outward
or contingent conditions are not reflected upon, but into whom the supernatural
qualifications of the Spirit are infused, be they Lazarusses or Vivesses, be
they Kings or Beggars, be they Jews, or Turks or Indian, Christ Jesus is their
head.

Last of all, Christ Jesus is the head of the Church, in all authority. It is
his own voice that said, All power is given unto me both in heaven and in
earth. Undependent supremacy is proper unto him. Hence is he styled by St. John
in the Revelation, the King of Saints, he exercising dominion over them; and
they promising, professing, performing all lawful obedience unto him. In the 2.
of Hebrews, 10. he is termed the Captain of our salvation; which may have
allusion unto that, Josh. 5.15. where he is called the Captain of the Lords
host: who, as he beats down our enemies before us, unweaponing them, and
dispossessing them of all forcible lability to lift up their heads against us;
so does he environ and surround us about with his special grace and ever
operative Providence, as that we do obtain a most secure convoy to the land of
the living, which is the inheritance of the Saints in glory. Life and death are
at his most just diposing, and none are exempted from awful subjection to his
imperial Scepter. His authority reaches over all, and the limits of his
jurisdiction extend as far as his alsufficient and unresistible omnipotency.
Thus Christ is head of the Church in all places, at all times, in all states
and conditions, and in all authority.

I put a period to my discourse on this head, passing over to the next, the
woman's head; And the head of the woman is the man.

The surpassing wisdom and power of the infinite Creator, having made woman an
help-meet for man, whom he made ruler over all his creatures: when he made him,
employed by the subject matter out of which she was made, man's sovereignty over
her. So much also is intimated by the priority of time, wherein Adam had being
and existence before her; upon which ground the Apostle frames this speech, I
suffer not a woman to usurp authority over the man, (...). 1 Timothy 2.12.
for Adam was first formed, then Eve: who in the process of time becoming a
pernicious help unto him, by the cunning sleight of the subtle serpent; wrought
both their own overthrowes. Whence the Apostle by way of Argument maintains
man's principality over the woman, Vxor mea tota in fermento est. Said he in
Plantus.
proceeding thus, verse. 13. and Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived was in the transgression; whereof the woman being convicted by the
righteous Judge of all the world, to whom the secrets of all hearts are open,
in express terms delivers this positive and resolute determination of the case,
to put it out of all question; Genes. 3.16.
Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. God, the
first Author of the sacred bond of Matrimony, has by a definitive sentence
ordered that the man shall be the head of the woman, the husband of the wife.
In token whereof it was the custom among the Hebrews, that the wife, when
first presented to her husband, covered her head with a veil. Rebecca took a
veil and covered her self, Genes. 24.65. and for this cause (namely in sign of
subjection) ought the woman to have power over her head, 1 Cor. 11.10. where by
power, Over all Muscovie; it is a custom observed that a maid id time of woing
sends to that suitor whom she chooses for her husband, a whip curiously
wrought by her self, in token of subjection unto him. Heyl p. 347 Numb, 5.1^.
the Apostle understands a veil. Should any ask the question, why he does
denote this veil by the name of power, especially seeing it was in token of
subjection? I reply, that the Apostle being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, might
have respect unto the Hebrew word Radid, signifying a vail, which is derived
from the root Radad, to bear rule and authority; and so might use the Greek
word (...) power; in the same sense the Hebrews did. And intruth, what was this
subjection to the husband, but a kind of power and protection derived unto the
wife, in comparison of her former state of virginity. Wherefore in case her
husband were jealous of her, among other tokens of sorrow, she was commanded to
stand at her trial, with her head uncovered; intimating thereby, that if she
could not then clear her-self, she was from thence forward deprived of all
power, which before she enjoyed by her husband.

Now for further satisfactory information in this point, my discourse shall be
divided into two rarts. 1. The one containing the respects wherein the man is
the woman's head. 2. The other the mutual good offices to be performed by both
to each other.


For the former, the man is the head of the woman;

1. In respect of discrepancy flowing from the several properties of an head,
differencing it from all and every singular part of the body.

2. In respect of congruity and agreement, effected by a uniformity radicated
and established in the very nature and essence of the head and members, by the
immutable law of the Omnipotent God.

Causa est potior effectu, the cause does exceed the effect in excellence. Her
name, she shall be called woman (says Adam) for she was taken out of man. Her
honor, in that she is one flesh with man; they both shall be one flesh: from
which unity does issue a communication of honor. For if one member be
honored, all the rest rejoice with it, faith St. Paul; and good reason, for
the honor given to any member or the head, is not so proper to it, but that it
is participated to the rest, causing an effluction of joy in all. So that what
proportion of honor the woman is possessour of, it is derived from the
principal in man, to whose superintendency the woman by divine institution is
subject; for the man was not created for the woman, 1 Cor. 11.9.
but the woman for the man.

Aristot^^.
that faemina est mas tantum occasionatus seu imperfectus, woman is an
imperfect man, whose generation or production is not intended by nature, but
contingent, occasioned either by the debility of an impotent natural agent, or
the imperfection of an infirm Patient, or the indisposition of the
ill-affected matter, or some transmutation thereof proceeding from eternal
causes. But let the naturalist yield me the like liberty of my thoughts, as he
for himself does challenge to his own; There is no great glory purchased to man
by the undervaluing of woman: questionless God having made woman as well as
man, intending thereby man's good; nature, the ordinance of God, Aquinas.
does really intend the generation of woman. Aquinas moderates the matter thus,
That universal nature does intend the production of woman, because it looks to
the main chance, the preservation of the whole universe; but the^e is no such
intention in particular nature, Durand.
but the contrary; which Durand another Schoolman denies, for the intention of
particular nature is but subordinate, not opposite to that of universal nature,
both aiming at tht same end. For mine own part (lest I be censured to be
unnatural to my Mother) I side with Durand for the woman; howsoever, the woman
must yield to man that superiority generally in bodily perfection whereof she
is not made capable.

Furthermore, if you view man's soul, you shall find sounder and more accurate
intellectuals in him, than in woman, the vivacity both of his speculative and
practical understanding is far more exquisite in comparison. Those inorganical
operations of man's spirit, and abstract notions of his intellect, that have no
dependances upon material or corporal substances, are more highly elevated, and
have most commonly a more noble object, than woman can comprehend. His
invention is more various, his judgment more fixed, and settled, than the
invention, than the judgment generally of woman is; his resolutions are less
subject to alteration, and his will follows the undeceiveable direction of
right reason, more close at the heels, than hers does. Thus in regard of
perfection man is the head of the woman, who is termed by the Apostle in this
regard the weaker vessel.

he shall rule over thee (says God) to the woman of the man: but neither
making her his slave, nor his servant, but his bosom friend and close
companion: and she must be willing to submit her neck to the yoke of obedience
in all matters of indifferency, lest she deserve the infamous title of an
unruly and disordered wife. Headstrong fancies grounded but upon superficial
appearances, must not interpose themselves, nor attempt to draw another way;
but at the appearing of sufficient reasons (which proceeding from the man, may
be in a better interpretation termed headstrong) must vanish away. Hence let
the judicious man learn to rule his wife, and the well-disposed woman learn to
obey her husbands will: that it may not be said, what I often heard men complain
of, that the wife is the husbands master.



Man is the head of the woman, in respect of congruity; which is threefold. The
head has a natural conformity with the members; both have the same nature. So
man does agree with woman in specie, though he differ from her in sexu. Adam
said of Eve, that he was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; and
therefore (says Moses shall a man leave his Father and his Mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery
(says Paul) which is a resemblance of a greater, the union of Christ and his
Church.

fear and nature of the Lord, and praise of God. 2. The avoidance of
fornication and preservation of chastity, thereby to keep themselves undefiled
members of Christ's body; for in this sacramental tie, there is comprehended a
firm restriction to curb in the insolent and violent extravagancies of our
carnal appetites and lustful affections. 3. The mutual succor and comfort that
the one is to afford the other, both in prosperity and adversity. Vae soli,
says the wise man; there is no comfort in being alone; in which regard marriage
is commended above a single life.

Woman was made for an help to man, to ease him of part of his labors, of his
pain; hence says Solomon, A good wife is the gift of God; no earthly nor
temporal blessing is like unto it: Sweet is the harmony betwixt the united
couple, who admit no distractions; for then will they aim at another end, the
supreme, which will be acquired, Gods glory and their salvation.

Ephesians 5.3.
They two shall be one flesh, says Saint Paul, and he that hates his wife,
hates his own soul, which in nature is most monstrous. No earthly unity is
comparable to this. Where whom God does thus join together, let none attempt to
put asunder; it was never the intention of the prime efficient of this sacred
Ordinance, that who were lawfully knit together, hand-fasted, and heart-fasted,
should be ever parted or really dis-joyned; but should continue one and the
same unto their dying day. Ephesians. 5.23.
Sic equidem ab initio, so (I am sure) it was from the beginning. Thus the
husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church. And thus
much for the first point, in what respects the man is the head of the woman.

The second part of my discourse shall be concerning the Offices, mutually to
be performed by man and wife.

I will begin with the wife; it is the Apostles exhortation unto them, Wives
submit your selves to your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. Colos. 3.18.
Ephesians. 5.24.
And in another place, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let wives be to
their own husbands in every thing. This submission, this subjection does import
three things; 1. An internal act of the heart, conceiving and acknowledging
their inferiority to their husbands, albeit for nobility of birth, and
honorable descent, for riches, or virtue, or prudence, they may perhaps excel.
Hence does proceed as from its proper fountain outward subjection, which cannot
be without the former, but either forced or feigned. This disposition of the
heart, discovered by outward expressions, the Apostles speech seems to reflect
upon; And the wife see that she reverence her husband. For wives to be in
subjection to their own husbands, Ephesians. 5. last:
was the fashion in the old world; thus Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord*
1 Pet. 3.6.
Let it, O let it (ye that are the daughters of pious Sara as long as ye do
well) be the fashion now. So shall not the resolute combination of your
faithful hearts admit an interruption, nor your hearty harmony the least
jarring. 2. This subjection of wives imports an endeavor of conforming
themselves to their husbands humors, in all lawful and different matters. It
is indeed a difficult task, but so much the more laudable when the work
consummated. An ingenuous nature will quickly effect it Hence, says the
Apostle, She that is married cares for the things of the world, how she may
please her husband. The principal way to attain present felicity, and
undisturbed contentation in this life for a woman, is, 1 Cor. 7.34.
to be industrious in framing her disposition and composing her affections in
that manner, as that her actions may be correspondent to her good man's desires.
When the rib whereof Eve was made, was taken out of Adam, Adam was in a deep
sleep, free from perturbation or pain; intimating (as one wittily observes)
that women must be neither troublesome nor painful unto their husbands, but
ever good and pleasing.

3. This subjection has this importance, that the love wives ought to bare
their husbands, ought to be entire. The care of their estates and children,
perpetual; their bearing with their infirmities, patient; their application of
comfort in every condition, Sicut in ligno vermis, ita perdit virwn suum u^or
malefica. Hierom.
constant: And if any husband be of dissolute behavior, it is the part of a
pious Matron by prayer and sweet conversation, to endeavor a reformation. A
woman thus virtuous, is a crown unto her husband, Prove. 12.4. Contrariwise, she
that makes ashamed, is as rottenness in his bones. Wherein the wise man
expresses the mischief of an evil wife, by an apt similitude; And that of
Hierom is not much behind it; As the worm eats into the heart of the tree, and
destroys it: so does a naughty wife her husband.

Now secondly, ye men whom God has blessed with the happiness of a wife, and ye
that intend this holy estate, observe your duties also. It is an Apostolical
Edict dictated by the Spirit of Truth; husbands love your wives, and be not
bitter against them. A twofold Precept, the one commanding love, the other
prohibiting bitterness. Your love must be pure and upright according to the
example of our Savior urged by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.25.
Husbands love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself
for it. (...), loved the Church, there is the affection of the heart; (...), and
gave himself for it, there is the effect of that affection. First then, you must
love and bestow your hearts upon them; and because that the demonstration of
your love, does consist in the exhibition of effects; there must be secondly an
expression of the inward affection in outward acts, which may be reduced to
these three.

He would be with his Church unto the end of the world. Inter utrunque ardor
amoris summus, ut Opianus de cervis agens scribit. Prove. 5.18, 19.
So be ye with your espoused wives, until death shall work a separation.
Rejoice (says Solomon) with the wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving
Hind and pleasant Roe; let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou
ravished with her love. Velut extra sis, and rerum aliarum obliviscare, says
Mercer.

If they learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home. 1 Cor. 14.35.
You are their Tutors and Supervisors, whose directions are not limited to
secular affairs, wherein they are your copartners; but extend also to
religious employments, and the divine matters of a more glorious and
everlasting Kingdom; Vxoris vitium aut tollendo, aut tollerando. Varro.
whereof with you they are coheirs. Dwell with them, says Saint Peter,
according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel,
(...), as being heirs together of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7.

He that provides not for those of his household, is worse than an infidel. Our
Savior supplies his Church (which is his Spouse) with what conduces to the
happiness thereof. So do ye; use the best means by an honest vocation, to
acquire what may be communicated to your wives necessity. And thus much for the
precept commanding love.

As love is enjoined, so is bitterness prohibited. The obligation that women
have on men in wedlock, is, that they are bound to good-behaviour toward them.
Their conversation and society must be ever sweetened with the best delights
that pious souls, and affectionate hearts can afford.

This bitterness that is to be abandoned, does discover it self in the 1.
Affections. 2. Speeches. 3. Actions.


In the affections, when men grounding an advantage on trifling matters, take
occasion to grow exasperate and harsh to the weaker vessels; which frequently
ends either in a deadly hatred, or in a languishing and remiss love: whereas
our love ought to be the same still, rather more than less, like Christ's love
to his Church, ever nourishing and cherishing it.

In speeches, when men's words aim at the reproach and contumely of their wives.

In action there is a discovery of bitterness. And that is when men shall bear
an Eve was not made of the foot of man, to be trodden under; but of the rib of
man, that he might hold her as dear as himself. Right dear therefore unto you
ought to be your wives, upon whom the principal part of your temporal felicity
has certain dependence. Love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. And thus
much for the second head, the head of the woman, which is the man.

Having thus run over the reciprocal duties of man and wife, a word (and but a
word) of the third head, And the head of Christ is God.

God is the head of Christ in regard of his 1. Divinity. 2. Humanity.


In regard of his Divinity; and that by eternal generation; because he is the
generative principle of the Son, according to that nature; he is God of very
God, being consubstantial and coessential with the Father. So that here is a
kind of subjection; whence the Arrians assume an inequality of essence, whose
assumption is most blasphemously untrue; for here is only a subjection in
regard of order, which imports no inequality of nature; as the woman is not
inferior unto man in nature, which is the same in both; but in order only by
divine constitution; so neither Christ to God.

God is the head of Christ, in regard of his humanity, and that four ways.

1. In respect of perfection; the perfection of God is infinite, the perfection
of Christ as man proceeding from the Father is finite. 2. In respect of
eminency; so God is above Christ as man, as the Creator above the creature. 3.
In respect of influence, all the divine graces in the humane nature of Christ,
were originally derived from God, from whom every good and perfect gift does
descend. 4. In respect of government; for he was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, whereby with the more alacrity he did the will of
him that sent him. He was filled full with the Holy Ghost, and so fulfilled all
righteousness.
And thus much concerning these three heads, the head of the woman, which is
man; the head of man, which is Christ; and the head of Christ, which is God.

THE ROYAL REMEMBRANGER; OR, PROMISES Put in Suit.
PSALM. 132.1. Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions.
AS for the Penman of this Psalm, who he should be; Expositors a^e at
variance: notwithstanding we may (with them are soundest) safely Father it on
the Father or the Son, David or Solomon. If on David, (as Lyra does) the Son
put the Fathers work to the Fathers use; Faelicis faelix filius ille patris.
if on Solomon, he was thereby his own Fathers Son, following his steps, happy
father, happy son.

David loved God, 1 King. 2.3.
so did Solomon; David had a care to instruct his son in the ways of God:
Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of his father.

A president for Kings and their sons. For Kings to bring up their sons in the
fear of God; 1 King. 3.3.
for Kings sons in the fear of God, to obey the King their father.

Few Kings, and few Kings sons are now adays of this nature; happy therefore
are these Kingdoms of great Britain and Ireland, that have such a King, the
son of such a King, witness daily experience: God grant us to make good use of
it.

Well then, whether it be David or Solomon, the father or the son which was the
Author of this Psalm, it matters not: he was a King, and inspired by God; yet
it seems rather to be Solomon.

As for the title of this Psalm, it is called Shir Hamagnoloth, a song of
degrees. There is a new song, Psalm. 33.3. there is a song of triumph or
thanksgiving for deliverance past; such as Moses song after the Israelites had
passed through the red sea, Exodus 15. Such a song was Deborah's and Baraks,
after they had delivered Israel from Jabin and Sisera, Judge. 5. There is a song
of mourning. Such a song was David's for Readiness death. 2 Samuel 1. Such a song (if
we may call it a song) is Jeremies Lamentation. There is a song of loves,
whereof we may read Ezekiel. 33.32. there is a song of joys, such was Hannah's, 1 Samuel 2. Such was Elizabeth's John's Mother; such was Mary's the Mother of
Christ, such was Zacharies, Luke 1. such was the Angels to the shepherds in
the field, such was old Simeons, Luke 2. There is Shir Hashirim; 1 King. 4.32.
a song of songs, which is Solomon's, Cant 1. this is but one of a thousand and
five which he composed. So here is Shir Hamagnaloth, a song of degrees.

Here are fifteen songs of degrees following one the other; which are so named,
because, as Lyra says, that the Levites sung them on the steps or degrees
whereby they went up to the Temple: for indeed we read that there were such
steps: whereof, if we believe Lyra, there were fifteen; which opinion as
unlikely, with Luther I pass over. But it is probable that they were sung in
an high place, where they that were appointed to sing might be both better
heard and seen. As for the time when they were sung, it is thought they were
sung at the departure of the people out of the temple, for an up-shot to their
divine service; therefore called songs of degrees or ascensions, for songs of
conclusions, because short, However, Sine periculo bic erratur.
and therefore more fit to conclude with all. If it be thus, we see the
antiquity of this custom, of concluding with a Psalm.

I return to the Author as he was in office, in that therefore he was a King
that was the inditer of this Psalm, we learn this; That, Rex p^us est
reipublicae opnamento.
Kings and Magistrates should be godly. They are to have the practice of piety.
Many, I think, have it lying by them, or in their hands; few indeed have it in
their hearts. Many would have it if they did know how; this is the way, yet
godly wisdom, the practice will follow; and this is gotten by going to God:
Mat. 7.7.
God does give the Spirit of wisdom to such as earnestly desire it; Ask, and it
shall be given you. Solomon's request to God was for wisdom, and he gave it him,
and more than that. None was than more wise then Solomon; the Queen of Sheba
came from the farthest bounds of the earth, to hear him discourse. And none was
then more wealthy, or in so great prosperity, Prove. 3.16. Bona throni, and bona
scabelli.
because none more wise. The way then to prosper, is to obtain wisdom of God.
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor.

Again, I gather from hence: That Kings and Governors should not dispose the
wisdom which God bestows on them, to their own private ends; but they must make
others of the same rank, their sons, their subjects partakers of it; as here
David and Solomon did; ut Regis ad exemplum, that they might conform
themselves to the like godly courses. Which may be a counterblast to all those
bastards of the whore of Babylon that have snapped at the credit of some
Princes; (witness K. James of blessed memory) saying, that he was more fit to
be a Divine, than a King. Blind leaders of the blind! why not both? (I mean not
my profession.) In that they are filled with so great a measure of divine
knowledge above others; they are fitter to be Kings: David was a King and a
Prophet, so was Solomon; why should the like then be accounted a fault in
others?

Furthermore; he that is the Principal Member of Gods Church, within his own
dominions, should be soundly grounded in Gods word, and able to render an
account of his faith. How were it possible that he and his house (with Joshuah)
should serve the Lord truly, if he were ignorant of the points of Religion, or
of those things wherein he is to serve him? Kings must serve God as well as
others; Reges ut reges, says Austin; Worship him all ye gods, Psalm. 97.7. Aug.
It was Gods own command, Deuteronomy. 17.18. where he sets down what a King must
do; And it shall be when he sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he
shall write him a Copy of this Law in a book, out of that which is before the
Priests, the Levites: And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this law, and these statutes to do them, etc.

Lastly, from this arises another observation; That Kings and Governors ought
to pray for divine Knowledge and Wisdom. For in their Kingdoms they are Judges
of Ecclesiastical and Civil matters, except they wilfully give up their titles
of right. How can they judge righteously, if they be ignorant of the matters
whereof they are Judges? They must scan matters over and over and sift them;
for it is the honor of Kings to search out a matter. Be wise now therefore, O
ye Kings, Prove. 25.2. Psalm. 2.10. Psalm. 119.104.
be instructed, ye Judges of the earth. But how is this gotten? Through thy
precepts I get understanding, says David.

Here I limit not my self to Kings, but what I say of their duty, I say of all
Christians; for they are Kings through Christ. The use then is this; Revel. 1.6.
How far from pleasing God, are such as neglect this so great a duty, and so
great a good; that whereas they may have wisdom for the asking; or whereas, if
by asking they obtain it, they should use it to the edification of others; all
is neglected: hence instead of pious songs, such as David's and Solomon's; the
world is filled with swarms of Pamphlets. Let us therefore pray, that God would
teach all of us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. And this for Preface to what ensues.

The words are short and sweet; being a breviary of the whole Psalm; which is
partly petitional, non voz sed votum, from this first verse to the eleventh;
and partly repetitional, of Gods promises, non votum sed vox, from the eleventh
verse to the end; all which is sweetly compiled in these words, Lord, remember
David, and all his afflictions.

Two things are here recommended to Gods remembrance; viz. David, and his
afflictions. Luth.
But what David? Not bare David without either welt or guard, not David
materialiter, but David formaliter, says Luther, as he was godly David, as
unto whom God passed his word and promise, that when thy days shall be
fulfilled (speaking to David by the Prophet Nathan) and thou shall sleep with
thy fathers; I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy
bowels, and I will est ablish his Kingdom; 2 Samuel 7.
he shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his
Kingdom for ever. And this is it that is comprised in this verse, and enlarged
in the rest. Therefore, says he, remember David, that is, the promises made to
David.

We can have no better exposition of Scripture than scripture. 1 Kings 8.28.
Solomon in another place prays for the same; Therefore now Lord God of
Israel, keep with thy servant David, my father, that thou promised'st him,
saying, there shall not be cut off unto thee, a man from my sight (as the
original is) to sit on the throne of Israel; but on condition, so, that thy
children take heed to their way, that they walk before me, as thou bast walked
before me; And now, O God of Israel, let thy word I pray thee ^e verified, etc.

Again, in our common speech, we know when a promise is to any; we use to say,
remember such a one. Calv.
And hence because the promise was made to David, therefore (as Calvin
observes) he is pleased in the midst of the verse; in medio virtus; here lies
the best part, (Gods promises.)

But methinks I smell a Papist raising this doctrine out of these words; That
we are aided by the suffrages of the dead Saints. Thedoret.
Remember David. Dead Saints they are that raise it. For we do not consider
David here barely, (as Theodoret does) but as one to whom belonged the
promises, as I said before.

I pass over this dead doctrine of the dead, and turn back to the words of
spirit and life. Lord remember David.

The Kingly Prophet we see prays to God; he goes not to Angels or Saints, for
they are not (as he well did know) to be invocated, Psalm. 73.25.
Wherefore David says, whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. And again, Ex profundis, out of the deeps
have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

I wonder that the Papists condemn him not of immodesty or presumption; but
albeit they are so full of modesty, it is but Pythagorical, that shameless
modesty, they rob God of his honor. No wonder, as Corvinus forgot his name,
they forget their manners. But I say, Give Caesar what is Caesar's; Angels are
not to be invocated, Mat. 4.10.
but God alone. The Papists distinction of (...) and (...) is mere Sophistry.
Both services are due to God; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

Moreover, Romans 10.
how shall they call on them on whom they have not believed? If they call on
Saints, they must believe in Saints; and what is this, but to make Christ and
his sufferings not to be the complete object of justifying faith? I only name
this. Solomon learned otherwise from his father, to make God the chief defender
of his faith, to whom he should pray, Lord.

Here also I observe, a secret confession of Gods love, in promising to David;
of Solomon's hope in obtaining. God is faithful and ready to promise, and as
faithful and ready to perform, Solomon both faithful and ready to receive. A
Looking-glass for Kings and all others; hoc facite and vivite, do the like and
live.

Four divinity Lectures, or Lectures of divine morality for Kings, spring from
Solomon's Petitioning to the Lord in this manner, drawn together from the
contents of his Petition.

First that Church and Kingdom are in the hand of God, to be disposed of as
pleases him. The most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whom
soever he will. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. By me Ksngs reign,
says Wisdom; Kings are Gods Vicegerents here on earth, Dan. 4.32. Revel. 19.16.
who bear the stamp of the divine Majesty; they are in his stead; his
servants, Populum gubernando, says Thomas, notwithstanding his other paradox.
Pro. 8.15.
Therefore advisedly he runs not to man, he seeks not to get a Kingdom by
violence, or by the strength of flesh and blood; for there is no King saved by
the multitude of an host; Romans 13.
he trusts not to the broken reeds of Egypt; cursed is he that trusts in
man; he learned this lesson from his father, that vain is the help of man; vain
also the help of Princes, Jerem. 17.5.
Put not your trust in Princes; but the name of the Lord is a strong tower.
Thus he acknowledges Gods supremacy. Lord.

Secondly, as the first establishing of Church and Policy, is in Gods power,
so is it he that causes a flourishing Church and Policy. As he gives the
being, so also the welbeing. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in
vain that build it; Psalm. 127. Arena sine culce.
(indeed it may well be called Labor in vain) except the Lord keep the City,
the watchmen wake but in vain; This was David's song for his son Solomon. That
King therefore that will have a flourishing Church and Commonweal, must pray
to God for it, with all humility and submission. This is via regia, a Kings
highway; Solomon has chalk't it out. Here observe his voluntary allegiance to
God. Lord.

Thirdly, Kings sons are to have a special care of the charge that their
fathers leave behind with them; as Solomon had here of David's. Therefore they
must pray and do all that can be done, for the welfare of their subjects; so
that they must not be slack in matters of Religion, but very zealous: it is
that unicum necessarium. David has lead him the way, the zeal of thy house
has eaten me up, and Solomon was not far behind him, he follows the tract. And
good reason. The Crown can never be kept without good subjects, the subjects
can never be good without true Religion; Solomon prays for both, and that is
the next way to get both. And David, Peace be within thy walls, Psalm 122.
and prosperity within thy Palaces; the effect of both. Both these, Care and
Zeal, jump together in one peaceful King, to root out Idolatry, and plant true
Religion; What follows? Peace and Prosperity.

Fourthly, here is an Emblem of his hope joined with innocence; this made him
pray to the Lord with heart of grace. He knew the Articles; If thy children
will keep my Covenant and my testimony, then their children shall sit upon the
throne for evermore. He found himself yet to have a good conscience, for God
will not hear the prayer of the wicked. Therefore his innocence confirmed his
hope. Yet afterward he fell away, (whether wholly or no, we conclude not
uncharitably of him with the Papists;) whereby the bond was forfeited, 1 King.
11.
the promise disanull'd; and yet God was more merciful than he sinful; for the
Lord would not take all the Kingdom from Solomon, nor his seed for David's sake.
Mat. 1.
Neither was David's seed (being in captivity) quite cut off, for Christ
descened from the line of David, according to the flesh; and hence is called
the Son of David, and now reigns for evermore according to Gods promise, and so
is David's Lord. This I touch by the way; It is requisite then, that Kings
should have care to serve God continually, in the integrity and innocence of
their heart. If they fall from God, God falls from them; and then he will
either rend their Kingdoms, as he did Solomon's; or pull down both King and
throne, and lay their honor in the dust.

If not, but that they will keep Gods Commandments, and maintain Religion, as
David did; as David shall they prosper all the days of their life. This
Solomon intended, and in this intent cried he, Lord, remember David.

In these words again, do but observe Solomon's Sampson-like faith; he presses
God with his promise, his faith works upon that. Since God was so gracious to
promise, Solomon would not stick to exact the thing promised: therefore
whenever God makes a promise either to King or people, they must not be so
coy as not, to take hold of it, and to challenge God of his promise. For he
promises to the end they should remember him; and thereby he them. Fear not
then, it is his delight.

Again, Gods promise is the strongest argument a man can use; it is a sign of
an invincible faith to apply it; the remembrance whereof should drive us to
God. And is the best comfort to a Christian man in this life. It was here
Solomon's chiefest joy, which made him come thus to God; Lord, remember David.

It should seem by this speech, that God was asleep, or forgetful of his
promise. But the speech is not proper; for he that keeps Israel, does neither
slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121.4.
God cannot be said to remember or forget properly, but by a metaphor; not
Theologice, but Oeconomice, as the Fathers speak, or per (...), which the
Logicians call ambignum ex analogia conceptus; because we cannot otherwise
conceive, by reason of our natural imbecility. God is said then to remember,
when he shows himself to have a respect unto us, for his promise sake. So
Tremelius expounds it, Tremel.
demonstra te meminisse; Lord, declare by a plain demonstration that thou
forget'st not thy promise made to thy servant David; by performing it, or being
as good as thy word in me. I will not enter into any Philosophical speculation
concerning this.

And what should he remember? A^^.
Vt impleatur quod promisit, says Austin. To whom promised? To David; Lord,
remember David. That is, that he would fulfill in him, what he promised to David
his father, that his seed should sit in his throne for ever; that he should
plant his Church and true worship there, and dwell among them; that the
ministry should be pure and powerful, the arm of God to salvation; that he
would give them food sufficient; that the glory of his Kingdom should never
come to decay. This is the Summa totalis.

In these words we may perceive, as in a Perspective-Glasse, who it is that is
the first raiser of a State, and who the puller down. States are not guided by
blind fortune, as the Poets feign, nor by Angels appointed thereto in every
Kingdom, as the Platonists imagine; nor by the Stars, as some Star-gazers
affirm; but God alone guides all, by his Providence. The heavens does rule,
says Daniel, by a Metommy of the subject for the adjunct. Dan. 4.
None can stay his hands, or say unto him, What do thou? says
Nebuchadnezzar.

A lesson for Kings and Magistrates, that they solicit none but God for the
welfare of Church and Commonweal, as here Solomon did. But what? is this all?
No, they must do it of necessity; therein to acknowledge his Supremacy, and
their Allegiance; but this I touched already.

They must also have as great care of Religion, as of the Commonweal; and
more, for that was the end why Commonweales were ordained: without, the
Commonweal will but be a common poverty; it is the soul of the Politic State,
it gives life unto it. Whereupon, it being without Religion, is compared to a
dead body without a soul; but both being joined together, the one may say of
the other, Parsque tui latitat corpore clausa meo. Both must be minded, as in
promise here meant by David) So in Prayer. Solomon is our example. And as their
care for the planting of Religion must be great; so must they have a watchful
eye for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee.

Lastly, they must commit all to God; Trust in the Lord with all thine heart,
and lean not to thine own understanding. Prove. 3.5. Victo i^ mihi creed, non
hominum disciplinis aut industria comparatur; sed Dei O.M. benignitate and
arbitrio; etc. Ferdinand. K. of Arragon.
He is the Watchman of Israel; he it is, that in the night and in the day
discovers all plots and conspiracies; that brings the rebellious to
confusion; It is he that gives salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144.10. Thus, they
may assure themselves, that if God be on their side, they need not fear what
man can do unto them. If they cast their care upon the Lord, he will care for
them. This was Solomon's way to the throne, when as he said, Lord, remember
David.

Now let us come to know what David was in himself, without any respect to the
promises.

He was (as his name imports) beloved, amiable, or a friend; true indeed, for
he was the beloved of the Lord; for God was with him; he was the son of Jesse,
Ruth. 4.22.
by profession a Shepherd: but changed from a Shepherd to be King of Judah, 2 Samuel 1.4. King of Israel, cap. 5.3. God we see has not respect of persons
outwardly; he chooses poor David before any in Israel to be King; for thus
says the Lord to Samuel, Arise, anoint him, this is he. 1 Samuel 16.
David provided Ministers to serve the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 16.4. He provided matter
for the building of a Temple, he appointed Solomon to build, because God did
for bid himself, 1 Chronicles. 22.3. He gave Solomon the pattern, and sound out the
place, 2 Samuel 5. He followed the Lord with all his heart, 1 Kings 14. save in
the matter of Vriah, cap. 15. These are parts of the Acts and Monuments of
David.

Thus we see Gods love to David, and David's zeal to Godward; he did as much as
he could, more if he could do, he would have done; God denied, David would not
resist.

A doctrine for Kings and Governors, not to counter-check Gods commands. And
when he heard he should not do it, he sat not idle, as many would have done;
but prepared materials for the building.

Let all of all degrees, learn hence to provide all things for the setting
forward of a good work. What work better than the building of a house for God,
wherein to call on his name. But in this age men scarce vouchsafe to repair;
nay, some rather have pulled down, and instead thereof erected stables. Which
indeed has proved the way to bring an old house on their heads.

Contrary to this was David's practice; therefore says Solomon, Remember David,
or, thy promise made to David my Father. It follows, and all his afflictions.

Some translate these words cum tota, or cum omni afflictione ejus; some ad^
[and;] and then we read it thus as in our Bibles; And all his afflictions. The
reason of this diversity lies in the Particle, (...)
which sometimes bears the force of the Article of the Accusative case, and
then they add [and] to make up a perfect sentence; it is called by the
Grammarians Asyndeton, when a conjunction is wanting: Sometime the force of the
Proposition cum; then, Remember David, with all his afflictions; the matter is
indifferent, the sense is the same.

There is a greater difference in the translation of the word Gnuunotho;
Austin, Hierom and Theodoret, with almost all the Papists translate it, and
omnis mansuetudinis ejus: but Luther, Calvin, Tremelius and others translate
it, Cum tota afflictione ejus. So Arias Montanus a Papist, Cum universa ejus
afflictione; ad verbum cum omni affligi ejus; we follow the last.

But to leave off words, and come to the matter; it is manifest by these words,
that David had many afflictions, yet he was the beloved of the Lord, his
darling; so was Christ, yet from the Cradle to the Cross was he afflicted; of
whose troubles David's here were types. Therefore Gods dearest children are
subject to afflictions; they are Gods messengers to bring them to him;
messengers of life, not of death; of love, not of hate; for the Lord chasteneth
whom he loves.

David was afflicted by Saul and his followers, before he had possession of the
throne; and after he was sole Monarch placed in the throne, many were the
troubles that attended on him. Thus Kings are not exempted from being afflicted.

Among his manifold troubles, this one is recounted, the inward care he had of
finding out a sit and convenient place where to build a Temple for the Lord.
This we may perceive in the verses following; he was tossed too and fro with many
difficulties, inwardly perplexed, and all for Gods glory.

Constantine the great was of his mind, for no sooner did he conquer Maxentius
and Licinius, (by which victory he ended the Persecution moved in the East and
West Churches) but he caused Bishops to be consecrated, Churches to be built,
and then the Church of God began to flourish, which before was almost drowned
in the red sea of bloody persecution for some hundreds of years.

I might be infinite in reckoning up the Godly Acts in this kind, of Kings and
Governors; which outward acts show the inward love they bore to God and true
Religion.

Here is mention made of David's afflictions, to show the truth or certainty of
promise, as if they had been therewith sealed and signed. Which proves that he
endured all these troubles, because he had so fair promises of God. Therefore
to whom God does give comfortable promises, no trouble or anguish should annoy
him; but he should willingly undergo all tribulations for the promise sake. It
was not for his afflictions that God made him this promise, it was gratis.

Lastly, David's afflictions are put down for an example, to incite others to
suffer the like. To comfort them, and to assure them that albeit they suffer
never so many troubles, that it would seem impossible that those promises
should be accomplished, yet should they put their trust and hope in God, who
out of stones is able to raise up children to Abraham.

As Solomon prayed thus in his own behalf, so let us (as the Apostle commands)
make intercession for Kings, and those which are in authority.

Lord, remember our David, CHARLES the second, by the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. Thou who art the
King of Kings, make him a King over many Kings; thou who art the King of peace,
guide the feet of our King in the ways of peace. Sit thou in his heart, the
chief Defender of his faith. Council thou him from above, to have mercy on them
to whom mercy belongs; and to execute justice to them to whom justice. Lord,
discover all plots and conspiracies, intended against his sacred Majesty: Let
them be taken in their own nets, that conspire against him. Make him careful of
thy Church. Fill him with Faith, Hope and Charity; and at last reward him with
a crown of glory. And grant that ever after his seed may sit on his throne,
till the coming of the Messiah. Amen.

THE WATCHMAN'S Watchword.
ACT. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over
the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God
which he has purchased with his own blood.
WHosoever shall seriously observe Gods powerful providence in Paul's
Conversion; may discern an act of great mercy in God, and a strange alteration
in Paul. It was the great mercy of the Almighty, that ever Paul was converted
to the faith: He was a raveming wolf of the tribe of Benjamin, using his best
endeavors to devour the little flock of God, breathing out threatenings against
the Christian profession, and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord. Yet
God (in whose hands are the hearts of all m^n) did so suddenly alter his savage
disposition, and so turn the course of his resolutions another way, as for a
time seemed incredible. From persecuting the Gospel, the Lord won him to the
preaching of the Gospel; from being a professed Enemy to Christianity, to be a
strong Pillar of the Christian Religion. The time was, that his whole aim was
bent to the extirpation of the Doctrine of Christ Jesus; not a Professor durst
hold up his head in his sight; his employment was to find out such, and to
bring them bound to Jerusalem. To this purpose had he Letters framed,
countenanced by the Great ones, and bacht with the chief Authority, that his
actions might pass unquestioned without contradiction: Neither wanted he wit,
learning and courage, to draw his projects into public view and execution
with all dexterity, thereby to discharge his warranted Commission with
approbation.

But when he heard that Voice from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
when he saw the Heavens took notice of his actions; he was struck into a maze,
he trembled exceedingly, his courage fell down, his heart was astonished, and
suddenly turns Professor of that faith, he erewhile persecuted to the death.
What before he endeavored to pull down and trample under foot, be took in hand
to erect and build up: Christ crucified was the subject of his discourse, as
before the object of his hate; for whose sake he was put into as great fears,
as ever he put others; and was subject to as great dangers by others, as ever
others were by him. But in process of time, he became a man of so undaunted a
spirit, as that no threatenings could terrify him, no fierce looks outlook him,
no power affright him, no dangers discourage him, from publishing to the world
the Doctrine of Peace and Reconciliation, through the blood of Jesus Christ;
called then by the Scribes and Pharisees, (as to this day by the Roman
Sectaries) Heresy.

God having thus made him a Chosen vessel, to bear his Name before the Gentiles
and Kings; he went about from place to place, preaching, That Christ that was
crucified, was the Son of God. Being at length come to Miletus, he calls the
Elders of the Church together, to whom he delivers sundry wholesome Instructions,
tending to the good of Gods Church committed to their cure. This was his
Conscio ad Clerum, and it was his parting Sermon. It begins at the 18. verse of
this Chapter, and continues to the 36. Part of which Sermon, are these words I
am discoursing on:

Which are a pious Exhortation directed to the Elders of the Church, containing
a twofold Caution. 1. The one respecting themselves; Take heed therefore to
your selves. 2. The other, the Church of God; And to all the Flock.

The arguments produced to back this Exhortation to a diligent Providence of
Gods people, are, 1. Because they are Overseers of the Flock? 2. Because they
are called to the performance of that office, by Divine election and
constitution, in these words, Over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers. 3. Because Gods intent in calling them to that office, was to feed
the Church of God. 4. Because it is not a thing of a small value, that is
committed to their charge; but that which God with his own blood purchased;
Which he has purchased with his own blood.

Before I meddle with the two main particulars, (the only matter intended) my
meditation shall reflect a little upon the ground hereof, implied in the
illative particle [therefore,] which ever has relation to a precedent matter.

Paul protells that he has declared the whole counsel of God to them; and that
he is pure from the blood of all men, in that he did conceal nothing from them
that concerned their salvation. Seeing then he leaves them in so good a state,
acquainting them with the Lords pleasure and counsel; he charge the Elders to
beware of themselves, and of the flock. Take heed therefore to your selves, etc.

Where you may note, how piously Paul is devoted to Religion, how zealously
affected to Gods Church, how provident for their welfare. Loath he was to
depart, until he had settled the affairs Ecclesiastical. A Synod therefore
assembled, he lays himself open to all; Like an indulgent Parent departing from
his children, could not part without an exhortation, for preventing future
perils. He did undoubtedly conclude (as well he might) the improvidence of
Ministers should be fatal to the Church. Neglective carelessness has evermore a
dead stroke in the corruption or fall of Religion. Where pride pranked with
outward semblances, goes for gravity; where outward observances and ceremonious
complements, pass for inward zeal and devotion; where humane eloquence (perhaps
impertinent to the matter in hand) runs current for profound learning, and is
preferred before the demonstration of the Spirit; where Hagar gets the
pre-eminence of Sarah, (I mean) where Philosophy shall coin Articles of Faith,
and prescribe rules to Divinity; where Vice walks in the habit of Virtue; where
Avarice is counted Thristiness; where gain of money and revenue is more
desired, than gain of souls: Gods Vineyard must needs be neglected, and without
question down comes Religion. Take heed therefore to your selves.

The Apostle in this illation, has yet a further reach. In the precedent verse
he does aver, that he is pure from the blood of all men; and for his
justification, alleges that he has kept back from them no part of Gods
counsel, which he was pleased to reveal for their endless felicity. Take heed
therefore to your selves, and to all the flock. Do ye so likewise. Hence it is
requisite that you be industrious in the search of heavenly mysteries; See that
Earth make you not to forget Heaven, and so slacken your care; but let your
studies be spent in finding knowledge, that is able to save your souls and them
that hear you; in doctrine, in exhortation, in reproof, aiming at the
perfection of the Saints of God, and his glory.

It is an unquestionable truth, That the blood of them who receive little or no
instruction of their Pastors; or who fall away from the Truth, through the
Pastors neglect or careless carriage in their vocation; will be required at the
Pastors hand. Ezekiel in his 33. chap. confirms this assertion: O son of man, I
have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shall hear
the word at my mouth, Fulmina, non verba. Eras.
and warn them from me: When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall
surely die; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that
wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand. If you intend the good of Zion, if you prefix for your scope the glory of
God, if you hope for salvation; quit your selves, my Brethren, from the guilt
of blood, of murdering souls through your negligence. Attend to Paul's
exhortation; Take heed to your selves, etc.

First, take heed to your selves. The prime care of a faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ, is how to behave himself in the Church of Christ, which is the
house of the living God. It is an hard task, I must confess, he is put to a
painful work that he takes in hand; for the finishing whereof, there must be a
concurrence of conscience and skill. If conscience be without skill, the good
will and honest intentions may win applause, egregiam certe laudem, but the
Church is not profited: If skill, and no conscience; whilst he teaches others,
he himself becomes a reprobate. Those instructions he imparts to others, will
in the end prove his own overthrow. Take heed therefore to your selves.

It is the speech of Evagrius Scholasticus, in his Ecclesiastical history,
Libr. 3.
concerning an Emperor; That an Emperor is not to be counted of thereafter as
he governs others, but as he guides and rules himself. It behooves him to
suffer no lascivious motion to root within his breast, but valiantly to
encounter with Intemperancie, and to make his life a pattern of virtue, or a
lanthorn for his subjects to follow after, thereby to lead them to godly
instruction.

This I may apply to the true Divine, and true Man of God: He must have an
observing eye as well upon himself as others; All his actions must be so ruled,
as that we may read piety in each of them, and that they may serve for patterns
of imitation to the people. Surely, Nunquam aliorum salutem sedulo curabit, qui
suam negliget, says one; It can never enter into my heart to think, much less
to believe, that he shall be careful for the salvation of others, who shall
neglect his own. It is an argument beyond probability, that that man will never
respect any good, that slights his proper; except upon such terms as Moses
wished his name blotted out of the book of life, or as Paul himself accursed
for his bretrhens sake. But these were elevated to the highest pitch of zeal,
which few ever attained unto: These were studious both of their own and others
safety; and of others safety, (...).
because of their own. See then, as says the Apostle, that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5.15. Extraordinary
circumspection transporting us above the common sphere, must be used, or else
we shall be condemned of extraordinary folly. The wise man's eyes are in his
head, faith Wisdom. It is a point of the greatest wisdom, for a man to have his
wits ever about him; and far most of all for a Churchman. Subtle and powerful
are they with whom he has to do; the gifts where with he ought to be furnished
withal, are not to be reputed vulgar; yet so are they to be tempered, as that
they outstretch not the capacity of the vulgar upon occasion. His work is not
stinted to the Body; the Soul is the subject he works upon. The dignity
therefore of the Soul, far exceeds that of the Body. And as the commodity
arising from their spiritual industry, redounds more to the Spirit of a man,
the finer metal, than the Body, the baser substance, though indeed to both: So
in a Divine indeed, must the Divine habiliments of the mind, seasoned and
moderated with the grace of Gods holy Spirit; that they may work with the more
agility, and with the greater efficacy, and far surpass the best endowments
generally of the common sort. He has more precious things in hand than any;
wherefore his sufficiency must be correspondent to his charge, and his care
proportionable to his sufficiency. Salvation is the end of his intentions, and
that that crowns his actions. Wherefore look about you, Tuke heed unto your
selves.

In our selves, we must take heed of two things: 1. Of our Doctrine. 2. Of our
Life.


Take heed unto thy self, says Paul to Timothy, and unto the doctrine,
continue in them; 1 Timothy 4. uit.
for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. As
our life is not contemplative alone, spent in the bare speculation of Divine
oracles, like Moses conferring with God; but also practical spent in actions
with men, pertaining to holiness: So we must behave our selves in both with
that moderation and convenient wariness, as that the one may be an help and
furtherer to the other; to remove all obstacles that may be prejudicial to the
acquiring of the happiness of Eternity, both in our selves and others.

The ornaments of the Priests robe in the old Law, Lib. de sacr. Altar. mist.
c. 17.
were significant intimations hereof; as is observed by Pope Innocent. It was
sumptuously garnished with Onix stones, Bells and Pomgranates: By the Onix
stones are intimated Truth and Sincerity; by the brightness of their truth of
Doctrine, which must be as clear as the Sun; by their solidity and integrity of
Conversation, both springing up out of sound Learning: The Bells note our
incessant sounding forth the praises of the Lord in his holy Temple, by
preaching in season and out of season; Woe be to me, says Paul, if I preach
not the Gospel: The Pomgranates are signs, are symbols of good works.

The order gives occasion of a further observation. There was a Bell and a
Pomgranate, a Bell and a Pomgranate, and a Bell betwixt every Pomgranate;
figuring how that good works in the Ministerial order, must be ever
intermingled with good words; the matter of these yields matter for amplifying
this discourse. They were made of pure gold, pure metal abstracted from all
dross; to signify the necessary concurrence and sweet harmony of an undefiled
life, and true doctrine; both appearing exceeding good to the eye, both
sounding exceeding well to the ear. If all of our Function excel in purity of
life, and foundness of doctrine; then are we all (spiritually) true Bell-metal.
Hence it is said by the Evangelist, that Christ began to do and to teach; whose
steps we must follow. He did much, but he did no sin, to show that our
conversation should be blameless; and in his mouth was found no guile, to show
that we should speak nothing but the truth.

Take heed of your Doctrine. First, that it be found, agreeable to the
Scriptures* If any teach otherwise, let him be accursed. The Word of God is the
foundation of revealed Truth, whereupon we must build: Take heed of vain
Philosophy, whose precepts may seem specious, but in them may be comprehended
the doctrine of devils. Many turbulent spirits delighting to be pragmatical and
factious, have obtruded into the Church for doctrine, the commandments of men;
and for their own ends attempt to corrupt Religion, and bring in Innovations
and newfangled devices, causing an apostasy from the Truth, and drawing
disciples after them. But (I trust) ye have learned otherwise, not to be guided
by the ostentation or umbratical shows of any plausible tongue, but by the most
perfect rule of Divine truth, the Word of God.

Believe it, Schismatical wits, if not prevented, breed an infection in the
Church worse than the plague. Let the Word of God then be the ground of our
proceedings, lest we wander out of the way, and affirmatively conclude what God
denies. To this end, by Canonical constitutions they are to be duly examined,
who plead for admittance into Holy Orders; that so they may both satisfy
themselves by experience, and certify others, whether or no they be
orthodoxally learned, and (...), apt to teach. Pious therefore was that
resolution of a most Reverend Father in God. Never to admit any into this holy
Function, but such, of whose Knowledge in Divinity he should receive some
competent intelligence. The part of a most wise and judicious Prelate. The
admission of illerate men into the Ministry, has been the bane of our
Religion, and the disgrace of our Profession, as we all well know. For where
there is no Knowledge, the people must perish, Gods service and worship must be
disregarded. There are some are probably suspected of heterodoxal doctrine; who
upon examination, or serious dispute, or preaching, care should be taken they
may be hindered from propagating their inventions. Others there are, whose
Insufficiency is so gross, that to hear them speak to the purpose, is as great
a wonder, as it was to hear Balaam's Ass. The Church suffers under both. It
is most convenient therefore, that whosoever desire to take this Vocation upon
them, should have solid Learning, and be able to exhort, to reprove, to
instruct the people of God; and should solemnly protest to teach and maintain
nothing contrary to what the Word of God shall warrant. Let us therefore take
heed unto our selves, that our Doctrine be sound; for, The Priests lips
preserve knowledge.

Secondly, What we teach must be plain, as well as found. There is no goodness
to be hoped, no proficiency to be expected by teaching, where, what is taught
is not understood. Our speech must not outstretch the common apprehension:
Prudentibus vicis non placont phalerata, sed fortia, said Bishop Jewel.
Bonaventure's words in prenching; were not inflantis, sed inflammantia.
Not strong lines, but a plain phrase tends to Edification, the end of
Preaching. Many times, in difficult Terms lies enwrapt a pestilent Heresy.
Heretics (at least Novelists) coin such obscure sentences, as that they may
walk unseen, as it were in a cloud of obscurity. But this is not the way to
gain souls to God; the plainest manner is the best. My speech and my preaching
(says Paul) was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.

Thirdly, What we teach we must press home to the Conscience, as an arrow to
the mark. It is not the pleasing volubility of a superficial tongue (olt-times
exorbitant) that does the work of the Lord, or makes a good Preacher, or found
Christian; it must be touched with a coal from the Altar, that it may infuse
into the cold hearts o^ men, the true zeal of perfect godliness. The Word of
God well pressed, well applied, is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, Heb 4.11.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. It
swims not in the brain, as the Prophets axe did upon the water; but enters into
the conscience, and the very bowels (as I may so say) of the soul. What humane
Eloquence has such effectual operation? Surely, it tickles the ear, but
touches not the heart. Men may be never the wiser, I am sure never the better,
where tickling words are preferred before solid matter; and where men endeavor
to please the ear, more than to edify the soul, or to comfort a distempered or
distracted Conscience, or to inform a misled one.

God never condemns, but he first indicts and arraighs; He never punishes, but
he first forewarns; He never rejects, but he first respects, He never sends
misery, but he first offers mercy: He puts the way of life, and the way of
death, before all, take which they will for better or worse. Such is Gods good
will to man, that seeing man cannot or will not come to him, he vouchsaseth to
come to man; such is his goodness: either in his Divine person, as he did to
Adam, or in his Messengers; bidding them turn to him, that he might turn to
them; that they might have experience of Gods mercy, (not of his judgments;)
that He wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and live. Herein he uses not the extremity of the Law against
man; neither deals he as an unjust Judge, first hang; then examine the cause:
But he opens the case, shows the cause, sets their sins in order before their
eyes, and makes known the dangers they lie in, by a Proclamation; Cry aloud,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, Isa. 58.1.
and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Such therefore are only fit for Gods people, who can cry aloud, and spare not.
Spare not,

For 1. Love. Or, 2. Fear.


Spare not for love. Not for love of any; Open rebuke is better than secret
love. Pro. 27.5.
Not for love of money or reward; lest it be said to thee, as Simon Peter said
to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. For he that has my Word (says the
Lord) let him speak my Word faithfully: Not add, not diminish, not put false
glosses thereon. Cursed be such, Revel. ult. Jer. 23.28.


Spare not.] Spare not sin, spare no sin; cry against all. When the Lord
brought the Israelites into the land of Canaan, he gave them charge, not to
leave a mothers son of them alive: They did not so, they spared them; but God
spared not them when they fell into their Idolatry: So God will not spare to
plague those Messengers of his, that spare to cry against sin, and to cut it
from off the earth. Woe be to them (says the Prophet) that sow pillows under
all elbows, Ezekiel. 13.18. Who say peace, peace, when there is no peace, Jer.
16.14. for there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. These (like
Hananiah) make the people to trust in a lie, Jer. 28.15. causing them to err.
But Gods true Prophets and Messengers are against all sin and sinners, without
sparing or excepting any: For Gods Word is in them, as it was in Jeremy; His
Word was in my heart as burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary of
forbearing, I could not stay. cap. 20.9. It was Christ's speech to the Pharisees
concerning his Apostles; If these should hold their peace, or spare speaking,
the stones would cry out. Therefore (beloved Brethren) cry aloud, spare not.
cap. 62.1.
Imitate that Angelical Doctor, and Evangelical Prophet, Isaiah: For Zion's
Jake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest; until
the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as
a lamp that burns. And again, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence.

Spare not for fear. Fear not little flock, Be not afraid of their faces, for I
am with thee to deliver thee, Jer. 1.8. Do they contend with thee? do they
condemn thee? fear not, spare not; He is near that justifies thee, who will
contend with thee? Tua causa erit mea causa, as the Emperor said to one; so
says Christ to all his servants. Causa ut sit magna, magnus est actor and
author ejus: neque enim nostra est, says Luther to Meloncthon.
Isa. 50.8. Do they reproath thee? do they revile thee? Fear not, spare not; Be
not dismayed at their reproachings or revilings, Isa. 51. Do they despise thee?
Fear not, spare not: He that despises you, despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me, says our Savior, Luke 10.16. Do they forbid
thee, beat thee, do they seek to stone thee, as they did Christ, as they did
Paul. and the rest of the Apostles? Fear not, spare not; but be like blind
Bartis meus, who, the more the people charged him to hold his peace, the more
he cried a great deal, Mar. 10.48. Do they say they will kill thee? Fear not,
spare not; they may kill the body, but cannot the soul. Remember, The righteous
are bold as a Lion, that turns not away at any. Ministers (as Luther said of
Historians) must have the hearts of Lions. Thou shall have thy reward, Vincenti
corona; To him that overcomes will I give a crown, Rev. 3. And they, their
punishment; for, Qui vos tangit, pupillam oculi mei tangit; He that touches
you, or any of mine, touches the apple of mine eye, Zach. 2.8. Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15.

Do they provoke me to anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves to
the confusion of their own faces? They do, they do. Witness the Primitive
times, wherein such as envied or hindered the prosperity of Gods Church, never
prospered. Pharaoh sunk in the Red sea like a stone; Ahab, Elias enemy, was
shot with an arrow and died; Nebuchadnezzar grievously punished; Antiochus
Epiphanes died in most miserable torments; Herod the Great, Christ's enemy,
perished with a lousie disease; Herod Antipas, that put John Baptist to death,
overcome by Socer, and after banished into France with his wanton Herodias,
died an Exile: The Jews that persecuted Christ and his Apostles, what
punishments they had, their lamentable wars, and more lamentable destruction,
is a sufficient testimony: Herod Agrippa, that put James John's brother to
death, was put to death by vermin, as his Grandfather was.

If we take a slight view of the Ten Persecutions: Nero, who robbed Peter and
paid Paul, Peter of his life, Paul with death; was his own death, killed
himsel. Domitian, that banished John into Pathmos, and crucified Simon Bishop
of Jerusalem, that put Publius Bishop of Athens to death; was killed, and his
statues and monuments taken quite away. Trajan, that caused Simeon Bishop of
Alexandria to be crucified, and Ignatius Bishop of Antioch to be devoured of
wild beasts; suffered many miseries; in his time Tiber overflowed all Rome,
Pantheon burnt with thunderbolts, Cities in Asia shaken with grievous
Earthquakes, and the whole Empire almost wasted by a most wretched dearth.
Adrianus, in whose Persecution, Alexander Bishop of Rome, with Hermes, his
wife, children and household, to the number of twelve hundred and fifty
persons, were burnt all in a furnace, and Theodorus a Deacon had his tongue cut
out of his head, his hands and feet cut off, afterward beheaded, and was cast
to dogs; at this time there were ten thousand crucified in Mount Ararat, round
with thorns, and their bodies pierced through with darts; at last he died
doubting of the life to come. Antoninus Verus, and his brother Lu^us,
persecuted Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and Justin the Philosopher put to
death; but in their time there did an unheard of Plague spread over a great
part of their Empire, Severus, a most severe Emperor in persecuting the
Christians, caused Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, and Calixtus Bishop of Rome, to be
martyred; but after he himself was slain, and the Roman Empire afflicted with
Civil wars. Maximinus, who martyred Hypolitus Bishop of an head City in Arabia,
was killed by his soldiers. Decius, in whose reign another Bishop of Antioch
suffered death, died miserably in the Scythian war, suffocated in a fen. In the
persecution under Valerian, died Cypriun Bishop of Carthage, that Caesar of the
Christian: But he was vanquished by Sapor King of Persia, and served instead of
a footstool, when the Persian took horse. I had almost forgot one thing; A
Judge in the time of Severus, condemned one Agapeius, a youth of fifteen; at
whose execution the Judge fell down from his seat, and cried, his bowels burnt
within him, and so died. Dioclesian and Maximian, raised a Persecution, which
like a flood ran over all the Roman Provinces, Syria, Tire, Egypt, etc. But at
last Dioclesian in his old days poisoned himself; and Maximian died a dogs
death, he was hanged up for a sign of Gods wrath, by Constantine. Thus in these
Ten Persecutions, Gods Ministers run through fire and water, (as the Prophet
David speaks of the afflictions of Gods children) and were not spared: But God
spared not to punish those wicked Emperors, the raisers of them. Then after
Julian the Apostate plays the devil; but God, the Lord of Hosts: for the
Persian got the honor of the day; and Julian wounded, sprinkling his blood up
toward heaven, died blaspheming, Vicisti tandem puer Galilee! Vulence, seduced
by the Arrians, made havoc of the Church; but being taken of the Goths in a
Cabin whither he fled, was burnt there. I could proceed.

The Mahumetan Persecution I need not insist on: Only, The Saracens, they are
vanished; Selymus the first Turkish Emperor, rooted out of that Nation; and the
Turks, they never are at ease, but at continual war; whose end, by the judgment
of the more learned, is at hand.

Neither need I (and therefore will not) insist on the Persecutions continued
under the Popes, in Italy, Germany, Spain, France, England, and in the Eastern
tract of the world. But who knows not the state of that Church? from whom are
hidden what deaths, many and most of them died? Take one for all, Boniface the
8. of whom it is reported, He came in like a Fox, he reigned like a Lion, and
died like a Dog.

Let these Examples be as so many arguments to induce Gods Ministers, howsoever
persecuted, to rejoice; for, Blessed are you, when for Christ's sake ye suffer
persecution, for yours is the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. They that will not
receive your crying aloud without sparing, shake the dust off your feet against
them; Sodom and Gomorrah shall be in a better case at the last day, than they;
Mat. 10.14. cap. 11.22. cap. 12.42.
It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Siaon, than for them. The Ninevites
and the Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment against them; Therefore
tell them their own soundly, and fear not. Though ye be among scorpions (as the
Lord said to Ezekiel) spare not for fear of the ensuing dangers. For whosoever
spares, incurs his own destruction, and the destruction of the people; both
shall be overwhelmed in the flood of Gods wrath; both shall sink into the gulf
of everlasting perdition; both being as the Prophet Jeremy speaks) sifted in
the sieve of vanity.

Yea, Press things home to the Conscience, and spare not, though no hope of
amendment of their life appear. God bids thee, and duty birds thee because God
bids thee. 1.2.
Though ye will not be believed, as Jeremy was not; where Azariah, Johanan, and
all the proud men said to him, Thou speak falsely: Yet cry aloud and spare
not, leave the event to God. Go, says he to Ezekiel, and tell this people,
whether they hear, or hear not: If they do, they shall have life; if not,
judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools, Prove.
19. ult. For if they heir not you, when you cry from God to them; God will not
hear them when they cry to him, or you for them. Jer. 7.16.

Now God Almighty enable, embolden and encourage all his Ministers to cry aloud
to those whose minds are wandering, that their hearts may turn to God; to those
that are in pursuit of their own wicked lusts, that they may be reclaimed; to
those that are afar off, that they may hear and return homeward to God; to
those that are asleep in sin, that they may awake to righteousness; to those
that stop their ears, that they may open them with gladness; to those that hear
carelessly, that they may hear diligently; to those that are dead in sins, that
they may arise and be quickened with the life of grace, to the life of glory.

Again, As we must take heed of our Doctrine, so we must take heed of our
Lives, that we be unspotted of this wicked world. Mundamimini qui fertis vasa
Domini; Ye that carry the vessels of the Lord, be clean. The Breast Plate of
the Priest had this inscription, HOLINESS TO THE LORD; signifying, that we
should have Holiness impressed in our hearts. Remember the Orders ye have taken,
they are holy, Holy Orders: Be ye not then defiled with the contaminating and
for did customs of the world; but as ye are separated from all others to an
holy emploiment, so do not ye degenerate; but let your light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in
heaven. Know, that the eyes of all men are fixed upon you: If covetousness,
pride, luxury, drunkenness, or any other vice reign in any of you; if any of
you be of a dissolute life, whose conversation is not ruled by the doctrine ye
teach; ye are but miserable creatures. Be assured, Pope Innoc. lib. 3. de S.
Altar. mist.
that Quisquis sacris indumentis ornatur, and honestis moribus non (...) quanto
venerabilior apparet hominibus, tanto indignior redditur apud Deum, says one.
God contemns him, and will reward him according to his work: For, It is not
every one that cries Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven;
but only they that do the will of my Father, says Christ. Take heed therefore
to your lives. If you preach well, and live ill, you do but build with one
hand, and pull down with another. And thus much for the Caveat, as it respects
our selves.

Now of the Caveat briefly, as it respects the Church of God. Take heed to all
the flock, etc. A Minister has the custody of many souls; and if any perish
through his means, he is liable to Gods judgments. As therefore we come
provided with Knowledge, so with a resolution to propagate and diffuse it.
Knowledge in the best of us, not communicated to the building up of the Church
in holiness, is like costly materials prepared for the erecting of some
sumptuous building, yet to no use, the loss whereof is irrecoverable. It stands
us upon therefore to be instant in season and out of season; to be Instructers
of the flock committed to our charge, both in doctrine and manner of living.
The reason hereof rendered in my Text, is substantial, in that we are made
Overseers of the flock.

The word interpreted Overseer, is (...): hence, says one, Nomen Episcopi plus
sonat oneris quam honoris. But I take it here in a larger signification than it
is commonly used. All Ministers are Overseers of that Flock, the charge of
whose souls is committed to them. They are their Spiritual Tutors, unfolding
unto them the secret mysteries of Divine knowledge: They must inform them, if
ignorant; reform them, if erroneous; reprove them, if dissolute; confirm them,
if weak in the faith.

They are called Watchmen, to watch for their souls salvation, that they be not
carried away with every wind of dectrine, that they run not into absurd
enormities; but that they hold fast the profession of the faith, in holiness
and righteousness all the days of their lives. They are called Pastors, whose
calling is to use all diligence to feed their flock, and protect them from
eminent mischiefs, by a careful foresight, or present needful power. The
Symbol of this (say some) is the Bishops Crosier, the Spiritual Shepherds
staff, which is acutus in fine ad pungendum pigros, rectus in medio ad regendum
debiles, retortus in summo ad colligendum vagos: sharp in the end, to prick up
the slothful and make them nimble; right in the midst, to govern the weak; but
crooked in the top like a hook, to gather the dispersed, or such as go astray.
They are called Gods Stewards, whose office is, faithfully to provide all
things necessary for his family. They are called the Light of the world, whose
property is to discover things hid in darkness; They by their knowledge dispel
the clouds of ignorance, by their holy conversation the works of darkness.

All things that are discovered, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever
does make manifest, is light: hence they show the house of Judah their sins,
Ephesians. 5 13.
and the house of Jacob their thrnsgressions. They are called Stars, Fixed in
the right hand of God, tanquam in firmamento suo, as in their heaven. Stars
have their light from the Sun; so you not originally from your selves, but
derivatively from the Sun of Righteousness: Your knowledge proceeds from the
revelation of Jesus Christ, who was in the bosom of the Father, and must be
communicated to the world. And to this end they move perpetually about the
world; so ought you about the Church, that all therein may be partakers of the
light of life.

Wonderful are the effects, and powerful the operation that the Celestial
bodies have by their influences upon the Elements, and upon those things
compacted by them: So questionless, the effects wrought by the powerful
preaching of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, by such
whose conversation is in heaven, as Divine stars, are far superior unto them.
The operation, I am sure, more effectual, because more spiritual. For as the
Stars beget life in things void of life, and cause vegetation by their heat; So
they by their precepts beget says, in those that are dead in sins and
trespasses; which is the soul of the soul, by which we live unto God; for,
Faith comes by hearing, and the just lives by his faith. Furthermore, by the
propagation of the Gospel by preaching, the Church of God grows, and all
therein as tender plants and trees of righteousness, bring forth the fruits of
eternal life. Lastly, The fixed Stars, candem sempet inter (...) disstantiam,
they keep the same proportion of distance to each other: The like harmony must
be among us, that all of us together may declare the glory of God.

They are called Angels, to whom God has given charge over his people, to
protect them: Heb. 1. ult.
For as they are ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of salvation; so are Ministers: wherefore says the Prophet, How
beautiful are the feet of those that bring the glad tidings of peace! What
shall I say more? They are called Fathers.

All these names import labor in them to whom they are ascribed: So that great
must be the pains that we must take with the Flock, the Church of God, over the
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers.

A word to the people. I beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very
highly in love for their work sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Apud Graecos majori in
honor babebantur Philosophi quam Oratores: Illi enim recte vivendi, etc.
Lactantius.
The Grecians gave greater respect to their Philosophers, than to their
Orators; because these taught them how to speak, but those how to live well.
And s^ffer the word of exhortation, Heb. 13.22.

God must send, ere man can go. And here is Gods care of man, his love to man.
God comes not in his own proper person, He speaks not in his own proper voice:
So great is the Majesty of the one, that none can see him and live, Exodus 33.20.
So terrible the other, that the Israelites trembled, cap. 19.16. His sight so
full of Majesty, that, Woe is me, says Isaiah, I am undone, for mine eyes have
seen the King the Lord of Hosts, cap. 6.5. So full of terror his Voice, that
the Israelites said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not
God speak with us, lest we die, Exodus 20.20. Thus, would God come unto us, his
sight would dash us, his voice would daunt us; His presence is accompanied with
lightning, when he speaks he thunders. Sinai was in a burning sever before God;
the Earth was troubled with a shaking ague; the floods ran back at his
presence; the heavens dropped at the first sight, Psalm. 68.8. The voice of the
Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty, Namper C^dros
intelligit (...) quicquid est eximium in mundo.
the voice of the Lord breaks the cedars, the voice of the Lord divides the
flames of fire, the voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, the Lord shakes
the wilderness of Kadesh, etc. Psalm. 29. So that the Lord considering that Man
is but flesh, as weak as water; he refrains from coming, but not from sending,
to us, for us. Not Angels, though ministering spirits, as he did before the Law;
but (having an eye to man's imbecility) flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone,
Men. Because himself would not thunder, he sends Boanerges, sons of thunder. He
sends not Angels, spirits; but Men-angels, messengers, Mat. 2. but little
inferior to Angels. And this he does for several reasons, besides that of his
love and care, viz.

1. To show us in what reputation Man is with him. He makes men, not mean men,
but his Ambassadors to men. Such as do reveal his secrets, Privy Counselors,
such as represent his Person, a kind of Kings. And this honor all his Saints
have. Psalm. 149.9.


2. To exercise us in that high grace of humility. God exalts man, to humble
man. If the Lion roar, who will not fear? Amos 3.8. If the Lord speak, who will
not, who cannot but obey? No thanks to him then. But when Man speaks, and men
obey; hoc opus, this is the work of humility: Here he shows himself a true
subject, when he yields obedience to Gods word spoken by man, albeit in dignity
he be far inferior unto him.

3. Because it is the surest bond of Amity. If one needed not the instruction
of another, but every one should think himself sufficient of himself; (such is
the pride of man) what division, what debate, what contempt of one another? Now
this is the surest True-loves knot between man and man.

Let therefore a man so account of us (says the Apostle) as the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. And, Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13.17.

SCALA JACOBI; OR, St James his Ladder.
JAMES. ^.25. But whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man
shall be blessed in his deed.
ANTIQUITY reports, that the statute of Merciery was erected where cross ways
met, to point out to passengers and pilgrims, the direct paths they desired to
travel: So I may conceive of this blessed messenger of God, the Apostle James,
made in the likeness of God. In this world we are pilgrims and strangers, where
we have no abiding City, but seek for one to come: our way to that City, which
is the heavenly Jerusalem, is through many tribulations and crosses; where
this Apostle being set up, does show the way to us wherein we must walk, if we
will possess the treasure of our hopes and longed for felicity.

And because the way is ascendant, leading gradually upward; I therefore may
compare it to a pair of stairs, or call it Scalam Jacobi, St James his ladder;
wherein are to be observed, 1. The bottom or ground. 2. The several steps,
placed in a due proportion. 3. The top or upper part, which we aim to arrive
at.


As for the bottom, it is that good word of God, the Gospel of Christ Jesus,

As for the steps, they are four; the first is Speculation, Whosoever looks: and
continues therein; the third is Remembrance, he being not a forgetful hearer;
the fourth is Practice, but a doer of the work.

As for the top of these stairs, it is the end of this Scripture,
[blessedness] this man shall be blessed in his deed.

I must stand a while upon the bottom of the stairs, the Gospel of salvation,
termed a law; the law of the spirit, the law of faith; the law of the spirit,
as the prime inditer, the law of faith, as the prime effect: the law of the
spirit, in regard of the spiritual graces of God produced by it; the law of
faith, as the special duty enjoined us in it.

Rat io nominis primum inquirenda; we are now by the laws of accurate
teaching, to enquire specially why the Gospel is called a law; and that is, 1.
Because what is delivered therein to be observed of us, is obligatory, coming
by way of command? and having in it the regal stamp of supreme authority. 2.
Because it prescribes punishments to the disobedient transgressors thereof;
sincere obedience and essectual believing in Christ being exacted of us, upon
pain of death. 3. Because it contains large promises of great rewards, to the
faithful observers of the sacred contents thereof; Bernard.
as Bernard says in his Meditations, Si tormenta non terreant, saltem invitent
praemia; if threatened punishments do not deterr us; promised rewards may the
more invite us.

As it is a law, so it is a perfect law; perfect in the Author Gods Spirit,
which is infallible; not admitting either Popish legends to delude the People,
or traditional writs to destroy them. Integra est doctrina, ac pro^nde animos
redintegrat. Jun. Psalm. 19.
Perfect in the manner of delivery, divine inspiration, as proceeding from the
will of God, not from the will of man. Perfect in operation, as converting the
soul; making wise the simple; rejoicing the heart; in lightning the eyes; and
making the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. Perfect
in the contents and matter, as full, and wanting nothing conducing to the bet
tering of our knowledge in the ways of piety; our knowledge contemplative in
matters of faith; our knowledge practical matters of fact. And perfect in the
end, Gods glory; the glory of his mercy in the salvation of penitent and
believing souls, the glory of his justice, in the condemnation of obdurate and
perverse malefactors.

As it is a perfect law, so it is a law of liberty; opposed to the Mosaical,
which is lex senvitutis, a law of thraldom. The liberty of this law in respect
of our twofold condition is twofold, 1. Gracious here in the life of grace,
wrought by Christ the Son of the everliving God; if the Son make us free, we
are free indeed. Joh. 8.36.
Wherefore we have a free access at all times to call upon the Father of
mercys, imploring his powerful assistance in holy actions, and invincible
protection from all evil. 2. Glorious, in the life of glory; called
Vindicationis libertas, the liberty of complete redemption; the creature being
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. Phrasis qulgatissima est Deum colere. Non secus at que agri
fertiles inprimis and optimi, sic Dei cultus, f^uctus fert ad vitam aternam
uberrimos.


Of this twofold liberty, there are these parts, 1. A liberty from sin; our
submission to the Gospel, and faithful embracing of the promises of God in
Christ; frees us both from the reigning power of sin; and from the condemning
power: For being made free from sin, we become servants to God, and have our
fruit unto holiness, and the and everlusting life, Romans 6.22. 2. A liberty from
the yoke of the ceremonial law, and bondage of the moral. From the yoke of the
ceremonial law, which was so ponderous, as that neither we nor our fathers were
able to bear: but now by Christ and the law of faith, it is blotted out, quite
abolished, and taken out of the way.

And from the bondage of the moral law in these ensuing particulars; 1. From
the curse, and consequently from the punishment of sin, the transgression of
the law; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us: Gal. 3.13. Romans 8.1. (...).
and the Apostle certifies us, that there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. 2. From the rigor and exaction of the law, requiring of us
for our justification, perfect righteousness inherent in us, and perfect
obedience to be practiced by us. 3. From the terror and coaction of the law,
which ingendereth servile fear in those who are under it, and compels them
through the horror of torment, as bondslaves by the whip or rack, to the
outward (though unwilling) performance of it. But those that are under the law
of grace, are zealously addicted to good works and services of God; which are
over done by them, with the free consent of a plous mind; the original cause
whereof is not any natural disposition; but the love of God shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. 4. from the instigation of
the law, for which reason says Pareus on 1 Cor. 15.56. it has got the name of
the strength of sin, whereby sin appears more sinful; which is not caused by
any fault in the law, in it self good, and condemning sin; but through the
viciousness of our unregenerate nature, that takes occasion from the sacred
prohibitions of it, to transgress: which irritation is accidental, not
essential to the undefiled law of the righteous Lord.

Another part of this liberty, is a liberty from death; which is twofold, the
first and the second. They that are effectually in subjection to the Gospel,
the glad-tidings of peace; are free from the first death, as it is a
punishment: And from the second, over them the second death shall have no
power. Tollitur more, non ne fiat, sed ne obsit. Aug.
To them the nature of the first death is changed, and made but transitus ad
vitam, a passage from death to life; it is the end of sin and misery, and the
beginning of our unspeakable happiness, the highway from the vale of tears,
to the Kingdom of glory and Celestial joys; the Period of a mortal life, and
the innitiation of a life immortal.

Last of all there is a liberty from Satan and the world, granted to the sons
of God, adopted in the Son of God, the Son of God has over come the strong
man, Not imperium Principis, but Carnificis. a Lapide.
and bound him, as being stronger than he; thorough death, he destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and delivers them who
through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.14.
Get thee behind us Satan (as Christ said to Peter) and let the wicked world
follow thee, which Christ has overcome. Joh. 16. ult. And since (O loving
Savior) we live free men, free from sin reigning, condemning, free from Satan
and the world, under the easy yoke of thy Evangelical Law, and under the
protection of thy wings; We will, with thy disciples, follow thee whithersoever
thou go; and run after thee, whither thy good Spirit shall lead us. Thus it
is apparent, how the Gospel of Christ is a perfect Law of liberty; into which
whosoever looks and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed.

From the bottom of the stairs or ladder, we now go up the steps: the first
whereof is speculation, whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty. Joh.
5.39. Audite saeculares, comparate vobis Biblia animae Pharmaca. Chrysostom.
Prono capite and propenso collo accurate in trospieere. 1 Pet. 1.12.


It was a good advice (blessed be the mouth that gave it) Search the Scriptures;
which is made good by the reasons rendered, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me, says our Savior: hence this
search must not be slight, this speculation not vain, this looking not
perfunctory; our Knowledge of Christ and eternal life depending on it: This is
intimated in the original word (...), signifying an exact and accurate prying
into a thing; as if one to find out, somewhat difficult to find out, should
stand in this posture, with his body or head bended toward the earth, his eyes
contracted and fixed upon some object, as if he did intend to look it through,
and so to inform himself fully: Thus when we attempt to look into the abstruse
mysteries of divinity, to acquaint our selves with the sacred Principles of
Religion; a superficial view is of no avail; Profound matters require a serious
and frequent meditation, an indefatigable study; hence the Apostle St Peter
describing the desire of the Angels to know the hidden mysteries of salvation,
expresses it by the same word, the Angels desire to look narrowly into the
things revealed to us by the Holy Ghost, a work worthy their and our pains: not
to be posted over with a careless run, but to be stuck close unto, and
prosecuted until finished, and the mind in some sort rest satisfied.

Had that Apostate Julian disburdened his soul of all praejudicate opinions,
had he pondered divine truths as was requisite, had he looked into it as into
the word of God; he never had blasphemed it, in saying, Vidi, legi, contempsi;
I saw it, read it, contemned it; to whom learned Basil modestly replied as
Chamier that famous Frenchman reports out of history, Vidisti? legisti? non
intellexisti, si intellexisses, non contempsisses; sawedst thou it? readst thou
it? thou never understoodst it; had thou understood it, thou had never
contemned it. Of so great authority and so full of divine majesty are the
Oracles of God; as that in an understanding man, they beget an awful reverence,
and mightily prevail for an obedient subscription, with those that studiously
look into it: never man spoke as Christ, never man as God.

Now who those are that should diligently enquire after the will of God, and
look into the perfect Law of liberty; is a point worthy our enquiring after.
None but such as exempt themselves from God, exempt themselves from this task.
All are bound to it, but who will observe it? Minister and People, as they
combine to honor God, so to know him, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ: The
Knowledge of whose will glides not into the soul of man, by natural instinct,
or moral infusion; but by the Spirit and the Word of truth; the Spirit
illuminating, the Word informing our understanding, In which word, we that are
Pastors of the flock of Christ, above others must use assiduous scrutiny: it is
our profession to know more than ordinary, Act. 20.28.
as appointed in an higher sphere to be Overseers of the Church of God. Hence
the Spirit terms the Prophets Seers, because they saw the will of God, which
others also saw by them; 1 Cor. 4.1.
and the Apostles with their successors, stewards of the mysteries of God, and
Ambassadors for Christ, to pray men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God: 2
Cor. 5.20. En flexanimam suadae medullam.
whose knowledge by preaching must be diffused, others must reap the benefit of
our pains. God makes us knowing men, to make knowing men; which many have
taken on them to do, but some neglect it; some can, but will not; some will
not, because they cannot; some cannot, and yet presume: As for them that can
and will not, I pity them, they shall be beaten with many stripes; as for them
that will not, because they cannot, I slight them, though richer than my self,
they are but dumb dogs; as for them that cannot, yet presume; the world may
jeere them, they make the Pulpit undervalued. But for Gods sake my brethren let
us that can, will; and endeavor when we speak from the father of languages, to
deliver our embassage, not in an ill one, lest we expose our selves to a
scornful censure; nor in a too obscure and affected one, laboring more for
fine words than fit ones; lest affecting the praise of humane eloquence; we
feed the people as Heliogabalus did his Parasites, with painted dishes; as
those fed the eye, not the body, so the other tickle the ear, but profit not
the soul. It Is truth that one speaks, there is a Magic in the tongue, can
charm the wild man's motions: and though God has chosen by weak things to
confound the wise; 1 Cor. 1.27.
yet experience shows, that in all times a washed language has much prevailed.
The Scriptures are penned in a tongue of a deep expression, in every word almost
a Metaphor illustrating by some allusion. How political is Moses? how
Philosophycal and Mathematical is Job? how massy and sententious Solomon in his
Proverbs? how quaint and amorously affected in his Canticles? how grave and
solemn in his Ecclesiastes? and how poetical and full of heavenly raptures, is
his father in his Psalms? Christ's doctrine astonished the Jews; Paul pleaded
at the bar in a transcendent strain of eloquence, and in dispute was subtle.
In a word, it suites not with the Majesty of so divine an Art as is that of
winning souls, to be presented in sordid rags, but in a graceful trim, yet
plain. Confections that are cordial, are not the worse, but the better, for
being gilded. Divinity, as it must not lasciviate, so being well ordered by
significant words, placed in a native decency; angles the soul, and lifts it up
to heaven.

As Herod therefore bade the wise men, diligently to search for the young child
Jesus, and when they had found him, to bring him word; that he might go and
worship him also, so I advise my brethren accurately to look into this perfect
law of liberty, and when they have found what there is hidden, by constant
preaching to divulge it. By this means the perverse transgressor is called and
converted; and Gods pleasure before neglected, is observed. I repeat St Peter's
exhortation, feed the flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, (...), Tant^m ut nos pascat and v^stiat.
not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. 1
Pet. 5.2. that every one of you may say, with the Apostle of the Gentiles, As
much as in me lies, I am ready to preach the Gospel unto you, Romans 1.15.
Quicquid in me situm est, Promptum est.
Which done in sincerity, not having an eye to the airy applause of men, nor
wordly commodity; but to the glory of God immortal, in the salvation of the
souls of the hearers; when the chief shepherd shall appear, (...), ye shall
receive a Crown of glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.

As for silent Ministers, not silent by authority, but through insufficiency: I
should wish them well, did I wish they never had that calling, unto which I
dare say they were never truly called; but compelled by necessity, on whom
avarice laid on the supposedly holy hands. By which disorder of ordering broken
tradesmen, and such of the giddy-headed multitude, untuter'd in the Word of
God, who never knew other Art than how to deceive; this holy function is
profaned, the Church scandalized, the well-deserving kept in penury, ignorance
gets head, impiety propagates, and the sheep of Christ with these Wolves in
sheepskins, are pitifully worried. This tends to verifying Winifrids
Apothegme, changing one word; In old time there were golden Pastors and wooden
Chalices, but now golden Chalices and wooden Pastors: as of old the Jews had a
royal Temple, but a rascal Priesthood. To redress this abuse, the remedy lies
in the Imposers hands; would the reverend Fathers of the Church, hold in their
hands from imposition, and Patrons theirs from Donation, until merit claimed
it; Clerus Angliae, stupor mundi.
these unworthy vermin would never appear, and Churchmen would gain their
ancient reputation. I make bold therefore to report, what an honorable person
once writ to his most excellent Majesty of famous memory, learned King James,
They must rather leave the Ark to shake as it shall please God, than put
unworthy hands to hold it up; Nil defensoribus istis indiget Ecclesia; It Is a
fearful doom they shall undergo, when God shall require the peoples blood at
their hands, who perish for want of knowledge: however these men cannot be
denied the benefit of their Clergy, if they can but read.

As for them that cannot preach, yet presume; their presumption speaks their
folly; yet such m^lapart audacity is sooner crowned with the Laurel, than a
modest ingenuity. Upon the first hearing, they are noised famous, when indeed
they offer but the sacrifice of fools. It was a religious wish of a wise man,
God forbid, that every man that can take unto himself boldness to speak an
hour together in a Church upon a text, should be admitted for a Preacher,
though he mean never so well: A settled brain, a good sad temper, a studious
disposition, a well-grounded learning is fittest for this enterprise. Therefore
we may justly admire the valor of some men, that before their studies dare
ascend the Pulpit, and do there take more pains, than they have in their
library. This makes some to use an inculcation of vain tautologie; others (as
one says) such fugitive Divines, that like cowards they run away from their
text. I say no more of them, but wish with all my soul, that ere they looked
abroad, they had looked well into the perfect law of liberty at home; and so I
dismiss them.

As Ministers must look into the Word of God first; so must the people after.
The lips of the Priest preserve knowledge for the peoples use; Non libro
sacerdotis, sed labr^; non codice, sed cord, conservatur scientia.
their blood will be required at his hands, if they through his default wander
out of the way, and perish in their sins: if otherwise, their blood will be
upon their own heads.

Your practice then (dear brethren) in looking into the Word, must be, To hear
the Word when preached; to hear it, (...), with joy; rejoyceing with David, to
go into the house of the Lord, and to dwell there for ever: To hear it, (...),
with all readiness of mind, 1 Pet. 2.2. and longing after it, Psalm. 119.131.
To hear it, (...), with all humility; like Paul sitting at Gamaliels feet: To
hear it, (...), with fear and reverence, as in Gods presence; like Cornelius,
hearing what God says: To hear it, (...), with patience and a retired
attention; like Mary, laying aside all cumbersom thoughts of the world that may
distract your souls.

The Romans held their Censors so reverend, that they thought him worthy of no
small punishment that did but yawne before him; and shall not God judge them
(think you) that care not how they hear his Ambassadors, holding forth the word
of reconciliation? Heathenish Alexander and Attila, that received Jaddus and
Leo, as the Lord himself; and the foolish Galatians, that received Saint Paul
as an Angel of God, even as Christ hiraself; shall rise and condemn all
perfunctory Auditors of his truth. Take heed then how you hear; and follow not
the steps of that untoward generation of the Jews, in their peevish
incredulity, shutting their eyes upon the glorious light of saving truth: Like
that sullen tree in the Indies, which, they say, closes it self against the
beams of the rising Sun; and opens only to the dampish shades of the night.
What a shame will it be to you, shall that conceit of a new invention be
fulfilled in you, Christians had once blind Churches and lightsom hearts; but
now blind hearts and lightsom Churches. It was the complaint of one in his
time, that the fathers had plowed, sown, reaped, fan'd the wheat, and set the
bread upon the table; but the children had not a mouth to eat it. Let it not be
so said of you, for if it may for truth; in truth you perish your souls
everlastingly. Solomon confirms me, he that despises the Word shall be
destroyed. Prove. 13.13.
Carefully look then into the Word by hearing, so shall ye suredly pass that
danger.

Again, your practice must be to read the Law of your God; whilst your tongues
read, your souls hear God speaking: The circumspect reading of one Chapter
whereof (I speak it by experience) sets me a thinking more than I can imagine;
it elevates the soul above it self, which rests satisfied without expecting
farther Enthusiasms or new Revelations; such heavenly doctrine is thereby dropped
into the heart, as fits the reader to render a reason of his faith. Those
faithful witnesses of Christ in Bohemia called Thalorites, if they had not
diligently plied the Scriptures, could not have been so skilful in them, as
Aeneas Sylvius their professed enemy reports them. Aeneas Sylvius de dict. and
fact. Alphons. lib. 2. c. 17.
Many has fame crowned for wise men, that read much; but none for more wise,
than those who delight in the Law of the Lord, and meditate therein both day
and night. Which meditation is the souls Perspective-Glasse, whereby in her
long remove, she discerns God, as if he were near at hand. Nothing can carry
us so near God and heaven as this; do but join them together, and they give up
a man to raptures, and irradiate the soul with such high apprehensions; that
all that wisdom which this world has, hereby appears contemptible.

Now for the better understanding of the mind of God, it will not be amiss in
reading, in meditating; to confer Scripture with Scripture: As the clouds
clashing together in the air above, throw them at the length a most bright
lightning; so do the Scriptures when paralleled. The reason is strong; Ireneus
gave it; Ireneus.
Ostentiones quae sunt in Scripturis, non possunt aliter ostendi quam ex
Scripturis; The demonstrations in Scripture, cannot be otherwise made good,
than by Scripture. A good wit invented this allusion, the striking of two or
three strings together, directs the Musician for the tuning of his
instrument; so the comparing of several texts of Sacred Writ, leads us to the
true intention of the Spirit. Thus if we read, thus if we meditate; we shall
read, we shall meditate with understanding.

Furthermore, your practice must be to confer with the learned dead, with the
learned living; so Christ's disciples did with Christ, the Eunuch did so with
Philip. Hierom highly commends Marcella for the like, and Fiabiola for the like
zeal. With the learned dead, in their works; breathing instructions are more
effectual (all grant) but these have their operation: And being the number is
but small, as the number of Pearls in comparison of baser stones; the want
(blessed be our God) is well provided for, by their living monuments; which we
may use, as a traveller does a Map, the better to find out the way; or as
Joseph did the man's help, that advised him to leave Sechem, and seek his
brethren in Dothan.

But to what purpose is all this? The Patrons of ignorance suggest unto us,
that the Scriptures are obscure, and so unfit for the Vulgar to look into:
believe it not, it is a false alarm, it is a bold tale; by David's help, ye may
des^ry them; Thy Word is a light unto my feet, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Pet. 1.19.
and a lanthorn unto my paths, faith the blessed King. Saint Peter calls it a
light that shines in a dark place; which if the darkness comprehend not, the
aspersion is not to be cast upon the Word, but upon us, in whom the darkness
dwells. The Sun is not a jot the more obscure, that a blind man sees it not;
no more is the Word of God, that a natural man understands it not: for it is
impossible for him so considered; 1. In regard of his natural corruption,
whereby he loves darkness more than light. 2. In regard of his natural
dimnesse, whereby (says Justin Martyn) he is too weak to apprehend clearly the
greater matters. 3. In regard of the malice of our ancient enemy, who labors
to take that seed which is sown, out of our hearts, and make it unprofitable.

Yet this word is to be looked into of all; to be heard, received, meditated and
discourst of; because by this means we may in time attain to the understanding
of it. But specially by the guidance of the unerring Spirit, that teaches us
all things; for which, we must daily supplicate unto the Father of wisdom, to
make us wise unto salvation. For if he be once conferred upon us, 1 Cor. 2.10.
we are fitted then to search all things, even the deep things of God. Until
which, there remains a vail over the heart, and scales of ignorance, which must
first fall lo^, as those did from Paul's eyes. It is not every one that brings
with him a rational soul, that is capable of Divine Revelations; it is true,
(...), etc. The mind sees, the mind hears, Epicharmus said it: Epicharmus.
yet never is it fit to entertain sacred and supernatural objects, until first
rectified by the Spirit of truth. For the Gentile, that is, the unregenerate
walkers in the vanity of their minds, until the power Divine actuate them anew,
until the holly Ghost, who is the anointing eye salve, Joh. 14.26.
open their eyes, and teach them all things; remain in that dark condition.
Velamen amove volumen evolve.
Hence proceeded David's Petition, Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy La^, Psalm. 119.18. If God open the heart of man, as
he did the heart of Lydiu, What should (...) from reading Gods mind in his
written Word? For this the Bereans won the reputation of being Noble; which
none but the ignoble brood of the lying Whore of Babylon oppose, who, were not
their faces thatcht over with impudence, as is their devotion laid over with
ignorance, might extremely be ashamed. For which grand Sacrilege, they pretend
Apostolical authority, derived from the Popes Chair, under the disguise of
holiness; wherein lies a deep plot, how to cheat men's souls of saving
knowledge, and thereby men of their souls. The scope of which damned project,
is to keep the people in a servile awe at their back, and make them submit to
what they prescribe* whereby poor souls, they are hurried aloug^ood winckt,
into an unavoidable destruction. I would to God, they were better advised. A
Chancellor in England advising a Judge, told him, it was his duty to open the
Jurors eyes, and not to lead them by the nose: So I may say to the Popish
Clergy, it is their duty not to debar any Layman for looking into the
perfect law of liberty, which is all the evidence they can show for the Kingdom
of heaven, the land of the living; but to let them use that granted liberty for
their own satisfaction, and better assurance.

Let them then say what they will, the Scriptures are not for hardness, like
unto the Cities of the Anakims, which were so strong and so walled, that they
made the Israelites quake to think of them; Numb. 6.13.
neither are they for danger so perilous (as they report) to be meddled with,
as the tree of knowledge of good and evil, that brought death to them that
tasted it; but it is the power of God unto salvation, and to them that keep it,
there is great reward. I advise you therefore to fear nothing, but in the
strength of the Lord, seek to know your Fathers will every way, that you may be
the better enabled to do it, to your endless comfort, and his endless glory;
who is God over all blessed for ever.

For what remains, I contract my discourse. The second step is Perseverance.
And continues therein] That is, persevereth in the study of this holy
doctrine; and remain thin the Knowledge, belief and (...). Non quaruntu^ in
Christianis initis, sed finis. Hierom.
(...) their glory, when they lest their love to the truth. It is the evening
that crowns the day, and the last act that commands the whole scene. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed. Joh. 8.31.

The third step is Remembrance. He being not a forgetful hearer,] There is an
Hebraism in the words, (...), an hearer of oblivion; a term answering the
former similitude. Wicked men are often expressed by their bad memories; and
the sins of Gods people are usually sins of forgetfulness and incogitancy. Our
souls (says one) are like filthy ponds, in which fish die soon, frogs live
long: Profane jests are remembered, pious passages forgotten. Our memories
naturally are very false, and there is a wilful forgetfulness of the best
things. Therefore we should use the best helps; As, Attention, Prove. 4.21.
Affection, Psalm. 119.97. Application, Job 5.27. Meditation, Luke 2.19. And
Practice, Psalm. 119.49. All these are great friends to memory; which is the
Chest and Ark of Divine Truths; Isa. 42.23.
in which we should see them carefully locked up. We should lay up something
for the time to come; and learn that in Zion, which may support us in Babylon.

The fourth step is Practice. But a doer of the work;] That is, labors to
refer and bring all things to practice. Non quid legerint, sed quid eperint;
non quid dixerint, sed quomode, vixerint.
This is the end of all our reading and hearing, that we may do it; it is not
knowing, but practicing that brings blessedness. At the last day Christ will
demand, not what have we read or said but what have we done. One practical
Christian brings more glory to God: than a thousand notional formal professors.
Is Optime legit Scripturas, qui verba vertit in opera; An evidence we are truly
godly, when the Word is written in the heart, and held forth in the life, Phil.
2.16. It is not talking of wine, but drinking of it, that comforts and chears
the heart. The Theory of Music is delightful, but the practice is far more
excellent and pleasant. A real good man, is Decalogus explicatus, a living
Decalogue; his life is a comment on the commandments. He walks up to his
principles and privileges; answering his Gospel Light with a Gospel life. Ille
plus didicit quiplus facit.
A grain of grace is better than many pounds of gifts. Obedience is better than
sacrifice.

These lead to the top of all, which is blessedness. This man shall be blessed
in his deed;] Mark this against the Papists; the Apostle does not say, for, but
in his deed: It Is an evidence of our blessedness, though not the ground of it;
the way, though not the cause.

There is a blessedness annexed to obedience; not for the works sake, but out
of the mercy of God; see then that we so carry, as that we may come within the
compass of the blessing. His disciples were more blessed in hearing Christ,
than his mother in bearing him, Luke 11.28.

DECVS SANCTORVM; OR, THE Saints Dignity.
PSALM. 149.9. This honor have all his Saints.
HOnor Christianorum, Crux Christi; The Cross of Christ is the Christians
glory. God forbid that any of Christ's flock should glory in any thing, save in
the Cross of Christ. There is pain indeed, but there is pleasure too; the pain
is outward, but the pleasure inward; the pain is for a moment lasting, but the
pleasure time out of mind everlasting. There is trouble in the Cross; but hold
out unto the end, and the consequence of it will be rest world without end. All
afflictions are but light, in comparison of that exceeding and eternal weight
of glory that crowns them. Besides, the joy of the Holy Ghost is wrought in the
hearts of the afflicted members of Jesus Christ, weighs down the burden of that
sorrow that is laid upon them. Hence it is that they faint not; for though the
outward man perish, yet is the inward man renewed day by day. 2 Cor. 4.16.
It is an infallible Maxim dictated by Gods Spirit, That they that live godly
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.
But observe the magnanimity of the Martyrs: Though they be reviled, yet they
bless; though they be persecuted, yet they suffer it; though they be defamed,
yet they bless; though their blood run down about their ears, yet they rejoice,
forasmuch as they are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory
shall be revealed, they may be glad also with exceeding joy. For whosoever
suffers reproach, or any kind of persecution for the name of Christ, keeping
a good conscience, happy are they; for, the Spirit of glory and of God rests
upon them, and God on their part is glorified. The Church of God, which is the
Congregation of Saints, is compared to a City which is besieged; ab hostibus
oppugnatur, non expugnatur; which is assaulted, but not vanquished by any
adverse power, the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.
The Bush that Moses in a vision saw burning, but not consuming; did signify
the Church of God then in Egypt, burning in the fiery furnace of tribulation,
yet free from consumption: You may easily conceive the reason, God was there;
Here am I, said he to Moses. Where the Lord is, there is safety: No power can
destroy that which is supported by the highest power. Vritur, non comburitur;
the bush the Church does burn, but consumes not away; it is preserved for
greater glory, and greater glory reserved for it. For no doubt but the Saints,
the holy ones of the Holy One of Israel, shall at length have the upper hand of
their enemies: Principalities, powers and dominions, do set themselves against
them; but what of that? Principalities, powers and dominions must submit unto
them.

Wherefore, Let the Saints be joyful in glory; let them sing aloud upon their
beds; let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in
their hand; to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the
people; to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron;
to execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his Saints.

Observe in these words, these three parts. 1. A Subject; and that is Gods
Saints. 2. An Attribute, which is a special honor proper and peculiar to the
Saints, expressed in the precedent words, and here implied; This honor. 3. The
latitude and extent of this attribute of honor; all Gods Saints are partakers
of it; This honor have all his Saints. The Subject must be the first subject
of my discourse.

There are two sorts of Saints, 1. Seeming Saints, and 2. Real Saints.


Seeming Saints are, whose Religion is terminated in outward appearances; None
can have a fairer outside, none a fouler inside. Whereupon our Savior compares
them by the name of Hypocrites, to painted sepulchers; and others give them the
plausible appellation of white Devils. Painted sepulchers are glorious without,
but within nothing visible but rottenness: White Devils appear like Angels of
light; but do but search them, and you shall find them Angels of darkness;
Devils, though white as the Devil would have it, and as the Negro's paint him,
as a color contrary to their own, Multa videntur quae non sunt; Many good
things appear by them, but not one good thing can be found in them. Our Savior
deciphered them by the name of Wolves in Sheeps clothing; harmless in
profession, but in truth of a wolvish disposition; like those in the
Revelasion, that said they were Jews, and were not, but the Synagogue of Satan.
These are Saints in the Devils name, and of his making, whose damnation is
just, and from whom good Lord deliver us. Let us leave them as nothing to do
with this Text, nor this Text with them; which has only to do with Gods
Saints. And take this note with you; Si vita sanct^rum nobis acerit, appellatio
sanctorum nihi proderit, says reverend Davenant: The name of Saints will nover
do us good, if we lead not the good life of Saints.

There are real Saints, Saints of God; and they are Saints two ways, 1. By
Imputation. 2. By Renovation.


By Imputation; for to them the sanctity and righteousness of Jesus Christ is
imputed; in which respect the Saints gone were, the Saints living are perfect
in this lise. John 17.19. Ephesians. 5.27. Tales nos amat Deus, quales futu^i sumus
ipsius dono, non quales sumus nostro merito. Says an Ancient Council.
For the holiness of our dear Savior, in a bottomless mercy and goodness
imputed to them, is in it self most perfect. Of this our Savior speaks, when
he says, For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth. And the Apostle delivers this doctrine thus; That Christ
loved his Church, and he gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Were it not that
they are not imputed, and that Christ's righteousness is imputed to them; many
were the spots and wrinkles of the Saints whilst here militant. Sanctity
imports, among other things, a cleansing from impurity: whence Isidore, Sancti,
quasi sanguine tincti; Saints are so called, because they are sprinkled with
the blood of Jesus Christ, that cleanses from all sin. Who were anciently
purified, were sprinkled with the blood of the Sacrifice; so now the Saints
with the blood of the Son of God, who gave himself for them to God, an Offering
and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor; the righteousness and merits of
which Sacrifice are made theirs by assignment. Assignata est homini aliena
justitia, quia caruit sua, Bernard.
says Bernard; The righteousness of another is allotted and assigned unto man,
because he lost his own conferred on him of God. Since man's first apostasy and
fall from God, none could ever be perfect Saints in this world, without the
perfect rightcousness of Christ, which perfects them alone to whom it is
imputed; who being in Christ Jesus, are considered as one mystical person with
him who is their Head, from whom flows all perfection, by whom remission of
sin is compassed, and through whom freedom from condemnation eternally is
obtained. Thus Gods Saints are Saints by Imputation; whom I believe in Christ
to be no sinners, and therefore not guilty of death, but just and holy, and
lords over both sin and death, and assured heirs of everlasting life.

The Saints of God are Saints by Renovation: For to whom God sent forth his Son
into the world to redeem them, God sends forth the Spirit of his Son into their
hearts to sanctify them; which Sanctity wrought by the Spirit of grace and
Word of God, is a quality or qualification newly created in their hearts,
whereby the Image of God which was lost by the fall of Adam, is again restored,
and the corruption of sin by degrees abolished; the working grace of the
blessed Spirit never ceasing, until by a transcendent operation it mould and
frame them to righteousness and true holiness. Hence they are called new
creatures, whose intentions and actions are conformed to the exact rule of
holiness, Gods most holy Word, and the unerring directions of his renewing
Spirit.

Saints thus by Renovation, have in them a twofold grace and righteousness,
Viz. 1. Inherent grace. 2. Actual grace.


The inherent grace or righteousness of the Saints, does not originally arise
out of the principles of Nature, but of Gods free grace; not of their own
industrious acquisition, but of Gods favorable infusion. Hereby the tyranny of
sin was and is suppressed in them, and the violence of their natural corruption
inclined to mischief, by the predominancy of a more effectual grace habituated
in them, kept in order and subjection. Hereby the ruins of our nature are
repaired, and we by the quickening power of the God of life therein, graciously
revived. Hereby all Gods Saints are disposed and enabled to perform his
injunctions; and made acceptable in the Beloved; without whom, inherent grace
or sanctity is neither permanent nor operative: for in Christ, and by Christ
alone, the Saints are what they are, and do what good they do.

The actual righteousness of the Saints of God, is that conformity, which their
actions proceeding from the habit of grace, wrought in them by the Spirit of
sanctification dwelling in their hearts, have to Gods law. This is moral; yet
the beginning, the progression, and the finishing of it, proceeds from the
Supreme Author of all good. Nulli sunt conatus nostri ad bonum, si non
excitentur; vani, si non adjuventur: We never bend our endeavors and forces to
the performance of any good thing, if not excited: and all are but vain, if not
supported. For who is sufficient for these things that God exacts, if God
enable not? His grace is sufficient for us, and without it we insufficient for
them. The Saints work out their salvation with fear and trembling; but by the
help of God, that works in them both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
By the efficacy of his al sufficient working they exercise themselves unto
godliness, and apply their hearts to his service. Hence they are called Vessels
of honor, and Temples of the Holy Ghost, sequestered from all others for the
service of the Lord, and honor of his holy Name. It is to honor and to serve
him, that the Saints are by Baptism admitted into the Church; Nazianzen.
whence Nazianzen describes Baptism to be, Pactum vitae purioris cum Deo, A
compact made by man with God, to lead an undefiled life, and not to walk in the
way of sinners.

Sanctity I conceive to be like a Diametrical line in a Circle, constituting
two distinct Hemispheres of men, differencing the good from the bad, the Saints
from the Wicked: whereby we, and all men who are the Saints of God now in
being, are advertised to eschew the society of Atheists, Blasphemers,
Drunkards, Adulterers, Idolaters, and all malefactors, and to tread in the pure
footsteps of the blessed Saints, in their heavenly hemisphere; composing our
selves to keep within the Compass into which no Devil can have admittance. We
are men (if Saints) of another and a better world, and must not fashion our
selves according unto this. It is reported of the people of Lorain, Heyl. Ge^g^.
That they participate of the French Complement, and German Drinking. I fear it
may be reported of too many of us, and that report too true, That we
participate of the French Complement, and German Drinking, of the Spaniards
Oppression and Cruelty, of the Italians Whoring, of the Turks Atheism, of the
Jews Avarice, of the Papists Superstition, of Machiavels Perfidiousness, and
many others evil heapt up in the pack of mischief. But these things become not
Saints, they stand in opposition to their conditions; such men are Antipodes to
the Godly, walking contrary unto them. Wherefore lay aside all uncleanness of
the flesh; let not the fantastic pleasures of this bewitching world besot
your souls, neither come you into the assembly of the wicked, whom the world
may style, but with a false gloss, Men of renown. Chrysostom.
It is Chrysostom's speech on the 24. of Matthew; Sanctorum est non inquirere
mansiones ubi clariores sunt viri, fed ubi fideliores; nec gaudent ubi epulae
sunt largae, fed ubi storet sanctitas: It is not the property of Saints to
desire to dwell in those mansions, where the more famous men of this world
resort, but where the more faithful dwell; neither delight they to be where
dainties are in abundance, but where sanctity and holiness does most flourish.
Like Moses, that chose rather to live miserably with the opressed Israelites,
than deliciously in the Court of Pharach among swaggering Gallants. Be ye thus
minded as becomes Saints. Set up your rest where Religion flourishes, where
Piety is practiced, where good works performed, where Grace reigns; and be ye
as they, holy, and do as they do, good; otherwise God will spue you out of his
mouth, like the lukewarm Laodiceans. Hierom.
Non Hierosolymis fuisse, fed Hierosolymis been vixisse, laudandum est, says
Hierom: Not to live in Jerusalem, but to live well in Jerusalem, is
praiseworthy. We must not live in the Church amongst the Saints, but we must
be Saints of the Church.

Thus the Saints of God by renovation, have in them inherent and actual
sanctity: which in respect of their twofold state, is twofold, imperfect and
perfect; imperfect in their state militant, and perfect in their state
triumphant.

First then, There was never Saint found, nor ever shall be found Saint so
journing on this earth, during the days of his pilgrimage, endued with absolute
or complete sanctity: Their righteousness is but inchoative, begun here; yet
true, but not perfect until the day of our full and perfect redemption, until
our absolute translation from death to life, until our better change out of
this life of mortality into the life of immortal glory. Aug.
Nullus sanctus caret peccato, nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse sanctus, cum
affectu teneat sanctitatem, says Austin: No Saint wants sin, yet does he not
hereby cease to be a Saint, being his affection is possessed of holiness; The
desires of his soul have embraced grace, for which God graciously embraces his
soul. This impersection of the Saints, appears by the Apostle complaining of a
law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and so leading him
captive to the law of sin in his members; whereby, the good that he would do,
he did not. Of this he speaks, 2 Cor. 7.1.
when he says, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting or finishing holiness in the fear of God. Where the word
finishing imports the imperfection of the most perfect mere man, under which
he still groaneth in this life, and for which Paul he still cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? until
the day wherein he shall finish his course and sanctification in Gods fear. We
hear the Saints praised for the strictness of their holy life, and not
undeserved; their goodness is applauded of the good, and honored of the best.
Ambr^s.
Yet says Ambrose, Cognascamus sanctos non naturae praestantioris fuisse, fed
observantiae majoris; nec vitia nescisse, fed emendasse: Let us know, that the
Saints had not a more excellent nature than we, but had a greater observance
and respect to God, neither were they void of sin, but were always on the
mending hand. They were ever inclining to that perfection which they had not
yet obtained; and declining that evil which makes men incapable of perfection
Do ye so likewise; for be assured, that they that live in the world without
sanctity and amendment of life, live without the true God of the world; which
whosoever does, Hierom.
shall not live out of this world with God world without end. Non nisi sanctes
Coelestis aula suscipiet, says Hierom; The Court of Heaven entertains no
Courtiers but Saints and holy men: There shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27.
or works abomination, but they which are written in the book of life. Where
their imperfection is turned to perfection, and their incomplete grace to
perfect glory.

Secondly, So that albeit the Saints are not perfect in their state militant,
yet are complete in their state triumphant: Though not thoroughly holy in the
state of grace, yet their sanctification accomplished in the state of glory;
where no foe can oppress them, no sin infect them, no devil pervert them; ubi
una placida and fida tranqui^itas, una sollida and perpetua securit as, says
Cyprian; Cypr.
where there is only pleasing and faithful tranquillity, where only is solid
and perpetual security. Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie: Only the
blessed that do his commandment, Rev. 22.14, 15.
enter into the city, the new Jerusalem: Who are like Absalom in another
sense, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head without blemish; and
not like Isaiah's sinners, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
no whole part. This happy perfection and perfect happiness, let it be (as
annexed to the glory of God) the highest point of your ambitious thoughts, and
the But to which you shoot all the arrows of obedience: Then shall ye, being
with the Saints righteous by imputation and renovation, by grace inherent and
actual, here imperfect, but perfect registered and placed with the Saints; shall
be like the Sun in the firmament of heaven.

And so much concerning the Subject of this Text, Gods Saints; whom I leave in
their proper sphere, having brought them to their long home, where I trust we
shall all meet them in glory everlasting.

The second part of the Text, is the Attribute of special honor, proper to the
Saints; This honor. What is imported by this honor, is expressed in the
foregoing verses, and in the first part of the Text. To be brief, it is this; An
absolute victory over all People, Nations, Kings and Potentates, that fight
against the Saints. But being we cannot conceive a Conquest before a Conflict;
I will by Divine assistance treat a little of the Saints Conflict, and their
honorable Conquest.

Gods children and Saints are here in a continual warfare: Afflictions (says
one) are perpendicular to his graces in them; Virtue never yet wanted
opposites, Tendit ad astra per aspera virtus. The way to Heaven (as one
observes) is strewed with briars; like that which Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer passed betwixt two rocks, Bozez and Seneh, that is, foul and
thorny. Grievous and many are the Massacres of the Saints. The French proverb
of Sicknesses, is true of the Churches persecutions and conflicts; They come on
horseback, but go away on foot: And Rest and Pleasure, like Oxen, come slow
and heavily, and go away like Posthorses on the spur. The Kings of the earth
assemble themselves against the Lord and his anointed ones. To omit others,
Have not France, Germany, Spain, Italy, (who not?) been up in arms against the
Professors of the Truth, to send them through the Red sea of Tribulation, into
the land of Canaan? And do not those bitter enemies exercise all manner of
cruelty that barbarous rage can invent? Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel. As for torments and kinds of death,
Phalaris and his fellow-tyrants come short of those Bloodhounds of the Spanish
Inquisition: whom I may compare to the women of Vlna in India, Heyl. Geogr.
who black their teeth, because dogs teeth are white; so these black their
souls with the works of darkness, because the souls of the Saints are white
with innocence. But yet, as the malignant fury of inveterable men in authority,
did not terrify the Saints from professing the Truth; so neither did the
hideous dealings and tyrannous pursuits affright the Saints and faithful
Martyrs of our times, who vowed their lives and fortunes to the service of God:
witness the Saints in the time of the Ten Persecutions; witness the English
Martyrs in the time of Queen Mary; the most Christian resolution of the German
Princes, who cleaving to the doctrine of Luther, forsaking Popery, protested
that they would defend it to the death, Heyl.
and hence were first called Protestants.

I have read, that the Prince of Lorain gives for his Device, An armed Arm
coming as it were from Heaven, and grasping a naked sword; to show that he
holds his Estate by no other tenure than God and his sword. Such may be the
Device of the Saints, to show that they hold their Religion and eternal estate
on inheritance, by no other tenure than God and the sword of his Spirit, which
is his Word. It was Caesar's speech, everywhere where he fought, That he
fought for Honor; but in one place above the rest, for his Life: But Gods
Saints, ever for both. Niteris in cassum Christi subme^gere puppem: Fluctuat,
at nunquam mergitur^lla ratis.
But he in whose sight precious is the death of his Saints, has his victorious
arm stretched out for their protection. They are like reeds and tender plants,
which yield to a surious wind; but the blustering storm once overblown, recover
their former straightness. Gad, (says Jacob prophetically) a troop shall
overcome him, but he shall overcome at last. So the Church of God dispersed
over the earth, tossed to and fro, did and shall receive many overthrows, but
at last^t shall overcome. Adhuc in saeculo sumus, adhuc in acie constituti,
etc. (says Cyprian:) We are yet in the world, Cypr.
yet militant in the front of Gods army, like the forlorn hope; we fight daily
for our lives, with Paul we die daily: We must therefore husband our
opportunity the best we may, that we may persevere so in the narrow and strait
passage of Praise and Glory. If we continue unto the end, we shall be assuredly
saved: For after our storm of misery is past, we shall breathe in a free air,
in a world without an end.

Thus you have seen the Conflict of the Saints; mark now the issue of it: 1.
They cannot be overcome. 2. They cannot but overcome.


And this honor have all his Saints.

First, They cannot be overcome; for they are defended with the potent arm of
the Almighty, who never forsakes them in their extremity, but in their
greatest weakness manifests his strength, and grants deliverance when most
desperate. He forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever. The
Israelites in Egypr, David preserved by Saul, Psalm. 37.28.
the three Children in the fiery furnace, Daniel in the Lions den, were
wonderfully preserved: And hence the Saints in all ages since mightily
sustained, yea even in death some, by that God, whose hand is not shortened that
it cannot save,

Quosdam aperte liberavit, Aug.
quosdam occulte coronavit, says Austin on that Psalm; Some he openly
redeemed, and some he crowned in secret. The profoundest stratagem, though
fetched from the lowest pit of hell, cannot work their ruin. There is no
enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel: In God do they put
their trust, and care not what man can do unto them; The Lord of Hosts is with
them, the God of Jacob is their refuge. Nec plus ad dijiciendum praevalet
terrena poena, Cypr.
qu^m ad erigendum tutela divina, says a Father; Earthly tortures cannot
prevail more to pull them down, than Divine protection to raise them up. Though
they fall, Flebile principium, me^^or fortuna sequctur.
yet shall they rise; though they sit in darkness, yet shall the Lord be light
about them, Mic. 7.8. As an Eagle fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad
her wings, takes them and bears them on her wings; so does the Lord by his
special providence support his Saints, and bear them up on the wings of his
protection into the land of the living. Thus the Saints cannot be overcome.

Secondly, They cannot but overcome: There are more, and of greater power, that
fight for them, than against them. Greater is he that is in them, than is he
that is in the world. Be of good cheer, says Christ, (who in the Revelation is
styled the King of Saints) I have overcome the world. Qui pro nobis mortuus
semel vicit, semper vincit in nobis; He that once dying has overcome for us,
does ever overcome in us. Cypr. Ep. 9.
Wherefore, like a potters vessel shall their and our enemies be broken in
pieces; Kings shall be tied in fetters of iron, and great fear shall be on all
people. None are able to resist that power by which they fight the battles of
the Lord; Rather than resist, they will add the wings of fear to the feet of
cowardice, and fly away; The Devil and all will fly away if resisted.

It was Zuinglius his prophecy; Scio veritatem superaturam esse, and ubi ossa
mea in favillam redacta fuerint; acciditur quidem Christus, fed brevi resurgit,
ac de hostibus triumphat: I know that Truth will overcome, Luther.
even when my bones are consumed to ashes; Christ is slain in his Saints, but
he with them will shortly rise and triumph over his and their enemies. A
resolute Christian spoke it: He that suffers for a moment, overcomes once; but
he that always enters the lists to conflict with pain and tortures, non
vincitur, quotidie coronatur, is nover vanquished, but daily crowned.

Let this add spirit to your heart of grace; That when occasion offers it self,
ye may not be dismayed at the grim countenance of the fiercest adversary, nor
flinch at the most pinching torments that hell can invent. Though the Earth
move round (as Copernious imagined) yet are ye on sure ground on the Rock
Christ Jesus: And be assured, the day will be your own, though ye think it
long; Quo ^ongior pugna, hoc corona sublimior; The longer the fight, the more
glorious the trown. Cypr. Ep. 16.
The consideration of this may make you (as the Jews when they escaped
pernicious Haman's plot to take away their lives) have light, and gladness, and
joy; and honor: For as the Jews had the killing, so shall you with the rest of
the Saints have the judging of your enemies; their overthrow shall be your
rejoicing. Be not ye therefore like the Turks Janissaries, now more factious in
the Court, than valiant in the Camp; but go out in the strength of the Lord,
fight the good fight of faith, finish your course with joy, and lay hold upon
eternal life; for we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Post pluvias serenitatem, pest tenebras lucem, post procellas placidam
lenitatem, post miseriam gloriam, mittet Deus: The Everlasting God will send
unto you, after rain fair weather, after darkness light, after tempestuous
storms a gentle calm, after a temporary misery everlasting glory. And this
honor have all his Saints. And thus much concerning the Attribute of special
honor; This honor.

The last part of the Text, is the latitude or extent of this special honor;
All Gods Saints have it. This honor have all his Saints.

Every one whom the Lord of Hosts calls to bear arms, or to expose his life or
fortunes to dangers in this spiritual war, He does furnish him with all
military habiliments, und confers upon him that strength whereby he may return
conqueror; upon whose victorious return unto him from whom he came, he crowns
him with glory and honor. Every particular Saint has due unto himself by
promise, a crown of life laid up for him, which the righteous Judge shall at
the last day give unto him, Peter, Paul, James, John, and every sanctified man
shall not miss of the King of Kings royal pay. Be thou faithful unto death,
says the Spirit in the Revelation, and I will give thee the crown of life. He
that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death. He that overcomes and
keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations, and
he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessel of a potter shall they be
broken to shivers. To him (again says the same Spirit) that overcomes* will I
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame and am set down with
my Father in his throne

So that all and every one of his Saints, has the honor of overcoming and
triumphing, upon the overthrow of their Antagonists. God will thus deal with
you too, if you keep on hostility against the enemies of your salvation, if you
be faithful defenders of the true faith. An honorable end ever crowns honorable
actions: And what other can be the expectation of the Heirs of salvation? which
is the proper title of Gods S^ints; and I trust, that title with all the
concomitants thereof, ours. Be ye sure then to make your Election, your
Justification, your Sanctification sure: For, not those that are registered
Saints in Popes Calendars, are thus honored; but only they that are cleansed
with the blood of Christ, they that are sanctified with the holy Spirit, only
they who are Canonized in heaven, and belonging to the election of grace. Who,
to their exceeding joy at the last day, shall hear that fearful sentence of
death pronounced against their enemies, Go ye cursed, etc. And this judgment
have all the wicked. And that comfortable sentence of an endless life, prono
need to them; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world; which Kingdom is called by the Apostle,
the inheritance of the Saints in light. And this honor have all his Saints.
Amen.

WARRANTABLE SEPARATION; WITHOUT Breach of Union.
GAL. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars,
perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the
right bands of fellowship, that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto
the circumcision.
VERITAS semper habet inimicos, pictas semper derisiones; truth is never free
from foes, ever ignorant; piety never free from division, ever profane; but
truths triumph rests in this, invicta manet, that it stands for ever, because a
beam of the divine wisdom: Pieties glory consists in this, it fits for heaven:
They that continue to the end in truth and piety, here is their triumph, here
is their honor, they shall be saved, and reign with God, Coheirs with Christ
in the likeness of God, as at the beginning,

What truth more hated than the truth of the Gospel, by the Jew? the Jew's
convinct: What piety or Religion more contemned than Christian piety by the Jew
also; the Jew is forsaken. Who more hated for the truth and pious living than
Christ, the Lord of glory, received into glory? After Christ, who more
despised, hated, reviled, persecuted for the constant profession of the truth
of the Gospel, both in life and doctrine, than Paul, now clothed with glory and
majestey? for thus shall it be done to him whom the King delights to honor.
Was it not thus with Paul? had he not false brethren, that said to him, as the
Jews did to Christ, What new doctrine is this? Or as the Epicurean and stoic
Philosophers said unto him, may we know what this new doctrine whereof thou
speak is? thou bring strange things unto our ears. Did not false
brethren creep in derogating from his Apostolical dignity? but such was his
undoubted resolution, that neither their great words, nor their high looks
could daunt him. Weather-beaten-souldier as I may so speak) in Christianity.
See his defense in the first Chapter of this Epistle, like that among the
Philosophers in the midst of Mars hill, continuing unto this verse in hand;
where he shakes off his viperous opponents, with as much ease, as he did the
viper from off his hands. I need not point out the several verses tending to
his purpose, but rather confine my self to the text.

Only thus much in general, false brethren there were, (as he calls them in
the 4th verse of this Chapter) contradicting the Gospel preached by him, and
Christian liberty; to whom he yielded not a foot of ground or advantage.
Whereupon the Apostles subscribe unto him on sure grounds and plain
demonstrations, in the 7. and 8. verses, and in the text; And this is the
occasion.

Thus you see truth stands firm, piety unalterable. 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be ye therefore followers of me, as I am of Christ Jesus, says Paul; and ye
shall stand firm, unmovable. Vincenti corona, to him that overcomes will I
give a Crown, Apoc. 3.
and he shall sit in my throne says Christ.

Thus Paul gets the glory of the day, witness, the parts of the text; which may
seem to be a Paradox.

1. An union, admitting a separation 2. A separation, without breach of the
union.
1. In the union are the persons united, James, Cephas, John, and Paul and
Barnabas; with a description of the former from their offices, who seemed to be
pillars. 2. The ground of the union, perceived the grace that was given unto
me; and the consequitur thereof the act of union, they gave unto me and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship: Thus by the grace of God they are
united. And by the same grace separated, Se via sindit in ambas, that we should
go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.

And here I cannot let pass any name, without note. To begin with the persons
uniting, worthy of that title the Scripture gives unto the Giants in the sixth
of Genesis, men of renown, styled here to that effect, Pillars; James, Cephas,
and John; in number three, not happily without mystery, intimating how in the
counsel of he wen it was determined before by the highest powers, the powers
Divine, the Trinity, that Paul should be an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Three such
whose same for the eminency of their spiritual endowments, spread far and wide.
Three such whose wisdom, by reason they were more familiar with Christ than the
rest, was (happily) of an higher strain. These were the three disciples which he
cul'd from the rest to go with him up into the mountain where he was
transfigured, Q. Elizabeth's Motto was, Video, Tacco. Cambd. Eliz.
to whom at his coming down he said, see ye tell to no man the vision, until
the Son of man rise from the dead, Mat. 17. These are the three that attended
on him, when he restored the dead maid to life, Luke 8.51. And two of these
Cephas and John, were with him in the extremity of his agony, when he said, my
soul is sorrowful even unto death, Mat. 26.38.

Now severally of each name, a little more than naming them.

First, James. James of Jacob, which imports a supplanter; of him I may say,
Judge. 8.
as Zeba and Zalmunnah said of Gideou; as is the man, so is his strength.
Strong in faith, vindicating the truth from the blows of the adversary. Hence
rightly named Justus, doing justice a work of righteousness, toward God,
toward the man of God. Toward God, while like a good King he seconds a
defender of the faith; toward the man of God (Paul) whilst he acknowledging
Paul's gifts to be the gifts of God, protects him as himself, from the rage of
false brethren; and giving the definitive sentence on his side, like a Patron
of truth. A true testimony of his love to Christ.

This was he that was called the Lords brother, tied unto him with a
true-lovesknot, indissoluble, by force of either man or Angel, good or bad. And
here you find him maintaining his brothers right, against these white devils,
hypocrites, false brethren. Let me exhort you then, to be followers of him, as
he was of Christ Jesus: Supplant sin, Satan, the wicked enemies of God, of man;
and ye shall be Isreal's prevalent with God.

Cephas follows, this was Simon Peter, Joh. 1.42. thou art Simon the son of
Jonah, Difference between Cephas and (...).
thou shall be called Cephas, by interpretation a stone. And Mat. 16. blessed
are thou Simon Barjonah, I say also unto thee, thou art Peter; and hence
proceeds the Papists paradox, that Peter is the head of the Church, but there
is no such matter; Christ is the only head, Christ is the only foundation;
Christ is the only head, Quantum inter stellas ^una minores. Ephesians. 5.23.
for God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Hence he is compared to an husband, as the
husband is the head of the wife, so Christ is the head of the Church. Christ is
the only foundation, for no other foundation can any man lay, than that is
laid, which is Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. This subtle invention of the Papists
was thrust in among the other false heads of their Religion, to make that
stumbling block unto us (I mean the Pope) head of the Church, without sense,
without reason: but since he is a stumbling block unto the true professors of
Christ, the Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2. and a dead head; I will grace him
only with the title of a block-head, being spel'd and put together.

Here all the nimble chop Jesuits, more in words than in substance, labor in
vain to prove Peter prince of the Apostles: let them put on their considering
caps and weigh these things in the balance of the Sanctuary the Word of God. I
would send them no farther than to the two verses before the text, together
with the text; where we find Paul for gifts of the Spirit to be equal with
Peter and the rest, where James is preferred before Peter, where James, Cephas
and John, are called Pillars equally, where Paul's territory does extend
farther than Peter's, as the Gentiles the Jews. And thus I give them a Mittimus
to the Pope with a flea in their ear. Thus much by the way; I will prosecute
it no farther, leaving it to those more parts, who (as Jael did by Sisera) can
hit the nail in the head down to the ground. Judge. 4.
This name must have his note.

Cephas, or Peter, it signifies a rock, or a stone, as rocks or hard stones are
wont to be laid in the foundation of any building; so the faith of Peter, and
of the whole Church, does stay upon Christ the firm and unmovable rock, upon
whom the whole Church is bullded. As he is Cephas a stone, so Simon one that is
attentive, one that is obedient, both fruits of faith: by it he walked on the
sea, and sunk not like a stone; by it he confessed Christ to be the Son of the
living God; after the resurrection he was demanded of Christ thrice to feed his
sheep, to feed them with the Word and Sacraments, thrice bidden, because
(happily) to be done in the name of three, the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; he fed Christ's flock, for at one Sermon he
converted three thousand hearers; he healed the man that was lame from his
mothers womb; be killed by the power of the Word two scab'd sheep, Ananias and
Saphira his wise, for lying unto the holy Ghost; he healed Aeneas sick of the
palsy; he raisea Tabitha from death to life; he convinced Simon Magus of his
Sorcery.

And as the best were and are not without their faults, no more was he without
his. Three times together denied he Christ, wherein, rather than in any thing
else, the Pope succeeds him, and therefore Antichrist. But Peter wept bitterly
for his lapsus linguae; 2 Samuel 25.
Antichrist is not touched with grief, but rejoices in what he does, therefore
as Abigail said of Nabal, so Lof him, As his name is, so is he.

These things being known, because (as Paul speaks of other things) they were
not done in a corner, made him wonderful in the eyes and ears of all, and
therefore counted a grand Pillar of the Church. Here we find him receiving Paul
into his fellowship, with heart and hand, with the rest of the Apostles. Now
give me leave to exhort you to be followers of him, as he was of Christ Jesus.
Herein shall you show your selves to be attentive and obedient to the heavenly
voice, and hereby you are made precious stones, knit to the rock Christ Jesus,
in the new Jerusalem, now here, and above hereafter in glory.

Now I come to John, Luke 1.
which is as much as gracious; to whom I may apply that salutation of the
Angel, to the Virgin Mary; hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is
with thee, blessed art thou among women; So hail thou that art highly
favored, or graciously accepted, or much graced, the Lord is with thee,
blessed art thou among the sons of men: for thou have found favor with God,
thou have found favor with thy Savior the Son of God. This is that disciple
commonly called the disciple whom the Lord loved; into whose hands, as a sure
pledge of his love, as Potipher did to Joseph, finding favor in his sight, he
made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hands;
Genesis 39.
he committed I say unto his charge as with the rest of the Apostles, the
oversight of his house his Church; so especially to him alone, upon the cross
making himself ready to appease the wrath of his Father, the protection of his
mother; as if he had said, love me, love my mother; for behold thy mother. John
19.


Now the same exhortation that I used before, I use again this third time, be
ye followers of him also, as he was of Christ Jesus, and ye shall be gracious
and graciously accepted in the sight of God. Set these three before you for
example, and ye shall be supplanters of sin; and able to trip up the devils
heels, and prevall with God for a blessing; ye shall be stones, like David's
pebble slung at Goliath, able to dash Satan, that he shall not have a word to
speak against you, or power to hurt you; you shall be the gracious children of
the most high; in a word, ye shall be, as they were, Pillars in the Temple of
God. And thus I come to the description of these three Apostles, James, Cephas,
and John, who seemed to be pillars.

It was Christ's question, whereunto shall we liken the Kingdom of God, Mark. 4.
or with what comparison shall we compare it? According unto which* frame
another, whereunto shall we liken the Apostles of Christ, or with what
comparison shall we compare them? I omit many, that of Shepherds, that of
Overseers, or that of faithful Stewards in Gods house, and such like; only I
insist on this in the text; Pillars; who seemed to be Pillars.

The Apostles then, whom I may rightly term, Genesis 32.2.
as Jacob did the Angels that met him, Gods host; are like unto pillars in
this first; viz. Pillars are not the foundation, but laid on the foundation.
Here then observe, that neither Peter nor any of the Apostles, nor altogether,
can be truly called fundamentum Ecclesiae Dei, the foundation of Gods Church;
it is Christ's own prerogative royal, to be the foundation, the head of his
people; Psalm. 18.2.
hence says the Anointed of the God of Jacob, the Lord is my rock, my
fortress, and my deliverer; 2 Samuel 22.1 Cor. 3.11:
for who is God save the Lord, and who is a rock save our God? Other foundation
can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ; so that we need not
go to Rome to seek a foundation, for we are built upon the foundation (that is
the doctrine) of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the
chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
agreeing with that, Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone,
elect, precious; in whom (says the Apostle farther) all the building fitly
framed together, consisting of Jew and Gentile, whom Christ the cornerstone
knits together; grows into an holy temple in the Lord. This Temple is made of
stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.
and stones like Christ, living stones; not like Nabal, whose heart is said to
have died within him, and to become a stone, stone-dead; but they are
living-stones, full of life and spirit; to whom coming as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, ye also as lively
stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Thus the Church of God
is all stone-work, therefore strong and firm, as appears verse 6. but by
faith; he that believes in him shall not be confounded.

True it is, Rev. 21. Immota manet. According to the Ven tian Motto, Nec
fluctu, nec flatu movetur.
that the wall of the New Jerusalem is said to have twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; but the meaning is mystical;
One foundation and twelve names written thereon, one Christ preached by the
twelve Apostles; therefore called twelve foundations; not twelve distinctly and
severally, but one with twelve names. As Paul says, like a wise master builder
I have laid the foundation, so might the rest of the Apostles say; and thus in
number twelve, indeed but one.

If this satisfy not, put a distinction between the first and principal
foundation, and second and less principal; these are Pillars fixed on the
first, improperly called foundation.

The Apostles again are like unto Pillars, sustinendo aedificium Domini, in
supporting the Church of God, that spiritual edifice; Wisdom, says the wise
man in the Proverbs has hewn her out seven pillars, Prove. 9.1.
according to the sevenfold operation of the Spirit; which Saint Bernard
reduces unto these, Fear, Piety, Knowledge, Counsel, Fortitude, Understanding,
Wisdom. Christ, the Wisdom of the Father so termed, has hewn him out twelve
Pillars, twelve Apostles, for the strengthening, for the supporting of his
Church, by the sevenfold operation of his Spirit.

Dagon the god of the Philistines cannot stand, 1 Samuel 5.
troubled with the falling sickness, while the Ark of God is present: So these
false brethren Paul's accusers, down they must with a vengeance in the presence
of these three pillars, wherein was written the Law of the Lord, as Gods ten
Commands in the two tables of stone: 2 Samuel 7.12.
And here they show themselves to be Eben-ezers stones of help, such as Samuel
set between Mispeh and Shen. Therefore be strong in the Lord.

Strong Pillars they were, Veritatem confirmando, errores refutando; these were
the Apostles acts, as ye may find in the Acts of the Apostles; I name one place
for all, and for all one man, Paul, Acts 9.22. But Saul increased the more in
strength, and confounded the Jews that dwelt in Damascus; and hence they are
called Saviors, Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion, Obadiah 21. This is it
that Paul says of a Bishop, that he must be able by sound doctrine both to
exhort and convince the gainsayers; Tit. 1.9.
it is not sufficient to resist Satan and his accomplices steadfast in the faith,
as the Apostle Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 5.9. but there must be a conquest, Rev.
3.12.
there must be a conqueror. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the
Temple of my God. That this be done, persiste and vinces, stand steadfast and
thou shall overcome. Resist the Devil, and he will show you a pair of heels,
he will fly. Be ye steadfast and unmovable.

Many Pillars sustained the Tabernacle, whose Chapiters and Bases were of gold,
the middle part were done about with silver. The golden Chapiters and Bases set
forth Christ, the silver part the Apostles and the faithful. Columnaes, si
fueris in firma fide; argentea, si divini fueris usu instructus Sermonis, faith
Bernard. Bern.
But the Spouse in the Canticles says, that the Pillars of the Church are made
of Marble, standing on Bases of gold; made of Marble, therefore strong, made of
Marble standing on Bases of gold, therefore glorious to behold. Such the
Apostles, glorious for their good life, for their constancy, in faith; thus
many glorious things are spoken of thee O City, O Church of God. I may say,
Helcath-^azzurim, O thou field of strong men, many glorious things are spoken
of thee.

Solomon erected two Pillars in the Porch of the Temple, that on the right hand
he called Jachin, that is, he shall establish; that on the left hand he called
Boaz, in it is strength: by the first is meant (if you believe Hugo) Peter, by
the last Paul: but give me leave to say all Christ's Apostles were like these
two Pillars against the assaults of Satan, for the gates of hell did not, could
not prevail against them, shall not, cannot against Gods faithful messengers.
Therefore Elias was called the Charets and horsemen of Israel, that is, Isreal's
strength. So God said unto Jeremy, Jerem. 1.
Behold I have made thee this day a walled City, and a Pillar of iron. And
besides Pillars, I may call the Apostles Lions, like those two that stood
besides Solomon's throne for strength and beauty. As strong, so high; like Kings
high and mighty; 1 King. 10.
high like Saul, higher by head and shoulders than any other people; by head
for the understanding the mysteries of Religion; by the shoulders, to support
them near heaven; the higher the Pillar, the nearer heaven: Mighty like
Sampson, that they may pull down the rotten pillars of the adversaries on their
head. High to see over, being overseers of Gods heritage: Mighty, because
ordained to pull down the strong holds of Satan, casting down imaginations and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, Nemo sibi
de suo palpet; qu^sque sibi Satan est.
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. High, belonging to the most High, they must reach to heaven, over
Nations, over Kingdoms, Jer. 1.10. Mighty, not in Word only, but in power and
much assurance. 1 These. 1.5.
Hence they are called able Ministers, 2 Cor. 3.6. Thus they were, and Gods
Ministers are as the people of Canaan in respect of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
greater and taller than they, who is able to stand before them? But let not
this make them high-minded, for the greater a man is, the more he ought to bow
down under mercies and humble himself. The authority of the Gospel must not be
defended with high looks, they must not look big about them on the business,
lest the pestilence of Ambition creep in among the Evangelical virtues, says
Erasmus on John 6. Erasmus in Joh. 6.
Therefore though great and high, yet humble, like unto Piramids seeming
smallest where highest. Thus Paul, in nothing I am behind the chiefest
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11.
here is his greatness, here is his height; though I be nothing, here is his
humility, here is his lowliness. He is something, he is nothing; riddle me
this. Of this after.

The Pillars of the Tabernacle were upright, so as also the Pillars of Solomon's
Temple. So were the Apostles, so must Ministers. Paul said unto the lame man,
stand upright on thy feet; the Lord said unto the Levites, thou shall be
upright and sincere with the Lord thy God; upright fide and conscientia,
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. Hence proceed purity of
doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.9.
good endeavor, conscionable diligence, good example; not to be carried away
with diverse strange doctrines, Heb. 10.23.
but holding fast the profession of our faith without wavering; for he that
wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, Jam. 1.6.
driven with the wind and tossed. Upright in faith, without bending either to
the right hand or to the left; left they fall, and great be the fall of them;
for by faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1.24.

From my former speech, I deduce this consequence; we may make these Pillars
our pillows, as Jacob made the stone his, Genesis 28. where we may lie down
secure, sleep quietly without disturbance, rest comfortably without annoyance.
Male cubans suaviter dormit, and faeliciter dormiat.
Here we may find, what Jacob found where he lay, the gate of heaven; I mean
Christ, I am the door, says he.

Now let us make this use, that we maintain and not budge from the doctrine of
the Apostles. Take heed, faith the Lord, Adpenuitatem benefitiorum necessario
sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum. Panormkan.
that thou forsake not the Levites as long as thou live on the earth, Deuteronomy.
12.19.

Would therefore Papists know our Religion? Would they know the Judge of all
controversies? We produce all the Apostles, as witnesses of our Religion; every
Apostle as a several Pillar, and all of them together as an heap, on whose
doctrine we rely.

This again is our confession, this our profession; as Jacob said unto Laban
concerning the Pillars that they erected, Genesis 31.51. So say we of all and
every one of these Pillars, behold this heap, and behold this Pillar, which I
have cast betwixt us; this heap be witness, and this Pillar be witness, that
I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shall not pass over
this heap unto me for harm. If you would know the reason, take it; their words
are Gods words, Gods Oracles. No buckram Of Rome.
Bishop of them all, no Jesuits Knights of the Post, can pass current without
Gods warrant; Thus says the Lord.

In a word, let me use a word of exhortation, I direct it to such as be
Ministers indeed; be strong and beautiful in life and doctrine, for how
beautiful are the feet of those that bring the glad tidings of salvation?) be
upright in faith and a pure conscience; awake, awake, put on thy strength, O
Zion, Isa. 52.1.
put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, and as they, so shall we be; Such
honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149.9.

I cannot pass over these Pillars yet, yet I will not stay long on them. We
read that the Lord went before the Israelites, in a pillar of cloud by day;
Exodus 13.21.
So does he now this blessed day, this Sunshine of the Gospel go before us in a
cloud of Witnesses, Prophets, Patriarchs, Apostles; we are compassed about with
a great cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12.1. We read also the Lord went before them
in a Pillar of fire; he goes before us in the Apostles, as in Pillars of fire
that give light unto us, in this night of sin, this vale of misery, this shadow
of death. John Baptist was a burning lamp, and the Apostles were the light of
the world faith Christ; Sua fide, sua doctrina, suis operibus, luminaria facts
sunt; By their faith, by their doctrine, by their works, they were made stars.
Revel. 1.
Hence the Angels of the seven Churches are called stars, fixed in Christ's
right hand, tanquam in firmamento, as in the firmament of heaven; not unlike to
that star that directed the three wise men unto Christ, Mat. 2.

Now when these stars, these Pillars of fire, by the light of grace which
shined in them; perceived the grace which was given unto Paul; When James,
Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given
unto me. And thus I come to the ground or hand of the union, the fodder that
knit them together, grace perceived; the grace that was given unto me.

Grace is either (...), or (...), Active, or Passive. The active is Gods love
and free grace, ready to grace us: The Passive, Gods graces, Gods gifts,
whereby we are graced, wherewith we are glorified; graced here, to be glorified
hereafter. The first is a branch or a blossom of his goodness, that tree of
life, that tree of good; The last, the fruit, sweet as honey in the heart, as
the little book in the Revelation was in Saint John's mouth. By that active
grace, God decreed man's Election, Rev. 10.20.
ere any thing had a being; and by that active grace he does bestow in the
dispensation of the fullness of times the riches of his mercy, heaven upon
earth. By it God comes to man, ere man can go to God; He comes to man with his
preventing grace, inspiring him with religious thoughts, breathing into him the
true breath of life, and ravishing him with the desire of things supernatural,
out of natures compass and sphere of activity; that thus man might come to
him; he comes to man by his preparing grace, casting his understanding and will
into a new mould, that thence he may become a new man, wise unto salvation,
obedient to the death. He comes to man by his operating grace. God first
prepares, then works; he first makes man capable o^ his works, then works on
him works in him, and works of wonder; actually freeing from the tyranny of
sin, and renewing him in the inward man, the understanding, will, affections.
He comes to man by his cooperating grace: As by his operating grace he moves
the will to will that which is good, so by this cooperating grace he makes him
able to effect, what the will desires, to work out salvation with fear and
trembling. He comes unto man by his consummating grace; giving him power to be
constant to the end, till he come to the full period Eternal glory, the height
of his ambition, Heaven: Ephesians. 2.5.
Ye are saved by grace. Thus God begins by his grace; by his grace he does
finish what he has begun. Now (beloved) this active grace of God distinguished
by the diversities of its gracious acts; works in man passive grace, those
heavenly characters of the Deity, drawn by the finger of God. Some of these are
common to the Reprobate with the Elect; some proper only to the elect; some are
saving graces of the Spirit, some not: Some of these are called gratin gratis
data; others, gratia gratis data gratum faciens. Vocation, Christian doctrine,
Prudence in businesses, Patience in labor, Fortitude in dangers, the gift of
Prophecy, the gift of Tongues, the gift of Miracles, and such like, are gifts
of grace, but not saving graces of the Spirit; neither are these of any moment,
except God gives the earnest of the Spirit in the heart, 2 Cor. 1.22. (...).
(that I may use the Apostles phrase) except they be seasoned with the grace of
God, I mean the saving graces, which make a man acceptable in the sight of God,
Faith, Hope, Charity: Faith justifies, as the hand makes rich; Hope makes not
ashamed; Charity bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things; it never
fails: But whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be
Tongues, they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away.
Now all these together are like the sweet Incense in the spoons, that were
offered by the twelve Heads of Israel, at the dedication of the Tabernacle,
Numb. 7.86. Or like Noah's Sacrifice after the Deluge, making a sweet favor in
the nostrils of God.

Bernard.
S. Bernard makes mention of a threefold grace: One whereby we are converted;
another whereby we are aided in fiery trials; a third whereby (after trial) we
are rewarded. The first is initial, whereby we are called; the second
beneficial, whereby we are justified; the last is final, whereby we are
glorified. The first is Gods free grace; the second is Christ's merit: the third
the reward, glory. Of the first it is said, Of his fullness have we all
received: Of the two last, grace for grace; as Bernard expounds it, Munera
gloriae aeterna, and merita temporalis militiae: Which give me leave to
interpret for my self, Not for any merit of ours, but for Christ's merits for
us. The two first make way for the last; the last cannot be obtained while the
soul dwells in this prison of mortality; but the two first, with those I have
spoken of already, make up a perfect man in Jesus Christ, in some measure in
this life.

The original of these graces if we would know, we must run to God; Every good
and perfect gift comes from above. Jam. 1.
Non per naturam insita, sed divinitus data; they are transcendent, they are
given. When Christ led captivity captive, he gave gifts unto men, He poured
forth his Spirit, says Joel: He gave, he poured forth, Ephesians. 1. Joel 2.
that is, active grace; gifts unto men, his Spirit, that is, gifts of his
Spirit, that is, passive grace. Grace is given of God by grace; A blessed
Giver, a blessed gift, The earth of our hearts brings not forth such branches
of virtue; but as the earth after Gods curse upon it, thorns and thistles. I
will not here encounter with Papists concerning Free Will in both kinds of Gods
graces; but leave it to some other David, who can better cut off Goliah's head,
as with the sword of the Spirit, as with his own sword, and beat them with
their own weapons. Only let me ask them one question, What have we that we have
not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.
And conclude this with that of the Psalmist, Not unto us, not unto us; then (
O Lord) but unto thy Name give the glory.

Thus we have had a sight of the riches of Gods mercy: Now will I show you the
man to whom it was given by grace to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven; that we may know who is he, and we will call him blessed. Therefore as
Samuel said of King Saul, I apply to our Saul here; See ye him whom the Lord
has chosen; It is Paul, justified; sanctified, made gracious, made glorious. 1 Samuel 10.
Once a Persecuter; now (as Saul once among the Prophets a Prophet, so Saul now
among the Apostles) an Apostle, by the grace that was given him. Once a professed
Enemy to Christianity; now a professed Preacher of the Gospel of grace. Once a
Subverter of Gods Church; now a Converter unto Gods Church. On whom I will pass
my censure, as one did on Origin for his writing: Vbi been, nemo melius; ^bi
male, nemb pejus: Where he has done well, none did better; where ill, none
worse.

We read of two names that were given him, Saul, and Paul. Hierom.
S. Hierom is of opinion, that he was first called Saul; and by converting
Sergius Paulus to the faith, received that name Paul, tanquam trophaeum, as a
victory. Others suppose, that he being a Pharisee, was called Saul, but after
his conversion, Paul; that his Religion being changed, he changed his name.
Origin thinks he had two names, Origin.
as Matthew is called Levi, and Solomon Jedidiah. But it matters not much,
whether you call him Saul, or Paul: In both names is contained a
Prognostication of good. Saul signifies, Lent of the Lord: Lent of the Lord to
try his people; lent of the Lord to convert the Elect, yet unregenerate; lent
of the Lord to confirm all in the faith of Jesus Christ, praedicando, precando,
by preaching, praying, by preaching to them, by praying for them; lent of the
Lord to glorify his Name, by doing his will here on earth, as it is in heaven.
As lent of the Lord, so lent to the Lord: As Hannah said of Samuel, I have lent
him unto the Lord as long as he lives, he shall be to the Lord. 1 Samuel 1.28.


And as for his other name [Paul,] that signifies Wonderful, or Rest. Wonderful
for his Conversion, for his Conversation. All that heard him preach, were
amazed, Act. 9. Wonderful for his Conversion, respecting circumstances; Light
from heaven shining about him; his blindness, his falling to the earth, going
with a bloody mind post-haste to Damascus, his hearing of a voice from heaven,
his trembling and astonishment, his receiving of his sight by Ananias.
Wonderful for his Conversation, in preaching, in working miracles, casting out
evil spirits, healing the sick, whether absent or present; Wonderful for
patience in tribulation, in labors, in perils, in death, in all miseries; In a
word, wonderful for faith, See my Waters of Marah.
for life, for doctrine, wisdom, understanding. And here he took up his Rest;
resting from blaspheming Gods Name, resting from persecuting Gods chosen,
Israel, resting from all errors of faith, of doctrine, of life; for a time in
grace, and now for ever by grace in glory, by the grace that was given him. And
forasmuch as he was of the Tribe of Benjamin, we may apply unto him the
prophecy and blessing that Jacob gave to Benjamin; Benjamin shall raven as a
wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the
spoil. Paul in his youth before his Conversion, as a ravening Wolf persecuted
and devoured the faithful; but being made of a ravening Wolf as quiet as a
Lamb, he distributed the food of the Gospel unto the world, by the grace that
was given unto him.

Baronius speaking of Paul, Baronius.
derives his name from the Latin word Paulus, little. We read of King Saul,
how he debased himself; Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of
Israel, 1 Samuel 9.21. 1 Cor. 15.9. Paulus quasi Paululus.
and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? We read
the like of our Saul; I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God; but by the grace of
God I am what I am. And again, I am made a Minister of the Gospel, according to
the gift of the grace of God given unto me; Opulentissima met^lla, quo um in
also latent venae.
unto me who am less than the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I
should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8,
9. So that Paul thus despicable in his own sight, Sen. ep. 23. Ruth 2.10.
might say unto the Lord, as Ruth said unto Boaz, Why have I found grace in
thine eyes, that thou should take knowledge of me?

Thus you have heard of the Man, who was inricht with the rich treasures of
spiritual wisdom; concerning whom I may demand of you, as Pharaoh did of his
servants concerning Joseph, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom
the Spirit of God is? Unto which demand I annex Pharaoh's answer; Forasmuch as
God has showed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art,
O Paul! Therefore as Tully was called Phaenix Oratorum, the Phoenix of Orators;
Lactantius, Phaenix Christianorum, the Phoenix of Christians; and Cyprian, the
Christian Caesar: Why not Paul, Phaenix Apostolorum, the Phoenix (or Nonesuch)
of Apostles? For his rare virtues, for his invaluable gifts, for the light of
grace, seen, known, understood, perceived of James, Cephas and John; which when
they had seen, known, understood and perceived, they gave unto him the right
hand of fellowship.

And thus I come to the act of union. Grace brings in love; and love, union,
whereof it is an affection. -- Perceived the grace that was given unto me, they
gave unto me and Barnabas the right hund of fellowship. 1 Samuel 3.8.
When they perceived Gods graces to him, in him, as Eli perceived that the Lord
called the child Samuel, they gave unto me the right hand of fellowship,
dextras societatis; they made him a right Benjamite by spiritual union, a son
of the right hand, they admit him into their fraternity, or as Citizens speak,
they make him brother of their company: Thus they go hand in hand, to show that
Birds of a feather flock together. Men endued with the same graces, called by
the same Spirit, must be hand-fastned and heart-fastned by the same Gordian
knot of love. Let me not transcend the limits of these words: I take it then,
that we have infimated here unto us, the sweet harmony, the consent, the
sympathy between the Ministers of the Gospel of grace. This is pleasant music
in the ears of God. (...).
Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity,
Psalm. 133. The curtains coupled together compassing the Tabernacle, typically
represented the concord and agreement of Ministers: So a garment without seam,
about Christ the true Tabernacle, full of Gods glory, in whom dwelt the fullness
of the Godhead bodily. Their agreement must be like unto that of the parts of
man's body, expressed by Hippocrates, one agreement, one confluence, all
consenting, being tied and united by the strong ligament of grace or love.

This union is spiritual; therefore it must be an union of spirits, an union of
unions, a meeting of friends, expressed by the text [fellowship.] But if you
would know what fellowship, you may find it Phil. 1.5. a fellowship in the
Gospel; and ver. 27. steadfast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together
for the faith of the Gospel: With one mind, as the Apostles, Act. 2. All were
of one mind, striving together; not one against another, but all together
against their opposers, for the faith of the Gospel. And this is concors
discordia, an agreeing discord, musical frets. Hence then, Union of minds makes
fellows of the Gospel. Union in virtue (which is threefold) is a badge of the
union of minds; Union in virtues intellectual, in virtues moral, in virtues
spiritual: In virtue intellectual, there is heavenly knowledge; in virtue
moral, there is honesty and goodness; in virtue spiritual, there is Religion,
faith and obedience: A threefold cord of this making, is hard to break, says
the Wise man. Therefore what the Apostle exhorts to all the faithful, I
restrain to my present matter; Ephesians. 4.3. (...).
Let Ministers endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

Worthy memory is the story of him, that had Eighty sons; who ready to breathe
his last, gave each of them a bundle of Arrows, commanding them to break it:
But they conscious of their own imbecility, ingenuously confessed that it was a
task impossible to be performed by them; which taken, he singled out the
arrows, and broke them every one by themselves with ease: Thus says he (O my
sons) if ye hold together in brotherly love, ye are invincible; but if the
cursed seed of discord be once sown in your hearts, ye are gone, ye are broken,
expect nothing but destruction. I leave the application of this to you, my
Brethren: Only remember this saying, Let brotherly love continue. Peacemakers
must not be Peace-breakers; for, Septimum abominatio animae illius.
the sowing of discord is one of the seven things that God hates, Pro. 6.19.
with 16. God is love; therefore Ministers of God must be Ministers of love;
like-minded, having the same love, of one accord, of one mind, Phil. 2.2. Animo
animaque inter se miscebantur, Act. 4.32.
says Tertullian of those Primitive Christians; yea, they were una anima, one
soul, (so Tremellius renders that text out of the Syriack,) all informed with
one and the same soul, all as one man.

Poets tell us of Theseus and Perithous, of Achilles and Patroclus, of Orestes
and Pylades, of Damas and Piphias, of Aeneas and Achates; faithful lovers,
sworn friends. Holy Writ tells us of Abraham and Lot, of David and Jonathan,
of Solomon and Hiram, of Christ and John, of Paul, James, Peter, John; true
hearts all. To show of what nature their love must be, I instance only in David
and Jonathan: David and Jonathan's souls were knit, as if there were but one
soul in two bodies; And Jonathan loved David as his own soul, 1 Samuel 18.1.
Hence, amicus quasi animi custos. Far were they, and ought ye to be from that
execrable answer of Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Far be from us all private
grudgings, Genesis 4.
gilded over with fair words; all public contentions, in matters of little
consequence. The first is a main trick of the Devils invention: Mel in ore,
verba lactis; fell in cord, fraus in factis; Their tongue is here in the West,
while their hearts stray in the East, far enough asundea. These are
double-hearted, as the Prophet speaks, Facta est fides Evangeliorum, fides
temporum; and cum fides una esse debeat, eo pene ventum est ut nulla sit.
Hilary.
an heart and heart; Monsters of men they are. The other the Devil fathers too;
the root of it is pride: But remember what the Apostle writes to Timothy, The
servant of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.24. (...), Ne rixando amittatur
veritas, ut fere fit. Whence so many Schisms in the Church of God? whence so
great havoc of Religion? whence so many Paradoxes and Chimera's of Opinions?
whence the first raising of that Antichristian Idol of Rome? whence proceeded
those Locusts that came out of the infernal pit, I mean Jesuits, and others of
their disordered Orders? whence so many murders and poisoning of Kings? whence
the damnable ^ots invented by those Rake-hels I leave to name? Is it not from
contention founded on ambition? (A contentious spirit is a proud spirit; Pro.
13.
Only by pride comes contention.) Is it not from private emulation? Is it not
(in a word) from the Devil? for had not he been in them, all had been well.

Hate then (ye children of the most High) hearted and enmity: See ye love one
another, but avoid these enemies of the Gospel as serpents: (They pretend to be
servants of Christ, yet they serve Antichrist.) Have no fellowship, no peace
with that painted Whore of Babylon; shake not hands with her, kiss her not: She
offers a golden cup; but beware, Mors in olla; touch not, taste not, handle
not; it is full of poison, full of abomination. But rather hearken to the
heavenly voice, Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence; Come out of her,
come out of her, Isa. 52.11. Esto procul Roma, qui cupis esse pius.
my people, 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 18.4. How can they possibly agree with you, who
cannot agree among themselves?

And here I impose a task upon you, and a blessing if ye perform it. Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee: Peace be then to thee,
and peace be to thine helpers, for thy God helps thee, as Amasai said to
David. 1 Chr. 12.18.
And now to end this point, I beseech you brethren with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
1.10. I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, speaking
the truth in love. There must be the same mind, (...).
the same judgment, Ephesians. 4.15. So be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11.

And now I pass to the second part of the Text, The Separation without breach
of the Union; whereof a word and away. That we should go unto the Heathen, and
they unto the Circumcision.

Christ's charge unto his Disciples, was, Ite, praedicate, Go and preach to all
Nations, to all the parts of the world, East, West, North, South. A figure
hereof might be those twelve Oxen that supported the molten Sea; three looking
toward the North, three toward the West, three toward the South, three
toward the East. Mark 6.
And our Savior having gathered these Twelve together, he sends them forth by
two and two, or by couples: They go therefore; they fulfill his command, Take
my yoke upon you, Matthew. 11. I may compare them thus coupled, unto the two
Milch-kine that carried the Ark from the Philistims unto Kiriath-jearim: And
the rather to Milch-kine, because they being full of the sincere milk of the
Word, they feed all Nations by two and two; to signify the calling of two
people, Jew and Gentile. Romans 3.29.
The Jews thought that God was confined unto them: Is he the God of the Jews
only? is not he also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also: Therefore our
Savior sent them as well to the Gentile as to the Jew. They are likened to the
bells of the High Priest, they depend on the virtue of the Eternal Priest after
the order of Melchisedeck; Psalm. 19. Romans 10. (...).
that as the Psalmist reports, there is no speech nor language, where their
voice is not heard; their sound went into all the carth, and their words unto
the ends of the world. They are like the middle bar in the midst of the boards
in the Tabernacle, which reach from end to end, Exodus 26.28. They are the
Chariots of the Lord, Bernard.
who by says, hope and charity, carry the Trinity through the world: Non
corporis praesentia, sed mentis providentia, says Bernard; not in bodily
presence, but in the wisdom of the mind, providing for future things, like
Ezekiels chariot going to the four corners of the world. Quae regio in terras
nostri non plena laboris?

Thus Christ sent. Now a little of the Apostles sending; That they should go
unto the Gentiles, and we unto the Circumcision.

Nihil hic statuunt Apostoli, quod non ante statuit Deus: Here the Apostles
ordain nothing, (...), says a Greek Father.
that was not preordained of God. It was Gods own voice to Ananias, Paul is a
chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles and Kings, and the
children of Israel, Act. 9.15. Paul was Gods chief Hearld, the Gospels loudest
Trumpeter. It was Gods own voice unto Paul himself, I will send thee far unto
the Gentiles, Act. 22.21. It was Gods voice unto the Prophets and Teachers that
were at Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have
called them, Act. 13.12. Whereupon they immediately went, and preached unto the
Gentiles.

And here note the wisdom of God: Paul a Gentile, full of wisdom, was sent here
unto the Gentiles, who sought for wisdom: Peter a Jew, excellent for working
miracles, sent unto the Jews, who sought always for miracles and signs, a sign
of their infidelity; all working togeher for the good of his elect, of one mind
when farthest asunder.

Now seeing the Jews have rejected the yoke of Christ, and the Gentiles (of
whom we are a part) have taken it on them: We may say of them, as they sometime
of us, We have a little sister, and she has no breasts. Amazon-like she has
one breast, the Old Testament; but wants the other, the chief breast, the New.
Let us pray for them, as they did for us; that they may hear Christ crying out
aloud to the Church, Cant. 6.
Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return! that we may look upon thee, and
see as it were the company of two Armies, the one of Jews, the other of
Gentiles, all one Church, one flock.

We pray thee then, O Heavenly Father, to call the uncalled Jew and Gentile, to
comfort the comfortless, and to make an end of these days of sin wherein we
live; and cause our Savior to appear in the clouds, for our full and perfect
Redemption. Do it for his sake, that died for us: To whom, with Thee and thy
Holy Spirit, be given all glory; As it was in the beginning, so now and ever
shall be, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Deo soli Gloria.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 18. read earth. p. 6. l. 17. r. us. p. 7. l. 13. carnal. p. 9. l.
ult. place. p. 11. l. 1. then. Marg. r. via. p. 13. l. 46. ipse. p. 14. l. 35.
recusat vivere. marg. r. diligere. p. 15. l. 6. that. l. 10. replenisht. l. 14.
through. marg. absit. p. 16. l. 16. loquentes. p. 17. l. 37. Jerusalem. p. 18.
m. infimis. p. 23. l. 42. Man. p. 25. l. 9. virtue. l. 10. godliness. p. 27. l.
5. offense. p. 28. l. pen. to. p. 31. l. 21. (...). marg. in uudis. p. 32. l.
ult. with. p. 34. l. 6. parvae. l. 20. (...). p. 35. m. (...). p. 37. l. 34.
conversationis. l. 36. distraction. l. 48. Spirit. l. 49. Bernard. p. 46. l.
43. good. p. 50. l. 7. eum. p. 53. l. 1. know. p. 72. r. generatione. l. 44.
in. p. 73. l. 41. Spirit. l. 45. add of. p. 74. m. ille. p. 77. l. 51. grants.
p. 78. m. vocis. p. 79. l. 19. nothing. l. 48. (...). p. 80. l. 24. add may. p.
81. l. 27. add are. p. 84. l. 49. r. sapientissimum. p. 96. l. 14. through. p.
100. l. 50. either. p. 106. l. 19. r. Divesses. p. 107. l. 16. parts. l. 47.
his. p. 108. l. 47. she. p. 109. l. 44. indifferent. p. 113. l. 16. get. l. 19.
then. marg. ornamento. p. 114. l. 7. vox. l. 30. placed. p. 115. marg. calce.
p. 129. Mercury. p. 130. l. 23. add in. l. 31. mercies. marg. vulgatissima. p.
131. m. introspicere, p 134. l. 30. r. thence. p. 135. l. 52. commends. p. 136.
m. egerint. p. 140. l. 7. (...). p. 142. m. ratis. p. 148. l. 19. r. columna es.

A TABLE Of the Principal THINGS contained in the EXERCITATIONS.
A.
ADam's fall, what misery to mankind. Page 4 Angels rejoice at the good of Gods
Church. Page 18 What to be admired in God. Page 20 Ardency in prayer, how
grounded. Page 79, 80 Ground of our Adoption. Page 81. Benefit of it. Page 81,
82 Gods dearest children subject to Afflictions. Page 117 God sends not Angels,
but Men-Angels to preach the Word, why. Page 128 Apostles called Pillars, why.
Page 147, forward.
B.
THe glory of our Saviors Body and Soul, in his state of Exaltation. Page 58
Brittle estate of man. Page 85 Bishop, what. Page 126 Baseness of the Popish
Clergy. Page 135 Blessedness Page 136
C.
GOD would have men's hearts prepared for Christ. Page 4 Christ ordered our
High Priest by Covenant. Page 6 Purity of Christ's conception. Page 12 Peace of
Conscience, what it produces in man. Page 31, 32 Civil peace. Page 33. Peace
with the Creatures. Page 38 Converts stand upon firmer terms in Christ, than
before their first declination. Page 40 Christ's cruel conflict upon the Cross.
Page 59 The best in this life partly carnal. Page 71 Comfort unspeakable, a
benefit of the Spirit. Page 75 Crying of the Spirit in our hearts, Page 77,
forward. Crying in prayer, what. ibid. and forward. Calling not to be
neglected. Page 87 Christ the Head of the Church, how. Page 104, forward. Page
145 Cross of Christ. Page 137 Conflict and Conquest of Saints. Page 141,
forward.
D.
CHrist must die a cursed Death. Page 8. His Dignity. Page 15, 16 A Doxology.
Page 18 Our divisions cause Papists insult. Page 37 The blessed consequences of
Christ's Life and Death. Page 41. Why Christ died. Page 53 Of the Three Persons
in the Deity, largely. Page 67, 68, forward. Inferences from the Spirits
dwelling in our hearts, Page 76, 77 Christian society should be delightful.
Page 92 Songs of Degrees. Page 113 Doctrine, what must be preached. Page 122,
forward
E.
FRults of Christ's Exaltation, Page 15, 16 The malignity of Envy. Page 35
Ecclesiastical peace. Page 36 Christ Exalted according to both Natures. Page
57, forward. Six Evidences of the Spirits dwelling in our hearts. Page 73, 74
No easy matter to be a Minister of the Gospel. Page 92 An Emperors duty. Page
121
F.
WE may come confidently to God, us to a Father. Page 80 Not build Faith on a
staggering foundation, Page 92 The Soul naturally subjected to Fear. Page 95,
96 Several Fears. Page 96, forward. Benefis of holy Fear. Page 98, forward. Two
causes of Fear. Page 99 The uses. Page 100, forward. Foundation of the Church,
who. Page 147, forward.
G.
GOD, the All-wise and gracious Moderator. Page 5 Grace for grace, how. Page
10, 11 Of Gods Glory at large. Page 19, 20 What Glory due to God from man,
imports. Page 20, 21 Gods Good Will how superabundant. Page 43, 44 In what
particular acts expressed. Page 45, forw. Comfortable inferences thence
deduced. Page 46 The Spirits mission into our hearts, a great gift Page 68, 69
God and the Holy Spirit not unequal. ibid. Heart governed by the Spirit. Page
74 God is Christ's Head, how. Page 111 God alone to be invocated. Page 114 Grace
inherent and actual. Page 139 Concerning Grace at large. Page 150, forward.
H.
HOw Christ is Holy. Page 11, 12. How Harmless. ibid. The benefits of Christ
made higher than the Heavens. Page 17, 18 Honor to God, wherein it consists.
Page 22, 23, 24 Heart the Metropolis of the Soul. Page 34 Humiliation of
Christ, a work of power, mercy, justice. Page 48, forward. Wherein it consists,
Page 51, forward. Holy Ghost called a Spirit, why. Page 63, 64 Spirit of the
Son, why. ibid. Heart principally desired in man, Page 72 It Is the seat of the
Spirit, proved. Page 72, 73 Head of the Woman is Man, in what respects. Page
107 Hear the word, how. Page 133, 134
I.
JEsus, a reverend Name. Page 6 Indignities put upon Christ, Page 7, 8. His
intercession. Page 9. Not for all promiscuously. ibid. Fruit of it. Page 10
Justice and Mercy. Page 21. Both to be admired. Page 22 Justification. Page 41
Illumination of the understanding. Page 73 A Christian least reason to be idle,
why. Page 84, forward. Satan gets great advantage by it. Page 85. Idleness
reproved. Page 87 Use of it. Page 88 Insufficient Ministry, the evil of it.
Page 132, 133 James, unde. Page 145 John, what it signifies. Page 146
K.
KIngs, their duty. Page 113, 116, 117 Four Divinity-Lectures for them. Page
115 Not exempted from afflictions. Page 117. To be prayed for. Page 118
L.
LOve God, how. Page 23. Gods love to Mankind. Page 63, 64 Livelihood from the
Spirit. Page 75, 76 What love should be betwixt Ministers. Page 89 Ministers
must take heed to their lives, how. Page 126 Gospel, why called a Law Page 129,
130 A perfect Law. ibid. A Law of liberty. Page 130, 131 In what language
Ministers should deliver their message. Page 132
M.
THe first Man was the first ordered Priest. Page 3 Man's recovery is by a
Mediator. Page 4 Of Gods Mercy. Page 39 The Mediator must be both God and Man.
Page 50. forward. Mission of the Spirit. Page 70 Plotters of Mischief. Page 87
Man is the woman's head. Page 106, forward, Ministers improvidence fatal to the
Church Page 120. Ministry an hard task. ibid. Must look to themselves, how.
Page 121 Neither spare for love nor fear. Page 123, 124 How called, and why.
Page 126, forward. Merits confuted. Page 41, 42
N.
TO Number our days, what. Page 86
O.
THe Offense committed, must be purged away by the Nature offending. Page 5 God
added an Oath to the Covenant of grace and peace, why. Page 6, 7 Oblation of
Christ in the Heavens. Page 9 Obedience to God, internal, external, largely.
Page 22, 23. How qualified. Page 24, 25 Excellency of Order. Page 103 Offices
mutually to be performed by man and wife. Page 109, forward,
P.
DIgnity of Christ's Priesthood. Page 7 A double comfort from the purity of our
High Priest. Page 13 Christ a Pattern for our imitation. Page 14 Peace
fourfold, wrought by Christ Jesus. Page 26, 27 How made. Page 27, 28. Peace of
a good Conscience amply described. Page 30, 31, 32. Peace pressed. Page 33, 34
The Spirit of the Son is a Person, why. Page 66, 67 And distinct, why. ibid.
And the third and last Person, how. ibid. Pilgrimage, some kind lawful. Page 8
Papists false Inferences refuted ibid. forward. Apostles are Pillars. Page 91
Perfection absolute not here. Page 98 Promises strongest Arguments. Page 116
Ten Persecutions. Page 124, 125 Perseverance. Page 135 Practice. Page 136
Saints estate perfect and imperfect, how. Page 140, forward. Protestants,
whence. Page 141 Peter, the signification. Page 146 Paul, what imports. Page
151, forward.
Q.
OF Quenching the Spirit. Page 77
R.
ROme's Sacrilege. Page 10 Righteousness of Christ efficacious to us. Page 13,
14 Resurrection of Christ, Arguments proving it. Page 59. Necessity of it. Page
60, 61. Ends of it. Page 61, 62. The Conclusion. Page 62, 63 Regeneration. Page
73 Religious hearts in a continual awe of God. Page 96 Reading and Meditation
to be joined. Page 134 Remembrance. Page 135, 136 Our Religion how founded,
Page 149
S.
THe Son of God must be made the Son of Man. Page 5 Sufferings of Christ, the
reason. Page 8 Christ separate from sinners, how. Page 14. Made sin for us,
how. Page 21, 22 Benefits by Christ's sufferings. Page 29 Sanctification. Page
43 None by nature excepted from sins contagion. Page 43 Sufferings of Christ
were incessant. Page 51 Some specialties. Page 52. Necessity of them. Page 53
forward. And Effects. Page 55, forward. The Application. Page 56 Sons of God,
what. Page 81 Spirit of truth, and of lying. Page 83 States how guided. Page
116 Religion the soul of them. ibid. Scripture to be compared with Scripture.
Page 134 The Spirit to be supplicated for. Page 135 Saints, two sorts. Page
138, forward. Saul, what signifies. Page 151
T.
MYstery of the Trinity. Page 68 Time, an account to be kept of Page 84
Precious. ibid. Will not be stayed. Page 85 How we must make account of it,
ibid. Time must be redeemed. Page 86
V.
CHrist undefiled in the whole course of his life, and why. Page 13 Vbiquity
refuted. Page 17 Union with Christ. Page 73 Universality of the Church. Page
105 Voice of God daunting. Page 127, 128 Union must be amongst Ministers. Page
152
W.
CHrist born of a Woman, why. Page 5, 6 The Word made flesh, how. Page 13
Divine Worship. Page 25, 26. largely. God to be worshipped every where. Page 90
The merciful project of Gods Eternal Wisdom. Page 47 Bitterness to Wives
discovers it self, how. Page 110, forward. Word to be looked into accurately.
Page 131
FINIS.

