Coffee-House JESTS. Refined and Enlarged.

By the Author of the OXFORD JESTS.

The Fourth Edition, with Large Additions.

This may be Reprinted, Feb. 25. 1685. R. P.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Rhodes, next door to the Swan-Tavern, near Bride-Lane
in Fleet street, 1686.

coffee house scene COFFEE HOUSE JESTS
Printed for Henry Rodes near Bride lane in Fleetstr^



Coffee-House JESTS.
1.
A Lusty Widdower in Yorkshire, came to Woo a Rich Widow in Sommersetshire:
and being at her House, she led him out in the Afternoon to show him what fine
conveniences she had about her; and first showed him her Garden: saying, Have
you seen Sir, such large Cabbages as these any where? He told her, they were
indeed large Cabbages, for this Country, but his Cabbages were so large, that
they would shelter a Teem of Horses under 'em, all a whole Winters Night; which
made her wonder: Then she showed him the Dairy, and therein some Cheeses;
saying, They were accounted the largest Cheeses in England: Yes, says he, They
are I confess large Cheeses for this Country, but mine are so big in
Yorkshire, that my Dairy Maid is forced to call the Men to turn them with
Levers every Morning: This made her wonder the more. Then she showed him her
House, saying, Is it not very high? for it is accounted the highest House in all
our Country, Yes, says he, It Is a high House for this Country; for mine is so
high in Yorkshire, that if a Man goes but up to the upper Room, and he does
not take a six-penny Loaf with him, he will be starved before he comes down: The
good well-meaning Woman had a mind to believe some part of it, because she saw
him a handsome and personable Man, and had a Months mind to him. So in the
Morning before the Master was up, she takes out his Servant, and shows him the
Garden and her good Cabbages there and asked him, If they were not very large
ones? Yes, indeed are they Mistress, says he but says she, Thy Master says, his
are so big, that they will keep a Teem of Horses dry a whole Winters Night
though it rain all the while: Truly forsooth Mistress, says he, I seldom come
into the Garden; but this I can tell you o^ my Masters Cabbages, that he makes
Wine-mill Posts of the Stalks of them; then she began to simper at this, and
thought the rest might be true: Yet still she doubted. Then she showed him the
Dairy, asking him, Whether these were not very large Cheeses? Yes by my faith,
says he, Forsooth Mistress, they are very large Cheeses indeed: but says she,
Your Master says, That his Cheeses are so big in his Dairy in Yorkshire, that
men turn them every Morning with Levers: Truly forsooth, says he, I seldom come
into the Dairy; but this I can say, that the Whey of one of his Cheeses will
drive a Mill for two hours together: Then she bid him look upon the height of
her House, and asked him, Whether it was not very high? Yes says he, it is
extremely high, Yet says she, Your Master says, That his House is so high, that
if a go up to the Top, although he have a six-penny Loaf in his Hand, yet he will
be starved before he comes down again: Truly forsooth, says he, I know nothing
of that; but this I can say, that when I am in the upper Room of his House,
that I can hear a Noise in another World: Nay, then says the Woman, I find all
is true, that thy Master says, and am resolved to make it a match: and Married
they were the Tuesday seven-night after: but I know nothing on it.

2.
A Maid once was making of Black-pudings, and her Dame told her, That the Stuff
looked dry, there was not Blood enough in it: Truly Dame, says she, I think
there is Blood enough for my nose has bled this half hour, and all dropped into
the Bowl. I would they were in your Guts, says her Dame. Truly, says the Maid,
so I intend they shall be when they are boiled.

3.
The Wench abovesaid, had a very large Tripe to wash and cleanse, as she was
washing it, her dame told her, she must use some hot Water about it: then she
pretty heart pist upon it very plentifully, and rubbed it in with great care:
says her Dame, I bid you use some hot Water about it. So I did, says she, all
that I could make, for I can do no more than I can.

4.
A Trooper in a Fight had fixed a pair of Rams-horns in a thick Leather Cap,
very artificially, to secure his Head instead of a Headpiece in the Fight:
Which another Soldiers Wife hearing of, said, If that secured the other
Soldier so well, being only Artificial, what will mine do Neighbor, which are
truly Natural on my dear Husband's Head? And now I find what was preserved him
in all the Fight, for he never was Wounded in the Head at all.

5.
One coming into New Market to buy some Butter, and there cheapned some; and
the Woman asked 10 d. a pound: then he smelt to it; What, says she, do you smell
to it, in seems you do not like my Butter: Yes says he but it is no better then
it should be: Then you will buy none, says she: No, says he, for a reason best
known to my self. Then she asked him the Reason; and with much importunity he
told her, 'twas because he had no Money: Well then, says the Woman, take it for
nothing, so you will pay me for it next time you come.

6.
A Falconer being a Hawking in the Country, by chance came to a little
Alehouse standing alone in a Wood; and being a Horseback, knocked at the
door, upon which a little Girl came out; then says he to her, I pray Virgin do
me the Kindness as to fetch me a Coal of Fire to light my Tobacco; then she ran
into her Mother, and told her that he called her Virgin; out comes the Mother
in a great Fury and told him: He was a Rogue to call her Daughter Virgin, she would
have him to know, she kept no such Creatures in her House, for though she was
Poor, she kept an Honest House, and shut the door upon him, and told him, he
should have no Fire there.

7.
A Citizens Wife was telling one that she had been in the Country, and saw how
Wheat, Rye, B^^ley, and Oats grew; but she could never tell how Malt grew: Why
truly Neighbor, says the other, the Women in the Country do spin the Malt
altogether: My troth, says she, I believe so too, for I see the threads hang out
at the ends of it.

8.
A Gentleman coming drunk to Bed overnight, in the morning he could not find
his Breeches, then he knocked for the Chamberlain: Sir, says he, if you are
sure you brought them in with you, you had best search your Pockets for them,
for you lost all your Money last Night out of your Pockets, it may be your
Breeches are got in there.

9.
Pride and Hewson, Two Oliverian Colonels, the first a Dray-man and the other
a-Cobler, being met together, they must needs to Joking one with the other,
then Pride told him he saw a piece of Cobblers Wax stick on his Scarlet Cloak:
puh, says Hewson, a handful of Brewers Grains will scour it off presently.

10.
It happened that Oliver was coming from Hampton Court in a very rainy day in his
Coach, which was very full, and Hugh Peter's was a Horseback riding by: then
Oliver out of pure kindness would have lent him a Coat to keep him from the
Rain, but he refused it, and bid the man tell his Master, That he would not be
in his Coat for a Thousand pound.

11.
A Country Fellow coming to Oxford Market, cheapned some Apples of an
Apple-woman there, and she told him, Six a Penny: which he thought
unreasonable, and thereupon called her the Son of a Whore; then she told him.
He was a Rogue to call her the Son of a Whore, for her Mother was as honest a
Woman's Child, as any was in the Parish where she lived.

12.
Some being merry together, among other discourse, one said, A bushel of March
dust is worth a Kings Ransom, but says another; What is a hogshead of March
Beer worth then? For that comforts the Spirits, and the other spoils the Eyes?

13.
Some Gentlemen were sitting at a Coffee-house together, one was asking what
News there was? The Other told him, There was forty thousand Men, rose to day,
which made them all stare about, and asked him to what end they rose, and what
they did intend? Why faith, says he, only to go to bed at Night again.

14.
A Country Fellow being before the Justices upon his Oath at the Sessions, was
asked the cause of the two men's falling out: He said, my Lord, you are a Rogue.
The Judge seeing the People beginning to laugh, bad him speak to the Jury, for
there were twelve of them.

15.
One bid a Maid to go and kiss such a Gentleman: No faith, says she, I beg your
pardon, for that, for I will not go to Market for such Ware, which I can have
brought home to my door without any trouble with vantage too.

16.
A Girl that had a months mind to be Married, and on the Wedding day at Night,
says she (to one of her Com^adet) When I was to go to Bed, I unlac't, and lac't
my self again, and pulled off my Shoes and Stockings, and put 'em on again: But
when I was to go into Bed, said I, O lack a day! must I lie with a strange man
to Night: And when I was a Bed, I bethought my self how I should lie, for if I
should turn my Face to him, he would think I was bold, and if I should turn my
Breech to him, he would say I was unmannerly, therefore I was resolved to lie upon
my Back, let come what would.

17.
In the time of the Rump, Two Rump Parliament Men being in a pair of Oars, says
one of them, You Watermen are Hypocrites: For you row one way and look another:
O Sir, says one of them (being a smart Fellow) we have not plied so long at
Westminster, but we have learned something of our Masters (the Parliament that
sit there) that is to pretend one thing, and act another.

18.
A Country Fellow brought a Letter to a Gentleman's house, but he not being at
home, he left it with a Monkey that stood at the door; the Gentleman hearing of
it, when he met the man, was very angry with him: Sir, says he, And please your
Worship I delivered it to your Son which was at the door. My Son, says he,
'twas a Monkey: Truly Sir, says he, I thought it was your Son, it was so like
you.

19.
A Tailor having got an Old Doublet, to mend of an ancient decayed Gentleman,
they happened upon a very large Louse, which by chance he cut in two as he was
ripping a place in the Doublet; then he gave one half of the great Louse unto
his Wife, and took the other himself, and they both eat it, and after that
called themselves Gentleman and Gentlewoman; their Journey-man seeing what they
did, and hearing what they said, said he was a piece of a Gentleman too; which
made them ask the reason of it? Why, says he, When you cut the Louse in two
with the Sheers, and did eat it, I at that time lickt the Sheers that cut it.
Ergo.

20.
In the Rumps time, a Foot Soldier met at a Church in the Suburbs a Whore, who
was very diligently taking Sermon-Notes, but that night he lay with her, and
about a month after his Captain heard that she was caught a Bed with two men
by the Constable; and he told the Soldier of it; but he rapping out a great
Oath, swore he did not think she had been a Whore though; and yet he pretty
heart had layn with her half a score nights before that, and therefore had good
reason to wonder that one should think her a Whore. Probatum est.

21.
An Arch Wagg put a great many Rams-horns in a Basket, and went up and down and
cried New Fruit, New Fruit, in the Winter time; at last a Lawyer bid him let
him see his Winter Fruit, which when he saw them, said, You Fool, who do you
think will buy Horns? O Sir, says he, though you are provided, yet I may meet
with some that are not.

22.
A man was advised of late to venture at the great Lottery in Morefields; No,
no, says he, there is none but Cuckolds have any luck there; at which his sweet
and virtuous Wife being by, and hearing of it, said, My dear Husband, let me
entreat you of all loves to venture there, for I Am certain you will have good
luck. But how he took it I cannot tell.

23.
One speaking of the burning of the Streets of London at the great Fire there,
said, Cannon-street roared, Milk-street was burnt too; Wood-street was burnt to
Ashes; Bread-street was burnt to a Coal; Ironmonger-lane was burnt red hot;
Distaff-lane had spun a fine Thread; Snow-hill was melted down; Shoe-lane was
burnt to boot; Creed-lane would not believe it till it came; and Pudding-lane,
and Pye-Corner were over baked.

24.
A Countryman coming to Town in the Rumps Time, and hearing of the great
things they had done, would needs go to the Parliament House to see them; and
being there said, Now Gods blessing on you all for you are a goodly Company,
and have done wonderful things to the good of us all; and that we may be
further serviceable unto you, my Wife and I, and all my Children will work hard
for you all; for I see there is a great number of you: not doubting but in a
little time, you may have occasion to make use of me and my Trade: Then they
ask't him what Trade he was, he told them a Rope-maker; and presently slipped
away among the Crowd.

25.
A Man that had great store of Arable Land, did command a Boy of his to watch
the Pigeons, that they should not eat up the new sowed Corn: The Boy went
presently to the Pool, and there stood, which his Master seeing, Sirrah, did
not I bid you watch the Pigeons, and do you stand loytering there? Sir, says
he, this is the best place for me to stand to watch the Pool, that is, not to
suffer them to drink; for if they don't drink, I Am sure they cannot eat.

26.
A Welsh-man met another going up a Mountain with a large Pompion in his hand:
he asked him what it was? He told him it 'twas a Mare's Egg, and would have a
Colt; then he gave him a Groat for it, and carried it up the Hill; and when he
was come to the Top, by chance he let the Pompion fall, which tumbled apace
down the Hill, till it came to a Bush where it stopped; and by its beating the
Bush, forced out a Hare from thence, which the Welsh-man seeing, thought 'twas
a Colt; and cried as it ran, Stop her Colt, stop her Colt: yet for all that
there went the Hare away, which made the poor Welsh-man for Grief to turn bald,
in regard he had lost his Hare.

27.
A Lord Mayor being once invited to the Temple to Dinner; but finding his
entertainment at his first coming not to answer his expectation, retired back
without eating; and at his coming out, a Gentleman met one of his Servants, and
said to him, Much good d'it you Sir: Why now, says he, you think you have
jeered me; but I Will assure you, I have dined to day as well as my Lord Mayor.

28.
A Mayor of a Town in Wiltshire, came to give a Visit to the Mayor of Wooton
Basset; and when he came to his house, he found him turning of the Spit, which
made him think he might jeer him abroad for it; and therefore desired the other
Mayor to sit down, and turn the Spit, whilst he went out to fetch some drink;
which he did; and he in the mean time invited all the Aldermen of his Town to
dinner; where being come, they found the other Mayor a turning the Spit; which
saved the Credit of the Mayor of Wooton Basset, Probatum est.

29.
A rich and covetous Councellor of this Kingdom, that had an only Child, which
was a Daughter, and worth 20000 l. A young and handsome Gentleman of good
Birth, though of no great Fortune; yet had so far insinuated himself into the
Young Lady's Favor, that she promised him Marriage, if he could get her
Father's Consent. Immediately he comes for London, and goes to her Father, and
told him, That he would give him 10 l. for a Fee, if he could assist him in a
business which did much concern him: which was, That there was a rich young
Heiress in Town, which had promised him marriage, if it could any way be made
good by Law: Why, says he, let her hire a Horse, and invite you to take her
away, and let her get up before and you behind, that it may not be said that
you rode away with her, but she with you; and let her go to the Minister, and
tell him, it is her desire to be married to you, and to get a License
accordingly; and when you are married, then be sure to bed her, and I Will
warrant you she is your own. And this, says the Gentleman, you will avouch for
Law? He told him, Yes. Well Sir, says he, if you will set your Hand to it, I Will
give you Ten Pounds more; which he did. Immediately he goes into Country, and
shows the young Lady what was done, and how 'twas done; and she accordingly
performed her promise, and suddenly married and bedded; and having so continued
a week, they both came to London, and came to her Father, and fell down upon
their Knees to him, and craved his Blessing: which made him at first fly into
harsh Language; but the Gentleman said, We have done nothing but what you have
avoucht for Law, and have it under your hand. The Lawyer fearing his Reputation
might be brought in question, and seeing him to be a handsome and well-bred
Gentleman, and of a good Family, clapped both their hands together, and bid God
bless them; and then gave them a Subsistence for the present, and made over all
to them after his death. Probatum est.

30.
A mad roaring Fellow, as he was riding, falling from his horse, pitched upon
his head, ran among the People standing by, swearing that he had broke his
Neck; and they had no other cause but to believe him, because he swore it so
himself.

31.
A Country Fellow haing been at London, and being come home, a She-Neighbour
asked him, What News there was in London? Faith, says he, all the news that I
heard, was, That there was a great Press out for Cuckolds. Are you sure on it,
says she? Sure on it, says he, I Am certain of it. Then I am resolved, says she,
my dear Husband shall not stir out till the Press is over; I Will allow him to
press me; but he shall not be pressed himself; which showed her to be an honest,
and truly loving Wife.

32.
Says a Lady to her maid, What are you with Child, Hussy? Yes forsooth, Maedam
Why, who got it, you whore? My Master, forsooth. Where? In the Truckle Bed.
Where was I then? Asleep in the high Bed, forsooth. Why did you not call out,
you whore? Why, says she, would your Ladyship have done so?

33.
An Arch Wagg hearing a Woman cry Kitchen Stuff, ask't her what it was? she
said, That which drops from Flesh. Well, says he, Call to morrow morning, and
I Will help you to some: And having* got a Pot full of Sir-reverence, the Woman,
as her Custom is, puts her hand into the Pot, and drawing it out, smelt the
affront, and began to be angry; Nay, says he, don't be angry, for I helped you
to that which falls from the Flesh. It Is very true indeed, says she, and I find
your Flesh is now very dry (she strok't his Face with her hand) and it wants a
little greasing, and stands I think in need of basting too, and being a lusty
Jade, did baste him well-favouredly.

34.
An Englishman and his wife which was with Child, Lodged at a French-mans
house where they understood not one another: It chanced that one Night the
English-woman called for a Midwife, and he came down in his shirt to his
Landlords Chamber to acquaint them with it: and 'twas a very cold Night, says
she to her Husband, Let the English- man come to Bed, for he cannot go to his
own Bed, as his Wives Condition is; and you need not fear any thing seeing you
are a Bed with me; which being granted, he lay down on the other side of the
Woman; and the Frenchman being tired the day before, fell fast asleep: But a
little after the moving of the Bed, awaked her Husband, saying, What a Pox are
you a doing? Why, what would you have me to die, says she, if I should speak to
him, it would be to no purpose, for you know he understands not a word of our
Language.

35.
A Gallant did fancy that he sung exceeding well, although he had a very bad
and hoarse Voice; and having observed that a poor woman did always cry when she
heard him sing, asked her the reason of it? Truly Sir, said she, When I was
forced, being poor, to sell all my Goods, and nothing left me but one poor
silly Ass, which was all my Support; and at last I lost my Ass too; and that
which makes me cry, is, that whenever I hear you sing, it puts me in mind of
my poor Ass. Tarbox for that beloved.

36.
A strange Gentleman being much necessitated for a House of Office in the City,
and being unacquainted, went into an Upholsters Shop, and bid him show him a
Close-stool: Then he showed him one: What, says he, Have you no better? Yes,
says he, all of colored Velvet. Go, says he, fetch me two or three down: In
the mean time he lets down his Breeches, and sat down: The Upholster coming
down and seeing him in that posture, asked him what he did? Why truly, says he,
I am trying of it. And plucking up his Breeches again, said, He did not like
any of them, for they were all too low for him, and so went out of the doors.

37.
A Doctor of Divinity in Oliver's days that had been sufficiently persecuted
and plundered for his Loyalty to his Prince, which made him and many others
(that held his Tenets) to talk at random sometimes, when they had nothing to
lose; but this talking of his happened to be a benefit to him: for diverse did
acquaint Oliver, that he was often heard to say, that he did heartily wish that
Oliver and all his Army were in Hell: upon which Oliver sent him a Summons to
appear before him, and being come, Why how now Doctor, says he, I did never
expect to hear such Language to have proceeded from a man of your Coat? Why
Sir, says the Doctor, what did I say? Why says Oliver, I heard that you should
wish that both my self, and my Army were in Hell: Is that all? says the Doctor,
why truly Sir you need not endeavor to procure any testimony to make this
manifest; for I do confess I have said so a hundred times, and do wish the same
still, and I think I have done exceedingly well in so wishing; and my reasons
are these. For if you and your Army have conquered three such Kingdoms as
these, if you were all in Hell, I think it were impossible for that one Kingdom
to withstand you; and that being conquered, would it not be a great blessing to
us all? Which conceit not only procured his Pardon, but a Restitution of his
Parsonage also, and likewise a Gratuity; which made him as Loyal to him as he
was before.

38.
A Scottish Minister being Chaplain to an English Regiment of Foot, in the time
of the Rump Parliament at Saint Edmonds Bury in Suffolk; and there as he was
preaching to them, said Good Lord Bless the grand Council above (viz. the
Parliament) and grant they may aw hang together: which a Country Fellow that
stood underneath hearing, said, Yes, Sir with alll my Heart, and the sooner the
better; and I am sure it is the Prayers of all good people. But good Friends,
says the Person, I do not mean as that naughty man means; but I pray that they
may all hang together in Accord and Concord: Yes, says the Fellow again, In any
Cord, so it be a strong Cord: And when he had so said, he slipped away from the
Company: At last being searched for by the chief Officer there, they could not
find him: How, says he, Is he slipped away? If he had not, he should have had the
slip bestowed upon him, for his unreverent Language to the Parliament.

39.
A great Cavalier in the time of the War betwixt the King and Parliament, was
taken Prisoner in the County of Chester by some of the Parliament-Forces; and
in regard that this Gentleman was a Colonel and had been very active in the
Kings Service; he was adjudged by the said Parliament aforesaid, not only to
Prison in Nantwich; but there to be put in a dark Dungeon, with nothing but
Straw to lie on; which he patiently endured for two days: But on Saturday
night, he told the Jailer, That he desired that he might have liberty to go to
Church on the Morrow to hear their preaching; perhaps, says he, I may be of
your Opinion then: which Sir William granted; and as the Preacher was Praising
God that all their great Victories, he prayed God that he would be a Sentinel
also, over that only Town of Nantwich, that had been so faithful to the
Parliament; at that the Colonel started up, saying, Pray Sir, must he be a
Muscateer or a Pikeman; Upon which he was conveyed to his aforesaid Lodging
again. Probatum est.

40.
In a Village in Norfolk, where the Church stands upon a high Stony-hill; the
Lady there and her Family, when they went to Church, did use to Load the Fool
with all their Cloaks and Saveguards, for fear it should Rain by the way; and
always gave him a Stick between his Legs, telling him he should ride up, for
'twas a Horse; which he often did with Confidence and Satisfaction to himself:
But being one time come to the top of the Hill, and being much loaded with the
aforesaid things, he began to puff and blow extremely, saying, Do You call this a
Horse? I am sure but for the Name of a Horse, I had as good a gone a foot all
the way.

41.
A Cobbler was sitting in his Shop a singing merrily, his Song was this,
Tamberlain was and he was; and Tamberlain was and he was; and continued so
singing, and nothing else, many times together; which a Gentleman that past by
took notice of, and said to the Cobbler, Prithee Friend, says the Gentleman,
what was he? Why, says the Cobbler, as arrant a Fool as your self, for ought I
know: Sirrah, says the Gentleman, you are a Rascal, came out and I Will kick you;
No Sir, says he, it is no matter, I thank you for your Love as much as if I had
it, for I don't want kicking: Sirrah, says the Gentleman again, Come out and
I Will give you a kick: No Sir, says he, You need not trouble your self, I will not
come if you would give me two.

42.
A Schoolmaster did always dictate to his Scholars, H non est Litera, that is
H is no Letter; and on a time he called one of the Scholars to him, and bid him
heat the Cawdle, and when he asked for it, the Scholar told him, that he had
done with the Cawdle as he bid him, What Is that? says his Master, Why Sir, says
he, I did eat it: Sirrah, says he, I bid you heat it with an H: Yes Sir, says
he, But I did eat it with Bread.

43.
A Gentleman desired of a Covetous Neighbor of his to lend him ten pounds, he
professed he had none to spare; but the Gentleman having at that time very
great occasion, told him, he had a Gelding, that he had been offered twelve
pounds for, but for the present he will take ten: Well Sir, says the Miser, I
will go and try a Friend (which you may be sure was his Chest) and fetch the
Money presently: which when the Gentleman had received, and the Horse
delivered, he said, Now I find that Horses have more Credit than Men, and so
God-a-mercy Horse.

44.
Two Fellows going with a Present to a Covetous Man, one of them said they
should but lose their labor; well, says the other, I Will hold you a Crown that we
shall get there both Meat, Drink, and Money; Done, says the other: And being come
thither, one of them told him. that he was very dry, then he bid them go down
into the Gellar; and when they came there, he told the Butler, that he could
not drink without eating; then the Butler went up and told his Master of it,
who bid him set a cold Pasty before them; of which they eat plentifully: And
when they had filled their Bellies they both went to the Master to take their
leaves of him (also expecting some gratuity) which when they saw not appearing,
says one of them boldly, Pray Sir, what shall we say to our Master, if he
should ask us what you gave us? which put him to a stand for a while, at lost
he gave them half a Crown: so the fellow won his wager.

45.
A Cavalier in Oxfordshire, that was very zealous in his Loyalty for his
Prince, and had suffered very much for it; and once meeting with some of the
Rumpish Officers at Oxford, says or e of them to him, God save you, Noble
Squire, and you, says he, if it be possible: for he did believe that all that
were against the King could not be saved.

46.
Some Women were making merry together at a Gossipping at Limus, near Ratcliff,
and the Godfather was there among them; but one of the Women that was an Arch
Jade, said to him, Sir I have something to say to you. Well, says he, say on:
Don't you know, says she, Ratcliff Market? yes, says he, Very well: Why, says
she, if you will meet me there to morrow morning with a Tu -- in your Mouth,
I Will give you a pint of Sack: but, says he, I must drink it to wash my mouth,
and if I do not do it, then you shall have the Sack again at second hand: Well,
says she, I see that you would cast your kindness upon me, if I do accept on it:
And says he, If I do not meet you there, yet I Will come hither and tell you that
I cannot come to you.

47.
There were two Modest and Civil Whetstons-park Women, that were scolding most
comfortably in the street together; and amongst their virtuous Discourse (of
which there was great store) to the great Satisfaction of all the
Neighborhood, that their Daughters might learn the better how to behave
themselves: One called the other Whore: Faith, says she, and thou would fain
be a Whore too, but that thou are so ugly, that no body will lie with thee:
What you Whore, says she, I can have one for a Groat a night and thank ye too.

48.
A Gentleman was riding through a Forest in Oxfordshire, where two supposed
Cripples begged something of him; then he put his Hand in his Pocket, and bid
them give him a Groat, and he would give them a Sixpence, which they did; and
when he had the Groat he rode away with it: With that one of them swore a great
Oath, saying, Cut thy Girth Tom, cut thy Girth, you Rogue, and let us after
him: And though he gallopt a good pace away, yet they were so nimble (and so by
consequence Cripples) that they over took him as he was opening a Gate, and had
almost laid hold on him; that the Gentleman, for his security was forced to
throw two or three Shillings down on the Ground, and whilst they were scrabling
for that he got away: Probatum est.

49.
A Gentleman and a peevish Parson were riding together (in an extreme rainy
day) in the Forest of Sherwood in Nottingham-shire; so that there was no House
within four or five miles of the place, that they were soundly soust with the
Rain; which made the Parson fret and vex extremely: Come cheer up, says the
Gentleman to him, for if it does not hold up quickly we'll e'ne do as they do
in Spain. Well, says the Parson, what is that? Why says the other, e'ne let it
rain on: which put the Parson in a greater chase than before. And as they
gallopt along by a poor Beggerman's Hutt, which was in the middle of the
Forest, and just in the Highway, and being almost a quarter of a mile gallopt
beyond it, the Old Man hearing some Horses gallop by, come out and cries, Do You
hear, do you hear, do you hear Gentlemen, which made them think, that he would tell
them something to avoid Robbing, and so presently gallopt back again to the
Hutt. Then says the beggar to them, Pray Gentlemen bestow a penny upon a poor
Old Man: which put the Parson into such a Fury, that he would have beat the
Beggar, and had so done but for the Gentleman; who was so pleased with the
Humor of the Old Man, and the Conceit also, and to see the Parson in such a
Fume; that he threw him sixpence: So they both rode away for Tuxford as fast
as they could; and when they came there, they had never a wet Thread dry about
them: Probatum est.

50.
A Fellow that had never a Nose, a roguish Beggar begged of him an Alms, and
still as he begged, he prayed for his eyesight; he asked him what he meant by
that? He told him, that he hoped his eyesight would never fail him; For if it
does, says he, you are in a most miserable Condition; for there was no place to
fix a pair of Spectacles on.

51.
Another meeting him by chance without a Nose, asked him by way of jeer, what
that was upon his Nose? He said, a Worm. Alas poor Worm, says he, I see he is
faint to go about, now the Bridge is broken down.

52.
An Apothecary in Oxford spoke to a Countryman, by way of Jeer, to bring him
some live Rats, and he would give him eighteen pence a piece for them; and a
fortnight after he brought them; and then the Apothecary told him, That he was
provided the day before. The Country Fellow seeing he was abused, was resolved
to be quit with him, saying, I am unwilling (seeing I have brought them) to
carry then back again; and told him, he would take three pence out in Physic
at some time or other, and so opened his Bag, and let them about the Shop,
which did so whisk up and down the Shelves, that in a little space they broke
him about forty Pots and Glasses, and could never be rid of them since.
Probatum est.

53.
A Lady in Covent Garden that had a Daughter about four years of Age, and being
below a pretty space, her mother called for her up, and asked her, Where she had
been all that while? she told her, That she had been to see her Brother learn
to dance, and that he was taught by a Monkey; alluding to the great deformity
that was in the Dancing Master: and the same Girl told her Mother on a
weekday, That she thought it was Sunday, because the Sun then did shine so
bright, which had been clouded so long before: which was much in a Child of
four years of Age.

54.
One told him that had never a Nose, that though his Accomplices were fled that
joined with him in the Plot against the State, that he should be made a
Sacrifice for all the rest. Nay, says he, I don't fear, for the Old Law says,
that nothing must be sacrificed that had a Blemish.

55.
A Gentleman was forced for his Loyalty to betake himself to the Sea for his
security and relief, during the time of the Grand Rebellion, and was there so
long, that he became an expert Seaman; insomuch that when he came back (which
was about the time of his Majesty's most happy Restaurarion.) he was asked by a
Fanatic Parson, Whether he could say his Compass or not? Yes, says he, that I
can, and I Will lay a wager with you also, that I can say my Compass better than
you can say the Lord's Prayer; (which he poor heart heart had discontinued for
many years before) and the Sea Captain was the Judge to determine who said
best: So the Gentleman said over his Compass, and the Parson the Lord's Prayer;
but the Captain could not judge who said best: Then the Gentleman began to say
his Compass backward, which he did very well; but the Parson could not say the
Lords Prayer backwards; so that the Gentleman won the wager; who also told him,
That it was no wonder that he could not say it backwards, because for many
years together he never saw him forwards to say it at all.

56.
A man was condemned the last Sessions to be hanged for a Robbery; but before
and after he was condemned, his careful, dear, and loving wife bid him take no
care; for she had took that care that he should not die; which made the man
live more dissolutely than he would have done, but for his wife's Confidence;
which Confidence she continued to him, till the night before he was to be
hanged: and then, she came to him, and told him, That all the great Promises
made to her were come to nothing; for she could not procure him a Pardon by any
means whatsoever; which put the poor man into such a Grief and Trembling, that
he was scarce himself: Come Husband, says she, take Heart, for though I cannot
get you a Pardon, yet I Will tell you what I Will do for you: I will make you an
excellent Cawdle to night, which will make you sleep well, and another to
morrow morning to comfort up your heart before you are hanged: for truly I
believe it troubles you as well as me, that I could not get your pardon;
therefore pass it by this once; but if ever you come to be hanged again, I Will
warrant you, I Will get you your pardon.

57.
A Fellow was accused before a Justice for calling a woman Whore: the Justice
asked, why he did so? he told him, Because he had lain with her above a hundred
times. O pray Sir, says she, don't believe him: for he never lay with me but 3
times in his life, and then he promised to give me half a Crown a time; but I
will assure you, Sir, I never received one penny of him. And why did you not
ask him for it? says the Justice, Indeed Sir, says she, I did often call upon
him for it, nay I called him Rogue too, because he would not pay me: why then,
says the Justice, do you think him a Rogue? yes truly, Sir, says she, to
aggravate the matter, he is a very Rogue: Nay, says the Justice, Then it is pity
that a Rogue and a Whore should be parted, and so sent them both to Prison
together; then they both entreated him: Nay, says the Justice, confess and be
hanged; and so sent them both away.

58.
A mad hare-brain'd Country Fellow, came to a great Lady that was his Landlady,
to tell her that his Wife was brought to Bed: Faith it is true Madam, says he,
How brought to Bed, says my Lady, what was she Drunk or Sick? No, no, Madam, I
mean she has a Child: O, says my Lady, now I understand you: Well then, says
she, what has God sent her? Faith, says he, nothing as I know of, I don't
believe she ever heard from him in her life: Puh, says the Lady, I mean has she
a Boy or a Girl? O do you mean so forsooth Madam; why guess then, says he: It Is a
Boy, says my Lady, no vaith Madam, guess again: Why a Girl, says she: Vaith
Madam I think in my Conscience you are a Witch, it is a Girl indeed.

59.
A man being newly married, entered himself into a Fencing-School the very next
day after, which made most of the Neighbors wonder why he did it: Some thought
that he had a better Opinion of his Wife's Honesty than she deserved, and so
thought it was to defend her; but the naked Truth was, that he had matched with
her before, now he did intend only to match her, because he knew she would be at
Daggers drawing with him, if he did but look angry.

60.
A Fellow was indicted for stealing a silver Cup, and the Judge asked him what
he could say for himself, that Judgment should not pass upon him? He told him,
that he meant no hurt to the man when he took it, and did only intend to pawn
it for a time, and then to bring it back to him again, and pay him so much a
month for the use whilst he had it; and that it was only a foolish Custom he
had got. Well says the Judge, if it be your Custom to steal, it is also my
Custom to hang up those that do steal: For the Commandment says, Thou shall not
steal: Yes, says he, Thou must not steal, but I may, and therefore why should I
be hanged for it? And besides, Sir, says the Thief, I take it very ill from you
to offer to hang me, only for having a Cup too much: No, says the Justice, It Is
not for having a Cup too much, but for having a Cup more than your own. Sir,
said he, I do not own it to be mine, it is his.

61.
A cleanly woman in Cambridge-shire, had made good store of Butter, and whilst
she went a little way out into the Town, about some earnast occasions, a
neighbor's Dog came in, in the mean time, and eat up half the Butter: Being
come home, her maid told her what the Dog had done, and that she had locked him
up in the Dairy-House: So she took the dog, and hanged him up by the heels,
till she had squeezed all the Butter out of his Throat again; which she pretty
cleanly Soul, took, and put to the rest of the Butter, and made it up for
Cambridge Market; but her Maid told her, she was ashamed to see such a nasty
Trick done: Hold your peace, you Fool, says she, it is good enough for
Schollards; away to Market with it.

62.
An Englishman and a Scotch-man were both in the Hold of a Ship together, in
the last Engagement at Sea; and as they were in the heat of the Fight, says the
Englishman to him, Com let us go up, and partake with our Brethren in the
Fight, and not stand here like Drones, and do nothing. Be God, says he, wi aw
my heart: And as the Englishman led the way, when he was half way up, a great
Bullet came in, and cut him just in two in the middle. Udsbread, says the
Scotch- man, What the deel do gang up to fight, and leave thy Arse behind
thee?

63.
A Frenchman was scoffing at the English-mens humors, because they did so
admire their Nation. Faith friends, says the English- man, you are mistaken;
for we in England do esteem you, as you in France do our Hounds, for pleasure.

64.
At a general hurling in Cornwall, which is still observed twice a year, where
also is great wrestling and Cudgel-playing, a Minister happening to be among
the multitude there; for reproving a Fellow for swearing so much, had his head
broke very deep by a stone that the Fellow flung at him; which some that stood
by seeing, said, Come Sir, we'll go along with you to a Justice. No, says the
Minister, truly, I think there is more need to go with me to a Surgeon.

65.
A great Divine being extremely sick, a Physician was sent to him, and when he
came, he asked him the cause of his Distemper? And finding the Physician to
falter much in his discourse, he told him plainly, he would take none of his
Physic: For, says he, if he be not able to show me the Cause, I am sure he is
less able to take it away; And so had him turned out.

66.
A Gentleman was saying, that this is a strange Age we live in; because most
Maids now a days do much resemble their great Grand mother, Goody Eve: for she
was no sooner a woman, but she was married; and as she knew not her Husband
till she had eaten Fruit; so most Maids now, have commonly Fruit before they
know their Husbands.

67.
A woman in the Country having lost abundance of Linen off her hedge; but
could not imagine who was the Thief, so she went to a sober Gentleman, whom she
took to be an Astrologer, to desire him to help her to her Linen again: Then
he took her up into his Chamber, and bid her lie down upon the Bed, and when he
knew her as well as her husband, he told her, he would tell her more. What,
says she, do you intend to make me a Whore? Why yes, says he, why should not I
make you a whore, as well as you make me a witch?

68.
Hugh Peter's in former times coming into a Cathedral, where they were singing
the Litany; I wonder, says a man, why they would let any such Fellows come
there: But however, he thought they sung very ill; and whereas they sung, Have
mercy upon us miserable Sinners; he said they had more need to say, Have mercy
upon us miserable Singers: Probatum est.

69.
A Rumpish Gallant that had been a little too forward (in those Days) in buying
of the Kings Lands, for which he did repent heartily, but not till it was too
late; and this same very Person, had a little before made a Book called A World
in the Moon; and after the Kings most happy Restoration, he had a great desire
it seems to speak with his Majesty; and among other discourse, says the King to
him; Sir, I hear that you have found out a new World in the Moon, and I being a
Sovereign Prince (as you see I am now, though you did not think me so formerly)
sure I must needs havs some Lands there, and if you please I will sell them to
you; and what will you give me for them? O Sir, says he, I beg your Majesty's
pardon, for I find it is dangerous to purchase any Kings Lands.

70.
Some Jovial Companions being in a Room a drinking together, one would have had
another to have pledged him that Cup, he vowed he would not; nay more than
that, he said, he resolved to leave off drinking, because it made him have a
short memory; which made the other laugh at him for it, swearing that he would
drink on still, because it made him have a long memory; for since I have learnt
to drink hard, I am a year in remembering that, which before I could call to
mind presently; and so have a long memory.

71.
A Clown in Flanders had a very pretty Woman to his Wife, and both came to an
Inn six miles from Gaunt that night, and a lusty Spanish Soldier happened to
lie there that night also, and when they were both in Bed, he seeing she was
handsome, made up the number three in the Bed, without saying by your leave;
and the Woman it seems lay in the middle; and the Clown hearing the Soldier,
as he thought something to bold with his Wife, durst not speak at first; at
last he took a Courage (for you must know he was wonderfully valiant) and bid
her desire the Spaniard to lie still, and she being a very discreet and good
natured Woman, and to avoid any further quarrelling: Said, Sweet Husband, you
know I cannot speak Spanish, but let me entreat you to rise and go to the
Sexton, for he speaks Spanish very well: So the good man followed his dear
Wifes advice, and rose and went to him; and what was done then is quite out of
my head now, yet I knew the Woman must needs be virtuous, and I think you will
swear discreet; but before he came back the Spaniard was gone, which when he
perceived he began to domineer: swearing if he had him here how he would Cudgel
the Rogue, for troubling of them so that night: In truth Husband, says she,
(very discreetly) I am heartily glad you did not come while he was here, for in
your anger I am sure you would a killed him; and I know you are very desperate: But
prithee sweet heart, says he, how long did he stay when I was gone; Truly
Husband, says she, you were scarce out of the door but he ran away: Well, says
he, I cannot choose but laugh to see how I have scared him; you see what comes of
policy and discretion now; for if I had been hasty, the Rogue might have killed
me for ought I know, and then what would thou have done for such a good
Husband again, my dear? Truly Husband, says he, 'twas best as it is, and I am
very well pleased with what was done.

72.
A Gallant wooing his Mistress in Marriage, she told him she would have none of him
if he did not leave off taking Tobacco, and he was Bound to under Hand and
Seal, that he should never take any again; and on the Wedding Night he lay
still and stirred not; she asked him the reason of it, he told her that she had
bound him from Tobacco, which did usually make him active in all things, and
without that was always like a Stone Statue. Then she immediately knocked for
the Maid and bid her bring in the Bond, and withal some good Tobacco, and the
Bond flung in the Fire; and after he had taken a Pipe then he gave her a kiss;
then she called the Wench again saying, Hussy, I charge you to bring in a
dozen more, and that with all speed; which being done, she left them to their
repose.

73.
Appelles, the most Famous Painter, in the time of Alexander the Great, had
drawn the Picture of the said Alexander on Horseback at Ephesus; but when
Alexander had seen it, it seems he did not give it that Praise which it did
deserve: Upon which a Horse was immediately brought in, who as soon as he had
seen the Painted Horse, began to neigh, as thinking it to be a true: it was so
exquisitely done; then Appelles told the King, that that Horse did understand
Painting much better than him.

74.
Oliver Cromwell, when he was Protector, had a mind on a time to salace himself
with some Mirth, for then there was a Cavalier Doctor that came to him at that
time about his Benefice which had been wrongfully took from him; and Oliver
knowing him to be Ingenious, was resolved to have some discourse with him; and
after much talk, Oliver told him of a strange thing that happened lately: O,
says the Doctor, I can tell you of a stranger thing then that, and for a Bottle
of Wine you shall know it: Well, after a Bottle or two drinking, says Oliver,
Come now, Doctor, your strange Story: Why says he, is not this a stranger thing
then that, for who would have thought twenty years ago, that we should have had
such a Copper-nosed King; and such a fat A -- Queen.

75.
A Gentleman that was riding by a Riverside, asked a Country Fellow, Whether
that River might be past over or no? Yes, says he. Then the Gentleman went to
try, and of a sudden plunged himself over Head and Ears, and at last with much
ado got out again: when he was out, says he, You Rogue, did you not tell me
that I might pass over: Truly Sir, says he, I would not have you angry for I
meant no hurt; for I thought you might go over safely, when I saw my Brother
Masons Dog that is less then your Horse, go over and back again without any
danger; and you and your Horse are ten times as big again as my Brothers Dog;
for a little one is sooner drowned than a great one, Sir.

76.
A Noble Man in this Kingdom desired a Gentleman (that was a merry Wag) to
accompany him down in the Country this last Summer, wherein they had several
merry Discourses, and among the rest, the Lord desired him to ask what it was a
Clock; so he asked a Shepherd that was on one side of the Coach, what it was a
Clock? and he said Four, then he asked another on the other side of the Coach, and
he said Five; then the Lord asked what it was a Clock? and he told him Nine: How
so? says he; Why my Lord, says he, he on this side the Coach told me 'twas
Four, and the other Five, and is not that Nine: then the Lord bid him look on
his Watch; which it seems was half an hour to slow; and my Lords went too fast;
yet he told him, That his went the rightest: No my Lord, says he, mine must
needs be truest, for you know the Proverb is, slow and sure.

77.
A Young Country Fellow went a Wooing to a Country Lass, and he had on then a
spick and span new Suit with Silver Buttons also; and in all his Discourse with
her he used all the Art he could to have her take notice of his Buttons; at
last when he saw that she would take no notice of them at all: Well, says he,
these Silver Buttons keep me so warm: Yes, says she, you had best lie in them
all night, lest you should take cold this frosty weather.

78.
A Rich Usurer in Oxford, that had one Summer bought the Crop of Grass which
then was standing in a large Meadow near Maudlin Bridge, but it seems it
happened that Summer that there fell great store of Rain; which was succeeded
with a great Flood, which came after the Grass was cut, and half made into Hay;
which was almost all carried into the adjacent Rivers, and that which was left
all destroyed; he then comes very pensively to Maudlin Bridge, and leans upon
the wall, saying, What Grass no by the Mass;
What Hay no by my Fay;
What Fodder never Nodder;
What Muck the worst Luck.


79.
A reverend old Woman that had lived 70 odd, or thereabouts, and being
something unsatisfied in her Religion, went to the Minister of the Town, who
was a Presbyter, and having asked her many Questions, at last asked her how many
Commandments there were? Truly Sir, says she, an't please your worship, I don't
know: for I never minded any of 'em all. Then he called down his Maid Ann, and
bid her name them all to her, and she named nine of them: What, says he, is
there but nine? No, Sir says she, for you and I broke one last night. Nay, says
the old woman, if they be so easy to be broke, I am glad I had nothing at all
to to do with them.

80.
Some Gentlemen that were riding a hunting in a gloomy day, and coming to a
Shepherd that sat there under a Bush, they asked him what weather it would be
to day? he said, That weather which pleases me. They asked him what he meant by
that? Truly, says he, it shall be what weather it pleases God, and what
weather pleases God that weather pleases me.

81.
A Gentleman that was a great Courtier of Ladies, and loved Hawking very much,
was riding through Burford in Oxfordshire, and seeing a Fellow going home with
a Sheeps head; says the Gentleman, It Is such Rogues as this as makes our Dogs
Meat so dear. And you, says the Fellow, it is that makes Whores so dear; for
formerly a man might have had one for a Groat, but you have so raised the
price, that we cannot get 'em now at any ordinary rate.

82.
An Impudent and Brazen-fac't Fellow would almost every day intrude and invite
himself to a Person of Qualities House still about Dinner and Supper time; and
once at his coming in, the Gentleman bid 'em stay Dinner a while; then he asked
one of the Servants what time Dinner would come up? Faith, says the Fellow,
I Will assure you, Sir, not before you are gone.

83.
A Quaker met with one of his Holy Sisters and asked her how all fared at home?
Truly says she, we all fare well, but my Daughter Rebekah, for she is fallen;
what, from the Truth? No: fallen in Love? No, for a Zealous Brother did fall in
Love with her, and she since is fallen asunder; and as we in our Country say,
fallen in twain: O Sister, Sister, says he, when Zealous Kittens meet, they will
play together; for it is natural to 'em so to do.

84.
A Gentleman of a great estate, who it seems hated Tobacco, and hearing his
eldest Son did take it, though not in his presence; he told him, if he knew
that he did take Tobacco, that he would disinherit him: Truly Father, says he,
they that told you so were mistaken; for before that I will take any Tobacco,
I Will see it all a fire: Say thou so my Boy, says he, I Will give thee 500 l. a
year the more for that.

85.
A Man that lived at a Market Town, intending to go further into the Country,
but having forgot something, came at night back again, and on the Bed found a
pair of Breeches; and looking further, found a Man a-bed with his Wife: Are
these your Breeches? says he, Yes, says the Man, I profess, says he, if ever I
find you a-bed with my Wife again, I Will throw your Breeches out of the Window.

86.
A Gentleman was drolling with a Woman, and told her he was resolved to lie
with her that night, but she told him she had her Husbands Company, then says
he, I must confess, though I love your Husbands company well, yet then I had
rather have his room than his company: And truly, says she, I had rather have
his room empty at any time, than to have your company.

87.
A Person of Quality in this Kingdom, was one night at Supper at
Pickadilly-house which was then an Ordinary and great Gaming-House, where he
had bowled all day; and after Supper he called for some Cheese, which it seems
was very thin and lean; then he ask't the Master of the House where those Cows
went, of whose Milk that Cheese was made? He told them they grazed not far off;
then he swore a great Oath that he was confident that they never fed in any
other place then his Bowling Alley, which was made good by the fatness of the
Cheese they now tasted of: for it cries Rub, rub, in the eating of it, when
it is so long a going down.

88.
Another person of Quality also, in this Kingdom, amongst other Gentlemen, did
often meet at a Bowling-Ally, which stood next to the Churchyard; and the
Parson of that Church had this Benefit, That if any did swear there, he was to
have 12 d. for every Oath: This Person aforesaid, happened to swear a great
Goliath Oath, upon which the Parson demanded 12 d. which he gave him; and after
that swore many others, for which he paid 12 d. a piece; and then swearing
another, he demanded 12 d. as before; then he plucked out of his pocket a 20
Shilling piece, and bid him give him 19 s. again: Sir, says he, I cannot: Why
then, says he, take it, for I intend to swear it out.

89.
Queen Elizabeth was very much importuned by a Gentleman that was one of her
Servants, for an Employment that then was fallen: Why, says the Queen, you are
not fit for it; An't please your Majesty, says he, I can get one to officiate
it for me: I thank you indeed, says the Queen, for that, for so I may put in
one of my Maids, and they can do it as well.

90.
A Weaver at Bourdeaux in France, dreamt one night that he was a Cuckold, so he
went to the Priest to desire him to take his Wives Confession, especially in
that point: Well, says the Priest to him; I Will lend thee my Gown and Hood, and
you shall shrive her your self: And it seems this very Priest had been very
familiar with her; and while he was waiting for his Wives coming, he went and
told her of the passage, and that 'twas her Husband in his Habit, that was to
shrive her; so she comes to him, and after many impertinent questions which he
ask't her, she told him she had lain only with three men, which was a
Young Man, an Old Man, and a Friar: So he came home, as he thought
undiscovered; and as he was at work, he often repeated the Young Man, the
Old Man, and the Friar: Faith Husband, says she, I believe the Priest has told
you what I confessed to day, and I did indeed so confess it; and yet Husband
these three were but one: for I lay with you when you were a Young Man, and
don't I lie with you now you are Old? And were not you the Friar to day?
Therefore all these three were you my dear Husband And is it so, my dear Wife?
Now thou have given me so great satisfaction, that I shall never have an ill
opinion of thee again: Come kiss me. Then he with Tears in his Eyes kissed her,
and asked her pardon for his former mistrust of her; and the Friar was as
welcome to them, and who but the Friar, when they had any Feast: Thus you see
what it is for Men to mistrust their Wives when there is no cause, as you see it
was in this Virtuous Woman.

91.
A great German Prince, that was much addicted to Drinking, had drank so much
one day, that the next he was very sick; then his Fool came in to him and asked
him, why he was so melancholy? he told him his Sickness was occasioned by
drinking yesterday: Why then, says the Fool, if that be all, I Will be your
Physician; that is, if you are ill with drinking one day, the next day take a
Hare of the same Dog. Well, says the Prince, and what the second day? The Fool
told him the same again: And what the third day? the same too. And what at the
fourth? Why the same. We'll come to the purpose, says he, and what the fifth
day? Why Faith, says he, then you will be as arrant a Fool as I am.

92.
A Gallant it seems upon a time cast his ^ye upon precise Mistress Temperance,
a Feather-makers Wife, and after a little conference, swore he would lie with
her: What, says she, cannot you glance upon a Modest Woman as I am, but you
must covet; indeed Brother I must chide you for it: Well, says she, but that I
am tender of Oaths; and would be loath to have you break yours, for the Oaths
sake I am willing to consent to you at present; but otherwise I profess I would
not do it, if you would give me a thousand pound.

93.
A Gallant once meeting in Covent-Gaerden with a handsome, and it seems, smart
Lass, with her naked Breasts appearing very largely: Says he, I pray Mistress
is that Flesh to be sold? No, says she, no Money shall buy it: Well, says he,
then let me advise you if you will not sell, you should shut up your shop:
Faith, says she, you may be confident I shall shut you out for ever entering
into any of my doors: Then, says he, you have doors, but if you have, they must
needs be wicked doors.

94.
A Fellow at a Coffee-house swore that he saw a very strange thing done in
Suffolk lately, they asked him what it was? Then he told them a Masty Dog ran at
a Gentleman, and he not knowing how to avoid him, first thrust his hand into
his Mouth, and after that quite through, and catched hold of his Tail; and being
very strong, by main force turned him the wrong side outward: All which he
confirmed with a lusty Oath, and that he saw it done himself.

95.
A Man having a very Virtuous and good Huswifely Woman to his Wife (as you will
find by the story) it seems he lost her for three or four days, and having
searched all about for her, at last she came home of her own accord, and told
him that she would tell him very good News, if he would not be angry wi^s her, and
indeed you have no cause if you knew all; for you know that we have a great
deal of Money to pay for Rent and other things: But Husband, says she, I have
got Money enough to pay every Body. How he took it I cannot tell, but certainly
she was a good woman, and loving to her Husband.

96.
Another Fanatic did advise his neighbor to leave off all wickedness
whatsoever especially that of the Flesh, and live altogether by the Spirit; for
we Holy men all do so: Yes, says his neighbor, I do believe you, for sure
'twas some Spirit that moved you to get your Maid with Child.

97.
A Lusty Young Man was earnest with his Father to be married, and after much
importunity he was married to a Neighbors Daughter; he had not been Married
six Months, but he looked so bad, and was so ill and so feeble, that he could
scarce stand upon his Legs; alittle after he spied a Butcher running over a
plowed Field after a mad Bull, then he asked him, why he did so? he told him to
tame him: O, says he, let him be married, let him be married, if that don't
tame him I Will be hanged.

98.
A Woman in twenty weeks after marriage, was brought to bed of a Boy; How now
Wife, says he, methinks this is a little too soon: No Husband, says she, you
mistake, for we married only a little too late: Faith and I think so too, says
he; and if ever we happen to marry again, we'll be sure to marry a little
sooner, or not to marry at all, for this trick. But Husband, says she, you
don't know the Custom, yet of the Women's going with Child; for we go twenty
weeks by day, and twenty weeks by night. O then, says he, cham zatisfied.

99.
A Rich Simpleton was to Court a pretty Maid, and when he was come to her, his
man would still be to help him out, (but I think he need not do that, for he
was out enough himself) then she asked his Man what estate he had? He said a
1000 l. a year: Puh, says he, my Man's a Fool; I, and a thousand, and a thousand
to that too: Then she asked him how long his Master went to School? He said near
a twelve month: He lies, says he, I was not there half so long; for my Master
did nothing but whip me; so he did: Then she asked his Man how old his Master
was? He told her above five and twenty: Puh, says he, I am five and twenty, and
five and twenty, and five and twenty too: I think my man is the arrantest Fool
in the World: You speak for me, I hope I have so much wit as to speak for my
self; and I hope Mistress forsooth you will love me now, now you have heard all
my good qualities: Yes, says she, I am willing to have you, so you will promise
me never to be my Husband: Yes, forsooth, says he, I Will do any thing to please
you, so you will have me.

100.
A Gentleman that came home one night drunk in the Winter time, was had to Bed;
and his Wife staying up long after, when she was going to bed, she bid her Maid
warm her side of the Bed with the Pan; and as she was doing of it, by chance
burnt her Master's Thigh, which he felt not then, sleeping soundly: And about
three days after, a Gentleman meeting of him in Oxford, asked him how he came so
lame? Nothing, says he, but only burnt by a Whore.

101.
One since the King's Restoration meeting with one of Oliver's Relations in
the Park thought to put a Trick upon her, saying, Madam, your Father stinks
now. Pray Sir, let me ask you a Question, that is, whether he be living or
dead? He then told her he was dead. By my troth, Sir, says she, I thought so;
for if he had been living, he would have made you stink too.

102.
A great Lady that lived in a Market Town in the North, was pleased to give a
Fool that was kept at the Town charge his Diet every day, and one day coming
about eleven of the Clock, two of my Ladies Gentlemen were playing at Tables in
the Hall, and they a one side of the Table, and the Jackanapes a the other,
looking on them as they played, and as soon as it knocked to the Dresser, the
Gentlemen left their Game to carry up Dinner; then the Ape took up the Dice in
his hand, and flung them as they did, and turned the Men about also. Says the
Fool to the Ape, Come, faith I Will play with thee for a Pot and a Pipe, and went
to take the Dice out of his hand; then the Ape grinn'd and chatter'd at him,
and still kept the Dice in his hand, and would not throw. Then says the Fool,
Throw, if thou be'st a man, throw; and offered to take the dice away from him;
which so incensed the Ape, that he flew upon him, and had certainly killed him,
had not some of the Gentlemen, that privately looked on, came to his rescue: And
from that time to this, the Fool could never be got to come to the House. And
when he was to pass by the House, he would still go a t'otherside of the
Street, looking fearfully a one side, fearing the Ape should see him, which it
seems he did out of the Window; and had he not been chained, had certainly
leapt down, and fell upon him, which the Fool seeing, ran away crying as fast
as he could, and left his Cap behind him for have; and could never be got to
come through that Street again.

103.
The French Ambassador being at dinner with King James, the King in mirth drank
a Health to him, saying, The King of France drinks a Health to the French King.
Upon which the French Ambassador suddenly replied, The King, my Master, is a
good Lieutenant; for he holds France well for you. No, says the King, he holds
it from me. Truly, Sir says the Ambassador, it is no further from you than it
was.

104.
Count Gundamore being invited to the Reader's Feast at Grays Inn, just at the
time of the Palsgrave (who was elected a little before King of Bohemia) was
come to Prague; and among other Healths, one was begun to the King of Bohemia;
he pledged it merrily, and thankt the Reader, and all the rest of the Company,
For 'twas the first time that ever he pledged the Emperor's Health in England.

105.
Just at Gundamore's going for Spain, King James sent to the Lord Mayor, to
envite him to dinner before he went; and being at dinner, several Healths went
about, and began by the Lord Mayor; then Gundamore began a Health to the King
of Spain's Mistress, and after that another to his Wife: By his Mistress, he
meant the East Indies, wherein he did give the English leave to be dabling in
their Traffic; but by his wife, he meant the West Indies, which he is resolved
solely to keep to himself. Therefore I pray my Lord Mayor, and you the rest of
these Noble Aldermen, do not offer to meddle with the King, my Master's Wife.

106.
The Florentines once sent an Apothecary for their Ambassador to Alphonso, King
of Naples; and having acquitted himself elegantly, and with much generosity at
his first Audience, the King said, If the Apothecaries of Florence are such,
what shall we think of their Physicians? For the Pills of this Speech wrought
stronger with me than ever his other Pills did to any of his Patients; alluding
to the Family of de Medicis that were then Governors there.,

107.
A Woman that had a good handsome young Daughter, sent her to her Landlord at
New-years-tide, with a New-years-gift, and he being a lusty Bachelor, and
loved a pretty Lady besides, and seeing the Maid to be handsome, with some
Importunity, and some Gratuity, got her Consent, that she proved with Child,
for whose Maintenance and Mothers too he paid: And then hearing of a lusty
young woman and rich, that lived hard by him, be became a Suitor to her in
Marriage; to which she easily condescended: And on that day that they were to
be married, the other that he had got with Child before, came to the Church
also to see the Wedding, which her Child in her Arms; and all the while they
were in the Church, that woman would dandle her Child up and down in her Arms;
and sometimes look upon her Landlord, and sometimes on her Child, with a
smiling Countenance; which that woman that was that day to be married to him
observing, told him plainly, that she would not be married till he gave her
satisfaction concerning that Woman and her Child: He put her off still with
excuses; but at last he told her he would tell her the truth, if she would not
take it ill. No, says she, I will not, let it be what it will. Why then, says
he, I got her with Child, and what is the Child in her Arms. Puh, says she, is
that all? I had one a twelve month ago by Londoner that lodged at our house.
Say you so, says he, then I faith I Will marry a Whore of my own making rather
than of another man's, and so called the Woman to him that had the Child in her
Arms, and married her presently.

108.
A little Girl about twelve years old, took her Sister, which was about two
years old upon her Back a pick-pack, and running about the room with it, said,
Who Will buy my Pack? Who Will buy my Pack? At last her Father seeing no body else
would take notice of her called to her and said, Come I Will buy your Pack. With
that she took the Child off her Shoulders, and gave it to her Father, saying,
Here, take it, it is a Pig of your own Sow. Probatum est.

109.
A man met near Billings-gate a Hartfordshire Man and his Wife, that he had not
seen a long time; and told him, he would give his Wife some Oysters. Hang her, says
he, she never eat any Oysters in her life; for she eat but three the other day,
and she was as sick as the driven Snow. What, with eating of three? No, says
he, but with eating of Oysters. Why, you said first she eat none. Yes, says he,
none but three.

110.
A Schoolboy in Oxford was surpised in the Street, by having a great Occasion
to untruss a Point; and the Fashion in those days was, that they tied their
Breeches with Points, and the poor Boys, one was so tied, that he could not
undo it, though he were in a great deal of haste; and at last finding he could
not untie it, was forced for have sake to put off Doublet and all in the corner
of a Street, and for haste sake, as beforesaid, never took notice how his
Doublet fell; so that he discharged his Gun just in his sleeve of his Doublet,
and did not know it neither; and fearing any should come by, he hastened away,
and put on his Doublet again: and when he had thrust in his Arm, he thrust with
his fist all the powder that came out of his Gun; and finding himself in this
sweet powder pickle, instead of going to School, he was forced to go home to
mundifie himself, which when it came to be known, there was an Adjective added
to his Surname for a long time after; that had an Sh. at the beginning.
Probatum est.

111.
A rich Knight in the Country, that was covetous withal, had a Daughter whose
Name was Grace, that was very handsome, and indeed of good humor, witty, and
well bred, which a young man had a kindness for; but having no Fortune, durst
not presume further than joking; and having heard the Knight say that he would
make his Daughter worth 2000 l. he in a frolic comes to him, and knowing him
to be very covetous, told him that he knew how to save him 500 l, in a
business; and this young man was a Lawyers Clerk, and therefore he thought he
might discover something about the Law wherein he might stand him in some
stead, and so bid him very welcome, and invited him to dinner: And after dinner
bid his Wife give him some Sweetmeats, and the wet went into his mouth, but
the dry made a sally into his Pocket; and after having filled both belly,
pocket, and mind, with good meat, sweetmeats, and good welcome, the Knight
told his Wife what a good Friend he was to him, and how he knew that he could
save him 500 l. in a business, which made his Wife the more earnest to know it;
and being all three sat down in the Couch together, and Mrs. Grace in another
Chair by, the Knight asked him wherein he could do him that courtesy as he
spoke of? Why thus I can do it Sir, says he, I am certainly informed that you
will give in marriage with your Daughter Grace 2000 l. and I am willing to take
her with 1500 l. The Knight hearing what he said, began to curse and swear;
then the Gentleman thankt him for his Sweetmeats; no says he, thank my Wife
for them: But after that, for the conceits sake, Mrs. Grace had a great
kindness for him: For fear of which they instantly clapped up a match for her,
but it is confidently said that the Lawyers Clerk (who indeed was a Gentleman)
made her frequent Visits, and with allowance of the Female, but whether of the
new married Male, I know not. Probatum est.

112.
A Lady in this Kingdom hearing that a Lady, that was a Person of Quality, did
much long for Oysters, she then sent a Footman of hers, that was an Irishman,
to the said Lady with a Barrel of Oysters, and as he was going, he met an Arch
Wag by the way, who asked him whither he was going? Then he told him: O Donniel,
says he, you must gut them before you go, or else they will Poison the Lady; I
Predde, says he, show me how to do it? So the Fellow took them and opened them,
and took out all the Oysters and put them into a Wooden Dish that was by, and
then put all the Shells again into the Barrel: Now, says he, you may carry
them, for they are all Gutted: E Fait, said Donniel, for this Kindness I Will
give thee a pint of Wine out of the Vails that I shall have of my Lady: but I
know not how they were accepted.

113.
A Blind Man inviting another Blind Man to Supper: Methinks, says the Blind
Host, this Candle burns dim: So methinks too, says the Blind Guest: Wife, says
he, mend this light with a Pox to ye, that we may see the better to choose our
meat. Then she being a very obedient and obliging Woman, put the Candle quite
out, and presently clapped down two empty Candlesticks upon the Table, because
she knew her Husbands feeling was good still: Now Husband, says she, how do you
like it? I marry, says he, now it is light indeed, Come Neighbor fall to and
welcome: And after Supper he bid his Wife light the Guest out-a-doors: Myself
you mean, says she, No, I mean him; Why says she, he is blind Why then you
whore, has he not the more need of light?

114.
Though age and youth can never agree yet once I knew two young and two old
folks agree like Lambs together for diverse years: and thus it was, An old Woman
loved a young Man and married him; and likewise an old Man loved a young Woman
and he married her and they were both coupled made of his Estate now his Father
was dead? He told him that he made more in one year than his Father did in
twenty, for he made but Five hundred pound a year of it, but I made Ten
thousand pound of it in one years time: O, says he, then I find that you were
so good a Husband, that you sold it a year after your Fathers death; and I
question now whether you will make any thing of it at all before the twenty
years be at an end.

118.
Two Widows that were devilish Scolds and very litigious, had spent great
store of Money in Law, about a frivolous thing: a friend comes to one of them,
and told her, that her Enemy had removed her Suit into the Chancery: Well, says
that Virago, let her remove it to Hell, I am sure I shall have a Lawyer to
follow it; for I am sure some of 'em has followed me to Hell for a Dinner.

119.
A Man once asked a sottish Fellow where he lay? He told him he lay at the Three
Cups in Breadstreet: Faith, says he, thou might well have left out
Bread-street, for whether thou do Sup or Dine, e're thou go to bed,
thou't be in thy Cups.

120.
Some Gentlemen were the last Christmas at a Friends House making merry
together, and four of the Company being at Cards together at a Table, where one
was as it were locked in, and could not get out, without disturbing the rest of
the company: and being an arch Wag, he desired the Mistress of the House to let
her Maid do him but a small Courtesy; she told him yes, with all her hear: so
he winked upon the company not to laugh, nor take any notice of his Conceit at
all, but follow their game: then he spoke to the Girl (which was not above 14
years of age, and newly come out of the Country, and a very innocent poor Soul)
and entreated her that she would but do him so much kindness (in regard he
could not come forth himself) as to go into the yard and make water for him;
with that the Girl began to blush, but her Mistress (to keep up the humor kept
her countenance also) and said to the Girl, Hussy, if you can, go and do it
the Gentleman; for you see he cannot well come out himself: Truly forsooth, says
she, I cannot indeed, for I made my water but just now in our back Kitchen.
Which set them all a laughing, and the poor Girl a crying; but the Gentleman
gave her six pence to pacify her: Probatum est.

121.
A Humorous Country Knight gave his Man that waited on him this Charge, that he
should never say any thing to him but what he asked him; a little after he
invited two Gentlemen to his Child's Christening, his Man accordingly went
to'em, and acquainted them with it; they bid him thank his Master, but to let
him know they were prae-engaged and could not come that day; and the Knight
stayed an hour later then ordinary for their coming, but seeing they came not,
he asked his Man if he had spoke to 'em? Yes, says he, but they said they could
not come: You Rogue, says he, why did not you tell me so before? Why truly Sir,
says he, because you did not ask me.

122.
A Parson in a Parish was thought to be more familiar than ordinary with a
Woman who had Ten Children, and she told her Husband that Nine were his and no
more. Well, says he, I never denied the Clergy their due, and will not begin
now to break that Custom; for I Will keep the Nine and give the Tenth for his
Tithe, as being rightly due to him.

123.
A man was saying, That such a man had an ill opinion of him. O Sir, says
another, there is your mistake; for I Will assure you he stands well in his own
conceit. By my troth, says a third, so he had need; for he stands so in no
body's else but his own.

124.
Says a Fellow, that had lost one of his Ears at Newcastle, for no goodness
it is thought; when one told him a Story, It Is in at one oar, and out at
the other. By my troth, says the other, then there is a great deal of wonder in
the travel of these Tales, for thy two Ears be two hundred miles asunder.

125.
Says a mad Fellow, It Is credibly reported that the Devils dead, I wonder who
shall inherit his Land? O, says a man (that it seems had a very good woman to
his -- Wife) that shall my Wife; for I am sure she is the nearest a kinn. The
Devil she is, says the other.

126.
Two Scholars in the University, the one a great Eater, and the other a small,
says he that eat least, This small diet will make us good Scholars. It Is true,
says the other, and this thin Dinner will make me study indeed that is, to make
me study to get more meat, when this is gone.

127.
A Widow in Norwich did desire a Gossipping Neighbor of hers to get her a
Husband, not for any carnal desire she had, but only to look to her Estate;
which I find too great and troublese me to look after my self; and about three
days after the Woman came and acquainted her that she had provided her a very
good husband, that was rich, discreet, and very industrious, but only wants you
know what; which I am sure you regard not as you told me before. Why truly,
says she, these are all very good qualities, yet I would not have him to lack
any thing, that if we chance to fall out may make us friends again. By which you
may understand that her Gossip lost her three days labor.

128.
A Man chiding his Wife, told her, That she could call nothing hers, but her
Ring, Fillet, and Hair-lace, nay her very Breech was none of hers; Which the
good and harmless Woman understanding, one night let som'thing drop into the
Bed, which having found out by the smell, asked her what was the Cause of her so
doing? She told him, That whilst she thought her Breech hers, she had a
command over it; but being his, she could not rule another Bodies body; Tar-box
for that, dear Husband.

129.
A little Boy being a cutting some Bread and Butter, says his Brother to him,
Why did you not cut me some, when you were a cutting some for your self, you
Bastard you? What, says he, do you call my Mother Whore, you Son of a Bitch. If I
am the Son of a Bitch then you are a Whelp; And so are you, you Puppy, says
the other.

130.
A Scholar coming home from Cambridge to his Father, his Father asked him what
he had learnt? Why Father, says he, I Will prove that this Capon is better than
the blessing of God. How Zon, says he, come let us hear it; Why thus, Father,
says he, nothing you know is better than the blessing of God, and this Leg of
the Capon is better than nothing; Ergo* Tarbox, thou meanest, says his Father.
And well, and what else can thou do? Why, says he, I Will prove these two
Chickens to be three; thus, here is one: Well, says his Father, and here is
another, that is two: Well, says he, and is not one and two three? Well, says
his Father, you have spoke very well, here Wife, do thee take one, and I Will
take the other; and and our Zon shall have the third, cause he found it out.

131.
A humorous and rich Ignoramus, did pretend much to speak conceited words, and
his usual word was, I think so too; So he asked a poor Gentleman one day (that
used to visit for a Dinners sake) how old he was? He told him as old as his
little finger; and after he had paused a little while, In troth says he, I
think so too; for I must study long before I can find out your conceits. Then
the Gentleman told him, that such a Lord had done for him more than he
deserved; then says the other I think so too. And another told me that I was a
wise man; but says he, I know to the contrary; for I am a fool: I think so too,
says the Humourist. And another told me I was an Intruding Knave; says the other,
I think so too. Well, says he, I see you are good natured, for whatsoever I
think you think so too. That makes you visit me so often, for the love I bear
to you, for I love your company better than -- Than what? Than my meat. O, says
he, you have given me many wipes to day. Why yes says he, I hope you allow me
as great a privilege as you do my Napkins: For you see that they wipe you
often.

132.
After some Thieves had robbed a Gentleman of a great deal of Money, a Watch
and Ring, and good Cloths, that were in the Portmantua: Sir, says his Man
(which was very ingenious) nust I give them the hundred pound in Gold which is
quelted in my Breeches too? Yes, says his Master, by all means, for they are
very civil persons, and have eased me and my horses of a great deal of luggage
and trouble. This is to let us see what happiness it is to have so good and
discreet a Servant as his Man was.

133.
A Fellow in the County of Kent was so very poor, that he could not get
Victuals to put into his Head; he began to despair, and took a Rope and went to
hang himself; and as he was going to a Tree to do the Execution, he spied where
some great Treasure was hid; which he immediately took away, and left the
Halter in the place; and a little after the Owner of the Treasure came to take
a view of it, as was his daily custom, and finding it to be gone, for very
grief he takes the Halter and Hangs himself; but I think he deserves to be
Hanged again, because he Hanged himself contrary to Law.

134.
A great and discreet Lady was one day disputing with a Physician, and asked him
why he did always prescribe either Asses or Goats Milk for one in a
Consumption? For, says she, truly I think that the Milk of a Cow should be far
better; as having better flesh and better feeding, and always breeds better
blood and humors. No Madam, says the Physician, I do not approve of your
opinion by any means, unless the Patient be a Calf.

135.
A good sufficient man that lived in the Suburbs of London, amongst other
things of his Estate, had a good large Field before, and then had newly
purchased two Fields more; which made a Gentleman say that he had purchased
More-Fields.

136.
One meeting a mad Fellow that was drunk, asked him whither he was going? says
he, I am going to the Tavern: No, says the other, that you are not; for
Drunkenness is the way to Hell, and thither you are going. Puh, says the
Drunkard, you are therein much mistaken; and I never fear that, for I am so
drunk, that my Legs are not able to carry me so far; and what need I go thither
again, for I came from the Devil (Tavern) but now.

137.
A man was telling very soberly to an Arch wag, that such a Venison Pasty was
an excellent good one, and that he was very sorry it was eaten; and could find
in his heart to write an Epitaph upon it: then he told him that he must write
his Epitaph in the House of Office, for there 'twas buried.

138.
A fair young Lady being upon occasion at the Assizes in Oxford; and seeing the
Sheriff, who was a very fair young Gallant, to wait upon the Judge, that was an
old man, to and fro, as there was occasion; her friend asked her, if she was put
to her choice, which she had most mind to marry; the Judge or the Sheriff? She
told him the Sheriff. Why so? says he. Why truly, says she, I do confess I love
Judgment well, but I love Excution much better.

139.
In former times, when first they wore high-crown'd Hatts, every one began to
spend their Verdicts on it; One said they were like Pyramids, a second like
Sugar-loaves; but a third told them plainly they were like Close-stool-pans;
and if the old Philosophers were alive, they would wonder to see men put their
Heads where their Tails should be; and therefore 'twas certain it was no new
Fashion: but Hats that came from their Predecessors, and so by consequence
Entailed Hatts; and I think I have it now.

140.
Some Frenchmen seeing a man standing stock-still in the Highway in the midst
of the rain, they asked him why he stood so? Why, says he, do you think I am mad
to ride in the Rain as you do? Why says they, Ma foy you are quite wet. Indeed
Gentlemen, says he, you are much mistaken; for I will assure you that I have
never a dry thread wet about me: Nor a wet thread dry, I Will swear, says another.

141.
A confident Physician demanded money of another, for a Brother of his that was
his Patient, and had been dead many years before; the Gentleman told him,
indeed that 'twas a work of Charity to visit the sick (which did belong to his
profession) but if he was in such have, and so earnest for money, it were best
for him to go and visit the Dead; and then he might be confident he should
never want money more.

142.
A confident bold Fellow at a Nisiprius in the Country, having a Trial then in
Law, and fearing that the Trial would go against him, said to the Judge, My
Lord I do not desire your Sentence now, but only your Opinion at the present;
and I will wait upon your Lordship for Judgment at some other time. Well, says
the Judge, if you would only have my Opinion now, why then my Opinion, is That if
you had had Judgment to be hanged seven years ago, the Country would have been
more quiet then now it is. Well, my Lord, says he, if this be your Opinion,
then your Judgment and mine does not suit at all; so that I Will have nothing to
do with you, but go to another Judge.

143.
A Gentleman being at Dinner with some others with powdered Beef and Mustard,
he having too much mustard at one time on his Meat, made him shed tears in a
plentiful manner; then an old Gentlewoman ask't him, Why he cried so? He told
her because his Grandfather died that day one and twenty years, and about that
time a day. After Dinner, and the Gentleman gone, says the Gentlewomans Maid to
her Mistress, that then waited at the Table, who was newly come out of the
Country; Truly forsooth Mistress, says she, methinks that Gentleman that dined
here, is a very good conditioned man, as to be concerned so much for the death
of his Grandmother, that died so many years ago. Probatum est.

144.
A Fellow being so drunk, that he was fain to be carried home on men's
Shoulders, as he was going, by chance he spied two men leading through the
Street another Drunkard to his house also: when bursting out into a great
passion, he said, Is it not a shame that men should be so drunk as to be led
home? He pretty heart it seems was so drunk, that he did not know that he was
carrying home himself.

145.
A modest Gentlewoman being compelled by her Mother to accuse her Husband of
defect; and being in the Court, she humbly desired of the Judge, That she might
write her mind, and not to speak it, for Modestys sake: The Judge gave her that
liberty, and a Clerk was presently commanded to give her Pen, Ink and Paper;
whereupon she took the Pen without dipping of it into the Ink, and made as if
she would write; says the Clerk to her, Madam, There Is no Ink in your Pen.
Truly Sir, says she, that is just my case, and therefore I need not explain my
self any further.

146.
A crafty Fellow being extremely in debt, and being threatened by his Creditors,
that they would have him if he was above ground, got himself into a Cellar, and
there lay with the Tapster; and being reproved for so doing, he told them
there is no fear of catching him there, because 'twas under ground, and then
they durst not break their Oaths, because they swore they would have him above
Ground.

147.
A Fellow being adjudg'd to lose his Ears for some notorious Crime, and being
in prison, was visited (though not sick) by some friends, three or four days
before he was to suffer; then the visitants fell into a dispute about the loss
of his Ears. One said the Ears were to be cut off by the root, another said
only the tip, and they grew so hot upon this argument, that they fell together
by the Ears; which the Prisoner seeing, entreated them to be patient, for he
told them within a week he should be able to resolve them the doubt.

148.
An humorous ancient Gentleman was so much used to drink Burage, Balm, Bugloss,
and other sorts of Garden Herbs in his Wine all the Summer, that when Winter
came, and no herbs to be had, he could not drink without putting a green Ribbon
into the Glass, which no doubt but gave him satisfaction both in taste and
smell.

149.
A very ingenious person set his Bottles in a Bucket down in a Well, to cool
the Wine, and coming two hours after, to draw them up again, espied his and his
Man's Image in the water; upon which he ran in for his Sword, swearing that the
Antipodes were drinking up his Wine; but the man being as discreet as his Lord,
told him that just as he went from the Well, one of them below ran away to
fetch more company; which made me draw them up before you came back again: and
as I pulled, so did he at bottom pull, yet I was too strong for him, and got
'em up: Well, says my Lord very discreetly, who'd a thought that these
Antipodes had been so near us: nay I no sooner go to the Well, but one of them
stares me in the face: so that If I do but hold up my hand at him, he holds up
his hand at me again, but I Will warrant 'em for catching any more of my Wine
there again. I am glad it was my fortune to find their roguery first.

150.
Two Baboons being to be seen at their first coming to London, abundance of
Citizens and others did resort thither to take a view of them, and did heartily
laugh at their ugliness, and the strange faces which they made; which a most
motherly and very discreet woman being present, did sharply thus rebuke 'em:
Do You think you do well to laugh at strangers, who understand not your Language,
and if you were in their Country, you would take it for a great abuse I warrant
you if they should laugh at you: so that you see it is a great happiness to have
one wise woman among the rest.

151.
Another discreet motherly woman also, being with her husband and other
neighbors, invited to a Knights house, which was their Landlord in the
Country; and as they were going out of the Hall into the Parlor, there was a
Jack-an-apes tied by a Chain at the Parlor door; and as all the Tenants came in
he would have a pluck and fling at 'em; which this worthy woman seeing, very
discreetly asked the Usher of the Hall what that young Gentleman was, and what
his name was? He told her 'twas a Jack-an-apes; then she very mannerly coming
to go in, makes a very reverend Curtchy; and says, By your leave Mr.
Jack-an-apes. The Ape hearing her speak to him, began to chatter at her, and to
pluck her more than all the rest; at which she grew offended, and told him, let
him be who he will, yet he was an ill bred man thus to affront an honest woman,
who has been these Twenty years a Midwife in the Parish and my husband, I Would
have you to know was Constable within these three years; but the Knight told
her, what he did was but in jest, and he should do it no more; and so was
removed from the Parlor door.

175.
A Lady said to Oliver's Wife, when he had newly made a Knight, How can your
husband make a Knight, when he is none himself: But, says she boldly, He is a
Knight and shall be a Knight; and he has dubbed him so. O, says the new married
Knight's wife, If I thought dubbing would have made him a Knight, I could a
dubbed him my self; and all the rest that were there did own what she said: for
what need he have been at the charge of a Knights Fee, when we can dubb 'em our
selves without any charges at all; nay perhaps may get a Diamond Ring, or some
other Rarity sometimes into the bargain: Tarbox for that too.

153.
A well-bred woman being above-stairs, and her well-tutor'd Son below, then she
called to him and said, Come up my Bird. What Bird mother,? says this dutiful
Son: Why Whores-Bird Sirrah, says she; By my troth Mother, says he, I think you
never spoke truer in your life. Why Sirrah, says she, if that be true, then you
are a Bastard. Why Mother, though I be a Bastard. yet I am sure you are not a
Whore: For how can she be a Whore, when he is only a Bastard?

154.
A Woman going to her Husbands funeral with several of her Neighbors, a Man
among them, which was of the Parish too, came and whispered her in the Ear as
she was going to Church; which when the company saw, they thought it was a
business of some great concernment; but indeed it was to woo her, Sir, says
she, I thank you very kindly for your good will, and do like you well enough;
and am very sorry also that you come too late; for I Will assure you I was made
sure to another yesterday.

155.
There Is a Proverb which says, The fair lasts all the year, said a Woman; but
says her Husband, My Dear, I cannot in this years fair, sell thee for fair. It
may be so, says she; but I have the worst luck, for I can neither sell thee for
fair nor foul. What Is the reason of that Wife? says he: Why says she, my Mother
always told me that no Cuckolds would off in a Fair; for she could never put
off her Husband there: and yet she was as honest a woman as any in the parish,
though I say it, that should not say it.

156.
It seemed one Doll was brought before a Judge for some Crime or other, which
all believed was true, yet they could not prove it: says Jone to her, Faith
Doll how did come off? Why, says Doll, I set a good face on it. By my troth,
then says Jone, thou did borrow it; for I am sure thou never had one of thy
own. Says Doll, if I can have one for borrowing, what need I keep one of own?

157.
God sends fortune to Fools, said a Man to his Wife: No Indeed, says his Wife,
for he made you a Fool, but 'twas I that gave you your fortune: which will send
you to that place where the Devils cannot come at you: For you know my dear
Husband, That all Cuckolds go to Heaven.

158
A Scholar in Oxford was often sent to by a Citizen there for Money, which he
pretended was due to him, and finding his answer not according to expectation
he took the boldness and went to him himself, and modesty said to him in
private: Sir, There Is some Money betwixt you and I. Say you so, says the
Scholar, I pray where is it? we'll divide it if you please. Sir, says he, I
have taken your word for it hitherto. Truly, says he, so you are like to do
till you are paid.

159.
Another time he hired a Horse of an Oxford Man for Two Shillings a day, and
did engage that if the Horse came to any disaster, he would pay him the price
of him; which he said was Six pounds; but after many sendings to and fro, it
seems he did still remember to forget to pay him: and the Scholar having some
occasion to go for London, was there met by a Bailiff, who very Ingeniously
said to him, Sir I Arrest you for a Horse; the more fool you, says he, do I
look like a Horse? Why then says he, I do Arrest you: Truly, says he, I thank
you for that, for I am very weary with walking: Sir, says he, I do tell you I
do Arrest you for Money: Why I know that, says he, for you will not do it without
Money I am sure. At last says he, You Bailiffs are very idle fellows. Why so,
says he, because says the Scholar, you are still Arresting, yet I must confess
sometimes you take a great deal of pains in it.

160.
Jane, says a Man to a Woman, I Will give thee Ten Shillings if thou will not
answer me with a lie: and when she had took it: says he, Tell me true is thy
Husband a Cuckold or no? upon this she answered him never a word; and when he
saw that he could not make her speak, he demanded his Ten Shillings again. Why,
says she, did I make any lie to you? No, says he. Then says she, I have won
the wager, and thou art never the near for thy question. Then he swore he would
never talk with that Woman again, that can revile a man in speech, and in
silence beguile him.

161.
A Gentleman that used to be smart in his Repartees, once had in his Hat a very
gallant and rich Knot, or Faver of Gold and Silver Ribbon; which some young
Ladies had a mind to, if they could get it handsomely without begging of it;
and so one of them said to him: Sir, you have a very fine Faver in your Hat;
and so they said all: Pray Madam, says he to the first, tell me truly do you
like it? Yes indeed Sir, says she. Why then, says he, if you had not liked it,
I would have flung it into the Fire, but since you say you like it, I pro test
I like it the better, and am resolved to keep it for your sakes.

162.
A Gentleman that had a great Wit, and well beloved among the great ones, and
therefore invited often among them; but it seems had a very sore Leg; he being
at a Noble man's Table, greedily cat'd at a Goblet of Wine, says my Lord to him,
Prithee Jack drink it not, for 'twill hurt thy Leg. O my Lord, says he, take no
care for my Leg, for I have care enough of that, for I always drink, of the
the other side.

163.
A Man that had a Woman to his Wife that was not much tongue-tied, and for her
other imperfections the Man was much troubled, told her plainly, that if he
were to be married again, he would never marry a Woman again with a Beetle-Brow. And
I says she, had rather marry a Man with a Beetle Brow then a Beetle head.

164.
One asked a Man where he lived? He told him he lived between Ludgate and
Newgate. No says the other, I don't believe that, for you cannot live between
'em: because you must either live in Newgate or Ludgate; or no where. Truly,
says he, I Would as live be no where as be there.

165.
One was a saying also, that the Tapster and the Brewers Horse are both alike;
for, they both do draw Beer, but yet I must confess they do differ in this,
That the Tapster draws Beer and drinks it; but the Horse draws; but drinks none.

167.
A man that had been terribly troubl^d in Lawsuits, went one day to Tyburn, to
see the Execution, and then swore, 'twas better to have to do with Tyburn than
Westminster Hall; for there Suits hang half a year, but at Tyburn half an hours
hanging ends all.

168.
A Simple Fellow, it seems before some Women did let a crack behind; and then
he bragged and said, that he had a very good report behind his Back: It Is true,
says another, thy Tail can talk indeed, and yet it knows no Letter, for though
thy Tongue can talk sweeter, yet thy Tail can talk much better; for that has
more wisdom in telling a Tale than thy Tongue, and commonly thy Back Tale is
very long, and therefore every Body does desire to have an end of thy Tale as
soon as they can,

169.
A many Men sitting a drinking together, they were praising the Ale about
England, as Marget Ale, and Hull Ale, and Cheshire Ale, and Lambeth Ale, etc.
But one said there was in London to his knowledge, the best in all England: and
yet says another, there is as good Ale in England as in London.

170.
A Man being very much diseased and weak, was bemoaning himself to his only
Son, whom he loved very well. For Jack, says he, if I stand my Legs ache, if I
kneel my Knees ache, if I go my Feet ache, if I lie then my back aches, if I sit
my Hips ache, if I lean my Elbows ache. Why truly Father, says he, (like a good
dutiful Child) I advise you Father to hang your self an hour or two, and if
that does not do, then come to me again.

171.
Two Men were Vapouring what they could do more than the other, at last one said
Sirrah I can do more than thee: Indeed, says the other, I believe it, and I must
yield to him, for he can kiss my Belly behind, which I cannot do. Well then,
says the other, then I am the bravest Fellow, for I can do more than you.

172.
A Deaf Man was selling Pears at the Towns end in St. Gileses, and a Gentleman
riding out o'th Town, asked him what 'twas a Clock? He said Ten a Penny Master:
Then he asked him again what 'twas a Clock? He told 'em indeed he could afford no
more. You Rogue, says he, I Will kick you about the streets, then says the man,
Sir if you will not another will.

173.
A man in the North having been to Christen a Child being something in Drink,
he was asked, whether it was a Boy or a Girl? Indeed says he, I cannot tell.
Then they asked him the name Faith says he, I have forgot that too, if it had
one; but I well remember I heard the Minister talk of Creeds and Commandments,
and such kind of things which I never heard of before; and that made me not
mind it at all; Why had the Child no name then? Troth, says he, I cannot tell
that neither.

174.
A Woman when she gave her Grandchild her Blessing, would always bid her
bestow her Maidenhead well; and one day being a Milking, a neighbors Son of
hers passed by, being a hansome young man, and asked her what he should give her
for her Maidenhead? she told him her Grandmother bid her not sell it, but
bestow it well. Why, says he, you cannot bestow it better than upon me. So she
being very good natured, let him have it; and being come home, told her
Grandmother what she had done: Out you Jade, says she, I did not mean so; but
since he has got it, I charge thee on my Blessing to go back again to him and
fetch it; for no Man will marry you if your Maidenhead be g^n^: So she came
back and told him what her Grandmother said ( for I Would have you to know, says
she, that she is an understanding woman) which made him seem much troubled:
Nay, nay says she, I must have it; and then he like a good natured fellow, gave
it her again; which it may be some other men would not have done.

175.
A Gentleman that was not accounted a Philosopher, and a Man of slow speech
also; had a very great desire to be dabbling with a pretty Young Woman that was
a Vintners Widow, who was a Woman of a smart Wit: Then he called for a Bottle
of Sack, and sent for her, but she came not, and another, but she came not; but
after three Bottles up she came; and having with Two or Three more with her,
si^ten a pretty while with him, he asked what was to Pay? Answer was made an
Angel: That is Ten Shillings in our Country, says she. Methinks, says he, the
word Angel had been better, because it came from you: Come Sir, says she, since
you say so, we'll have some Mirth before we part. Then she told 'em there was a
Creature that spoke but once, and when it died it went neither to Heaven nor to
Hell: he could not tell the meaning of it, then she told him it was Balaams
Ass; for an Angel opened his mouth, but I think we must have Two Angels to open
yours; and I am sure here is but one Angel in yet: Come Boy give us more Sack,
which will be the only way to bring in the other Angel to open his mouth.

176.
A Man and his Wife, that formerly had lived well together, grew to be poor,
and both of 'em loved the Pot well; and it happened that a friend of hers met
her and gave her Sixpence; so she came home with joy to her Husband, saying to
him. What shall we have my dear Husband, for we are rich now: Wife, says he,
it is your own, do what you will with it: Why then, says she, let me see we will
have, stay, we will have, now I think on it, a Groats worth Bread and Two pence
Drink: Do what you will, sweetheart, says he, it is your own. Then she goes out
of doors and comes back again saying, No, now I think on it Husband, we will have
Four pennyworth of Drink and Two pennyworth of Bread? Do what you please,
says he, Sweetheart, it is your own: Out she goes again, but comes in presently:
O Husband, says she, now I think better on it, I am resolved to have Five penny
worth of Drink, and penny in Bread: Do what you please my dear, says he, for
it is your own: Then out she goes and comes immediately back again: I am now
fully resolved to have it all in Drink, and beg a Toast of them. O dear Wife,
says he, now thou have won my Heart for ever: Come I Will give thee a Buss, but
be sure to let us have it, quick, quick, quick, you Rogue: Well Sweetheart,
says he, how happy it was that thou wentest out to day.

177.
A Gentleman lately walking in the Strand, was followed by a lusty beggar, who
craved his benevolence, he told him he would give him nothing; still he urged him
he bid him be gone, and trouble him no more: then he importuned him the more.
Sirrah, says he, you Rogue, I Will not give you a Farthing. Pray Sir, says the
Fellow, let me speak but one word to you; What Is that? says he, That your
Worship would but procure me a Whore. Why you Rogue, says he, do I look like a
Pandar? No Sir, he said, but there is a Wise Man has said, that a Whore will
bring a Man to a Morsel of Bread, which I should be glad of; for I profess Sir,
I have seen none these three days. Which conceit of his procured him a
Shilling, and then the Gentleman went away. Well, says the Fellow, I see that a
Whore has a great Influence upon some Men, when but the Name of a Whore has now
got me a Shilling: I did love them pretty well formerly, but now I shall love
'em the better as long as I live.

178.
A Nobleman once told his Fool, that if he could but tell him what Sir John
Falstaffs Christen name was, he would settle Eight Pound a year upon him for his
Life, and he should Marry the Dairy Maid, who he loved dearly: Woo't IN faith
Lord, says the Fool. I that I will, says the Lord: Swear it Lord, swear it,
says he. I protest I will, says my Lord: Well stay a little then; says he, Sir
John, what, says he, why Sir John Falstaffs Christen name: Nay, says my Lord,
I Will tell you further, his Name is Falstaff, and he was Christened John; now
tell me what Sir John Falstaff's Christen Name is. And after he had walked Two
or Three times about the Room, my Lord urged him to tell him: Prithee Lord,
says he, tell me his Name once again; why his Name was Falstaff, and he was
Christ'ned John, Now tell me his Christen Name? At last, after half an hours
pawsing: Now Lord I have it, I have it, says he; for I can tell what Sir John
Falstaffs Christen name was, and shall I have Eight pound a year? Yes, and Doll
too, I that thou shall, I protest, says he, again. Why then, says he, bear
Witness, for I have hit on it now: Sir John Falstaff's Christen Name was, he
was Christened Sir John Falstaff: Look you there you Rogues, who is a Fool now:
Hey for Doll, O brave Doll, she is my own, I Will go and buss her now, for she is
mine own you Rogue.

179.
A Drunken Fellow one Night was taking a Pipe of Tobacco, and being so reeling
ripe, he could not hit the Candle with his Pipe to light it, which he finding,
took up the Candle in his hand, and at last put the Pipe into the Candlestick
instead of the Candle, and then put the Candle into his Mouth instead of the
Pipe; and after he had sucked a pretty while, and finding no smoke come, but the
sweet Tallow melting in his Mouth, he Swore a great Oath that the Pipe-maker
had not burnt it; for 'twas perfectly Clay still; and therein he said true (for
how could the Candle be burnt when it was whole and unburnt) and this Rogue of
a Pihe-maker, says he, has also forgot to make a hole in it too? A pox on it,
says he, I might a sucked long enough, and so flung it away.

180.
A Country Fellow coming into London, had a broken Groat in his pocket, and
came to a Goldsmiths Shop, and putting off his Hat very low, did desire of the
Prentice that he would give him a little piece of Silver as big as a Hazel Nut,
to soder it again, and when you come into our Country, says he, I Will give you a
piece of Lead shall be ten times as big; the Prentice told him he had something
else to do: What a Pox, says he, do you keep open Shop for, if you will not part
with any of your Goods? Says the other, My Goods will prove but bad, if I should
part with 'em in this manner.

181.
A company of merry wags were got together at a Club, among which were bandied
to and fro many smart reparties; but one among the Company, that thought
himself a great Wit, and indeed I think so too; for one asked him very
seriously, Whether he thought he was his own Mother's Son? Truly, says he,
Gentlemen, I am not certain, but I believe I am, for you know, that are wits,
it is a hard question. Then he was asked by another, whether he thought he was
his own Fathers Son? Faith. says he, I cannot well tell, but for ought I know I
am: for how can I be sure of that? Upon which they all fell a Laughing: Why
Gentlemen, says he, very discreetly, It Is a wise Child that knows his own
Father.

182.
An Old Woman that had never seen a Jack-an-apes in her Life before, and coming
to Bedford to the Market, saw one riding on a Dogs back, and the Dog running
away with him: Says she, I am afraid that Young Gentleman will fall by and by,
he rides so fast; and when she saw he did not, then she cried out, Well rid
Young Gentleman, well rid Young Gentleman; in truth he is a good Horseman.

183.
A Drunken Fellow in the Streets met with an ^ncient acquaintance of his, and
desired him to lend him an Angel, and I don't doubt but I shall pay pou within
a month again; he asked him how? He told him he had a great swelling in his Neck,
and he hoped it was the King's Evil; which if it were, then the King would give
him an Angel, with which he would pay him.

184.
An Old Man bringing his Son to be catechized at Easter, the Minister thought
the Old Man needed more instruction than his Son, and asked him who made him?
the Old Man said he had forgot 'twas so long since he was made: says the
Minister, it is a shame for you at these years to let your Child know more than
your self: I think so indeed, says he, for he was but lately made, and it is
above Fourscore Years since I was made. Well, says the Minister, how many
Commandments are there? He said he thought about Four or Five: Fie, says the
Minister, there is Ten. Vaith says he, I thought you would bring 'em to Ten, because
you would have the Tithe: Why, Old Man, says the Minister, I tell thee again
there is Ten: Why then, says he, there is a goodly Company of them. Well Friend,
says he, how many Sacraments are there? Why, says the Old Man, there is Four.
Which are they? says the Minister: Why, says the Old Man, there is Christmas,
Easter, Whitsuntide, and our Wake. And so went out a-doors, as taking it for an
affront to be catechized at that Age; and well he might, for you see he
understood well enough what he said.

185.
A Notorious but cunning Thief, being arraigned before a Judge for a great
Crime, the Judge asked him what answer he made to his Accusation: Truly my Lord,
says he, I find it is a foul matter, and I desire to hear no more on it; for
which being reproved for his impudent sawciness; he swore he would bind the
Judge over to the Peace, because he stood in fear of his Life by his means:
Well, says the Judge, you shall not sleep in peace to Night for that conceit; and
so commanded that he should be laid in Irons, Pray my Lord, says he, let me go
about my business, for I never wronged you in my Life, and therefore you have
nothing to do with me; for I am going to receive some Money to pay my Debts;
for I owe my Landlord and several others a great deal of Money, and they will
arrest me as I go by in the Cart; and I would willingly pay my debts before I
am hanged, and I think that is the part of an honest man; though it may be you
don't think so.

186.
Another time a Thief was going to the Gallows out of the Town, near Norwich,
and many Boys were running to see the Execution; which he seeing, called to
'em, saying, Boys you need not make such haste, for there will be no sport till
I come. What, says a man, is there but one to be hanged, I Will go home again:
Do You hear Friend, says he, you need not go home, for if you like it so well,
pray come and supply my place, for I can afford you a good pennyworth on it.

187.
A Witty Fellow, that was Clerk to Two Justices of Peace in Olivers days, that
for a Bribe used to help Delinquents at a dead lift; and being once speaking of
the Two Justices, he said one was the craftiest and subtlest Fellow in the
World, but the other an arrant Dance; and said he had as much a-do to conceal a
business from the one, as to make the other understand it.

188.
A Gentleman intending to dine and be merry with some others, did bespeak a Leg
of Pork well powdered against such a day; and she, poor heart, spared no Salt
upon it, and made it so Briny, that it would have fired a Palate of Ice: and
the day being come that they should eat it, the Gentleman that bespoke it, cut
a piece, and put a bit on it in his Mouth, and immediately spit it out again, and
threw the Dish and Pork against the ground. The company that had kept their
Stomachs for that Pork all that day, asked him the cause why he did so? Why,
says he, I bid the Salt Bitch corn me a Leg of Pork well, and she has brought
in a Limb of Lots Wife: Truly Sir, says she, I gave it but a little Salt, but I
must confess I bought the Hog of a Man of Saltwich, where it seems it was bred
and born; and I think that is the chiefest cause of its saltness. Do You see,
says he, how this Bitch does bring a Witch to excuse her self.

189.
A Discourse rose at a Dinner among some Merchants, about their loving Wives;
and one said his Wife was the most affectionate Woman in the World, and for the
Evidence of it, he had often heard her swear; Nay when ever I rose out of the
Bed in a Morning before her, she would always convey her self into my warm
place; so much she loved the very heat and impression I had made: Puh, says a
Wag to him, this that you evidence, is an infallible token against you; for it
seems she loved your room better than your company.

190.
A Country Woman sent her Son Three or Four Miles off to her Landlords House
with a New-Years-Gift upon New Years-day, where the Boy was never before, and
being in the Kitchen, he there saw a Dog turning of the Spit, which was it
seems a strange thing to the Boy; so he stood loytring to stare upon that and
other fine things which he saw there, that he staid it seems longer than
ordinary; for which his Mother beat him lustily when he came home: O Mother,
says he, if you had been there, you would have stayed as long as I, for it
would have done your heart good to see how a Dog in a Wheel did spin
Roast-Meat: Nay Mother he did reel too, that is when he was weary, which was
much Mother to see a Dog spin and reel; I am sure 'twas more than our Maid Jone
could do when she came to you first. Now Mother I hope chave sartified you, and
when I go thither again, if I should stay long, pray Mother don't beat me again.

191.
A Ridiculous and Impudent Fellow, being laughed at by all that came into his
company, told 'em he had a certain quality, which was to laugh at all that
laughed at him; Faith, says one of his Companions, then thou live the merriest
life of any man in Christendom; for I never saw any man that ever came in thy
company but laughed at thee: Why then, says he, I hope I please them if they
laugh so heartily, and those that please are best liked of.

192.
A Drunkard having but one of his Eyes left with Drinking, was warned by
Physicians to leave off tippling, or else he would lose the other Eye also: Faith,
says he, I care not if I do; for I do confess ingeniously I have seen enough,
but I have not drank enough: Ergo.

193.
Another reverend Drunkard having spent about Fifteen hundred Pounds a year in
Drink, nay, was so much addicted to it that he counted all those his enemies
that did persuade him against it; yet one took the boldness upon him as to
upbraid him for such extravagency. Puh, says he, what you thrust in at one Ear
goes out at the other. Nay, I Will tell you more than I am persuaded you know, for
I also have spent above Ten thousand pounds in ready cash in Drink besides, and
yet I have not drink enough Boys. For Drinking that, will make one fat, and
brisk as Cat or Mouse, or Rat, and when I have it -- it makes me chat, like little
Brat, that sits on the Mat.

194.
An Old Man being to swear in a Cause before a Judge, the Judge bid him beware
that he did not forswear himself; and told him if he did, he might be confident
the Devil would have him: Truly my Lord, says he, I hope the Devil will have
nothing to do with me, for I have given him my Eldest Son already, and I hope
he will content himself with him, for I think one out of a Family is enough for
him; Then the Judge bid him explain himself more clearly: Why truly, my Lord,
says he, I have made my Eldest Son a Lawyer, for I believe that all of that
Profession goes to the Devil; for the Devil himself you know it is said has
been a Lawyer from the beginning: A Liar you mean, says the Judge, Why, says
he, a Lawyer and a Liar is all one, I hope; or else we are all mistaken in our
opinions.

195.
A Mayor of a Town in this Kingdom, that had been a Cavalier, and when the King
was restored, beg^n a Health to the King upon his Knee, purposely to fetch a
Fanatic Alderman down upon his: but the Alderman (being a crafty man) contrary
to all men's expectations, pledged it with seeming zeal on both his knees; at
which the Mayor wondered (and was much concerned that he did not begin it on
both his Knees also) and asked him, why he did not do as he began it, on one
Knee, but must do it on both Knees? Why truly Mr. Mayor, says he, one Knee was
in Honor of the King, and the other was to ask God forgiveness for so doing:
What, says he, do you ask God forgiveness for doing the King Honor: No, says he,
not for that, but because I pledged a Health on that which I confess I ought to
Pray on. Probatum est.

196.
Diverse French Courtiers, passing over the New Bridge at Paris in France, spied
a blind Man a begging there, with the Balls of his Eyes so fair, that they
thought him a Counterfeit; then an Earl among them, being indeed a Bastard to a
great Prince there, said he would try the Experiment; for if he can see he must
needs know me, for I do daily pass by here; upon which he went immediately to
the Beggar, and pulled him by the Nose; at which the Beggar roared out, and
called him him Bastardly Rogue: Look you there now, says he, did not I tell you
he counterfeits; he could never have known me else. But the Count was much
mistaken, for the Beggar was really blind, and that word Bastard was a common
word which he had daily in his mouth to every one that did affront him, as you
see this Count did.

197.
There Is an University in France, where any Man may proceed Doctor for Money,
though he be utterly unlearned: It happened that an Ignorant German came
thither, and having (for his better Progress in his degree he hoped to take)
invited the Doctor of the Chair to Supper, the German being a little Fluster'd,
asked the Doctor if he would take Money, to make his Horse a Doctor too? Yes,
says he, I may make a Horse a Doctor as well as an Ass, and so by consequence
your Horse as well as your self.

198.
A Gallant being a Suitor to a Rich Widow; when ever he went to wait upon her
in the Country where she lived, he would hire one Man or other to wait upon him
thither, and never came twice with one Man; at last the Gallant being to go
into the West, came to take his leave of the Widow, and when he had done, I
pray Sir, says she, give me leave to take my leave of your Man too? He asked
her what she meant by that? O, says she, there is more reason that I should take
my leave of him than of you, for happily I may see you again, but am confident I
shall never see your Man again: Why, Widow, says he, this is a great mistake in
you now, for these that have waited upon me hither, are all my own Servants
that I keep at Board wages, purposely to attend me and look to my Horses; and
the reason why I brought not one Man twice, was because thou should see that
'twas a Man of Fortune came to woo thee, by keeping so many Servants as I do;
and when we are married, my dear Widow, then thou shall see them all together,
and not before: Well Sir, says she, I believe you say truly.

199.
Two Gentlemen standing together, a very beautiful Woman passed by, upon which
one of them said, There goes the handsomest Woman that ever I saw. She hearing
him, turned back, and seeing him very ugly, said, Sir, I would I could in way
of requital say as much by you: Faith, says he, so you may, and lie as I did.

Here follows some Probable Stories told by several Persons in a Room
together.
200.
A Gentleman in North Wales was standing in a Sun-shiny day, upon a high rock
near the Seaside in those parts; and as he was looking about, he saw an Island
some Four miles from the shore or thereabouts, upon which Island he spied two
Hares playing one with another: Well, says he, are you got over there now; for
I am sure I cours'd you both yesterday with my two Greyhounds, and then you
showed me a trick, but now I Will show you one. So he went immediately home, and
fetched his two Greyhounds, and a great Morter-piece which he had of a Thousand
pound weight, which he fastened between the two Dogs Necks; but he was forced
to fasten a Cord to it also, lest the Dogs might run away with it; and when
they had carried it to the Rock aforesaid, he charged the Morter-piece, and
presently the two Greyhounds slipped into it (for it seems they had been used to
it) which two Greyhounds he ram'd in very well, and then discharged the
Morter-piece with no hurt at all to the Greyhounds, (for you must know he shot
with white Powder) and it so happened that says he, I protest to ye Gentlemen,
(upon my honest word and credit it is true) that the two Greyhounds each
lighted upon a Hare as they were playing, and then killed 'em and immediately
left the Island, and swam through the Sea with the Hares in their Mouths, which
were one boiled and the other roasted for my Dinner. The one asked him what color
his Greyhounds were? He swore they were both black before, but the White Powder
did so change their color, that they were both turned gray; and so from them
all of their kind were called Greyhounds, for their sakes, to this day. They
told him they thought this probable enough to be improbable. O Gentleman, says
he, far be it from me to tell you a lie, for if you will not believe me, pray ask
the two Dogs,

201.
Another was saying, that once upon a time, it was his fortune to be in
Hide-Park, where he saw several Races run; and at length, says he, I undertook
to run a Race with my little Galloway Nag, with another of that size, a Race of
a mile long for Five pound: And just as we were riding with full speed, he that
rode with me was on the right hand, and so past by the Coach; but my poor
Galloway seeing he could not pass for the Coach (and being a cunning Jade, and
unwilling that his Master should lose) for if he did, he thought he should fare
the worse for it at night; presently cast me off his back, and leapt quite
through the Coach himself (notwithstanding it went a great pace) but it was done
so nimbly and so dexterously, that all admired, and so well 'twas ordered, that
just as he came through the Coach, when he came out, he caught me directly upon
his back again on the other side of the Coach, and though 'twas done so hastily,
yet the other got ground of us; but my Horse so handled his Legs, that without
Switch or Spur I won the wager. Now, says he, show me such a Galloway Nagg in
England again; then they all told him 'twas very much, and more than they could
have believed, if he had not told it.

202.
Another swore, that he in his Travels round about the World, which he had
encompast Three times and half in Seven years time, but could not finish the
other half, because he fell very Sick, and so was forced to return back again;
and in his return he came into a Kings Court, but I cannot for my life remember
the place, because I have been in so many; and there, says he, I saw a Lute of
a very great bigness, and Thirty Else long, bating only three inches, and Three
broad, and swore that the least string upon it was bigger than his Thumb. Then
they asked him how it possibly could be played on? He told them that a Man and
his Wife that were Giants (of which there is abundance in that Country) had Two
large Iron Bows, made each with Eight Feet like Gridirons, with which he and
his dear Consort (which I think is the best name for her now, in regard of that
Music) scrat over the strings; that is, she on the Treble part, and he on the
Bass, whilst Eight great Mastiff Dogs ran up and down the Frets of the Lute,
with their bare Feet, and stopped directly in Tune as they played; (but you must
conceive that these Dogs were bred up to it, or else 'twere a thing impossible)
to the admiration of all strangers that were there; and the Case of that Lute
served for a Kennel for the Eight Dogs to lie in: but it seems it is common with
them there, for they made nothing of it: and this he made good by whole volleys
of thundering Oaths.

203.
Another Gallant swore likewise (for it seems they were all guilty of swearing
to confirm their stories, or else it is possible that few of them would be
believed) That as he was fishing in Germany in the great River Rhine, where I
saw an infinite number of Fish of all soets, and a Fisher of that Country
which I saw draw up with his Net an Eele, that was far bigger than the May Pole
in the Strand at the bottom, which they at first thought to be a lie; and when
he had occasion to go into the Yard, they asked his Man, who indeed was very
sober and discreet, whether it were true of the Eele, to be as big as the
May Pole in the Strand at bottom: Truly Gentlemen, says he, I then stood nearer
than my Master, which makes him a little mistake, for I think in good truth it
was scarce so big, but swore, that it was full so long. This made them cry him
up with a Hum, and presently writ Probatum est: And good reason they had I
think, because he had a witness to prove it there, which spoke as true as
himself.

204.
Another, That in the Wars in Germany between the Swedes and them, there was so
great a Frost one Winter, that Two Men desiring to talk with one another, and
one was on one side of the River, and the other on the other, and as they spoke
one to another, the Frost was so great, that it froze up their words, which was
not audible then, nor indeed (upon my reputation) could not be heard till Nine
days after, when it chanced to thaw: which one of the company hearing, said
'twas a brave Country to speak Treason in; for whatsoever a Man said, a Man
could not be heard: Nay, the very lowings of the Bulls and Cows were froz'n up
also, that the owners had much ado to find them to fodder them, for want of
hearing them as formerly. Nay, by your favor, says another, there is another
Country, which had as great a convenience to speak Treason in as that had from
1648 to 1660; and there one might speak any sort of Treason, and was never
called to an account for it: Nay, the more Treason they spoke, they were the
better esteemed; so that there was no need of a frost at that time in England
for that use.

205.
A Woman accidentally coming into the Room where they were, and hearing them
speak of that Frost in Germany, told some such stories; but when she saw the
Company began to scruple at the truth of it (which I wonder they did, if they
consider but her following discourse) then she up and told them That her dear
and loving Husband, peace be with him, was in that great Frost, out late one
night, which, truly Gentlemen, I believe was the occasion of his death: though
he lingered Fourteen or Fifteen years after it; he I say, riding that night,
came to a Common, where were great store of very good Cole-pits, insomuch that
he fell down to the bottom in one of them, and his Horse fell directly upon
him; that it was impossible at that time of night, and in such weather, to be
relieved in that great distress: and having lain so for a long time, and no
hopes to be relieved at all, he presently bethought himself, and immediately
rose and went to the next Village, and there borrowed a Pickaxe and a Spade,
and then came back with 'em to the Pit, and first dug out himself, and then
his Horse, and so about five a Clock in the Morning came home; but so weary and
so cold, that he could not unbotton his Doublet: Nay, says she, after I had
hope him off with all his Clothes; he was so benumbed, that I was forced to take
a Warming-pan of hot Coals, and so went all over his body, yet was he so cold
that he scarce felt, though the warming-Pan sometimes stood a pretty while
together in one place; which truly Gentlemen I was fain to do for my Dear
Husband: which confirmed them in the belief of it, that it was as true as any
of the rest, and gave her thanks for it also: and so she made them half a dozen
reverend Oourchys and bid 'em god-by.

206.
Another Fellow said that he had heard all their stories, and did think at
first that some of them had been untruths, but now, says he, I am better
satisfied; and I will tell what I know upon my own Knowledge. I was once in
some company where I heard one of them say that to his Knowledge a Raven would
live a hundred years: so the next day I went and bought me one purposely to
make a Trial, and put him into a Cage and taught him to sing; and I think in my
conscience no Bird but a Raven could sing like him. Well, says he, I kept this
Bird above a hundred years; nay, if I should say two hundred, I should not lie
(and fed him all the time my self) yet I could never make him speak as your
Starling does for my life; at last being very tame, I turned him out of the
Cage, and put him into a Room, where I had only a Goose, but never a Gander for
her: I know not how it happened, but the Raven and the Goose fell in league
together (for you must know 'twas a Cock Raven) and the Raven trod her, and she
brought ten young ones, all colored half black and half white, and those Five
which were black toward the head cried just like a Raven, and those that were
white toward the head, cried like Geese, and I eat one of the former, that was
black toward the head, and if you will believe me, I have had ever since such a
strange croaking in my Stomach, especially if I chance to see any Carrion, that
it is a great disturbance to me: Nay, One of my Neighbors upon some occasion
called my Wife Carrion; and though I did not love her before; yet ever since I
have had a great kindness for her. Then they told him that the strangeness of
this story made it true, and the Proverb makes it good, that is, It Is not so
strange as true,

207.
Another of this Crew came in with his story too, which they thought
improbable, till he gave 'em evident demonstration of the truth of it, and that
was this: He said he was one Winter about seven years since in Lincolnshire,
near the Fenns, where there is always great store of all sorts of Wild Fowl,
but especially of Duck and Mallard, which made me take my Gun, and when I came
near to a Hedge, they were very thick at the other side, upon which I presently
discharged my Gun, and killed at one Shoot Three hundred twenty five, and I
think, I wounded a great number also; then they wondered how he could kill so
many at one shot, he told them that there were near Four hundred little holes
in the Barrel of his Gun, so big as Shot might easily pass through them; and at
the discharge of the Gun every Shot went out at his own hole, and killed so
many as I told you, I am certain: Nay, I had killed many more if they had lay a
little closer: Then they asked him how he got 'em home, he told 'em he went home
first and fetched a Horse, which was loaded Three times home with them, besides
what I carried on my Shoulders; and they were all as fat as the driven Snow.
They said 'twas very much indeed, and very many to be killed at one time.

208.
Another that had been a Soldier, and newly come from the great and long Siege
of Ostend, one asked him what news there? He swore there was great want of
Bread: But one day when some was brought in, he saw a lusty Soldier that was
one of their Regiment, take up a Loaf; and having a very large and sharp Knife,
he slic't quite through the Loaf; and himself (being eager at it) and two more
Soldiers behind him; and by that means we got their Shares, and so fared the
better; and to the confirmation of it added some lusty Oaths: Nay, said they,
we'll believe this, cause it is a well-bred story.

209.
A Gentleman that had bred up a Young Colt, and had taught him many pretty
pieces of Activity, but one among the rest, that of leaping so well, that no
Ditch or Hedge, though never so broad or deep, but he whipped over: nay, an
ordinary House was nothing with him, or small Country Church also, but yet
could never leap over the Steeple. It fortuned that the Gentleman having
occasion to ride abroad on him, came to a River that was about Twenty yards
wide, which you will say was very broad; yet this poor beast leapt with him to
the very brink of the River on the other side, and there by chance lighted upon
a stump of a Tree, which run into his Belly: which the Master seeing, alighted,
and so left the poor Beast in that condition, yet would not kill him, and so
went away. About Six months after this Gentleman was riding that way with his
Man, and as they rode, says his Master, Don't you see something move yonder?
Yes, says he, I think I see a Tree go^ and coming near to it, they put aside
all the Boughs, and there spied his late Horse, which he thought had died
there; so they cut off all the Boughs, which were so many as to load almost
three Carts, and then he took the poor Beast home, and cured him of all but the
stump of the Tree which was in his Belly: and indeed he need not do it, for he
received a great advantage by it every year, that is, at least Two or Three
load of Wood, which served him to burn in his Chamber; for he would never burn
any other there but that, out of the love he bore to that poor beast of his.
But some that heard him till it, thought it savored too much of the Legend:
Why if you will not believe me, ask my Man, who knows it as well as I, and shall
swear it too, if you please.

210.
A Lusty Widow about Forty five years Old, yet it seems had a mind to another
Husband; and she lived about Four Miles from High-Wickham, a Market Town in
Buckingham shire; and having one Market day sent her Maid to the Market at
Wickham, about some business, the Maid it seems staid longer than ordinary
abroad, and when she came home her Mistress asked her, what was the cause of her
staying so long at Market? I profess I Will hang your Coat for it: Pray Mrs.
Forsooth, says she, hear me but speak first, and I don't doubt but to give you
satisfaction: Come you Jade, speak quickly then. Why Forsooth, says she, there
was the finest Proclamation that ever I heard in my Life; What Proclamation you
Queen, speak quickly; Why Forsooth, 'Twas that every Woman that had a little
Mouth, should have two Husbands: With that the Widow being very much pleased
with the News, began to purse and draw up her sweet Mouth: And saying, O, 'twas
a pretty Proclamation, a brave Proclamation, an excellent Proclamation: I but
Forsooth, says she, I Will tell you more News than all this: There was another
Proclamation; What was that? Says the Widow, Why forsooth, those that have a
wide Mouth shall have three Husbands. With that she began to widen her lovely
Mouth: Saying, Whaw, whaw, whaw, what a brave Proclamation is that indeed. And
so every day after enlarged her Mouth by degrees that her Neighbors might take
notice of it; and so gave in her name to the next Justice accordingly.

211.
A Gentleman that lived in the Country in the Christ-mass-Holy days, as many
others do, did invite his Tenants to a Dinner or Supper; and one day being at
Dinner, and seeing the Pigs long in coming (and being a very passionate Man
also) asked his Wife what was become of the two Pigs? She told him they would
come presently, and prayed him to be patient. With that he began to curse and
swear that he did believe he should never see his two Spits again; his Wife
asked him why he said so? Because, says he, I do believe the Pigs are run away
with them, for I saw 'em with the Spits in their Mouths two hours ago.

212.
A Great Noble Man, that was accounted mad by all that came near him, but yet
had a great deal of Craft withal; and one day having got a great rusty
Horse-nail in his hand, he made those in the House believe he had eaten it;
which that all the Physicians that were far and near were sent for, and after
they had a long and serious consultation together, some said it was good to
send it out by way of Purgation, others said they would dissolve it in the Body and
yet should do him no hurt; and he sitting by and hearing all their discourse,
told them they were all Fools and Mountebanks: For, says he, could not you have
applied a Loadstone to my Breech, and that would a drawn it out, for that
attracts all Iron to it.

213.
A very Covetous Tradesman had a mind to be married, and yet was afraid for
fear of the charge of having Children too fast; at last he resolved to marry,
and indented with his Wife before marriage, that they would lie together but
once a month: And, says he, I intend to get every month a Joint from Head to
Foot of the Child, so by that means we shall not have too many Children; but I
do it for this reason, to ease thee in the bringing of them up: And after
Marriage it seems he lay with her the first Night: And I know not how it came
about but at forty weeks end she was brought to Bed of a brave Boy, and perfect
every way. Why how now Wife? says he, this is not according to my expectation:
Yes Husband, says she, but I may thank good Neighbor, or else for ought I know
we might have had a deformed Child.

214.
A Bold Cavalier passing by Ludgate in Olivers time, one night was examined by
the Constable and watch, what he was? He told them he was a man. Who do you
serve? says the Constable. I serve, says he, the King. So as they were sending
him to Prison, he told them he served his Highness the Lord Protector. O, I cry
your mercy, says the Constable, why did you not say so before? Because, says
he, I thought you had l^^'d the King better than my Lord Protector: if you
don't, says he, I am sure you ought to do it; and so whipped out at the Wicket and
ran away; or else, they had had him to Bridewell and there whipped him.

215.
A Youth passing by the Watch late at Temple Bar one night also; the Constable
asked him what he was? Why, says he, a Boy; don't you see: Who do you serve, says
the Constable, Why the King, says the Boy: Says the Constable, So do we, Is
that all? Do You serve no body else? Away with him to the Counter: At length he
told him that he was Page to Mr. Baxter at Court; O, says the ingenious
Constable, are you Page to the Back-stairs at Court; go your ways home, for I
will not stay any of the Kings Servants. No, says the Boy, how can you stop 'em,
unless y^u find where they run out.

216.
At a Market Town in Yorkshire, there lived a Quaker that was a Barber, and
the Minister of the Parish came to him for to demand Twenty Shillings for Tithe
belonging to his Parsonage: The Quaker told him he owed him none, nor none
would he pay him: He told him 'twas his due, and if he could not have it by
fair means he must have it by foul: The Quaker asked him for what it was due? He
told him for Preaching and Reading Divine Service, and other Ministerial Duties
in the Church: Why, says the Quaker, I never came there: You might and you
would, says the Parson, the Door stands open. A little after the Quaker hearing
that he was suing of him for the money, enters an Action also against the
Parson for Twenty Shillings; and when the Parson came to hear of it, he went
and asked him how he came to owe him twenty Shillings? He told him for Trimming:
Why, says the Minister, I never came there in my life: You might and you would,
says the Quaker, for the Door stands open.

217.
An Oxonian, meeting with a Rhodomontade in London, who it seems swore that he
would take the wall of all that he met, the Scholar thinking nothing, was going
between the wall and him: with that the Ruffler began to thrust him back, and
told him, He did not use to give every Coxcomb the Wall. No, says the other, what
good will the Wall do me without the House: But, says the other, I mean I don't
use to give every Fool the wall; But Sir, says he, I do, ^and am very glad that
I have so good an opportunity to serve you; and so let him have it and marched
away, and the other also went away very well satisfied, thinking he had put an
affront upon the Scholar.

218.
A man describing to his Friend a broad brim'd Hat, which he wondered at when
he came first to London, and when he came down into the Country again, he told
them of this fashioned Hat; But one said it was so broad, that it would have
served conveniently for a Pent-house for another man besides himself; says he,
When I saw the brim of it buttoned up on one side, methoughts it looked just
like a Trap-door nailed up; and his body, having a Coat on with lark Loops,
showed just like a Ladder underneath the Trap-door.

219.
A great Butler once drinking to a sober Person a Glass of Wine, he refused to
pledge him. What, says he, will not you pledge me? Why then I wish this curse may
attend thee: That is, that I wish that in a dark and cold rainy night, thou
were set upon a tired Jade bare-ridg'd, in a dirty Lane, with a Pocky Whore
behind thee, and thy own Bones rotten, and Nine Miles from any House, not
knowing one step of the way, and with never a penny in thy Purse, and both
thirsty and hungry: Sir, says he, I thank you for your good wishes, but I hope
in a little time you will enjoy 'em all your self.

220.
A Simpleton, having been married Seven or Eight years, and had no Children,
and one day a Kinsman of his coming to visit him, whispered to him (innocently)
Cosen, Cosen, betwixt you and I my Wife's with Child; though, says he, I
protest I had no hand in it: No, says he, I don't believe you had any hand in
it: But being in a manner overjoyed with the conceit on it, and (knowing it to
be of his own begetting) said Cosen, Cosen, but betwixt you and I, I shall
have an Heir, and I hope you will be Godfather to it: No, says his Cosen, by
no means, for if I should be Godfather, all the Neighbors will say you take
Gods Name in vain there.

221.
A Natural Fool, that served a Knight in this Kingdom, he commanded him to give
such a Lord his hand; which he presently did, but gave him his left hand, for
which his Master chid him, and told him he should have given the Lord his right
hand: A Fit Master, says the Fool, I think you are more Fool than I; for that is
an unseemly thing indeed to give to a great Lord that hand, which I wipe my
Breech withal every day.

222.
A Discreet Gentlewoman kept more Maids than ordinary to please her Husband,
and he like a Wise Man gave her leave to roam abroad at her pleasure also, and
being absent they always contented each other, but if present then they were
content to be Bawds one to another; so that there was never such true love
between any couple that I have heard of before: which I think is a very goody
example for married folks hereafter, to follow their discreet rule, to avoid
contention and quarrelling.

223.
A Knights Son in the West, who was indeed his Fathers only Child, and so gave
him a little more liberty than ordinary, and he was rather a lover of the State
of Venus -- than Genoa, and did often haunt the young Girls thereabouts; but
especially one above the rest, which was a very pretty Maid, and about Eighteen
years of age, and a Farmers Daughter, who was his Fathers Tenant; which gave
him the more liberty to have free egress and regress thither; and having
importuned the Maid very much, yet she would never grant: at last he promised
her Marriage, upon which he had his desire, and the Maid was with Child; but
his Father and Mother fearing he might make up a match there, by his going so
often thither, sent to another Knight that lived four Miles of, to treat
between their Daughter and his Son, which was a pretty Woman also, which they
suddenly consented to, and the marriage day appointed; and on the Marriage day,
when he was riding with his man thither, the Farmer and his Daughter waylaid
him under a Hedge, and asked him what recompense he should have for the wrong he
had done his Daughter. Well, says he, there is Fifty pound for you in Gold, and
I now will give you a Bond for Fifty pound more to be paid in Six Months, so
you will be contented. So under the Hedge the Bond was making, and the People at
the Bride-house wondering at his so long stay, sent a Man to enquire after him;
and when he came, he found him a uniting under the Hedge with the Farmer and his
Daughter; and when he had done he went his way to the Bride-house as fast as he
could gallop: and the Farmer and his Daughter seeing they could not help
themselves, put up their Pipes and went home; at last they were married, had
Dined, and supt, and when they were in Bed together, he began to kiss her:
Pray, says she, let me ask you a question, first, what made you under the Hedge
with the Farmer and his Daughter so long? Why, says he, it does not concern you
at all: Well, says she, I will know, or else you and I shall he at a distance.
Why, says he, If you will not be angry I Will tell you: Well I will not, says she,
let it be what it will: Why then, says he, I got the Farmers Daughter
with-Child, and she was such a Fool to tell her Father of it: By my troth, says
she she was a Fool indeed; for my Fathers Man got me with-child above a twelve
month ago, and you are the first that ever I told of it: Tarbox for that
beloved.

224.
A Rump Soldiers Wife being a cleanly Woman, in a Moon shiny night going through
Thieving-lane in Westminster, and pretty late, she having at that time an
occasion to untruss a point, went into a corner of that Lane, and under a Bulk
was pleased to deliver a poor Prisoner (for it could be no otherwise in
Thieving-lane) but I know not by what oversight it happened, for her under-Coat,
sweet Soul, doubled inwardly, which caught the poor Prisoner again when he was
got out; o^ last like a discreet Woman that could over-see all she had done,
she looked on the Ground, and seeing it not, Well, says she, the place well
deserves the name of Thieving-lane; for a Body cannot lay down any thing but
it is stole away presently: And the poor thing it seems was loath to leave her
turned Page, and followed at the heels, dab, dab, dab, every step; which she
knew not of till she smelt the Rogues tricks: Sirrah, says she, hence forward
I Will have no more to do with you; and so shak'd him off, that the poor thing
was forced to lie in the Street all that cold night.

225.
Another Rump Officer, which forsooth to be fine, must needs have a Muff; and
being much put to it, to deliver a poor Prisoner also, was forced to put into an
Ale House, and bid him fill him a Pot of Ale, and he would come presently: And when
he came to the convenient place, and it being a little duskish, and being in
have too, pretty worm; had forgot his Muff, which hung it seems behind him, and
well he might be pardoned for it, for that was the first day that e're he wore
a Muff; and making more than ordinary haste, it happened that his new Muff
lighted just underneath his Masters Namesake, viz. the Rump, and he most
valiantly discharged all into it; and so when he had done (though he did not
know what he had done) come out of the little House into the Yard, and as he
was going into the House, thrust his pretty hand with his Gloves on into the
Muff, which he quickly smelt and put him into such a fume, that he threw his
Muff and Gloves in the Woman's Face, and told her that was enough to pay for the
pot of Ale, and so went away.

226.
A Country Woman that was a bold Gossip, came to a Butchers in Oxford, and
when she saw a Shoulder of Mutton hang up, she asked him what she should give
him for it? He told her two Shillings and a half: Two farts and a half, says
she: Why says he, give me two farts and a half and thou shall have it: Say
thou so Boy, says she, Why then have at it; then she lifted up her pretty right
leg, and let a good one; Well, says he, there is one; then sweet soul, she
lifted up her left leg, and let another as good; then lifting up her two legs
one after another, she let a lusty one; Well, says he, there is three, but
where is the half one? Why, says she, take which half you will of the last, for
that was a rowsing one.

227.
A Lord in this Kingdom, that it seems by mistake, had sealed to something that
day, for which he was very much troubled, at last, after some vexation and
grief for it, he called up his man into the Chamber to him, saying, Tom was not
I a Fool to do as I did to day? Yes truly were you, my Lord, says he, you were
an arrant fool for it. Sirrah, says he, though I call my self Fool, I don't
allow you to do it too; and so kicked him out of doors.

228.
An ancient Justice of Peace was chid by a Neighbor Justice, for marrying a
young Girl; Peace Brother, says he, hold thy tongue, she will be a Woman to
morrow; for, says he, Wives are young men's Mistresses, middle aged men's
Companions, and old men's Nurses; and will you blame a man to have a Nurse in
his old age? No, says he, I don't blame you to have a Nurse, but I do blame
you, that you are not provided for Heaven, but that your Wife must do it: Why,
says he, don't you know whither all Cuckolds go? O, says he, now you put me in
mind on it, it is true; I have heard your Wife say many years ago, that she was
confident her husband would go to heaven, and now I find which way; and mum for
that my dear Brother too.

229.
One was saying, That those men which do affect gravity, did seldom speak when
any was a telling them a story, but only wag the head: but another told him he
was confident they do as we do our Bottles that is shake 'em to try if they
have any wit in their heads to give answer to their speech: but a third said,
he thought that all those who wagg'd their heads, did it only but in waggery.

230.
Two Gentlemen it seems one night quarrelled at gaming, and overnight one sent
the other a challenge to meet him by Six a clock to morrow morning at such a
place, upon his honor: Hang honor, says he, for we both are but worshipful;
and withal tell him, it is not my custom (and I also know it is not his) to rise
before Eleven or Twelve a Clock, and bid him consider with himself whether we
should break our rest to break our limbs? The other sent him word, that if he
did not meet him, he would Post him. Well, says he, tell him if he does, I Will ride
Post out of Town, and there stay till his fury is over. So we see that some are
in post-haste to fight, and some in post-haste to ride away.

231.
One asked another of his Companions at a Coffee-house, What was the meaning of
this Proverb, viz. The City for wealth and the Country for health? He told him
it was preposterous, for you know there is more Healths drank in the City than
in all the Country again. Why, says he, that makes for the Proverb, for if they
drink away their healths they can never be well: but the truth is, that the
wealth of the Country being brought into the City, is the occasion of so much
drinking of Healths.

232.
Also there is another Proverb which speaks very p^t, viz. Sleep without
supping, and health will follow: yet I must ingeniously confess, that I never
saw a man sup in his sleep, Yes, says the other, it is many suppings many times
that makes him sleep; and commonly after supping a great many healths do follow.

233.
One was saying, That the body is more dressed than the soul; But I deny that,
says his Friend, for the Body and Soul of a Goose are both dressed alike, and
together; and the Body of a Sole-fish is not dressed by piece-meals, but
altogether: Truly, says the other, I think you are solely in the right; Nay it is
true, I would not so-lie as you do every day for a great deal.

234.
A good and virtuous Woman was told by a Lawyers Clerk, that lived in that
Country-Town where she dwelt, That when he was at London last, there was a Law
made, that all laboring men that were Cuckolds, were to have four pounds a
year allowed them out of the Shire where they lived. Well, says she, this is
comfortable news, I am sure my poor husband take as much pains as any man, and
four pounds a year will do us a courtesy these hard times. Then she asked him
how many times doing would make a man a Cuckold; He told her by this new Law
three times would. Nay then, says she, I am well enough, for I am sure my poor
Husband will receive his pension.

Here follows some Probable Improbable Stories.
235.
A great Spanish Commander, that had been in service against the Turks: when he
came home, he told such a loud lie before the Council of Spain, that all looked
upon it as ridiculous, but impudent in him to tell it there; then the Council
put him out, and called in one of the Captains, who did not only second what
his Commander had said, but told a louder lie; for which he was rebuk't by one
of the Council, for telling such a notorious untruth: O my Lord, says he, you
must pardon me, I do but my duty in following my Commander. Then they told him
he had outdone his Commander: The more is my honor and glory then; says he,
and I hope the King will pay me well for it.

236.
In a Discourse at Table, wherein they chiefly treated of strange things, and
one among them said, that he had a piece of the Hawthorn-Tree in a Box, which
always bloomed on Christmas day for many years together, and at last was
robbed of it by some of the Parliament Forces, and could never get it again:
Why, says one, how could it live and bloom as you say, without some earth, or
the Suns influence? Why, says he, do you think if it have that virtue to bloom on
Christmass-day, that it had not the virtue also to bloom without the help of
the Sun or earth? and so let out some Oaths to confirm it.

237.
But another being by to fit him in his Story; and to make it appear to be
truth (as you know it was) began to confirm what the other had said, with some
Oaths too) For, says he, I my self have seen that Hawthorn-Tree bloom a Hundred
Christmas Day, and if I should say a Hundred more, I should not lie; and I went
once thither when they were come to the Berries, which were red, hard and
laoge; and so took some of them and buttoned me a Suit and Coat with it, as the
fashion is now (for you know our fashion in England for Clothes never alters)
and when I and some others were at Church together upon Christmass-day in the
morning, little thinking of it about Ten of the Clock precisely (he swore) that
the branches sprung out so fast and so thick, that he was covered all over with
them; insomuch that he looked as if he had been in a Wood, and so heavy they
were upon him, that he could not stir till one went out of the Church and
fetched an Axe, and cut away all the Boughs, that he might see his way out; and
when they had done, he went home in this posture to his lodging; and swore
also, that there was as much Wood cut off as served him all that Winter for
fuel to his Chamber; But how ever, says he, I had rather be at the charge of
Wood, then to be served so again. But Gentlemen I tell you this to confirm what
that worthy Gentleman told you before? whereas you were in doubt for a great
while whether it was truth or no: but I hope there is no doubt now, and so swore
it again.

238.
Then another told a Story that a Miller had a Horse for many years together,
whose name was Roan, and being tired with working all day, poor Jade, slept
soundly at night; which a thievish Fellow espying, flayed off his Skin, whilst
he slept, and went away with it: But Old Roan when he awak't, (though 'twas a
bitter cold night) yet poor thing he came home to the Mill-door and neighed
very loud, which the honest Miller hearing awak't his Wife, and asked her
whether that was not the neighing of our Old Roan? Truly Husband, says she, it
is, let us rise and see what is the matter with him; and when they came out, they
wondered to see him in such a pickle: Well Husband, says she, since it is as
it is, I Would have you kill Five or Six of your Sheep (and to morrow being Market
day, we can sell their Flesh there) and take all the Skins and clap 'em hot
upon poor Roan; which he presently did with his dear Wives help, and clapped them
hot upon the Horses flayed Back; which with the cold night were presently
froz'd on, and the Horse as well or rather better in health than ever he was in
his life, and I am sure you will say warmer: And this Horse, says he, they kept
for many years after, and every year it brought him Thirty Tod of Wool: And I
hope you will believe it; but if you don't believe it I pray take notice, that
I am not bound to find you stories and belief too. Then they all concluded it
was true -- lie so.

239.
Another swore most plentifully, That he saw a Lobster kill a Hare upon
Salisbury Plain; then they all began to think indeed that was a lie, till he
very discreetly told them how it was; for the Lobsters that are taken at
Weymouth, Southampton, and upon the Seacoasts thereabouts, are presently
conveyed in Panniers into the Midland Country, and by the way on Salisbury
Plain did drop a very good Lobster, and a Hare a little after came close to the
lobster: which the Lobster feeling, with his Claw presently caught him fast by
the foot, and so killed him; and swore also that they put it into a Pie, and
both baked together (but I don't mean with the skin and the shell on) then
you would think it a lie indeed; and so sent up to London, and eaten there.

240.
Another swore pretty largely too, That he knew a Hare, that after he was taken
and garbaged, did give the Dogs a Chase for five or six miles together; then
they ^ay'd out all 'twas a loud lie: No: says he, it cannot be a loud lie, for
it seems you don't allow it. Yes, says they, we do allow it for a lie: But says
he, I do avow it for truth; and thus it was, for the Hare being tied to a
Hunts-mans Saddle in a string, it happened that the string slipped, and the Hare
in the string hung down between the Horse Legs upon the Ground, and the Horse
being metttlesome, gallopt away with the Hare at his heels, and the Dogs marched
after; but the truth was, the Man could not hold the Horse in: Nay then, say
they, this may be impossibly probable.

241.
Another very sober Man told a story; That once he went a coursing alone with a
Greyhound Bitch, that was great with Whelp; and having started a Hare, it
happened the Hare went through a Muse in a Hedge, where a Carpenter had hid his
Axe, lying it seems with the edge upwards: and so the Hare being with young, in
going through that Muse, cut her belly with the edge of the Axe; and then out
started 8 young Hares, and began to run immediately (as you know some Hares
will, before they are kindled) but the Greyhound Bitch suddenly following the
Hare through the very same Muse, by chance cut her Belly also, and out came
Eight Whelps, Which eight Whelps ran after the eight young Hares, and the Bitch
after the Old Hare, and killed 'em at all. Now, says he to them, Some nice
people may take this for a lie, but I think it is as probable as any of the
rest, because the wonder is greater: that there should be but just the number
of Eight Whelps and Eight young Hares, and if true, Probatum est.

242.
Another Story was, That he being in a Low-room, with some other Gentlemen a
dringing a Bottle of Ale; he saw the Man of the House open a Bottle, and the
Cork flew up with such a Violence, that it struck his Hat off his Head, and
after that went through the Cieling of that Room, and another Room above that,
which was two pair of Stairs high, and killed a Men and his Wife as they lay in
Bed, and from thence flew up into the Garret, and they could not get it out
with a Hammer and Mallet,

234.
Sir, says another, to make good your Story, which I saw with my own Eyes that
being with some others in an upper Room, one was then opening a Bottle of Ale,
and the Cork then flew up with such a violence through the Top of the House;
that it broke the Cieling and Tiles also, and killed a Kite as he was flying
just then over the House; and the hole was so big which the Cork had made, that
down fell the Kite through the hole, and they opening the Kite to see where she
was wounded, found two great Chickens in her Belly, which they sold to pay for
their Drink, and after that would never drink in any other Room in that House:
but I don't know that it ever happened so again; for these things, though there be
truth in 'em, don't happen every day so.

244.
Another began to tell them his Story (which he swore was of a certain, as you
know all these things are:) For, says he, I was riding to Saint Albans, and
riding through a Lane, that was of stiff clay, as I was galloping, my Horses
foot sticking in, plucked off shoe and hooff too, and so I gallopt on for three
or four Miles: and my horse never complained, that I never saw a horse that
gallopt so well on three legs in my life; at length he began to limp, then I
lighted to see what he ailed, and found both shoe and hooff gone; so fearing to
pay for the horse; got presently up again; and gallopt as fast as I could drive,
and fortunately my Horse leg lighted again in the same place, and pulled up
hooff shoe and all, which was better fastened then when I came out; and so I
performed my journey, and got that night as far as I rid.

245.
Another, whom all the Town knew to be as far from telling a lie as the London
Clocks, and so gave the more ear to him; swore, that he had traveled all over
Germany, and at Auspurg a great City there, he saw a man that had a Nose so
big, that he could not hear himself sneeze: Sure, says one of the Company, this
cannot be an honest man? Yes, says he, he was accounted an honest man, and was
also a Burgomaster; but, says he, I am sure he was a Knave. Pray, explain your
self, says the other: Why, says he, I believe he has heen in the Pillory, and so
by consequence had lost his Ears. Ergo.

246.
Another very learnedly said, That he saw two men ride down a hill together a
great pace, and of a sudden the first horse stopped in the midway; which gave
the foremost such a jerk, that he threw him quite out of the Saddle backwards,
that he lighted a stride behind the hindmost man; and his coming so forcibly
upon him struck the hindmost man off his own upon the first Horse, which stood
still, and all in an instant: Truly, says one, It Is strange if it be true.
Truly, says the other, it is not so strange as true.

247.
A Gentleman that had more mind to have store of Money than to have a Wife, yet
he found he could no way supply himself so well as that way, unless he sold
some of his Estate; at length he was told by his friend, that he might have a
Gentlewoman with Fifteen hundred pounds, but she was ugly: Faith, says he,
though my occasions are very great for Money, yet I would be content with half
the Money till I fetch away the Bride.

248.
A Gentleman did advise a Kinsman of his to marriage, for Marriage frees a Man
from all care: for then the Wife takes all upon her: which a married Man that
fate by hearing, said, Yes a pox on her, so does my Wife take all upon her that
comes to hes.

249.
A Vintner being broke, was it seems forced to set up an Alehouse in the
Suburbs, and being asked why he did discredit himself so much, to leave off Win^
to sell Beer and Ale? He told him the chie^ reason was because he loved a
Countryman better than a Stranger; for Beer and Ale are my Countrymen, but
Wine's a Stranger: but the Gentleman told him he did not well, for he must make
much of any Stranger that comes within his gates: So will I that, says he, when
I get it within my gates again; I Will make more of it than I did; nay much more;
because I would not break the Command.

250.
One did advise a Noble man that must live high (yet had no great estate to
bear it out) that he should do well to be only attended with Blackmores, which
would ease him of a vast charge, especially if he should put all his family in
mourning, for it is but turning of them naked at that time and they are in
mourning in a trice. Why, says the Lord, that will be a shame for 'em to go
along the streets so. No, no, my Lord, says he, it is natural for Moors to go
naked; for more goes so than clothed.

251.
A Country Gentleman asked a wise man, when he saw a fellow abuse him and spurn
at him, why he did not spurn at him again? Why truly, says he, I think I should
do very indiscreetly in so doing; for if an Ass should kick me, must I needs
kick bim again?

252.
A Gentleman being in a great Assembly of Gentlemen at a great Dinner, one asked
why he would not live in London in the Winter; where he should find all sorts
of company to fit his humor? Faith, says he, so I would, if I could find a
house fit for my turn. One, whose name was Chambers, thinking to abuse him,
told him he could help him to a house that had three Rooms of a floor; but it
was built of Wood: He asked him where it was. He told him at Tyburn. It Is true
indeed, says the Gentleman, it is a convenient house, and stands in a good air;
for in an hour it cures people of all Diseases: and for a house that is but one
story high it is a fine house indeed; but I find there is no want in it but
Chambers: Tarbox for that Sir.

253.
A Gentleman traveling into Norfolk by chance lost his way; and coming into a
Village, and seeing a man standing at his door, asked him which was the next way
to Norwich? The man (as many would do) asked him from whence he came? What Is
that to you, says he, from whence I come? You say true indeed, says the man,
it is nothing to me, whence you come nor whither you go: and with that whipped in
and shut the door upon the Gentleman, who else would have whipped his Jacket for
him. So he did advise all his friends, if ever they traveled into Norfolk,
never to call at that man's house, which he poor heart thought a great
punishment for him.

254.
A Company of confident Blades were each of 'em bragging what they durst do,
and how they would go upon any exploit. Puh, says one among 'em, ye are all
Cowards to me; for I dare go where a Prince cannot send his Ambassador: Then
they asked him where that was? He said, To go to stool; for though an Ambassador
represents the Kings person, yet he cannot do his Business for him that way.
Yes, yes, says they, we smell your conceit, and therefore think you a Fanatic;
for it savours too much of the Rump.

255.
A man pays very dear for things that are good cheap; because it tempts him to
buy those things which he has no need of: but if he has no need of 'em, why
does he buy 'em? he was told because they were cheap: Why, says the other, how
can they be cheap when he paid too dear for them.

256.
A Man when he is married turns his walking-Staff into a fixed Stake, for then
his condition is not ambulatory but settled and fixed; that is (as I humbly
conceive) if he be fixed to a good Woman, if not, then all the months in the
year may be March to him; that is may be blustering, which will certainly put
him into a marching condition again,

257.
A Gentleman was saying, That Wine, Women, and Play, does undo Men laughing;
but by his favor, I cannot submit to his opinion therein, but do flatly deny
it: for Play does undo Men by Cursing, Fretting, Swearing and Duelling; nay,
some fret so much that the tickling frets of an Instrument would never compose
'em'

258.
One said that he saw a Man cut a Purse, and gave it to his Wife to wear, which
she did hang by her side: But, says he, if you should cut a Purse, you may hang
by the side of the Gallows; and though the Purse is so civil to them, as to
keep safe whatsoever is put in, yet whenever they would have it out again, they
are so uncivil to pluck the Purse by the ears to open it, and at all times do
almost starve him; for they tie up his mouth from eating.

259.
A Gentleman lying in a Lodging in Westminster, had a Shock Dog which came up
into his Chamber where he was, where it seems a Cat had kitten'd; then the Cat
flew upon the Dog, and the Dog at her again: Let 'em alone, says another, I Will
warrant you the Dog will stand a shock or two with the Cat: Faith, says he, if
he does, I Will bake a shock of Wheat into excellent Bread for him: And then
he will be a well-bread Dog too.

260.
When a Citizen was by accident in Tower street burnt to death by Powder, a
Gentleman said he had eaten so much powdered Beef that day that he was all in a
flame: and though he was blown up, yet I Will assure you no broken Citizen: for
he was found whole, and in another hole was put the next day.

261.
A Gentleman tacitly drank the Kings Health in Olivers days, by drinking a
Health to Oliver C. that is O live C. R. and likewise at another time drank the
Kings Health as tacitly, when he drank a Health to the King of the Jews, viz.
I. Ireland, E. England, W. Wales, and S. Scotland, which Four Letters put
together make up the word Jews; and several of the Parliament Officers drank it
also, not knowing what they did when they drank it.

262.
When a London Scriv'ner died in Oxford in the time of the Sickness, a merry
Jack writ this over him: May all by these presents know, that I that have bound
so many, am now fast bound my self: by the means of a Gentleman of an Ancient
Family, called Mr. Death, who brought me my last Sheet, and to my last period
or fulpoint; and though I was never guilty of any great wickedness, yet I lived
not without many a blot, which my Daughter Pen was the occasion of: I gave no
ill example to any, but rather give good Copies unto all: I was learned too,
for I always dealt in good Letters, and was a Justice of Peace in my own
Dominions; and though I could hang, yet I could draw; yet I could hang an Arse
when my own Money was to be paid: and I made all Bond men hut my Prentices, for
them I made free: and after I had writ up all my Letters, this Mr. Death threw
some Dust upon 'em; and as one dash of my Pen has ruined many, so my Daughter
Pen, has ruined her self: But this naughty Mr. Death assaults me with Bills
when I was making of Bonds, and at last sealed the Letters of my Eyes quite up;
and then sent me away Tomlong home.

263.
There was one Monday a Cutler in Shoelane, that hanged himself, but it was no
boot for him to do 'it, for he never recovered after: And when the People came
in they found a Knife in the House to cut the Rope, upon which the Common
Council of that place made an Act presently, that Tuesday should begin the
Week; since Monday (a Rope take him) has hanged himself, that is the cause
that all the Cutlers in that place never works of a Monday: It may be that was
the occasion also among the Shoe-makers, because they call Monday the
Shoe-makers Holy Day, and they don't make Holy Days for nothing.

264.
A Goldsmith it seems was formerly brought into the Star Chamber for false Gold
and Silver, for which they fined him 100 l. and about a Twelve Month after 100
l. more and a Year after that 100 l. more: then says he, My Lords, I see that
you have fined me, and fined me again, and refined me; but it seems you cannot do
so to my Metal, that nothing can melt me down in your sense. They told him if
they could not melt him, they would melt his purse so, that it should run quite out
at last: But my Lords, says he, as the Cobbler says, my Last is not come yet.

265.
An Honest Man, that was a true Cavalier, was when he came from the Wars, so
reduced, that he was forced to turn Ale-Draper, and his Sign was the Rose and
Crown; and in 1649, the Rump forced him to blot out the Crown, but left the
Rose still, as they thought, to prick his Fingers; and when the King was
restored, then he put on the Crown again, and writ underneath, The Case is
altered.

266.
A Simpleton, that was brought in by power in Olivers days to be a Fellow of a
College in Oxford, his Father being then made a Baron of Olivers, he would
never name his Father or Mother to any body, but he would say, My Lord the
Baron my Father, and my Lady the Baronness my Mother; for which he was rebukt
by some of their own party who were ashamed to hear him say so. But a Gentleman
told 'em they did err in rebuking of him, and told 'em also, that he had
spoken nothing but truth, for he was truly descended from them both (his Father
also was counted none of Solomon's Bastards neither) and thus I will riddle it
to you: first from the Baron, because he was a bare one in Judgment; and then
from the Baronness, because he had a great barenness in his Wit: Indeed Sir,
says the Simpleton, I think you have defined it very well, I wish I may have
that grace but to be as you say: Yes Ass I say, I protest Sir, that is a pretty
joke: that belongs to me too, does it not? Yes, yes. Then he fell out a
laughing heartily, and rubbing his hands; saying, Sir your servant, your
servant, your servant in Folio: Yes, says he, in Foolio indeed; and so they
parted.

267.
An honest Cavalier had a devilish Round head to his Wife, which did discover
all his Secrets and Actions to the then pretended Parliament, which made him
ask a Friend of his, what was the best cure for a Roundhead, He told him to
let him do as if his right hand offended him, for desperate Diseases must have
desperate Cures.

268.
A great number both of Seamen and Soldiers deing in a great Ship together
this last Summers engagement, one of them, when he saw 'em cast Anchor, asked
the Master and his Mate, whether the Ship were sick or not? They asked him his
reason? He said because it spewed. How showed? says they: Why does it not spew
when it does cast? Cast what? Why Anchor: Yes indeed, says the Master, we did
cast Ann Car overboard, after she died.

269.
A Gallant that had a very great mind to be married, but more for Moneys sake
than for any thing else; at last a Gentleman of his acquaintance, hearing by a
Letter from a Friend of his in the Country, found out one presently, as he
thought a great match for him, seeing he aimed at nothing but Money, and so went
to him and acquainted him that he had found out a very great match for him;
For, says he, I know your temper, and she has 8000 l. to her Portion, but she
is sufficiently ugly: which he hearing shrug'd up his Shoulders, and said:
Indeed Sir I do confess the Money is a very good match: Indeed, says the other, I
think you have met with your match now: It may be says he, I have met with my
match but not with my Wife; for I Will see her as low as her 8000 l. was from
whence it came at first, before I Will have any thing to do with such a bowed
token.

270.
One asked a Gentleman why he staid and walked so long in that dirty field? He
told him because it was very Civil and courteous to him, and more than he did
deserve or desire; for at every step the dirt did invite him to stay. Yes, says
the other, I believe so; for it seems 'twas a good stay to you: for I did not see
you fall.

271.
A Gallant, when he saw that he could not make a young woman to love him, asked
her the reason? She told him because his face was so devilish ugly. How, says
he, my face ugly? do you know what you say? for I know it cannot be: And I Will
assure ye I had my choice of twenty faces this morning, and therefore you may
presume that I would not make choice of the worst. That is, his Looking-glass
was broke into so many pieces.

272.
A Vaporing Coxcomb, introducing himself, as he did always, into all Companies
where pretty Ladies were, was telling the Ladies how such a one gave him a
Ring, and the other a Favor, and the other a Kiss, and abundance more; which a
Gentleman that knew him very well, knew that he lied in all he said: and so
whipped him in such terms that he did not understand: For, says he, Ladies you
must believe this Gentleman; for I have often been in his company, and among
very pretty Ladies too, and they hove loved him so well, that they doated upon
his very absence; and when many times be intruded himself among them, they
would desire him to bestow his absence upon them. Law you there now Ladies,
will you believe me another time? says he.

273.
A Man advised a Gentleman to marry that Woman, though she was unhandsome, for
her moneys sake. No, says he, I protest I would not marry her, though she were
endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgrest: Why says he, you
may have that Land behind our Hop-yard too, and some where else, which was
never any of Adams Portion: How, says he, what do you mean? Why goodman fool,
says he, it is Eve's Jointure as I mean: Truly, says the other, I never knew that
till now.

274.
A Gentleman, that had as I hear, been long a Suitor to a young Lady, whose
Father was a Knight, and at that time High Sheriff of the County; and after
they had long disputed about the Portion, it happened that the Sheriff had
summoned the County together upon some urgent occasion, into a Common three or
four Miles off, and there did appear upon a very brave Horse, which the young
Gentleman that was a Suitor to his Daughter was much in love withal, and did
desire that he would bestow that Horse upon him; the Knight told him that he
would not part from him; then he desired to buy him: but he told him plainly
that no Money should buy him: Why then, says he in a fume, you may keep your
Daughter: and so rode away: But about three months after he took it into
consideration, and thought he had done very indiscreetly, and went again to the
Knights House, and as he was riding into the Gate, a Maid of the House spied
him, and went and told her young Mistress; who bid her shut the Door fast and
lock it too: A little after the Gentleman comes to the door and knocks, and the
young Lady being a the other side, asked who was there? He said, Madam a faithful
Servant of yours: Sir, says she, I don't know you, and I dare not let any body
in now my Father's from home; for we had a-great Robbery committed lately hard
by at this time a day: Why Madam, says he, don't you know me; I am such a man
that loves you dearly I protest: O Sir, says she, is it you? I do remember
about six months ago that here was such a one indeed that was in love with my
Fathers Horse: and so flung away, and would not suffer the Door to be opened,
nor never would admit of any more of his addresses to her: That it seems he was
at last contented to march off without Lady or Horse either.

275.
A Man in a bitter cold Winter night was passing through the Street, and seeing
all a Bed, and no Candle in any Window neither: then bethought himself of this
project* for he then went up and down crying Fire, Fire, which made several
come to the Windows: They asked him where? where? He told then that he did not
know, for if he did, he would go to it to warm himself: For, says he, I am
devilish cold.

276.
Several Men being merry together, and among other discourse, were praising
their Wives: Faith, says a Fellow, that had a devilish scold to his Wife, My
Wife is as brave a Woman as any is in England, all but her Tongue: Why do
not cut it out, says another: No, no, says he, by no means; for I have heard
say that if you lop a Tree, it takes the faster root, and hy consequence there
will more branches come out: which will be stronger than those before: and who
can tell but it may be so with my dear Wife's Tongue, if I should cut it.

277.
A merry Wagg at Woluecot near Oxford, met a Countryman going thither with a
Goose to sell; but he had agreed with a Comrade of his to say 'twas an Owl: So
he asked him how he sold his Owl? He said it was a Goose, and the other an Owl? So
they argued a good while together, at last says the Wagg, We'll be tried by the
next man we meet: Content, says the Countryman; and if he says it is a Goose,
then you shall give me half a Crown for the Goose, and I Will keep it too.
Content, says the Wagg. So going on, they met as by accident, his aforesaid
Comrade; and after some debate, he plainly said it was an Owl: and so they got
the Goose. So the Countryman as he went along, began at last to think he was
cheated; and was resolved to study for a revenge; and about a Week after he
comes to Oxford again, and brought a Pot of supposed Honey with him to sell; So
the Wagg spying him in the Market, asked him how he sold his Honey? He said it
was Sir-reverence. The Other said 'twas Honey, but the man said 'twas Tu -- and
so they argued a great while; at last he bought it of him, saying, Let it be
what it will I Will buy it: and when he came home to open it, he found it was
true that the man said, only the top for an inch deep covered with Honey: and
when he had got his money, thought he to himself now I am quit with you; for
the Case is All turd:

278.
On some occasion, Oliver had sent for a Minister, and did much revile him and
abuse him; that he put the poor Minister to a stand what to say: At last Oliver
putting off his Cap, and the Minister spying his bald Pate: Truly, says he, I
will not reproach you, nor revile you, as you have done to me, but I hope
you will give me leave to commend your Hair for leaving so bad a Head.

279.
In the Rumps time there were a many worthy Men, that were made Justices of the
Peace, and among which this one, which it seems formerly had been a Tradesman;
and when a Man and a Woman was brought before him for some offense: Says the
Reverend Justice, Where Is your reverence: to me, do you come in here without
bowing? Do You know who I am? Then Sirrah, says he, what Woman is that you
brought with you? says he, An't please your Honor, it is my Wife before God:
How you Rogue, says he, do you swear? first lay down your 12 d. for swearing, and
then go un: Sir, says he, I dare not go on; for if this be swearing, I fear I
shall so often swear, that I shall have no Money to defray it; and so retired
with his Wife.

280.
Another Mad Fellow being brought before this Renowned Justice, in the morning
before his Worship had drank his mornings draught, and to that end there stood
a Silver Beaker of Ale, Nutmeg, and Sugar ready, and after his Examination,
says the Justice to him. Is this true what they say against you? (the Fellow
being a the other side the Table) True Sir, says he, and with that whipped into his
hand the Silver Beaker aforesaid, and said, If it be true, I wish this Beaker
may never go through me; and so drank it up: Now Sir, says he, I hope you will
not believe them, but me hereafter.

281.
A Gentleman in King James's days, that was a Servant to him, was a very fat
Man, and the King it seems took delight in his comyany for his dry Jests now
and then; and would often come and lean upon his Shoulder; but one time it
seems leaned a little harder than ordinary, that this fat Gentleman began to
puff and blow: which the King observing, yet would take no notice of it; but
the Gentleman finding the weight a little too heavy, said, I beseech your
Majesty not to lean upon the Cushion too hard, least you burst out the Feathers.

282.
A Notable Fellow, that as it is said, would not be drunk above seven days in
the week; and when he was drunk, was so besotted that he knew not what he did:
Once his Prentice was sent by his Wife to fetch him home and when he found him
out he found him reeling-ripe also: and as they came down Ludgate Hill, in a
Moon-shiny night, saw the reflection of the Bell-Savage sign-post upon the
ground, and it seems took it for a Block, and went to lift his Leg over it, his
Prentice having him by the Arm for his supporter, asked what he meant by that?
Why, says he, to go over this Block? He told him 'twas not a Block; What is it
then says he? It Is a Sign, says the Boy: What Sign I prithee? Why Master it is a
Sign you are drunk.

283.
Another Night the same Boy was his guide home again, or else he had took up new
Lodgings in the Counter that, night? and as he was passing by Fleet-Conduit,
when it was standing, where the Water did continually run out of a Cock from
thence; this reverend Sot coming to the Conduit, told the Boy he must piss, and
did piss against the Conduit, close by where the Water Cock ran; and after he
had stood there a pretty while, his Boy told him 'twas late and prayed him to
come home: What you Rogue, says he, would you have me bepiss my Breeches? Do
you hear how I piss still? Thinking that the Cock running was his Pissing: The
Boy told him he had done, 'twas the Cock that ran. Say you so, says he, in
troth I thought I had pist all this while: So went as well as he could home
with the Boy.

284.
Another remarkable Drunkard, that always when he went abroad; would have
hanging by his side a great short Hanger in a Leather Belt; and one time having
been at it till he was red hot with tippling; he and his Companions paid the
Reckoning, and having laid by his Dagger, when he was going away, instead of
the Dagger put the end of his Leather Belt into the ear of a Chamber Pot, half
full of Piss, and so fastened it to his side, and so marched out into the
Streets, and every step some Piss would slop out; which set the Peaple in the
Street into a laughter, and came flocking about him: and he thinking that they
came to abuse him, went to reach his Dagger, but instead of that laid hold of
the Chamber Pot and threw all the Piss in the Peoples Faces; and so by that
found his Error, and then went back for his Dagger.

285.
Another, that was a very great Glutton, yet forsooth had a great mind to be
married; that is, to marry a very rich Widow: and to that end, by his Letters
got admittance, and when he came, she saw the man was comely enough, and well
clad; but seeing him two or three times feed so largely, she asked a friend of
hers what he was? He said he was a great Glutton; and when he came to speak to
her about the matter, he protested he loved her as well as he did his own Soul.
By my troth Sir, says she, but I had rather you loved me as well as you love
your Body.

286.
Some Gallants were sitting merrily a drinking a Pot of nappy Ale; wherein they
had several Discourses of Experiments; but one of them said, that he could
demonstrate it so, that though there was four sides of a House that stands
alone, yet there is a way to make it rain but on one side: then they desire him
to tell them, he said he would for two Pots; Content, say they; then he told
them. You know though there is four sides of a House, yet there is really but
two; that is, the outside and the inside, so that if you can keep it from
raining in, it will rain only on the outside; Probatum est. Well, say they, to
make good your conceit, we are resolved to seize the two Pots which we have
lost; and we will so order the matter, that there is none of that in the pots
shall enter into your inside; we'll so stop them.

289.
A Countrey-woman that lived at Headington near Oxford, and upon a Sunday, she
being not well, bid her Maid go to Church that afternoon, and after Sermon was
done, her Dame asked her what was the Text (She said, Truly forsooth Dame the
Text was said before I came. Well, says she, what said he in the middle of his
Sermon? Truly, says she, I was asleep then. Well what did he say at the latter
end then? Indeed forsooth, says she, I went away before 'twas done. Well,
howsoever I will have you tell me something of it. What, says she, do you think I
am a Blab of my Tongue? No I warrant you, I was better bred than so.

290.
A precise Woman undertook to chastise her Daughter, and charged her to look no
more upon Men; but instead of that, when you are in their Company you must
still look upon the Ground: No, Mother, says she, I beg your Pardon for that,
for I see you don't read the Bible often; For we ought to look upon men from
whence we came, and they on the ground from whence they came. And if I should
not look upon 'em, how should I know whether I like them or no: and Mother I
have often heard when were a Maid, that you never went to Church, but to show
your fine Clothes, and to look upon young Men. Well thou have convinced me,
prithee Child take thy course.

291.
A Gentleman coming to London immediately after the Fire, and coming to
Fleet Street, there took notice how far the Fire had burnt, which was just to
the Hercules Pillars, and no farther: Well, says he, it is very much that the
Fire should take notice of that saying of Hercules, viz. Ne plus ultra.

292.
A Man it seems that had to his Wife as good a Woman as any was in England, but
for Whoring, Lying, Swearing, Nastiness, and other such small infirmities,
which made him define a Woman rightly as he thought. Says he, Women are born in
Wiltshire, brought up in Cumberland, lead their lives in Bedfordshire, ( that
is be in Cloth-fair near Smithfield, till twelve a Clock every day) then bring
their Husbands to Buckinghamshire, and die in Shrewsbury.

293.
A humorous Gallant that kept two Boys, and they having committed some fault,
he told 'em, he would kill 'em both; but when he saw they were afraid, he would do
them some Mischief, he called 'em to him, saying, first to one -- Sirrah, you
shall live, because you are little, and you Sirrah, because you are no bigger,
and both because -- you are but two: As I live, says one of them, my Master
speaks very well.

294.
A very rich Miser's Son, riding upon the Highway, was met by a Boy that was
in great distress, and begged his charity: For Sir, says he, I cannot help my
self; and I am Fatherless besides: Get you gone you Rogue, says the good natured
Gentleman what do you jeer me: Is that a fault Sirrah? for I would think it a
great happiness that I were Fatherless* For thou grievest for thy Fathers
death, and if thou do think it a great loss to thee, I Will be so charitable
to thee, as to feed thee with good wishes; that is, I wish my Father had
excused thine.

295.
A Gallant had marched in a bitter cold night up and down several streets to get
him a Lodging, but no body would open to him, some perhaps not knowing him, and
some perchance too well: at last he bethought himself of getting a Lodging a
new kind of way, and so went to the Watch at Temple Bar, and there called 'em
all Rogues and other vile names, for which they had him to the Counter; the
next morning he was brought before the Alderman of the Ward, and he said to
him, Methinks you look something like a Gentleman, pray what was the reason to
abuse the Constable and his Watch thus without a cause? Truly Sir, says he, I
will tell you the truth; I had gone from Street to street that bitter night to
get some Lodging, but could find none: at last I thank 'em they brought me to
the Counter, where I had a good ^^re, good Drink, and a good Bed; for which
courtesy I do here give them a Crown: and this I Will assure you Sir was the
cause and nothing else: And so he made his release.

296.
Some Prentices in London, being indeed one Christmas to act a Play, when they
were perfect, they came to a grave Citizen, and desired him to lend them his
Clothes to Act in a Play: No, says he, no body shall play the fool in my Cloths
but my self.

297.
A Gallant thought to put a trick upon one (that he thought simple) before
great Company in a Room, but he proved a subtle Fellow, and as you will find
baffled him. The question was, that he asked him, How old he was? He said ever
since he was born and twenty Weeks before: Then he asked him how he knew that?
Why, says he, that is a question only to be asked of my Mother and the Midwife:
for surely I don't well remember it: Then he asked him how old he was since he
was Christened? He told him he could not tell: Why, says the Gallant, that is
much methinks, for I am sure you were there your self: Yes, says he, I was
there, but I am sure you were not, because you never was at any Christning, not
christened your self; His Father being an Anabap is it.

298.
Two Brothers that were Scholars in one College and Bedfellows, did love the
tossing of the pot so much; that after all their Books weae well sold and
pawned, then went their Cloths; so that they had but one Suit, Hat, Gown, and
Shoes and Stockings: so that one went abroad with the Cloths; and the other lay
a-bed; and so they released each other day by day: at last their Father comes
to Town, and sends for his two Sons; the one came: He asked where his Brother
was? He told him he was to declaim to morrow, and was providing for it: then
the next day the other Brother came, and his Brother took up his quarters in
the Bed: and so they served their Father two or three days; and then he went to
their Chamber privately and knocked, and when he was in, he found the other in
Bed: At last he found the cause and removed them to another Tutor, who looked
better after them.

299.
A Fellow was by the Judge condemned to lose his Ears for Perjury, and after he
had stood long in the Pillory, the Jailor was coming to cut off both his Ears,
and when he went to lay hold on 'em, found nothing but the places where they
had been. What a pox, says the Jailer, you Rogue do you abuse me; to put me to
the trouble and charge to cut off your Ears, and now all is ready you have no
Ears you Dog? Well, says he, I Will go to the Judge (...) thou were condemned
before for Perjury, but now I Will indite thee for Cousenage. Why friend, says
the man, the Order runs that I should lose my Ears: but it does not bind me to
find you Ears to cut off: I think I have done you a courtesy, seeing I have
saved you so much labor.

300.
There Is a Proverb which says, Two heads are better than one; which made a Boy
it seems bid his Father, when he went to buy some Sheep, to take their Dog with
him: For, says he, he that you are to deal withal is a crafty fellow; and
though it is said that two heads are better than one, that is, I think he means
Codsheads, when they are both scarce enough for the company; also if both the
heads be without wit, 'twere better have none.

301.
There Is also a Proverb, which says When the Belly is full, then the Bones
should be at rest. But Mr. Proverb, I think you are mistaken in this; for all
Women that are big bellied, are the most molested with Bones, and they then are
least at rest.

302.
An ingenious young Man that was sent to a Boarding-School to learn Latin and
to Write, and after he had been there more than two years, his Father sent him
a Letter that he should write to him, that he might see how he had profited
both in his Learning and his Writing; and so very Scholastically directs his
Letter to his Father thus, To my most Obedient Father, which is my Mothers
Husband, at the House where they live: Says a Man to him, They will not find the
House by this direction: Puh; says he, no body but knows my Fathers House, for
if I were in the Town I could find it my self and yet I have not been there
this two years. And at the end he subscribed thus, I cease ever to be your
Dutiful Son: and so forth.

303.
Two Oxonians were in a very great dispute there concerning the Man in the
Moon, whether a Gentleman or a Citizen? and after a great deal of Pro's and
Con's between them, one of them solved it thus, that when the Moon was at full,
then there was a Gentleman in her, but when she appeared with two Horns, then
he might be confident there was a Citizen in her; and that they were lunatic
that did not believe it; the Spanish Count de Luna being at that time come to
take a view of Oxford, and to confirm it.

304.
An Imperious Gentlewoman intending to make a great Feast for some of her
Friends and Relations, sent one of her Servants (which formerly had been a
Servitor in Oxford) to invite those Persons to the said Feast; and when he came
back, she asked him what he had done? Madam, says he, I have commanded them all
to come. Why, you impudent Raskal, says she, I commanded you to bid 'em.
Alack-a-day, Madam says he, I wonder your Ladyship should talk so strangely;
having been in the Imperative Mood so long your self, that you should not know,
That to bid and command is all one there. Sirrah I bid you go out of my sight.
Madam, says he, I am at your command; and is not that all one, when your
Ladyship and I so well agree.

305.
One passing by the Watch at Aldgate, says the Watch men, Who Is there? Says he,
Mine Ar -- then they acquainted the Constable with it, for using such unseemly
Language: then says the Worshipful Mr. Constable. How dare you use such a word
to them? O Mr. Constable, says he, are you there? Though I used it to them, I
do confess I dare not to you; for in truth Sir, now I have left mine Ar --
behind me. Well, says the Constable, the next time you do so* I will make you
leave your Sword behind, and instead of casting up your sums with a pen, I
shall make you do it in Counters.

306.
A Frenchman, as I hear, coming late by Ludgate one night; says one of the
Watch to him, Stand and come before the Constable, Begar, says he, that is very
pretty; I cannot stand and come before the Constable too. Stand, I say, says
another, and come before the Constable. At which the Frenchman laughed
heartily, saying, Begar des men be all ingenious, stand and come before de
Constable; at last the Constable appears, Sir, says he, whither are you going?
Begar dat's very pretty too. Mr. Constable I love you very much great deal
well, cause you be so lik^ my Wife; for when I go out a door, she says, Husband
whither are you going? just like you Mr. Constable. Sir says he, Whither are
you going now? Begar Mr. Constable me be going there where you dare not go.
Where Is that? says the Constable. Why begar, says he, to bed to my own Wife
Mark you dat Mr. Constable: an^ st^^ laughed on^ that the Constable to be rid,
as he thought of such impertinency, let him go.

307.
Two Fellows were earing of a large Dish of Porridge together, and being very
hot, they would be a blowing of it; says the other, If you blow any more, I Will
take you a blow of the chops. With that that the other turned about to the Dish,
and let a rousing Fa -- What a pox, says he, if you blow your porridge a that
manner, you shall lap by your self. Hold your tongue, says he, or else I shall
lap your sides.

308.
A widow in Oxford having been long in possession of an Inn called the
Maidenhead there, and as she thought lawfully; but another laying claim to it,
they both went to Law, and her adversary overthrew her; for which she extremely
grieved: then an ancient acquaintance of hers asked her why she grieved so much:
She told him she had lost her Maidenhead. Why, says he; were you never married?
Yes says she, married to him that brought me this Maidenhead, but I could not
keep it: so that now I find there is a Law against keeping of Maidenheads: for I
lost it by Law. Law you now, says he, but I pray let me ask you a question, Did
the loss of this Maidenhead trouble you so much as that before? O says she, I
had rather have lost that twenty times over, than this once: for that
Maidenhead I can show in the house, but the other Maidenhead is gone with the
house; and never to be retrieved again.

309.
Henry Martin the great Rumper, for you know all Martins are Birds, and he
being so, flew so high before; but after the Kings most happy Restoration, was
brought so low, as to kneel at the Bar of the Lords House; though it is thought
he never came into the Lords House before, unless it Were to see a handsome
Girl there: But at the Lords Bar he was asked what he could say, that Judgment
should not pass upon him? My Lords, says he, I understood that the Kings
Proclamation extended to favor of life, upon rendering my self: which I then
did: And withal, my Lords, I do let you to know, and I do ingeniously confess
it, that I never obeyed any of His Majesty's Proclamations before, but this:
and I hope I shall not be hanged for taking the Kings word now.

310.
King James being in his Progress at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, the King finding
it to rain so one morning that he could not ride a Hunting; had got some of the
Nobility and Gentry together, resolving to be merry: And one bumour was, that
the King having that morning a fine curvet^ing Horse given him, which kind of
Horse he never liked in his life; told them, that he that could tell the
greatest lie should have that Horse: So one told one lie, and another another;
and several had told others, that there was great laughing; and just in the
midst of this mirth in comes a Country Fellow, complaining to the King that
some of his Servants had wronged him: 'Well, well, says the King, we'll hear
you of that anon: Come, come hither amongst us, and you must know that he that
can tell the greatest lie shall have that horse Truly Sir, says he an't please
your Grace I never told a lie in all my life: With that says the King, Give him
the Horse, give him the Horse, for I am sure that is the greatest lie that has
been told to day.

311.
Some Oxford Scholars when they did intend to perform that Journey called Iter
Boreale went first to Worcestershire, then-through Shropshire, Cheshire,
Lancashire, Westmoreland and Cumberland, and so to Dumfrees, and then to
Glascow, and having seen the Western parts of Scotland came then toward the
East, viz. To St. Johnsons, Dundee, St. Andrews, Edinbourgh, Dunbar, and
Barwick, and so came into England East-wards: from thence to New Castle,
Durham, York, Hull, and over the arm of the Sea at Hull, which is six miles
broad there, into Lincolnshire, and so to Norfolk: and being in the City of
Norwich at an Inn, and their Money after so long a journey running low: it
seems in the morning the Landlord brought 'em up a saucy Reckoning, which they
perusing shakt their heads, and well they might, for they could not shake their
Purses then: Then says the Landlord to them, Gentlemen I see you are Scholards,
and if you can but tell me how I may be eased of a great trouble which lies
upon me, I will give you a Gallon of Sack. They asked him what is was? He told
'em, he was so infinitely troubled with Rats, that they destroyed most of the
Goods in his House. Well, says the Scholars, bring up your Gallon of Wine, and
we'll give you a remedy for your trouble of the Rats, which if you follow,
we'll warrant you they will never trouble you more: and that is this, The first
thing you must do, is to prepare a great Supper, and then invite all the Rats
you have in the House to that Supper, and in the morning do but bring them up
such a Bill as you have brought to us and if they trouble your House more I Will
be h^^g'^. Well Gentlemen, says he, I see you want Money, I will, if you please
to accept of it, le^d you Five Pound and excu^e you the paying of your Bill
^^ill three months after your arrival into Oxford, and before that time I Will
send my Son to receive that and the Five pound, and do intend he shall stay at
what College you please, but I must have one of you to be his Tutor. And about
six weeks after the Son came, and was admitted into Christs-Church College, of
which College those Iter-borealeans were: of which kindness for the Money lent,
and excusing the Bill, these Scholars made an excellent Copy of Verses, and
sent it to their Landlord in Norwich and Forty Shillings to drink their
Healths, which was done so to the purpose, that they were all fain to be led to
Bed that night.

312.
A Gentleman meeting with one of the Fallow Deer which had strayed out of
Whetson's Park, and so must needs be Fallow, because she followed him to a
House where there were several others in a large Room dancing Country Dances;
and after some Dances, it was his turn to lead up a Dance; she asked him what
Dance he would call? He said, Feeble Robin, which is an old Country Dance. No,
says she, I hate that: Then he told her he would call Mall Stanhopes Delight.
Yes says she, I like that: Well, says she, name some more though: W^ what say
you To go to bed in the dark? Yes, says she, that is well enough too. Then, says
he, what say you to Under and Over? Yes, says she, that I think's best: But
first we'll begin with Mall Stanhopes Delight, and then Go to Bed in the dark,
and at last Under and Over; and so dance them (as the neighbors in our Alley
say) one after another.

313.
An Ingenious Cavalier in Oliver's days, that was a Person of Quality, was then
by the Protectors Order put into the Tower, and after he had been there a
pretty while, says the Lieutenant of the Tower to him, Sir I hope you like your
Cheer well, for I endeavor to provide the best for you I Will assure you: Yes
truly Mr. Lieutenant, says the Prisoner, I do not mislike my fare; but
whenever you see that I do mislike it, then thrust me out adoors, and I shall
be so far from taking it ill from you, that I will think you have done me a
favor in it.

314.
A man that had been a Four years Voyage at Sea, and when he came home, his
dear and Virtuous Wife coming to meet and welcome him home, brought a little
Boy in her Arms of a Twelve month Old; which he preceiving, Umph, says, he: And
Umph, says she, again, you might have come home sooner then: Why, says he, I
came home as soon as my convenience would give me leave: And I, says she, staid
as long as my convenience would give me leave: Well, says he, whose Child is
this? Why mine, says she, and that that is mine is yours, for I can lawfully
call nothing my own but my Ring, Fillet, and Hair-lace, and therefore the Child
is yours; How will you prove it, says he? Why thus, says she, here hold it in
your Arms; and as he took it, Now says she, I freely give it you. Nay now, says
he; I am satisfied, and know it is mine; therefore prithee get it a good Nurse;
for I Will have none of my Children that comes so easily to be Nursed at home.

315.
A dear and Loving wife, that always bore a great respect to her Husband, both
in Sickness and in Health, and now did make it appear to the very last; for
when her dear Husband was in Essex condemned to die, for a small matter, God
knows that is only for stealing four or five Horses, and breaking up as many
Houses: So this sweet loving Soul his wife, hearing where he was, came and gave
him a visit. Wife says he, you see what I am come to now, prithee pray for me,
and have a care to bring up our Children in the fear of God. Husband, says she,
as soon as I heard of it, you see I came to you, and as you know I have always
been loving to you; you shall now find it at the last: Pray Husband tell me,
are we to be at the charge of a Rope or they, for I would have all things ready
that might do you a Kindness: For here I have brought one forty Miles to do you
a Courtesy. And so left the Rope with him. Well Wife, says he, I thank you
heartily, and pray go home and look after the Children: No Husband, says she, I
have not come so far, but a Grace a God I Will see you hanged before I go.

316.
A very great Student, that had written many excellent Books, and one among the
rest was, he had wrote a History of the whole World: This said Student it seems
had lost himself in a Wood, because he took little notice of the Path; being
still in a musing condition: At last being weary, and his Stomach crying
Cupboard also, began very seriously to endeavor to get out of the Wood; and
after he had wandered about a great while, he met by chance with a Country Man
that lived near Oxford and was then going thither to Market (which Country Man
knew him very well) then he desired him to guide him out of the Wood, and he would
give him Six pence, Sir, says he, I do admire very much, that you that have
writ a Tract of the whole World, should not now find the Tract out of this
little Wood? Friend, says he, I think thou art Wood: Sir, says he, if I am mad,
I am not fit to be your guide, but you speak as if you mere in a wood: Yes
faith, says the Student, so I am; and I would fain get out on it if I could.

317.
Another Simple Rumpish Minister, as he was riding one Afternoon to a Parsonage
which he had eight Miles from Oxford, which he used to do every Saturday (that
is if it be fair) to Preach there on Sunday, but if otherwise, then one of the
Junior Fellows in the College, where he was Head, was sent in his room. This
said Minister, se^ing a Boy at Plough in the Fields with Oxen (which it seems
was a smart knave) rid up with his Man to him, and there began to catechize the
Boy notably; and after the Boy had answered him hand-pat to all his questions
(which the Parson admired) Now Sir, says the Boy, I hope you will give me leave
to ask you a Question: Yes, Boy, says he, with all my heart. Pray Sir, says he
(...) tell me who made these O^ (...) says the Parson: Nay that is a lie, says
the Boy, for God made 'em Bulls, but my Father made 'em Oxen. And so drove away
the Plough and whistled on still, that though the Parson asked him many other
questions, yet he took no notice of him, nor did not afford him another word.
Then he and his Man rode away from him. This Story his Man told when he came
home, for which his good Master turned him out a-doors; so kind they were still
to all that told truth,

318.
A Plain Country Fellow, coming to the Market at Brainford one Tuesday, he
cheapned of a Butcher a Shoulder of Mutton; the Butcher told him he would have
Twenty pence for it. Fie, says he, twenty pence, I Will tell you not long since,
you goodman Brown there is a Man in this Town, that is called John Bennet, who
within this Sennet, sold me a Shoulder of Mutton, witness your Neighbor John
Sutton, for no more than fourteen pence; or I wish I may never go hence: Well,
says the Butcher, strait Take it so, for this conceit: Probatum est.

319.
A Gentleman having drank very hard at the King's Head Tavern, came Reeling out
up Chancery Lane, and chanced to Reel within the Rails of the Pump, and kept
his motion round so long that he was tired; whereupon leaning on the Rail, he
asked one that passed by where he was, he told him over against the Chancery: I
thought so (says he) and that is the Reason I think I shall never get out of
this place.

320.
A sturdy Beggar meeting a high Commander of the long Parliament Army (under
whom he was a Soldier) began to beseech his Honors Charity upon a poor
crippl'd Soldier, that had lost his Blood and Limbs in the States Service: The
Officer very gravely answered him, He had not for him: God bless your Honor,
for although you are not in humor to supply my wants at this present, I am ever
bound to pray for your Honor, because you have saved my Life; at which word,
his Honor vouchsafed to look back, and asked him where, and how he had saved
his Life? To which the Beggar replied, Your Honor may Remember, when you fled
into the Saw-pit, I followed you, or else I had stood to, and been Slain, I
thank your good Honor.

321.
Two old Companions (that had not seen each other a great while) met in St.
Paul's Churchyard, who after some little Discourse (had in the Street) agreed
by consent, to go to the Feathers-Tavern, where they sat pecking, from six in
the Evening, till past ten at night, and having in this time drank
sufficiently, one of 'em desired to be gone, urging to him that he knew his
Impediment, viz. He could neither go nor stand when he was Drunk; well, says
the other, and thou know I am Tongue-tied, and cannot speak when I am
fudled; but I believe that one pint more will neither hinder my talking, nor
thy walking: 'faith says the other, if I cannot go thou must lead me: he
answered him, he would, and the the other pint brought both of them to their
Infirmities, so that the one was Lame, and the the other was Dumb, and having
paid the reckoning (about eleven a Clock) the Dumb Man, by the help of the
Drawers, got the Lame Man down stairs, where at the Bar he takes the Lame Man
upon his back, and away he marches with him toward Ludgate, where the Watch
being set, before they came near, they called, Who goes there? Come before the
Constable. So the Dumb Man (unseen by the Watch) set (...) the Lame Man in the
dark by the Prison door upon a Bench, and goes to the Constable, who asked him
what he did out so late? And where he had been? To all which the Dumb Man made
many mouths and signs, but could not answer; the Lame Man in the dark being
troubled to hear his Friend so hardly put to it with Questions, calls out to
the Constable, and tells him, He cannot speak; what says the Constable, is
there more of you? Come you before the Constable and answer, you can speak; but
I cannot go, says the other, with that they went all to him; and he gave them so
sufficient an account of what they were, where they had been, what were their
impediments, and how they got together; that the Constable and Watch laughed
heartily, bidding the Dumb Man take up his Lame Luggage, and march home.

322.
When Dun that kept the Meremaid-Tavern in Cornhill, being himself in a Room
with some witty Gallants, one of them (which it seems knew his Wife) too
boldly cried out in a fantastic humor, I Will lay five pound There Is a Cuckold
in this Company, (...) another.

323.
An old Recorder of a City in this Land was busy with a Country Mayor; in the
mean space they were interrupted by a fellow that was brought before him for
killing a Man: The Recorder asked the Fellow's Name; who answered his Name was
Gilman; said the Recorder, take away G. and thy Name is Ilman, put K. to it,
thy Name is Kilman, and put Sp. to it thy Name is Spilman, thou art half hanged
already, (as the Proverb says) for thou have an ill-name, let a Man vary it how
he can: The Mayor all this while stood by musing at the Recorders canvasing the
Man's Name; and afterward being at home among his own good People, he had an
offender brought before him for getting a Wench with Child, Master Mayor asked
him his Name, the Fellow said, if it please your Worship, my Name is Johnson:
Then Master Mayor (striving to imitate the Recorder) said, Take away G. and thy
Name is Ilman, put K. to it, Thy Name is Kilman, put Sp. to it, thy Name is
Spilman: Thou art a Knave thou have an ill Name, and thou shall be hanged, take
my word for it.

324.
Three Young conceited wits sitting in a Tavern very merry, it chanced that a
grave old Gentleman with a Gray-beard looked into the Room, whom as soon as
they espied, to show their Wit, one saluted him with the name of Father
Abraham, the other with Isaac, and the third with Jacob. I am (said the
Gentleman) neither Father Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob, but Saul the Son of Kish,
who went out to seek his Fathers Asses, and here I find them, and here I leave
them.

325.
A Gentleman being a great distance from his own House, and having very urgent
reasons for his speedy return, rid Post, having Supt, and being in Bed with his
Wife, he said, Dearest, excuse me to Night that I pay not that Tribute due to
our Loves; for I am so weary that I am incapable of doing any thing but sleep:
These Words were none of the most pleasant you may think to a young sanguine
Gentle woman, after a long absence of a lusty Husband. Not long after, walking
in his back-yard with his Wife in his hand, he chanced to see a Cock, he took
great delight in, sitting in the Sun asleep, reject^^^ (...) of his Fruitless
Wives: Prithee sweet Heart (said he) what ails my Cock, that he thus hangs his
Head, and follows not the Hens? Indeed I do not know, Husband, (said she)
unless he has lately ridden Post.

326.
A French man that spoke very broken English, bespoken a dish of Fish, being on
the Table, and seeing but little Pepper, by the Corruption of his
Pronunciation, he called for more Piss instead of Spice, the Woman took away
the Dish, and did as she thought he did bid her, and brought it in again; I
say, said he, a little more Piss, with that she carried it out, and her
Daughter Pist upon it, and then brought it in; but he still cried a little more
Piss; well Sir, said she, I will warrant you shall have enough now, and then
carried it to her Maid, a strapping Girl, but the Frenchman was still
unsatisfied, and cried out for more Piss; Well Sir, let me tell you, I, my
Daughter, and Maidservant have all Pist as much as we can upon it, and if that
will not satisfy you, even Piss upon it your self.

327.
A cheating Monyless Traveller coming to an Inn, sent for a Shoemaker to bring
him choice of Boots: A Shoemaker brings three or four pair, one pair very well
fitted him, being both drawn on, he asked the price, and was told it; but the
Traveller, desired the Shoemaker that he would trust him till that day Seven
night, and he would pay him faithfully; but the Shoemaker said, he was a
stranger to him, and required present payment, or his Boots again: The other
perceiving there was no hopes of prevailing, gets to the Inn-gate discoursing,
and having designed his way, runs quite through the Town, and the Shoemaker
after him, crying out, stop him, stop him, stop him; and some going to stop
him, he cried out to them, Pray do not stop me, we two run a race for a Wager,
Lin Boots, and he in Shoes and Stockings; which the People believing, some
cried, Well run Boots, others, Well run Shoes, and Stockings. Boots wins the
Wager, and it were for a Hundred Pounds. Thus the Poor Shoemaker was run out of
his Boots, and almost out of Wits.

328.
A Wild young man being married to a witty young woman, being a good Houswife
and a Shrew, had but one only Child of a quarter old, by him tenderly beloved.
He would often be drunk, and she as often would maunder with him; and often
threaten to throw his Child into the Pond, the next time he came home drunk:
not many Nights after, she having Inteligence of his drinking with debauched
Companions, she forms a design, bids her Maid carry his beloved Infant to a
Neighbor's House, and laps a Cat very formally in Bed and Blankets, and lays
it in the Cradle; having done, home comes her Husband whom she saluted with a
look like a Storm, and a thundering Speech, and by him as hotly returned; but
she in a frame high Passion, runs to the Cradle, takes out the Cat in her
formalities, and cries, I have often threatened, now I Will be revenged, runs to
the Pond, and flings it in, he after her with, Good dear Wife, save the Child,
but too late: he runs in after it up to the Shoulders in a cold Winters night,
got hold on the Mantle, comes ashore, crying, Oh! my poor Child, lays it before
the Fire, unpins the Blankets, and amazed Puss springs out (...) which made his
Wife laugh heartily. He vowed a Reformation, she warmed his Bed put him on a
dry shirt, sent for the Child home and to bed they went.

329.
A Young Married Woman in Cheapside, in the Morning being a bed, her Husband
being underneath in the Shop selling of his Tinkets below, she was playing her
tricks above; for she trying to put her heal over her Neck: Which being done,
she could not get it back again, but with striving, tumbled off the bed. Her
Husband hearing a great noise above sent up his Prentice, a raw Country Boy, to
see what was the matter, who came down and told his Master, That his Mistress
was bewitched or turned into an Owl; and that she had fallen off the Bed, and
with the fall had gotten a great gash on her shoulder.

330.
A Welsh-man riding with a charge of Money behind him, was set upon by a Thief,
who bad him deliver immediately; or (drawing a Pistol) said, he would make it
bounce through him; says hur so, says the Welsh-man, since hur has hur Money,
let hur hear one pounce for it; for hur never heard the pounce of a Cun. The
good naturd Thief to satisfy the Curiosity of the Welsh-man, (whom he looked on
as a very silly Fellow) discharged his Pistol, which Echoed in many places,
Cuds splutter a nails, says the Welsh-man, it was a gallant Pounce, and there
was many little pounces too; good hur Vrship let hur have one pounce more for
hur money, and hur will be satisfied: So the Thief discharged the other; at
which the Welsh-man seemed better pleased than before, and asked if he had no
more pounces; no said the Thief, I have no more. No (said the Welshman) then
hur has one pounce in store, which hur will make pounce through hur immediately
if hur deliver not hur Money back presently, and so forced the Thief to
re-deliver.

331.
A Young Man Married a cross piece of flesh, who not contented, though her
Husband was very kind, continual complaints to her Father, to the great grief
of both Families; the Husband being no longer able to endure this Scurvy humor,
banged her soundly: hereupon she complained to her Father, who understanding
well the perverseness of her humor, took her to task, and laced her sides
soundly too; saying, go and commend me to your Husband, and tell him I am now
even with him, for I have cudgelled his Wife, as well as he has beaten my
Daug^ters.

332.
A Gentleman who had a Ruby Face, came to a Barber to be trimmed, and asked the
Fellow if he could or durst trim him? The Barber replied, That he learned his
Trade, and kept Shop on purpose, and therefore both could, durst, and would
trim him, if he pleased; but, quoth the Gallant, behold my Face, and the rugg'd
difficulty of Shaving. If you trim me without bloodshed, I will give you ten
Shillings; but if I find you draw Blood, with this Stilletto I will stab you
immediately: The Brisk Barber being more tempted with the rare reward of ten
Shillings, than dismayed by his threatening, undertakes him, and very artfully
trimmed him without bloodshed, and the Gentleman was well pleased; but withal
asked how he durst venture upon him since he was in so much hazard of his Life,
to whom the Barber replied, I had no cause to fear my Life* For if I had
fetched Blood of your Face, before you could have been sensible of it, I would
quickly have let you Blood in the Wind pipe, and secured me from your Stab. The
Gentleman held up his Hands in thanks for his deliverance, and vowed never to
be trimmed upon those Conditions again.

233.
In the beginning of the Spring, when scarce one flower was seen to bud out, a
Scotch Gallant by chance espying a Primrose fairly brown; and going to pluck
it, considered with himself, how much more proper it might be for his Mistress
to gather it with her fair hands, and resolves to entreat her thither; but
fearing it should be plucked in his absence, he covered it with his Hat, and
walks to the Ladies Chamber. In the mean time one passing by, takes up the Hat,
crops the Flower, leaving in the room thereof a Rose of stronger savor, covers
it with the Hat and departs. Presently after comes the Scotch-man leading of
his Lady, expressing the rarity of the Flower, and that 'twas his Fortune to
find it, and that none but her Virgin-hand was fit to pluck it. Whereis this
Flower, quoth she, you so much commend? Here, sweetest Lady, answered he,
carefully covered with my Beaver; and with that (curriously removing on it)
discovers the Flower in a smoking Fragrancy. The Scotch-man blushes, the Lady
rails. What he then thought, or how her dainty Nostrils took it, is left to the
Reader's Conception.

334.
A very honest and prudent Gentleman had the ill fortune to marry a Wife a
grain too light; one day returning home, he went up the stairs, and found his
Chamber door open, entering, he caught his Wife and the Adulterer (who were so
intent upon their sport that they minded nothing else) in the very act; the
Gentleman seemingly unmoved, said, Wife, Wife, Wife, Indeed you don't do well
to expose your own and my reputation thus to the hazard of being lost by
carelessness: Sure in a business, that so nearly concerns us both, you might
have shut the door: I pray consider what if any one else had come and caught
you in this posture; and so went and left them the midness of this reproof so
effectually wrought upon this Woman, that she ever after abhorred the thought
of enjoying any other Man but her Husband.

A PREACHMENT ON MALT.
CErtain Townsmen of Prisal, returning from a merry Meeting at a certain
Alehouse, met in the Fields a Preacher, who had lately made a bitter Sermon
against Drunkards, and among other opprobrious words, called them Malt-worms.
Wherefore they agreed to take him, and by violence compel him to Preach a
Sermon, and his Text should be MALT* The Preacher thinking it better to yield
than contend with them in their cause, began his Sermon as follows.

There is no Preaching without Division-and this Text cannot well be divided
into many parts, because it is but one word, nor into many Syllables, because
it is but one Syllable: It must therefore be divided into Letters, and they are
(...) to be four, viz. M, A, L, T, These letters represent four
interpretations, which Divines commonly do use thus, M. Moral, A. Allegorical,
L. Literal, T. Tropological.

The Moral Interpretation is well put first, and first to teach you boysterious
Men some good manners, at least in procuring your attention to the Sermon;
Therefore M. Masters, A. All, L. Listen, T. to the Text.

An Allegory is when one thing is spoen, and another thing meant; The thing
spoken is Malt, the thing meant is the Oil of Malt, commonly called Ale, which
to you Drunkards is so precious, that you account it to be M. Meat, A. Ale, L.
Liberty, T. Treasure.

The literal sense is as it has been often heard of heretofore, so it is true
acording to the letter, M. Much, A. Ale, L. Little, T. Th(...)

The Tropological sense applies that which now is to somewhat following,
either in this world, or in the world to come the thing that now is, is the
effect which Oil of Malt produces and works in some of you, viz. M. Murder,
in others A. Adultery, in all L. Loose living, in many T. Treason, and that
which hearafter ^oweth, both in this world and in the world to come, is M.
Misery, A. Anguish, L. Lamentation, T. Trouble.

I shall now come to a conclusion, and withal, to pepswade you boysterious men
to amend, that so you may escape the danger wherein to many of you are like to
fall but I have no hopes to prevail, because I plainly see, and my Text as
plainly tells me it is M. to A. that is, a Thousand Pound to a Pot of Ale you
will never mend, because all Drunkards are L. Lewd, T. Thieves, but yet for
discharging my Conscience and duty, First toward God, and Secondly towords you
my Neighbors, I say once again, concluding with my Text, M. Mend, A. All, and
L. Leave, T. Tippling. otherwise, M. Masters, A. All, L. Look for T. Terror and
Torment.

By this time the Ale wrought in the Townsmens Brains that theh were between
Hawk and Buzzard, nearer sleeping than waking, which the Preacher perceiving
stole a way, Leaving them to take their Nap.

FINIS.

