IMPRIMATUR.

C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Martii 26. 1686.
SPECULUM BEATAE VIRGINIS.

A DISCOURSE OF THE DUE PRAISE AND HONOR OF THE Virgin Mary.

By a true CATHOLIC of the Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1686.

THE PREFACE.
THE chief End for which I undertook to make this following Discourse, was to
set before the English Reader a prospect of the Devotions, which the Church of
Rome pays, and allows to be paid to the Blessed Virgin, and to give him thereby
an opportunity of judging, Whether the R. Catholics do indeed no more, than
pray to the Saints in Heaven, as they do to their Brethren upon earth, to pray
for them in the Name, and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

This is the Sum of the late Apologies for Worshipping of Saints, and whether
in reality it be so, or no, among them, I leave the candid, and honest Reader,
of what Religion soever, to judge. They have no reason to be offended at me for
my Undertaking, for if their Devotions to the Virgin be good, and Orthodox, I
have done them, and their Church no dishonor; but if they be not, however I
have done them no wrong: for I have not misrepresented their Prayers, and
Hymns, and Antiphones, nor put any false Colors upon the use of them, but have
presented them, as they are in themselves, and treated those that use them
without any provoking, or reproachful Language; and perhaps many, that at first
sight cannot read such offensive Devotions without Indignation, will think I
have treated the Virgins Votaries too gently, and said rather too little, than
too much.

But what may perhaps justly move their Passions, will not move mine, who am
used to read the Latin Offices, and other allowed Books of Devotion among those
of the Latin Communion, and I think fit also to acquaint the Reader, that I
could have proved from their most Authentic Prayers to other Saints, as well,
as to the Virgin, that they do more, than desire the Saints to pray for them,
Hymn. Beat pastor Petre. in Brev. Romans D. 28. Jan. and alibi. Hymn. Tu natale
solum protege. Brev. Romans in Festo S. Martinae. Antiph. Michael Archangele veni
in adjutorium populo Dei. Brev. Romans in Fest. S. Mich. Hymn. Vt queant laxis.
Brev. Romans in Not. S. J. Bapt. Hymn. Egregie Doctor Paul. Br. Romans Die 29.
Jan. Orat. Deus cujus dextera. Br. Romans D. 6. Jul. Orat Omnipotens, and
misericors Deus. Br. Romans D. 14. Jul. Hymn. Regis superni nuntia. Brev. Romans in
Festo S. Tiresiae. Hymn Placarc Christ Servulis. Br. Romans in Festo omnium
Sanctor. Et Orat. Sempiterne Deus. ibid. Et Hymn. Salutis aeternae dator. ibid.
in tert. Nocturn. Orat. Sacrificium nostrum. Missal. in Fest. S. Andraeae.
as sick men desire the Prayers of the Congregation, as any indifferent person
will be satisfied they do, if he please to consult the Hymns and Prayers cited
in the Margin.

Since I finished this Discourse, I met with another Hymn made of the Te Deum,
to the Blessed Virgin, which is a more exact Transprosal of it, than that I
have cited out of Cardinal Bonaventure.

I shall here set it down, almost verbatim, as I find it translated in a little
Entitled. A Decree of our Holy Father Pope Innocent XI. etc.
book Printed at Oxford, 1678.

We praise thee, O Mary: we acknowledge thee to be the Lady. All the earth does
worship thee: the Mother of the everlasting God. To thee all Angels cry aloud:
the Heavens and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubim, and Seraphim:
continually do cry. Holy, venerable, wonderful: Mother of the Lord God of
Sabbath. Heaven, and earth are full: of the fruitfulness of thy Virginity. The
glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee. The goodly number of the
Prophets: praise thee. The holy Church throughout the world: does acknowledge
thee. The Mother: of infinite Majesty. Thine honorable, true: and only Son.
Conceived by the Holy Ghost: the Comforter. Thou art the Queen of Glory: O
Mary. Thou art the true Mother: of the Son of the Everlasting Father. When he
took upon him to deliver man: thou did afford him thy Virgin-womb. Thy Seed
having overcome the sharpness of death: the Kingdom of Heaven is open to all
believers. Thou sit at the right hand of thy Son: in the glory of the
Mother. We believe, that thou shall come: with thy Son the Judge. We therefore
pray thee help thy Votaries: whom thy Son has redeemed with the precious blood
he had from thee. Make them to be numbered with the Saints of God: in eternal
glory. O Lady save thy people, and bless thy Sons inheritance. Day by day: we
magnify thee. And we worship thy name: ever world without end. Vouchsafe, O
Lady: to keep us this day without sin. O Lady, have mercy upon us: have mercy
upon us. O Lady, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee. O
Mary, in thee have I trusted after God: let me never be confounded.

The Publisher of the forecited Book took the Original of this Hymn, out of a
book written by Melchior Inchofer a Jesuit, which that Father says was sent to
the Messeneses by the Blessed Virgin, and he thinks it was the same, or not
much differing from that, which Pope Paul the Fifth approved, and which the
present Pope has prohibited, and suppressed by a Decree. It is a decree worthy
of his holy Character, and I wish for his honor he had prohibited it as
Impious, or Blasphemous, or Idolatrous, or contrary to the word of God. However
the bare prohibition of it ought to be acknowledged for a good work, and I
beseech Almighty God to pour out the Spirit of Reforming more, and more upon
the Bishop, and Clergy of the Roman Church, that instead of Expounding,
Palliating, and Excusing, they may set themselves in good earnest to Reform,
and amend whatever is amiss, that so the Church, wheresoever dispersed over the
Universal World, may be restored to the truly Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolical Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, and become one undivided
Catholic Communion, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

SPECULUM BEATAE VIRGINIS.
S. LUKE I. 28. And the Angel came in unto Her, and said, Hail, thou that art
highly favored, the Lord is with Thee, Blessed art thou among Women.


THE words of my Text are the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel, unto the Virgin
Mary, when he came to tell her, that God had chosen her to be the Mother of the
Messiah. And that they are words of pure Salutation, and not of Devotion, is
evident from the word (...), Hail, which is a form of Saluting, as may be seen
in those two mock-salutations of our Lord, (...), Hail Master, Hail King of the
Jews; as likewise from the use of the Original word, in Acts 15.23. where it is
said, that the Apostles and Elders wrote Letters, and sent greeting to the
Brethren, in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia.

It is also evident that these are words of mere Salutation, from what the
Evangelist says in the next Verse, that upon hearing of them she was troubled
at his saying, and cast in her mind, what manner of SALVTATION this should be.
It seemed strange to her, that an Angel should appear to her in an Age, when
Visions and Apparitions were grown so rare, and that she should be accosted by
him with a joyful and a gracious Salutation, which was so much above the humble
opinion she had of her self. Her modesty increased her wonder, and in a mixture
of fear and surprise together, she began to think within her self, what the
meaning of the Salutation might be, whither it would tend, and what the Angel
had to say unto her. She was very solicitous betwixt hope and fear, to know
what message he had to deliver, after his kind Salutation, and while she was
musing what it might be, he said unto her, Fear not Mary, for thou have found
favor with God, and behold thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a
Son, and shall call his name Jesus; He shall be great, and shall be called the
Son of the Highest; And the Lord shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David, and he shall Reign over the house of David for ever, and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end.

These are the words of the Annunciation or Message of the Angel, but I shall
keep strictly to the words of his Salutation. And in treating of them I shall
show,

1. That there is nothing in their signification so peculiar to the B. Virgin,
but that they might have been used by the Angel, in saluting any other
Righteous and Holy person.

2. That the B. Virgin, to whom the Angel spoke then, was a very Holy person.

3. That she ought to be honored, and celebrated, and praised for her great
Holiness, and for being chosen to be the Mother of God.

4. That in honoring her we must take care that we do not honor her too much,
or express the honor we have for her in such a manner as is not competible to
a Creature.

1. First then I shall show that the words of the Salutation have nothing so
peculiar in their signification, but that they might have been used by the
Angel in saluting any other Righteous person.

Thus for the Original word (...), which we render Hail, and the Vulgar Latin
Ave, it was, as I have already shown, a common form of Saluting among the Jews;
and it farther appears to have been so from the second Epistle of S. John, ver.
10, 11. where the Apostle forbidding to salute any man that denies Christ to
be come in the Flesh, says, (...), say not Hail unto him; nec ave dixeritis,
says the Vulgar Translation, bid him not God speed; (...), qui enim dicit illi
Ave, for he that says Hail unto him, or he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.

Thus God and Angels, when they speak with men, use the phrases, and speak with
the tongues of men. And so for that expression, The Lord is with thee, or as it
might be rendered, the Lord be with thee, it is the very form of speech in which
Boaz saluted the Reapers, Ruth 2.4. And Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto
the Reapers, The Lord be with you, and they answered him, The Lord bless thee.

And so for that phrase (...), blessed art thou, or blessed be thou, among
women, we have the very same form of speech in Judges 5.24. (...), Blessed be
Jael among women, the wife of Heber, blessed shall she be above women in the
Tent. So Boaz said unto Ruth, Ruth 3.10. (...), Blessed be thou of the Lord my
Daughter. And so 1 Samuel 25.33. says David unto Abigal, (...), blessed art thou
which have kept me from shedding of blood. And so said Elizabeth unto the B.
Virgin, ver. 42. of this Chapter, (...), blessed art, or blessed be thou among
women, and blessed is, or blessed be the fruit of thy womb.

From all which I think it is plain, that all these expressions, Hail, The Lord
is with thee, and blessed art thou amongst women, are not peculiar, but common
forms of speech, which were used in common conversation among the Jews.

And then for that word (...), thou that art highly favored, the Verb from
whence this Participle does come, is used by S. Paul, Ephesians. 1.6. where it is
written, to the praise and glory of his grace, wherein (...), he has made us
accepted in the beloved. The Vulgar Latin has it, in qua gratificavit nos,
wherein he has made us accepted. And accordingly Theophylact says, that (...)
in my Text, is explained by that expression, ver. 10. (...), thou have found
favor with God, or thou have obtained favor of God. Now in this sense of the
word, as it signifies favored or accepted, S. Paul does in effect say, in the
forecited place, that every true and faithful believer is (...), favored and
accepted by God, or dear and acceptable to him in Christ. And this observation
concerning the dearness and acceptableness of all true believers unto God, is
very agreeable to what our Lord replied to him who told him, that his Mother
and his Brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him. Our Savior says
unto him, Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? And then stretching forth
his hands toward his Disciples, he said, Behold my Mother and my Brethren, for
whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, (the same is
highly favored) the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

Wherefore there is nothing in this signification of (...), that might hinder
an Angel from using it in saluting any true Disciple of Christ; especially if
he were sent to give him notice of some particular favor, that God intended to
bestow upon him, upon the special account whereof he might be said to have
found favor with God. Thus Noah was (...), as we read Genesis 6.8. He above all
mankind found grace, or favor, in the eyes of the Lord, when he resolved to
destroy the world. It is in the Greek Translation, (...), which is the very
phrase that Gabriel used to the Virgin, ver. 30. for thou have found favor
with God. So Abraham was (...), or highly favored of God, because he of all
mankind was chosen to be the Father of the faithful, and was called the friend
of God. So Lot was (...), or highly favored, because God only spared him and
his when he destroyed Sodom; and therefore says he unto God, in this very
phrase which Gabriel used unto the B. Virgin, Behold thy servant has found
grace in thy sight, Genesis 19.19. So also Moses was (...), because he of all the
Hebrews was chosen to be the deliverer of Israel, and the Mediator of the Old
Testament, and had the special privilege of speaking to God, as a man does to
his friend face to face. Upon which account he said unto him in this very
phrase in which his Angel spoke unto the B. Virgin; I know thee by Name, and
thou have found grace in my sight, Genesis 33.12, 17.

The like might be said of many other Saints, as well as of the B. Virgin; and
accordingly S. Paul, who of a Persecutor of the Church, had the honor to be
chosen the Apostle of the Gentiles, said 1 Cor. 15.10. by the grace or favor
of God I am that I am. And therefore the title of (...), thou that art highly
favored, as it is explained by (...), have found or obtained favor, has
nothing in its signification so singular to the B. Virgin, but that it may be
applied to any other Saint, who has received any special favor or honor from
God.

But then there is another acceptance of (...), as the Verb (...) comes from
(...), in that signification wherein it is taken for Virtue or Grace; and in
this sense it may be rendered, thou that art very gracious. And so it is rendered
by the Vulgar Latin, Ave gratia plena, Hail thou that art full of grace, or
virtue. And in this signification also there is nothing peculiar and singular
in it, but what in equivalent terms has been spoken of other Saints, as well
as of the B. Virgin.

Thus it was said of Noah, that he was a just man and perfect in his
generation, Genesis 6.9. And when God called him into the Ark, he said unto him,
Come thou and all thy house into the Ark, for thee have I seen righteous before
me in this generation. I suppose if the Angel had said to the B. Virgin, Hail
thou that art righteous before God, and perfect in thy generation, it would
have been every jot as Emphatical, as to say, Ave gratia plena, Hail thou that
art full of grace, and as good an Argument to the full, to prove that she was
free from sin. So the Lord himself gave this testimony of Job, chap. 2.3. That
he was a perfect and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, and
that there was none like him in the Earth; which, considering who it was that
spoke it, I think implies as much innocence and perfection, as Ave gratia
plena, out of the mouth of an Angel, Hail thou that art very gracious, or thou
that art full of grace. So it is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, that they
were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord blameless, ver. 6. of this Chapter. And so an Angel of the Lord
gave this character of his Son John the Baptist, that he should be great in the
sight of the Lord, and be filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb,
Ver. 15. So it is written of the Holy Martyr Stephen, that he was full of
Faith, and of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6.5. which I think is a phrase of as much
importance as to be full of grace; and might justify the speaking as high
things of these Saints, as in reason can be said of the B. Virgin, to whom the
Angel said in common terms of Salutation among the Jews, Hail, thou that art
highly favored, or full of grace, the Lord is with thee, Blessed art thou
amongst women.

Having now showed that there is nothing so peculiar in the Angels Salutation,
but that he might have said the like to any other righteous person, I proceed
to show,

2. That the B. Virgin whom he Saluted in the foregoing words, was a very holy
person; as may be shown First in general; and Secondly in particular, from the
History of the Annunciation, as it is set forth in this Chapter.

1. First then, it may be showed in general, that she was a very holy person
from the word (...), whether it be rendered, Thou that art highly favored, or
Thou that art full of grace. It is not to be imagined that an Angel should be
sent from God, to give such a Title to any man or woman, but who was a Saint of
the first rank. But it is much more evident that she was such an one from the
matter of his Message, or Annunciation, which was to tell her, that she should
conceive and bring forth Jesus the Savior of the World; and that the Holy
Ghost to that end should come upon her, and the power of the Highest overshadow
her; and that the Holy Child which should be born of her, should be the Son of
God. Certainly the Holy Ghost would come upon none but a pure Saint; he that
affects the Symbols of Innocence and Purity, in all his appearances, and cannot
enter into a malicious Soul, nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto sin,
would not have come in that manner and for that mighty purpose, upon any
Daughter of Adam, but who had cleansed her self from all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit, and perfected holiness in the fear of God, Nay, God the Father, who
was to prepare a body for his Eternal Son, as it is written, a Body have thou
prepared me, would not form it of the substance of a sinful Woman, but his own
essential Holiness, as well as the mysterious decency of the Dispensation would
prompt him to form it of the substance of one, that like the Kings Daughter in
the Psalm, was all glorious within, and a pure and spotless Virgin, both in
Body and Mind. We may be also assured from the holiness of God the Son, the
Eternal Word of the Father, that he would not take upon him the Seed of
Abraham, but of one of the genuine Daughters of Abraham; nor deign to be
conceived in the womb of any Woman, but of such an one, who was a vessel of
Honor, in whom the Spirit of God did dwell, and whose very Body was the Temple
of the Holy Ghost.

She that was the Mother of God could not but be a very good Woman; She that
conceived, and bare, and brought forth the Holy Child Jesus, the Virgin Mother
of Immanuel, of whom the Prophet wrote as he was inspired, surely must have
been pure as he was pure, and holy as he was holy.

For to use the Apostles phrase in another sense, the fullness of the Godhead
could not dwell bodily in a wicked woman; nor could she be deceived and led
away by the Serpent, whose Seed was to bruise the Serpent's head.

Nay to be chosen for the Mother of God, was the greatest honor and favor
that ever God conferred upon any humane creature. None of the special honors
and favors that he did to any of the Saints before or since, are equivalent to
the honor of being the Mother of God. And therefore we may be sure that God,
who said, them that honor me I will honor, would not have done so great an
honor to any daughter of Abraham, but to one who best deserved it, to one of
the holiest among the daughters of Israel, to the most heavenly minded Virgin
of the Tribe of Judah, and the Royal house of David; who had no superior for
holiness upon earth.

If we had no particular account of her graces, we might rationally conclude
all this of her from the history of our Lord's Incarnation; for nothing less
than Superlative holiness could receive such a Testimony of Divine honor from
the Holy Trinity. She was as it were the Spouse of God, Co-Parent with him of
the wonderful Immanuel, who was God and man, God of the substance of the
Father, begotten before the worlds, and Man of the substance of his Holy Mother
born in the world; perfect God and perfect Man, and yet not Two, but one Christ.

2. But then in the Second place, we have a particular account of many of those
eminent graces which adorned her, in the Annunciation of the Angel, as it is
related by S. Luke. As first of her Chastity, she was a Virgin, ver. 27. one
that knew not a man, ver. 34.

Such a pure Virgin as was foretold by the Prophet, who said a Virgin shall
conceive a son, Isa. 7.14. a Virgin in mind as well as body, such a Virgin as
never looked upon a man to lust after him, an entire Virgin, who was all purity
within as well as without, who never cherished unclean thoughts, nor let them
grow into unchaste desires, but stifled the beginnings of Lust in its first
motions, keeping her Body as the Sanctuary or holy place, and her Soul as the
holiest of holies, and herself fit both in Body and Soul, to be the habitation
of the Holy Ghost, and a Tabernacle for the Son of God. Secondly, we have an
account of her great Modesty, and Humility, which put her into great disorder
at the Salutation of the Angel, when she saw him, she was troubled at his
saying, and wondered what the meaning of his Salutation should be. She had
nothing of the Pharisee in her, as doubtless many other Virgins had, who would
upon such an Address have presently concluded in favor of their holiness, that
it was so great and eminent above the holiness of other Virgins, that they
deserved that peculiar honor of God. But she on the contrary was so very
humble, that she was all blush without, and confusion within, at the appearance
and complement of the Angel. She wondered what should move God to send one of
the Seven Spirits that attend upon his Throne to visit her, she wondered what
should incline him to honor her so much, and why the Angel should speak unto
her as unto an holy person, and the favorite of Heaven. She had a greater
sense of her humane imperfections and infirmities, than of her virtues; and in
so mean and humble an opinion of herself could not imagine, why she should be
blessed and praised above those of her own Sex.

So also in her Magnificat, which she delivered upon the Salutation of her
Cousin Elizabeth, she admires and adores the infinite condescension of God to
her low Estate. And truly the signal honor which God did her, in choosing her
for the Mother of his Son, is an argument according to the Scriptures, that she
was lowly in Mind, as well as low in Fortune. For God resists the proud, but
he gives grace, (which is an Hebrew phrase for showing favor) unto the lowly,
says Solomon, Prove. 3.34. And says the Prophet Isaiah, 57.15. Thus says the
high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in
the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the hearts of the contrite
ones. And this being the usual method of God's proceeding with the Sons of Men,
we may conclude that the Virgin Mary was a very meek and humble Maid, because
God exalted her above her fellows.

The Third eminent Grace, which we find in the Blessed Virgin, was her Faith,
which was every way as great as that of the Father of the Faithful, who being
not weak in Faith, says the Apostle, Rom, 4.17, etc. considered not his own
body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness
of Sarahs womb, but against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the
father of many nations, not staggering at the promise of God, who can quicken
the dead, and call those things which be not as though they were. In like
manner the Blessed Virgin, after the Angel had told her, that the power of the
Highest should come upon her, staggered not at the Promise of God through
unbelief, but was strong in Faith, being fully persuaded, that what he had
promised, he was able to perform. She knew that he who formed Adam of the
ground, and Eve of one of the Ribs of Adam; was also able to form the body of
his Son of her Substance; and therefore though she knew not a man, she said
unto the Angel, Behold, the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to
thy word. She knew it was most reasonable to rely on the word of Omnipotence,
and essential truth, and in this She is commended above Zacharias, who did not
believe the message of the Angel, when he told him that his wife Elizabeth
should bear him a Son. He objected that he was an old man, and his wife well
stricken in years, forgetting that Sarah her self received strength to conceive
Isaac, when she was past age; and therefore the Lord struck him with dumbness,
because he believed not his words.

But though we read of no other Graces in her, yet we may be sure she had all
the rest, that could render her righteous and acceptable in the sight of God.
There must needs have been a noble Structure erected, upon such a foundation of
Humility, Purity, and Faith; when these led up the dance, we may be sure the
whole Chore of moral Virtues followed after. And therefore in the Third place,

3. It is our duty, who have the benefit of her example, to honor and
celebrate her Name, and commemorate her Virtues, and set forth her praises, in
whom there was a concurrence of so many divine Virtues, such a strong Faith,
such abasing Humility, such pure Chastity, and all other Graces in as much
perfection, as was consistent with humane frailty.

So Divine, so Righteous a person ought to be had in everlasting remembrance,
and blessed among Women from generation to generation. We ought not to mention
her name without honor, her Name, which ought to be like precious ointment,
wheresoever the Gospel is preached, and written in the biggest, and most
conspicuous character in the Diptychs of the Church.

If the Names of other Saints are distinguished with Miniature, Here Is ought to
shine with Gold. Especially if we consider that She, of all the
Virgin-daughters of Israel, had the honor to be chosen by the Holy Trinity for
the Mother of God. What shall be done to the Woman, whom the King of Kings
delights to honor. Certainly if we should hold our peace, and refuse to
praise her among Women, the stones of the Church would cry out, the stone shall
cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. If what
the woman did, who poured forth a box of precious ointment upon the head of our
Savior, was to be spoken of for a memorial of her, wheresoever the Gospel
should be preached throughout the whole world; surely that most B. Virgin, who
had the honor to bring forth, and breed up the Son of God, ought to have a
Festival and be mentioned with all due reverence, and esteem, in all the
Churches of the Saints. Wheresoever the Gospel is preached, that which she has
done and suffered for our Lord ought to be spoken of, for a memorial of her,
from whom he took that very body, which was crucified, and that precious blood,
which was shed for the remission of our sins.

4. But then in the Fourth place, though we ought to honor her, and have
honorable thoughts, and make honorable mention of her, yet we ought to take
care, that we do not honor her too much, in thinking and speaking more highly
of her, than we ought to think and speak of an humane Creature. Indeed there is
a particular respect due unto her, upon the account of her eminent Graces, and
as she is the Mother of God. And so we find her Cousin Elizabeth treated her,
with a particular respect under that Character, whence is this to me, that the
Mother of my Lord should come unto me? But then we must not let our respect for
her commence into Worship, nor Romance her into a Deity, because it was her Lot
to be that Happy Virgin of whom Christ was Born. We must not treat her upon the
account of her singular Relation to Immanuel, as if she were an Infinite
Majesty, or as if her graces were indeed Divine Attributes, Epist Dedicat. to
the Contemplations of the V. Mary.
and her prerogatives of Grace and Glory, as a late book asserts, one and the
same with those of her Son. We ought not to pay such Homage and Veneration to
her under the Character of the Queen, as is only due to the King of Heaven, but
we must carefully keep our respects to her Person and Memory within due bounds
and limits, lest transgressing herein, we should fall into those unwarrantable
excesses and abuses, which a great part of Christendom is too justly chargeable
with.

And that I may not be accused of charging so great and considerable a number
of our Fellow Christians wrongfully, or of saying what I cannot prove, I shall
spend the remainder of my pains in showing, how extravagant the Votaries of the
B. Virgin have been, and still are, in her Commendations, and Praises, and in
the Honor which they pay, and the Devotions which they offer up unto her: And
Secondly, in making a short Application of the whole discourse.

1. I shall show how extravagant the Votaries of the Blessed Virgin are, both
in word and deed, in the Honors which they pay unto her, out of the Offices of
the Latin Church, and the Ancient and Modern approved Authors of her Communion,
who speak such extravagant things of her, as in reality are a Dishonor to her,
and a diminution of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

To begin with the Offices of the Latin Church; in the form of Absolving a
Penitent, in the Ritual the Priest concludes with these words, Passio Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, merita B. Mariae Virginis, and omnium Sanctorum, quicquid
boni feceris, and mali sustinueris, sint tibi in remission^m peccatorum,
augmentum gratiae, and praemium vitae aeternae, Amen.
The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the B. Virgin Mary, and
all Saints, all the good thou have done, and the evil thou have suffered, be
unto thee for remission of sins, increase of grace, and the reward of Eternal
Life, Amen. So in many of her Offices there are these following Prayers. Beata
matter, gloriosa Regina mundi, intercede pro nobis ad Dominum. Offic. B. M. in
Sabbato. and Offic. parv. B. Mariae.
O blessed mother, and glorious Queen of the world, intercede for us unto the
Lord, and Sub tuum praesidium confugimus, sancta Dei Genetrix, nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera
nos semper, Virgo gloriosa and benedicta. Offic. parv. B. M.
we fly unto thy protection, and safeguard, O holy mother of God, despise not
our Prayers in our necessities, but always deliver us from all dangers, O
glorious and Blessed Virgin. I think this is something more than to desire her
to pray for us, as we do the faithful upon earth, through the merits of Jesus
Christ. And so is the Hymn, Ave maris stella, which I shall render in the
following words, Hail Star of the Sea, Ave maris stella,
Dei Matter alma,
Atque semper Virgo,
Foelix coeli porta.
Sumens illud ave
Gabrielis ore
Funda nos in pace,
Mutans Hevae nomen.
Solve vincla reis,
Profer lumen caecis,
Mala nostra pelle,
Bona cuncta posce.
Monstra te esse Matrem,
Sumat per te preces
Qui pro nobis natus
Tulit esse tuus.
Virgo singularis,
Inter omnes mitis,
Nos culpis solutos
Mites fac and castos,
Vitam praesta puram
Iter para tutum,
Vt videntes Jesum
Semper collaetemur.
Sit laus Deo Patri,
Summo Christo decus,
Spiritui Sancto,
Tribus honor unus. Amen.
Offic. B. M. in Sabbato and alibi.
and nursing mother of God, perpetual Virgin, and blessed gate of Heaven, Thou
that receivest the Salutation, which was spoken by the mouth of Gabriel, and
changest the name of Eve, loose the bonds of guilty sinners, enlighten the eyes
of the blind, drive away all evils from us, and ask all good things for us.
Show that thou art the Mother of Christ, and let him who was born of thee for
us, and vouchsafed to be thy Son, receive our prayers, through Thee, O most
excellent, and humble Virgin; make us humble, and chaste, and free from the
bonds of our sins; give us purity of life, and grant us a safe passage into the
next World, that we attaining the Beatisick Vision of Jesus, may rejoice with
everlasting joy. Praise be given to God the Father, glory to Christ the
Sovereign Lord, and to the Holy Ghost, to all three be one honor. Amen.

You see they pray unto her here, as unto an Author and Donor of Spiritual
Blessings, and remind her of her power and influence over her Son. And so in
another Hymn, they remind him of whom he took his Body, Memento rerum Conditor
Nostri quod olim corporis
Sacrata ab alvo Virginis
Nascendo sormam sumpsti,
Maria Matter gratiae,
Dulcis parens clementiae,
Tu nos ab host protege
Et mortis hora suscipe.
Jesu tibi sit gloria,
Qui natus es de Virgin,
Cum Patre and almo Spiritu,
In sempiterna secula. Amen.
Off. parv. B. M.
and then pray unto her, in the following manner, Remember O Creator of all
things, that thou formerly tookest the shape of our Body, by being born of the
holy womb of the Virgin. O Mary Mother of Grace, and sweet parent of mercy,
protect us from the Enemy, and receive us in the hour of Death. Glory be to
thee, O Jesus, who wast born of the Virgin, with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit. Amen.

So in another Hymn they invoke her thus; O Gloriosa Virginum,
Sublimis inter sydera,
Qui te creavit, parvulum
Lactente nutris ubere.
Quod Heva tristis abstulit
Tu reddis almo germine;
Intrent ut astra flebiles
Coeli recludis cardines.
Tu Regis alti janua,
Et aula lucis fulgida,
Vitam datam per Vioginem,
Gentes redempta plaudito.
Jesu sit tibi gloria, etc. Ibid.

O Glorious Virgin, who art aloft among the Stars, thou nursedst thy Creator
with the milk of thy Dugs, thou restorest unto us by the holy Branch, what Eve
took from us, thou openest the Gates of Heaven, that penitents might enter in,
thou art the Gate of the great King, the bright Palace of light. O redeemed
Nations express your joy for the life that is given by the Blessed Virgin.
Glory be to thee O Jesus, etc.

One of the Lessons for the Saturday-Office of the B. Virgin begins thus;
Amplectamur Mariae vestigia, fratres mei, and devotissima supplicatione beatis
illius pedibus provolvamur. Teneamus eam, nec dimittamus donce benedixerit
nobis. Potens est enim, etc. Mense Oct. Sermon. Bernardi Abbatis.
My Brethren, let us embrace the footsteps of Mary, let us throw our selves at
her feet, with most devout supplication; let us hold her fast, and not let her
go, till she bless us, for she is powerful, etc.

And in another Office there is this Prayer; Precibus and meritis B. Mariae
semper Virginis, and omnium sanctorum parducat nos Dominus ad regnum coelorum.
Amen. Offic. parv.
The Lord bring us all unto the Kingdom of Heaven, by the merits and prayers of
the perpetual Virgin Mary, and all the Saints. Amen.

In the Saturday-Office there is also this solemn prayer of Intercession to
her; O Beata Dei Genetrix Maria, virgo perpetua, templum Domini, sacrarium
Spiritus Sancti; sola sine exemplo placuisti Domino nostro Jesu Christo: Ora
pro populo, i^erveni pro Clero, intercede pro devoto foemineo sexu.
O Mary, Blessed Mother of God, perpetual Virgin, Temple of the Lord, sanctuary
of the Holy Ghost; Thou only without example, wast pleasing to our Lord Jesus
Christ: Pray for the people, mediate for the Clergy, and interceed for the
devout female Sex. And then follows this prayer unto God; Concedo nos famulos
tuos, quaesumus Domine Deus, perpetua mentis and corporis sanitate gaudere, and
gloriosa B. Mariae, semper Virginis, intercessione, a praesenti liberari
tristitia, and aterna perfrui latitia, Per Dominum.
We beseech thee O Lord God grant, that we thy servants may enjoy perpetual
soundness of body, and mind, and by the glorious intercession of the blessed
and perpetual Virgin, may be delivered from our present sorrow, and enjoy
everlasting comfort. Through our Lord.

In the Office for the Festival of her Conception, there is this Antiphone; Cum
jucunditate conceptionem B. Mariae celebremus: ut ipsa pro nobis intercedat ad
Dominum J^sum Christum. Breviar. Romans
Let us celebrate the Conception of the B. Virgin with joy, that she may
interceed for us with Jesus Christ. And this address in Versicle and Answer;
Foelix namque es sacra V. Maria, and omni land dignissima: Quia ex te ortus
est sol justitiae Christus Deus noster. Ora pro Populo, interveni pro Clero,
intercede pro devoto foemineo sexus, sentiant omnes tuum juvamen quicunque
celebrant tuam sanctam conceptionem, ibid.
For thou art blessed O holy Virgin, and worthy of all praise, because Christ
our God the Son of righteousness rose out of thee. O pray for the People,
mediate for the Clergy, intercede for the devout female sex, and let all those
who celebrate thy holy conception feel thy help.

In the Office of S. Mary ad Nives there is this versicle and answer, Verse.
Dignare me lauda ^^tesacrata Virgo. Da mihi virtutem contra hosts tuos. Fest.
S. Mar ad Nives.
make me worthy to praise thee, O holy Virgin, R. And give me power against thy
enemies. And then follows this Antiphone; Sancta Maria succurre miseris, juva
pusillanimes, refove flebiles, ora pro populo -- sentiant omnes tuum juvam^n
quicunque celebrant tuam sanctam festivitatem. Ibid,
O holy Mary, succor them that are miserable, help them that are weak hearted,
comfort those that are sorrowful, pray for the people, -- and let those who
celebrate thy holy Festival become sensible of thy help.

In the second day of the Octave of her Nativity, there is this Prayer, or
Lesson. O B Maria quis tibi digne valeat jura gratiarum, ac laudum praeconia
rependere, quae singulari tuo assensu mundo succurris perdito? Quas tibi lauds
fragilitas humani generis persolvat, quae solo tuo commercio recuperandi aditum
invenit? Accipe itaque quascunque exiles, quascunque meritis tuis, impares
gratiarum ictiones: Et cum susceperis vota, culpas nostras orando excusa.
Admit nostras preces intra sacrarium exauditionis, and reporta nobis
antidotum reconciliationis, ibid.
O B. Mary, who can sufficiently give thee praise, and thanks, who by thy
singular assent did succor the world when it was undone? what praises
sufficient can frail mankind pay unto thee who have found a way of recovery,
only by thy commerce with God? We therefore pray thee, receive our
Thanksgivings how mean soever they be, and unequal to thy merits, and when thou
shall receive our Devotions, excuse our faults by praying. O admit our prayers
within the Sanctuary of thy audience, and bring back, unto us the antidote of
reconciliation.

What is meant in this Prayer by her succouring the world when it was undone,
by her assent, I cannot tell, unless her acceptance of God's offer to be the
Mother of Jesus, be to be understood by it, as a late The Contemplations, p.
60, 64, 66.
Book makes me think it is, which says that God referred the execution of his
Sons Incarnation to her acceptance, and thereby admitted her to a consultive
and decisive suffrage in his Counsels.

But to proceed; the next lesson is a Prayer of the same strain, in the
following words; Sit per te excusibile quod per te ingerimus, fiat impetrabile,
quod fida mente poscimus. Accipe quod offerimus, redona quod rogamus, excusa
quod timemus: quia tu es spes unica peccatorum. Per te speramus veniam
delictorum, and in te beatissima nostrorum est expoctatio praemiorum. Sancta
Maria succurre miseris, etc. Brev. Romans
Let every thing be excused which we bring unto God by thee, and let us obtain
whatsoever we ask with a faithful mind. Accept that we offer, give that we ask,
and pardon that we fear: because thou art the only hope of sinners. We hope for
the pardon of our offenses by thee, and in thee is the most blessed expectation
of our reward, O holy Mary, succor those that are miserable, uphold those that
are faint-hearted, comfort those that weep, pray for the people, and so forth
as above recited. And if this be not to derogate from the merits and mediation
of our Lord, I know not what is.

In the Advent Sundays, this is a common Collect; Deus, qui de B. Mariae
Virginis utero, Verbum tuum, Angelo nunciante, carnom suscipere voluisti:
praesta supplicibus tuis, ut qui vere eam genetricem Dei credimus, ejus apud to
intercessionibus adjuvemur, Missal. Romans
O God, who by the Annunciation of an Angel, would have thy eternal Son
assume flesh, of the substance of the blessed Virgin Mary, grant to us thy
supplicants, that we who truly believe her to be the Mother of God, may be
helped by her intercession with thee.

In the second Sunday after the Epiphany, there is this Prayer; Haec nos
Communio, Domine, purget a crimine; and intercedente B Virgin Dei genetrice
Maria coelestis remedii faciat ejus consories. ibid.
O Lord let this Communion cleanse us from sin, and make us partakers of the
heavenly remedy, by the intercession of the B. Virgin Mary the Mother of God.

In the Mass of her Assumption, there is this Prayer; Subveniat, Domine, plebi
tuae Dei genetricis oration: quam etsi pro condition carnis migrasse
cognoscimus, in coelesti gloria apud te pro nobis intercedere sentiamus, per
eundem, etc. ibid.
O Lord let the Prayer of the Mother of God help thy people, and although we
know she died, and was carried hence, yet let us perceive that she intercedes
for us in heaven, by the same our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the proper Mass of her Seven Sorrows, she is called, Coeli Regina, and
matter mundi -- ibid.
The Queen of heaven, and Lady of the world, and what that signifies you shall
have from a late Author, who says that Epist. Dedicat* to the Contemplations.
Kings are the most noble Images of God's Majesty in the visible world, and
Christian Queens the Representatives of the mother of Jesus; according to which
comparison it follows, that as the Queen is in privilege, power, authority,
greatness and prerogative to the King of an earthly Kingdom, so the B. Virgin
is to God the King of Heaven, and Sovereign Lord of the world.

And therefore it is no wonder, that in the solemn Hymn, which begins, In missa
propria de 7. doloribus. -- Eja Matter fons amoris,
Me sentire vim doloris
Fac ut tecum lugeam.
Fac ut ardeat cor meum
In amando Christum Deum
Vt sibi complaccam --
-- Fac me v^re tecum flere,
Crucifixo condol^re,
Don ^ego vixero --
-- Fac me plagis vulnerari
Cruce hac inebriari
Ob amorem Filii.
Inflammatus and accensus,
Per te V. sim defensus,
In die judicii.
Fac me cruce custodiri,
Morte Christi praemuniri,
Confoveri gratia.
Quando corpus morietur,
Fac ut animae donetur,
Paradisi gloria. Amen.

Stabat Matter dolorosa, they as solemnly pray unto her to make them sensible of
her sorrows, to make their hearts burn with the love of Christ, and to imprint
his wounds upon them; to enable them to weep with her, and condole the
crucified Jesus, to be wounded with his wounds, and inebriated with the love of
him, and to defend them in the day of judgment. They also pray her, to keep
them by the Cross, to fortify them by the death of Christ, to cherish them
with her favor, and to grant that when their Souls depart from their Bodies,
they may go into the glory of Paradise. And then solemnly say, Amen.

In another Mass they have this prayer; Deus, qui per gloriosissimam Filii tui
Matrem, ad liberandos Christi sideles a potestate Paganorum, nova Ecclesiam
tuam prole amplificare dignatus es: Praesta quaesumus, ut quam pie veneramur
tanti operis institutricem, ejus pariter meritis and intercessione a peccatis
omnibus and captivitate Daemonis liberemur. Per cundem Dominum. Missa B. V. M.
de Mercede.
O Lord, who by the glorious Mother of thy Son have vouchsafed to enlarge thy
Church, with a new offspring, to free the faithful in Christ from the power of
Pagans; grant we beseech thee, that we who worship the Foundress of so great a
work may be delivered, as well by her merits, as her intercession, from all our
sins, and the captivity of the Devil, by the same our Lord.

In the Mass of her Name there is this Collect; Deus qui gloriosam Matrem tuam
Mariam nominari voluisti: concede quaesumus, ut qui dulce Maria nomen
implorant, perpetuum sentiant tuae benedictionis effectum, Qui vivis and
regnas. Missa de Nomine B. V. M.
O God, who would have thy glorious Mother named Mary, grant we pray thee,
that those who implore her sweet name, may find the perpetual effect of thy
benediction, who live and reignest, etc.

In the sixth of the Octave of her Nativity, one Lesson begins thus; De Maria
accipitur (liccat mihi dicere) quod scriptum est de Ecclesia: Relinquet homo
Patrem suum, and Matrem suum, and adhaerebit uxori suae: and erunt duo in carne
una. Lect. 6. in secundo Nocturno Brev. Roman.
I may say that that which is written of the Church may be understood of Mary;
A man shall leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they shall
be two in one flesh.

And accordingly in the Lesson for the Festival of her Assumption, and the
Octaves thereof, they apply all that is said of the Church in the Song of
Solomon to her, as if she were indeed the Spouse of Christ, and likewise those
expressions of the King's Bride in the 45th. Psalm, Astitit regina a dextris
tuis, in vestitu deaurato circundata varietate. Ibid.
which under the type of Solomon's marriage, prefigured the marriage of Christ
to his Church.

In the Octave of her Nativity, in the fourth Lesson of the first Nocturn, it
is said; Laus and gloria sit tibi Sancta Trinitas, quae omnes nos ad hanc
celebritatem convocasti. Sit etiam tibi sancta Dei Matter laus. Tu enim es
pretiosa Margarita, etc. Ibid.
Praise and glory be given to thee O Holy Trinity, who have called us unto this
celebrity. And praise be also unto thee O holy Mother of God, for thou art the
precious pearl of the world. And then it follows in the fifth Lesson; Per te
Trinitas sanctificatur, per te Crux pretiosa celebratur, and adoratur in toto
terrarum orb. Per te, etc. Ibid.
By thee the holy Trinity is sanctified, and the precious Cross celebrated, and
adored through the world; by thee Heaven does exult, the Angels and Archangels
rejoice, Devils are put to flight, and man is called back to Heaven, etc.

I have taken all this, and might have taken more out of the reformed Missal,
and Breviary, which a late small The Author of Popery anatomized.
Writer calls the Authentic Books of the Church of Rome. And in some of these
Devotions you see, they pray unto her alone, as unto a Deity, to bless them,
and to bestow Spiritual and Temporal blessings upon them, saying in effect unto
her, Have pity upon us, hear our prayers, etc. which the late French Expositor
of the Catholic Doctrine says, is the proper way of speaking unto God.

In others of them they pray unto God the Father, through her Merits or
Intercession, and so make her a collateral Mediatrice with Christ.

In others they pray unto Christ for her sake, and through her Intercession,
and so make her an under-Mediatrice unto him.

In others they desire her to interceed with God for them, which also makes her
a joint Mediatrice with Christ.

In others they desire her to So they pray unto S. Ambr. Beat Ambrosi
deprecare pro nobis filium Dei.
interceed with Christ for them, which also makes her a subordinate Mediatrice
to him.

In others they pray unto God through her Merits or Intercession by Christ
Jesus, which seems to join her with him in the Office of Mediator.

In others they join several of these Forms together, contrary to the
Scriptures, which direct us to pray unto none but God, and through no Mediator
but Jesus Christ; and which positively teach, that as there is but one God, so
there is but one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, and that
he ever lives to make intercession for us. Indeed they may well pray unto God,
and Christ through her merits, who pray unto Christ through the merits of S.
Joseph her reputed husband, as they do on his Festival in the following Prayer,
We pray thee, O Lord, that we may be helped by the merits of the Spouse of thy
holy Mother, Sanctissimae genetricis tuae sponsi, quaesumus Domine, meritis
adjuvemur: ut quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet, ejus nobis intercessione
donetur: Qui vivis and regnas cum Deo Patre. Brev. Romans
that what our weakness cannot obtain, may be given unto us by his
intercession; who live and reignest with the Father.

So they pray unto God through Christ, and S. Nicolas together in the following
words; Deus qui Beatum Nicolaum innumeris decorasti miraculis, tribue
quaesumus, ut ejus meritis and precibus, a gehennae incendiis liberemur per
Dominum. ibid.
O God who have graced S. Nicolas the Bishop with many Miracles, grant we
beseech thee, that we may be delivered from hell fire by his merits and
prayers, through Christ our Lord.

But to return to the B. Virgin, I think it very agreeable to my present
subject and undertaking, to tell you the story of her Assumption out of the
Office, which I have so often cited, Ex antiqua accepimus traditione quod
tempore gloriosae dormitionis, etc. Quarta die infra Octavam Assumptionis, B.
Mariae, Lect. 4.
and which gives us this account thereof. When she died, all the Apostles,
wheresoever dispersed to preach the Gospel, were suddenly caught up in the air,
and brought to Jerusalem. Being met together, a vision of Angels appeared to
them, and the Vision was attended with a sweet Psalmody of the heavenly powers,
in which the B. Virgin resigned her soul into the hands of God in a glorious
manner, and the Angels and Apostles continuing to sing together, her body was
carried out, and put in a Coffin, and buried at Gethsemane, where the Angels
continued to sing three days together. At the end of three days, Thomas, who
was not with the Apostles when she died, came to Jerusalem, and being desirous
to worship the Body of the B. Virgin, they went to Gethsemane to take it up;
but when they had opened the grave, and the Coffin, to their great astonishment
there was no body there, and they all agreed in this opinion, that it had
pleased the Word of God, and the Lord of Glory, who took his body out of the B.
Virgin, not to suffer hers to see corruption, but to do her the honor to
translate it into Heaven, before the common and universal resurrection.

I cannot but observe here, how that Thomas was absent at this meeting of the
Apostles, just as he was at that in which Jesus stood in the midst of them, and
showed unto them his hands and his side. Poor unfortunate Apostle! that art
always tardy, and can never come in time to meet the rest of thy Brethren.
But perhaps he was at the Indies, and had a greater journey than the rest, who
were nearer to Jerusalem. I am as content as any man to admit this excuse, and
if you further desire to know what death the B. Virgin died of, the Author of
the Contemplations will tell you, p. 80.
that she died of a spiritual Fever, into which she fell through a Seraphick
vehemence of divine love, which enflamed her blood, and set her sacred heart on
fire; and that her assumption was on this manner, Her glorious soul, says he,
p. 84.
descended from her Imperial seat in Heaven, accompanied with Seraphims and
chiefest Saints, and reassumed her sacred body, and ascended with it again,
and placed it above all the troops of the blessed. p. 89.90, etc.
Being assumed in body and soul into ^eaven, she was seated on a Throne above
all Seraphims, next to the most Glorious Trinity, and inaugurated, proclaimed,
and acknowledged, Queen of all pure creatures, and at her Coronation she was
clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon for her footstool, and was Crowned with
an Imperial Crown of twelve Stars. And truly in some of her Offices, the 1st
verse of the 12th chap. of the Revelations is applied to her, where it is
written, And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

After this short account of the manner of their praying to her, and the
history of her Assumption and Coronation, I shall only re-mind you of the
divine Titles by which they invoke her in their Offices, as Queen of heaven,
Mother of grace, sweet Parent of mercy, the Gate of the great King, the only
hope of sinners; to which I may add, Queen of Angels, p. 12.62.
Adoptive mother, Patroness of man, Advocate of sinners, and more of the same
nature in this book of the Contemplations, where the Author addresses himself
unto her in these words, I choose thee O glorious Mother of Jesus, Page 86.
to be my Patroness, Advocate, and Adoptive Mother, admit me, O powerful Queen
of Angels, among thy Clients, suppress my Enemies, manage my cause in the Court
of our Requests. -- ah, permit not my Soul to perish, for which thy Son Jesus
did shed those precious drops of blood, which he received from the rich
fountain of thy loving heart.

Thus have I showed you out of the Offices of the Latin Church, how extravagant
the Votaries of the B. Virgin are in the honor, which they render unto her;
and for which I am sure there is no ground, neither in my Text, nor in any
other place of the holy Scripture; not in my Text, in which I showed that there
is not one word, but which the Angel might have used in saluting any other
Righteous person, as well as the V. Mary; nor in any other place of Scripture,
where she is mentioned: but on the contrary, there are many places which teach
us, that we should not think of her above the condition of an humane Creature.

Thus at the marriage in Cana in Galilee, when she told our Savior there was
no Wine, Woman, says he, what have I to do with thee? When she said unto him,
Why have thou dealt thus with us? thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing;
he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be
about my Fathers business?

When a woman, in admiration of him, lift up her voice and said, Blessed is the
womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked, he answered, Yea
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Another time
when some told him, that his Mother and Brethren stood without, desiring to
speak with him, he said, Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? and then
stretching forth his hands toward his Disciples he said, Behold my Mother and
my Brethren, for whosoever does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the
same is my Mother, and Sister, and Brother.

When he saw his Mother standing by the Cross, and the Disciple whom he loved
standing by her, he said no more unto her, but Woman behold thy Son; and to him
nothing else but Behold thy Mother. And S. Paul having occasion to mention her,
upon the account of Christ's Incarnation, says no more than this, When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a WOMAN, made under
the law.

Having now showed out of the Latin Offices, how extravagant the Votaries of
the B. Virgin are in the honors which they pay unto her, I proceed to show the
same out of the Ancient and Modern approved Authors of the Latin Communion. But
I shall begin with the Modern, and particularly with the Contemplations on her
life and glory; where the Author calls her, Ep. Dedicat.
Queen of Seraphims, and Queen of Heaven, and says that, whatever can be said
of her, will be infinitely too narrow to fill the Orbs of her exuberant
Sanctity, Grace, and Glory; and that with trembling he attempted to explain the
mystery of her Life and Glory, lest searching into the holies of so great a
Majesty, he should be oppressed with its splendors.

He says, It is impossible for a pure Creature to unfold the immense
attributes of her Maternity. And truly they cannot but be immense, if the
prerogatives of Grace and Glory in her, and Jesus are not distinct perfections,
but one and the same attribute, as he proves out of one of their own Writers.
He says that, Whatever gifts are bestowed upon us by Jesus, Page 7.
we receive them by the mediation of Mary, and that she has full power, as a
Mother, to obtain of her Son whatever he can ask of God the Father; and that no
one ever petitioned her, who was refused by him, or trusted in her, who was
abandoned by him; and that, Page 16.
he blesses those whom she blesses, and owns them for his Disciples, whom she
adopts for her Children.

This is a new sort of Divinity, which the Apostles and their Scholars never
taught the World. They told us but of one Mediator in Heaven, to whom we should
immediately apply our selves, but here we are told of two, of Jesus who is a
Mediator with God the Father, and of Mary, who is as powerful a Mediatrice with
Jesus, as he is with his Father; and if this be true, it is no matter to which
of the two we pray, or whether we pray to him or no, since no one ever
petitioned her, who was refused by him.

He further says, Page 96.
that Her sacred body is endowed with a superseraphical activity, whereby she
can render her self present in a moment, to all her Votaries, and aid them at
any distance; and upon these two suppositions of her full mediatory power, and
presence in all places, we need not wonder at the following Devotions.

V. Open my lips O Mother of Jesus. Page 23.

R. And my Soul shall speak forth thy praise.
V: Divine Lady be intent to my aid.
R. Graciously make have to help me.
V. Glory be to Jesus and Mary;
R. As it was, is, and ever shall be.
Page 24.
Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us now and in the hour of death. Bid us, be
blessed, O holy Mary. And Page 101.
O sacred Virgin, Mother of God, Queen of Angels, Empress of Saints, Refuge of
Sinners, and my special Patroness and Advocate, unto thy custody I commit and
recommend my self, with all the powers, passions, and motions of my body, and
mind, and all living and dead, especially those whom I would or should pray
for, humbly entreating thee, through all thy mercies, and merits, thy
privileges, and power, and by whatever is dearest unto thee, that we may be
admitted to be thy Children, Servants, and Devotes, that we may be protected,
directed, assisted, and comforted by thee; and that by thee we may be presented
to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; with much more, too
long to be transcribed. To which I shall add this blessing. Page 24.
Through the merits and intercession of the Mother of Jesus, may we come to the
harbor of Eternal Salvation; and this, Page 103.
Through the mediation of the most glorious Virgin Mother of Jesus, may God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless and keep us now and for evermore. Page 25.
And this Cantique, Let us praise thee O Mother of Jesus, let us acknowledge
thee our Sovereign Lady, let men and Angels give honor to thee, the first
conceived of all pure Creatures, to thee the morning-Stars, and highest
Seraphims sing glory for thy magnificence, make intercession for us O powerful
Mother of Jesus, for God will not refuse thee our Petitions, then shall we
rejoice in the fullness of thy glory, and shall sing the praises of Jesus for
ever.

You may perceive by the style of this Cantique, that it was composed in
imitation of the Te Deum; of which I shall speak more hereafter.

From the Contemplations I pass to the Psalter of the B. Virgin Mary, which was
composed in the French Tongue, by a Father of the Society of Jesus, and
translated into English, and Printed with allowance in 1624; out of which I
shall present you with a few Petitions, to which I need not crave your
attention.

1. Petition.
O glorious Virgin grant me grace, that I may receive pardon for my sins, draw
near unto me O blessed Virgin, who art the Mother of the afflicted, my Enemies
are gathered together against me, and I have this only refuge to cast my self
under the shadow of your wings, defend me against their enterprises, and bring
them all to shame and confusion. Your Majesty and greatness, together with the
incredible sweetness of your infinite mercy, have obliged my lips to publish
the praises of no other than of your self. Be you glorified O most amiable
Virgin, together with your sweet Son Jesus, both now and evermore. Give my Soul
entrance into Paradise, when it shall leave the Body, and by your holy prayers
deliver me from the dreadful pains of Hell; and let all that is due unto me for
my sins be cancelled by your merits. You have been the cause that God took
humane flesh upon him, you then as a Mother can obtain for us all that which we
ask of him. -- He will pardon us for the love of you -- Remember our humanity,
and grant that we may find grace with you, who art the Foundress of our grace
and Salvation. Stretch forth your hand to draw me out of the filthiness of my
sins, and let the greatness of your mercy blot out the multitude of my
offenses, supplying by your merits, what in justice I dare not demand. Turn not
your face away from me, for I put my trust in you. 2. Petition.
You are the Sanctuary into which I desire to retire -- I magnify you as the
Foundress of Grace; I will never cease to beseech you with all my desires, and
affections -- until I know that you have beheld me with compassion, and given
ear to my prayers. I will humble my heart before you, for I know that the proud
shall not be entertained near unto your sacred Majesty -- If you do not
undertake our defense, how shall we do to appear before Jesus? -- put words
into my mouth that I may worthily praise you, since the Heavens themselves set
forth your glory, and that all Creatures call upon you, when they are oppressed
-- as soon as you extend your hand upon the sick, they are healed, and the
waves of this troublesome world are soon appeased by your commandment. -- I will
never cease to praise and exalt you with Hymns, Psalms, and Canticles, but day
by day will I render you my vows. Receive my Soul into your hands when it shall
leave this mortal Body, and take it into your protection, for it will be lost
with fear, and will not know to what side to turn to save it self, unless under
the shadow of your mercy. Obtain for me by your grace a place of perpetual
habitation, among those who be in Paradise, there to enjoy the felicity, which
the Souls of those who have devoutly served you, do eternally possess. O
blessed Virgin, 3. Petition.
mother of unlimited power, adored and called upon by the Universe, give me
strength to resist the temptations of my invisible enemies -- if you should
have forsaken me, to whom should I have then repaired, that would have looked
upon me with pity and compassion, I will confess your name, among all Nations,
because it is holy -- and will make known to all, the Majesty of your
greatness.

All the fifteen Petitions in this Psalter are full of such like devotions, and
the last of them concludes thus:

Be pleased with my prayers, O sacred Virgin, and may it please you not to
reject this little Psalter dedicated to your Sacred Majesty, a part whereof I
will recite before you every day, to the end you may receive my soul into your
bosom, when it shall depart out of this world into another life.

I must further acquaint you, that this Author who made this Psalter in
imitation of the Psalter of David, advises his Reader to say these Psalms
before an Image of the blessed Virgin Mary in some holy place, or Oratory, and
before every Petition to say the Ave Maria in English, and the Translator of it
does assure the Lady, to whom he Dedicates it, that it had the approbation of
the better sort of Catholics, and was presented to one of the greatest Queens
of Europe in its French attire.

The Author also tells us, that he has put the Angels Salutation before every
Petition, to implore the favor of the Sacred Virgin, and this he did
conformably to the Latin Offices, which abound with Ave Mary's, though I
profess I cannot tell, why they should convert a pure Salutation, which I have
showed consists of common forms of Speech, into a form of Invocation. Why
should that, which might have been spoken by the Angel to any other righteous
person be esteemed such an acceptable Sacrifice of Praise to her? and yet the
Mystery of the holy Rosary, which we are In the Advertisement before the method
of saying the Rosary.
told the blessed Virgin revealed to Dominic [I must be pardoned that I cannot
add Saint] consists in saying one Pater noster, and ten Ave Mary's at a time,
with one Prayer to the Virgin Mary, after a Meditation upon something that
happened, or that they say happened to her, and I must confess, I cannot
understand, how any Office, wherein there are ten, or eleven Invocations of
Mary for one Prayer to God, Ibid.
should be most efficacious for obtaining all favors from him, and averting
all evils from our selves. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, I cannot
attain unto it, but I must for ever be content to be ranked 1 Sermon. p 6. Sermon.
6. p. 5.
among those babes who are to be fed with milk, and not with such strong meat.
My stomach will not digest it, I have not been hitherto able to bear it,
neither yet am able, nor to beg her intercession, or hope to obtain the
assistance of the Holy Ghost by saying an Ave Maria to her; I neither
understand nor believe how the repetition of the Angels message can warrant the
expectation of such blessings from God by the Mediation of the B. Virgin, nor
can I persuade my self to say with the Votaries of Loretto, we fly to your
patronage O Sacred mother of God, despise not our prayers in our necessities,
but deliver us from all dangers O ever glorious, and blessed Virgin.

Horolog. Ascet.
Cardinal Bona a late, and most approved Writer of the Latin Church tells us,
that the Rosary is so called, because it is composed of 150 Ave Mary's, as of
so many sweet smelling Roses; as if the 15 Pater nosters in it did not smell as
sweet as they: and though he is one of the approvers of Mr. de Meaux his
Exposition, which says, they only pray to Saints to pray for them, yet in his
Ibid.
Paraphrase on the Angels Salutation, he says very extravagant things of her,
and in another place prays unto her, as unto a Donor in the following words,
Protect me, O sweetest Virgin Mary, under the shadow of thy wings, and never
let thy name, which flows with honey, depart from my mouth, and heart, be not
far from me, O most powerful mother of God, because my enemies compass me round
about. What can I do without thee, O blessed Virgin, or what would become of
me, if thou should turn away thy face from me? When will thou come, O most
sweet Virgin, when will thou appear to thy most unworthy servant? Thy breath, O
Mary, is sweeter than honey, and the possession of thy love above Gold, and
precious Stones. Let my Soul perceive the sweetness of thy Love, and be always
employed in thy praises, because thou art my comfort next after God. Have
compassion on my Soul, that breaths after thee, have a regard unto me, and make
have to help me. Grant me thy grace, that I may always rejoice in thee, and
after this time of exile, behold thee in glory. My Soul breaths after thee,
as a child does after the bosom of his mother, O despise me not thou mother of
mercy. How vehemently do I desire to see thy face, O most beautiful Virgin,
take me up quickly unto thee, and fulfill my desire. Who can forbear loving of
thee, O Queen of hearts, and mother of holy love, who can forbear loving of
thee? O that all creatures might serve thee, and live, and die in thy love.
Receive my heart O most beloved mother, and offer it with thy most holy hands
to thy most holy Son. I rejoice, and exult, O blessed Virgin, that God loves
thee above all his works, and am delighted with it above all things, and I had
rather undergo the pains of hell, than that thy glory, and dignity should be
the least diminished for a moment of time. Let all that know thy name, trust in
thee, O Glorious Virgin, because thou do not forsake those, that trust in
thee. Let the Light of thy Countenance appear unto me in my Agony, and let thy
Comfort (most merciful mother) make glad my departing Soul.

I might here add his Prayers to Saints, and Angels in the like strain, and his
Invocation of the Five wounds of Christ, but my present undertaking obliges me
only to take notice of the extravagant honor, which the Votaries of the
Blessed Virgin are wont to pay unto her.

From Cardinal Bona, I proceed to John Peckham formerly Archbishop of
Canterbury, who at the end of the Preface to this Psalter of the Blessed Virgin
not yet printed, prays her, that she would be pleased to release the sins of
all those for whom he prayed, Usher's Answer to a challenge, etc. P. 493.
and cause both his name, and theirs to be written in the book of life. In the
first Psalm of it he prays her to make us to meditate often on Gods Law, and
to be made blessed in the glory of his kingdom, and all the rest are filled
with Petitions of the like nature. From Peckham I go on to Cardinal
Bonaventure, who shines in the Calender of the Latin Saints. He flourished
about 430 years since, when Superstition was in its Zenith, and darkness
covered the face of the earth. He wrote several Tracts in honor of the Virgin
Mary, one called the Blessed Virgins Speculum beatae Virginis.
mirrhour, which is a most extravagant Paraphrase upon the Angels Salutation,
wherein he applies to the Blessed Virgin in the Mystery, whatever is Literally
said of Queen Esther, and the Queen of Sheba in the holy Scriptures. He
observes, that her Name signifies Lady, and that it agrees very well to so
great an Empress, who is Queen of Angels, Men and Devils, and of things in
Heaven, things in Earth, and things under the Earth; and in the conclusion of
the Prologue to his Mirrhour, he thus be speaks her: O most benign Lady Mary,
accept of this small gift, which thy poor friend offers up unto thee. I Salute
thee with this little book upon my bended knees, and with my bowed head, I
Salute thee with heart, and mouth, and say AVE MARIA. He composed another
Office called the Crown of the blessed Virgin, where one of the Orizons
prescribed to be said unto her, is as follows, O Empress and our most kind
Lady, by the authority of a mother Jure matris imperae tuo dilectissimo silio.
Corona B. Virginis, Tom. 6. Edit. Romans 1588.
command thy most beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would vouchsafe to
lift up our minds from the love of earthly things unto heavenly desires. The
harshness of this petition is a little qualified in another Psalm. Bonav. edit.
Paris. 1596.
Edition thus: Incline the countenance of thy Son upon us, compel him by thy
Prayers, to have mercy upon us sinners. Which puts me in mind of that sentence
of Anselm in his Treatise of the excellence of the B. Virgin, that more present
relief is sometimes found by Commemorating the name of Mary, than by calling
upon the name of our Lord Jesus her only Son. This extravagant saying of Anselm
has been since used by another of the Virgins Votaries Answer to a challenge.
p. 495.
as Bishop Usher observes.

But to return to Cardinal Bonaventure, he has made many other Offices in the
Virgins praise, of which, that which he calls the Psalter of the blessed Virgin
is most remarkable. It consists of the Psalms of David converted into Forms of
Prayer, and Thanksgivings, and Praises unto her by putting Lady in the place of
Lord. The first verse of the 93. Psalm is this, Deus ultionum Dominus, sed tu
matter misericordia ad miserandum inflectis; God is a God of vengeance, but
thou, O mother of mercy art inclined to show mercy. At the end of this Psalter
he has transprosed the Hymns of the Church, the Benedicite, the Benedictus,
and the Te Deum into her praise, which begins thus: We praise thee the mother
of God, we acknowledge thee to be a Virgin, all the earth does worship thee,
the Spouse of the eternal Father, all Angels, and Archangels, all Thrones, and
Powers do faithfully serve thee, to thee all Angels cry aloud, with a
never-ceasing voice, holy, holy, holy Mary mother of God -- the whole Court of
heaven does honor thee as Queen, the holy Church throughout all the world does
invoke and praise thee the Mother of Divine Majesty, etc. Nay, he has also
Transprosed the Athanasian Creed into a form of Confession to her honor, and
it begins thus: Whosoever would be saved, before all things it is necessary,
that he hold a firm Faith concerning Mary; which Faith except every one do keep
whole, and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly; and then
though her Assumption into Heaven, her sitting at the right hand of Christ, and
never ceasing to pray for us, be made Articles of that Creed, yet it concludes
thus: This is the true Faith concerning Mary, which except a man believe
firmly, and faithfully, he cannot be saved.

From C. Bonaventure I go on to Arnoldus Carnotensis, who lived about Five
hundred years ago, and wrote an extravagant Inter opusc. adscripta Cypriano,
Ed. Oxon. 1682.
Tract, in the praises of the blessed Virgin, in which he says, that if he had
the Tongues of Men, and Angels, he could not worthily set forth the glory of
the holy, and ever-blessed Virgin. He says, She is exalted above all
Creatures; and that whoever bows his knee to Jesus, must also fall prostrate
before Mary; he says, they have both one flesh, one Spirit, and one love, and
one glory; that she cannot be separated from his dominion, and power, and that
they both stand before the face of God to interceed for us, and obtain
remission of sins.

From Arnoldus I proceed to Bernard, who flourished almost Six hundred years
ago. He was bred a Monk in a dark Age, and his Sermons of the Virgin Mary's
Assumption are full of very extravagant, and unwarrantable expressions. He
calls her the Queen of Heaven, and Queen of mercy, and Lady of all things. He
says, When she ascended on high, she also gave good gifts unto men, seeing she
neither wanted power, nor will: Not power, because she was the Mother of God;
nor will, because all her bowels were Charity. He talks much about her
Coronation, and says, That no man can find out the length, and breadth, and
height, and depth of her mercy; and that Christ bestows all his gifts and
graces through her, and exhorts us to give God thanks, who in mercy provided us
such a Mediatrice; and in short, what apprehensions he had for her, may be seen
from a prayer, which begins thus: We lift our hearts, and eyes, and hands unto
thee O Queen of the World, we kneel, and bow before the glory of thy highness,
and send up our prayers with sighs unto thee to Heaven. The rest of the prayer
is like the beginning, and toward the latter end of it he has this
expression, Speak O Lady, for thy Son hears, and will grant whatsoever thou
shall ask.

There are also many such extravagant and unwarrantable things said of her, and
many prayers directed unto her in the Homilies de Tempore upon Christ's
Nativity, and the Homilies de Sanctis, especially in that of the Assumption
falsely ascribed to S. Augustine, as the writers of the Latin Church are forced
to acknowledge.

I have also omitted the extravagant sayings, and notions about her in the
Schoolmen, as that her Suarez. 3. p. disp. 18. S. 4.
Grace was greater in the first moment of her Conception, than the Grace of the
highest Angel; and that in the second it was doubled, and so increased in
Geometrical proportion unto her lives end; and that she was dearer to God than
the whole reasonable Creation, and that he loved her more than the Universal
Church.

I have also passed over the many Legendous stories that are told of her, and
to show how dangerous it is for men to magnify her above the condition of an
humane Creature; I think I may tell you of C. Scribanius, Provincial of the
Belgic Jesuits, who in a rapture of Devotion to the blessed Virgin, made a
Copy of Haereo lac inter meditans interque; cruorem, Inter delicias uberis, and
lateris, etc.

There is also such a Copy of Verses in Gazaeus his Pia Hilaria.


Latin Verses, wherein he equals the benefits, and merit of her milk to that of
his blood.

I have also omitted their Ancient Offices, in which there are prayers to S.
Joachim the Father, and to S. Anne the Mother of the blessed Virgin, wherein
they put Breviar. Sar. July 26. O vas coelestis gratiae, matter Reginae
Virginum, memento matter inclyta, quam potens es per filiam.


her in mind of the power she has by her Daughter, and tell him, Brev. Romans
Antiqu. Mart. 20. O Pater summae Joachim puellae -- potes omne si vis, nihil
nepos Jesus merito negabit, nil tibi nata.


that his Nephew Jesus, and his Daughter Mary will deny him nothing.

But you will perhaps say, that the Latin Church has laid aside these
Devotions: God be thanked for it, and grant the happy time may come when she
will lay aside all the rest, that I have cited after the example of this truly
Catholic, and Apostolic Church, of which we are members; but then though she
has laid them aside, yet since she formerly allowed, and approved them, she
must, as a learned The Author of the R. Devotions.
Author observes, be answerable for them, till she acknowledges she was
mistaken. The rejecting and reforming of these, and As of S. Julian in Miss.
secund. usum Sarum, Rothom. Edit. S. Batilde ibid. S. Scholastica ibid. S
Potentiana ibid. S. Aldelmus ibid. S Martin B. and Conf. ibid. S. Sabina ibid.
S. Andoenus ibid.
other Offices cannot consist with her pretensions to Infallibility, which I
observe in answer to that Plea, which says it is most reasonable for men to be
of the Infallible Church. I confess a man were mad, that would not rather be of
an Infallible, than a Fallible Church; but then it is obvious to Reply, That it
is one thing for a Church to be Infallible, and another for her, or others, to
say she is so; nay, I desire to know if any Church is ever a jot the more
Infallible for pretending to Infallibility; or if those men do not act
rationally, who choose to continue under the care of Learned and modest
Physicians, that own themselves Fallible, rather than commit themselves to
those, who give out Bills of this, or that Infallible Cure.

Thus have I showed you from the Ancient and Modern approved Authors of the
Latin Communion, how extravagant the Votaries of the blessed Virgin are in the
honors they pay unto her; and as I showed before, that there is no ground for
them in Scripture: So I am sure there is none in the First and Pure Antiquity
for above Three hundred years, as will appear from the manner, in which the
ancient Fathers mentioned her, when they had occasion to speak of her.

S. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians, mentions her by the name of plain
Mary in the Scripture-stile, (...).
saying, These three great Mysteries, the Virginity, and bringing forth of
Mary, and the death of the Lord, were concealed from the Ruler of this World.
Justin Martyr, who mentions her so often in his Works, upon occasion of giving
an account of our Lords Conception, and Birth, never calls her by any greater
Title than the Virgin, or the Virgin Mary. L. 3. c. 3. l 7. c. 37.
S. Irenaeus mentions her by no other name. Ep. ad Paul. Samosat.
Dionysius Alexandrinus calls her the holy Virgin Mary, and Mother of God.
Sermon. 2. de Annunc. S. Virgin. Mariae.
Gregorius Thaumat. calls her the holy Mother of God. The Author of the
Questions, etc. falsely ascribed to Justin Martyr, calls her the (...).
most happy or blessed Virgin. De Virgin. Veland. de carne Christi, adversus
Praxeam, adversus Judaos.
Tertullian, whom I should have named before, calls her nothing but the Virgin,
or Mary, or the Virgin Mary, when he was tempted to speak magnificently of her
against Jews, and Heretics. Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 37
Origin in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans calls her the Mother of
God. Eusebius. l. 1. c. 7. de vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 43.
Eusebius calls her Mary in one place, and the Mother of God in another.
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria calls her the Mother of God. 1 vol. ad epist. de
incar. verb. dei. 2 vol. p. 298.
S. Athanasius sometimes calls her Mary, sometimes the Virgin Mary, sometimes
the Holy Virgin, and sometimes the Mother of God. And how far he was from
calling of her Queen of heaven, etc. or giving religious respect unto her,
appears from other Ep. ad Epict. and 3 Orat. cont. Arr.
places, where he says, that She is our sister, because we are all the
children of Adam.

Till this time in all Antiquity there is not to be found the least footstep of
Invocating the Virgin, or any other Saint, or of giving Religious worship to
them. Indeed Gregory Nazianzen in his Orat. 18.
Oration upon S. Cyprian, tells us how (...).
Justina supplicated the Virgin Mary for help, when she found her self
assaulted by the Magical artifices of Cyprian and the Devil, but it is evident
to any, who is conversant in the writings of the first Three Ages, that there
was no such practice of Invocating Saints in the time of Cyprian, much less
before the time of his Conversion, and therefore computing the time when
Gregory spoke that Oration, which was after the the year 370. and the time when
Cyprian is said to have attempted the Chastity of Justina, which must have been
before the year 247. when he was made Presbyter, it is not to be imagined, that
Gregory spoke of Justina's praying to the Virgin, according to the practice of
the Age wherein she and Cyprian lived, but according to the practice of
compellating Saints, which now first began in his own. I call it the practice
of Compellating Saints, because the manner of calling upon them in Rhetorical
Apostrophes, and wishes, and without any circumstances of religious worship,
was not as yet, strictly speaking, come up to formal, and proper Invocation, in
a supplicatory way, with all the signs and solemnities of worship and as it is
usual for Painters to draw men, and women of former Ages in the garb and
dresses of their own: so it is not unusual among Writers (especially for
Orators) to relate things not according to the usage and practice of the times,
when they were done, but according to the custom of the Age and place in which
they live, as a very Dallaeus advers. Latin. c. 8. p. 51.
Learned man has showed by several instances, that Gregory, and other Writers
have done.

This alone were a sufficient Answer to that single instance out of Gregory, if
the story of Cyprian, as he has related it, were credible in the other
particulars; but instead of being credible, it is highly incredible in all the
other particulars of it, because there is nothing of them in the life of S.
Cyprian written by Pontius his Deacon, who says not one word of his being a
Magician, or of Justina, or of his attempting her Chastity by Magical Arts
before his Conversion, nor of burning his Magical books after it, etc. and
therefore her Invocating the Virgin Mary, has as much truth in it, as his
falling in love with her, etc. Gregory took them all alike upon trust, and they
are all alike to be believed.

I am come now in talking about Gregory to the latter end of the Fourth
Century, when Superstition began to get ground, and he especially among other
Fathers, gave occasion to the world of praying by way of Adoration unto Saints,
by his Rhetorical, and optative Invocations of them at their solemn
Commemorations, but how far that Age was in the general practice of it from
this religious way of Invocating the blessed Virgin, or other Saints, or from
allowing the Invocation of her, by way of Supplication, as a part of worship
and service due unto her; we may learn from St. Epiphanius who flourished at
the same time with Gregory, toward the latter end of the fourth Century; when
a certain Sect of women meeting together to worship the Virgin Mary, offered
certain Cakes unto her, called Collyrides, from whence they were called
Collyridians. This good Bishop did burn with zeal against them, as it appears
from his warm way of writing, in which he has treated them as Heretics, and
Idolaters. In a Sermon p. 23.
A late Writer acknowledges, that he treated them as Heretics for offering
Cakes unto her, and that in so doing, they gave her more honor than is
allowable to a creature: Nay, if I understand his meaning right, he
acknowledges, that to offer Cakes unto her, was to adore her as a goddess; and
if offering Cakes unto her was so absurd as he makes it, and so enormous a
crime, even a Sacrilegious Idolatry, as he speaks; then methinks to offer
Candles, and Incense to her is so too. I should be glad to understand the
difference between the two offerings, as to the charge of Epiphanius. But
because he so pens his periods, as to make his Reader believe that that Father
called them Heretics, only upon the account of their offering unto her [as if
in doing that only, they raised her above the nature of a creature] I beg the
Preachers leave to cite him more at large than he has done, and to make it
appear thereby, that the holy Fathers censure will reach the honoring of her
by Prayer, and external Adoration, as well as by offering unto her, and that
those who only practice the former according to the direction of the Latin
Offices, entrench upon the divine Prerogatives, and transgress the bounds, and
limits, which the Church in his days put to the honor of the blessed Virgin.

Haeres. 69. S. 4.
After a short account of the Original of Idolatry, which he ascribes to the
Devil, and to the adulterous mind of man, which runs from the worship of the
one God, as common Strumpets do from the chaste estate of Matrimony under one
Husband: he says, indeed, The body of Mary was holy, but she was not a deity;
and she was truly a Virgin, and an (...).
honorable Virgin, but she was not proposed to us for (...).
to be worshipped, but did (...).
her self worship him that was born of her own flesh, and descended from
Heaven, and the Fathers bosom. And then adds, that the Scripture did for this
cause forewarn us by the mouth of our Lord, who said unto her, woman what have
I to do with thee, and he called her woman lest any should (...), S. Aug.
says, Christ admonished her, and bid her fear her Son. De Symb. l. 2. c. 5.
Athanas. says, he checked her, (...), Qrat. 4. advers. Arr. Chrysostom. says, he
was angry at her. Ireneus, that he repelled her unseasonable hastiness. l. 3.
c. 18. and Theophyl. that he chid her not without cause. In Joh. 2.4.
think too highly of her, thereby as it were prophesying of the Schisms and
Heresies that would arise about her, that none by too much admiring the Holy
Virgin, might fall into this folly of Heresy.

In the fifth Sect. he puts this smart question, Which of the Prophets, says
he, permitted any man, much less a woman to be (...).
worshipped? Indeed she is a chosen vessel, but nevertheless a woman, who has
not changed her nature, though she is much honored as the bodies of Saints
are, or to speak more to her praise, as Elias, who was a perpetual Virgin from
the womb, and taken up into heaven, without seeing death, or as S. John, who
lay in the bosom of our Lord, or as the holy Thecla. But Mary is more to be
honored than her, upon the account of the dispensation, of which she was
vouchsafed worthy. But neither is Elias to be (...).
worshipped, though he never died, nor John, though he departed in such a wonderful
manner, nor is Thecla, or any other Saint worshipped. For we are not under the
dominion of the old error to leave the living God, and (...).
worship his creatures, as it is written, they served and worshipped the
creature, besides [or with] the Creator, and became fools. For if he will not
let the Angels be (...)
worshipped, much less will he permit the daughter of Anne to be worshipped,
who was begotten, and born, as all other mortals were.

In the seventh Sect. says he, Christ as the Contriver, and Lord of the affair
formed himself of the Virgin, as of the ground, but not that she should be
worshipped, or that he intended to make a Deity of her, or that we should bring
offerings to her -- he gave her not so much as power to baptize, or to bless
his Disciples, nor to rule upon the earth, but only to be an (...).
holy creature, and to be worthy of his kingdom. -- From whence then is the
Dragon come again unto us? how comes it to pass that he renews his devices
against us, let Mary be (...).
honored, but let the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be worshipped. Let no man
worship Mary. This Mystery is due to no man, nor woman, nor ought the Holy
Angels to share in this Glory -- therefore though Mary be most excellent, and
holy, and honored, yet she is not to be worshipped: and at last concludes
thus, that I may not seem too tedious, let it suffice to have said, (...).
Ambros l. 3. de Spir. S. c. 12. Maria erat templum Dei, non Deus templi, and
ideo ille solus adorandus qui operabatur in templo. Augustinus ait, Hoc etiam
ipsos optimos Angelos, and excellentissima Dei ministeria velle credamus, ut
unum cum ipsis colamus Deum, cujus contemplatione beati sunt -- quare honoramus
eos charitate non servitute, -- religet nos Religio uni omnipotenti Deo. Lib.
de vera relig. cap. 55.
let Mary be honored, and our Lord worshipped.

I appeal to the Conscience of any Learned Votary of the Blessed Virgin,
whether the Christians of the Latin Communion do not give her such Worship, as
the Greeks express by (...), which is the very word that Epiphanius uses
throughout this whole discourse, when he speaks of Worshipping in opposition to
honoring of the Holy Virgin: and I appeal to the Conscience of every
unprejudiced Learned man, whether going in Pilgrimage to her, and praying to
her in places of Divine Worship, with all the circumstances of external
Adoration with bended knees and hands, and eyes lifted up to Heaven, and before
her Images, deserve not the name of Worship, as it is signified by (...)? Nay,
let them tell me if praying unto her in a posture of worship for Temporal, or
Spiritual blessings, and carrying her Image about in Solemn Procession, while
they chant forth Hymns unto her, do not answer the full import of that word?
and whether the holy Father in all probability would not have made the same
distinction betwixt honoring and worshipping the Blessed Virgin against these
practices, that he did against the Collyridians? Our Savior thought the very
falling down before the Devil without Temple, Priest, Altar or Offering, would
have been a worshipping of him, in his esteem the bare external act of
Adoration was both (...), and Latria, for when the Devil said unto him, all
these things I will give thee if thou will fall down and worship me, He
answered him, Get the gone Satan, for it is written, thou shall (...).
worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall (...).
serve.

Wherefore this full and ample testimony of S. Epiphanius is an evident proof,
that as yet the honor of the B. Virgin was, at least generally speaking,
confined within just bounds, and limits, and that the Church hitherto did not
allow the Worship and Service of Prayer, and Invocation to be given unto her.
As yet she had not commenced Queen of Heaven, nor Mediatrice between Man and
God, nor received any Prayers or Addresses as a Service due unto her, nor sat
in the Temple of God, though shortly after men began to think too highly of her,
August Tom. 7. de not. and great. Contra Pelag. Edit. Paris. p. 161 B. but in
his Book de perfections justitiae contra Celest. he exempts none from sin, but
Christ alone.
and to magnify her holiness so much as to doubt whether she ever sinned?
While men were thus disposed by Superstition to exalt her above the rank, and
condition of an humane creature, it happened that Nestorius Patriarch of
Constantinople, taught the world, that it was not lawful to call her the (...).
mother of God. This alarmed the Christian world, and made good men afraid,
that Nestorius under this pretense was setting up for another Arius, or
Sabellius to undermine the Deity of Christ. Upon this a General Council was
called at Ephesus in the year 431. in which Nestorius was deposed, and his
opinion condemned as Heretical, and then in opposition to him, and his
followers, men, as it is natural for them to do, began to run into the other
extreme, and let their inventions, and fancies take an unlimited scope in
magnifying the Blessed Virgin. Then they began to call her Lady, to talk of her
immaculate Conception, and afterward, to assert it, which seems contrary to
the testimony, and opinion of Epiphanius, (...). etc. Haeres. 69.5. S.
who says, she was begotten, as all other men were of the Seed of man, and the
Womb of a Woman. Then they came to assert that she did not bring forth our
Lord, after the common custom of women, contrary to the testimony of De carne
Christi.
Tertullian, and the Holy Scripture, which says, that when the days of her
purification were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present him
to the Lord, as it is written in the Law of the Lord, every male that opens
the womb, shall be holy to the Lord. Then also they began to tell Superstitious
stories of her appearing, and of her Apud. Evagr.
Statues turning away in indignation from some that prayed unto her, and to
assert without any ground in Scripture, or pure Antiquity, that she had vowed
her Virginity to God, before the Angel Gabriel came unto her, and then came in
the story of her Assumption (which seems to me to have been the last
improvement of her immaculate Conception, and innocence) contrary to the
testimony of Epiphanius, who in Haeresy 68. observes several times, that the
Scriptures were silent, and said nothing of her death, and that he could not
tell whether she was dead, and buried, or no, or were yet alive, and remained
immortal, according to what is written, Rev. 12.14. or whether she died a
Martyr, because Simeon told her, a Sword should pierce through her Soul. He could
not determine what was become of her, which manifestly proves, that her
Assumption was not then the Tradition of the Church. To be short, then they
began to make such extravagant Sermons in her praise, as that is, which is
falsely ascribed to Vol. 1. p. 1028.
Athanasius under the title of a Sermon, upon the Annunciation of the most Holy
Virgin the mother of God. There the Author of it says, that as the Son of the
Virgin is King and Lord, so she by him is Queen and Lady; and that she stands
at his right hand in a Vesture of Gold, in a Golden Vesture of incorruption and
immortality, and then he invokes her in this religious manner, O daughter of
Abraham, and David, incline thine ears unto our Prayers, and forget not thy
people, nor us who are of thy Father's house, etc.

Thus by degrees, from over-admiring, men came to worshipping the Blessed
Virgin, and the bounds being once broken down, which the Scripture sets to the
Praise and Honor of Creatures, Superstition never stopped, till the Church came
to have a Queen, as well as a King of Heaven, a mother, as well as a Father of
mercy, and a Mediatrice, as well as a Mediator betwixt sinful men, and God.

The Devotions, and Assertions, which I have cited out of the Offices of the
Latin Church, and her Ancient and Modern approved Writers are a sufficient
proof of this Charge; and I was the more willing to set them before you,
because some late Authors have done all they can to palliate, and disguise the
Latin worship, and turn the best side of it outward; though, God knows, it
has a very strange appearance, as it is misrepresented in the best dress, that
Art and Wit can put upon it. They tell us they pray to the Saints, and by
consequence to the Virgin, Advertisement to the Exposition, etc. p. 12.
as we pray to our Brethren, who are upon Earth to pray with us, and for us in
the name of Jesus Christ; but do we pray to our absent Brethren? does any man
in England pray to his Friend in the Indies to pray with him, and for him to
God in the name of Christ? or does he carry his absent Brother's Image, and
place it in a Temple, or over an Altar, and then pray to his Brother before
that Image in the most humble posture of External Adoration? Or when men pray
to any of their Brethren upon Earth, that are present with them, do they
properly speaking offer up prayers unto them, as a Spiritual Service, with
hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven; or do they give them such Titles, as the
Latin Offices give the Virgin, or tell them of their Merits, Per Virginem
Matrem concedat nobis Dominus salutem. and pacem. Officium B.M. in Sabb.
or pray unto God in any of their names, and together with their prayers offer
up Praises, and Thanksgivings to them? I desire the late Apologists to Answer
these Questions, and then to tell me, whether indeed they only pray to her to
pray for them to our common Master in the name of our common Mediator, or
whether they do no more, than desire her Intercession to God, with the same
mind that we desire one another prayers? If this be really so, how dare they,
as I have shown, pray unto her to bless them, and to bestow Temporal, and
Spiritual blessings upon them, and to present their prayers to God? which the
Scripture tells us is the proper office of Christ. How dare they pray unto God
conjunctly through her and Christ's merits, and join his passion, and her
merits in the Absolution of Penitents? How dare they call her the only hope of
Sinners, Does any man pray unto God through the merits, or intercession of any
of his Brethren upon Earth?
and pray unto God through her merits, and intercession, and without mentioning
the merits, and intercession of Christ? Nay, how dare they pray formally, and
absolutely unto her alone, as unto a Deity, and offer Candles, and Incense, and
solemn Praises, and Thanksgivings unto her, which they desire her to receive
how mean soever they be, and unequal to her merits. Exposition, Sect. 4.
But we are told, we ought to understand, that in what terms soever those
prayers are couched, it is the intention of the Church, and of her faithful to
reduce them always to this form of PRAY FOR US. But can the intention of the
Church, and of her faithful, alter the nature of things; or is this declaration
of their intention to be admitted against the plain Literal, and Grammatical
sense of those prayers, wherein they pray to her against their own rule, to
give them good things, and to deliver them from evil, and not to despise their
prayer, but to admit them within the Sanctuary of her Audience, which is
equivalent to the form of hear our prayer, which they acknowledge to be the
proper manner of speaking to God.

Would it not have been more for the honor of that Church, which styles her
self Catholic, and Apostolic, and a far more Authentical, and Satisfactory
Declaration of her intention, to have reformed, or laid aside such prayers in a
general Council, and to have condemned all the other Prayers and Offices in
their allowed, approved, and celebrated Writers, who have taught the people to
give the Virgin Divine Titles, and pray unto her in the same style, that Jews,
and Christians pray unto God. How can we trust our Souls, or the Souls of our
Children in such a Church, whose Churchmen are fain to make such an Exposition
of her Liturgical Devotions, as is not without violence reconcilable to the
Letter of them, and which still lets so many Books, and Offices be recommended
to her people, that are absolutely contradictory to this late Exposition, which
for many good reasons, elsewhere given, we cannot admit for a fixed and
Authentic Exposition of the Latin Church.

Wherefore my Brethren of this truly Catholic, and Apostolic Church of
England, let us take care to keep within the bounds and limits, which our pure
and holy Mother, after the example of the Primitive Church, has set to the
praise, and honor of the blessed Virgin. Let us cheerfully, and respectfully
give her the honorable Titles of Holy, and Blessed, and perpetual Virgin; and
call her without scruple the Holy and Blessed Mother of God: Nay, let us for
peace-sake go as far as we can with our Fellow Christians of the Latin
Communion, so we go with caution, and circumspection in honoring of this
Glorious Saint. Let us acknowledge with them, that she is to be honored above
all Saints; but let us not honor her with Religious honor, nor pray unto her
either as a Donor, or as an Intercessor in the presence of God. Let us
acknowledge with them her perpetual Virginity, according to ancient Tradition;
and if it will gain, or oblige any of them, let us not oppose them in the
opinion they have, that she promised, and vowed her Virginity to God; for it is
an innocent Opinion, though it is precarious, and has no ground in Scripture,
or Primitive Antiquity. In a word, let us admire her singular Purity and
Holiness, though we cannot admit her 6. Sermon. p. 5.
Innocence. Let us give her all the honor that is due to so great a Saint; but
not one jot more than is allowed to a Creature; and if by doing so much, and no
more, you offend on the left hand, and on the right, the offense will be taken,
and not given; but if by refusing to do so much you offend, the offense will be
given, to both Churches, and that will be a great offense. To conclude, let us
always mention her with respect; let her Name still perfume the Air like
precious ointment; let us celebrate her great Virtues; let us keep her
Festivals, as it becomes true Sons of the Primitive Church of England; let us
imitate her blessed Example, and thank God for the benefit of it; let us
endeavor, as she did, to hear the Word of God, and keep it, and to do the will
of our Heavenly Father, and then we shall all become [(...)] high favorites of
Heaven, even the Mother, and Sister, and Brethren of Christ; To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by the universal Church, all Worship,
Adoration, Majesty, and Dominion both now, and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

