THE CASE OF Infant Baptism. In Five QUESTIONS.

I. Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism? II. Whether Infants are excluded
from Baptism by Christ? III. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church,
which appoints Infants to be Baptized? IV. Whether it be the Duty of
Christian Parents to bring their Children unto Baptism? V. Whether it is lawful
to Communicate with Believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy?
LONDON, Printed by T. Hodgkin, for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street;
Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; 1685.

THE CASE OF Infant Baptism. The Previous Discourse.
THE better to prepare the mind of my Reader for what I shall say in this
Discourse about Infant Baptism, I think it requisite to premise a short
Introduction.

First, Concerning the Original, And

Secondly, Concerning the Nature of the Jewish Church.

Thirdly, Concerning the initiatory Sacrament into it, and the Persons that
were capable of Initiation.

And Lastly, Concerning the alteration of it from the Mosaic into the Christian
Economy, or to express my self more plainly in the Heb. 2.5, 6*
Scripture Phrase, concerning the alteration of the House of Moses into the
House of Christ.

As for the Original of the Jewish Church, it is to be referred unto Abraham
the Romans 4.11.
Father of the Faithful purely considered as a Church. But if it be considered
as a Commonwealth, or as a Church under such a Political Regulation, then it
is to be referred unto Moses, who was called, even by Heathen Writers, the
Dionys. Longin. (...). Sect. 7.
Legislator of the Jews. These two Considerations of the Jewish Church, purely
as a Church, and as a Commonwealth, or as a Church under such a mixture with a
Commonwealth ought heedfully to be distinguished.

1. Because there is ground for such a distinction in the nature of the thing.

2. Because this distinction is made by the Apostle, who was of the Seed of
Abraham, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and by consequence very well qualified to
understand the difference betwixt the Jewish Economy as a Church, and as a
Commonwealth.

First, I say, there is a Ground for such a distinction in the Nature of the
thing, as is evident to any Man, who is capable of considering the difference
betwixt the Church-Christian before, and after its Union with the Empire.
Before its Union with the Empire, it subsisted by it self purely as a Church
above three hundred years, in a State of Persecution, from Christ unto
Constantine the Great; and just so the Jewish Church for above four hundred
years subsisted by it self in a State of Peregrination and Captivity from
Abraham unto Moses, who brought them out of Egypt, and gave them the Law.

But Secondly, As there is ground for this distinction in the nature of the
thing, so is it in effect made by the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. This I say, that the
Covenant that was before confirmed of God [with Abraham] in Christ, the Law
which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul, that it should
make the Promise [to Abraham] of none Effect. Here is a plain difference made
between the Covenant or Promise which God made with Abraham and his Seed, when
he separated him from the World unto himself, and that Political one, which he
afterward made with the Jews, when he gave them the Law: And this difference
is also observed, Romans 4.13. The Promise, that he should be the Heir of the
World, was not given to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through
the Righteousness of Faith: For if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is
made void, and the Promise is of no effect.

From these words, which distinguish so plainly between the Covenant which God
made with Abraham, or the Promise, which he made unto him, and the Law, it is
evident that the beginning of the Jewish Church purely considered, as a Church,
is to be dated from the Covenant which God made with Abraham, and therefore in
the second place, the way to find out the nature of the Abrahamical, or pure
Jewish Church, is to consider the nature of the Covenant, or Promise upon which
it was founded; and if we examine the Scriptures, we shall find, that it was an
Evangelical Covenant: For substance the same with that which is since made
betwixt God and us through Christ. This will appear upon a Review of those
Scriptures which teach us, That Faith was the Condition of this Abrahamical
Covenant; that it was made with Fide autem stare justitia^, and illic esse
vitam praedicta^ est apud Habbaccuc. Justus autem ex fide vivet. Inde Abraham
pater Gentium credidit. In Genes. credidit Abraham Deo, and deputatum est ei ad
justitiam. Item Paulus ad Galatas. Abraham credidit Deo and deputatum est ei ad
justitiam. Cognoscitis ergo qui ex fide sunt hi sunt filii Abrahae, providens
autem Scriptura quia ex fide, etc. Cyprian. advers. Judaeos. Judaeos a Deo
recessisse. -- successisse vero in eorum locum Christianos fide Dominum
promerentes, and de omnibus Gentibus, ac toto orb venientes. Cyprian. ad
Quirin. Testim. L. 3.
Abraham, as the Father of the Faithful, and in him with all Believers, with
his Spiritual, as well as Carnal Seed, proceeding from him by Spiritual, as
well as Natural Generation; and that the Blessings or Promises of this Covenant
belonged unto them upon the same Account of their Faith.

To this purpose speaks the Apostle in the Fourth Chapter of his Epistle to
the Romans, from the 9th. to the 15th. Verse: Comes then this Blessedness [of
Justification by Faith] upon the Circumcision only, or upon the Uncircumcision
also? For we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness; how was
it then reckoned? When he was in Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? Not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision; and he received the Sign of Circumcision a
Seal of (the Promises made to) the Righteousness of Faith, which he had being
yet uncircumcised that [so believing before Circumcision] he might be the
Father (both) of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also (as his Children) and the Father
of Circumcision to them, who are not of the Circumcision only, but (who) also
walk in the Steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised; for the Promise that he should be the Heir of the World (in his
Posterity) was not to Abraham, or his Seed, through (the Righteousness of) the
Law; but through the Righteousness (which comes) of Faith: For if they [only]
which are of the Law be Heirs, (his) Faith ( so much celebrated is made void,
and the Promise made (to it) of no effect. So Gal. 3. from the 5th to the 10th
Verse: He therefore that ministers unto you the (extraordinary Gifts of the)
Spirit, and works Miracles among you; does he it by the works of the Law, or
by the Faith, which you have heard preached, even as (it is written of) Quoniam
autem and in Abraham praefigurabatur fides nostra, and quoniam Patriarcha
nostrae fidei, and velut propheta fuit, plenissime Apostolus docuit in ea
Epistola, quae est ad Galatas dicens, Qui ergo tribuit vobis Spiritum and
operatur virtutes in vobis -- Irenaeus Lib. 4. cap. 38.
Abraham, (he) believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness;
know ye therefore, that they which are (the Children) of Faith, the same are
the Children of Abraham; and God in the Scripture foreseeing that he would
justify the Heathen through Faith preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. So then they which be (the
Children) of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham who is the Father of them
that believe. Afterward in Verse 26. Now to Abraham, or his Seed, or Race were
the Promises [of God] made: He, ( i. e. God, or Moses his Penman) says, Not
to Seeds, or Races, as if there were diverse of them; but to thy Seed, i. e. to
one of thy Seed, which is Christ. And this I say, that the (Abrahamical)
Covenant that was before confirmed by God in Christ, the Law, which was four
hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul, that it should make the Promise
( made unto Abraham) of none effect.

From all these Texts put together, it is plain, that the Abrahamical Covenant,
upon which the Jewish Church, as such, was founded, was of a Spiritual,
Evangelical Nature, and perfectly verified and fulfilled in Jesus Christ, who
was made of the Seed of Abraham, and in whom all the Families of the Earth are
blessed, and whose Day Abraham himself saw, and rejoiced. It is farther evident
from them, that this Covenant was made with Abraham, as the Father of
Believers, and with his Posterity, not as proceeding from him by natural, but
by spiritual Generation, as Heirs of his Faith, as is plain from Romans 4.16.
Therefore (the Promise) is of Faith, that so also it might be by Grace; to the
end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed (of Abraham) not to that only,
which is of the Law; but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is
the Father of us all, both Jew and Gentile, that believe. So Chap. 9.6. etc.
not as though the Word or Promise of God to them had taken none effect: For they
are not all (the) Israel which are descended of Israel; neither because they
are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children (of God's Covenant) but ('it is
said) in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; [ though Abraham had more Sons] that is
(all) they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of
God; but the Children of the Promise (only as Isaac was) are counted for the
Seed.

Hence says the Apostle in the name of the Christians, Phil. 3.3.
we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and have no
Confidence in the Flesh, and it is one God which shall justify the
Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith; and if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs, according to the Promise,
which God made unto Abraham.

Furthermore, that this Covenant was Evangelical, and made with the Posterity
of Abraham, not as his Natural, but as his Spiritual Offspring, will appear in
the third place from the initiatory Sacrament into it, which was Circumcision,
or cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh; as it is written, You shall
Circumcise the Foreskin of your Flesh, and it shall be a Sign of the Covenant
betwixt me and you. Hence the Covenant of which it was the Sign, is called by
Acts 7.8.
St. Stephen, the Covenant of Circumcision; and Circumcision on the other hand
is called by St. Paul, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; Faith, or
Faithful Obedience being the Condition of that Covenant which God required of
the Children of Abraham, and which they promised to perform. It also signified
the Circumcision of the (...), Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260. (...).
ibid. p. 261.
Heart; as Moses said unto the People of Israel, Circumcise the Foreskin of
your Hearts, Deuteronomy. 10.16. and in Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise
thine heart, and the hearts of thy Seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God
with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may live. And
agreeable unto this Spiritual Signification of Circumcision, St. Paul says
Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outwardly in the Flesh, but he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God.

As to the Persons who were capable of initiation into the Jewish Church by
this Sacrament, we have a very plain account at the institution of it in Genesis
Chap. 27. I will (says God unto Abraham) establish my Covenant between Me, and
thee, and thy Seed after thee for an Everlasting Covenant to be a God unto
thee, and thy Seed after thee -- Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore thou and
thy Seed after thee in their Generations; this is [The Token of] my Covenant,
which ye shall keep between Me and you, and thy Seed after thee, every Male
among you shall be Circumcised. And ye shall Circumcise the flesh of your
Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant betwixt Me and you, and he
that is eight days old shall be Circumcised among you, every Male in your
Generations, he that is born in the House, or bought with Money of any
Stranger, which is not of thy Seed, he that is born in thy House, and he that
is bought with thy Money must needs be Circumcised, and my Covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting Covenant.

From this account of Persons to be Circumcised, it is plain,

First, That Gentiles who were born of Exodus 12.48, 49.
Gentile Parents in Abraham's House, or bought with his Money, as Servants then
were, and Blacks are now among us, were to be initiated into the Covenant by
Circumcision, from whence it appears, that the Spiritual Race of Abraham were
the Children of the Covenant, and that when God promised to be a God to him,
and his Seed after him, he meant the Children of his Faith. Hence in all Ages
of the Jewish Church, if any Gentiles embraced the Jewish Faith and Religion,
they were admitted into it by Circumcision, and thereupon reckoned among the
Posterity of Abraham, and the peculiar People of God, although they were not
the Children of Abraham according to the Flesh. There were great numbers of
Gentiles thus converted to the Jewish Faith and Religion, and grafted like wild
Branches into the Olive Tree, in all the Ages of the Jewish Church. Not to
mention particular Persons, we read that many of the Medes and Persians became
Jews in the time of Ashuerus, Esther 8.17. Seldom de jure l. 2. c. 2.
Likewise, in the time of David and Solomon, vast numbers of the neighboring
Countries embraced Judaism, and in the time of Hyrcanus the whole Nation of the
Idumaeans turned Jews, and lived in their own Country according to the Jewish
Rites. This short account of the Jewish Proselytes may satisfy any Man, who is
not perverted beyond cure, that the Church of the Jews was not founded upon,
nor constituted by natural Generation, but by Spiritual Regeneration, as the
Church Christian is, and that those, who were then related unto God, as Members
of his Church were so, because they were the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, who
then was and still is the Father of the Church, and Church Members, to whom he
is related not in his Natural, but in his Religious Capacity, as he was a
Believer, and the Father of all those that believe.

But Secondly, It is manifest from this Scriptural account of persons to be
Circumcised, that Circumcision was an Ordinance of Latitude, comprehending
Persons of all Ages, and that Children, and Minors not yet arrived at years of
Discretion, who were incapacitated, as to some ends of Circumcision, were
notwithstanding to be solemnly initiated by it, as well as grown Men, who were
capable of all. God was pleased to call them his; nay, they were his Property,
as much as their Parents of whom they descended, he looked upon them as holy
and separate, and as Candidates of the Covenant, and he thought them so well
qualified for admission into it, that he would not have it put off beyond the
eighth day.

He that is eight days old, or as it is in the Original, a Son of eight days,
shall be circumcised among you. God was so far from excluding of them from
Sacramental Initiation upon the account of natural incapacity, that he limited
the time for the administration of it, beyond which he would not have it
deferred. And accordingly the Jews ever did most religiously observe it, from
the time of Abraham unto the time of John the Baptist, and Christ, who were
both Circumcised the Luke 1.59.2.21.
eighth day. Nay when any Gentile turned Jew, they immediately Circumcised his
Children if he desired it; always understanding that Children were called and
elected by God in their Parents. Thus says God unto Abraham, I will establish
my Covenant between thee and me, and thy Seed after thee for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and thy Seed after thee.

The great Goodness of God made him thus separate the Children with their
Parents from the rest of the World, and look upon them as part of his chosen
peculiar People, by which they became relatively Holy, and of a religious
Consideration, and differed from the Children of Unbelievers, as much as their
Parents did from the Unbelievers themselves. Since therefore God was pleased to
be so gracious as to choose the Children with their Parents, and look upon them
as Holy upon their account, it is no wonder that he should oblige them to
dedicate, and devote them betimes unto him, by solemn initiation into his
Church. I say, he called and elected them in their Parents, and with them
separated them unto himself from the World, and, agreeably to the nature of
this Gracious Call, and separation, he made it a sufficient qualification for
their actual admission into the Church, by the initiating Ordinance, which the
Children of Heathens were not capable of, because they were not so called, and
chosen, and separated of God.

This was ground enough for their admission into the Church, and for God to
look upon them, as Believers, though they could not make open Profession of
their Faith, as Abraham did before he was Baptized, and it is certain, after
the example of Abraham, all Seldom de Synedr. l. 2. c. 3.
adult Proselytes did. But though Abraham professed his Faith before he was
Circumcised, Isaac the next Heir of the Promise was Circumcised before he
professed, or could profess his Faith, because if he lived he was as sure to
profess it by virtue of his Calling, and Election as any adult Proselyte was to
continue in the Profession of his.

In the mean time the Faith and Consent of the Father, or, if the Child had
none, of the Susceptor or Godfather, 1 Maccab. 2.46.
and of the Congregation under which he was Circumcised, was believed of old by
the Jews to be Seld. de iure lib 2. c. 2. de Synedr. l. 1. c 3.
imputed to the Child, as his own Faith and Consent. They had very good ground
in the Scriptures for this Opinion, because the Infidelity and Disobedience of
the Parents, in wilfully neglecting, or despising Circumcision, was imputed to
the Children, who were esteemed and punished as Breakers of the Covenant, when
they were not circumcised, as it is written, Every uncircumcised Male, whose
Flesh of his Foreskin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his
People; he has broken my Covenant; Cassand. de Baptism. Infant. p. 732.
and therefore if the Act of Parents in neglecting to bring their Children to
Circumcision was reputed theirs, much more their Act in bringing them to it
might well be reputed as their Act and Deed. Thus in Numb. 3.28. we find the
keeping of the Sanctuary imputed to the Males of the Cohathites of a month old
and upwards, because their Fathers actually kept it, and they were to be
trained up unto it; and in Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. the little ones are expressly said
to enter into Covenant with God, because the Men of Israel did so; and thus
also our Blessed Lord, who took upon him the Seed of Abraham, although he
healed Matthew. 9.29.
grown Persons for their own Faith; yet he healed Mark 9.23. Matthew. 8.13. John
4.50. Vid. Cassand. de Baptismo Infant. p. 729. Dr. Tailor of Baptizing
Infants, Great Exemplar. P^^t 1. Sect. 9.
Children upon the account of the Faith of their Parents; or others who
besought him for them; as it were imputing it to them for their own Faith.

Having now briefly discoursed of the Original, and Evangelical Nature of the
Jewish Church, and the Initiatory Sacrament of it, and the persons that were
initiated thereinto, I now proceed to make a few Observations upon the
Alteration of it, from the Mosaical into the Christian Economy; or from the
Legal State of it under the Old Testament, into the Evangelical under the New.

For as it was the same for Substance under the Law that it was before it; so
it still remains the same for Substance under the Gospel, that it was under the
Law. The Foundation is the same, though the Superstructure and Fashion of the
House be very different. For Abraham is still the Father of the Faithful; and
we that believe under the Gospel, are as much his Seed, and Children in God's
prime Intention, and the true meaning of the Words, as those that were
Believers under the Law.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Church-Christian is called in the New
Testament, the New and Supernal Jerusalem; to let us know, that Christianity is
nothing but Spiritual Judaism, the same City new reformed, constituted upon a
new Charter, blessed with more noble and ample Privileges than formerly; and
every way better built, and more August than it was. Thus in Rev. 3.12. Unto
him that overcomes (says the Son of Man) I will write the Name of my God, and
the Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which is come down out
of Heaven, from my God: that is, I will acknowledge him that holds out to the
end for a person truly godly, and for a true Member of the pure Catholic
Christian-Church, which is the Spiritual Jerusalem descended from above. And so
Chap. 21. 2. I saw the Holy City New Jerusalem coming down from God, down out
of Heaven prepared as a Bride, adorned for her Husband, meaning Jesus Christ.
So in Gal. 4. Jerusalem which is from above, or the Supernal Jerusalem is [a]
free [City] which is the Mother of us all.

Hence also it comes to pass, that St. Peter in his first General Epistle,
calls the Christians by those proper Titles and Appellations which God gave
unto the Jews, as unto his peculiar People, viz. a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People; which must needs imply, that the
Christian Church is fundamentally, and radically the same with the ancient
Church of the Jews. Accordingly St. Paul though he was the Doctor of the
Gentiles, yet compared the calling of them to the engrafting of the wild
Olive Tree into the old Olive Trees Stock. It some of the Branches (says Romans
11.
he unto them) be broken off [through Unbelief] and thou being a wild Olive
Branch, was grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest of the Root and
Fatness of the [Ancient] Olive Tree, boast not against the Branches [so cut
off] but if thou boast [remember that] thou bear not the Root, but the Root
thee; and afterward, If thou were cut off from the Olive Tree, which is wild
by Nature, and were grafted contrary to [thy wild] Nature into a good
Olive Tree, how much more shall these [unbelieving Jews] which be the natural
Branches, be re-grafted into their own Olive Tree? From this Comparison it is
plain, that the Jewish and Christian Church are the same in the Root and Stock:
And from this radical Argument that is betwixt them, it proceeds, that St. John
in his Symbolical way of Writing in the Apocalypse, calls the Christians Jews:
Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan which say they are Jews but
are not, Rev. 3.9.2.9. Indeed, as Judaism was nothing but mystical
Christianity; so Christianity is nothing but reformed Judaism, which made our
Savior, who was the Reformer of it, say unto the Jews, Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law, and the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to
perfect and fulfill. And unto his Disciples, who under him were to be
Master Builders of his House, he said, That a Scribe, or Doctor rightly
instructed unto the Kingdom of God, was like a Man that is an Householder, who
brings out of his Storehouse things both new and old. Thereby showing, as
Irenaeus observes, L. 4. c. 21. and 43.
that he must be a very skilful Scribe in the Old Testament, that was fit to
make a Workman of the new. The Old Testament and legal Economy was to be his
Magazine, and Storehouse, out of which he was to fetch many serviceable pieces
for the new Building; and accordingly our Savior, though in reforming the House
of Moses, he was fain to pull it down, that it might be enlarged, yet both he
that began the Reformation, and his Apostles, who finished it, like Men that
were House-holders, used much of the Old Timber and Materials, and conformed it
too, as much as they could, after the manner of the old. Dr. Hammond of
Infant Baptism.
They introduced as much of Judaism into the Christian Religion, as the nature
of the Reformation would well bear, and adhered as much as they could to the
old, both in the Matter and Form of the new Economy; and laid by few Jewish
Rites and Customs, but such as were fulfilled in Christ and Christianity, as
the Antitype and Substance of them; or else such as were inconsistent with the
Nature of the Church-Christian, as it was to be a manly, free, and universal
Church.

These were the two reasons for which Christ and his Apostles so much altered
the Face of the Church from what it was under the Mosaical Economy, First,
because very many of the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies were Ac primo ita his in
rebus comparatur, ut antitypus in typi locum succedat, eumque adeo loco moveat,
ut simul atque antitypus adsit, nullus deinceps typo locus, nullus usus
reperiatur. Outramus de Sacrificiis, Lib. 2. c. 16. p. 204.
fulfilled in Christ and Christianity; and Secondly, because many of them were
inconsistent with the nature of a manly, free and universal Church, such as
Christ intended his should be.

First, Then, many of the Ecclesiastical rites, and usages of the Jews were
laid aside, at the time of Reformation, because they were fulfilled in Christ,
as the Antitype, and Substance of them, as is plain from the words of the
Apostle, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect of
an Holyday, or of the New Moons, or of the Sabbath days, which are a Shadow of
things that are to come to pass; but the Body is Christ: that is to say, Let no
Man impose upon you the Doctrine of Mosaical Abstinence, or condemn you for
eating and drinking things prohibited by the Jewish Religion, or for not
observing their Feasts, New Moons and Sabbaths, which are but Types of
Christianity; and therefore ought to be laid aside. The like he does show in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the Temple, Priesthood, Altar,
Sacrifices, and the whole Temple-Service; as is plain from many Passages,
whereof I shall recite some. The Priesthood being changed, there is made also
of necessity a change in the Law, Chap. 7. 22. The Holy Ghost, this signifying
thereby, that the way into the holiest of all, was not yet made manifest,
while, as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, which was but a Figure for the
time then present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices; that could
not make him that did the Service perfect [and cleansed] as pertaining to the
Conscience, which stood, or consisted only in a certain use of Meats and
Drinks, and diverse Washings, and other carnal Ordinances imposed on them, [as
Types] until the time of Reformation [by Christ] Chap. 9.8, 9, 10. So verse. 24.
Christ [with the Blood of his Sacrifice] is not entered into the Holy Places
made with Hands, which are the Figures of the true. And after all, Chap. 10. 1.
the Law having only a Shadow of the good things to come, and not the Solidity
of the things themselves, can never with those [umbratical] Sacrifices, which
they offered year by year continually make the Comers thereunto perfect.

It would make a Book of it self, to recite all the Types and Shadows of the
Old Testament, which are applied to Christ and Christianity by the Writers
under the New. Besides what occurs in the Apostles Writings, there is much to
the same purpose in the Epistle of St. Barnabas, which is very ancient; the
Dialogue of Justin Martyr, with Trypho the Jew; and the Fourth Book of
Irenaeus, who after insisting upon many typical things, and persons in the Old
Testament, at last concludes in the 38th Chapter, Nihil enim vacuum, nihil sine
signo; that almost every thing in it was typical, and had a mystical Reference
to something under the New.

But Secondly, as many of the Ecclesiastical Rites, and Usages of the Jewish
Church were taken away, because they were fulfilled in Christ and Christianity,
so many others were annulled, as being inconsistent with the nature of the
Church-Christian, as it was to be a manly, free, and universal Church.

First, As it was to be a manly Church in opposition to the legal Pedagogy of
the Jews, as St. Paul called it in saying, That the Law was but a Schoolmaster
to bring them unto Christ [Gal. 3.24] and that the Jews were under it as
Children are under Tutors, and Governors, until the time appointed by the
Father, the Fullness of Time, when God sent forth his Son, [ Chap. 4.1, 2, 3,
4.] Hither we may refer abundance of those Precepts which concerned their
Washings, and Purifications, or their Abstinence from menstruous Women, and
unclean Creatures, which God imposed upon them in that State of Minority,
chiefly to lecture unto them moral Purity and Temperance: For they had childish
Understandings, and were, like Children, to be instructed by Symbols, and
Symbolical Lessons, as is plain from the Precept about their Phylacteries,
Numb. 15.38. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and bid them that they make
Fringes in the Borders of their Garments throughout their Generations, and that
they put upon the Fringes of their borders, a Ribband of Blue, and it shall be
unto you for a Fringe, that you may look upon it, and remember all the
Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that ye seek not after your own
Heart, and your own Eyes, after which ye use to go a Whoring.

But Secondly, As many of their Rites and Ceremonies were annulled at the time
of Reformation, because they were inconsistent with the manly nature of the
Christian Religion, so others were annulled, because they were not consistent
with the free nature of it, in opposition to the Servile nature of the Jewish
Church, which is excellently set forth by the Apostle, Gal. 4.22, etc. Abraham
had two Sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman, but he that
was born of the Bond-maid was born according to the Flesh, but he that was born
of the Freewoman, was born [by virtue of the] Promise which God made unto
Abraham: Which things are an Allegory, for these [two Women] are the two
Covenants. The one the Covenant which was made on Mount Sinai, which gendreth
to Bondage, and this was Agar. For this Agar is [the figure of] Mount Sinai in
Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is [still] in Bondage with
her Children. But [Sarah is the figure of the Spiritual] Jerusalem, which is
[come with Christ from] above, which is the Mother of us all.

Now this Ecclesiastical Bondage, and Servitude of the Jews, consisted in the
vast number of their Religious Rites and Observances, which if a Man consider
in retail as to the Days, Weeks, Months, and Years, which they were bound to
observe; the multitude of Sacrifices of all sorts, which they were bound to
offer; the frequent Washings and Purifications they were bound to undergo; the
strict distinction they were to make of clean from unclean Animals; the Rules
and Ceremonies they were bound to observe at Births, Marriages, Burials, at Bed
and Board, at Home and Abroad, in Sickness and in Health, nay, even in Plowing,
Sowing, and Reaping, he shall find that they were left almost in nothing to
their own Freedom and Discretion, but that the Observances, to which they were
bound in almost all their Actions, took up half of their time.

Such a burdensome and grievous Economy was that under which the Jews lived,
but yet how severe and slavish soever it was, it was suitable to the slavish
temper of that People, upon whom God imposed all these Carnal Ordinances for
the hardness of their hearts, and propension to Idolatry, as (...).
Justin Martyr often observes in his Dialogue with the Jew.

They were apt to forget God, and therefore he loaded them with so many Divine
Rites and Observations, that at all times and places, and in every action, they
might be put in mind of him, and this Ceremonial Yoke was so heavy upon them,
that it was little less than intolerable, according to St. Peter, who said, Why
tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, which neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear? This he said in the Council at Jerusalem,
against the believing Pharisees, who taught, that it was needful to Circumcise
the Gentile Christians, and to command them to keep the Mosaical Law, not yet
rightly understanding, or believing, that it was one end of Christ's coming to
set them free from the Mosaic Observances, as the Apostles then declared, and
as St. Paul afterward instructed the Galatians, who were led away into this
error, saying, Stand fast therefore in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made
us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.

Hither therefore we are to refer the annulling not so much of any particular
sort of Jewish Ceremonies as of the whole Mass of them, even the dissolution of
the whole Ceremonial Law, of which the Jews were grown weary, and with which
they had been for a long time heavy laden, when Christ called them to take his
Yoke and Burden upon them, which was to be so easy, and light.

But then in the last place, as the obligatory force of all the Jewish Rites
and Ceremonies were taken away, because they were inconsistent with the free
nature of the Christian Church: So some more especially were annulled, as being
inconsistent with the universality of it, as it was to be a Catholic Church.

Hither we may refer all those which were set up by God as Maimonides more
Nevoch. p. 3. c. 37.
Mounds and Hedges to keep the Jews from mixing and conversing with their
Idolatrous Neighbors, and their Idolatrous Neighbors from being too familiar
and well acquainted with them. Such as these were those of not rounding the
Corners of their Heads, and of not shaving of the Corners of their Beards, of
not letting their Cattle gender with diverse kinds, of not sowing their Fields
with mingled Seed, nor their Vineyards with diverse Seeds; of not Plowing with
an Ox and an Ass together, and of not wearing a Garment of Linen and Woolen.
God injoined them these, and other things in opposition to the neighboring
Idolatrous Nations, that there might be a mutual strangeness and hatred betwixt
them, and that by these and other Ceremonial Singularities, they might be
distinguished from the rest of the World. But then Christ coming to break down
the middle wall of Partition betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, and to abolish the
Enmity of Ordinances that was betwixt them, that he might make Peace betwixt
them, and reconcile them both into one Body in the Cross, it was requisite to
this end, that he should abolish these, and all other distinguishing Characters
betwixt them, which would have hindered the Progress of the Gospel, had it been
clogged with Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, which were become so odious, and
ridiculous to all the Gentile World.

In particular, For this reason he was obliged to change the Initiatory
Sacrament, and the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, I mean Circumcision, by which
the Jews (excepting a few The ancient Egyptians, Ethiopians, Ismaelites,
Cholchians.
Nations) were distinguished from all the World.

They were become Jura Verpe per Anchialum. Mart. Credat Judaeus Apelles.
Horat. Ferro succiderit inguinis oram. Petron. Mox and praeputia ponunt. Juven.
1 Cor. 7.18. Is any Man called, being circumcised, let him not be
uncircumcised. i. e. Let him not use means to attract the Praeputium, which the
Jews did often to avoid Shame, and Persecution in Gentile Countries.
odious and ridiculous to all other People upon the account of it, and for this
reason it would have been a mighty bar to the Progress of the Gospel, had the
Gentiles been to be initiated thereby.

Furthermore, it alone was reckoned as a grievous burden by reason of the
painful and bloody nature of it; and for that Reason also was laid aside, as
being inconsistent with the free and easy nature of the Christian Religion;
for if Zipporah was so much offended at Moses, and called him a bloody Husband
upon the account of it, we may well presume how much the Gentiles would have
been offended at the Apostles, and at their Doctrine, upon the account thereof.

No Religious Rite could be more ungrateful to Flesh and Blood, and therefore
the Wisdom of our Lord is to be admired in changing of it into the easy and
practicable Ceremony of Baptism; which was of more universal significancy, and
which Diabolus ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum divinorum idolorum mysteriis
aemulatur, tingit and ipse quosdam, utique credentes, ac fideles suos --
caeterum si Numae superstitiones revolvamus -- nonne manifest diabolus
morositatem illam Judaicae legis imitatus est? Tertull. de praescrip. haeret.
c. 40. O nimium faciles! Qui tristia crimina caedis tolli fluminea posse
putatis aqua.
Pagans (as Paganism was nothing but Judaism corrupted by the Devil) practiced,
as well as Jews.

Hitherto I have given the Reasons of altering the Jewish Economy, and of
reforming of it into the Christian Church, but then my undertaking obliges me
to prove what before I observed, that Verissimum enim est, quod vir doctissimus
Hugo Broughtonus ad Danielem notavit: Nullos a Christo institutos ritus novos,
etc. Grotii opusc. Tom. 3. p. 520. See Dr. Hammond in his discourse of the
Baptizing of Infants.
Christ and his Apostles, who were the Reformers of it, did build with many of
the old Materials, and conformed their new house, as much as they could, after
the Platform of the old. This will appear from Baptism it self, which was a
Ceremony by which Seld. de jure l. 2. c. 2. de Synedi. l. 1. c. 3. Lightfoot
Horae Hebraicae, p. 42. Hammond on Matthew. 3. v. 1. and of the Baptizing of
Infants. Jacob Altingius dissert. Philologica Septima de Proselytis.
Proselytes both Men, Women, and Children were initiated into the Jewish
Church. Though it were but a mere humane Institution, or, as the dissenting
Parties usually phrase it, a mere humane Invention; yet so much respect had our
blessed Lord for the Ancient Orders and Customs of the Jewish Church, that
being obliged to lay by Circumcision for the reasons above mentioned, he
consecrated this instead of it to be the Sacrament of initiation into his
Church, and a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. So likewise the other
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was certainly of Mede 1 Book disc. 51. b. 11.
Christian Sacrifice. Grot. Opusc Tom. 3. p. 510. Dr. Cudworth on the Lord's
Supper. Thorndike of Religious Assembly. chap. 10. Dr. Tailor 's great
Exemplar. p. 1. disc. of Baptism. Numb. 11.
Jewish Original, as has been showed by many Learned Men, and the
Correspondence of the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, to the High Priest,
Priests and Levites, does show that the Subordination of the Christian
Hierarchy is taken from the Jewish Church, as St. Jerome observes in his
Epistle to Evagrius. Et ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri
Testamento, quod Aaron, and filii ejus, and Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi
Episcopi, and Presbyteri and diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. What the
High Priest, Priests, and Levites, were in the Temple, that the Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, are in the Church according to Apostolical
Constitution taken from the Old Testament.

Hither also is to be referred that wonderful Correspondence betwixt the
Priesthood and Altar of the Jewish and Christian Church, as it is most
excellently discoursed by the Learned, and Pious In his Discourse concerning
the one Altar, and the one Priesthood, etc.
Mr. Dodwell.

To all which, I may add many other Institutions, as that of Dr. Tailor his
great Exemplar Disc. of Baptism. Num^. 11. Lightfoot on 1 Cor. c. 5. v. 4.
Excommunication, and of the ritual performance of Ordination, Confirmation,
and Absolution of Penitents by Imposition of Hands, all which are of Jewish
Original.

Likewise, the Observation of the ancient Love Feasts before the
Holy-Eucharist, which for their extreme inconvenience, were taken away by the
Council. Sext. in Trull. c. 24.
Churches Authority; the use of Festivals and Fasts; the Institution of the
Lord's day, which is nothing but the Sabbath translated. In a word, the
manifold and almost entire Correspondence of the Church in her public
Assemblies, and Worship with the Synagogue, as it is set forth by Mr.
Thorndike, in his Book of Religious Assemblies, even to the formal use of the
Hebrew-word, 1 Cor. 14.16 Romans 11.36. Ephesians. 3.21. Phil. 4.20. 2 Timothy 1.17. Heb.
23.27. 1 Pet. 4.11. Rev. 1.16. Rev. 1.7. Just. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 97. Iren. l. 2.
c. 10. Athan. Apol. ad constable. Imper. p. 683.
Amen.

Hitherto I have made a short Previous Discourse concerning many useful
Particulars. As

First, Concerning the beginning, or Original of the Jewish Church.

Secondly, Concerning the Nature of it.

Thirdly, Concerning the initiatory Sacrament into it, and the Persons that
were capable of Initiation.

And Lastly, Concerning the alteration of it from the Legal into the
Evangelical Dispensation; wherein I have briefly showed the true grounds of
that blessed Reformation, and how tender Christ, and his Apostles were of
Altering or rejecting, more than was necessary, or of receding more than was
needful from the Jewish Church.

All these things I thought necessary to be discoursed [as Praecognita] to fit
and prepare the Reader's mind to understand the State of the Controversy about
Infant Baptism, as it is proposed in these five Comprehensive Questions. 1.
Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism? 2. Whether they are excluded from
Baptism by Christ? 3. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church which
appoints Infants to be Baptized? 4. Whether it be the duty of Christian
Parents to bring their Children unto Baptism? 5. Whether it is lawful to
Communicate with believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy? The whole merit
of the Controversy about Infant Baptism, lies in these five Comprehensive
Questions, and I shall presently proceed to the stating of them after I have
showed, that Circumcision was a Sacrament of equal Significancy, Force, and
Perfection with Baptism, and that Baptism succeeded in the room of it, not as
the Antitype succeeded in the place of the Type, but as one positive
Institution succeeds in the place of another, and this also is necessary to be
foreknown by the Reader, because the Anabaptists endeavor to shift off the
force of many good Arguments, which otherwise are not to be evaded, by saying
that Circumcision under the Old Testament, was a Type of Baptism under the New.

Now to show that Circumcision was not a Type but only the Forerunner of
Baptism, we must note, that strictly and properly speaking, there was the same
difference betwixt the Type and the Antitype, as betwixt the Shadow, and the
Substance, or betwixt a Man and his Picture in a Glass; Deinde (quod maxim
advertendum) id inter Antitypum and Typum interest, quod quae revera in
Antitypo vis in est, ea non nisi specie tenus, aut gradu long exiliori in Typo
extiterit. Enimvero quam^is Typus nonnunquam rem aliquam cum Antitypo suo
communem habuerit, ea tamen res multo minus in Typo, quam in Antitypo semper
valet. -- ita ut vis rei adumbrantis virtutis in adumbrata repertae nil nisi
Symbolica quaedam Species, aut tam exilis gradus fuerit, ut pro umbra quadam
haberi possit. Outramus de Sacrif. l. 2. c. 18.
insomuch, that what was really, literally, and properly in the Antitype, and
of perfect Efficacy and Power, was generally, but Symbolically and
representatively in the Type, and figurative of something, which did in a more
noble, perfect, eminent, and efficacious manner belong to the Antitype, than it
did to it.

Thus the blood of the Legal Sacrifices were but Shadows, and Representations
of the Blood of Christ, and the purging and cleansing Virtue in their Blood,
serving to the purifying of the Flesh, was also but a faint and umbratical
resemblance of the more noble and efficacious cleansing Virtue of his Blood
which purges the Conscience from dead works. So the Brazen Serpent was but a
Shadow or Symbol of Christ upon the Cross, and the healing Virtue which,
belonged to it, was but a figure, or shadow of that more eminent, and
powerfully healing Virtue, which was in Jesus Christ. But the case is not so
betwixt Circumcision, and Baptism, because Circumcision has no Symbolical
likeness with Baptism, nor any thing belonging to it common with Baptism, which
does not as literally, properly, fully, and eminently belong unto it, as unto
Baptism it self.

For First, Is Baptism a Sacrament of initiation into the Covenant of Grace
under the Gospel? So was Circumcision before, and under the Law. Is Baptism now
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith? So was Circumcision then. Does it
properly, and effectually confirm and establish the Covenant betwixt God and us
now? So did Circumcision then, as it is written, you shall Circumcise the Flesh
of your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant betwixt me and you.
Baptism does nothing under the Gospel, which Circumcision did not as properly,
and effectually under the Law. This was then as absolute and real a Sacrament,
as that now is. This did then as really initiate true Believers, as that now
does. It never was an Umbraticall Sacrament, or shadow of another Sacrament, it
never did Umbratically initiate Believers, or Umbratically, and in show and
Similitude only confirm the Covenant betwixt God, and the Seed of Abraham; and
therefore could not be a Type of Baptism, no more than the Broad Seal of
England 300 Years ago was a Type of this.

Accordingly it is never mentioned in the New Testament as a Type of Baptism,
nor Baptism, as the Antitype of it; but on the contrary, the only Typical
Adumbrations which are found of it in the Gospel, are such things, which have
some Symbolical likeness with it, and were fitted upon that account to be Types
thereof.

The First, Is the Baptizing of the Israelites in the Mare autem illud
Sacramentum Baptismi fuisse declarat beatus Apostolus, Dicens, nolo enim vos
ignorare. -- Et addidit, dicens, haec autem omnia figurae nostrae sunt.
Cyprian. Ep. 69. Ed. Ox.
Red Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. Where the Red Sea is a Type of the Water of Baptism,
their passing through it, when they were delivered from Pharaoh and his Host, a
Type of our passing through that, and of our deliverance thereby from the
Devil, and his Angels; and their Captain and Deliverer Moses, a Type of our
Savior Christ.

The Second, Is the saving of Noah and his Family in the Ark, the like figure
whereunto, says the Apostle, even Baptism does also save us, Item Petrus ipse
quoque demonstrans, etc. Cyprian. Ep. 74. ad Pompeium contra Epist. Stephani,
and in Firmilian. Ep. contra eandem Epist. ad Cyprian. and in Ep. 69. Quod and
Petrus ostendens unam Ecclesiam esse, etc.
1 Pet. 3.21. Here it is plain, that the Waters of the Flood were a shadow of
the Waters of Baptism, the Ark a Type of the Church, and that the passing of
the Ark through the Waters did prefigure our passing through the Waters of
Baptism in the Ark of the Church.

But as for Circumcision it has nothing in it Symbolical of Baptism, nor was
it an Umbratical, but a real Consignation of the Covenant of Grace, every way
as real, and substantial an Ordinance, as Baptism now is, and therefore
succeeded in the room of it, not as the Antitype did in the place of the Type,
but as one absolute Ordinance or positive Institution does in the place of
another, according to the Apostle, who says unto the Colossians. -- In whom
also ye are Circumcised, with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, having
been buried with him in Baptism, Col. 2.11, 12.

But in the second place, if we consider the Original of Baptism, as a Jewish
Institution, we shall find it very improbable, that Circumcision should be a
Type of it, because a Type properly speaking is a Typus, quatenus vox ista
sensum habet Theologicum, ita definiri posse videtur, ut sit futuri alicujus
Symbolum quoddam, aut exemplum ita a Deo comparatum, ut ipsius plane instituto
futurum illud prafiguret. Quod autem ita praefiguratur illud Antitypus dici
solet. Outramus de Sacrificiis, l. 1. cap. 18.
Symbol of something future, or an Exemplar appointed under the Old Testament
to prefigure something under the New.

But, Baptism was it self of Jewish Institution under the Old Testament; and by
consequence could not be Typified, and prefigured by Circumcision, with which
it was coexistent, and used with it for many years together in the Jewish
Church.

The Jewish Church made it a Ceremony of initiating Proselytes unto the Law,
and our Savior liking the Institution, continued the use of it, and made it
the only Ceremony of Initiating Proselytes unto the Gospel, superadding unto it
the complete Nature of an Initiatory Sacrament, or the full force of
Circumcision as it was a Sign of the Covenant, and a Seal of the Righteousness
of Faith.

These things being premised, let us proceed to the stating of the former
Questions. And first of all,

Quest. I. Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism?

Which, considering what has already been said concerning the Spiritual and
Evangelical Nature of the Covenant, which God made with Abraham, and the
initiation of young Children into it by God's especial appointment, cannot
without rashness be affirmed. Nothing can reflect more dishonor upon the
Wisdom of God, and the practice of the Jewish Church than to assert Infants to
be incapable of the same privilege, which God, and the Jewish Church granted
unto them. For God commanded them to be Circumcised, and the Jewish Church
commanded them to be Baptized, as well adult Proselytes, and if they were then
capable both of Circumcision, and Baptism, surely they are capable of Baptism
now.

If they be not, from whence comes the difference? Not from the Nature of the
Covenants, for the Covenant, which God made with Abraham, and his Seed, was, as
I have showed, the same Covenant for substance, which he has since renewed
with us in Christ: Nor from the Signs and Seals of the Covenant; for
Circumcision was a Sign and Seal of the same Grace, or of the same
Righteousness of Faith under the Old Testament, that Baptism is now under the
New.

Wherefore, since the Covenants were for substance the same, both Spiritual and
Evangelical Covenants, and the Grace of those Covenants the very same, and only
the Rites and Ceremonies which were Signs of those Covenants, and Seals of that
Grace being different; what hinders in the nature of the thing, but that
Infants who were capable of the one, should not also be capable of the other?
Is Baptism a more Spiritual Ordinance than Circumcision? That cannot be,
because Circumcision is a Gospel-Ordinance; I mean, an Ordinance of the Gospel
which God preached before unto Abraham, and if the Spirituality of outward
Ordinances are to be measured from the ends of their institution, then
Circumcision was every way as Spiritual as Baptism, because it really signed
the same Covenant, and sealed the same Grace, and was a Ceremony of Initiation
to the same Spiritual Seed of Abraham, that Baptism now is.

Wherefore, if the relative nature of Circumcision, considered as a Sacrament,
was the same under the Law, that Baptism is under the Gospel, it must needs
follow, that Children under the Gospel, are as capable of this (supposing no
new Command to exclude them) as under the Law, they were of that; if Infant
Church Membership, or the Initiation of Infants was then no absurdity, surely
it can be none now: If God under the Old Testament vouchsafed it as a gracious
Privilege unto Children to be incorporated with actual Believers, and with
them to be made members of his Church; without a Prohibition to the contrary,
they must needs be capable of the same Privilege still Nay, if Infants were
admitted into the Church, when the entrance into it was more grievous, and not
without blood, how unreasonable is it to assert, that they are now incapable of
admission into it, when the entrance into it is made more easy, and more
agreeable to the natural weakness of a young and tender Child? Certainly if the
Jewish Infants were Circumcised with the most painful and bloody Circumcision
made with hands, Christian Infants, without a Special Countermand from God,
must be deemed capable of the Circumcision made without hands, I mean of
Baptism, which is the Circumcision of Christ. What God has Sanctified, and
Adopted, and made a Member of his Church, let no Man presume to think it
incapable of Sanctification, Adoption, and Church Membership, but yet so rash
and extravagant have the professed Adversaries of Infant Baptism been, as to
pronounce little Infants as incapable of Baptism, as the young ones of
unreasonable Creatures, and that it is as vain to call upon God to send his
Holy Spirit upon them, as to pray him to illuminate a Stone or a Tree.

Nay, upon this very Presumption, that Infants are incapable of Baptism, they
assert Infant Baptism to be a Scandalous abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism, a
mere Nullity and insignificant performance, and scornfully call it
Baby-Baptism, forgetting all this while that Circumcision of Infants was no
scandalous abuse of the Ordinance of Circumcision, but a valid and significant
Performance, and that in their Phrase there was Baby-Circumcision, and
Baby-Baptism in the Jewish Church.

The reason why they conclude Infants incapable of Baptism, is taken from the
consideration of their incapacity, as to some ends and uses of Baptism, which
cannot be answered (say they) but by the Baptism of grown Persons, who are
capable of understanding the Gospel, and of professing their Faith, and
Repentance, and of submitting unto Baptism, and of having their Faith and Hope
further strengthened in the use of it; but Infants being utterly incapable of
understanding the Gospel, or of professing their Faith, and Repentance, and of
submitting unto Baptism in which they are merely passive, or of having their
Faith strengthened in the use of it, they ought to be deemed incapable of
Baptism, whose ends are so much frustrated, when it is applied unto them.

But this way of arguing, how plausible soever it may seem at first hearing, is
weak and fallacious, and highly reflecting upon the Council, and Wisdom of God.

First, It is weak and fallacious, because it makes no distinction betwixt a
strict institution, which is instituted by God for one, or a few ends, and
precisely for Persons of one sort, and an Institution of Latitude, which is
instituted by him for several ends, and for different sorts of Persons
differently qualified for those several ends. Of the first sort, was the
Ordinance of Fringes abovementioned, which could only concern grown Persons,
because they only were capable of answering the end, for which it was
instituted, viz. To look upon them and remember the Commandments of the Lord,
and of the latter sort is the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, which was appointed
by God for several ends, and for Persons differently qualified, and capacitated
for those several ends, in so much, that Persons, who are incapacitated as to
some ends of Marriage, may yet honestly Marry, because they are capable of the
rest. All the ends and uses, for which it was appointed can only be answered by
the Marrying of Persons who are capacitated for procreation of Children,
notwithstanding superannuated Persons, who are past that capacity, are not
incapable Subjects of Marriage, nor is the Marriage of such invalid, or an
abuse of the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, because they are capable of answering
one end, for which Marriage was ordained.

This shows how fallaciously the Anabaptists argue against Baptizing of
Infants, because of their incapacity as to some ends and uses for which Baptism
was ordained; they ought first to have proved, what they take for granted, that
it was a Divine Institution of the first sort, which I call a strict
Institution, and then their Argument had been good, but this they will never be
able to prove, because Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision, which was
a Divine Institution of the latter sort, and because our Savior was Baptized,
in whom there was a greater incapacity, as to the ends of Baptism, than
possibly can be in Infants, even as he was in a greater incapacity as to
answering the ends of Circumcision, than ordinary Jewish Infants were. John
verily did Baptize with the Baptism of Repentance, and thereby sealed unto the
People the Remission of their Sins, and therefore understanding very well that
our Lord was not capable of this, and other ends of his Baptism, he forbad him,
telling him, that he was fitter to be the Baptist, than to be Baptized of him;
but yet as soon as our Lord gave him one general reason why he ought to be
Baptized, viz. Because it became him to fulfill all Righteousness, he suffered
him, which shows that Baptism is a Divine Institution of Latitude, and that in
such an Institution the incapacity of a Person, as to some ends, does not
incapacitate him for it, when he is capable of the rest.

But Secondly, This way of arguing from the incapacity of Infants, as to some
ends of Baptism is highly reflecting upon the Wisdom of God; who commanded
young Babes to be Circumcised, although all the ends of Circumcision could not
be answered, but by the Circumcision of adult Persons, who only were capable of
understanding the nature of the Institution, and the nature of the Covenant,
into which they were to enter, of professing their Faith and Repentance, and of
submitting unto the bloody Sacrament, in which Children were merely Passive,
and of having their Faith and Hope further strengthened upon fealing unto them
the Remission of their Sins.

Wherefore, the full force of this Objection rises up against
Infant-Circumcision, as well as Infant Baptism, because Circumcision was
instituted for the same ends, that Baptism now is, and accordingly when Men
were initiated by Circumcision they were to profess their Faith, and
Repentance, and shortly after at their Baptism solemnly to renounce Idolatry,
and all idolatrous Manners and Worship, and their idolatrous Kindred and
Relations; and yet upon the desire of such Proselytes, their Children were
initiated both by Circumcision, and Baptism, though they were altogether
incapable of understanding, or doing those things which their Fathers did.

Wherefore, those Men who argue against Infant Baptism, because it does not
answer all the ends of Baptism, reproach the Divine Wisdom, and the Wisdom of
the Jewish Church, not considering, that Circumcision was, and Baptism is an
Institution of great Latitude and compass, designed on purpose by God for
Children, in whom there is a capacity for some, nay, for the Rem Praecipuam in
Baptismo non attendunt, hoc est testificationem divinae benevolentiae in foedus
and tutelam suam suscipientis and gratiam conferentis, etc. nam in Baptismo
praecipua res est divina gratia, quae consistit in remissione peccatorum,
regeneratione, adoptione, haereditate Vitae aeternae, cujus sane gratiae
Infantes and indigentes and capaces sunt. Cassand. de Bapt. Infant.
chief ends of Baptism, as well as for Men and Women, in whom there is a
capa,city for all.

They are capable of all the ends of it, as it is instituted for a Sign from
God toward us, to assure us of his Gracious favor, and to consign unto us the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace. For their Childhood does not hinder, but
that they may be made Members of the Church, as of a Family, Tribe, College,
or any other Society, nor does it incapacitate them any more from being adopted
the Children of God, than the Children of any other Person, nor of becoming
Heirs of Eternal Life by virtue of that Adoption, than by virtue of any other
civil Adoption, the Heirs to such a Temporal Estate. For Children are capable
of all acts of Favor and Honor from God and Men, and of being instated in all
the Privileges of any Society, though they cannot as yet perform the Duties of
it, nor understand any thing thereof. Since therefore, Children are as capable,
and stand as much in need of almost all the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace,
and the Privileges of Church Membership as Men, is it not as fit that the
Confirmatory Sign of those Benefits and Privileges should be applied unto them
as well as unto these? Should a Prince Adopt a Beggar's Child, and incorporate
him into the Royal Family, and settle a part of his Dominions upon him, and to
solemnize and confirm all this, should cut off a bit of his Flesh, or command
him to be washed with Water, who would count this an insignificant Solemnity,
or say, that the Child was not capable of the Sign, when he was capable of the
chief Things signified thereby? Or to make a Comparison, which has a nearer
semblance with the Case of Infant Baptism. Suppose a Prince should send for an
attainted Traytor's Child, and in the Presence of several Persons assembled for
that purpose, should say: You know the Blood of this Child is attainted by his
Fathers Treason, by Law he has forfeited all Right to his Ancestors Estate,
and Titles, and is quite undone, though he be not sensible of his wretched
Condition. My Bowels of Compassion yern upon him, and here I restore him to his
Blood and Inheritance, to which henceforward he shall have as much right, as if
the Family had never been attainted. I justify him freely, and declare my self
reconciled unto him, and that no spot or imputation may hereafter lay upon him,
I here before you all wash him with pure water, to signify that he is cleansed
from his. Original Attaindure and Corruption of Blood, and that he is as fully
restored to his Birthright, as if he had never been Attaint.

Now suppose this were done for a poor attainted Infant, could any Man say that
the action was insignificant, and invalid, because the Child knew nothing of
it, or that he was incapable of the Sign, when he was capable of being washed
from the Attaindure, and of being thereby restored to his blood, and
Birthright, which was the chief thing signified thereby?

These things should be well considered by the Despisers of Infant Baptism,
against whom I may urge for Precedents the Circumcision, and Baptism of the
Jewish Church, both these, as I must often observe, were applied unto Infants
as well as adult, and actual Believers under the Old Testament, and
accordingly, though Abraham believed, and solemnly professed his Faith before he
was Circumcised, yet I hope they will not say that God acted foolishly, in
commanding Isaac, etc. to be Circumcised before he understood the ends of
Circumcision, or could believe, much less make profession of his Belief. He was
entered Sacramentally into Covenant with God before he was able to recontract,
or understand what the condition of the Covenant was, but yet I presume they
will not say he was Circumcised in vain, although he was under the very same
incapacity as to the ends of Circumcision, that Infants are of Baptism now.

The best way, that I know, they have of evading the force of this Argument, is
by saying, that Circumcision was more proper for Infants than Baptism, because
it left a significant Mark, and Character in their Flesh, whereas Baptism is a
transient Sign, and leaves no significant Impression behind it, whereby to
instruct Men and Women what was done unto them in their Infancy. But this is a
mere shift:

First, Because the Mark, and Character, which Circumcision left in the Flesh
of the Child, was as insignificant to him during the time of his Nonage, as
Baptism is to Christian Infants, neither afterward could he tell, but by the
instruction of others, what the meaning of that Character was, and for what
ends it was imprinted in his Flesh. And therefore, according to their way of
reasoning against Infant Baptism, it ought to have been deferred till the full
years of discretion, when the Circumcised Person might have understood the
Spiritual Signification thereof.

Furthermore, in answer to this Objection, I must remind them, that the Mark
and Character which Circumcision left behind it, was of no force, or
signification, unless it did appear from the Ezrah 2.62. Nehem. 7.5.64.
Registers of the Tribes, that the Person circumcised was a Jew.

I say, the Character which Circumcision left behind it, was merely of it self
of no force nor signification without the Registers, or written Genealogies,
because without them neither the circumcised Person himself, nor the Church
could know in many Circumstances whether he were a true Son of Abraham, or an
Egyptian, Ismaelite, or Samaritan, who were all Circumcised as well as the
Jews. If Baptism then be a Transient, Circumcision was an Equivocal Sign, and
therefore these pretended circumstantial Differences signify nothing, nor make
any substantial difference betwixt Circumcision and Baptism, as to the capacity
of Infants unto both. They are capable of contracting a Spiritual Relation unto
God by this, as formerly they were by that; they are capable of having their
Spiritual attaindure removed; they are capable of receiving the Blessings of
the Covenant, though they cannot perform the duties of it, and God may solemnly
bind himself unto them, though they cannot as yet personally bind themselves unto
him.

But Secondly, Allowing that Circumcision was more proper for Infants, than
Baptism, yet this difference is wholly avoided by referring the Practice of
Infant Baptism not only unto Infant. Circumcision, but unto the Original
Practice of Infant Baptism in the Jewish Church; which understood very well,
that it was but a transient rite, and left no Character upon the person, who
was initiated thereby. Those therefore who take upon them to argue against
Infant Baptism from this or any other pretended reason, take upon them to
censure, and condemn the Jewish Church, which for many Ages Baptized Infants,
and Minor Proselytes into the Covenant, as well as actual Believers, and yet
were never censured, or reproved for it by any Prophet, which we may presume
they would have been, had Baptismal Initiation of Infants into the Covenant
been so absurd, Insignificant, and abusive a practice, as the Professors
against Infant Baptism vainly pretend it is.

Having now, I hope, sufficiently proved, that Infants are not incapable
Subjects of Baptism. Let us proceed to state the next Question, which is this.

Quest. II. Whether Infants are excluded from Baptism by Christ?

Where, in the first place, I must observe, that the Question ought to be
proposed in these Terms, and not Whether Christ has commanded Infants to be
Baptized? For as a good Herodot. lib. 2.
Author observes of the River Nile, that we ought not to ask the reason, Why
Nile overflows so many days about the Summer-solstice? But rather Why it does
not overflow all the Year long? So in the Controversy about Infant Baptism,
the enquiry ought not to be, whether Christ has commanded Infants to be
Baptized? But whether he has excluded them from Baptism? Because, considering
the practice of the Jewish Church as to Infant-Circumcision and Infant Baptism
too, it must needs be granted, that a Command from Christ, to initiate
Proselytes out of all Nations into the Christian Religion, must without an
exception to the contrary, be understood to comprehend Infants, as well as Men.

As for Example, suppose our Savior had not changed the Seal of the Covenant,
Dr. Stilling-fleets Vindication of the A. C. p. 100.
but instead of Baptizing, had said unto the Apostles, Go, and make all Nations
my Disciples, Circumcising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost. I appeal to any Impartial Man's judgment, whether the
Apostles receiving such a Commission to Circumcise Proselytes of all Nations,
would not have presumed without directions to the contrary, that it was
Christ's Intention that the Infants of adult Profelytes should be Circumcised
as well as Proselytes themselves, according to the Commandment of God under the
Old Testament, and the Practice of the Jewish Church.

And if a command to Proselyte and Circumcise all Nations would, without an
exception, have comprehended Infants, as well as Men, why should it be imagined
that the command to Proselyte and Baptize all Nations should not likewise
comprehend them, seeing that Infant Baptism, as well as Infant-Circumcision had
been the immemorial Practice of the Jewish Church.

This is so true, that supposing our Savior had intended the gathering of
Churches among the Gentiles according to the Old Testament, and the Custom of
the Jewish Church, he need not have expressed his meaning in any other manner,
than by saying unto the Apostles; Go Proselyte all Nations, Circumcising and
Baptising of them, etc. Nay he could scarce have expressed his Intentions in a
more emphatical or intelligible manner unto them, who being Jews must needs
have the same Apprehensions as to the Subjects of Initiation, and
Church Membership under the Gospel, that they had under the Law. They had lived
under a Dispensation, where Infants were initiated both by Circumcision and
Baptism into the Church, and without they had been instructed to the contrary,
they must naturally have understood their Commission of Baptizing to have
extended unto Infants, as well as actual Believers; as if, for instance, God
should now extraordinarily call twelve Men of any Christian Nation, where
Infant Baptism had been a constant and universal Practice, and bid them go, and
Proselyte the Indians, baptizing them, etc. None of these Men could possibly
imagine, that Infants were excepted out of their Commission; but common n^^e,
on the contrary, would oblige them to understand it according to the usage of
their own Church.

Besides, abstracting at present from the Controversy, Whether Christ did, or
did not exclude Infants from Baptism? What reason can any Man give, why he who
fetched so many of his Institutions from Jewish usages, should exclude them
from it, and recede in this Point from the Jewish Church.

They are every way as capable of the visible Signs of Gods invisible favor,
and of the Benefits of the Abrahamical Covenant under the New Testament, as
they were under the Old, they are as fit Subjects of Baptism now, as they were
of Circumcision and Baptism then, their initiation into both Churches seems to
be equally rational, because, though the sign of the Covenant be altered, yet
the Covenant still remains the same. In a word, there lay no Obligation upon
our Blessed Lord, to lay aside the practice of Infant Baptism, as being
inconsistent either with the Free, or the Manly, or Universal nature of the
Christian Church.

Thus much I have said to show, why the Question betwixt us and the Dissenters
upon the account of Infant Baptism should be, Whether Christ has excluded
Infants from Baptism? And not Whether he has commanded Infants to be Baptized?
And certainly, the Premises being considered, there is far more reason to
conclude, that Christ should have prohibited Infants from Baptism, if it had
been his intention not to have them Baptized, than that he should have
commanded them to be Baptized, if it had been his intention to continue the
practice of Infant Baptism. For he need not have commanded his Apostles to do
that, which they would naturally have done of themselves without a Prohibition,
and that he did not prohibit them to Baptize Infants, is now the thing to be
proved, in showing, that he did not exclude Infants from Baptism.

For if he excluded them from Baptism, he either excluded them from it directly
by an express Prohibition not to Baptize them, or consequentially by so
limiting, and determining the Subject of Baptism, as to make it unapplicable
unto them.

That he never excluded them by any express Prohibition, the Anabaptists
themselves do grant, because there is no such Prohibition to be found in the
New Testament; but then they pretend, that it was Christ's intention that grown
Persons should be the only Subjects of Baptism, because the Gospel requires,
that Persons to be Baptized should first be Taught, Believe, and Repent.

First, The Gospel requires, that they should be Taught, as in Matthew. 28.29. Go
and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.

Secondly, That they should believe, as in Mark 16.15, Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature, saying, He that Believes, and
is Baptized shall be saved.

Thirdly, Repentance, as in Acts 2.38. Repent, and be Baptized every one of you
in the Name of Jesus.

But now, say they, these three Qualifications before Baptism, can belong to
none but grown Persons, to Men and Women, at years of discretion, and therefore
none but such ought to be Baptized. And accordingly, we find that Baptism was
practiced upon these terms throughout the History of the Acts, and in Heb. 6.1,
2. Repentance and Faith are mentioned as prerequisite qualifications to Baptism
in these Words, Not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from deadly
works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms.

These are the Arguments, by which the Adversaries of Infant Baptism endeavor
to prove, that Christ so limited the subject of Baptism, as to exclude Infants
from it. But in this they are grievously mistaken, because these, and the like
Texts do of themselves no more prove, that grown persons are the only Subjects
of Baptism, than the words of the Apostle, 2 These. 3.10. prove that grown
Persons only are to eat. The Apostles words are these: When we were with you,
this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. From
whence in their Sophistical way it may be argued thus.

It belongs only to grown Persons to eat, because the Apostle requires, that
Persons who eat, should first Work; but now this Apostolical qualification of
working can belong to none but grown Persons, and therefore none but such ought
to eat.

I have made use of this Parallel instance to show how inconclusive the former
way of arguing against Infant Baptism is in it self, and how impossible it is
to prove from the Texts abovementioned, or any other like them, that Baptism
is restrained to grown Persons, because none but grown Persons can be Taught,
Believe, and Repent. And I will further discover the weakness and fallacy of
this Argument from a familiar Comparison, which any common Capacity may
understand.

Suppose then there were a great Plague in any Country, and God should
miraculously call eleven, or twelve Men, and Communicate unto them a certain
Medicine against this Plague, and say unto them: Go into such a Country, and
call the People of it together, and teach them the Virtues of this Medicine,
and assure them, that he that believes, and takes it from you, shall Live,
but he that believes not, shall Dye.

Upon this Supposition I demand of these Dissenters, if the words of such a
Commission would be sufficient for the Missioners that received it, or any
others to conclude, that it was God's intention, that they should administer
his revealed Medicine to none, but grown Persons, Because they only could be
called together, and taught the Virtues of it, and believe or disbelieve them
who brought it. No certainly, this way of arguing would not be admitted by any
rational Man, because the Children would be as capable of the Medicine, as the
Men, though they were ignorant of the benefits of it, and merely passive in the
Administration thereof.

Wherefore seeing Children, as I have showed, are capable of the benefits of
Baptism, and seeing the Apostles who received a Commission to go and Teach, and
Baptize all Nations, Or, as it is in the words of St. Mark, to Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, saying, He that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved. I say, seeing Children are capable of the benefits of Baptism, and the
Apostles, who received this Commission, knew them to be capable of it, and to
have had both Circumcision, and Baptism administered to them in the Jewish
Church, how should they, or any others imagine from the tenure of such a
Commission, which was given unto them, as Planters of Churches, but that it was
Christ's intention that Children, as well as grown Persons were to be Baptized?

Should God in the days of David, or Solomon, have called eleven or twelve
Prophets, and given them the same Commission, which [Mutatis Mutandis] Christ
gave to his Apostles, bidding them go and Teach all Nations the Law,
Circumcising, and Baptizing of them in the Name of the God of Abraham, and
teaching them to do whatsoever he had commanded them, I say, should he have
sent them out to Preach the Law to every Creature, saying, He that believes,
aad is Circumcised, and baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned, would a Commission so worded have been of it self a sufficient
ground for them to think, that it was God's intention to restrain Circumcision
and Baptism to adult Persons, contrary to the practice of the Jewish Church?
Or, if in a short History of their Mission, and Undertaking, we should have
read, that they Circumcised, and Baptized as many Proselytes, as gladly
received their word, would this have been an Argument that they did not also
Circumcise and Baptize the Infants of those believing Proselytes, according to
the Laws, and Usages of their Mother Church? No certainly, such a Commission to
Proselyte Strangers to the Jewish Religion, could not in reason have been
strained to prejudice the customary right of Infants to Circumcision, and
Baptism, and therefore in parity of reason, neither could the Apostles so
understand their Commission without other Notices, as to exclude Infants from
Sacramental Initiation into the Church.

The plain truth is, their Commission was a direction how they should proselyte
Strangers to Christianity, according to the nature of propagating a new
Religion in strange Countries, as it is set forth by the Apostle, Romans 20.14.
How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach unless they be sent? Accordingly
they were sent out to Preach, or to Disciple Men, and Women by Preaching, and
to Baptize as many of them, as should upon their Preaching Believe, and Repent.
But though the Order of Nature required that they should proceed in this Method
with grown Persons, as the Jews were wont to do with Proselytes to the Law, yet
it did not hinder, that they who had been born, and bred Jews, should initiate
the Infants of such Proselyted Persons, according to the usage of the Jewish
Church. What need Christ have said more unto them, when he sent them out, than
to bid them Go, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, etc. Or, to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, and tell them, that he
that would believe the Gospel, and be Baptized, should be saved. But then the
respective sense of these words could only concern adult Persons, and their
qualification for Baptism, but could in no reason be construed by them, to
exclude Infants, but only unbelieving Men, and Women, whereof none were to be
admitted into the Church by Baptism, before they were taught Christianity, and
had confessed their Faith and Sins. Should God, as I said before, call twelve
Men of any Church, where Infant Baptism had been the constant and undoubted
practice, and bid them go, and Preach the Gospel in the Indies to every
creature, and to say, He that believes the Doctrine which we Preach, and is
Baptized with the Baptism which we Administer, shall be Saved: I appeal to any
Dissenter upon the account of Infant Baptism, whether he thinks that these Men,
bred up to the practice of Infant Baptism, could in probability so interpret
this Commission, as to think, that it was God's intention, that they should
exclude the Infants of believing Proselytes from Baptismal admission into the
Church.

The Professors against Infant Baptism, put the greatest stress upon these
words of our Savior: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be Saved: But
if they would well consider the next words, they would find, that Infants are
not at all concerned in them, because it follows, but he that believes not
shall be Damned. The same want of Faith, which here excludes from Baptism,
excludes also from Salvation, and therefore it cannot be understood of Infants,
unless they will say with the The Petrobusians. vid. Cassandri praefat. ad Duc.
Jul. Cli. and praefat. advers. Anabaptistas.
Original Anabaptists, that the same incapacity of believing which excludes
them from Baptism, excludes them from Salvation too. Wherefore, it is plain,
that the believing, and not believing in that Text, is only to be understood of
such as are in capacity of hearing, and believing the Gospel, that is, of grown
Persons, just as the words in Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son of God
has Everlasting Life, and he that believes not shall not see Life, but the
Wrath of God abide thou him.

Thus far have I proceeded to show, how inconclusively and absurdly the
Anabaptists go about to prove, that Infants ought to be excluded from Baptism
from the forementioned Texts, which speak of the Order of Proselyting grown
Persons, and their Qualifications for Baptism; and as little success have they
with some others, which they bring to show how unprofitable Baptism is for
Infants, as that in 1. Pet: 3.21. Where the Apostle tells us, that external
Baptism of putting away the filth of the Flesh, of which Infants are only
capable, signifies nothing, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, of
which, say they, Infants are altogether incapable; to which the answer is very
easy, that another Apostle tells us, that external Circumcision of which
Infants were only capable, profited nothing without keeping the Law, which
Infants could not keep, nay, that the outward Circumcision, of which Infants
were only capable, was nothing, but that the inward Circumcision of the heart,
and in the spirit was the true Circumcision, and yet Infants remaining Infants
were utterly incapable of that; so that their way of arguing from this and such
like Texts, proves nothing, because it proves too much, and stretches the words
of the Apostles unto undue consequences, beyond their just Meaning, which was
only to let both Jews and Christians know, that there was no resting in
external Circumcision, or Baptism, but not that their Infants were unprofitably
Circumcised, and Baptized.

So weak, and unconcluding are all the Arguments, by which the Anabaptists
endeavor from Scripture, to prove, that Christ has limited the Subject of
Baptism unto grown Persons; put them all together they do not amount to any
tolerable degree of probability, much less unto a presumption, especially if
they be put in the balance against the early and universal practice of the
Catholic Church. Had not the Church been always in possession of this
practice, or could any time be showed on this side the Apostles, when it began.
Nay, could it be proved, that any one Church in the World did not Baptize
Infants, or that any considerable number of Men otherwise Orthodox, did decline
the Baptizing of them upon the same Principles, that these Men do now, then I
should suspect that their Arguments are better than really they are, and that
Infant Baptism might possibly be a deviation from the rule of Christ. But since
it is so universal, and ancient a practice, that no body knows when, or where
it began, or how from not being it came to be the practice of the Church, since
there was never any Church Ancient or Modern, which did not practice it, it
must argue a strange partiality to think, that it could be any thing less, than
an Apostolical Practice, and Tradition, or the Original use of Baptism in its
full Latitude under the Gospel, which it had under the Law. Had the Ec^uid
verisimise est tot ac tantae in unam fidem erraverint? Nullus inter multos
eventus unus est. Exitus variasse debuerat error doctrinae Ecclesiarum. Quod
autem apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. Tertull. de
praescriptione Haeret. c. 28.
Churches erred they would have varied (says Tertullian) but what is one and
the same amongst them all, proceeds not from error but Tradition. Or, as St. De
Baptismo contra Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
Augustine says upon this Subject, That which the Universal Church does hold,
and was never instituted by Councils, but was always retained in the Church, we
most rightly believe to have descended from nothing less than Apostolical
Tradition.

Cassand. advers. Anabapt. p. 675.
Menno, one of the most learned of the Anabaptists about the time of the
Reformation, was so pressed with this way of arguing, that he acknowledged
Infant Baptism to be as old, as the time of the Apostles, but then he said, it
proceeded from false-Apostles, and false-Teachers in the Apostles times. But if
it came first from false Apostles, and false-Teachers, in the time of the
Apostles, how came it to pass that we heard nothing of that Innovation in the
Writings of the Apostles or of their Companions and Contemporaries, such as St.
Clement, St. Ignatius, St. Polycarp, etc? How came St. John who survived unto
the latter end of the first Century to pass it over in silence, or how came the
Spirit in the Revelations, which by his Pen reproved so many abuses in the
Churches, not to censure this? It is very strange, that none of the Penmen of
the Holy Ghost, nor none of their Assistants, and Companions should animadvert
upon so scandalous an abuse of the Holy-Ordinance of Baptism, which in a short
time would fill the Church with sham Christians, and destroy the Essence
thereof. In like manner, if it came in by false Teachers, in the next Age to
the Apostles, how came it to pass that none of the famous Saints and Martyrs,
who flourished then, opposed it as a dangerous Innovation, nor gave us any
account thereof? They wrote against the Heresies of Simon, Menander, Saturnus,
Cerinthus, Ebion, Valentinus, Basilides, Marcion, etc. but we find nothing in
them against Infant Baptism, though we are sure from Omnes enim venit
[Christus] per semet ipsum salvare, omnes, inquam, qui per eum renasountur ad
deum, infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes, and seniores. i. e.
Christ came to save all by himself, all, I say, who by him are born again to
God, Infants, and little Ones, and Boys, and Young and Old. In the Ancient
Writers Baptism is called Regeneration, and Baptized Persons are said to be
Regenetate, or born again, according to the Scripture, which calls it, (...),
the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Hence says Just. Mart. Apol. 2. (...).
So has Phavorinus observed, (...), Holy Baptism is called Regeneration, and
those who would see more proofs of it, may consult Suicerus in the words (...)
and (...). Dr. Ham. on Matthew. 19.28. John 3.5. Seldom de jure l. 2. c. 4. But
if after all this evidence any Anabaptist will say, that renascuntur in this
place of Irenaeus, does not signify Baptized, or born again of Water, then it
must signify Regenerated, or born again of the Spirit; and if Infants, and
little Ones can be born again of the Spirit, then they are capable of being
born again of Water, or of being Baptized, as Vossius argues disp. de Baptismo,
p. 181.
Irenaeus, and De Baptismo. Where what he speaks about deferring the Baptism of
Infants, shows that it was the practice of the Christians in that Age, Pro
cujusque personae condition, ac dispositione, etiam aetate, cunctatio Baptismi
utilior est, praecipue tamen circa parvulos. Quid enim necesse est, si non tum
necesse, sponsores periculo ingeri? -- Quid festinat innocens a tas ad
remissionem peccatorum? But this Opinion of his, that it was more convenient to
defer the Baptism of Infants, was his own singular opinion, as much as that was
of deferring the Baptism of Virgins and Widows, till they were Married, which
follows in the next words. Non minore de causa innupti procrastinandi, etc. And
he shows the same cause why he would have the Baptism of Children, and
un-married Women deferred, for fear they should be tempted to renounce Christ
after Baptism. Siqui pondus intelligant Baptismi, magis timebunt consecutionem,
quam dilationem: fides integra secura est de salute. But then how absolutely
necessary he thought Baptism for Infants in case of extreme danger is evident
from other Passages, as Cap. 13. Quum vero praescribitur nomini sine Baptismo
competere salutem, and Cap. 17. Sufficiat scilicet in necessitatibus utaris,
sicubi, aut loci, aut temporis, aut personae conditio compellit. Tunc enim
constantia succurrentis excipitur, quoniam reus erit perditi hominis, si
supersederet praestare, quod libere potuit. So likewise in his Book de anima,
Cap. 39. Adeo nulla ferme Nativitas munda est Ethnicorum -- Alioquin meminerat
dominicae definitionis, nisi quis nascatur ex aqua and Spiritu, non ibit in
regnum Dei, i. e. Non erit Sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur,
donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda, quamdiu recenseatur. --
Tertullian, that it was practiced in that Age.

Ignatius, Polycarp, Papias, who were all the Act. Mart. Ignat.
Scholars of St. John, as likewise Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, and Hegesippus,
were all contemporary with Irenaeus who was Ep. Irenaei ad Florinum. advers.
Haeres. l. 3. cap. 3. l. 5. c p. 33.
the Disciple of Polycarp, (and who as he tells us in several places of his
Works, conversed with several Ancient Epist. ad Florinum. advers. Haeres. lib.
2. cap. 39.
Presbyters, that had lived in the Apostles times, of whom he had enquired
after the Apostles practices) and yet this inquisitive Father says nothing
against Infant Baptism though we are sure from him and his contemporary
Tertullian, that it was then of general practice in the Church.

What meaned all these Men to let such a pestilent practice pass uncondemned,
which in a short time, would leave none in the Church but Mock Christians, and
so prevail against the Catholic Church, which our Lord promised the Gates of
Hell should not prevail against? What, would not the Holy Ghost preserve so
much as one Church among so many, from such a dangerous error, but suffer them
all to embrace it without Opposition? Nunc omnes Ecclesiae erraverint, deceptus
sit and Apostolus de Testimonio reddendo Nullam respexerit Spiritus Sanctus,
uti eam in veritatem deducerer, ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de
patre, ut esset doctor veritatis. Neglexerit Officium Dei villicus, Christi
Vicarius, sinens Ecclesias aliter interim intelligere, aliter credere, quam
ipse per Apostolos praedicabat. Ecquid verisimile est tot ac tantae in unam
fidem erraverint? Tertul. de praescript. Haereticorum. c. 28.
Would he suffer them all so soon to Apostatize, and to practice, and believe
otherwise, than Christ had taught, and the Apostles preached No! It is
impossible, that they should all consent in such a dangerous error, or that
they should all peaceably, and tamely submit to it without opposition, or that
such an alteration should be made without Observation no body can tell how, or
when.

Wherefore these Dissenters are very unreasonable in charging the Church
universal with apostasy from Christ upon the account of Infant Baptism, and in
striving to throw her out of the possession of such an ancient, and general
practice merely by such indirect and consequential Arguments from the
Scriptures, as the Ancient Fathers never drew from them, nor we can admit
against their general practice and consent. Certainly those places of the Neque
vero ignota fuerunt Ecclesiae, and priscis Ecclesiae patribus Evangelicae and
Apostolicae Scripturae loca in quibus poenitentia, and fides una cum Baptismo
requiri videntur. Sciebant enim probe haec ad adultos -- Cassand. Praefat.
advers. Anabapt.
New Testament; which require a Profession of Faith, and Repentance, in grown
Persons before Baptism, were understood by the Ancient Fathers, they
undoubtedly had well read and considered the History of Baptism in the Acts of
the Apostles, but yet they never drew this absurd Consequence from them, that
because Faith and Repentance were to go before Baptism, which is an Institution
of Latitude, in Adult Persons, that therefore Baptism was not to go before
Faith, and Repentance in Children and Minors, as both Circumcision, and Baptism
in the like Case were wont to go before them in the Jewish Church. They knew
the difference betwixt the admission of actual and potential Believers, See Dr.
Tailor of Baptizing Infants, great Exemplar, Sect. 9. part 2.
and also knew it was a very great inconsequence to argue from the
Qualifications, which the Gospel requires in those, to the Exclusion of these.
I freely acknowledge to them, that no Arguments are equal to the Scriptures,
when the Interpretations of them are not doubtful, yet when they are so, I
appeal to any sober Dissenter of this, or any other Persuasion, whether the
harmonious practice of the Ancient Churches, and the undivided consent of
Apostolical Fathers be not the most sure and authentical Interpreters, that can
be betwixt Men, and Men. They thought Infant Baptism lawful, and valid, and no
abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism, and let any modest and moderate Man judge,
whether so many Famous Hanc desipuere praeterita saecula, ut tot millibus
parvulorum per mill, and eo amplius annos illusorium Baptisma ^ribuerent and a
Christi temporibus usque ad vos, non veros ei Christianos, sed Phant^sticos
crearent? Siccine caecatus est orbis terrarum, tantaque huc usque caligine
^^vol^^a, (...) ad aperiendos oculos suos, and ad tam diuturnam noctem
illustrandam post tot Patres, Martyrs, Pontifices, and universalem Ecclesiarum
Principes vos tamdiu expectarit? Petrus Abbas Cluntacens. apud Cassandr.
Saints and Martyrs, so near the Apostles times, should fall into such a
Delusion, as to conspire in the practice of Mock-Baptism, and of making so many
Millions of Mock-Christians, and Mock-Churches, or that a little Sect, which
must have separated from all the Ancient, as well as Modern Churches, that were
ever yet discovered, should be in a great, and grievous Error themselves.

Let them begin with the first Testimonies about the practice of
Infant Baptism, viz. at the latter end of the second, and beginning of the
third Century, and take the pains to consult the successive Writers of the
Church. St. Irenaeus, as I have observed, was the Disciple of St. Polycarp, who
was the Disciple of St. John, and Tertullian was contemporary with the last
days of St. Irenaeus, and the next Writer in whom we find Infant Baptism
mentioned as an In Ep. ad Romans l. 5. pro hoc and Ecclesia ab Apostolis
traditionem suscepit etiam parvulis Baptismum dare, quia essent in omnibus
genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam, and Spiritum ablui deberent. In Lucam
Homil. 14. Parvuli baptizantur in remissionem peccatorum -- and in lib. Homil.
8. quia per Baptismi Sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea
baptizantur and parvuli.
Apostolical, and Universal Practice, I mean Origin, flourished within fifteen
years after Tertullian's Death. St. Cyprian was Contemporary with the latter
days of Origin, and his Epistle to Fidus the Presbyter is such an account of
Infant Baptism, that it alone is enough to Convince any Soul, where Prejudice
does not reign, that it always was the practice of the Church. Fidus had
written unto him to let him know, that he thought it was not lawful to Baptize
Children before the Eighth Day, according to the Law of Circumcision, to which
he returned this Answer. Quantum autem ad causam Infantum pertinet, quas
dixisti intra secundum, vel tertium diem, quo nati sunt, constitutos, Baptizari
non oportere, and considerandam esse legem Circumcisionis antiquae, ut infra
octavum diem eum, qui natus est, Baptizandum, and Sanctificandum non putares,
long aliud in Concilio nostro omnibus visum est. Ep. 58. p. 95. Ed. Rigalt.
That he, and the Council (which consisted of 66 Bishops) were of another
Opinion, having determined, that as God under the Gospel was no accepter of
Persons: So he was no accepter of Ages, but that Infants might be Baptized as
soon as they were born, to wash away their Original Sin. The African Church was
one of the most flourishing, strict, and pious of the Primitive Churches, and
this resolution of the Council (which as St. Augustine observed an 100 Years
after, was not novum decretum) supposes that Infant Baptism had been the
Original, and immemorial practice of that Church. This Council sat about the
middle of the third Century, 150 Years or thereabouts after the Death of the
last surviving Apostle; and about the middle of the fourth Century we find
Gregory Nazianzen speaking thus. Orat. 40. in Sanct. Baptisma. (...) --
Have thou a Child? Let not Sin get the advantage, but let him be sanctified
from his Infancy, and consecrated by the Spirit from his tender Years. But it
may be thou art afraid to have him consigned, because of the weakness of his
Nature, what a silly Mother art thou, and how weak in Faith? Anna promised
Samuel to God before he was born, and not fearing any thing of Humane Weakness,
but trusting in God, Consecrated the Child to the Priesthood, almost as soon
as he saw the Light. Thou will have no need of Superstitious Charms, and
Amulets for him, in which the Devil steals to himself from silly Souls, the
Honor which is due to God, but call upon him the name of the Holy Trinity,
which is the most safe, and excellent of Charms. And afterward, (...).
so for the Baptism of those, who desire Baptism, but what shall we say of
Infants, who are sensible neither of the gain, nor loss of it, shall we Baptize
them? Most certainly, if they be in danger, for it is better, that they be
Sanctified without the Sense of it, than that they dye uninitiated and
unconsigned; and my reason is taken from Circumcision, which was administered on
the Eighth Day unto Infants, that had no Reason, to which I may add, the saving
of the Firstborn in Goshen, by the sign of the Blood on the Lintel of the
Door, and the two Side-Posts.

The Brevity, which I design in this Treatise, will not permit me to recite
many more Authorities, which are very Vid. testim. Veter. Script. de Baptism.
apud Cassand. and Gerhard. Joh. Voss. disp. 14. de Baptismo.
numerous out of Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, etc. But I shall rather
superadd some Considerations, which confirm this Ancient Tradition of
Infant Baptism, and are sufficient to induce any considerate and impartial Man
to believe, that so Ancient, and universal a Practice was as old, as the
Planting of Churches by the Apostles, and originally derives its Authority from
them.

For first, if Infant Baptism was not the Practice of the Apostles, but an
Innovation, it is very hard to imagine, that God should suffer his Church to
fall into such a dangerous Practice, which would in time Un-Church it, while
Miracles were yet Extant in the Church. The same Holy Spirit, that was the
guide of the Apostles, into all Truth, was the Author of Miracles too, but the
first four Witnesses, which I have produced for Infant Baptism, to wit,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian, do all likewise assure us, that
Miracles were then not extraordinary in the Church.

Adversus haereses, l. 2. cap. 56, 57. and Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. cap. 7.
Irenaeus tells us, that the true Disciples of Christ did then dispossess
Devils, and had the Gift of Tongues, and of Praescience, and Praediction, and
of healing the Sick, and that the whole Congregation meeting together did by
Fasting and Prayer, often raise the Dead, and that many so raised were then
alive in the Church. Nay, he tells us, that the number of Spiritual Gifts were
innumerable, which the Church all the World over then received from Christ, and
I truly confess it cannot enter into my heart to believe, that God should
suffer the Church to Embrace such a pernicious Error (as Infant Baptism was, if
it was not of Apostolical Tradition) and fill the Christian World with
Mock-Christians, while he bore them Witness with Signs and Wonders, and diverse
Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Tertullian in his Et ad Scapulam, c. 2.
Apologetic tells us, that the Christians had then power to make the Gods of
the Heathen confess themselves to be Devils. Nay, he Challenges the Heathens to
bring any one of those, that were acted, and inspired with any one of their
Gods, and Goddesses, whom they worshipped, and if that Demon God, or Goddess,
not daring to tell a Lie before any Christian, should not confess it self to be
a Devil, then they should shed the Blood of that Christian upon the Place.

Origin in his Answer to Celsus, frequently appeals to the Miracles, which the
Christians wrought in his Days, particularly in the first Cambridge Edition, p.
34.
Book, he says, that they exorcised Demons, healed the Sick, and foresaw
Future Events. And in the p. 334. See also p. 62, 80, 124, 127, 376.
seventh Book, he proves, that Christians did not their Miracles by any curious
Magical Arts, because Idiots, or illiterate Men among them did by nothing but
by Prayers, and Adjurations in the Name of Jesus, banish Devils from the Bodies
and Souls of Men.

In Epist. ad Donatum; vid. and Epist. ad Magnum and ad Demetrianum, p. 202.
Ed. Rigalt.
St. Cyprian tells us, that the Christians in his days had power to hinder the
Operation of deadly Poisons, to restore Madmen to their Senses, to force
Devils to confess themselves to be so, and with invisible strokes and Torments
to make them cry, and howl, and forsake the Bodies, which they possessed. These
are the first four Witnesses, which I have produced for the Practice of
Infant Baptism, and let any man judge, whether the Church could yet run into a
Church-destroying Practice within such an Holy, and Miraculous Period, as this.

But secondly, If Infant Baptism was not an Apostolical Tradition, or were
derivable from any thing less than Apostolical Practice, how came the Vid.
Vossii hist. Pelag. l. 2. pars. 2. These. 4. and 13. disp. de Bapt. These. 18.
and disp. 14. These. 4. Cassand. praefat. ad Duc. Jul. p. 670. and Testim.
veteru^ de Bapt. parvulorum, p. 687.
Pelagians not to reject it for an Innovation, seeing the Orthodox used it, as
an Argument against them, that Infants were guilty of Original Sin It had been
easy for them, had there been any ground for it, to say that it was an
Innovation crept into Practice since the time of the Apostles, or that it was
brought up by False-Apostles, and False-Teachers in the Apostles Times, but
then they were so far from doing this, which they would have been glad to do
upon any colorable Pretense, that they practiced it themselves, and owned it
for an Apostolical Tradition, and as necessary for Childrens obtaining the
Kingdom of Heaven, tho they denied that they were Baptized for the Remission of
Original Sin.

But thirdly, If Infant Baptism were not in Practice, from the first Plantation
of Christian Churches, or were derivable from any other Cause than Apostolical
Tradition, let the Opposers of it tell us any other probable way how it came to
be the uniform practice of all Churches, not only of such as were Colonies of
the same Mother Church, or had Correspondence with one another by their
Bishops, and Presbyters, but of such as were Original Plantations, and betwixt
which there was likely none, or but very little Communication, by reason of the
vast distance, and want of intercourse betwixt the Countries where Brerewoods
Enquiries, c. 23 Cassand. exposit. de auctor. Consult. Bapt. Infant. p. 692.
they lived. Among these, of the latter sort are the Abassin-Church, in the
further Ethiopia, and the Osor. l. 3. de rebus gest. Eman. cit. a Vossio in
disp. 14. de Baptismo Brerewoods Enquiries, c. 20.
Indian Church in Coulan, and Crangonor, and about Maliapur, Planted by St.
Thomas, both which practice Infant Baptism, tho in all probability they never
had it one from the other, or both from any third Church. It is very
incredible, that God should suffer all Churches in all the Parts of the World
to fall into one and the same Practice, which certainly is a Church-destroying
Practice, if the Apostles and their Assistants did not Baptize Infants, but
only grown Persons.

One may easily imagine, that God might suffer all Churches to fall into such
an harmless Practice as that of Infant Communion, or that the Fathers of the
Church might comply with the Religious fondness of the People, in bringing
their Children to the Sacrament, as we do with bringing them to Prayers, but
that God should let them all (not preserving any one for a Monument of
Apostolical Purity) fall into a Practice, which destroys the Being of the
Church, is at least a thousand times more Incredible, than that the Apostles,
without a Prohibition from Christ to the contrary, (and no such Prohibition is
Extant in the New Testament) should Baptize Infants according to the Practice
of the Jewish Church.

But in the fourth Place, what Account can rationally be given, why the Jewish
Christians, who were offended at the neglect of Circumcision, should not have
been much more offended, if the Apostles had refused to initiate Children under
the New Testament, which had always been initiated under the Old. Is it
reasonable to believe, that those, who complained so much merely because the
Apostles Taught the Jews, which lived among the Gentiles, that they should not
Circumcise their Children, would not have complained much more if they had not
Baptized them, but quite excluded them, like the Infants of Unbelievers from
Admission into the Church. It must in all probability have galled them very
much to see their Children Treated like the Children of mere Strangers, and to
have had no visible difference put between the Infants of those that Embraced,
and those that resisted the Faith. For they always looked upon Pagan Children,
as Common, and Unclean, but upon their own, as Separate, and Holy; and St. Paul
makes the same distinction between them, 1 Cor. 7.14. But had the Apostles
taught, that the Children of those, who were in Covenant with God, had no more
right unto Baptismal Initiation, than the Children of Idolaters, who were out
of the Covenant, they had Taught a Doctrine, which certainly would have
offended them more, than all they Preached against Circumcision, and keeping
the Ceremonial Law. Wherefore, since we never read among their many Complaints
upon the alteration of the Jews Customs, that they complained of their
Childrens not being initiated by Baptism, it is a greater presumption that the
Apostles, and their Assistants Baptized their Children, then the want of an
Express Example of Infant Baptism in the New Testament, is that they Baptized
them not.

Having now showed, first, that Infants are not incapable of Baptism.

Secondly, That they are not excluded from it by Christ; but that on the
contrary, we have very convincing Reasons to presume, that the Baptism of
Infants, as well as of grown Persons, was intended by him. Let us now proceed
to make a fair and impartial enquiry upon the Third Question.

Quest. III. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church, which appoints
Infants to be Baptized?

And this, considering what I have said upon the former Questions, must be
determined in the Negative, Whether we consider Infant Baptism only as a thing
lawful, and allowable, or, as a Thing highly requisite, or necessary to be done.

I know very well, that my Adversaries, in this Controversy, will be apt to
deny this distinction betwixt Lawful and Necessary; as acknowledging nothing in
Religious matters to be lawful, but what is necessary, according to that common
Principle imbibed by all sorts of Dissenters, That nothing is to be appointed
in Religious matters, but what is commanded by some Precept, or directed unto
by some special Example in the Word of God.

Hence they ordinarily say, Can you show us any Precept or Example for
Baptizing Infants in the New Testament, if you can, we will grant, that the
appointment of it is lawful, but if you cannot, we disallow it as unlawful,
nay, as an Usurpation, and will never be of a Church, which so Usurpeth it over
the Consciences of Men.

This way of Arguing is plausible to the Vulgar, and would be very good, were
there such a Principle in the Scripture, as this, from whence they Argue, viz.
That nothing is to be appointed in Religious matters, but what is warranted by
Precept, or Example in the Word of God. Wherefore, as the Men with whom I have
to deal in this Controversy, are generally Persons of good natural
Understandings:

So in the First place, I beg them to consider, that there is no such Rule in
the Scripture, as this, and therefore those, who teach it for a Scripture-rule,
or Precept, do themselves impose upon Men's Consciences, as bad as Papists, and,
like them and the Pharisees of old, teach the Traditions of Men for Doctrines
of God. On the contrary, the Gospel tells us, that Sin is the Transgression of
a Law, and that where there is no Law there is no Transgression; and according
to this plain, and intelligible Rule, though the Baptizing of Infants were not
commanded in the Scriptures, yet the Church would have Power and Authority to
appoint it, upon supposition that it is not forbid.

Secondly, I desire them to consider the absurdity of this pretended
Scripture-rule, in that it takes away the distinction betwixt barely lawful, or
allowable, and necessary, and leaves no Negative mean betwixt necessary and
sinful, but makes things forbidden, and things not commanded to be the very
same.

Thirdly, I desire them to consider, what a slavish Principle this is, and how
inconsistent it is with the free, and manly nature of the Christian Religion,
under which we should be in a far more servile, and Childish condition, then
the Jews were under the Law, which as it is evident from the Feast of Purim,
and from the Institution of Baptism among the Jews, allowed private Persons to
practice, and the Church to appoint things of a Religious nature, which God had
not commanded to be done.

Lastly, I entreat them to consider, how utterly impracticable this pretended
Principle is, as might be proved from the contrary Practice of all those, who
advance it against Ecclesiastical Authority, and particularly from their own
Practice, in Baptizing grown Persons, who were bred up from Infants in the
Christian Religion, and in admitting Women to the Lord's Supper, who were not
admitted to the Passover, nor Paschal-cup of Blessing, without any Precept, or
President for so doing in the Word of God.

This little well considered, is enough to obviate all Objections against my
first Assertion, viz. That it is not lawful to separate from a Church which
appoints Infants to be Baptized, upon supposition, that Infant Baptism is
barely lawful, and allowable; but if any man desire further satisfaction, as to
this point, he may have it abundantly in the case of indifferent things, to
which I refer him, it being more my business to show here that Infant Baptism
is at least, a lawful, and allowable thing.

To prove this, I need but desire the Reader to reflect upon the State of the
two first Questions: For if Infants be as capable of Baptism under the Gospel,
as they were of Circumcision under the Law, and if Christ have not excluded
them from it neither directly, nor consequentially: Otherwise, if Baptism be an
Institution of as great Latitude in its self, as Circumcision its Forerunner
was, and Christ has not determined the administration of it to one Age, more
than one Sex: Once more, if Children may be taken into the Covenant of Grace,
under the Gospel, as well as under the Law, and Christ never said, nor did any
thing which can in reason be interpreted to forbid them to be taken in: In a
word, If they are capable of all the Ends of Baptism now, that they were of
Circumcision then, and of having the Privileges of Church Membership, and the
Blessings of the Covenant consigned unto them, and Christ neither by himself,
nor by his Apostles did forbid the Church to satisfy and fulfill this their
capacity: Or last of all, If Christ has only appointed Baptism instead of
Circumcision, but said nothing to determine the Subject of it, then it must
needs follow, that Infant Baptism must at least be lawful, and allowable,
because it is an indifferent, and not a forbidden, or sinful thing. But upon
this supposition, that it were left undetermined, and indifferent by Christ, it
might like other indifferent things be lawfully appointed by any Church, from
which it would be a Sin to separate upon that account. For in this case,
Churches might safely differ in their practice about Infant Baptism, as they do
now in the Ceremonies of Baptism; and those who lived in a Church which did
practice it, ought no more to separate from her for appointing of it, then
those who lived in another Church, which did not practice it, ought to separate
from her, for not appointing thereof.

Thus much I have said, I hope with sufficient moderation, upon supposition,
that all I have written upon former Questions, does but satisfactorily prove,
that Infant Baptism is only lawful, and not highly requisite and necessary; but
then if it be not only lawful, but highly requisite and necessary, so that it
ought to be appointed, then it must needs be much more sinful to separate from
a Church, which appoints Infants to be Baptized.

Now, as to the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, supposing that my Reader
bears in memory, that I have said upon the last Question, (to make it appear
with the highest degree of credibility, that Christ instituted Baptism for
Infants, as well as grown Persons, and that the Apostles, and their Companions
Practiced Infant Baptism) I must here entreat him further to observe, that
there is a twofold necessity in matters of Christian Faith and practice, one
which proceeds from plain dictates of natural reason, or from plain and express
words of the Gospel, where the sense is so obvious and clear, that no sober man
can mistake it, or doubt of it, and another which proceeds from the general
Scope and Tenor of the Gospel, or from doubtful places in it so, or so
understood and interpreted by the unanimous voice, and practice of the ancient
Catholic Church.

The first degree of necessity is founded on ostensive certainty, and
demonstration, wherein there is no room left for Objection.

And the Second is founded upon violent presumption, where the Objections on
one hand are insufficient to move, or at least to turn the Balance, if put in
the Scale against the other, which is weighed down [Mole universatis Ecclesiae]
with the authority of the Universal Church. And because this Rule, like others,
is not so intelligible without an Example, I will add some Instances of things,
which are necessary to be believed, and practiced by every good Christian under
both these Notions of necessity, that they may be better understood.

According to the First Notion of it, it is necessary to believe, that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah, and the Son of God, because it is delivered in express
words of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe, that he
is of the same substance with the Father, and equal unto him, and that there
are three distinct, and coequal Persons in the Godhead, which are all but one
God, because these Doctrines, though they are not to be found in express words
in the Gospel, yet they are to be collected from several places of it, which
were always so interpreted by that ancient Catholic Church.

Again, according to the First Notion of necessity, it is necessary for all Men
to believe the Word of God, whether spoken or written, because natural reason
teaches us so to do.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe the Books
contained in the New Testament, to be the Word of God, and no other (how
Divine, and Orthodox, and Ancient soever they may be) because they, and they
only have been received for such by the ancient Catholic Church.

In like manner as to matter of Practice, by the First sort of Necessity, it is
necessary for Christians to assemble together to Worship God, because Reason,
and Scripture plainly teach them so to do.

And by the Second fort it is necessary, that they should assemble themselves
periodically to Worship God on every first day of the Week, because the
Observation of the Lords Day, appears to be a Duty from several places of the
New Testament, as they are interpreted to this sense by the universal Practice
of the ancient Catholic Church.

To proceed, according to the First Notion of Necessity, Church Government is
necessary, because it is enjoined by the Dictates of Common reason, and most
express places of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe the Books
contained in the New Testament, to be the Word of God, and no other, (how
Divine and Orthodox, and Ancient soever they may be) because they, and they
only have been received for such by the Ancient Catholic Church.

In like manner as to matter of Practice, by the First sort of Necessity, it is
necessary for Christians to assemble together to Worship God, because Reason,
and Scripture plainly teach them so to do.

And by the Second sort it is necessary, that they should assemble themselves
periodically to Worship God on every first day of the Week, because the
Observation of the Lords Day, appears to be a Duty from several places of the
New Testament, as they are interpreted to this sense by the universal Practice
of the Ancient Catholic Church.

To proceed, according to the First Notion of Necessity, Church Government is
necessary, because it is enjoined by the Dictates of Common reason, and most
express places of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary, that the Church
should be governed by Bishops (where they can be had) distinct from, and
Superior to Presbyters, because this Government appears to be instituted by
Christ from several Passages of the New Testament, as they are explained by the
uniform Practice of the Primitive Catholic Church.

Furthermore, according to the first sort of necessity, it is necessary to
administer the Lords Supper, because our Savior has commanded it in express
words.

And according to the Second, which is also an indispensable degree of
Necessity, it is necessary to administer it to Women, though they never were
admitted to the Passover, or Paschal Postcaenium, which answered unto it,
because we can prove from some probable places of the New Testament, that they
were admitted unto it, as those places are in equity to be interpreted by the
universal Practice of the Ancient Primitive Church.

To conclude, according to the former Notion of Necessity, it is necessary to
Baptize, because our Lord has commanded it in express words.

And according to the Second, It is in like manner necessary to Baptize
Infants, because we can prove their Baptism from the Scope, and Tenor of the
Gospel, and from many Passages of it, as they are interpreted according to the
Practice of the Ancient Primitive Church.

First, From the Scope and Tenor of the Gospel, which it is reasonable to
presume, would extend the Subject of Baptism, as far as the Jewish Church
extended the Subject both of Circumcision, and Baptism.

And Secondly, From many Passages in the Gospel, whereof I shall recite some.
Except a Man be Born again of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. John 3.5. Suffer the little Children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Mark 10.14. The three noted
places, which inform us, that the Apostles baptized whole Households, as of
Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. Lydia, Acts 16.15. and the Jailer, Acts 16.33. The
Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the [BELIEVING] Wife, and the unbelieving
Wife is Sanctified by the [BELIEVING] Husband; else, were your Children
[Common, or] Unclean, but now they are Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. And were all Baptized
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2.

The requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, may be fairly concluded from these
Texts.

For the First seems to make Purgation by Water, Alioquin meminerat dominicae
definitionis nisi quis nascatur ex Aqua and Spiritu non introibit in Regnum
Dei, id est, non erit Sanctus, ita omnis anima usque eo in Adam censetur, donec
in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda, quamdiu recenseatur. Tertull. de Anima.
cap. 39, 40. Pro hoc and Ecclesia traditionem suscepit ab Apostolis etiam
parvulis Baptismum dare -- quia essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati, quae
per aquam and spiritum ablui deberent. Orig. in Ep. ad Romans l. 5. and in Luc.
Hom. 14. Propterea Baptizantur and parvuli, nisi enim quis renatus, etc. Omnes
venit [Christus] per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam, qui per eum renascuntur
in Deum Infantes parvulos and pueros, and juvenes, and seniores. Irenaeus l. 2.
c. 39.
and the Spirit equally necessary for all: (...), unless one be born again, etc.

From the Tertullian de Bapt. ait quidem dominus, nolite prohibere illos ad me
venire. This he says by way of Objection, which shows, that this Text was in
his time understood for Infant Baptism, but then because it was his present
Opinion, that Cunctatio Baptismi praecipue circa parvulos was utilior, he
answers, Veniant dum adolescunt, veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniant docentur.
Second, it is reasonable to conclude, that little Children are capable of
Proselytism, or entering into the Covenant after the Jewish manner, when they
are brought unto it by others.

First, Because they are declared Cassandr. de Baptism. Infant. p, 730.
capable of the Kingdom of God.

And Secondly, Because Dr. Ham. of Infant Baptism. Sect. 22.28.
the Original words (...), are the same with (...), from whence the Word
Proselyte does come.

From the Third, it is reasonable to conclude, That they Baptized the Children
upon the Conversion of the Parents, after the Custom of the Jewish Church.

Tertul. de anima c. 39. Hinc enim and Apostolus ex Sanctificato alterutro sexu
Sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis
disciplina. Caeterum, inquit, immundi nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen
sanctitatis, and per hoc etiam salutis intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut
hujus spei pignora, Matrimoniis, quae retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur.
Alioqui meminerat. --
From the Fourth, it is reasonable to believe, That the Foederal Holiness of
Believers Children makes them Candidates for Baptism, and gives them a right
unto it.

And the Fifth makes it reasonable to conclude, from the Type to the Antitype,
that if the Jews with their Children were umbratically Baptized unto Moses in
the one, that Christians and their Infants should be really Baptized in the
other.

To all which may be added Romans 5. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 3.23, 24. Joh. 3.5, 6. 2
Cor. 15.21, 22. 2 Cor. 5 14, 15. Job 14 4. Vid Voss. hist. Pelag. l. 2. part 2.
other Texts, which have been alleged by the Ancients both Voss. hist. Pelag.
p. 1. These. 6.
before and after the Pelagian Controversy, to prove the Baptism of Infants
necessary, to wash away their Original Sin, which makes them obnoxious to
Eternal Death.

I say, the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, might be fairly concluded
from these Texts, without the Tradition of the Ancient Church, though without
it, I confess, it could not be demonstrated from them, as the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and the Deity of the Holy Ghost may be fairly, and sufficiently proved
from those Texts which the Orthodox bring for them, without Ancient Tradition,
though without it, they could not be demonstrated from them, because they do
not assert it in express words.

But then, as those Texts in Conjunction with Tradition, do put those Doctrines
out of all reasonable doubt: So do the other, which I have cited in Conjunction
with the Practice of the Ancient Church, put the requisite necessity of
Infant Baptism out of Question, because the Church in the next Age unto the
Apostles, practiced Infant Baptism, as an Apostolical Tradition, and by
consequence, as an Institution of Christ.

In like manner, as the Intrinsecal Arguments taken rom the Style, Sanctity,
Dignity, and Efficacy of the Holy Scriptures, and the perpetual Analogy, and
Conformity of the several Books contained in them, are by themselves but
probable, and no demonstrative reasons, that all the Books contained in the
Canon, and no other, are the Word of God, but in conjunction with the
Testimony, and Authority of the Ancient Catholic Church, amount to a
Demonstration: So, though the Texts which I have cited, are of themselves but
probable Arguments for the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, yet in
concurrence with such a Comment upon them, as the Practice of the next Age unto
the Apostles, and all Ages since, from one Generation to another, they amount
to such a demonstration, as is called in Logic, Demonstratio ducens ad
absurdum, and are a violent Presumption, that Children ought to be Baptized. I
might run on the Parallel, as to the other Instances of Episcopal Government,
the admitting of Women to the Communion, and the Observation of the Lord's day;
and therefore let the Adversaries of Infant Baptism consider well with
themselves, Whether rejecting of it after a Concurrence of such Texts, and such
a Tradition to establish it, they do not teach others, especially Atheists;
pure Deists, and Sabbatizers; to which I may add Scepticks, Socinians, and
Quakers, a way to deny all the rest.

Thus much I have said concerning the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, to
show that it is not lawful to separate from a Church for appointing of Infants
to be Baptized, when there are such cogent reasons arising from the concurrence
of Scripture, and Antiquity, to presume that Infant Baptism was an Apostolical
Tradition, and an Institution of Christ. And I have designedly called it a
requisite, to distinguish it from an absolute necessity, lest the Reader should
think I were of St. Augustin's Opinion, who thought Baptism indispensibly
necessary to the Salvation of Infants, so that a Child dying unbaptized,
through the carelessness, or Superstition of the Parents, or through their
mistaken Belief of the unlawfulness of Infant Baptism, were Potest proinde
recte dici parvulos sine Baptismo de corpore exeuntes in damnatione omnium
mitissima futuros. Multum autem fallit, and fallitur, qui eos in damnatione
praedicat non futuros, dicente Apostolo Judicium ex uno delicto -- August. de
peccat merit. and remiss. contra Pelag. l. 1. c. 16. Vid. and contra Julianum
Pelag. l. 5. c. 8.
infallibly damned.

No, I intended no such severe Conclusion, (because we ought not to tie God to
the same means, to which he has tied us) but only to show that the Baptism of
young Children is antecedently necessary, and Articles of Religion, Artic. 27.
in any wise to be retained in the Church, as being most agreeable with the
Holy Scripture, the Apostolical Practice, and the Institution of Christ. And to
set this way of arguing more home upon the Consciences of those, who Dissent
from the Church upon the account of Infant Baptism, I appeal unto them, Whether
Scripture, and Antiquity, standing against Infant Baptism in the same posture
of evidence, that they now stand for it, it would not be unjustifiable for any
sort of Men to separate from the Church, for not Baptizing Infants, as they do
now for Baptizing of them.

Let us suppose, for Example, That the Disciples of Christ, instead of rebuking
those, that brought little Children unto him, had brought them to him
themselves; and he had been much displeased at them for it, and said, I suffer
not little Children to come unto me, for the Kingdom of God is not of such: Let
us put the case, That two Evangelists had recorded this supposed Story, and
accordingly we had been assured, by the Writers of the two next Ages to the
Apostles, that then there was no Baptizing of Infants, and that the Apostles
Baptized them not, and that there never was any Church in after Ages which did
practice Infant Baptism: Upon this Supposition, I appeal unto them, Whether it
would not be highly unreasonable to separate from all the Churches in the
World, for not allowing of Infant Baptism against the Concurrence of such a
Text, to the contrary, and the sense and practice of the Catholic Church.

The case, which I suppose one way, is the real case the other, only with this
difference, that the supposed case would have but the benefit of one Text,
whereas the real has the benefit of many in Conjunction with Tradition; and
therefore, seeing there are so many Texts, and such a cloud of Witnesses for
Infant Baptism, Why should it not be looked upon as one of the common Notions
of Christianity, like the Parallel Doctrines abovementioned, though it be not
commanded (especially when, as I have showed there was no need of commanding of
it) in express Words.

I know the Dissenters of all sorts, and especially those, for whose sake I am
now writing, are bred up in great prejudice, and sinister Suspicions against
Tradition, declaiming against it, as very uncertain, and against the use of it
as very derogatory to the sufficiency of the Word of God. But as to the first
part of their Objection against the certainty of Tradition, I desire them to
take notice, that there is a certain, as well as an uncertain; an undoubted, as
well, as a pretended Tradition, as there are true, certain, and undoubted, as
well as pretended, and uncertain Scriptures, and that there are sure ways
whereby ingenious, and inquisitive. Men, may satisfy themselves, which is one,
and which is the other.

The way then to find out true and undoubted Tradition, as Advers. Haeres. c. 3.
Vincentius Lirinensis teaches, is to try it by these three Tests.
Universality, Antiquity, and Consent.

First, By Universality, If all the Churches, wheresoever dispersed, or how
different soever in their Languages, and Customs, do believe or practice such a
Doctrine.

Secondly, Antiquity, If what all the Churches all the World over does so
believe or practice, was no innovation, but Believed, and Practiced in the Ages
next to the Apostles, when such Fathers governed the Churches, or such Famous
Men lived in them, as knew the Apostles, and conversed with them, or lived near
unto those, or with those Apostolical Men, who so knew them, or conversed with
them, or lived near unto them.

Thirdly, Consent, If it appear that such a Doctrine was the consentient belief
or practice of all the Fathers in those Ages, or of all except a very few, who
had no proportion to the rest.

To which I will add, First, That this Tradition must be written, and not Oral.
And

Secondly, That it must be proved in every Age from Books that were written in
it, and whose Authors, whether under their own, or under borrowed Names, had no
interest to write so.

And therefore, though the Testimonies for Infant Baptism in the Constitutions,
going under the name of L. 6. c. 19. (...) -- Baptize your Infants, and educate
them in the Discipline, and Admonition of God, for says our Lord, Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not.
Clemens Romanus, and the Book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, bearing the name of
C. 7. Where arguing for Infant Baptism, he says, Of this we say the same
things, which our Divine Ministers of Holy things instructed by Divine
Tradition brought down to us.
Dionysius the Areopagite, are of no authority as to the first Century, when
St. Clement, and St. Denis lived; yet they are most excellent authorities for
the third, and fourth Century, when they were written, because they had no
interest to write for Infant Baptism. The like, I may say, of the Testimony
which the Quaest. and respons. 56. Where, he says, That there is this
difference betwixt Baptized, and unbaptized Infants, that Baptized Infants
enjoy the good things of Baptism, which those, that are not Baptized do not
enjoy, and that they enjoy them by the Faith of those, who offer them to
Baptism.
Ancient and Judicious Author of the Answers to the Orthodox concerning some
Questions, gives of Infant Baptism, it is of no authority as for the second
Century, when Justin Martyr, whose name it bears, flourished, but being a
disinteressed writer, it is of excellent authority for the third, when it was
written.

So much for the Test whereby to try certain, and undoubted from uncertain and
doubted Tradition, and happy had it been for the Church of God, if all Writers
at the beginning of the Reformation; had made this distinction, and not written
so, as many of them have done, against all Tradition without any
discrimination; whereas Tradition, as I have here stated it, is not only an
harmless thing, but in many cases very useful and necessary for the Church. It
was by Tradition in this sense, that the Catholics, or Orthodox defended
themselves in the fourth Century against the Arians, and the Church of Africa
against the Donatists, and the Protestants defend themselves, as to the
Scripture-Canon, and many other things against the Innovations of the Papists
And therefore, in answer to the Second part of their Objection against
Tradition, as detracting from the Sufficiency of the Scriptures, I must remind
them, that the Scriptures, whose sufficiency we admire, as well as they, cannot
be proved to be the Word of God without Tradition, and that though they are
sufficient, where they are understood to determine any Controversy, yet to the
right understanding, and interpretation of them in many points, Tradition is as
requisite, as the Lex currit cum praxi.
practice of the Courts is to understand the Books of the Law.

This is so true, that the Anabaptists themselves cannot defend the Baptizing
of such grown Persons, as were born, and bred in the Church merely from the
Scriptures, in which the very Institution of Baptism has a special regard unto
Proselytes, who from Judaism, or Gentilism, would come over unto the Christian
Faith. Accordingly they cannot produce one Precept, or Example for Baptizing of
such as were born of Christian Parents in all the New Testament, but all the
Baptized Persons we read of in it, were Jews, or Gentiles; and therefore they
cannot defend themselves against the Quakers, [who for this, and other Reasons,
have quite laid aside Baptism] without the Tradition, and Practice of the
Church.

Quest. IV. Whether it be a Duty incumbent upon Christian Parents, to bring
their Children unto Baptism?

To state this Question aright, I must proceed in the same order, that I did
upon the last.

First, In arguing from the bare lawfulness, and allowableness of
Infant Baptism.

And Secondly, From the necessity thereof.

As to the lawfulness of it, I have already shown upon the last Question, That
there is no necessity of having a Command, or Example for to justify the
practice of Infant-Initiation; but it is sufficient, that it is not forbidden
to make it lawful, and allowable under the Gospel. Nay, I have showed upon the
Second Question, that of the two, there is more reason that Christians should
have had an express command to leave off, or lay down the practice of
Infant-Initiation, because it was commanded by God in Infant-Circumcision, and
approved by him in Infant Baptism (which the Jewish Church added to
Infant-Circumcision) under the Legal State. Commands are usually given for the
beginning of the practice of something, which was never in practice before; but
to justify the continuation of an anciently instituted, or anciently received
practice, it is sufficient, that the Power, which instituted, or approved it,
do not countermand, or forbid it: and this, as I have shown, being the case of
Infants-Initiation, the Initiation of them by Baptism under the Gospel, must at
least be lawful and allowable, and if it be so, then Parents, and Pro-parents
are bound in Conscience to bring them unto Baptism in Obedience unto the Orders
of the Church. For the Church is a Society of a People in Covenant with God,
and in this Society, as in all others there are Superiors, and in Inferiors,
some that must Order, and some that must observe Orders, some that must
Command, and some that must Obey; and therefore, if the Catholic Church, or
any Member of it commands her Children to observe any lawful thing, they are
bound by the Common-Laws of all Government, and by the Precepts in the Gospel,
which regard Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, to observe her Commands. Obey
them (says the Heb. 13.17.
Apostle) who have the Rule over you, and submit your selves unto them, for
they watch for your Souls Accordingly we read that St. Act. 16.4.
Paul, as he went through the Grecian Cities delivered the Christians the
Decrees, which the Apostles had made at Jerusalem, to keep; but I think, I need
not spend more time in the Proof of a thing, which all Dissenters will grant
me, for though they differ from us, as to the Subject of pure Ecclesiastical
Power, yet they all agree, that there is such a Power, and that all lawful
Commands proceeding from it, ought to be Obeyed.

Wherefore, if Infants are not incapable of Baptismal Initiation, as is proved
under the first Question, nor excluded from it by Christ, as is proved under
the Second; but on the contrary, there are very good Reasons to presume, that
Christ at least allowed them the benefit and honor of Baptism, as well as
grown Persons: then the Ordinance of any Church to Baptize them must needs lay
an Obligation of Obedience upon the Consciences of Parents, and Pro-parents,
who live within the Pale of it, because the matter of that Ordinance is a thing
not forbidden, but at least, allowed by Jesus Christ.

But because People, when the are once satisfied with the lawfulness, are wont,
especially in Church Matters, to enquire into the expediency of their Superiors
Commands, and to obey them with most Cheerfulness, and Satisfaction, when they
know they have good reasons for what they ordain; therefore, least any one whom
perhaps I may have convinced of the bare lawfulness of Infant Baptism, should
doubt of the expediency of it, and upon that account be less ready to comply, I
will here proceed to justify the practice of the Church in this Particular; by
showing

First, That Baptismal-Initiation is very beneficial and profitable for Infants.

And Secondly, That the Baptizing of them conduces very much to the well-being
and edification of the Church.

First then, Baptismal-Initiation is very beneficial and profitable for
Infants, because they are capable of the Benefits, and Privileges of Baptism.

This I showed in general before, under the first Question, and now I will show
it in a more particular manner of Induction, by insisting upon the several
Ends, for which Baptism was ordained.

First then Baptism was ordained, That the Baptized Person might be thereby
solemnly consecrated unto God, and dedicated to his Service, and I hope I need
not prove, that Children are capable of this benefit; since Jewish Infants were
Consecrated to God by Circumcision; and the Scripture tells us, that Judges
13.15.
Sampson was a Nazarite from the Womb, and that Samuel from the time of his
Weaning, was dedicated unto the Lord.

Secondly Baptism was ordained, That the Baptized Person might be made a Member
of Christ's Mystical Body, which is the Holy Catholic Church. This is a great,
and honorable Privilege, and no Man can deny, but Infants are as capable of
it under the New, as they were under the Old Testament. Nay, so far are they
from being under any Natural Incapacity, as to Church Membership, that they are
ordinarily born free of Kingdoms, Cities, and Companies; and therefore, why any
Man should think it not so proper for the Church-Christian to be as indulgent
to them, as the Jewish Church was, and Civil Societies usually are, I profess I
cannot tell.

Thirdly it was ordained, That the Baptized Person might by that Solemnity pass
from a State of Nature, wherein he was a Child of Wrath, into a State of
Adoption or Grace, wherein he becomes a Child of God.

For by our First Birth we are all Children of Wrath.

But by our Second Birth in Baptism, we are made Children of God: And why it
should be so improper for a Child to pass in this solemn manner from one
Spiritual, as well, as from one Temporal State to another, or be Solemnly
Adopted by God, as well as Man, or

Lastly, Why a Child may not be Adopted under the Gospel, as well, as under the
Law? I am confident, those who are willing to defer the Baptism of Infants,
would be puzzled to give any rational account.

In the Fourth place, Baptism was instituted for a Sign to Seal unto Baptized
Persons the pardon of their Sins, and to confer upon them a Right of
Inheritance unto Everlasting Life; but Baptism has this Effect upon Infants,
as well as upon adult Persons, for it washes them clean from De hoc etia^ David
dixisse credendus est illud, qui in peccato concepit me matter mea, pro hoc and
Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit, etiam parvulis Baptismum dare.
Sciebant enim illi, quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt divinorum, quia
essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ablui
deberent. Origin. in Ep. ad Lous. l. 5. (...). Contra Celsum l. 4. Quanto magis
prohiberi non debet Infans, qui recens natus nihil peccavit, nisi quod secundum
Adam carnaliter natus contagium mortis antiquae prima Nativitate contraxit.
Cyprian. in Ep. ad Fidum. Those that would see more Testimonies out of the
Ancients about Original Sin, before the time of the Pelagian Controversy, may
consult Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 5. l. 5. cap. 16. l. 3. cap. 20. l. 5. cap. 14.17,
21. and many more cited out of Just. Mart. in Dial cum Tryph. Tatianus his
Scholar, Athanasius, etc. by Vossius in his Hist. Pelag. l. 2. part 1. Th. 6.
Vid. Can. Council. Carthag. 112.
Original, as it does Men, and Women both from Actual and Original Sin. I say,
it washes them clean from Original Sin, and seals the Pardon of it, and the
assurance of God's favor unto them, and being cleansed by the washing of
Regeneration from the guilt of that natural vitiosity which they derived from
Adam, and which made them obnoxious to the displeasure of God, they become
reconciled unto him, and acquire as certain a Right to Eternal Life, upon their
justification, as any actual Believer in the Word. I cannot deny, but they may
be saved without Baptism, by the extraordinary, and uncovenanted Mercies of
God, and so may actual Believers, who die unbaptized, if they did not contemn
Baptism; but then the hopes which we ought to have of Gods Mercy, in
extraordinary Cases, ought not to make us less regardful of his sure, ordinary,
and covenanted Mercies, and the appointed means, unto which they are annexed.

But in the Fifth place, Baptism was ordained, That being admitted into the
Covenant, and ingrafted into Christ's Body, we might acquire a present Right
unto all the Promises of the Gospel, and particularly unto the promises of the
Spirit, which is so ready to assist Initiated Persons, that it will descend in
its influences upon them at the time of their Initiation in such a manner, and
measure, as they are capable thereof.

This the Primitive Christians found by experience to be so true, that they
called Baptism, by the names of Heb. 6.4. (...), Just. Mart. Apol. 2.94. (...).
Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 40.
Illumination, Grace, and Unction; and we need not doubt, but they talked, as
they felt; and for this reason, they Baptized Infants, because they knew that
they acquired a Right unto the same Spirit by Baptism, who would be sure to
preside, and watch over them, and act upon their Souls according to the measure
of their capacity, and prevent them in their very first doings with his
gracious helps.

Wherefore, though it should be granted, that the Holy Ghost cannot be actually
conferred upon Infants in Baptism, Vid. Cypriani Ep. 1. ad Donatum.
by reason of their natural incapacity (as Anabaptists rashly assert) yet the
Baptizing of them is not frustraneous, as to this great End of Baptism, because
they thereby acquire an actual Antecedent Right to the Assistances, and
Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, which they shall receive, as soon, and as
fast, as their natural incapacity removes.

This distinction betwixt having the Spirit, and having a Right unto the
Spirit, holds not only in Infant Baptism, but in the Baptism of Hypocrites, and
secret Sinners, who by submitting unto the Ordinances of Baptism acquire an
actual Antecedent Right unto the Spirit, although they are in a moral
incapacity of receiving the Graces of it, till their Hypocrisy is removed.
Nevertheless, their Baptism is not ineffectual as to this End, but is a means
of conferring the Holy Ghost upon them without re-baptization, because though
they cannot receive it at the moment of their Baptism, by reason of their
Hypocrisy, as sincere Penitents do, in whom there is no such Moral Impediment;
yet by virtue of it, they will be sure to receive it afterward, as soon, as
they shall in any degree become capable thereof.

Those are the Blessings, and Benefits, consequent upon Baptism by God's
appointment, of which Infants are as capable, as actual Believers, and let any
Impartial Man judge, Whether it is more for their benefit, that this manifold
capacity in them should be actually answered by the timely Administration of
Baptism, or that it should lay void and unsatisfied, till they came to years of
Discretion? Which is best for a Child that has the Evil, to be Touched for it,
while he is a Child, or to wait till he is of sufficient Age to be sensible of
the Benefit? Or to make one Comparison more, which would be best for a Traitors
Child, to be presently restored to his Blood, and and Estate, and his Princes
Favor, or to be kept in a mere capacity of being restored till he was a Man?

But besides these Benefits which are consequent upon Baptism by God's
appointment, there is another no less profitable to young Children, which will
justify the practice of Infant-Initiation, and that is to have such an early
pre-engagement laid upon them, which without the highest Baseness can
Ingratitude, they cannot afterward retract. No Person of common Ingenuity, who
has any sense of honor, or any tolerable degree of Conscience within him, can
without shame and horror break those Sacred Bonds asunder, by which he was
bound to God, in his Infancy, when he comes to Years of understanding; but on
the contrary, will think himself in Honor, and Gratitude, bound to own, and
stand to the Obligation, which he then contracted, when he was graciously
admitted to so many Blessings and Privileges, before he could do any thing
himself toward the obtaining of them, or understand his own good. It would
argue a Person to be of a very ill nature, and untoward Disposition to break
such solemn Foederal Vows, and therefore, we see that Children generally do
readily take upon themselves their Baptismal Obligations, when they come to the
use of reason, whereas were they left alone, to their own Freedom, when they
would be Baptized, they would be apt to put it off from time to time, through
the aversness that the corrupt nature of Man has to such strict, and Spiritual
Engagements, and in such a State of Liberty, as this, Men would need, as many,
and as earnest Exhortations unto Baptism, as unto the Lord's Supper; and in
such an Age, as ours is at least, reluct as much to come unto that, as we see
by experience they do unto this. Wherefore, upon Supposition that Christ does
but allow Children to be brought unto him in Baptism, The Wisdom of the Church
is highly to be applauded for bringing them under such an early, and beneficial
pre-engagement, and not leaving them to their own liberty at such years, when
Flesh, and Blood, would be apt to find out so many Shifts, and Excuses, and
make them regret to be Baptized.

And therefore in the Second place, as the Baptism of Infants is very
Beneficial, and profitable unto them: So it conduces very much to the
well-being, and edification of the Church, in preventing those Scandalous and
Shameful delays of Baptism, which grown Persons otherwise would be apt to make,
putting of it off till the time of some great sickness, as many were wont to do
in the third and fourth Century, when being not Baptized in their Infancy, they
did ordinarily receive. Baptism, as Papists now receive extreme Unction, when
they were ready to expire.

For, as it is usual now for Persons to defer the receiving of the Lord's
Supper, for fear of Damnation, mistaking the Apostle, where he says, He that
Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats, and Drinks Damnation to himself: So
in those Ages it was usual for Persons to defer their own, and their Childrens
Baptism out of a Dr. Caves Prim. Christian. part 1. chapter 10. (...). -- Greg.
Nazianz. Orat. 40. p 647 and 649. Sed mundus rursus delinquit, quo male
comparetur diluvio, itaque igni destinatur, sicut and homo, qui post Baptismum
delicta restaurat. Tertull. de Baptismo. (...). Greg. Nyssen de Baptismo.
kind of Novatian Principle, for fear that if they fell into Sin after Baptism
there would be no place for Repentance; mistaking that place of the Apostle,
where it is said, that if they, who were once enlightened [i. e. Baptized] fall
away, it is impossible to renew them again unto Repentance.

Now the Baptizing of Children being deferred by their Parents out of this
Superstitious fear, they, when they came to be Men and Women, put the doing of
it off for several Reasons, and Pretenses, which we learn out of the Writers of
those times.

Some deferred it out of Worldly Love, and a Carnal loathness to renounce their
sinful Pleasures, and take upon them the Yoke of Christ. Some put it off
pretending want of leisure through multitude of worldly business; others out of
laziness, and careless negligence. Others were wont to plead the insufficiency
of their knowledge, See Mr. Walker's Excellent Preface to his Treatise of
Infant Baptism.
others the inconveniency of the present time; others would not be Baptized,
but at such a time, or in such a place, as such a City, or such a River, or by
such a Person, or in such a Company. Some would put it off upon a pretense of
not having such, or such Relations present, others would decline it upon the
account of some small Expenses, that attended it; others because they relucted
to confess their Sins, others because they favored not the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, or to comply with the Arians; some because they would imitate the
Example of Christ, who was not Baptized till the 30th Year of his Age, and some
out of fear of Persecution.

This happened formerly to the great shame, and dishonor of the Christian
Religion, though the Gregor. Nazianz. Greg. Nyss. and St. Basil.
Fathers sharply and vehemently Wrote, and Preached against it; and therefore,
upon supposition of the bare lawfulness, or indifferency of Infant Baptism, I
cannot but approve the Wisdom, and Prudence of those Churches, which appoint
it, because the practice of it does prevent such shameful, and scandalous
Neglects of Baptism, which to the great prejudice of Christianity, as
Experience has taught us, would otherwise arise in the Church.

Thus much upon enquiry into the lawfulness, and expediency of Infant Baptism,
to show Christian Parents what an indispensable Obligation lies upon their
Consciences to bring their Children to be Baptized in Obedience to the Church,
which has appointed Infant Baptism; but then if Infant Baptism be not only
necessary because the Church has appointed it, but the Church has appointed
it because it is necessary, and in any wise to be retained, then this
Antecedent sort of necessity does yet lay a stronger Obligation upon the
Consciences of Parents to initiate their Children as being most agreeable to
the practice of the Apostles, and the Intention, and Will of Christ.

First, As being most agreeable to the practice of the Apostles, who it is
highly to be presumed, authorized the practice of Infant Baptism, because, it
was practiced in the next Age unto them.

And Secondly, As being most agreeable to the Intention, and Will of Christ,
who it is to be presumed would have forbidden, and countermanded the Jewish
practice of initiating Infants, if he had not had a mind they should be
Baptized.

Wherefore Nam quum paedo-Baptismus in Ecclesia Judaica in admissione
Proselytorum ita fuit notus, usitatus, and frequens, ut nihil fere notius,
usitatius, and frequentius, non opus erat, ut aliquo praecepto roboraretur. Nam
Christus Baptismum in manus suas atque in usum Evangelicum suscepit, qualem
invenit, hoc solum addito, quod ad digniorem finem atque largiorem usum
promoverit. Novit satis gens universa parvulos folitos Baptizari, Illud
praecepto opus non habuit, quod Communi usu semper invaluerat. Si prodiret jam
edictum regale in haec verba: Recipiat se unusquisque die dominico ad publicum
conventum in Ecclesia, insaniet certe ille, quicunque olim hinc argueret non
celebrandas esse die dominico in publicis conventibus preces, conciones,
Psalmodias, eo quod nulla in edicto de lis mentio. Nam cavit edictum de
celebratione diei dominicae in publicis conventibus in genere, de
particularibus autem divini cultus speciebus ibidem celebrandis non opus erat,
ut esset mentio, cum istae ante datum edictum, and cum daretur, semper, and
ubique notae essent, and in usu assiduo. Ipsissimo hoc modo res se habuit cum
Baptismo, Christus cum instituit in Sacramentum Evangelicum, quo in
professionem Evangelii omnes admitterentur, ut olim in Proselytismum ad
Religionem Judaicum. Particularis eo spectantia modus scilicet Baptizandi aetas
Baptizanda, sexus Baptizandus, etc. regula and definitione opus non habuerunt,
eo quod haec vel lippis and tensoribus nota erant ex communi usu. E contra ergo
plana and aperta prohibitione opus erat, ut Infantes and parvuli non
Baptizarentur, si eos Baptizandos nollet servator. -- Si aboleri istam
consuetudinem vellet Christus aperte prohibuis^et. Silentium ergo ejus and
Scripturae paedo-baptismum sirmat, and propagat. Lightfoot Horae Hebraitae in
Marth. 3.6.
his very not repealing of that practice, is a sufficient Demonstration, that
it was his pleasure it should be continued; it was the practice of the Jewish
Church before he came, and the practice of the Church Christian not long after
he departed, and we find the practice of it in the one, harmoniously answering
to the practice of it in the other; and therefore what was before, and what was
after this time, we may well presume, was continued in the interim during the
time of the Apostles, as his presumed Will and Intention, who never did, or
spoke any thing, that can reasonably be interpreted, that he would have the
Jewish custom of admitting Infants into the Church, laid aside; and therefore,
his silence, and the silence of the Scriptures, are so far from being Arguments
against Infant Baptism, that considering the Antecedent usage of it, they are
very strong Presumptions for it, as the Learned Author in the Margin foregoing
does excellently prove.

To this purpose also, have I discoursed above, upon the Second and Third
Questions; and therefore if Christ in the Reformation of the Church, from the
Law into the Gospel, did not repeal the Ancient practice of Infant Baptism, but
left Baptism to be administered in the same Latitude, as before his time, then
it must needs be concluded, that there lies the same Obligation upon Parents
(abstracting from the Commands of the Church) to desire Baptism for their
Children, as for grown Profelytes to desire it for themselves.

For what authority soever enacts any thing concerning Children, or Persons
under the years of discretion, does lay at least an implicit Obligation upon
Parents, and Proparents to see that act be performed. As if for Example, an Act
of Parliament should be made, that all Persons whatsoever, Men, Women, and
Children, should pay so much an Head unto the King, the Act, by the nature of
it, would oblige Parents, and Pro-parents, to pay for their Children, and the
Minors in their custody, as well as for themselves. Or, if in the time of a
general Contagion, the Supreme Power should command, that all Men, Women, and
Children, should every Morning take such an Antidote, that Command would oblige
Parents to give it unto their Children, as well, as to take it themselves. Just
so the Ordinance of Baptism being intended, or instituted by our Savior in its
ancient Latitude for Children, as well, as grown Persons, it must needs lay an
Obligation upon Parents, and Pro-parents to bring them to the Holy Sacrrament,
otherwise the Divine Institution would in part be made void, and frustrated of
the Ends for which it was instituted, as if it did not also lay an Obligation
upon Adult Persons to offer themselves unto the Holy Sacrament, it would be of
no force at all.

To sum up all in short. When our Lord first appointed Baptism, and afterward
said, Go, and Proselyte all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. either he intended
that Children should be Baptized, as well as Grown Proselytes, or he did not;
if he did not intend they should be Baptized, Why did he not plainly discover
that Intention? Nay, Why did he not plainly forbid them to be Baptized, as they
were wont to be, but if he intended they should be Baptized according to the
ancient custom in the Jewish Church, Parents are as much bound to offer them
unto Baptism, as Adult Believers, Men and Women, are bound to offer themselves.

What I have here said about the Obligation, which lies upon Parents to bring
their Children unto Baptism, concerns all Pro-parents to whose care Children
are committed, as Guardians, Tutors, and Churchwardens; and lest any should
ask, as some Sceptically do, at What time they are bound to bring them unto
Baptism? As soon, as they are born, or the next day after, or when? I answer,
by showing the impertinency of that Question, in reference to Grown Believers
thus: When must a Believing Man, or Woman be Baptized? As soon as he Believes,
or the next day after, or when? And truly the Answer is the same to both
Questions, at any time, the Gospel indulging a discretional Latitude in both
Cases, and only forbidding the wilful neglect of the Ordinance, and all
unreasonable, and needless delays thereof.

Quest. V. Whether it is lawful to Communicate with Believers, who were only
Baptized in their Infancy?

The stating of this, depends upon what I have said upon the Second, and Third
Questions, to prove, That Infants are capable Subjects of Baptism, and that it
is lawful to Baptize them; and if I have not erred, as I hope I have not, in
those two Determinations, then the Baptism of Infants is lawful, and valid, and
if the Baptism of them be lawful, and valid, then it cannot be unlawful to
Communicate with them, when they come to be Men, and Women.

Accordingly, it never entered into the Heart of any of the ancient Christians
to refuse Communion with grown Believers, who had been Baptized in their
Infancy, whether they were Baptized in perfect health, as Children most
commonly were, or only in danger of Death, as the Children of those Novatian
kind of Parents above mentioned always were, who were so far from thinking
Infant Baptism a Nullity, or Corruption of Baptism, that they thought it
necessary for them in case of apparent danger, and durst not let them die
unbaptized.

Some others deferred the Baptizing of their Children, because they thought
them too weak to endure the Severities of the Trine immersion; and others,
perhaps, according to the private Opinion of De Baptismo, c. 18. Ait quidem
dominus, nolite illos prohibere ad me venire, veniant ergo dum adolescunt,
veniant dum discunt, dum, quo veniant, docentur.
Tertullian and (...). Orat. 40.
Nazianzen, thought is more convenient to delay the Baptizing of them till they
were capable of being Catechized, between Three, and Four years old, but still
this delay of Baptism supposed their continuing in health, but in case of
danger they thought it (...).
necessary to Baptize them, and if they survived the danger, looked upon them
as lawfully, and validly Baptized.

These were all the Pleas we read of for deferring the Baptism of Infants among
the Ancients, who never urged this for one, that Infant Baptism was unlawful,
or invalid. No, They never argued against it from the want of those
pre-requisite Conditions in Children, which Christ, and the Apostles required
in Adult Proselytes, nor from the want of Precept, and Example for it in the
New Testament, but so understood the Scriptures, as to think it as lawful, and
warrantable as the Baptism of grown Believers, and necessary in case of danger;
and just so did those, who deferred their Baptism, for fear of sinning after
it, think the Baptism of Men and Women only necessary at the last extremity, in
apparent danger of Death.

But then if the ordinary practice of Infant Baptism be not only lawful, and
valid, but also necessary, as appearing most agreeable to the presumed Will of
Christ, who did not countermand the practice of it, and most conformable to the
practice of the Apostles, as can be proved from the practice of the very next
Age unto them; then it must not only be lawful to Communicate with Believers,
who were Baptized in their Infancy, but an exceeding great Sin, and Presumption
to refuse Communion with them upon that account.

In a word, If Infant Baptism be not only lawful, but necessary, what a
grievous, and provoking Sin, must it needs be, to disown those for Members of
Christ's Body, whom he owns to be such? But if it be neither, as Anabaptists
vainly pretend, then there has not been a true Church upon the Face of the
Earth, for Eleven hundred Years, nor a Church, for above Fifteen hundred, with
which a true Christian could Communicate without Sin.

This is a very absurd, and dreadful consequence, and inconsistent with the
purity of the Apostolical Ages, while the Church was so full of Saints,
Martyrs, and Miracles, and represented as See Dr. More's Apocalypsis Apoc.
Preface, p. 20. and on the 11. Chapter of the Rev. v. 1, 2.
Symmetral by the Spirit of God under the Symbol of Measuring the Temple of
God, and the Altar, Revel. 11.1, 2.

THE CONCLUSION.
ALthough in the management of this Controversy against the Anabaptists, I
have endeavored so to state the Case of Infant Baptism, as to obviate, or
answer all the Considerable Pleas, and Material Objections, which they are wont
to make against it; yet there are two of their Objections, of which I have yet
taken no notice, thinking it better, that I might avoid tediousness, and
confusion in determining upon the preceding Questions, to Propose, and Answer
them a part by themselves.

The First of these two, is the ancient Custom of giving the Communion unto
Infants, which they endeavor with all their Art, and Skill to run Parallel
with the practice of Infant Baptism, although there is not the like Evidence,
nor the like Reason for the practice of that, as there is for the practice of
this.

First, There is not the like Evidence for the practice of it, St. Ac nequid de
esset ad criminis cumulum Infantes quoque parentum manibus vel impositi, vel
attracti: amiserunt parvuli, quod in primo statim Nativitatis Exordio fuerunt
consecuti. Nonne illi cum judicii dies venerit, dicent: Nos nihil fecimus, nec
derelicto cibo, ac poculo domini ad profana contagia sponte properavimus.
Afterward he tells a Story of a little Girl, who having been carried to the
Idol-Feasts, was afterward brought by her Mother who knew nothing of it, to
the Communion, when he administered it; and when the Deacon brought the Cup to
her, she turned away her Face from it, but the Deacon pouring some of the Wine
into her Mouth, she fell into Convulsions, and Vomitings, which the Holy Father
looking upon, as a Miracle, did thereupon discover, that she had been polluted
at the Idol-Feasts. Vid. and August. ad Bonifacium Episcop. Ep. 23. vol. 2.
Cyprian being the first Author which they can produce for it, and after him
the Cap. 7. Contemplat. 3. p. 360, 362.
Author of the Book of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and Catechesis 3.
isluminat. Hierosolym.
Cyril of Jerusalem are the next, who make mention of it toward the latter end
of the Fourth Century, and then St. De verbis domini in Evang. Johan. Epist.
23.106, 107. Lib. 1. de peccatotum merit. and remiss. cap. 20. lib. 1. Contra
Julianum c. 11. Contra duas Epistolas Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 22. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Augustine in the Fifth, who indeed speaks frequently of it, as of the practice
of the Church in that Age.

These are all the Authorities for Infant-Communion, that I know of, till St.
Augustin's time; whereas besides the authority of St. Cyprian, which is the
first they have for Communicating Infants, we have the authority of a whole
Council of Fathers, in which he presided, and of Origin, Tertullian, and
Irenaeus, who was the Scholar of St. Polycarp, and the Grand-Scholar of St.
John.

And then, whereas among the Writers of the 4th Century, there are but the two
above cited, who make mention of Infant-Communion, we have St. See them all
cited at large in Walker's Plea for Infant Baptism, from p. 266. to p. 275.
Hierom, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, and
the Third Council of Carthage, who all speak of Infant Baptism, as of a thing
generally practiced, and most of them, as of a thing, which ought to be
practiced in the Church.

Furthermore, none of the four Testimonies for, Infant-Communion, speak of it,
as of an Apostolical Tradition, as Origin does of Infant Baptism, not to
mention that the Pelagians never owned the necessity of Infant-Communion, as
they did of Infant Baptism: All which things considered, show, that there is
nothing near the like Evidence in Antiquity for the practice of the one, as
there is for that of the other.

And as there is not the like evidence for the constant, successive, and
general practice of Infant-Communion, that there is for Infant Baptism: So
there is not the like Reason for the practice of it.

First, Because Baptism is the Sacrament, or Mystery of Initiation, of which
Persons of all Ages are capable; it being instituted chiefly for an initiatory
Sign to solemnize the admission of the Baptized Person into the Church, and to
Seal all the Blessings of the Gospel unto him, as a Member of Christ. This is
the Substance, or Chief end of Baptism; which, as I have showed upon the
Second, and Fourth Questions, is equally answered in the Baptism of Children,
as well as of professing Believers; Confession of Faith, as well as Confession
of Sins, being but accidental Circumstantials, which are necessary with respect
to the State of the Person to be Baptized, but not to Baptism it self. But on
the contrary, the Holy Eucharist, or Communion, is the Sacrament of Perfection,
and Consummation in the Christian Religion, being primarily, and chiefly
instituted for a Sacrificial Feast in remembrance of Christ's Death, and
Passion, which being an act of great Knowledge and Piety, Children are not
capable to perform.

But Secondly, There is not the like Reason for Baptizing, and Communicating
Infants, because that is grounded upon the Authority of many Texts of
Scripture, which without the Concurrence of Tradition are fairly, and genuinely
interpretable for it; but this is grounded only upon one Text [ John 6.53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood ye have no life
in you] which it is doubtful whether it is to be understood of the Holy
Eucharist, or no, because it cannot be understood of it but in a proleptical
sense, the Lord's Supper having not been yet instituted by him; or if it be to
be so understood, yet the sense of it ought to be regulated by the Chief end of
its Institution contained in those words of our blessed Savior, do this in
remembrance of me, and this do ye, as often, as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
Wherefore though this Text were literally to be understood of the Holy
Eucharist, as St. Augustine first interprets it, yet it ought not to be
strained to Infant-Communion, because Infants cannot partake of the Holy
Banquet in remembrance of Christ. And therefore though the Custom of
Communicating Infants prevailed by Degrees in some Ages of the Church, yet the
Western Churches discerning the mistake upon which it was grounded, have long
since laid it aside, though they still continue the practice of Infant Baptism,
as fully answering the Chief end of Baptism, and as being founded upon more,
and clearer Texts of Scriptures, and a much more noble Tradition, than
Infant-Communion is.

But Thirdly, There is not the like reason for Baptizing, and Communicating
Infants, because the Correspondent practice of the Jewish Church in
Infant-Circumcision, and Infant Baptism, answered as a Pattern unto that under
the Law, but there was nothing of a Pattern under it, which answered so to
Infant-Communion, because a Child never partook of the Exodus 12.26, 27.
Passover, before he was old enough to take his Father by the hand, and to go
up from the Gates of Jerusalem unto the Mount of the Temple, and to enquire
about the meaning of the Service, and was capable of understanding the nature
of it, as it was done in remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt.

And in like manner when the Children of Christians are old enough to be
instructed in the nature of the Holy Communion, and to understand that, then
they may partake of it, be it as soon, as it will, if they are Baptized and
Confirmed; though it is true, that Christian Children are usually much older,
than the Jewish were, before they Communicate, which is merely accidental,
because it requires a riper reason to understand the Mystery of the Holy
Eucharist, which is done in remembrance of our Spiritual Deliverance by the
Sacrifice of Christ, both God and Man, upon the Cross, than to understand the
plain and easy meaning of the Passover, which was annually kept in remembrance
of the Temporal Deliverance of the Jews.

But to speak yet more fully of Infant-Communion, the practice of it is so far
from prejudicing the Cause of Infant Baptism, that it mightily confirms it,
because none were, or could be admitted to partake of the Holy Communion, till
they were validly Theodoret. Therapeut. Sermon. 2. (...).
Baptized, and therefore the practice of Infant-Communion is a most emphatical
Declaration, that all the Churches, wherein it ever was, or As in the Greek,
Russian, and Abyssin Churches, and among the Christians of St. Thomas in the
Indies.
still is practiced, were of Opinion that the Baptism of Infants was as lawful,
and valid, as that of professing Believers can be.

As for the Original of this custom, it is not known when it began, probably it
came in by degrees from the ancient, and laudable custom of administering the
Lord's Supper to grown Persons presently after their Baptism; and if so many of
the ancient Churches were so tender toward Infants, as to bring them to the
Communion, rather than deprive them of the least shadow of right, what shall be
said in excuse of those uncharitable Men, who will rather destroy all the
Churches in the World, than bring their Children unto Baptism, of which they
are capable, and to which they have a Right so highly probable, if not certain,
and infallible, as I have proved above?

The Second Objection against Infant Baptism, which I took no notice of, but
reserved for this place, is taken from their incapacity to engage themselves in
Covenant unto God. For, say these Men, all who enter into Covenant, and receive
the Seal of the Covenant, must contract, and stipulate for their parts, as well
as God does for his, and therefore St. Peter says, That the Baptism which
saves us, 1 Ep. 3.21.
must have the answer, or restipulation of a good Conscience toward God. But
how can Infants restipulate, or what Conscience can be in them, who have not
the use of reason, nor are capable of knowing what the Covenant means?

To this Objection, I answer as formerly, That it is as strong against
Infant-Circumcision; as Infant Baptism; for the Infants of the Jews were
admitted as effectually into the Covenant, and had it as really sealed unto
them, and were as strongly tied to perform the Conditions of it, when they came
to years of understanding, as if they had been Circumcised then, and at their
Circumcision had personally, and expressly indented with God.

Wherefore the same answer which will serve to justify Infant-Circumcision
will justify Infant Baptism, which succeeds in the place of it, and it is
this: That God of his goodness toward Infants was pleased to seal the Covenant
of Grace unto Infants upon an implicit, and imputative sort of Stipulation,
which at years of understanding they were bound to own by openly professing the
Jewish Religion, or if they then renounced it, thereupon they became Strangers
to the Covenant, which in such cases was as void, as if it had never been made.
An implicit Stipulation was sufficient for the Children of Believers, though an
open Profession and Stipulation was required of Grown Proselytes, which shows,
that Circumcision was an institution of Latitude, and that personal, and
express Restipulation was not a general pre-requisite condition to
Circumcision, but only to some Persons to be Circumcised.

In like manner Baptism being an institution of Latitude, ordained for Persons
under, as well as at the years of discretion, personal and express Stipulation
is only required of the former; and therefore St. Peter in the Text above cited
likely had respect not to all Baptism, or Baptism in general, but only to the
Baptism of Adult Proselytes, whom the Minister used to Hence Tertullian de
Baptismo calls Baptism Sponsionem Salutis. And in St. Cyprian we often read of
the interrogation in Baptism.
interrogate at the time of Baptism, much after the same manner, as we
interrogate Adult Proselytes now.

Wherefore, this Objection like the rest which the Anabaptists make, runs upon
this presumption, that Baptism is a strict institution, and that personal and
express answering or Restipulation is a pre-requisite condition to all Baptism,
whereas it is only a personal qualification required of Majors, or Adult
Persons, when they come to be Baptized.

But as for Children, Baptism may be administered unto them upon an implicit,
and imputative sort of Restipulation, as Circumcision was to the Jewish, and
Baptism now is to agonizing Christian Infants, or else it may be administered
unto them as Baptism formerly was among the Jews to the Infants, and Minors of
Proselytes upon a vicarious Restipulation by their Sponsors, which seems to
have been translated together with the use of Baptism from the Jewish Church.
It is certain, that De Baptismo cap. 18. quid enim necesse est Sponsores etiam
periculo ingeri?
Tertullian makes mention of Sponsors, or Sureties for Children at Baptism, and
very probable, that the Apostles made Parents, and Major domos stipulate in the
name of their Praefecturae igitur juridicae quae Baptismo prae erat
profitebatur Proselytus ipse Majorennis (Masculus qui annum decimum tertium,
foemina quae duodecim superaverat) legem Mosaicam se servaturum. Minorum vero
nomine idem ipsum profitebatur praefectura ipsa, uti in Christianismo
susceptores minorennium, seu parvulorum, saltem si nec parents adessent, qui
idem praestare possent. Seldom de Synedriis, Lib. 1. c. 3. And what is here
said of the CONSISTORY among the Jews, concerning the Baptism of Infants, and
Minors, St. Augustine says of the Church among Christians, accommodat illis
matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor, ut credant, aliorum
linguam ut fateantur.
Minors, when they Baptized them, as the Jews were wont to do; and upon this
Supposition St. Peter in the Text above cited, might also probably allude to
all Baptism, because Grown Proselytes to the Christan Religion did answer for
their Children, as well as for themselves at Baptism, according to the Custom
of the Jewish Church.

Nay, there is little reason to doubt, but that the Jewish being the Pattern of
the Christian Baptism, the Apostles, and their Assistants who were Jews, or
Hellenists, did observe this Custom of Vicarious Stipulation at the Baptism of
Infants, and Minors, as well as all the other Particulars, in which they
resemble one another, as the Picture does the Face, whose Picture it is.

As for Example, the Jewish Baptism was administered to Women, as well as Men,
and so is the Christian.

Secondly, It was never reiterated nor repeated, no more is the Christian.

Thirdly, It was called Regeneration, and a New Birth, and Baptized Persons
were said to be born again and Regenerated, which also holds in Christian
Baptism.

Fourthly, Baptized Proselytes among the Jews were bound to leave their nearest
Relations, if it were necessary, and adhere to the Church, and so are Baptized
Christian Proselytes bound to do the same.

Fifthly, The Infants of Proselytes were Baptized among the Jews, as well as
the Proselytes themselves, and so have I proved, that Infants have been always
Baptized among the Christians.

And therefore in the last place, since the Jewish Church Baptized Infants upon
Vicarious Stipulation, why should not we think it sufficient for their entrance
into the Covenant, and that the Apostles did so too?

These things, and whatsoever else is written in this little Tract, I hope will
be fairly, and heartily considered by the Dissenters among us upon the account
of Infant Baptism. I say, the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also
bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, who is the Searcher of Hearts, that I
have great heaviness, and almost continual sorrow in my heart for them, and
that to reconcile them to the Church. I could wish in the Apostles Sense, that
I my self were an Anathema from Christ. And because it is a Disease too common
among Dissenters, and more especially among those, with whom I have been a
dealing, to have minds full of Prejudice, Prepossession, and sinister
Suspicions against what we Speak, or Preach, or Write, I have here subjoined a
Letter of that Famous Martyr of Jesus Christ Mr. John Philpot, concerning
Infant Baptism, which I seriously recommend to their Impartial, and diligent
perusal, hoping that the same Arguments, which may perhaps have less effect
upon them as they come from me, may be better received, and make deeper
impression upon their Souls as they come from him, who like the Primitive
Martyrs, was Blessed with Heavenly Visions, and cheerfully suffered for his
Redeemer, who had suffered for him, and thanked God when the time was come,
that he was to seal the truth of the Protestant Religion with his Blood.

A Letter of Mr. PHILPOT, to a Friend of his, Prisoner the same time in
Newgate: Wherein is debated and discussed the matter or question of Infants to
be Baptized.
THE God of all Light and Understanding lighten your Heart with all true
Knowledge of his Word, Book of Martyrs, 3 Vol. p. 606. Col. 2. London. 1641.
and make you perfect to the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereunto you are
now called, through the mighty operation of his Holy Spirit, Amen.

I received Yesternight from you, (Dear Brother S. and Fellow-Prisoner for the
truth for Christ's Gospel) a Letter, wherein you gently require my Judgment,
concerning the Baptism of Infants, which is the effect thereof. And before I do
show you what I have learned out of God's Word, and of his true Infallible
Church, touching the fame, I think it not out of the matter, first to declare
what Vision I had the same Night whilst musing on your Letter I fell asleep,
knowing that God does not without cause reveal to his People who have their
Minds fixed on him, Special and Spiritual Revelations to their Comfort, as a
taste of their Joy and Kingdom to come, which Flesh and Blood cannot comprehend.

Being in the midst of my sweet rest, it seemed to me to see a great beautiful
City all of the color of Azure, and white, four square in a mavelous
beautiful composition in the midst of the Sky, the sight whereof so inwardly
comforted me, that I am not able to express the consolation I had thereof, yea,
the remembrance thereof causes my Heart as yet to leap for Joy: And as Charity
is no Churl, but would have others to be Partakers of his delight, some
thought I called to others (I cannot tell whom) and whilst they came and we
together beheld the same, by and by to my great Grief it vaded away.

This Dream I think not to have come of the illusion of the Senses, because it
brought with it so much Spiritual Joy, and I take it to be of the working of
God's Spirit for the contentation of your Request, as he wrought in Peter to
satisfy Cornelius. Therefore I Interpret this Beautiful City to be the
Glorious Church of Christ, and the appearance of it in the Sky, signifies the
Heavenly State thereof, whose Conversation is in Heaven, and that according to
the Primitive Church, which is now in Heaven, Men ought to measure and judge
the Church of Christ now in Earth; for as the Prophet David says, The
Foundations thereof be in the Holy Hills, and glorious things be spoken of the
City of God. And the mavelous quadrature of the same, I take to signify the
universal agreement in the same, and that all the Church here Militant ought to
consent to the Primitive Church throughout the four Parts of the World, as the
Prophet affirms, saying; God makes us to dwell after one manner in one
House. And that I conceived so wonderful Joy at the Contemplation thereof, I
understand the unspeakable Joy which they have that be at Unity with Christ's
Primitive Church: For there is Joy in the Holy Ghost, and Peace, which passes
all Understanding, as it is written in the Psalms; As of Joyful Persons is the
dwelling of all them that be in thee. And that I called others to the fruition
of this Vision, and to behold this wonderful City, I construe it by the Will of
God this Vision to have come upon me, musing on your Letter, to the end, that
under this Figure I might have occasion to move you with many others, to behold
the Primitive Church in all your Opinions concerning Faith, and to conform your
self in all points to the same, which is the Pillar and Establishment of truth,
and teaches the true use of the Sacraments, and having with a greater fullness
than we have now, the first fruits of the Holy Ghost, did declare the true
Interpretation of the Scriptures according to all verity, even as our Savior
promised to send them another Comforter, which should teach them all truth.

And since all truth was taught and revealed to the Primitive Church, which is
our Mother, let us all that be obedient Children of God, submit our selves to
the judgment of the Church for the better understanding of the Articles of our
Faith, and of the doubtful Sentences of the Scripture. Let us not go about to
show in us, by following any private Man's Interpretation upon the Word,
another Spirit than they of the Primitive Church had, lest we deceive our
selves. For there is but one Faith and one Spirit, which is not contrary to
himself, neither otherwise now teaches us than he did them. Therefore let us
believe as they have taught us of the Scriptures, and be at peace with them,
according as the true Catholic Church is at this day: And the God of Peace
assuredly will be with us, and deliver us out of all our Worldly* Troubles and
Miseries, and make us Partakers of their Joy and Bliss, through our Obedience
to Faith with them.

Therefore God commands us in Job, to ask of the Elder Generation, and to
search diligently the memory of the Fathers. For we are but Yesterdays
Children, Job. 8.
and be ignorant, and our days are like a Shadow, and they shall teach thee
(says the Lord) and speak to thee, and shall utter words from their Hearts.
Prove. 6.
And by Solomon we are commanded, not to reject the direction of our Mother.
The Lord grant you to direct your steps in all things after her, and to abhor
contention with her. For as St. Paul writes; If any Man be contentious,
neither we, 1 Cor. 11.
neither the Church of God has any such custom.

Hitherto I have showed you (good Brother S.) my Judgment generally of that you
stand in doubt and dissent from others, to the which I wish you as mine own
Heart to be comformable, and then doubtless you cannot err, but boldly may be
glad in your Troubles, and Triumph at the hour of your Death, that you shall
die in the Church of God a Faithful Martyr, and receive the Crown of Eternal
Glory. And thus much have I written upon the occasion of a Vision before God
unfeigned. But that you may not think that I go about to satisfy you with
uncertain Visions only, and not after God's Word, I will take the ground of
your Letter, and specially answer to the same by the Scriptures and by
infallible reasons deduced out of the same, and prove the Baptism of Infants to
be lawful, commendable, and necessary, whereof you seem to stand in doubt.

Indeed if you look upon the Papistical Synagogue only, which has corrupted
God's Word by false Interpretations, and has perverted the true use of
Christ's Sacraments, you might seem to have good handfast of your Opinion
against the Baptism of Infants. But forasmuch as it is of more Antiquity, and
has his beginning from God's Word, and from the use of the Primitive Church,
it must not in respect of the abuse in the Popish Church be neglected, or
thought not expedient to be used in Christ's Church. Amentius one of the
A^^^ims Sect, with his Adherente, was one of the first that denied the Baptism
of Children, and next after him Pel^gius the Heretic, and some other there
were in St. Bernard's time, as it does appear by his Writings, and in our days
the Anabaptists, and Inordinate kind of Men stirred up by the Devil, to the
destruction of the Gospel. But the Catholic truth delivered unto us by the
Scriptures, plainly determines, that all such are to be Baptized, as whom God
acknowledges for his People, and vouchsafes them worthy of Sanctification or
Remission of their Sin. Therefore since that Infants be in the number or scroll
of God's People, and be Partakers of the Promise by their Purification in
Christ, it must needs follow thereby, that they ought to be Baptized as well as
those that can Profess their Faith. For we judge the People of God as well by
the free and liberal Promise of God, as by the Confession of Faith. For to
whomsoever God promises himself to be their God, and whom he acknowledges for
his, those no Man without great Impeity may exclude from the number of the
Faithful. But God promises, that he will not only be the God of such as do
profess him, but also of Infants, promising them his Grace and Remission of
Sins, as it appears by the words of the Covenant made unto Abraham. Genesis 17.
I will set my Covenant between thee and me (says the Lord) and between thy
Seed after thee in their Generations, with an everlasting Covenant, to be thy
God, and the God of thy Seed after thee. To the which Covenant Circumcision was
added to be a sign of Sanctification as well in Children as in Men; and no Man
may think that this Promise is abrogated with Circumcision and other Ceremonial
Laws. For Christ came to fulfill the Promises, Matthew. 5.
and not to dissolve them. Therefore in the Gospel he says of Infants, that
is, of such as yet believed not; Matthew. 10.
Let the little Ones come unto me; and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Again, Matthew. 19.
It is not the Will of your Father which is in Heaven, that any of these little
Ones do perish. Also, Matthew. 18.
He that receives one such little Child in my Name, receives me. Take heed
therefore that ye despise not one of these Babes, for I tell you, their Angels
do continually see in Heaven my Father's Face. And what may be said more
plainer than this; It is not the Will of the Heavenly Father, that the Infants
should perish? Whereby we may gather that he receives them freely unto his
Grace, although as yet they confess not their Faith. Since then that the Word
of the Promise, which is contained in Baptism, pertains as well to Children
as Men, why should the sign of the Promise, which is Baptism in Water, be
withdrawn from Children, when Christ himself commands them to be received of
us, and promises the Reward of a Prophet to those that receive such a little
Infant, as he for an Example did put before his Disciples.

Now will I prove with manifest Arguments, Matthew. 28.
that Children ought to be Baptized, and that the Apostles of Christ did
Baptize Children. The Lord commanded his Apostles to Baptize all Nations;
therefore also Children ought to be Baptized, for they are comprehended under
this Word, All Nations.

Further, whom God does account among the faithful, they are faithful, for it
was said to Peter, Acts 10.
That thing which God has purified, thou shall not say to be common or
unclean: But GOD does repute Children among the Faithful: Ergo, they be
faithful, except we had rather to resist God, and seem stronger and wiser than
he.

1 Cor. 1.
And without all doubt the Apostles Baptized those which Christ commanded: But
he commanded the Faithful to be Baptized, among the which Infants be reckoned:
The Apostles then Baptized Infants.

1 Cor. 1.
The Gospel is more than Baptism, for Paul said; The Lord sent me to Preach the
Gospel, and not to Baptize: Not that he denied absolutely that he was sent to
Baptize, but that he preferred Doctrine before Baptism, for the Lord commanded
both to the Apostles: but Children be received by the Doctrine of the Gospel of
God, and not refused: Therefore what Person being of reason may deny them
Baptism, which is a thing lesser than the Gospel? For in the Sacraments be two
things to be considered, the thing signified, and the Sign, and thing signified
is greater than the Sign, and from the thing signified in Baptism, Children are
not excluded; who therefore may deny them the Sign, which is Baptism in Water?

St. Peter could not deny them to be Baptized in Water, to whom he saw the Holy
Ghost given, which is the certain Sign of God's People: Acts 10.
For he says in the Acts, May any body forbid them to be Baptized in Water,
who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Therefore St. Peter denied not
Baptism to Infants, for he knew certainly both by the Doctrine of Christ, and
by the Covenant which is everlasting, that the Kingdom of Heaven pertained to
Infants.

Romans 8.
None be received into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such as God loves, and which
are endued with his Spirit: For whosoever has not the Spirit of God, he is none of
his. But Infants be beloved of God, and therefore want not the Spirit of God:
Wherefore if they have the Spirit of God as well as Men, if they be numbered
among the People of God as well as we that be of Age, who (I pray you) may well
withstand Children to be Baptized with Water, in the Name of the Lord.

The Apostles in times past being yet not sufficiently instructed, did murmur
against those which brought their Children unto the Lord, but the Lord rebuked
them, and said; Matthew. 10.
Let the Babes come unto me. Why then do not these Rebellious Anabaptists obey
the Commandments of the Lord? For what do they now adays else that bring their
Children to Baptism, than that they did in times past, which brought their
Children to the Lord, and our Lord received them, and putting his hands on
them, Blessed them, and both by Words and by Gentle Behavior toward them,
declared manifestly that Children be the People of God, and entirely beloved of
GOD? But some will say, Why then did not Christ Baptize them? Because it is
Written, Jesus himself Baptized not, but his Disciples.

Moreover, John 4.
Circumcision in the Old Law was ministered to Infants; therefore Baptism ought
to be ministered in the New Law unto Children. For Baptism is come in the stead
of Circumcision, as St. Paul witnesses, saying to the Colossians; Colos. 2.
By Christ ye are Circumcised with a Circumcision which is without hands, when
ye put off the body of sin of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, being
buried together with him through Baptism. Behold, Paul calls Baptism the
Circumcision of a Christian Man, which is done without hands, not that Water
may be ministered without hands, but that with hands no Man any longer ought to
be Circumcised, albeit the Mystery of Circumcision do still remain in Faithful
People.

To this I may add, That the Servants of God were always ready to minister the
Sacraments to them, for whom they were instituted. As for an Example, we may
behold Joshua, Jos. 2.
who most diligently procured the People of Israel to be Circumcised before
they entered into the Land of Promise; but since the Apostles were the Preachers
of the Word, and the very Faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, who may hereafter
doubt that they Baptized Infants, since Baptism is in place of Circumcision?

Item, The Apostles did attemperate all their doings to the Shadows and Figures
of the Old Testament: Therefore it is certain that they did attemperate Baptism
accordingly to Circumcision, and Baptized Children because they were under the
Figure of Baptism; for the People of Israel passed through the Red Sea, and the
bottom of the Water of Jordan, with their Children. And although the Children
be not always expressed, neither the Women in the Holy Scriptures, yet they are
comprehended and understood in the same.

Also the Scripture evidently tells us, That the Apostles baptized whole
Families or Households: But the Children be comprehended in a Family or
Household, as the chiefest and dearest part thereof: Therefore we may conclude,
that the Apostles did Baptize Infants or Children, and not only Men of lawful
age. And that the House or Household is taken for Man, Woman, and Child, it is
manifest in the 17. of Genesis, and also in that Joseph does call Jacob with
all his House, to come out of the Land of Canaan into Egypt.

Finally, I can declare out of ancient Writers, that the Baptism of Infants
has continued from the Apostles time unto ours, neither that it was instituted
by any Councels, neither of the Pope, nor of other Men, but commended from the
Scripture by the Apostles themselves. Origin upon the Declaration of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, expounding the 6. Chapter, says, That the Church of
Christ received the Baptism from the very Apostles. St. Hierome makes mention
of the Baptism of Infants, in the 3. Book against the Pelagians, Heb. 11.
and in his Epistle to Leta. St. Augustine recites for this purpose, a place
out of John, Bishop of Constantinople, in his 1. Book aganst Julian, Chap. 2.
and he again writing to St. Hierome Epist. 28. says, That St. Cyprian not
making any new Decree, but firmly observing the Faith of the Church, judged
with his fellow Bishops, that as soon as one was born, he might be lawfully
Baptized. The place of Cyprian is to be seen in his Epistle to Fidus.

Also St. Augustine in writing against the Donatists in the 4. Book, Chap. 23.
and 24. says, That the Baptism of Infants was not derived from the authority
of Man, neither of Councels, but from the Tradition or Doctrine of the Apostles.

Cyril upon Leviticus, Chap. 8. approves the Baptism of Children, and
condemns the iteration of Baptism. These Authorities of Men I do allege, not
to tie the Baptism of Children unto the Testimonies of Men, but to show how
Men's Testimonies do agree with God's Word, and that the verity of Antiquity is
on our side, and that the Anabaptists have nothing but Lies for them, and new
Imaginations, which feign the Baptism of Children to be the Pope's Commandment.

After this will I answer to the sum of your Arguments for the contrary. The
first, which includes all the rest, is, It is Written, Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the glad Tidings to all Creatures. He that believes and is
Baptized, shall be Saved: But he that believes not shall be Damned, etc.

To this I answer, That nothing is added to God's Word by Baptism of Children,
as you pretend, but that is done which the same Word does require, for that
Children are accounted of Christ in the Gospel among the number of such as
believe, as it appears by these words; Matthew. 18.
He that offends one of these little Babes which believe in me, it were
better for him to have a Millstone tied about his Neck, and to be cast into the
bottom of the Sea. Where plainly Christ calls such as be not able to confess
their Faith, Believers; because of his mere Grace he reputeth them for
Believers. And this is no Wonder so to be taken, since God imputes Faith for
Righteousness unto Men that be of riper Age: For both in Men and Children,
Righteousness, Acceptance, or Sanctification is of mere Grace and by
Imputation, that the Glory of God's Grace might be praised.

And that the Children of Faithful Parents are Sanctified, and among such as do
believe, 1 Cor. 7.
is apparent in the 1 Cor. 7. And whereas you do gather by the order of the
words in the said Commandment of Christ, that Children ought to be taught
before they be Baptized, and to this end you allege many places out of the
Acts, proving that such as Confessed their Faith first, were Baptized after: I
answer, That if the order of words might weigh any thing to this Cause, we have
the Scripture that makes as well for us. St. Mark we read, that John did
Baptize in the Desert, Mark 1.
Preaching the Baptism of Repentance. In the which place we see Baptizing go
before, and Preaching to follow after.

And also I will declare this place of Matthew exactly considered, to make for
the use of Baptism in Children, for St. Matthew has it written in this wise;
Matthew. 28.
All Power is given me (says the Lord) in Heaven and in Earth, therefore going
forth (...), that is, Disciple ye, (as I may express the signification of the
Word;) that is, make or gather to me Disciples of all Nations. And following,
he declares the way how they should gather to him Disciples out of all
Nations, baptizing them and teaching; by baptizing and teaching ye shall
procure a Church to me. And both these aptly and briefly severally he sets
forth, saying, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. Now then Baptism goes before Doctrine.

But hereby I do not gather; that the Gentiles which never heard any thing
before of God, and of the Son of God, and of the Holy Ghost, ought to be
Baptized, neither they would permit themselves to be Baptized before they knew
to what end. But this I have declared to show you upon how feeble Foundation
the Anabaptists be grounded. And plainly it is not true which they imagine of
this Text, that the Lord did only command such to be Baptized, whom the
Apostles had first of all taught. Neither here verily is signified who only be
to be Baptized, but he speaks of such as be of perfect age, and of the first
Foundations of Faith, and of the Church to be planted among the Gentiles, which
were as yet rude and ignorant of Religion.

Such as be of Age may hear, believe, and confess, that which is Preached and
taught, but so cannot Infants; therefore we may justly collect, that he
speaks here nothing of Infants or Children. But for all this they be not to
be excluded from Baptism.

It is a general rule; He that does not Labor, must not Eat. But who is so
barbarous that might think hereby, that Children should be Famished?

The Lord sent his Apostles at the beginning of the setting up his true
Religion unto all Nations, unto such as were both ignorant of God, and were out
of the Covenant of God; and truly such Persons it behoved not first to be
taught, and after baptized. If at this day we should go to the Turks to Convert
them to the Faith of Christ, verily first we ought to teach them, and afterward
Baptize such as would yield to be the Servants of Christ. Likewise the Lord
himself in times past did, when first he renewed the Covenant with Abraham, and
ordained Circumcision to be a Seal of the Covenant after that Abraham was
Circumcised. But he, when he perceived the Infants also to pertain to the
Covenant, and that Circumcision was the sealing up of the Covenant, did not
only Circumcise Ismael his Son that was 13 years of Age, but all other Infants
that were born in his House, among whom we reckon Isaac.

Even so Faithful People which were Converted from Heathen Idolatry by the
Preaching of the Gospel, and Confessing the Faith, were Baptized; when they
understood their Children to be counted among the People of GOD, and that
Baptism was the Token of the People of GOD, they procured also their Children
to be baptized. Therefore as it is written; Abraham Circumcised all the Male
Children of his House. Semblably we read in the Acts and Writings of the
Apostles, that after the Master of the House was turned to the Faith, all the
whole House was baptized. And as concerning those which of old time were
compelled to Confess their Faith before they received Baptism, which were
called Catechumeni, they were such as with our Forefathers came from the
Gentiles to the Church, who being yet rude of Faith, they did instruct in the
Principles of their Belief, and afterward they did Baptize them; but the same
Ancient Fathers notwithstanding did Baptize the Children of Faithful Men, as I
have already partly declared.

And because you do require a hasty answer of your Letter of one that is but a
dull Writer, I am here enforced to cease particularly to go through your Letter
in answering thereto, knowing that I have fully answered every part thereof, in
that I have already written, although not in such order as it had been meet,
and as I purposed. But forasmuch as I understand that you will be no
Contentious Man, neither in this matter, neither in any other, contrary to the
judgment of Christ's Primitive Church, which is the Body and fullness of Christ,
I desire you in the entire love of him, or rather Christ desires you by me
(that your joy may be perfect, whereto you are now called) to submit your
Judgment to that Church, and to be at Peace and Unity with the same; that the
Coat of Christ which ought to be without Seam, but now alas, most miserably is
torn in pieces by many dangerous Sects and Damnable Opinions, may appear by you
in no part to have been rent, neither that any giddy Head in these Dog Days,
might take an ensample by you to dissent from Christ's true Church: I beseech
thee, Dear Brother, in the Gospel, follow the steps of the Faith of the
Glorious Martyrs in the Primitive Church, and of such as at this day follow the
same; decline from them neither to the Right Hand nor to the Left. Then shall
Death, be it never so bitter, be more sweeter than this Life; then shall Christ
with all the Heavenly Jerusalem triumphantly embrace your Spirit with
unspeakable Gladness and Exaltation, who in this Earth was content to join your
Spirit with their Spirits according as it is commanded by the Word, That the
Spirit of Prophets should be subject to the Prophets. One thing ask with David
ere you depart, and require the same, that you may dwell with a full accord in
his House, for there is Glory and Worship: And so with Simeon in the Temple
embracing Christ, 1 Cor. 14.
depart in Peace: To the which Peace Christ bring both you and me, and all our
loving Brethren that love GOD in the Unity of Faith, by such ways as shall
please him, to his Glory. Let the bitter Passion of Christ which he suffered
for your sake, and the Horrible Torments which the Godly Martyrs of Christ have
endured before us, and also the inestimable Reward of your Life to come, which
is hidden yet a little while from you with Christ, strengthen, comfort, and
encourage you to the end of that Glorious Race which you are in Amen.

Your Yoke Fellow in Captivity for the Verity of Christ's Gospel, to live and
die with you in the Unity of Faith, JOHN PHILPOT.

FINIS.

