A DISCOURSE OF THE Souveraign Power, IN A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Mary Le Bow,
Nov. 28. 1682.

Before the Artillery Company OF LONDON.

And now Published at their Desire.

By GEORGE HICKES, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed for John Baker, Printer to the Honorable Society, at the
Three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Pritchard, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON, And President of the Artillery COMPANY. To the Honorable, Sir James
Smith, Knight and Alderman, Vice President. To the Right Worshipful, Sir
Matthew Andrews, Treasurer.
As also to the Right Honorable, Duke of Albermarle, Earl of Oxford, Earl of
Arundel, Lord Falkland,
To the Honorable, and Right Worshipful, STEWARDS.
Henry Guy, Esquire William Leg, Esquire Sir William Dodson, Knight. Charles Duncomb, Esquire
And to the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen,
Professing and Exercising Arms in that Renowned and Honorable Society.
Right Honorable,
IN Obedience to your Desire, I have Published this Discourse, which I Preached
before you on your late Anniversary Solemnity; and if it may contribute to the
further Satisfaction of any who are already Loyal, or the Conviction, and
Reformation of such as are not truly so, I shall be thankful to God for
Blessing so mean a Performance with such happy success. The Subject, I am sure,
is suitable to the Occasion upon which it was Preached, and very necessary for
the Times; but yet I foresee it will displease some Men, whose Displeasure
indeed I do not value, because their Favor is not to be obtained by any
Minister of the Church of England, who will not be false to his own Profession,
and utterly decline the Preaching upon these Doctrines, and Duties, which I
have here plainly Taught. But you have not so Learned Christ, as appears by the
Entertainment, which this unpolished Sermon has found among you, merely for
the Truths sake. Your Approbation will be Protection sufficient both to it and
the Author, who Presents it unto you with all due Observance, wishing a daily
increase of such Obedient and Dutiful Subjects to His Majesty, as you are, to
whose firm and active Loyalty, next unto God's and our Governors Vigilant Care
and Providence, we owe our present Order, and Peace. I am,

Right Honorable, Your most Obedient Servant, George Hickes.

A SERMON Preached before The Artillery Company.
Romans 13.4. He bears not the Sword in Vain: for he is the Minister of God.
The context before, and after is this: Will thou then not be afraid of the
Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is
the Minister of God, to thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the Sword in Vain, for he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger to Execute wrath upon him, that does evil.

Although there now are, and have been for above Two thousand years, many Forms of
Civil Government in the World, yet all Historians Scared, or Civil, that write
of the times near unto the Flood, assure us, that Monarchies were every where
erected in those Ages, and that Kings were then the Sovereigns of the Earth.
Popular Governments, whether by the whole body of the People, as in
Democracies; or in a Select number of the Chief, as in Aristocracies, were then
in the Wombs of their special causes, being afterward introduced either by the
compact and agreement of Men, free to choose their own Government, as in new
Colonies, and Dispersions; or else by Rebellion, as in the famous Commonwealth
of Rome, which at first was Governed by Urbem Romam a principio reges habuere,
Tacit.
Kings after the most Primitive Form, and then after the Rebellion of Brutus,
Valerius and Collatinus by the S. P. Q. R.
four great Letters, the Senate, and People of Rome, and at last again by Kings;
upon whom first under the name of Nomine principis sub imperium accepit, Tacit.
Prince, and then under the Titles of Emperor, and Augustus, the Senate, and
People, not able to secure the public Peace without a Sovereign Head,
conferred all their Power; and as the Greek, and Latin Historians, observe,
really made them Kings, although, to prevent offense on both sides, they must not
forsooth be so called.

It was under Claudius the 5th. or Nero the Sixth of these Emperors, that St.
Paul wrote this Epistle unto the Romans, in which it is to be observed, that he
asserts the Roman Emperor to be the Minister of God, although he was chosen by the
Army, or the People, or sometimes by both, for even in Elective Monarchies,
where the People choose the Sovereign, he has not his Authority from his
Electors, but from God, as in Oeconomical Government, the Prince of the Family,
if I may so speak, has not his Authority as an Husband, from the Wife, who
chose him for her Husband, nor the Authority of a Master, from the Servant who
chose him for his Master, But his Conjugal, and Despotical Authority are both
from God, who has made the Husband the head of his Wife, as Christ is the head
of the Church, and the Master Lord, and Commander over his Servants, whom they
are to count worthy of all Honor, and be Obedient unto them, as unto Christ.

The choice indeed of the Husband, and Master is from the Wife, and Servant,
but the Power of them both is from God, they were free, as to their choice, but
aster it they are not free, as to their subjection, nor can they disobey them
without disobeying God. Just so is it in Elective Monarchies, the People or
their Deputies may choose the Man whom they will have for their Prince, but
they do not give him his Authority; that he has from God upon their Election,
which made Valentinian when the Army, that chose him Emperor, cried out, that
he should take a partner in the Government, answer them upon this principle
thus: Sozom. L. 6. C. 6.
It was in your Power Soldiers, to choose me for your Emperor, but now you
have chosen me, that which you demand is not in your Power, but mine: you ought
to be quiet, as Subjects, and I as an Emperor to consider, what is fit to be
done. And accordingly the Apostle here in my text asserts Claudius, or as it is
more likely, Nero the Emperor, who was chosen by the Army, and Senate, not to be
their Minister, or to have any Ministerial, or Fiduciary Power under them, but
to be the Minister of God over them, and as such to have the Power of the
Sword. He bears not the Sword in Vain, for he is the Minister of God.

According to which explication of the words, I shall undertake to prove two
propositions. First, That Sovereign Princes are Gods Ministers, and
Vicegerents, and Reign by his special ordinance and appointment. and Secondly,
That as such they have and exercise the Supreme Power, and particularly the
Power of the Sword. And these two Propositions being proved, I shall make some
practical inferences from this Loyal Doctrine, proper to this Audience and the
exgence of the Times, in which we live.

I. First then, that Sovereign Princes are Gods Ministers, and Vicegerents,
and Reign by his special ordinance, is plain from many express texts of the Old
and New Testament, which are the Loyallest, as well as the Divinest Books in
the World. I will begin with the Old Testament, whose Authority, were it not of
divine inspiration, ought upon the account of its antiquity, to preponderate
with us above any other Volume in the World.

There, as l. 5. c. 24.
Irenaeus observes, God says in the 8th. Chapter of the Book of Poverbs, By me
Kings Reign, and Princes decree justice, by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the Earth. Hence Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon is called
Gods Servant, or Minister, Jerem. 27.5, 6. I have made the Earth, and given it
unto whom it seemed meet unto me, and now I have given all these Lands into the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my Servant, and all Nations shall
serve him, and his Son, and his Sons Son, until the very time of his Land
come, and then many Nations, and great Kings shall serve themselves of him.
Accordingly when Daniel spoke unto him, he said, Thou O King art a King of
Kings, for the God of Heaven, has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength,
and Glory. Chap. 2.37. and afterward speaking of him unto Belshazzar his Son,
he said. O thou King! the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a
Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor, and for the Majesty, that he gave
him, all People trembled, and feared before him; whom he would he slew, and
whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he
pulled down.

According to this Doctrine also God calls Cyrus his Shepherd, and Anointed;
the very Titles, which he gave the Kings of Israel, whom he set over his own
People. Thus says the Lord, I am the Lord that makes all things, that
Stretches forth the Heavens alone, that says of Cyrus he is my Shepherd; and,
Thus says the Lord to Cyrus his Anointed, I have even called thee by thy name,
I have surnamed thee, tho thou have not known me. I have chosen to instance in
these two Pagan Kings, rather than in the Kings of Israel, because you may see,
that there is no difference among Sovereign Princes, as to the Divinity of
their Title, but that the Sacred Order of Kings in general, is the Ordinance of
God. And therefore God to Lecture this Doctrine more Emphatically unto us, has
together with the Sovereign Authority communicated unto them his own name. Thou
shall not revile the Gods (says God) nor curse the ruler of thy People, and
says the Psalmist, Ps. 82. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he
Judges among the Gods; and I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are
Children of the most high. In allusion to which (says our Savior) in his own
defense, Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods: and if he called
them Gods about whom the word of God was spoken, say ye of him, whom the Father
has sanctified, and sent into the World, thou blasphemest, because thou say
I am the Son of God. That is as much as to say, if Kings, who arc Anointed and
sent by God are called Gods, and the Sons of God, then how can it be blasphemy
in me, who am the Messiah himself sent from God, to say I am his Son.

Yes, Kings are petty Gods, who Govern men upon Earth as Michael and Gabriel
Govern their Angels in Heaven, by immediate delegation from God. Their
Sovereignty is an Image of his Sovereignty, their Majesty the Figure of his
Majesty, and their Empire a similitude of his Empire, they are Supreme on
Earth, as he is in Heaven, they derive not their Authority from their Subjects
(for that would be a contradiction) as he derives not his from his creatures,
but from him alone they derive it, they are his Lieutenants, and Trustees, the
honor or dishonor we do them terminates in him, who gives them their Scepters,
and sets them as the Scripture says, he set Solomon upon his own Throne, and
made him King, for the Lord his God. 1 Chr. 29.23.2 Chr. 9.8.

This is further evident out of the New Testament, from that solemn
acknowledgment which our blessed Savior as a Subject of the Empire, made of
the Sovereign Power of Tiberius, whom he owned, by paying the Tribute, which
was due unto him, for the Minister of God. For, for this cause (says the
Apostle) pay you Tribute also, because they are Gods Ministers, attending
continually upon this very thing. To which I shall only add the verses before,
and after my text: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is
no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore resists the power resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. -- Will thou then not be afraid
of the Power, do that which is good and thou shall have praise of the same, for
he is the Minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that, which is evil,
be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in Vain; for he is the Minister of God,
a revenger to execute wrath upon him, that does evil. Wherefore, you ought to
be subject not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Here you see how Emphatically the Apostle styleth the Power, the Ordinance,
and the Potentate, or Ruler, the Minister of God. And according to this
Apostolical lesson the Primitive Christians did acknowledge the Authority of
their persecuting Emperors to be derived from God.

Ad Antol. L. 1.
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch says, I will honor the Emperor, but not adore
him, I door the true God, knowing, that by him the Emperor is ordained. And to
the same purpose again, He is not himself God, but a man appointed by God, and
after a sort entrusted by God, with the Economy of the Empire. So Legate. pro
Christ.
Athenagoras Addressing his speech to Marcus Antoninus, and his Son Commodus:
to you (says he) the power of all things is committed, you have received the
Empire from above. So L. 8.
Origin tells Celsus, that it was not the Heathen God Saturn, but God who
Governs all things, that sets up Kings, and gives them Power to Reign,
and Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 11.
in Eusebius, Dionysius of Alexandria says in the name of the Christians, we
worship, and adore the one God, who has committed the Kingdom to out Sacred
Emperors Valcrianus, and Gallienus? And l. 5. c. 24.
Prenoeus Bishops, and Martyr, after a particular proof of this Doctrine by
many texts of Scripture, and this of mine among the rest, concludes with these
words: By whose Command Kings are born Men, by his Command likewise are Men
ordained Kings. And so Tertullian after him: Thence is the Emperor from whence
he was a man, before he was Emperor, thence he has this Authority, from whence
he has his breath And again. We must of necessity reverence the Emperor, as
one, that our Lord has chosen, so that we may reasonably say, that Caesar is
rather ours, than yours, as being ordained by our God. Apol. c. 30.33. and in
another place, a Christian is an Enemy to no man, much less to the Emperor,
whom he knows to be appointed by God, ad Scapul.

This was current Divinity among the Christians under the Pagan and Persecuting
Emperors, and what it was after they turned Christians, may be seen in the
Apology of St. Athanasrus, unto Constanius, especially from these words: O
Almighty Lord, eternal King, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou by thy
word have given the Empire to thy servant Constantius. It would be endless to
cite more Autorities to confirm this Doctrine out of the Fathers, I will rather
show how it has been taught by our own Acts, and Authors, of our own
Sovereigns, the Kings of the English Sir Orland. Bridgmans speech to the
Regicides p. 12, 13, 14.
Empire, to whom God has given this Granmers Letters to Qu. Mary.
Imperial Crown, the Statute of Praemunire lb. K. 2. c. 5. declares, that the
Crown of England is so free that it is in no Earthly Subjection, but
immediately subject to God in all things touching the regality of the same. And
the Parliament in the 25 H. 8.21. made this recognition unto his Majesty, that
his Graced Realm had no Superior under God, but only his Grace. and (24 H. 8.
c. 12.) and that next unto God they ought him a Natural, and Humble Obedience:
And long before this our Ancient, and learned Lawyer Bracton did declare, that
the L. 1 de rer. divis. c. 2.
King is the Vicar, and Minister of God, and Christ, that he L. 2. c. 22.
has neither equal, nor Superior, and that L. 1. de ver. divis. c. 8.
every Soul is under him, but he is under none except only God.

As for Ecclesiastical Autorities it would take up too much time to recite them
all. The Canon 36. Art. 1.
Church is to admit none into holy orders, but such as will first subscribe,
that the Kings Majesty next under God, is the only Supreme Governor of all his
Realsm and Dominions, and in the Book of see hom. about obedience part 1. and
against wilful Rebel. p. 1.
Homilies besides the assertion of this Doctrine about Sovereign Princes in
general, our late Sovereign King James is acknowledged for the high gift of
God. To conclude this head, from hence it comes to pass, that our Kings, as the
learned In Epistola ad virun. Ampl. D. Morley.
Bochart observed, are styled by the Grace of God, and that the Royal Motto is
Dieu et mon Droit; and accordingly this Church which is so Pure, and Primitive
in her Loyalty has taught her Children to Pray: Almighty God whose Kingdom is
everlasting, and Power infinite, have mercy upon the whole Church, and so rule
the heart of thy Chosen Servant Charles, our King and Governor, that he
knowing, whose Minister he is, may above all things seek thy Honor, and Glory,
and that we, and all his Subjects duly considering whose Authority he has, may
faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according
to thy blessed Word, and Ordinance. Yes, according to the word of the Apostle
in my text, who says, that the bears not te Sword in Vain, because he is the
Minister of God

II. Having now showed, that Sovereign Princes are Gods Ministers, and
Vicegerents; and Reign by his special appointment, I proceed to show in the
second place, that under that Character they have and exercise the Supreme
Power, and particularly the Power of the Sword.

This latter Proposition is a very easy and discernable consequence from the
former, and may be illustrated from the nature of subordinate Magistrates who
are the Kings Ministers, appointed under him, as he is appointed under God. As
for example: the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland is the Kings Minister, and
Vicegerent, and by consequence under that character he has, and exercises the
Supreme Power in the Government of that Kingdom both Civil, and Military, both
that of the Scepter, and that of the Sword, which the King has committed unto
him.

In like manner Sovereign Princes being, as I have shown, Gods Lieutenants, and
Vicegerents within their several Realms, and Dominions, they Reign under that
Sublime character, and as his Representiatives have, and exercise all
Jurisdiction, and in particular that of the Sword; accordingly, as the Apostle
says, he bears not the Sword in Vain, for he is the Minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath, or punishment, upon him, that does evil. Were men of
the temper of the Angels, who obey their Superiors purely for Conscience Sake,
then it would be sufficient for Princes, that they had the commanding without
the Punishing Power, but since most men are subject more for Fear, than
Conscience, it is highly necessary, that the Sovereign should be furnished with
the Coercive, and Vindicative Power, which may be called the Sword of Justice,
and without which all his Laws, and Orders would be vain, precarious and
insignificant words, and writings, mere Cobwebs, which the Wasps and Hornets,
that swarm in all Governments, would insultingly break through.

And were men also like the good Angels free from evil passions, would they be
quiet in the several ranks and stations, in which God has set them, then
Sovereign Princes like Archangels, who are secure from the insurrections of
their Subjects, would be safe without the Sword; but since Pride, Envy, and
Discontent, make men envy their Superiors, and strive to snatch the Crowns
from off their Princes heads, since there are Lucifers in all Kingdoms, and the
Dragon, and his Angels will in all worldly Governments, be still fighting with
Michael, and his; it is absolutely necessary, that the Sovereign be furnished
with the Supreme Command, Government, and Disposition of the Militia, or
Military Forces, which may be called the Sword of War. Furthermore it is
necessary for the Sovereign to bear the Sword of War, not only to defend
himself from his own Rebellious Subjects, but to defend both himself, and his
people from the invasions of other Sovereigns; for it is not upon Earth, as it
is in Heaven, where one Principality can live without danger, or jealousy of
anothe but in all Earthly Kingdoms there must be military Societies, and
Preparations ready to oppose foreign violence, actual and Potential Forces,
some every where, as the Historian speaks, in equis and Armis ad subita belli
excubantes, and if this Power of levying War, and providing Arms, and Forces,
did belong to any other person, than him whom God has appointed for Sovereign,
that person would be Sovereign, and not he.

From whence it is plain, that the Prince has the Sword in both senses, from
the same hand, from which he has his Robes, his Crown, and his Scepter. He is
a Sovereign as Gods Vicegerent and Representative, and as Gods Vicegerent and
Representative he is a Sovereign, and under both, or either character he holds
the Sword, by the Authority of his Heavenly Master; who has put it in his hand
for his Peoples defense and also to be an avenger, to execute wrath upon every
soul that is disobedient to the Laws, which are made to defend his rights,
against the invasions of his Subjects, or he rights of his Subjects, against
the violence, and invasions of one another. In both these respects he is an
Avenger, and God to whom Vengeance, and the Power of life, and death over men
Radically, and Originally belongs, has committed the Sword of War, and
Justice unto him, that he might be Vindex in terris, and not only Command, but
Punish in his stead.

Hence the Emperor Justinian, who according to my first proposition, in the
first sentence of his Preface to the Pandects solemnly Deo Autore nostrum,
gubernante imperium, quod no-bis a coelesti Majestate traditum est, prae fat I.
digest.
acknowledges, that he received his Empire from God, does in the beginning of
his Proem to the Institutions assert Arms to be primarily necessary for a
Prince, in the following words: Imperatoriam Majestatem non solum Armis
decoratam, sed etiam legibus oportet esse armatam. The Majesty of a King ought
to be fortified and adorned not only with Arms, but Laws. With Arms in the
first place, without which his Majesty would be contemptible and his Laws of no
force; for take away the Teeth, and Talons of the Lion, and his Roaring, to
which Solomon ingeniously compares the wrath of a King, shall be no longer
terrible, but every vile Dog will bark, and every silly Ass will bray in his
face, and lift up his heels against him.

Hence says Prolog. tract. de leg. and consuet. regn. Angl.
Glanvil of the Kings of England almost in the words of Justinian, Regiam
Majestatem non solum armis oportet esse decoratam, sed and legibus; and to this
purpose L. 1. c. 27.
Fleta, habet Rex in manu sua omnia jura, the King has all the Laws in his
hand, and materialem gladium, qui pertinet, ad Regni gubernaculum, and the
Sword, which belongs to the Government of his Kingdom, and says Bracton in
the beginning of his first Book; In rege, qui recle regit, necessaria sunt duo
baec, arma videlicet, and leges, there are two things necessary for a King,
that Governs well, Arms, and Laws. Hence the Laws of this Kingdom, which
acknowledge the imperial Crown, and Jurisdiction of his Realm, to be taken
immediately from God, according to my first Proposition, do also according to
the second, acknowledge the Kings Power over the Militia, and that force of
Armor belongs unto him, by virtue of his Royal Seignory, as may be seen in the
7 of Edward I. and in the 13 of our present Sovereign, c. 6. where it is
declared, that the supreme disposition of the Militia, and of all Forces by
Sea, and Land, and of all Forts, and places of strength is, and by the Laws of
England ever was the right of His Majesty, and his Royal Predecessors. And if
it were not, he would not be a real, but a mere nominal King, in show a
Sovereign, or shadow of a Sovereign, but in reality a Subject, a Spartan King,
a distressed Prince indeed, not Gods, but the Peoples unhappy Minister and
Servant; which his Majesty, of his great wisdom, knew very well, when he told
that House of Commons, which asked the Militia of him for some weeks, that he
would not part with it for an hour. It was the voice of a King, and a
Christian, he spoke as it became Gods Vicegerent, and Lieutenant, who knew
very well from whom he had his Sword as well as his Scepter, and that he bore
it not in vain, but was the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon
him, or them, that do evil.

Having now showed first that sovereign Princes are God's ministers and
vicegerents; and secondly, that as such, they have, and exercise the supreme
power, and particularly that of the Sword; I now proceed to make some practical
Observations upon this Loyal doctrine proper to this meeting, and the exigence
of these times* in which we live.

First then, we may observe what a groundless and blasphemous doctrine it is to
assert, as the Popish Writers do, that the Pope has all manner of temporal, as
well as spiritual power given him from God, and that he gives the former to
Emperors and Kings to use it under him; but so, that as his ministers and
vicegerents, they depend entirely upon him.

This is the great Palladium of the Popish Cause, which has murdered, and
deposed so many sovereign Princes, and disposed of their Crowns and Dominions.
This brought Henry the IV. Emperor of Germany, on a cold frosty day, barefoot
and bare headed to Pope Hildebrand's palace; this brought the Emperor
Frederick the first, to hold Pope Adrian the 4th's Stirrup; and this set the
foot of Pope Alexander the 3d upon his Neck, when his Holiness blasphemously
misapplyed the words of the Psalmist: Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder,
the young Lion and Dragon, thou shall trample under foot.

It was upon this account of the Pope's pretended universal Sovereignty that
King John surrendered this Kingdom to Pope Innocent the 3d that Henry the 2d
submitted to the lashes of the Monks of Canterbury, and that Henry the 4th. of
France, was whipped in the Person of his Ambassador Cardinal D'ossat, by the
Pope and Cardinals at Rome.

To be short, this doctrine makes all Princes the Pope's Vassals, and it ought
not to be endured by any Loyal Christian Subject, as being so unreasonable in
it self, so destructive to the rights and dignity of sovereign Princes, and so
contrary to the word of God. Our Ancestors themselves were never able to bear
it, as Colces instit. part 4. p. 13, 14.
appears from the resolve of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in the 40
year of Edward the 3d who when the Pope by his Ambassador demanded Homage of
the King for his two Kingdoms, answered, that King John (upon whose surrender
the Pope grounded his claim) could not put his Realm in any such subjection
without his peoples consent, that it was against his Coronation Oath, and that
for themselves they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to
the disinberison of the King and his Crown, and that if the Pope attempted any
thing of that nature, they would resist him with all their force.

And in the Stature of Praemunire, wherein as I have showed, the three Estates
of this Realm acknowledged the King to be immediately subject to God, they also
promised and bound themselves to defend the King's Crown and Regality against
the Papal Jurisdiction, and to live and dye with the same.

And in the 35 Hen. VIII. 11. the first oath of Supremacy, which acknowledges
the King supreme Head upon earth under God, was also formed against the Papal
Jurisdiction; which made Archbishop Cranmer, in Queen Mary's days, refuse to
answer the Bishop of Gloucester, who sat in judgment upon him by commission
from Rome; for which refusal he apologized in a Letter to the Queen, urging his
Oath of Allegiance to the contrary, and telling her Majesty, that it could not
but grieve the heart of any natural Subject to be accused, as he was, of his
own Sovereign within her own Realm, before an outward Judge.

But in the second place, we may observe what an absurd doctrine it is, and how
disagreeable to Christian divinity, to assert that the sovereign Power is
radically and originally seated in the People, and derived from them upon the
Prince. I deny not, but that God by his providence may invest the sovereign
Power in the body of the people, as sormerly in Athens, and now in the Cantons
of Switzerland, and that, as formerly in Sparta, they may commit the exercise
of it unto a single person under the character of King; but then such Kings are
only equivocal Kings, Kings in name, but in reality Subjects, and have the
People for their sovereign Lord, who in these unhappy governments, as
Themistocles calls them in his Epistles, are indeed the Ministers of God, and
ought to be obeyed, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience Sake.

But the opinion that I am speaking against is this, that the People are the
fountain and foundation of all power and dominion, which is understood to be
derived from them even upon those whom Custom calls sovereign Princes, who are
but their trustees, or siduciary ministers; with whom they have at least a
virtual contract, and if they do not perform their trust by not using their
power to the ends for which they received it, or abuse it to contrary ends,
then they forfeit the power and authority with which they were entrusted by
them, and ought to be answerable for their defaults.

I am confident this doctrine cannot be strange to any man, that has cast his
eyes never so little upon the seditious Pamphlets of these, or the late times.
It is expressed, or employed, taught, or insinuated in most of them, which
infect the unwary, the unthinking Vulgar with this Popish principle of
Rebellion, before they are aware. I call it a Popish principle, because the
Papists, of all Christians, first taught it, to arm the subjects at their
pleasure against their Sovereign, and by that means to revenge themselves upon
the Princes that would not submit unto the Pope. And indeed there never was any
doctrine better sitted and invented to destroy Monarchi^s, than this is: for as
the unchristian opinion, that Episcopacy is an usurpation over the Church,
makes many people sit so uneasy and discontented under the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and hate Bishops: So this unchristian doctrine, which makes
sovereign and independent Princes Usurpers over the peoples liberties, must
also make all people that believe it, uneasy and discontented under Monarchical
government, and secretly disaffected to the Princes, in whose Realms they live.

This we find by experience in this Kingdom, where this most unscriptural and
absurd doctrine is taught; unscriptural I call it, because it is so contrary to
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, which assert such wicked Princes
as Tiberius, Nebuchadnezzar, Claudius and Nero, to be the ministers of God, and
commamds allegiance both in subjection and non-resistence unto them upon that
account.

And as it is most contrary to the Scriptures, and the whole strain of
primitive Christian Writers; so is it in it self chargeable with many
absurdities and difficulties, which the maintainers thereof cannot answer: For
first, if the sovereign Power be radically and fundamentally seated in the
people, then there is but one sort of sovereign government in the World, viz.
Democracy, and by consequence all other Sovereigns, whether Senates or Princes,
are Usurpers, and ought to be reduced, or deposed. Secondly, They cannot tell
us upon this hypothesis, whether the supreme Power belongs to all the people
promiscuously, that have the use of reason, without any regard to Sex or
condition, or only to qualified persons, to Men only, and men of such a
condition and sort. If men only have a share and interest in the supreme
Power, by whose order and authority, or by what Salique law of Nature were
Women excluded from it, who are as useful members of the Commonwealth, and as
necessary for humane societies as the men are? Who gave the men authority to
deprive them of their birthright, and set them aside as unsit to meddle with
Government; when Histories teach us that they have weilded Sceptres, as well as
Men, and Experience shows, that there is no natural difference between their
understandings and ours, nor any defects in their knowledge of things, but what
Education makes?

But admitting that the sovereign Power is only in the Men, then they are as
hard puzzled to tell us, whether it b^ in all the men that have the use of
reason promiscuously, or only in qualified persons of such an age, estate, or
condition. If all, then young and old, masters and servants, fathers and
children, poor and rich must have an equal share and suffrage in the
Government, which would make an intolerable confusion; but if they say some,
and once set limitations, then they can never tell by what order, or authority
those without the limits, which must be the more numerous part of the people,
are shut out from the Government and from the concerns of the Commonwealth, of
which they are the greatest part.

But lastly, let us suppose, as most of these Commonwealths-men do, that the
Wife is included with her Husband, the Child with the Parent, and the Servant
with the Master, yet what provision is hereby made for all emancipated persons,
such I mean, as have neither husbands, parents, nor masters, must they come in
for a share of the Government, or not? or must only masters of Families have
the whole management, and if they must, must the poor and rich, those that have
estates, and those that have none, have an equal share and interest in it, or
if they must not, whence arises the inequality, or who is it that has
authority to give some more power, and some less?

Or if you will suppose a great Number of people not yet under any contract or
regular association, who can have power to convene them together, to appoint
times or places for meeting to preside in their assemblies, to determine
arising doubts, to draw up articles of agreement, form the scheme of the future
Government, compute voices, and the like? and then in their assemblies, will
the supreme Power rest in the Major, or in the wiser, or better part? and shall
their acts conclude those that could not, or would not come? When you have well
considered all these difficult and p^rplexed points, which attend this
hypothesis of placing all power in the People, you will easily perceive the
excellency of the Scriptural hypothesis above it. It is free from all the
for^mentioned difficulties and absurdities; it is more agreeable to the
original of Mankind from one single created Father; it leaves not so many
pretenses for Sedition and Rebellion; it lays the highest obligations that can
be upon the conscience of the Sovereign to rule well: In a word, it is not
only the most religious, but the most rational, easy, and complete account of
Government, to say, that sovereign States and Princes, are God's ministers and
not the peoples, that they derive their power from heaven, and not from men;
and particularly, that they have the power of the Sword not by donation from
the people, but by the ordinance of God.

But in the third place, From this Apostolical doctrine about the power and
authority of sovereign Princes, and States, you may perceive what a great sin
it is for the subjects of any government upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
up Arms without authority from the lawful Sovereign, be it in riots, tumults,
or rebellions, or any other illegal meetings howsoever called; for God has
committed the power of the Sword to the lawful Sovereign only, and whosoever
takes it, and uses it without his authority, much more against it, usurpeth
the chief part of the supreme authority, and is left by our blessed Savior to
be punished for his usurpation by the Sovereign's Sword: Put up thy Sword again
(says he unto Saint Peter, who drew it to defend his Master against the
officers of the persecuting Sanhedrim,) for all, that take the sword, shall
perish by the sword; and to this purpose, and almost in the same words, says
St. John, by way of precaution to the suffering Christians: He that kills
with the sword must be killed with the sword, here is the faith and patience of
the Saints. And accordingly the Apostle tells the Christian subjects of that
monster Nero, that the Powers that then were, were ordained of God, and that
they, who resisted the Power, resisted the ordinance of God, and should receive
damnation, or condemnation to themselves.

To bear the Sword, or have the supreme disposition of the Sword, is one of the
jura majestatis, or essential rights of Sovereignty, which belongs to the
Sovereign by the Imperial laws of all governments, and by the same Imperial
laws is it made capital to take it up against the Sovereign; and our Savior,
who came to destroy no man's civil rights, but to consirm them, was in the
first place tender of the Sovereign's rights, and of the Laws, by which they
are established, and confirmed them both: Render unto Caesar (says he) the
things that are Caesar's, and one part of Caesar's prerogative, as a sovereign
Prince, and indeed the foundation of all the rest, was to be accountable to no
earthly power, nor liable to any coercion, or force: for were there any other
power to which he was accountable, or which had a right to resist him by
violence or force of armor, that power would be Caesar, or Sovereign, and not
he.

Wherefore had our Savior given a power to Christian subjects upon the account
of Religion, or any other account whatsoever, to take up Arms against their
Sovereign, he had set up one Sovereign, and one Sword against another, in every
Government; and so had not come as he said, to save men's lives, but to destroy
them, and as he spoke in another sense, not to send Peace upon the earth, but a
Sword.

But instead of that, as I said before, he has confirmed the rights of
Sovereignty, and the Imperial laws of every sovereign government, which make it
capital to resist the Sovereign; and it is by these Laws, which I may call the
first Table of every government, and by the Gospel, which confirms them, that
passive obedience, or non-resistence becomes the double duty of Christian
subjects, who cannot take up the Sword against their Sovereign without
resisting God, whose Minister he is, and making themselves justly liable to the
stroke of that Sword, which God has put in his hand.

For God, to whom vengeance, or punishment, belongs, has made him a revenger
to execute wrath u^^n his subjects that do evil, but he has not made them
revengers to execute wrath upon him. Had he done so, he had set up two instead
of one Sovereign in every Government; but on the contrary, as his wisdom and
honor obliged him, he has reserved wicked Princes, and Tyrants for his own
punishment, and has allowed their subjects no Arms against them, but the Arms
of the Catholic and Apostolical Church, even the Primitive Artillery of
prayers and tears.

Perhaps this may seem a very harsh doctrine to some inconsiderate people at
first hearing, but if they well consider that the resistance of the Subjects
brings greater evils, upon the public, than the tyranny of the most wicked
Sovereign, they will find, that the doctrine of passive obedience is founded in
the highest reason, and that we are bound to praise the wisdom and goodness
ness of God, who has forbidden us a remedy, which is infinitely worse than the
disease. I need not send you far off to prove what I say, for in this little
Island since the beginning of the Reformation, there has been perhaps as much
Christian blood shed in pretended defensive Wars, by the Anti-Episcopal
Reformers, as in the first ten famous Persecutions throughout the Roman Empire;
and more men slain in the least set battle of the late Rebellion, which was
also called a Defensive War, than by the tyranny of all the Kings of this
Nation since the Crown was set upon the Conquerour's Head.

But in the fourth place, To pass over many other useful observations, as what
a strong obligation this doctrine lays upon the consciences of all Christian
States, and Princes, and how unjustly the faithful Ministers of this Church
are hated and aspersed for preaching of it up, as if they designed to flatter
their Prince into a Tyrant, and enslave the People: I say, to pass over these
considerations, which would effectually vindicate the Church and Clergy of
England, and discover the malice of their factious enemies, we may see how much
it is the special duty of all inferior Magistrates whether Civil or Military,
to take care that they employ not their power, which they have from their
Sovereign against him, or do any thing that may make his just Government
uneasy upon his shoulders; much less that may tend to the disinherison of his
Crown, the destruction of his Regality, or the diminution of his legal
authority, and power.

I make this observation, because it has been, and I am afraid still is, a
principle among our new Reformers, that the inferior Magistrates have their
power immediately from God, though they are chosen unto it by the Prince, and
are God's Trustees to see that he does his duty, and that if he will not, they
may compel him, and reform without him, and raise forces to resist his unjust
force. But as this opinion is utterly against Scripture, the Histories of all
times, and the practice of all civil governments, wherein all inferior
Magistrates have their commissions from the Supreme: So is it utterly against
reason, for then instead of one, we should have many Sovereigns in every
Government, Power against Power, and Sword against Sword; and if there be any
man here so absurd, that is not convinced of the danger and absurdity of it at
first hearing, I desire him to admit this hypothesis but for one year into his
own family: Let him suppose, that his Steward, or chief servant has his
Steward's authority immediately from God, and is God's Trustee to see that he
does his duty, and that when he will not, he may force him, and reform his
family without his consent; but if he abhor this as an absurd and impious
proposal, and as utterly inconsistent with the just exercise of the paternal
authority in Families, it is every whit as bad in sovereign States and
Kingdoms, and in a short time would make the Supreme, the subordinate
Magistrate's Slave.

I have also made this observation, because many inferior Powers and
Magistrates have formerly, and I wish I could not say of late, done very much
harm to the Crown, and given very ill example to the common people of this
Kingdom by their undutifull and disloyal actions. Were it needful, I could
prove this Charge by a volume of Examples out of the Histories of the late
times, to which I refer you; and heartily wish for the honor of God, and the
Protestant Religion, that our present Sovereign, and God's Vicegerent, to whose
goodness so many ungrateful men owe their honors, and estates, and some
incurable Traitors their honors and lives, had not of late been treated by
some inferior Powers, and Potentates more like a public enemy, than a Prince.

But in the fifth place, If God has put the Sword in the Sovereign's hand, we
may all learn how Necessary, and Honorable the profession of a Soldier is,
who bears not the Sword in vain, but to fight the Lord's battles in defense
of his Vicegerent, and to be a revenger to execute wrath upon them that do
evil. Every lawful Soldier whether Common, or Commander is God's Soldier,
and what Jehosaphat said unto his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. may with a little
alteration, be said by the King to his Militia, or Army, Let the fear of Gob be
upon you, and take heed what you do, for the judgments which you execute are
God's judgments, and you fight not for man but for the Lord.

I have made this observation because we have at least one Sect among us, who
say, that it is unlawful for a Christian to bear Arms, and serve in the Wars
under his lawful Prince. But this is just such another absurd opinion, as that
of the same men, who say it is unlawful to take an Oath before the lawful
Magistrate, when we are required to swear. I profess, I wonder what can be the
ground of such an absurd opinion, and how the Socinians, who pretend to be
Masters of Reason, can teach such an unreasonable thing. It is a perfect
contradiction to the doctrine of the Apostle, who here teaches us, that the
Sovereign bears the Sword, as he is God's Minister, and that he bears in
not in vain, but to be a revenger to execute wrath upon him that docth evil;
and if he bear the Sword by God's appointment, and for so great an end it must
needs be lawful, and laudable to bear it under him, just as because he is the
supreme Minister of Justice, some must needs serve under him in the
administration and execution of Justice, and those who do so, are to be
honored in their several places upon the account of that civil authority,
which they derive from him. The Sovereign is the fountain both of Civil and
Military authority, both are equally from God, and necessary for the support of
Government, and therefore I confess, I cannot understand, why it should be more
unlawful for a Christian to buckle on the Sword at the command of his Prince,
than to put on a Gown.

But secondly, I have made this observation to let our seditious people see how
little like Christians they demean themselves, in railing, as they have always
done, at the King's Guards, and of late at the loyal Militia of this City,
calling them, as they did not many days ago, my Lord Mayor's Janissaries, my
Lord Mayor's Army, and as they think very wittily, my Lord Mayor's Guards.
These people are themselves an argument to prove, how necessary the Sword is
for the quiet and welfare of Government, according to the moto of your Shield,
arma pacis fulcra, that arms are the cause of peace. They show us what we must
expect from them were it not for the Sword; and God be praised, that both the
King, and the Lord Mayor have their Guards to defend them, otherwise, I fear,
the spirit of Corah, which reigns still in these men, would soon push them on
to pull his Lordship out of his Chair, and His Majesty out of the Throne.

But in the last place, if God has put the Sword into the Sovereign's hand,
and the Military, as well, as the Civil Power be derived from him, you may see
how Honorable a Science the Science of Arms is, and how useful, and Profitable
to all Governments Schools of Arms are, wherein Men disposed for Martial
Employments may learn the Military Discipline, and how to be Expert in feats of
Arms. Such Honorable Societies are His Majesty's Nurseries for the Militia, as
the Inns of Court are for the Law, and the two Universities for the Church; and
as it is to be wished, and endeavored, that no Person be bred in either of the
former, who would employ their Tongues, and Pens against Gods Servant and their
Sovereign: So is it to be wished, and all possible Endeavors ought to be used
by you, who are Members of this Honorable Company, that none be admitted into
it, at least into the Government of it, who will likely so misemploy their
Swords.

You are the Chef d'ordre, the Chief Academy of this kind in His Majesty's
Dominions; and as you are the most Illustrious for the Number, and Quality of
your Members, so may you ever be the most Exemplary for Christian Loyalty; and
imitable Patterns for all His Majesty's Subjects of that Faith, and Allegiance,
which is due unto him by the Law of Cokes Calvin' s Case.
Nature, as well as the Municipal Laws of this Land.

May you all (according to the Ancient Oath of Allegiance wont to be
Administered in Courts of Britton. c. 29.
Leet) Be Faithful and Loyal to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Heirs, and
bear them Faith and Fealty of Life, Limb, and terrene Honor, and never do them
hurt, or damage, but Defend them to your Power. But if notwithstanding your
Care, and Endeavors to the contrary, any disaffected Persons have, or may
hereafter creep in among you, let their Right-hands forget their Cunning, and
cease to be dextrous in handling the Sword.

Let them never be able to stretch forth Hand or Sword against the Lords
Anointed; or if they do, let them prosper according to the presage of our
Blessed, and Obedient Savior, who said, He that takes up the Sword (that is
without, or against Authority) shall perish by the Sword. Let their Calamity, as
Solomon says, rise suddenly: Let swift Destruction, as David prayed against
his Enemies, come upon them unawares; let them be as the Chaff before the Wind,
and the Angel of the Lord scattering them: Let all this come upon them as upon
Absalom, Brutus, Cassius, and Choerea; and I hope there is none so disloyal in
this Audience, at least in this Honorable Company, that will not heartily say
Amen.

There are other Excellent Uses to be made of this Doctrine, especially against
the unchristian Practices of those Men, who not having the fe^r of the King of
Kings before their Eyes, love to speak and do every thing, as far as safely
they may against the Honor of his Vicegerent; standring his Person and
Government, belying or mis-construing his best Proceedings, blaming, or
Censuring his most Innocent Actions, delighting in his Misfortunes, Triumphing
in his Wants, Aggravating his Infirmities, dispersing Stories and Rumors to
his Prejudice, and loving to do every thing that tends to weaken his Authority,
and withdraw the Hearts of his People from him, and render him Odious, and
Contemptible in their Eyes.

If you ask these Men with what Conscience they can thus treat their Sovereign,
they will tell you, they do nothing but what they can Justify by Law; as if
the Laws of the Land, and not the Laws of the Gospel were the complete, and
adequate Rule of Christian Duty, Subjection, and Obedience: Or, as if Men were
to be Tried at the last Judgment by those, and not by these.

But alas, the Man of God, as the Apostle calls a Christian, cannot be made
Perfect in any one Duty by the Laws, nor furnished by them unto every good
Work, but quite contrary, the Laws of the Realm will allow us to do many
grievous things against Father, Mother, Wife, Children, or any other sort of
Relations, or Neighbors, for which, without Repentance, we shall be surely
Damned. Wherefore as the Laws of the Land are not the Measure of our Duty of
our Parents, etc. so neither are they the Perfect Rule of our Duty to our
Prince, as it is plain from the Verse after my Text, where the Apostle having
told the Romans, that the Emperor was the Minister of God, he then adds,
Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, or fear of Legal
Punishment, but also for Conscience Sake.

To Conclude all; these Disloyal Men, with which these Kingdoms so abound, Act
more like Greeks than Christians, and as if they had been bred at Athens, and
Sparta, rather than in the School of Christ: Otherwise they would be better
Affected toward Gods Anointed; they would Pray more for him, and Murmr, and
Clamor less against him, as knowing, that God gives us what Kings soever he
pleases, and that the Kings Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, and that he
turns it whithersoever he will. He is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and the
only Ruler of Princes. He is the Fountain of Sovereign Power, every King is his
Vicegerent, and every Kingdom a Theocracy, and therefore let us bless the Lord
before all the Congregation, and say, in the words of David, 1 Chronicles. 29.
Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory,
and the Majesty: For all that is in the Heaven, and in the Earth is thine;
thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted, as Head above all. Which in
other words is the very Doctrine of the Apostle, who says, That there is no
Power, but of God, and that he bears not the Sword in vain, because he is the
Minister of God, To whom, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, etc.

AMEN.

