THE Spirit of POPERY Speaking out of the Mouths of Phanatical-Protestants, OR
THE LAST SPEECHES OF Mr. JOHN KID And Mr. JOHN KING, Two Presbyterian
Ministers,Who were Executed for HIGH TREASON and REBELLION, At Edinburgh,
August the 14th. 1679. With ANIMADVERSIONS, and the History of the Archbishop
of St. Andrews his Murder, extracted out of the Registers of the Privy Council,
etc.

By an Orthodox Protestant.

1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, --
Yet if any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God
on this behalf.

Matthew. 23. 13. 16, 17. 27. 31, 32. Woe unto you Hypocrites, who for a pretense
make long Prayers, -- Ye fools, and blind, ye blind, Guides, you are like unto
beautified Sepulchers, fair without, but full of dead men's bones, and
uncleanness within. Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, for you are the
Sons of them who killed the Prophets.

Luke 11. 49, 50, 51. Some of them they shall Slay, and Persecute, that the
blood of all -- which was shed from the blood -- to the blood -- may be
required of this Generation.

Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of False-Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing,
but inwardly are Ravening-Wolves.

Genesis 49. 6. O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret, nor unto their
Assembly, for in their anger they Slew a Man.

2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Unthankful, Unholy,
False-Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, Traitors, Heady, High-minded, -- having
the outward appearance of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; from such
turn away.

Dehinc ut quiescant porro, moneo, and desinant maledicere, malefacta ne
noscant sua. LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to be Sold by Walter
Kittleby, at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

THE PREFACE,
Wherein the Author of the Animadversions addresseth himself to the
English-Dissenters, especially the Presbyterians, and shows the Jesuitical
Tricks that have been used in the former Edition of these Speeches.

IN Writing the Animadversions upon these two treasonable and blasphemous
Speeches, and the History of the Archbishops Murder, as a further Commentary
upon them; I have had a double regard, to the English and Scottish Reader, and
have consequently said some things in both of them with respect to the one,
which may seem superfluous to the other. The consideration I had to the former
obliged me to cite, and exemplify many Scottish Acts of Parliament, Orders,
and Proclamations of the King by his Privy Council; which had been needless,
but that without them it was not possible for any, but a Scotsman, fully to
understand the meaning of those passages in the Speeches, to illustrate which
they are produced. And the consideration I had to the latter, has made me
insist much on the invalidity of the Kirk-Ministery, and the Divine Institution
of Episcopacy, in doing of which I have cited the Latin Fathers in the
Original, and the Greek in Latin, because this Language in Scotland, among the
men, is almost as common as their Mother Tongue.

But besides those things upon which I have largely insisted for the sake of
the one, of which the other had not so much need, I have purposely insisted on
other useful things upon the common account of both. Particularly I have been
elaborat in explaining most of those Texs of Scripture which the two
Malefactors misapplied to themselves, or their own Party, and in citing out of
the Kirk-Writers their Papal, Jesuitical, Murderous, Schismatical and
Rebellious Principles; in doing of which, I protest, I have not said the
fourth-part of what I was able to produce. I have also here and there
exemplified their Principles with their Practices, and all this I have done
without any, at least without any material reflections upon the
English-Dissenters, for whose sake especially I have undertaken this small, but
tedious work.

For the conforming part of both Churches generally know enough to make them
detest the Principles and Practices of our Jesuitical Separatists, and so will
read things of this nature, not so much for instruction, as delight: and for
our Scottish-Nonconformists, especially those of the Field-Separation, it would
be lost labor to write Books for them, who lie under as strong a prejudice
against the Church-Writers, as the most bigoted Papists do, and like them are
also terrified and prohibited by their Jesuitical Preachers from reading of any
thing, that is written by an Orthodox Protestant Pen.

Therefore the principal design which I had in Publishing all this, was for
your sakes, O ye Nonconformists from our Sister Church of England, who have
more ingenuity, and who, I cannot but believe, are ignorant of the nature of
our Separatists, and their Separation, because upon all occasions, you appear
as much concerned for them, as if you thought, that their Cause and yours were
the very same. Did you not take them for a more rational, and innocent Sect
than they are, you would, I am confident, be ashamed to Correspond with them,
who are the shame of the Presbyterian Name. You would not, if you rightly
understood them, Defend their Separation; Apologize for their worst Actions; --
By sundry Libellous Pamphlets and most false and Seditious Discourses sent from
Scotland, and dispersed purposely in this our Kingdom of England, especially in
our City of London, that the cause of these Disorders is sought to be shifted
off the Rebels in Scotland, and most unjustly cast upon -- King Charles 1st.
his lesser Declarat. 1640. page 2.
disperse their Calumniating and lying Stories, and with your Interests and
Purses, support their tottering Cause. You would not defend their unrighteous
dealings; rail at those, who bring them to Condign Punishment, and call their
Fineings, Imprisonments, and Executions, Persecution, although they are
Condemned upon the very same Account, and Suffer for the very same Principles
and Practices, for which you rejoice to see the Papists, but especially the
Jesuits Dye, by the Executioners hand.

If you will not believe me, read this little Book, nay, read but the Speeches,
and the History, and if you please let the rest alone; and then, if you do not
find that I Charge them truly, expose me in Print for a Calumniator, or Post
me up for a Knave. But if you find that the Presbyterian Sect, of which these
two Malefactors, and the Archbishops Murderers were, profess a Papal
Sovereignty over your Native Prince, and most of all the Doctrines, if not all,
for which the Jesuits are Secluded both Kingdoms by Capital Laws; then I
beseech you, nay, I conjure you, as you would be thought true, and impartial
Protestants, or, men of common Ingenuity, not to favor, or approve in the
Presbyterian, what you abhor in the Popish Priests and People; nor to call the
Execution of wholesome and necessary Laws, Tyranny and Persecution, with respect
to the one, which you declare to be Laudable Justice on the other. How have
both you, and the Conforming-Protestants, applauded the Zeal and Justice of
your Magistrates, in Executing your Laws upon the former, and yet you revile
and hate those, who Execute our Laws upon the latter, (though their Principles
are as incompatible with the Government) and call the Church-Protestants,
Papists; or say, they are Popishly affected, when you hear them like good
Subjects rejoice at the news of their Defeats, or express their satisfaction,
that they Suffered, as the nature of their Crimes deserved.

I say, Their Principles are as incompatible with Who under the Mask, and
Vizard of Religion, seek to S^bvert all Monard^^al, and Civil Government. King
Ch(...) his lesser Declaration, 1640. p. 3.
Government, and the common Security that every man ought to have in Human
Societies, and that they would be extirpated out of any Protestant Government
of the World, (as the Jesuits were once out of France, and many other Popish
Countries) but Ours, and Yours; and yet when a Parcel of them a Year ago, were
sent on Shipboard into the Thames, in order to be Transported according to
Law, you made as great a stir about it with the King, and his Secretary for
this Kingdom, as if they had been the most Innocent and Orthodox-Protestants in
the World. Had they been Jesuited Papists, we should all have rejoiced; but had
they been so many of either Churches Communion; especially of those, whom you
invidiously call High-flown Churchmen; though in Charity, I believe you would
have been sorry for them, yet I doubt, if you would have taken half that pains
to prevent their Transportation, have given them half so much Money, or upon
their account have cried out Tyranny half so much.

In like manner, when the Highlanders about two years since were brought down
under the Conduct of their Chiefs into those Shires, where at least five parts
in six are of this Jesuitical Sect; What Tragical outcries did you make at
London? though if the Papists should have kept such frequent, and numerous
Field-Conventicles in the Popish Shires of England, at a time when the Kings
Standing Forces were not able to dissipate the tenth part of them; you would
have thought it both lawful, expedient, and laudable to have sent Thousands of
People from Protestant Shires, to Quarter among them for a little while, till
other expedients could have been found. You know very well, that the first
Discoverer of the Horrid Popish Plot has declared to all the World, That
Jesuits were sent into Scotland about the same time that they began to
Field-Conventicle, to encourage them to Rebel, and disturb the Ministry of the
Duke of Lauderdale; and yet you are so confident as to contradict him in this
particular, reporting in favor of our Jesuited Presbyterians, That there was
no need for such a Force to overruled them, but that they were brought upon
them purposely to provoke them to Rebel.

I must also remind you, of the innumerable Lies you dispersed (I cannot
believe you raised them) of the Devastations, Murders, Robberies, Rapes, etc.
committed by the Highlanders among those Presbyterian Jesuits, though there
were as few, and as small disorders committed by them, as ever was by the like
number, not only of Soldiers, but Men. For they are not Barbarians, as you
Styled them, unless it be in the same sense that the Greeks and Romans called
all other People Barbarous, that spoke not their Languages, and wore not the
Pall, and Gown. No, I assure you, they are a very Civil, Generous, and
Governable People, who committed not half so many, nor so great disorders in
that expedition, as the Soldiers, who were levied about the same time in
England, did about the places where they lay. Did any of them do such a
Barbarous action (not to mention others) as that of Captain -- upon Sir Robert
Viners Daughter? if they did, let it be published, but if they did not, then I
beseech you, be not accessory to such lying Stories again. But the Loyal
Highlanders were from the beginning Malls to the Covenant and Covenanters, and
this is the true ground, why our Presbyterians in the first place, and you by
contagion from them in the second, hate, and defame them so much.

For the very same reason you are directed by them, to Calumniate the great
name of his Grace the Duke of Lauderdale. The Church is supported upon, and our
Pestilent Sectarians crushed under his Ministry, and therefore you Conspire to
represent him as a Tyrant, Papist, and what not? Though some of the most
Considerable among you, know him to be a man of great Moderation and Piety, and
one who abominates Popery from his heart.

I think fit also to mind you of the Misrepresentations which you made of the
Archbishops Murder, endeavoring to lay it elsewhere than at the door of that
Phanatical Party, who brought his Grace (as the Jesuits have done greater men)
to Ehuds Dagger, and Gideons Sword. I have made a True Narrative of it, and of
the Jesuitical Principles upon which it was Committed; on purpose, that you
seeing of what manner of Faith, and Spirit this direful Sect are, may Befriend
them no longer; but show your selves sincere Protestants, in abhorring the
worst part of Popery in them, as well as in Papists properly so called.

Furthermore, I cannot but tell you, that I am very much offended at the
spiteful manner, after which you have Treated the Church and her Clergy, ever
since the Discovery of the Popish-Plot. I have seen the Narratives of your
Essex, and Leichestershire Elections, and have read the Books which your
Rabbis have lately put out, and comparing them with other Phanatical, shall I
call them, or Popish Libels; methinks I find little of the Ancient Puritan
Spirit among you, but that you have deviated ten times further from their
Principles, than the Divines in Celeusma are falsely represented to have
deviated from the Doctrines of the Church. Nay, to deal plainly with you, you
seem to have much of the Covenanting Spirit among you, and if you stop not in
time, I am afraid, that as many Acts of Parliament must be made in your
Country for the protection of the Clergy, as have been made in ours. What? are
you not ashamed to Assault the Church on one side, while the Papists Storm her
on the other? A Church, of all the Reformed, most hated by the Papists, and
whose Clergy alone has done much more against Popery than the Divines of all
Reformed Communions in the World. And yet you are not ashamed to misrepresent
this very Clergy to the people for Papists, or Papishly affected, a Clergy,
whose Writings all Foreign Protestant Divines study English on purpose to
understand, and which at this day, (praised be God for it) can produce more
Great men, than the Greek and Latin Churches, put together in the most
flourishing Century, could ever show at a time.

But this is not to act like Protestants, but Papists, or whatsoever else you
will call those, who endeavor to ruin the Fortress of the Protestant Cause.
And truly while some of your leading Dissenters openly avow, that they are
neither Presbyterians, nor Independents, etc. Nor of any other known name, do
they not prompt us to believe, that they may be Papists, or at least are so
fond of their own Conceits, as to be of nothing but of themselves. So Arius,
was an Arian, Novatus a Novatian, and Donatus a Donatist, and no part of
Christendom ever yet wanted men, who had the vanity to affect singularity in
Opinions of Religion, to Commence Heresiarchs, and become Chiefs of a Sect.
Thus for example, I know not what Mr. Baxter can be called, but a Papist, or
Baxterian, he is not of the Church of England; it is manifest folly, and
injustice to call him Papist; He says, He is no Presbyterian, etc. he must
therefore like the Founder of an Heresy, be denominated from himself, unless
he can reduce himself to any other denomination Catholic, or Heterodox, that
now is, or ever was among Christians, and if he can, let him do us the favor
to tell us what it is.

I am likewise very much Scandalized at you, for giving the right hand of
Fellowship to our Presbyterian Jesuits, whom, were you of the Principles of the
Ancient Puritans, you would thrust out of your Synagogues, as soon as you know
what they are; should you favor, and Caress Professed Jesuits, and admit them
to your Communions, would it not be reasonable to suspect, that you were
Jesuits your selves? and therefore if after this you shall own our Covenanting
Hildebrandists, who would set their feet on the Necks of Christian Princes, you
must excuse us, if we say, that you your selves are such. I am sure should the
Bishops, and Clergy of either Church, do but half as much for the Papists as
you have done for our Presbyterian Papalines, you would, and very justly too,
proclaim them for Papists all over the Protestant world. Many of them this day
are protected among you, and one of them among you; or which is worse, one of
your selves lately Published these two Treasonable, and Blasphemous Speeches
with so many Tricks, and Falsifications, as none but a Jesuit, or Jesuited
Nonconformist could do.

For first, in the Title Page he calls them, The last Speeches of etc. at the
place of Execution, without mentioning the horrid Crimes for which they were
Executed; which plainly shows, be he Scots, or English, that he is one of these
Jesuited Presbyterians, that counted the late Insurrection no Rebellion, as
these two Traitors did amply declare. Also by omitting to mention the Treasons
and Rebellion for which they were Executed, he gives the people occasion to
think, that they were put to death like Apostles, merely for Preaching the
Gospel, though before they engaged in the late Insurrection, they Preached
Treason and Rebellion in the Feilds, to Thousands of Armed-men.

In the 6th. page where he says, that Mr. King bore his Testimony against the
Covenant, he has left out these words in which he bore it.

Also I hear my Witness, and Testimony to our Covenants National, and
Solemn-League betwixt the Three Kingdoms, which Sacred and Solemn Oath I
believe cannot be dispensed with, nor loosed by any person, or party upon Vid.
p 42.
Earth, but are fully binding these Nations, and will be so hereafter. And in
the 7th. page he has left out all that follows.

And against all Oaths, and Bonds contrary to our Covenant and Engagements,
especially that Oath of Supremacy, the Declaration against the Covenant, and
that Bond called the Bond of peace, and that horrid Bond so frequently imposed
against the Meetings of his people in Fields, and Houses, intended for the
Down-bearing of the Gospel, and Interest of our Lord and Vid. p. 43. 44.
Master, with all other Bonds Public or Private, contrary to our Obligations
and Covenants to God; also against all such that Connive at, or Comply with, or
strengthen the hands of this Prelatical, Malignant, and Persecuting Party. In
the 8th. page he has left out all this.

And particularly, I bear my Testimony against that horrid Violation done to
our Lord Jesus Christ, and that by Usurping upon his Royal Prerogatives, and in
Spoiling him of his Crown, Sword, Scepter and Royal Robe, by taking those
Princely Ornaments to invest a man with, whose Breath is in his Vid. p, 46 47.
Nostrils, (...)ough that woeful Supremacy so much applauded to, and universally
owned, even of such, of whom better things might have been expected, I mean the
Indulged, and such as Countenanced them in that way, even to the ruining and
renting of the Church, which alas! is too Evident by sad, and doleful
experience.

So much for the larger Omissions; but in other places of this Speech, he has
left out as material passages, by which in the 5th. page he has perverted the
Sense; for in this place, I have been often dissuading from such ways and
practices, [and of this my Conscience bear me Witness, but here I would not
have you mistake me, as if I did approve of ways and Vid P. (...).
practices] contrary to the word of God, and that of our Covenanted Reformed
Religion. He has left out all betwixt the Hooks. Again, in the 8th. page to
that Expression, ( to all those who have laid down their Vid. p. 46.
lives) he should have added, as it follows in the true Copy, ( either formerly
or of late in the Fields) So in the 9th. page from these words -- ( provoke the
Lord to bring a Sword upon these Lands) he has taken away, ( to avenge the
Quarrel of his Covenant.) Lastly, page 12. in this Vid. p. 48.
Expression, And send a Reviving day to the (Work) and People of God, he has
omitted the word ( Work.)

So much for Kings Speech, and the Falsifications are no less considerable in
that of Kids; For first, he has Postponed the most scandalous part of his
Speech, which he spoke a little after the beginning, and put it toward the end.

For what is contained betwixt ( eighthly, as for, etc.) after ( Harlot
Scotland) page 21. and ( let the Land consider) after Principles and Practices,
page 25. line 3. should have been Printed after all that follows from these
words, and should have followed on the blank page, to ( reflection upon any)
page 27. line 19. as may be seen by consulting the Sixth and Eleventh Pages of
this Edition, which is sufficiently proved by these words, ( in the close as a
dying person) at the bottom of the Sixteenth Page of this Edition, which usher
in his last words.

The reason is plain, why he put the most poisonous part at the latter end,
viz. That the common Reader, who might have spit it out again at first, might
take it down without scruple, after his palate had been prepared with all he
had unwarily swallowed before.

But this had not been so great a fault, had he Printed it all; but he has
left out all that Treasonable, Papal, Rebellious, Jesuitical stuff from these
words, ( his Servants and People) page 7. line 17. in this Edition, to ( and
moreover) page 10. line 35. which I desire the Reader to consult. But besides
this great omission, he is guilty of several others, which ought to be
observed. For page 25. line 6. after ( cake not turned) Vid. p. 6.
he has left out, ( which is upon the matter contrary to, and inconsistent
with our solemnly Sworn Covenant) and after ( Reformation) l. 18. he has
omitted ( according to our Sworn Covenant;) and page 22. at the bottom, ^^stead
of ( Remember their Sworn Covenant) he has said P. 6.
( Remember their for^^er Obligations;) so likewise page 24. line 1. he has
put do^n ( Abetters of that Contention) instead of ( The late Convention of
Estates.) P. 16.


The Jesuitical Publisher of these Jesuitical Speeches, must needs be a
Presbyterian, because none of the other Sectaries would concern themselves so
much for the Covenant, Kirk-Sessions, and Presbyteries; nay, it is most
probable that he is a Covenanting Presbyterian of the Field-Sort, and therefore
I cannot but exhort you, who are the more moderate, and better Principled
Dissenters of that Denomination, to beware of such, and to endeavor to find
out this particular Sophisticator, and when you have discovered him, to purge
him out of your Synagogues, as a dangerous piece of Jesuitical Leven; or, as
the Apostle speaks of the Corinthian Fornicator, to put him away from among
your selves, as you tender your Reputation, and would have us believe you are
sound Protestants, and not of the stamp of our Jesuitical Whigs.

I cannot forbear to press this advice upon you with passion, for if you beware
not betimes of these Dogs of our Concision, your Societies will shortly be
incurably leavened with their Rebellious and Murderous Jesuitical Doctrines,
which in a little time will influence your practices, and impulse you like them
to March into the Field. If you take not speedy care, they will put you upon
Jesuitical Projects; set up a Cause, and Interest among you, which shall be
dearer to you than that of the Public, and bring you under another Government,
besides that of your Prince. There was a Project of that Jesuitical nature,
attempted by some of your Principals about four or five years ago, when some of
your Ministers and others Caballed together about reducing the Presbyterians
(Whether over England only, or over all the three Nations, I do not well
remember) into the same sort of Policy, by which the Jesuits are Governed over
all the world. The Nation was to be divided into Districts, or Provinces; every
District was to have its Provincial, and over all the Provinces was to be
appointed one General to reside constantly (as I remember) in London; and the
first, who was to have the Honor of that Office, (like the Founder of the
Jesuits) had been a Soldier, and a great Malesactor, and is also sit to be
General of an Army, and presided in that Consult. He is a Gentleman whom you
all know, and makes a great part of a late Narrative, wherein the impudent
Narrator implicitly calls you the most Sober and considerable Protestants of
the Land. The Provincials in their several Districts, were to take an account
of the growth or decay of the Party, to note their friends and enemies, to
receive their Contributions, and give an account of all to the General, who was
to supervise for the good of the whole. This account, with which I am confident
I do not surprise some of you, was told me upon condition of Secrecy, by a very
honest and peaceable, but Rigid Presbyterian Minister, our Countreyman, who
having got notice of the Consult, broke it in the beginning, by telling the
Projectors how he abhorred it, and threatening to discover it, if they did not
desist. He told me also, that he believed the Project came first from the
designed General, who intended by that means to raise his broken Fortunes,
which if he had accomplished, he might easily have done.

And to do his Memory Justice, he told me this Story with very great
indignation; the substance of which, (as I shall answer for it to God at the
day of Judgment) I have faithfully related (to the best of my memory) upon the
Faith of a Christian Man. I have told you this, not to upbraid you, but with an
honest design to make you take the greater care not to conform your selves to
the Jesuitical example of our Remonstrator Field-Presbyterians, who also have
such a secret policy ( imperium in imperio) among themselves. And I hope you
will hereafter detest them for the sake of their Jesuitical Principles and
Practices, that so you may not by insensible degrees grow like them in either
or both, but especially in Violence, Cruelty, and Inhumanity, and so make your
Bishops and their Clergy like ours, dread you as much as they dread the worst
of Papists, and think it indifferent whether they fall by the Popish, or
Presbyterian hands. There is no great difference in the choice between a
Clement and a Melvil, a Ravillac, and a Mitchel, Hanging 50 Cubits high, or
Burning, a Jail, and the Inquisition, or between being persecuted to any
degree, or in any kind, as an Heretic by Papists, or as a Papist by
Presbyterians, etc. as an enemy to the Church by those, and as an enemy to
Christ, and the Gospel by these.

The following Speeches alone will sufficiently inform you, what great reason
the Clergy and their Patrons have to fear the Jesuited Presbyterians; but if
you please to Consult the Animadversions, and the History of the Archbishops
Murder, you will have more abundant Evidence, and perceive how friendly I have
dealt with you in warning of you against that Execrable Sect.

In consulting my Citations, I must entreat you to take notice, that it is the
first Edition of Knoxes History in Octavo, out of which my Quotations of that
Author are taken. It is a very scarce Book, but more of them are extant among
our Phanaticks, than all Great Britain besides. If you have it not among your
selves, you may find it among them; and though Archbishop Spotswood (whose
incomparable Son was Lib. 5. 267.
Murdered by the Covenanters) proves undeniably, that the Church History
ascribed to him, is none of his; yet that is nothing to my purpose, since it is
evident it was written by an For Knox as Cambden in his Hist. of Queen Eliz.
lib. 1. p. 95. of the third Edition i^ English, relates thundered out of the
Pulpit, That Queen Mary Stuart should not only be Deposed, but put to Death.
Heroical Presbyterian, as he was; and if good Traditional Authority deceive us
not, one who was his familiar Servant, and who perhaps had a double portion of
his Masters Spirit, compiled it out of his Materials after he was dead.

When I began this Preface, I thought to have taken an occasion to lay down the
common Principles, in which all Presbyterians (I mean Presbyterians of all
sorts) do agree, and the Arguments by which they have combated Episcopacy, and
Episcopal Ordination, and to have shown you by direct, and undeniable
deductions, how the Principles of the Independents and of all other
Subdivisions of Sectaries, are the unavoidable consequents of the Former, and
that the whole Fabric of the Christian Religion will be mightily endangered if
not destroyed by the latter: not only the Baptizing of Infants, the Observation
of the Lord's Day, the Admission of Women to the Holy-Communion, (who were not,
as Cassand. observes, admitted to the Paschal Lamb, which it succeeded, nor can
it be expressly proved out of the New Testament, that ever they received it) but
the Order, and Authority of Presbyters to Administer it, nay, the use of both
the Holy Sacraments, (which the Vid. Apol. Relig. Reform. by Barclay.
Quakers say was a Temporary Institution) and the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures in general, upon which the Christian Religion depends. But I hear
that one intends to do this in a particular Tract, wherein he also designs to
show, That scarce one particular of the Christian Religion, except the
Authority of the Scriptures in general, has been so little contested as
Episcopacy, and Episcopal Ordination, wherein for above 1400. years, the
Heretics agreed with the Catholic Church.

This being so, it may easily be discerned to what cause we ought chiefly to
ascribe that Deluge of Atheism, and utter contempt of Religion, which has
overflowed the Land. You have been the main occasion of it, the Atheists, as
well as the whole Brood of Sects, are your (though I confess Equivocal)
Offspring; and to give them their due, they have not been ungrateful, but
always serviceable to you, and upon all occasions have joined with you in your
main designs against the Bishops and the Church. However it is the Churches
unhappiness, yet it is not Her dishonor, that She and Her Clergy have you and
them, your Allies, for their Common Enemies; you join hand in hand against
them, and endeavor to cover their Faces with shame, and fill their Souls with
contempt. But I desire you seriously to consider, whether your ingratitude to
God for such a Church, and your contempt and forsaking of such a Clergy, who
have always been such faithful, and invincible Champions against the Papists,
be not one of those crying Sins, which have justly provoked God to threaten us
with Popery, and which may at length urge him to bring you under the King of
Babylon, both for your Punishment and Cure.

I believe you will be offended at me for what I have said of the necessity of
Episcopal, and invalidity of Presbyterian Orders; but I have said no more of
this Subject than Bishop Against Champney, page 118.
Fern, who asserts that the latter are to be accounted void within the Church
of England, and every complete and regularly formed Church. Or Bishop Answer to
the third Epist. of Pet. Moulin.
Andrews, who asserted, That the Reformed Church of France in wanting
Episcopacy, wanted something which was of Divine Right. Or King In his first
Paper to Mr. Henderson.
Charles the First, who asserted, That by the alteration of our
Church Government, we should be deprived of a Lawful Priesthood, etc. Or in
effect then, Apocalypsis Apocalypscos, page 130.
Dr. More, who on Rev. 13. 11. makes Episcopacy to be the Horns of the Lamb,
which were upon the Beasts, or Antichrists Head. Or last of all, then In his
Separation of Churches.
Mr. Dodwell, who, as I am assured from very good Judges, has unanswerably
showed the nullity of these, by the necessity of having those in every visible
Church. I have not yet seen the Book, but I am confident I am rightly informed
about it, because I find Mr. Baxter so angry both at it and the Author in his
last Book. I shall say no more than this, That if this Doctrine be true, then
you who maliciously oppose the Divine Institution, or who by virtue of
Presbyterian Orders, Sacrilegiously presume to Administer the Sacraments in
opposition to our Episcopal Communions within the British Isles, have a sad
account to give, without Repentance, to the Head, and Founder of the Catholic
Church.

Edinburgh, Jan. 5. 1679./80.
The Author having met with King Charles the Firsts Declaration concerning his
Subjects of Scotland, 1640. since he finished his Animadversions, thought fit
to add what follows out of the 56, 57, and 58, Pages, for the further
illustration of what is said of the Letter of the Covenanting Lords to the
French King in the 30th. Page.

BUT to fill up the measure of their Treasons, they have endeavored to settle
Intelligences in parts beyond the Seas, and practiced to let in Foraign Power
into that Our Kingdom; as We are able to make appear under the hands of some of
the chiefest of them; as if the fire, which by their own Rebellions they have
already kindled within the bowels of that State, were not sufficient to consume
it, unless they added fuel to it from abroad. And herein appears first their
malignity to Us their Natural Sovereign, in that they had rather prostitute
themselves to Foraign Government, and that such as is different in Religion,
than yield conformity to Ours.

But because the World shall see that We charge them not, but upon very good
and sure grounds* We have thought fit to set down here their own Letter: Of
which We have given Our good Brother the French King account, being confident
he will not assist any Rebels against Us. The Letter follows, with this
endorsement, Au Roy, which in France is always understood from those Subjects
only to their Natural Prince.

SIRE,
VOstre Majeste (estant l'asyle and sanctuaire des Princes and Estats affligez)
nous avous trouve necessaire d'envoyer ce Gentilhome le Sieur de Colvil, pour
representer a V. M. la candeur and naivete tant de nos actions and procedures,
que de nos intentions, lesquelles nous desirons estre gravees and escrites a
tout ^univers avec un ray du Soleil, aussy bien que V. M. Nous vous Supplions
doncques treshumblement (Sire) de ^^y adjouster foy and creance, and a tout ce
qu'il dira de nostre part, touchant nous and nos affairs, estant tresasseures
(Sire) d'une assistance eigale a Vostre clemence accoustumee cydevant, and si
souvent monstree a ceste Nation, laquelle ne cedera la gloire a autre
quelconque d'estre eternellement,

Sire, de V. M. Les treshumbles and tresobeyssants and tressaffectionnes
Serviteurs, Rothes. Montrose. Leslie. Mar. Montgomery. Loudoun. Forrester.



Englished thus:

SIR,
YOur Majesty being the Refuge and Sanctuary of afflicted Princes and States,
we have found it necessary to send this Gentleman Mr. Colvil, to represent unto
Your Majesty the candor and ingenuity as well of our actions and proceedings,
as of our intentions, which we desire to be engraved and written to the World
with a beam of the Sun, as well as your Majesty. We therefore most humbly
beseech You (Sir) to give faith and credit to him, and to all that he shall say
on our part, touching us and our affairs, being most assured (Sir) of an
assistance equal to Your wonted clemency heretofore, and so often showed to
this Nation, which will not yield the glory to any other whatsoever to be
eternally,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate
Servants, Rothes. Montrose. Lesly. Mar. Montgogomery. Loudoun. Forrester.



Texts of Scripture; which the Presbyterian Preachers Blasphemously misapplied
to the Solemn League and Covenant.
2 Kings 11. 17. AND Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord, and the King,
and the People, That they should be the Lords People, between the King also,
and the People.

Isaiah 44. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords, another shall be called by the
name of Jacob, and another shall Subscribe with his hand unto the Lord.

Josh. 24. 25. So Joshua made a Covenant with the People the same day, and gave
them an Ordinance and Law in Sichem.

Deuteronomy. 29. 25. Jerem. 22. 8, 9. Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this
Land, and to this great City* Then Men shall say, Because they have forsaken
the Covenans of the Lrod God of their Fathers, which he made with them, when he
brought them out of the Land of Egypt.

2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 3a. And the King stood in his place, and made a Covenant
before the Lord, etc.

1 Chronicles. 16. 15. Be ye mindful always of his Covenant.

Jerem. 11. 2, 3. Speak unto the men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and say unto them, Thus s^ith the Lord the Lord God of Israel, Cursed be the
man, that obeys not the words of this Covenant.

With many more which occur in their Writings. See Note (w.) on the first
Speech.

ERRATA.
Page 37. line 29. for Twenty two read Twelve; on the Title Page of the
Narrative, for 1669. read 1679

THE LAST SPEECH OF Mr. John Kid. With Annotations thereupon.
Right Worthy and Well-beloved Spectators,
COnsidering what bodily distempers I have been exercised under, since I came
out of the Which was applied to him to make him Confess his Accomplices in the
Rebellion, and answer to such Questions, as Authority asked him in order to the
perfect discovery of it; which before he was brought to the boot (for that is
the name of the Instrument of Torture) he Jesuit-like refused to do. Contrary
to the manner of the Primitive Christians (to whom the Rebellious Covenanters
are blasphemously compared in the Apology for the persecuted Ministers, and
Professors of the Presbyterian reformed Religion Printed 1677.) of whose
behavior at the criminal Tribunals Tertullian writing in his first Apolog.
says, That it was their Custom freely to Confess when they were examined by
Authority. Christianus vero -- si denotatur gloriatur, si accusatur non
defendit, interrogatus vel ultro confitetur. But the 2d. Act of the 2d. Session
of the 2d. Parl. of Charles the 2d. began at Edinb. July 28. 1670.
Rebellious Covenanters quite contrary, when they are required by his Majesty's
Authority to declare either simply, or upon Oath, what they know of Rebellious
Field-meetings, and the persons who were present at them, and disorders done
therein, are wont to give either shifting Equivocating Answers, or else not to
answer at all, contrary to their Allegiance as Subjects, and in contempt of the
lawful Powers, and of God who has ordained them, but exactly according to the
Doctrine of the Jesuits in the Rhemish notes on the New Testament Acts. 23.
which say. If thou be put to an Oath to accuse Catholics for serving of God as
they ought to do, or to utter any innocent man to Gods enemies, and his, thou
ought first to refuse such unlawful Oaths; but if thou have not Constancy
and Courage so to do, know thou that such Oaths bind not at all in Conscience,
but may, and must be broken under the pain of Damnation.
Torture, being scarce two hours out of my Naked Bed in one day, it cannot be
expected that I can be in a Capacity for saying any thing to purpose in such a
Juncture, especially seeing I am not as yet free of it; However I cannot but
Reverence the good hand of God for good upon me, and desire with all my soul to
bless him for this my As if this Rebellious Pseudo-Minister, who helped to
Preach eight or nine thousand Subjects into arms against their Lawful
Sovereign, Suffered for the same Cause as did the Blessed Apostles, who
rejoiced that they were counted Worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. Acts.
5. 41.
present Lot. It may be there are a great many here that judge my Lot very sad
and deplorable. I must confess death in it self is very terrible to flesh and
blood; but as it is an outlet to sin, and an inlet to righteousness, so it is
the Christians great and unexpressible privilege: and give me leave to say
this, that there is something in a Christians condition, that can never put sin
without the reach of unsufferableness, even Death, Shame, and the Cross being
enclosed; and if there be Peace betwixt God and the Soul, there is nothing that
can damp peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, which is a most
supporting ingredient in the bitterest Cup, and under the Sharpest and There is
nothing more common, than for these Presbyterian Ministers (falsely so called)
to delude the poor people by abusive Applications of, and allusions to the
passages of the Holy Scriptures, after the manner of the Jesuits. Thus he by
this expression of the Fiery-Trial, gives them occasion to consider, the
Fineings, Imprisonments, and execution of the Rebels, as a Persecution; which
as Fire tries true from false Gold, would distinguish Sincere from Hypocritical
Christians, i. e. those who would Suffer for Christ's Soverainty, and the Solemn
League and Covenant, from those who would desert both. As if a Conspiracy
against the Apostolical Government of the Church Universal for above 1500 years
(for so the Covenant deserves to be called) could Justify, shall I say, or
Sanctify an Insurrection of Subjects against their Sovereign (which the
defense of the Christian name cannot justify by the Gospel) and by consequence
make the Legal Fineings, Imprisonments, and Transportations of incorrigible
Rebels Persecution, their executions by Axes and Haltars Martyrdom, and
themselves Martyrs for the holy Jesus, the Prince of Peace, who will not have
even the very being of his Church and Gospel defended by the Subjects Sword.
^^^yest Trial he can be expo^^^ (...). This is my mercy, that I have somewhat
of this to lay claim to, viz. It cannot reasonably be denied, but that God has
sometimes irradiated the Souls of Confessors, and Martyrs at the time of their
Sufferings, and begot within their hearts such a secret sense of his favor, as
has made them Sing in their torments, and rejoice at death: but this is a very
extraordinary, and unpromised favor, and given like the miraculous Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, but to some of those, who have truly suffered for the Cause of
Christ.

But for such a Malefactor as this, who lived in a state of Rebellion against
his Sovereign, and whose whole employment was to Preach his Subjects into
Rebellion against him, for the re-establishment of the Presbyterian Discipline,
of which the whole Church of God was utterly ignorant for almost 16 Ages: I
say, for such a Rebel as this to pretend to such secret significations of
Pardon from Gods Spirit at the hour of execution, when in the next words he
declares his utter impenitence for his crime, can be nothing but a delusion of
Satan, or an effect of the same Enthusiasm, which makes them pretend to Praying
and Preaching by Inspiration, and other gifts of the Holy Ghost.


Intimations of Pardon and Peace betwixt God and my Soul: and as concerning
that for which I am Condemned, I magnify his grace, that I never had the least
Behold good people how like a Jesuit he speaks. He acknowledges that he never
had the least remorse, or accusation of Conscience for his Treasons and
Rebellions, but counted it his honor to die under the name of a Traitor and
Rebel, for that Manyheaded Pope the Presbyterian Government, which as the
Kirk-men Teach, is the Royal Scepter of Christ*
Challenge, but on the contrary judge it my honor that ever I was counted
worthy to be Staged upon such a Consideration. 3ly. Another thing that re^ders
the Despicable lot of the Christian Superable, is, that there is a felt and
That God also was sometimes wont to give unto his Martyrs the Spirit of
Fortitude at the hour of death, as a sign that they were supported by him, and
by consequence suffered for him, is plain from the Holy Scriptures, and both
Jewish, and Christian Martyrologies; and therefore this wretch pretends here to
this Sign also, that he might seem to die not a deplorable, as he speaks, but a
glorious death, i. e. not as a Malefactor, but as a Martyr. But yet because he
was conscious to himself how timorous he appeared, notwithstanding all the
Brandy and Cordials which he had drank, he speaks ambiguously about it, telling
the people he had ground to believe, that more, or less God would perfect his
own strength in his weakness; certainly he meant that God would yet put forth
his glorious power in a greater degree in him, so that it should become more
apparent to the Spectators, before he was turned off the Ladder, than at the
moment when he spoke.
Sensible presence from the Lords strengthening the Soul when most put to it;
and if I could have this for my allowance this day, I could be bold to say, O
death where is thy Sting, and could not but cry out Welcome to it and all that
follows upon it; I grant the Lord by an Act of Sovereignty may go and come as
he pleases, but yet he will never There are many Texts in the Old-Test* which
speak of Gods forsaking, and not forsaking his people the Jews, and the Kings,
whom he set over them, as his Vicereys, which are all to be understood in a
Political sense. Thus 1 Samuel 12. 22. Says the Prophet Fear not, for the Lord
will not forsake his people, for his great names sake, because it has pleased
the Lord to make you his people. So 2 Kings 21. 13, 14. I will (says God)
Stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and I will wipe it as a man wipeth
a dish -- and I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance. So Psalm. 94. 14.
The Lord will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance. So Psalm.
71, King David prays God his rock and fortress to deliver him from the hand of
his enemies, and not to forsake him, i. e. not to lay him aside in his old age,
till he had shown his strength to the generation in which he lived, and his
power to every one that was to come. So also he prays God in the 51 Psalm. not
to cast him away from his presence, as he did Saul, nor to take his holy Spirit
from him, by which he was enabled to Govern his people. For God was wont to
send his Spirit in visible impressions upon all those, whom he called to judge
and Govern his people, as upon Judges 3. 10. 6. 34. 11. 29. 13. 25.
Othniel, Gideon, Jephtha, Samson, and Saul, whom Samuel told, when he was to
be made King, that the Spirit of the Lord should come upon him for a Sign, and
that he should Prophecy, and be turned into another man. 1 Samuel 10. 6, 9. And
at King David's inauguration it is expressly said, 1 Samuel 26. 13. that Samuel took
the horn of oil, and anointed David in the midst of his Brethren, and the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him from that day forward; this was the Spirit of
Government, which consisted in a mighty power and impulse to do brave Heroical
actions, and carried along with it all the Royal qualifications, that a man
ought to have, whom God was pleased to call to the Helm. Maimonides calls it
the Spirit of Fortitude, but he might as well have called it the Spirit of
Wisdom, and Counsel, for it fitted the persons upon whom it came in all points
for the Royal Office, and the Collation of it in visible impressions upon them
was a Sign to the people that they were Authorized, and Commissioned by God.
And therefore King David after the matter of Uriah, for which he deserved to be
rejected, like Saul, prays God in a most penitential manner, not to cast him
away from his presence, nor take away the Spirit of Government from him, which
he had instead of a standing Commission from God. Upon these, and such like
Texts, which are to be understood in a Political sense, has been founded the
Doctrine of Spiritual desertion or the comings and goings of God from the Soul,
which has been as useful an engine for the Ministers falsely so called, to
take fast hold on the Souls, and Purses of their Melancholic Disciples, as the
Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Absolution has been to the
Romish Priests, of taking hold of the Souls and Purses of theirs. For when a
man oppressed with Melancholy, or Melancholic Doctrines, shall in his fits of
dejection think himself deserted by God, will he not admire and reverence the
very Shadow of that holy man whose Prayers shall prevail with God to return
unto him again? And then after the recess of the Melancholic fit, which he is
taught to believe is the comfortable return of the Spirit, he cannot but be
very liberal to him, by whose powerful intercession he has received such a
Divine benefit, a blessing better than life it self. I deny not but that God
may sometimes beget Supernatural joy in the soul of an holy man, by impressing
upon him a secret sense of his love, and likewise kindle the flames of Hell in
the Conscience of a sinner, by impressing on his soul a secret sense of his
wrath: But these are extraordinary ways of dealing with men, of which the
Scriptures are silent; but he can no more impress the sense of his wrath upon
the spirit of a gracious, then the sense of his love upon the spirit of a
graceless Christian, nor secretly contribute to enslave, and torment the
Consciences of good men with horror, or unreasonable jealousies and fears.
Indeed nothing is more plainly taught in the Holy Scriptures than this; that
God gives his holy Spirit of assisting grace, or which is all one, the gracious
assistance of his holy Spirit to men, and upon certain provocations takes it
from them again: and this is the only Scriptural desertion, and the only sense
in which that word ought to be used. Away then with those Canting Phrases of
Gods Going, and Coming to the soul in fits of supernatural joys and fears, with
which the Coiners of the Doctrine of desertion teach, that the souls of holy
Men are now transported, and then pressed down as it were to Hell.
forsake his people, and this is a Cordial to me in the case I am now exposed
unto; the exercising and putting forth of his glorious Power is able to
Transport the Soul of the believer and mine above the reach of all sublunary
difficulties; and therefore seeing I have hope to be kept up by his power, I
would not have you look upon my Lot, or any other that is, or may be in my
case, in the least deplorable, seeing we have ground to believe that more or
less he will perfect his power and strength in weakness.

That I may come a little to the purpose in hand, I declare before you all in
the sight of God, Angels and Men, and in the sight of the sun and all that he
has Created, that I am a most Yes a Rebel, a Schismatic, a Blasphemous
interpreter of the Holy Scriptures, an usurper of the Ministry, who was guilty
of all the blood which was shed under the Kings Standard on one side, and the
Banner of Christ, as the Rebels in their Declaration Blasphemously called their
Standard on the other. But these are not the sins, which he confesses here,
but sins of another complexion; and indeed it is almost impossible to have any
reputation for holiness in the Kirk, unless a man has been a great sinner, and
Converted as St. Paul really was, and this Wretch pretends to have been, by a
strong hand, i. e. tout d'un coup, in a sudden miraculous manner. So that if a
good Christian cannot tell the time, and place, and other circumstances of his
Conversion, he shall still be looked upon as little better than an unregenerate
man, though he be never so Moral and unblamable in his life. As if it were
impossible for men to be good from their Childhood, or unscriptural to date
their regeneration from the Font.
miserable sinner, by reason of my original and actual trangressions, I must
confess that they are more than the hairs of my head, that they are gone over
my head, and altogether past reckoning, I cannot but say as Jacob said, I am
less than the least of Gods mercies, yet I must declare to the Commendation of
the The word Grace proceeds from the Latin word Gratia, by which the ancient
Latin Church rendered (...) whereby the Greek Translators rendered Hhen, and
Hhesed, whereof the former signifies Favor, Kindness, Love, Mercy, Pity,
Benevolence, and the latter as Maimonides (More Nev. part 3. c. 53) observes,
signifies a free benefit, or gratuitous favor, which is done to a person that
was altogether unworthy of it, or else a greater favor and benefit, than the
person on whom it is bestowed deserves. In which senses he says it is opposite
to Tzedakah which both signifies justice, and the due, which justice gives to
every man In this sense St. Paul says, Romans 3. 24. That we are justified
freely by his Grace, and not by works, or perfect sinless obedience, because
then the reward would be reckoned not of Grace but of debt, or Justice.
Accordingly the freedom of Gods grace consists in the gratuitous redemption of
the world through Jesus Christ, which was a mere favor, or such a benefit as
mankind was altogether unworthy of, and which God in justice was not bound to
do. I say it consists in the gratuitous redemption of all mankind, and not in
the arbitrarious calling and election of this, and that particular man, as this
Kirk-Preacher here suggests. So that when a man speaks of the free Grace of
God, in reference to his own particular, if he speak Orthodoxly, he ought to be
understood of his own share in the general free redemption, and not of the free
Grace of God in saving of him, and reprobating or passing over others, which is
the Kirk, and Kirkers usual sense of free grace, according to the Assemblies
larger and shorter Catechisms, which they have Homologated for their own. But
this is strange Divinity, and unworthy of the Divine Nature, which Phancys God
out of mere wilfulness and ostentation of his Soveranity, to pluck one man out
of the fire and leave another, as capable of his mercy, to burn eternally
therein. God indeed is a most Absolute Sovereign, but then, as Cicero says in
his Books of Laws, he is infinita men's and ratio, and his Absolute Soveranity
is under the Government and regulation of his infinite Wisdom, which is utterly
incapable of Fondness, and Antipathy, or the unaccountable loving of this, and
hating of that particular person, and must needs restrain him from Arbitrary
ways of dealing with his rational creatures, Angels and men.
freedom of his grace that to me who am the least of Such a Saint as the
Primitive Christians never heard of, nor all Antiquity can show.
Saints was his grace made known, and that by a strong hand, and dare not but
say that he has loved me and washed me in his own blood from all mine
iniquities; and well is me this day, that ever I heard or read that Faithful
saying, That Jesus Christ came to the world to save sinners, of whom I am the
chief.

2ly. I must declare in his sight, that I am the most unworthy that ever opened
a Mouth, to Preach the insearchable riches of Christ in the Gospel; yea the
sense of this made me altogether unwilling to set about so great a work, until
by the importunity of some (whose name is savory to me and many others) I was
prevailed with to fall about it, and howbeit out of great weakness I went about
it, yet I am hopeful, not altogether without Very true, for his Country saw
the fruits of his, and his Brethrens Ministry, in numberless Rendesvouzes of
Rebellion, and at last in a Covenanted Army in the Field.
fruit, and if I durst say it without vanity, I never found so much of the Here
the Enthusiast Blasphemously miscalls the irregular heat of his Fancy elevated
in Preaching, the cursed Zeal with which he Preached, and the sensual pleasure
and satisfaction which he took to see himself crowded about with troops of
Auditors in the Field, the presence of God upon his soul.
presence of God upon my spirit, as I have found in exercises of this nature,
though I must still confess attended with unexpressible weakness; Here like a
Jesuit he pretends to Suffer upon a Religious account, though he really
suffered as a Disturber of the Government, and as a Traitor and Rebel to the
King. He suffered not for Preaching, but for Preaching in arms, and among
armed-men, who assembled themselves on Stated days every week against the Law,
and defended their Assemblies by force of Arms. Or if he suffered for
Preaching, it was not for Preaching Christ and the Gospel, but for Preaching up
Rebellion, which is contrary to both. For Preaching against the Established
Government and the Laws. For railing in their Preaching against the King and
his Counselors, telling the people that he was guilty of Perjury, and had no
right to Govern, and that they endeavored to drive Christ out of the Kingdom.
Lastly, for Preaching up the Covenant, and the Presbyterian Government, of
which they assert the same things, as Priests and Jesuits do of the Pope.
and this is the main thing for which I must lay down my tabernacle this day,
viz. that I did Preach Christ and the Gospel in several places of this Nation,
for which I bless him, as I can, that ever such a poor and obscure person as I
am, should be thus privileged by him for mentionmaking of his grace, as I was
able. 3ly. Give me leave to add this word further, that though there be great
appearances of spreading and Preaching this glorious Gospel, yet I fear there
is a snare at the bottom, and poison in the dish, which may gender and be
productive of not only greater scarcity of honest Preachers and Preaching, but
a real Famine of the Word, this I say is my fear, and I hope God will keep his
i. e. The Kirk-Ministers and people from seeking, or accepting of any
indulgence from the King. For to Preach by leave and permission from the King,
is to grant that Ministers depend on the Secular power for the actual exercise
of their Ministry, and supposes that they may receive limitations and
restrictions from the Magistrate, which is utterly inconsistent with that
independent Authority which they derive immediately from the King in Sion, and
destructive of his Supremacy, Kingdom, Crown, and Scepter, as may plainly be
seen from Mr. Browns Jesuitical Letter, Printed at the end of these two
Speeches, and the Apology.
Servants and people from fomenting any thing to the detriment of the Gospel. I
am afraid that the Lord is beginning to multiply his stripes upon this land. We
have walked i. e. Several times contrary to him in setting up Episcopacy.
Seven times contrary to him and therefore we may lay our account (unless
repentance prevent it) that he will walk seven times contrary to us: there is
more and more ground to fear that there is a Well threatened.
Sword bathed in heaven, a glittering Sword sharpened and furbished against
thee O guilty and Harlot Scotland; let this Land consider how neutral and
indifferent we are grown in the i. e. In the matter of the Covenant.
matters of God, even like Ephraim long ago a Cake not turned, which is upon
the matter Contrary to, and inconsistent with our Solemnly sworn Covenant; next
how far are we fallen from our viz. Our love for the Presbyterian Discipline.
first Love? How far are we degenerate from that noble Vine into which the Lord
did once Plant us? How lamentable it is? How far we have gone the way to viz.
Episcopacy.
Egypt, drinking the waters of Sihor? Again What a woeful Spirit of bitterness
is predominating in this Land? and in this Age viz. The indulged Ministers
against the Field-Preachers, such as Welsh, Kid, King, Cameron, etc. and the
Field-Preachers against the indulged Ministers; who hold, that as long as they
are not subjected to the Bishops, it is not against their Solemn League and
Covenant, nor inconsistent with the Ministerial Authority, nor destructive to
Christ's Soverainity, to accept of a limited indulgence from the State. And
therefore they were content to be obliged not to Preach without their Parishes,
not to Baptize Children of other Parishes, nor to engage Parents at the Baptism
of their Children, to bring them up according to the Solemn League and
Covenant, nor to Preach against the Government of the Church or State, and to
observe the 29th. of May. etc.
Ephraim vexing Judah, and Judah Ephraim, Manasseh Ephraim and Ephraim
Manasseth; the growing doggedness of this temper almost amongst all, portends
terrible things from the Lord against this Land. 4ly. Reformation according to
our sworn Covenants is neither designed nor practiced. What means all this
deformation that is come to pass in these days instead of the Contrary? How
many of us have been Pulling down that which we have been building up? how many
of us call good evil, and evil good, disowning and dissavouching that which
sometime we judged our honor to testify for and avouch? 5ly. A Public Spirit
in contending for God and his matters, in substance and Circumstances according
to our vows and obligations, is much amissing amongst us at this day. Further I
am pressed in Conscience to make mention of all those great and glorious things
that God has done in Scotland since the year 1640. and 1641. the abundant
measure of his Spirit that was poured out upon his servants and people, and the
renewing of that National Covenant twice in that year, and once in the year
following, the Blessed efficacy that the Gospel had at that time in all the
Corners of the Land, and the great things that followed upon it, which while
improven, made our Land most desirable. The Solemn League and Covenant, is the
Alpha and Omega of the Kirk-Doctrines and Cause. Hence they commonly call it
the Holy League and Covenant, as both the Pope and Jesuits called its
Prototype, the League of the Papists in France; and as the Pope compared the
Duke of Guise to Judas Maccabaeus, and the Jesuits to Gideon. (Davila lib. 9.)
So the Kirk-Preachers taught, that the Lords who began the Design of the
Covenant, acted like the Jewish Worthys in promoting of it, and were moved and
directed so to do by the secret motions of the Spirit of God. In the beginning
of the Covenant, they set up one Mrs. Mitchelson a Ministers Daughter for a
Prophetess, who pretended to be Inspired with a Spirit of Divination, and she
said, that it was revealed to her by God, that their Covenant was approved by
him, and ratified in heaven, and Mr. Henry Rollock a Covenanting-Minister being
desired to pray with her, answered he durst not, because it would not be good
manners in him to speak, while his Master Christ was Speaking in her, and yet
at length she openly confessed, that she was an Impostor, and that the
Ministers told her in private what she should speak. The Author of Naphtali,
page 240. brings in Mr. Hugh Mackell a Rebel-Preacher saying, Whatever
indignity is done to the Solemn League and Covenant, I esteem it no less than
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace in his most eminent exerting of himself,
and that it is a sin of the same nature with that of those men, who ascribed
Christ's casting out of Devils to Beelzebub, but far greater. And Mr. Andrew Cant
in a Sermon at Glascow 1638, pressing the people to take the Covenant, said,
that he was sent to them with a Commission from Christ, to bid them Subscribe
the Covenant, which is Christ' s Contract, and that he himself was come a woer
to them from the Bridegroom, and called unto them to come, and be hand-fasted
unto Christ by Subscribing the Contract, and that he would not depart the Town
till he had got the names of all that should refuse to Subscribe it, of whom he
promised to complain to his Master Christ. But in effect he complained of them
to the Committee of Estates and general Assembly, to get them Forfeited and
Excommunicated. But the great Trick of the Kirk-Preachers, has always been to
Parallel the Solemn League and Covenant with the Mosaical Covenant, which was a
Political as well as a Religious Contract betwixt God and the Jews, by which he
as it were Espoused himself to that people, and that people to himself. Hence
they are wont to apply whatsoever is said of the Mosaical throughout the Old
Test. to the Solemn League and Covenant, and the making, keeping, or breaking
thereof. Were the Israelites Married to God by the one: so were the Scots and
English Married to him by the other? Was the forsaking of the one, the cause of
all the judgments which fell upon them: so the forsaking of the other (and not
the Kings blood) is the cause of all the judgments that have fallen upon these?
Were the King as well as the people obliged to keep the former: so his Majesty
as well as his Subjects are obliged to keep the latter? Did that oblige the
Children in the loins of their Parents; so does this oblige the people of both
Nations, and their Posterity for ever more? Hence they Sacrilegiously Baptize
their Children into it, and expressly renew it every time they receive the
Communion, which was instituted as a Seal of the Covenant of Grace. Was the
breaking of that a Revolting from God: so the rescission of this is an utter
Apostasy, especially of Scotland, from God? So that the Whig-Apostles never
speak of their Country since the Establishment of Episcopacy, but as of an
Harlot and Idolatress, that has forsaken her first Love, and Married her self
to another God. It would be endless to recite all their Blasphemies about it.
They make the last great Plague, and the Burning of London, to have been
judgments for burning this Covenant there by the hand of the Common-Hangman:
(Poor man's Cup of cold water, Printed in 4o 1678. page 19.) Nay they Teach that
his Majesty, like the Revolting Kings of Israel, and Judah, has no right to
Govern, because he has Revolted from it and Christ. Nay they damn all the
Edicts and Acts of Parliament that are contrary to it, as the Act Statuting,
that no Leagues, nor Bonds be made among the Subjects of any degree, upon
whatsoever Pretense without his Majesty's, and his Successors Privity and
Consent. The Act rescinding and Annulling all the pretended Parliaments held
1640, 1641 etc. The Act for the Reestablishing of Episcopacy. The Act
concerning the Declaration to be Signed by all in Public Trust, as
Privy-Counsellors, Members of Parliament, Judges, Magistrates in Corporations,
Justices of the Peace etc. A Copy of which I think fit to set down here.
I -- -- do sincerely affirm and declare, that I judge it unlawful to Subjects
upon pretense of Reformation, or other pretense whatsoever, to enter into
Leagues or Covenants, or to take up Arms against the King, or those
Commissionate by him, and that all those Gatherings, Convocations, Petitions,
Protestations, and erecting and keeping of Counsel-Tables that were used in the
beginning, and for carrying on of the late Troubles, were Unlawful and
Seditious. And particularly that these Oaths, whereof the one was commonly
called the National Covenant ( as it was Sworn and explained in the year 1638,
and thereafter,) and the other entitled a Solemn League and Covenant, were,
and are in themselves unlawful Oaths, and were taken by and imposed upon the
Subjects of this Kingdom, against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
same, and that their lies no obligation upon me, or any of the Subjects from
the said Oaths, or either of them, to endeavor any Change, or Alteration of
the Government either in Church or State, as it is now Established by the Laws
of the Kingdom.
The Act for Security of the Persons of regular Ministers. The Act against
Separation and Disobedience to Ecclesiastical Authority. The Act of Supremacy
(of which more hereafter) The Act against unlawful Ordinations. The Act for an
Anniversary day of Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Restoration, which the
Rebels in their lesser Declaration on the 29th of May last, call an Act
appointing an holy Anniversary day to be kept on the 29th of May, for giving
Thanks for the up-setting of an Usurped Power, destroying the interest of the
Church of Christ in the Land, which is to set up the Creature to be worshipped
in the room of our great Redeemer, and to consent to the assuming of the Power,
which is proper to the Lord alone. And therefore they burnt it publicly at the
Cross of Glasgow on the 29th. of May last, with the Act of Supremacy, the Act
concerning the Declaration, and the Rescinding Act. And as they damn all these
Acts upon the account of the Covenant, so they also damned the Bond which the
Council tendered in 1677, and 1678. The Author of the poor man's Cup calls it
the Bond of Disloyalty to Christ. And Mr. John Dickson in Crambushlane
Preaching at a Conventicle May 26th. 1678. Said that those, who had taken it
had committed a greater sin than the sin of the Holy Ghost, and were already in
hell. To conclude all their other Blasphemies about the Covenant, there goes
about among them a Manuscript, written to prove that it is unlawful to hear
the Church-Ministers, wherein the Author most Blasphemously affirms, that the
Solemn League and Covenant is nothing else, but the substance of the Covenant
of Grace.
2ly. I bear my Testimony to the Solemn League and Covenant, as it was
Professed and Sworn in Scotland, England, and Ireland, in the year 1643. Yea as
it was timed and taken by the Representatives and Body of these 3 Lands, which
tie is binding and can by no power on Earth be infringed, whether Secular or
Ecclefiastical, and that it was our glory to be counted a people married to the
Lord: we and ours from one generation to another, from henceforth and for ever;
so that Prelacy as it is now Established by a pretended Law, is destructive
down-rightly to the Sworn Covenants, yea not only Prelacy, Popery, Loyalty.
Malignancy and

Heresy, but His Majesty's Supremacy over all persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical within the Kingdom of Scotland, was asserted by the first Act of
the Second Parliament began at Edinburgh, October. 19. 1669. The Kirk-Ministers
have ever since railed against this Act above all the rest, saying, that Jesus
Christ is quite exauctorat and unkinged by it, that it has overthrown his
Prerogative Royal, and made the King Supreme in the house of Christ. That the
Three Estates have thereby Blasphemously declared, that they have no King but
Caesar, that it is most expressly contrary to the 2d. Psalm, and that by
subjecting all Ecclesiastical matters to the Imperial Scepter, they have given
a sinful mortal power to King it over the house of God. Insomuch that Jesus
Christ has neither name, nor thing of Kingly power left him by this Cursed
Act, by which all power Ecclesiastic is declared to be the intrinsic and
inherent Prerogative of the Crown. In particular the Author of the Poor Man's
Cup, etc. says, that he admires the Patience of God, that the Nation wherein
such a wickedness was decreed, has not before this Perished from under heaven;
and says that the Question is put by the Governors to the followers of Christ
in the fields, with greater contempt than Pilate put it. What? is Jesus than
your King? And then he cries, Oh noble Cause! Oh who would not rejoice to enter
the List of contradiction with these his enemies, and have once an opportunity
to say, Yes he is a King, and will be a King when you are gone, and will prove
himself higher than the Kings of the Earth, by rescinding your Supremacy that
Idol of his jealousy and indignation, and object of his revenge. Nay he says,
that it is a pure, perfect, and unparalled contradiction to the Doxology of
the Lords Prayer, and that never any thing was so like it in Sense and Sound,
as what is Recorded by the Holy Ghost of the King of Babylon, Isa. 14. 13, 14.
I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I
will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, I
will ascend above the heighths of the Clouds, I will be like the most High.
Supremacy, and every thing Original upon and derivate from it. 3ly. I can but
make mention of that honorable and noble practice, that this Land was
privileged with, viz. that after both defections the Lord put it in the heart
of Christ's Church and State, to renew those Covenants again with the National
and Solemn League and Covenants, together with an acknowledgment of sin and an
engagement to Duty, and that in the close of that year; which performance was
attended with so much of the So he Blasphemously calls a National Fascination
to Rebellion, and Schism*
Lords power and presence, that it was like a Resurrection from the Dead to
all, that were Witnesses thereof, both Speakers and Hearers, that many were
forced to Cry out, The joy of the Lord is our strength, God of a truth is here.

4ly. I dare not but add this in the case wherein I now stand, viz. I dare not
but add my Concurrence with, and Adherence to all these public Testimonies,
Protestations, and Declarations, that have been owned, evinced and remitted by
all the Presbyterian Ministers and Professors that appeared against the public
resolutions, for taking in the Malignant Party into Judicatories and Armies, as
also I join my Cordial adherence to and with them that protested against the 2
general Assemblies at Saint Andrews, who endeavored to approve what the
Commission had done in the year 1650. and 1651. in reference to the intrusting
of the Malignant Party, which, as was said by these protesting worthies, laid
the foundation of all that has come or may come upon us. I hope this will not
offend any.

5ly. I am bound in Conscience in the next place, to testify my dislike and
abhorrence of that horrid, cruel, barbarous, unheard of and unparalleld
Deportment and practice of that This is the 15th Act of the First Parliament,
begun at Edinburgh, Ian. 1. 1661. whereby all the pretended Parliaments from
1640. to the end of 1648. and by consequence the Established Presbyterian
Government were all rescinded, and Annulled; and they also rail as much against
it, as against the Act of Supremacy, and burnt them like two Idols both
together.
Act Recissory, wherewith as at one Lash, by an Act of that Precipitate
Parliament, they endeavored to Rescind, Annul, and Repel all those great and
glorious things that the So he Blaspemously calls a strong hand of Rebellion.
strong hand of the Lord had done in Scotland for more than 20 years bygone,
over the belly of so much opposition and standing contradiction of proclaimed
and avowed Adversaries upon all hands, yea I proclaim my abhorrence of all the
Confusion, He means the Blood first, of those who were Executed soon after his
Majesty's Restoration, as of Wariston, Guthrie, etc, 2ly. of those who were
Executed for the Rebellion at Pentland-Hills 1666, who in Naphtali and Ius
populi vindicatum are called Worthies, precious Saints, and Martyrs, etc. and
lastly the Blood of Mitchel, who suffered for attempting the Murder of the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, since effected by them, whom the Author of the Poor
Man's Cup has Canonized for a Saint and Martyr in this Parallel with Samson;
which I shall set down in his own words, page 35. First Samson was a Rackel and
Rough*handed Saint, ready to Pelt the Philistines on all occasions: yet
Secondly, the Holy Ghost for all the faults that followed him has Recorded his
name, and Enrolled him in the number (even while the names of many others are
left out) of those Eminent Worthies. Heb. 11. And so he has made the name of
Mr. Mitchell Savory, (...) ^s he took many Testimonies from him (...) (...) his
appearances to the Cause, so he owned him in the end, and honored him to die,
Witnessing a good Confession, which will be on Record to Posterity. Thirdly as
Samson did more mischief to the enemies of the people of God at his death, than
in all his life (for when they sent for him to make themselves merry at a sight
of his misery, the Lord helped him to spoil their Sport) So I judge it is
beyond question with every Sober man, that Mr. Mitchells death has done more
hurt to its Contrivers and furious drivers, than ever his life could have done,
even though he had shot again, and hit that unhallowed Mark, etc.
Blood, murder, Fineing* Confineing, Imprisonments, Stigmatizing, with other
unexpressible Cruelties that has issued (...) that Cursed Generation there ^9
years by gone; and moreover, I leave my Testimony against all other Confusions,
Imprisonments and Blood, that is or may be intended against these in the Land,
who design to He means from Idolatrous revolting from God into the Episcopal
Church, which is not the house of Christ, as they Sacrilegiously teach.
keep their garments clean, whether in Prison, or out of Prison.

6ly. As concerning that which is the ground of my death, viz. See note n.
Preaching here and there in some Corners, I bless my God I have not the least
Challenge for it, though these that Condemned me were pleased to call these
Preachings If weekly Meetings of Hundreds and Thousands of Armed-men in the
Fields, nay if weekly Meetings of Armed-men formed into Troops, and Companies
ready upon all occasions of probable capacity to Fight against the King, for
the King in Sion, were Rendevouzes of Rebellion, then your Field-Preachers were
Rebels, and the Field-Meetings Rendevouzes of Rebellion. What else were those
Field-Meetings of which was gathered that Army of Saints, which fought the
Kings Forces on Pentland-hills in a ranged Battle 1666? What else were those
numerous Field-Meetings a little more than 2 years since, upon his Grace the
Duke of Lauderdales going down into Scotland? which (...) the Privy Counsel to
advise his Majesty to send English forces to lie in readiness (...) the
borders, and to order the Vicount Granard to lie with an Army on the Irish
(...) ready to be Transported upon occasion, and likewise upon the motion of
the Marquess (...) A^hol, to procure the Lords of the Highlands a Commission to
March with their Vassals under the Command of his Majesty's Major General into
the West, to prevent the Field-Conventicles from running together into a
general Rebellion, as they did the last May. Or to come to particulars, what
else was that Field-fast near Iedburgh in Tive^tdale toward the latter end of
March 1678? where there were present 7 Preachers, and 5000 people, (the men
being armed) to seek God for 3 things. 1st. That he would be pleased to put an
end to the Persecution of his people in this Kingdom. 2ly. That he would have
mercy on all those that took the wicked Bond, and give them grace to repent of
it. 3ly. That he would bless with success, those noble Lords, who were gone to
London. What else was that formidable Conventicle in the March the May
following, where were Assembled eight or 9000 people to receive the Sacrament,
and renew the Solemn League and Covenant, of which the Privy Counsel gave his
Majesty an account? What else was that Conventicle near Dumbar shortly after,
where they fell upon the Kings Forces of the Basse, that went out to dismiss
them, and killed one of the Soldiers, and wounded more? But if I should go on
to enumerate all the Field-Meetings till that great one which began the
Rebellion in May last, I should rather write an History than a Commentary, but
I shall be ready to give a particular account of them* when a good occasion
shall require.
Rendezvouzes of Rebellion, yet I must say this of them, They were so far from
being reputed so in my eyes, that if The Kirk-Preachers are always wont to
speak Great and Magnificent things of their Followers, whereas for the general,
they are the most ignorant, and wicked sort of people perhaps in the Christian
world. For their ignorance take this as a Specimen or proof of it.
ever Christ had a Party or people wherein his Soul took pleasure, I am bold to
say these meetings were a great part of them; the Shinings and Glory of our God
were eminently seen amongst these Meetings, the Convincing Power and Authority
of our Lord went out with his Servants in those Blasphemously Nicknamed
Conventicles; this I say without Reflection upon any.

7ly. As for that other Clause in my Indictment, upon which my Sentence of
death is founded, viz. Personal presence twice or thrice with Parties whom they
called Rebels, for my own part I never judged nor called them such. I
acknowledge and do believe that there were Edingburgh 13. of May. 1678.
THis day a number of persons being brought before a Committee of Council, and
examined concerning their being at a Field-Conventicle, at or near Catcart upon
Sunday the 12th of this instant, one of them, named David Ferguson, being
interrogate, why he did not keep his Parish-Kirk, answered, that he had Sworn
the Covenant, whereby he was obliged not to hear Bishops, Deans, or Curates.
And several of these persons being asked, why they went to Conventicles,
declared it was to hear the truth of God, and being interrogate what that truth
of God was, declared they could not tell, and diverse of them being asked,
acknowledged, that they could not say the Lords Prayer, the Belief, nor the ten
Commandments. This is attested to be true by me Mr. Alexander Gibson one of
the Clerks of his Majesty's Privy Council.
Alexander Gibson.
The number of persons which were brought before the Committee were about 70,
being the very same Company of men, who were brought into the Thames about 9
Months since in order to their Transportation (according to the 2d. Act of the
2d. Session of the Second Parliament of Charles the II. began at Edinburgh,
July 28. 1670.) into his Majesty's Plantations for obstinately refusing, when
they were examined by Authority, to discover any persons who were at that
Field-Conventicle, in coming from which they were taken, and the disorders
transacted therein. And were not the Disciples of these Field-Prophets very
ignorant, it were not possible for them to believe Episcopacy to be an
Antichristian, and Presbytery, which is but of yesterday, to be a Divine
institution, to Baptize their Children into the Solemn League and Covenant, to
think it unlawful to hear Protestant Bishops and Episcopal Ministers Preach,
and call that Church Idolatrous which has neither Idols nor Ceremonies, nor
any Liturgical Forms, nor any thing which can give the least umbrage of
suspicion to tender Consciences falsely so called, but worships God in the
self-same manner as they themselves do. I speak not this to upbraid our
Sister-Church (for which I daily pray) with her defects, for her imperfect
state is not her fault, but her misery, caused by the iniquity of the times,
but to show the gross ignorance of the people, that are led away from her
Communion, and Believe, that the use of the Lords Prayer is Idolatrous, that
they cannot profit by the Church-Ministery, nay that all the Bishops and their
whole Clergy never did nor never will Convert a Soul, as Mr. John Dickson
Blasphemously Preached at Pollemadie in June 1673.
And then for their wickedness I refer the Reader to the 3, or 4 last pages of
Ravillac Redivivus, though I could say an hundred times more upon this Subject,
having by me a Manuscript of 20 sheets, Entitled the Principles and Practices
of the Phanaticks, under* the heads of Jesuitism, Anabaptism, Blasphemy,
Cheating, Lying, Cruelty, Slandering, Fornication, Bestiality, Witchcraft, etc.
which perhaps ere long may be made public for the honor of these Gnostics and
their Teachers; but were there no more to object against them, but their
Rebellious and Schismatical Principles and Practices, it is enough to make us
conclude, without breach of Charity, that they are not a Party or people,
wherein the Soul of Christ takes pleasure, as this deceiver confidently boasts.
many that came in the The Scripture speaks of those who followed Absalom, as
Rebels, though many of them followed him in the simplicity of their hearts, as
many of the Western people followed their Preachers into the late Rebellion,
and thought that they did God good Service in so doing, being deceived by this
Murderer of Souls and his Brethren, who make the people ignorant, and then
abuse their ignorance to the ruin of their Bodies, Souls and Estates.
simplicity of their hearts, like those that followed Absalom long ago. I am as
sure upon the other hand that there were a great Party there that had nothing
before them, but the reprocuring of the So he Blasphemously calls the Covenant,
and Presbyterian Discipline.
Lords fallen work and the restoring of the breach which is void as the Sea,
and I am apt to think that such of these that were most Branded with mistakes
will be found to be most single. But for He means Rebellion in his own
Jesuitical sense.
Rebellion against his Majesty's Person or just Government, the Lord knows my
Soul abhors the name and thing. Loyal have I been, and will every Christian to
be so. I was ever of this judgment, to give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods.

8ly. Since I came to Prison, I have been much Branded with many things which I
must call aspersions, whereof Neither thou pretended Minister of the Gospel,
nor thy Brethren will ever be able to wash off the aspersion of Jesuitism. 6
Book of Spotsw. Hist. particularly the story of Adam Blake.
For is it not Jesuitism to maintain, that the Rebellion of Churchmen is not
treason, because they are not subject to the Secular power? Is it not Jesuitism
to carry on Solemn Leagues and Covenants among the Subjects without, and
against the Princes consent? Buchan. de jure regni Lysimachus Nicanors letter.
Is it not Jesuitism to Teach, that Kings ought to be Excommunicated, and that
Subjects ought to withdraw their Obedience from them when they are
Excommunicated, nay as soon as they begin to abuse the power against the
Church? Spotsw. Hist. 6 book. the Covenanters protestation July 1638. published
at the Cross in Glascow. Lysim. Nic. Naphtali.
Is it not Jesuitism to deny, that Kings have power to Convocate and dissolve
Ecclesiastical Synods and Councils? And that no power on Earth is above that
Manyheaded-Pope, the general Assembly, which has power to make Laws without
the King? Is not Jesuitism to condemn the English Liturgy, and to forbid the
people under pain of public Penitence, or Damnation, to read it, or any books
of Episcopal Divines, nay not to have them in their houses, nor to converse
with Church-Ministers (whom they scornfully call Curates, and the Bishops
Journey-men) much less to hear them Preach? Is it not Jesuitism to assert, that
Salvation is not to be had out of the narrow Communion of Presbyterian
Churches, and to invent and impose new Articles of Faith as, That Episcopacy is
an Antichristian constitution, that it is Popery to observe the The passion,
resurrection, and ascension of our Lord, and the descent of the Holy Ghost.
Apostolical Festivals, or to administer the Communion in private to sick
persons, and that Presbytery is the sole and unalterable Government of the
Church. Is it not Jesuitism to Write and Preach against the Scottish Act and
English Oath of Supremacy, and to Knox in his Chron. page 78, and ^3. Lysim.
Nic.
absolve the people from their Oath of Allegiance, under a pretense of the
Kings being an enemy to Christ? Is it not Naphtali. Buchanan de jure regni.
Jesuitism to Teach that there is a Reciprocal obligation betwixt Kings and
their Subjects, and that if he perform not his part, they ought not to perform
theirs? Nay is it not Jesuitism to Teach, that the Buch. de jure regni.
Supreme power is lodged originally in the people, which they may take from the
Prince, when he is no longer worthy of it, and that the Buch. de jure regni.
Naphtalies probable capacity.
Primitive Christians did not take Arms against the persecuting Emperors for
the same reason, that Christians take not up Arms in the Ottoman Empire,
because they had not sufficient force? Is it not Jesuitism to assert that a
good intention will hallow a wicked action, or which is all one to Rebel,
Murder, and Rob to advance the cause of God? Is it not Jesuitism to compare
Protestant Princes to Heathen, idolatrous and persecuting Tyrants? And to
distinguish betwixt their Private and Political Persons, and so make the people
believe they fight for the King when they fight against the anointed man? Is it
not Jesuitism to Teach that Apology etc. Printed 1677.
Magistrates in Church Matters have only a Cumulative but not a Privative
power, and that all the Secular power on Earth cannot deprive or silence a
Minister, because every Minister is so by special mission from Christ, and in
his Ministerial capacity is subject to none but him? Is it not Jesuitism to
assert, that the King has not power to Ordain a public Fast or Festival, and
that Apology. Sect. 3.
passive obedience, and Submission to the unrighteous Decrees and unjust
Sentences, and punishments of Rulers, is as great a sin as active obedience to
their unrighteous laws? Is it not Jesuitism to assert, that King Solomon
deprived Apology.
Abiathar the High Priest, not as a King but as a Prophet, and that the
Ministers ought not to Preach by permission from the Magistrate, nor to have
the exercise of their Function regulated by Secular Edicts and Laws? Is it not
Jesuitism, nay the usurpation of the Inquisition it self, Spotsw. Hist. lib. 6.
An. 1596.
to meddle with every thing, even Edicts, and Acts of Parliament, under the
color and pretense of Scandal, and use the holy Communion as a Seal to other
Oaths, Vows and Covenants, besides that of our Baptismal Covenant with God? Is
is not Jesuitism to assert, that a Naphtali about Mr. Mitchels attempt. Knox in
his Chronicle applauds Norman Leslies kelling the Cardinal at St. Andrews, and
James Melvin calls it a godly fact, and Leighton in his Sions Plea says, that
Feltons killing the Duke of Buckingham was an heroical and laudable fact. See
also Mitchels Speeches in Ravillac Redivivus.
private person may kill a man in public Authority by impulse, and that such
Acts are heroical, like that of Phineas, and have wrought great deliverances
for the Church of God? Is it not Jesuitism to represent Christian Protestant
Kings as a judgment and not as a Blessing to the Church, by telling the people,
The information for defensive arms. Sions Plea, page 196.
there were no Kings before Cains days, that God gave the Jews their first King
in his wrath, and that the Church was well Governed for above 300 years before
there was any Christian King? Lastly, is it not Jesuitism to teach the people,
that they ought to labor for an holy hatred of our Reformed Bishops and their
adherents, and that it is Naphtali, Jus populi vindicatum. Mitchels greater
Speech in Ravillac Redivivus. The introduction to the Apology.
lawful and laudable to kill them and their Curates, and that Protestant
Prelacy is an enemy to true Godliness, and admirably fitted to bring the Church
unto a slavish dependence upon the King? If these be Jesuitical Doctrines, thou
blind leader of the blind, then thou and thy brethren will never be able to
wash off the aspersions of Jesuitism with all the water in Tweed and the Forth.
Jesuitism is one. I am hopeful there was never one that did converse with me,
that had the least ground of laying this to my charge, and know not how its
come to pass to cast it upon me, nothing except implacable prejudice that some
have been prepossessed with against me; I am not ignorant that near 2 years
ago, a person of Note in this Church, who living was pleased to say, that I had
died in that judgment, but after he was better informed, he changed his Note
and said it was misinformation; but now the Lord, before whom I must stand and
be judged by and by, knows, that I have a perfect abhorrence of the things, and
it was never my intention directly or indirectly. Though I must confess some
few years bygone some were pressing with me, that I might Conform and embrace
Prelacy; but for Popery and that trash it came never nearer my heart than the
Popes Conclave, or the Alcoran, which my Soul abhors.

9ly. I have been also Not by the Church-Ministers, but by the indulged
brethren, who think it consistent with the nature and design of the Covenant,
and the Supremacy of the King of Sion, to accept of his Majesty's indulgence,
which Brown, Welsh, King, Kid, Cameron and the rest, declare is unlawful to do.
branded with Factiousness, divisive and seditious Preaching and practices. I
must confess if it be so, it was more than I was ever aware of, according to
the measure that God has given me, it was my endeavor to Commend In his
Soverainity, Royal Prerogatives, Crown and Kingdom.
Christ to the hearts and souls of people, even repentance toward God and
Faith toward Jesus Christ according to the Word of God, Confession of Faith,
The Assemblies larger and shorter Catechism.
Catechisms larger and shorter, yea, I did press them also (when God did cast
it in That was as often as he thought fit.
my way) to remember their Sworn Covenant in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, and that they would make it their work to stand to it in substance
and Circumstances, seeing it is so cried down in this day* and if this be
divisive (...).

10ly. I am pressed in Conscience to bear my testimony against, and abhorrence
of every invasion, usurpation or incroachment that is made or has been made
against Christ's Royal Prerogative, Crown and Kingdom, original upon, and
derivate from that which they call the Sea note y.
Supremacy. I was never free to lay a Confederacy with those that I judge in a
great part have laid a Confederacy in that thing, and the Lord is my Record, I
was never free in my Conscience for that which is called the And as they hold
it unlawful to take the Kings Licenses and Indulgences, as being inconsistent
with their immediate Mission from Christ, and his Prerogative Royal: So they
think it unlawful to accept of any Accommodation from the Church, as being
incompatible with their Solemn League and Covenant, that Oath of God, as they
call it, by which they are obliged to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopal
Government, and set up Presbytery in its stead. Dr. Leighton sometimes Bishop
of Dumblane and Archbishop of Glascow, offered them Six Articles of
accommodation in his Diocese, by which he did really unbishop himself, and left
himself nothing of the holy Apostolic Office, but the empty name.
Indulgence, neither first nor second as it was tendered by the Council, and as
it was embraced by a great many Godly-hearted men in this Island; yea, it was
never lawful nor expedient to me: and in effect The ARTICLES.
this is the main ground why I am rendered obnoxious to so many imputations,
1st. That if the Dessenting brethren will come to Presbyteries and Synods, they
shall not only be obliged to renounce their own private opinion anent
Church Government, and Swear or Subscribe any thing thereto; but shall have
liberty at their entry to the said meeting, to declare, and enter it in what
form they please.
that I have been all along contrary to their Indulgence in my judgment. I
confess I have been of that judgment, and die in the judgment contrary to it;
and this I crave leave to say without any offense to 2ly. That all
Church Affairs shall be managed in Presbyteries or Synods, by the free vote of
Prebyters, or the Major part of them.
3ly. If any difference fall out in the Diocesian Synods betwixt any of the
Members thereof, it shall be lawful to appeal to a Provincial Synod, or their
Committee.
4ly. That Intrants being lawfully presented by the Patron, and duly Tried by
the Presbytery, there shall be a day agreed on by the Bishop and Presbytery for
their meeting together, and for their Solemn Ordination and Admission, at which
there shall be one appointed to Preach, and that it shall be at the
Parish Church where he is to be admitted. Except in the case of impossibility
or extreme inconvenience; and if any difference fall in touching that Affair,
it shall be referable to the Provincial Synods or their Committee, as any other
matter.
5ly. It is not to be doubted but my Lord Commissioner his Grace will make good
what he offered anent the Establishment of Presbyteries and Synods, and we
trust that his Grace will procure such security to those Brethren for declaring
their judgment, that they may do it without any hazard in contravening any law,
and that the Bishop shall humbly and earnestly recommend this to his Grace.
6ly. That no Intrant shall be engaged to any Canonical Oath or Subscription to
the Bishop, and that his opinion anent that Government shall not prejudge him
in this; but it shall be free for him to declare.
These are the Articles of accommodation, in which that Prelate most unworthily
parted with his Negative voice, wherein the very essence of Episcopal power
consists. Ignatius* ad Smyrn. ad Philadelph. ad Trall.
For (...) etc. was the Apostolical rule of Church Government, ( can. 39.
Sanct. Apost.) and therefore next to the appearance of a Bishop before a
meeting of Presbyters, upon a citation from them, and renouncing the Episcopal
Function before them, and craving their pardon that he had accepted of it, as
The Epistle Dedicatory to Bishops Halls Episcopacy.
Graham Bishop of Orkney did; his forsaking of his Negative power by a contract
with his Presbyters, and committing all Church Affairs to their sole management
(not to mention the remitting of their Canonical Oath) would have been as
Sacrilegious a concession, as a Bishop, quatenus such, could make. He had
thereby virtually reduced himself into a Presbyter, which the Primitive Church
did abhor as Can. 29. Council. Chalced. Math. Blastar Cap. 28. in E.
Sacrilege, and would undoubtedly have deprived and Excommunicated, if not
Anathematised, any Bishop that durst have been so perfidious to the Apostolic
cause. But yet though beyond all example he cut the very Nerves of Episcopal
Jurisdiction in these Articles of Accommodation, the Nonconform Ministers
scornfully rejected them, and wrote against them in a book entitled, The Case
of Accommodation etc. Printed in 4o 1671.
the Godly and There is not one Learned man among them, unless he be a Priest
(for so custom emphatically calls the Romish Presbyters) or a Jesuit in
Masquerade.
Learned that are of another judgment. I judge it fit likewise in this case to
leave my Testimony Last Summer was Twelvemonth, the Convention of Estates gave
his Majesty a Five-months Tax, or 30000l. Sterling a year, for five years
successively, to maintain a Regiment of Foot, and 3 Companies of Dragoons, and
3 Troops of Horse for suppressing of the Field-Conventicles. This Act was like
to be such a Blow to the Cause made up of Faction and Schism, that it was
vigorously opposed under some color or other by an insignificant contrary
Party, who were not the Sixth part of the House. And as soon as it was passed,
the Field-Preachers, who had told the people before, that the Convention would
come to nothing, fell immediately to Preach against the Five-months Tax,
telling them, that it was given by the enemies of Christ to drive him out of
the Kingdom, and that it would be as great a sin to pay it, as it was to Judas
to betray Christ. Nay they told them, that this was the day of Christ's enemies,
and the power of darkness, and the very Nick of temptation, which God permitted
to try whether they would have Christ for their King or no, and charged them,
as they would answer it before them at the great day, not to forsake him
contrary to their Holy Covenant, by sinfully complying with such an
Antichristian Act. Their people upon this were so affrighted, that many of them
rather than pay the Cess, will suffer distreint; and in particular the Earl of
Dundonalds chief servant fell perfectly distracted by trouble of Conscience for
having assisted his Lord at Renscot in laying the Cess upon that Shire. And the
very same Sanctified Ruffians, who murdered the Archbishop of St. Andrews in
Fife, had several days before laid wait for the Collectors of this Tax.
against the stent taxation cess that has been so unjustly imposed, so
irrelevantly founded and vigorously carried on by the late Convention of
Estates, and merely upon no other account imaginable, but to make a final
extirpation i. e. of Christ as King in Sion, of the Covenant and of the
Presbyterian Government, that Pattern in the Mount.
of Christ his Gospel and Ordinances out of the Land: and how lamentable it is
to consider how many Professors did willingly pay it, and were most forward for
others to do the same. In the next place, though to many I die desired, yet I
know, not to a few my death is not desired; and its the rejoicing of my heart
that I die in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved me and given
himself for me, and in the Faith of the Apostles and Prophets, and in the Faith
that there is not a name under Heaven by which men can be Saved, but by the
name of Jesus, and in the Faith of the Doctrine, Worship and Government of the
Kirk of Scotland, as it is now Established according to the Word of God,
Confessions of Faith, Catechisms larger and shorter like as I leave my
Testimony against Popery, Perjury, Prophanity, Prelacy, Heresy, and every
thing contrary to sound Doctrine. In the close, as a dying Person, and as one
who has obtained mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, I would humbly leave it on
the Godly Ministers to be faithful for their Lord and Master, and not to hold
their peace in such a day, when so many ways are taken for injuring him, his
Name, nay his Sanctuary, Ordinances, Crown and Kingdom. Well threatened false
Prophet.
I hope there will be found a Party in this Land, that will contend for him and
his matters upon all hazards: and as faithfulness is called for in Ministers,
so Professors would concern themselves that they countenance not nor abate any
thing that is inconsistent with their former principles and practices. I have a
word to add further that God is calling persons to repentance, and to do their
To assert the Covenant.
first Works. O that Scotland were a mourning Land! And O that Reformation were
our practice according as we are Sworn in the Covenant! Again, Christians of
grace and experience would study more stability and straightness in this day,
when so many are turning to the right hand and so many to the left: Consider
how Blasphemously he applies this Scripture.
He that endures to the end shall be saved: he has appointed a Kingdom for
such as continue with him in his temptations. Next, as ever ye would expect to
have the Form of the house of God showed you in all the Laws thereof, goings
23. Of the Presbyterian Government and Discipline.
out thereof, and comings in thereof, then think it no shame for you for all
that has been done; sitting down on this side Jordan is like to be our bane.
Oh when shall we get out and run after him with all our hearts, and never rest
till he return. I commend my Wife and poor young ones to the care and
Faithfulness of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God that has led me
to this day, and who is the God of my Salvation, be their God and my God, their
Father and my Father. I am also hopeful that Christian Friends and Relations
will not be unmindful of them, when I am gone. Lastly, I bear my Testimony to
the Cross of Christ, and Bless him, that ever he counted me worthy to appear
for him in such a Lot as this. Glory to him that ever I heard of him, and that
ever he fell upon such a method of dealing with me as this. And therefore let
none that loves Christ and his righteous Cause be offended at me; and as I
lived in the Faith of this, that the three Married to God by the Solemn League
and Covenant. See more in Notes upon W.
Kingdoms are married Lands, so I die in the Faith of it, that there will be a
Resurrection of his Name, Word, Cause and Covenant, and of all his interests
therein, though I dare not determine the time when, nor the manner how, but
leave all those things to the infinitely wise God, who has done and will do
all things well. Oh that he would return to this Land again, repair our
breaches, take away backslidings, appear for his Work! O that he were pacified
toward us! Oh that he would pass by Scotland once again, and make our time a
time of love! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, himself hasten it in his own time
and way. The Lord is my Light, my Joy, and my Life my Song and my Salvation.
The good of his chosen be my mercy this day, and the enriching comforts of the
Holy Ghost keep up and carry me fair through to the glory of his Grace, to the
Edification of his people, and my own eternal Advantage.

John Kid.

Amen.
THE LAST SPEECH OF Mr. John King. With Animadversions thereupon.
Men and Brethren,
I Do not doubt but many, that are Spectators here, have some or other end,
then to be edified by what ye may see in the behavior, or hear in the last
words of one going to eternity: But if any of you have ears to hear, as I doubt
not but some of this great gathering have, then I desire your ears and
attention, if the Lord shall help and permit me to speak to a few things. First
I bless the Lord (since by his wisdom and holy providence he has carved out my
lot to die after this manner) that I die not As unwillingly as other
malefactors use to do, for in the interval betwixt his condemnation, and
execution, he by his friends used all the means he could to procure his
Majesty's pardon.
unwillingly, nor by force. It is true, I could not do this of my self neither,
allways having an inclination to put the evil day far away; but through There
are two sorts of courage: one natural, and the other supernatural, or inspired,
and the raising of the Animal Spirits by strong liquors (for Aristotle compares
Enthusiasm to wine) will plausibly counterfit both. Hence we see that common
Malefactors, party to rid their minds of the torment of fear, and partly out of
a vain glorious desire to be mistaken by the rabble for men of great natural
courage, who contemn Death, privately fortify themselves before the time of
execution by strong spirits, and cordials, by virtue of which they often appear
to die like gallant men. In like manner religious Malefactors (I mean such as
pretend to suffer upon the account of religion) that they may rid themselves of
the terrors of an evil conscience, and appear to be assisted, like Martyrs,
with supernatural courage, highten their spirits at the time of execution, by
strong liquours, and cordialls, which make them brisk, and bold, and insensible
of Death, and Hell. But then as the former sometimes drink to much, and so
discover the Cheat by dying Drunk: so the latter (who are so much the more
execrable Hypocrites of the two, as it is a greater sin to counterfit Grace
than nature) sometimes by taking too much of the creature discover their
imposture by their Drunkenness, and by dying not like Martyrs, but sots. This
was the deplorable case of Hugh Peter's, whose sad condition that good penitent
Mr. Cook lamented at his execution. This likewise was the case of the
Pentland-Rebels who were executed at Edinburgh, who were so stupefied, and
besotted with the Sack, and Brandy, which they drank on the day of their
execution, and the day before, that they died like Beasts, without so much as
making a prayer to God, or desiring others to pray for them; to the great
scandal of all good Christian spectators, who saw them, and whereof many yet a
live can witness, what I say. Lastly, this was the case, though not to that
degree, of Gaven the Jesuit, elder brother to this deceiver, who delivered as
much, as he was permitted to speak, of this speech (which he had composed
before) in such a broken confused manner, as Drunken men use to do, in so much,
that the orthodox spectators pityed the wretch, and his brotherhood were
ashamed. See notes d, and f, on the first in Speech.
grace I have been helped, and by his grace yet hope to be, and though possibly
I might have shunned such a hard sentence, if I had done things which (though I
could) I durst not do, no not for my Soul, yet I durst not (God knows) redeem
my Life by the loss of my Integrity and Honesty. I bless the Lord, that since I
have been apprehended and a prisoner, God has very wonderfully upholden me,
and made out that comfortable word, I showed before on note c, in the first
speech, that this sort of Ministers falsely so called, have a Jesuitical trick
of abusively applying the holy Scriptures to themselves.

Here we may see another notable instance of it, where the deceiver applys to
himself this comfortable message, which the Prophet delivered in Gods name to
the Jews, as they were his People in a civil sense, bidding them not to be
afraid, or dismayed, because he would strengthen them, help them, and uphold
them against their Enemies: so that those who were incensed against them should
be ashamed, and confounded, and those that warred against them should be as a
thing of naught. But here he blasphemously asserts, that God miraculously
upheld him, and made out these comfortable words to him, as if the Holy Ghost
had whispered them in his conscience as expressly, as the Prophet spoke them
unto the Jews. Or as if whatsoever was written in the holy Scriptures, were to
be so exactly transcribed in the works of Providence, that even the Prophetical
passages, and predictions were to be accomplished over and over in different
Ages; or as if the latter works of Providence, not only in general, but as to
particular Societies, and Persons did answer as exactly to some or other places
of the Scripture, as Face answers to Face in a Glass. This Doctrine is taught
in a Book called, The fulfilling of the Scriptures, Printed 1669. wherein are
such Blasphemous applications of the Scripture-promises to the Condition of the
Covenanters in Scotland, as cannot be read without horror, and indignation, by
any Orthodox man. Ever since the Re-establishment of Episcopacy, the
Conventicle-Preachers have assured their People, that God would destroy it
again, and restore his own work; but then as often as they began to withdraw
from them, seeing no probability of such a turn, then they Preached, and Wrote
of the great promises which were made to Believing, as that Faith was the
Evidence of things not seen, and that they ought to believe the naked Word,
when there was no appearance of its out-making, according to 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
Hear O Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so
shall you be Established, believe his Prophets, so shall you Prosper. But then
when things fell not out according to the prediction of these false Prophets,
but quite contrary, then they had another Scripture to quiet their Disciples,
viz. That the Righteous ought not to be afraid of evil tidings, but that their
hearts should be established trusting in the Lord, and that they should not be
afraid, until they had seen their desires upon their Enemies, Psalm. 112. 7,
8. Therefore they ought to get their Spirits quiet in a recumbency on God, and
to trust his Testimony more than their own Hearts, because there was then a
most sensible outgate, when there was least of Sense Fulfill. of Script. page 50.
and most of Faith; that when their Cause was lowest, then God called them to
throw themselves on the promise, and that their most desperate venture of Life,
Estate, and Credit upon the Promises of God, has usually had the richest
Incom, and that those who have been most Friends to Faith, have had Faith most
a Friend to them. And then if through Faction of great men, or secret favor of
Fanatics in Power, any thing happened for their advantage, then there was
another comfortable Triumphant Text to be applied to them, to make them expect
greater matters yet, viz. Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the
Fig Tree, believe thou? Thou shall see greater things than these* Joh. 1. 50.
Therefore is it good with Caleb, to take part with the promise against the
discouraging reports about the Anakims; for believing does always make way for
sense, so that it is good to trust in God in a day of streights, seeing his
returns have been not only according to Faith, but have often exceeded their
belief. Then whatsoever happens for the Interest of the Cause, is not only the
reward of their Faith, but the answer of their Prayers; for the People of the
Lord can testify by experience, that when they have often with Hannah gone in
before the Lord in the bitterness of their Spirit, they have been made to
return with a sensible, and mavelous change in their case. For God is near
unto his People, in what they call upon him according to his Word. Those who
have a desire to see more of their Blasphemous applications of Scripture, may
consult the foresaid Book, out of which I have taken these. See also Notes e.
h. o.


Fear not, be not dismayed, I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, I will
uphold thee by the right hand of my righteousness, Isa. 41. 10. I thank the
Lord he never gave me leave so much as to have a thought, much less to seek
after any Yet when he was charged by authority for having born Arms in the late
Rebellion, he denied it. Upon which one, or more of those who apprehended him
being called, Swore that they took him with Swords and Pistols, to which, being
asked if that was not to bear Arms, he said, that he meant he never bore Arms
in an Hostile manner, viz. in his hands.
Shift, that might have been in the least sinful. I did always, and yet judge
it better to The Posterity of Abraham were made Gods Segoulah, or peculiar
People, by virtue of that particular Contract which he was pleased to make with
the Father of the Faithful, and seal with the Sacrament of Circumcision: and
therefore if Moses, when he came to years of Discretion, had owned himself for
the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and so had succeeded to Pharaohs Imperial Throne,
he had virtually abjured the Blood of Abraham, and thereby renounced God, his
only Church and People, and that holy Covenant, to which were annexed so many
Promises and Privileges, as singular Prerogatives of that People, and
particularly, that of them, as concerning the Flesh, Messiah himself should
come. In this therefore the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, commends the
Faith of Moses, that he chose rather in a time of Persecution to own his
Brethren, the only Church and People of God, and the Covenant by which they
were espoused to him, than to enjoy the Temporal pleasures of a Crown, to which
he could not have succeeded without renouncing of Abraham's Blood. But what is
this to the case of this Deceiver, who was hanged for rebelling against his
natural Prince? Yes, it was a brave Text to induce the People to believe, that
he was a great Prophet, and the Familiar Friend of God, as Moses was, and that
the Covenanters are Gods People, and the People of the Episcopal Churches, but
as Egyptians, whom it is Lawful and Meritorious to Rob, and Kill.
suffer affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin
for a season. Therefore I am come hither to Suffer, and to lay down my Life. I
bless the Lord, I dye not as a Fool, though I acknowledge, I have nothing to
boast of in my self. I acknowledge, I am a Sinner and one of the chiefest, that
has gone under the name of a Professor of Religion, yea, amongst the
unworthiest of those that have Preached the Gospel. See note on h. in the first
Speech.
My Sins and Corruptions have been many, I have defiled me in all things, and
even in the following and doing By Duty here, I suppose, he means Prayer, which
the Presbyterian Writers Emphatically call by that name. And as in other
things, so especially in this, they use to perplex, and enslave the consciences
of men, by representing the natural infirmities of human nature, for great
sins, which either are not sins at all, as those first motions of the appetite,
which the Schoolmen call motus primo primi, or else but common irregularities
of our corrupt nature, which God will never lay to our charge; unless we
indulge, and promote them. Such as are extravagant thinkings, which proce^^
from the nimble and disultory nature of the imagination, which will make
Excursions, when the mind is most serious, and intent. No man can be so intent
upon a Mathematical demonstration, but wandering thoughts will interpose,
whether he will or no, and inspite of his uttermost attention so interrupt him,
that he will sometimes loose the connection, and be forced to begin his
demonstration again. Besides some things, and accidents will make such deep
impressions upon our phancies, do what we can to resist them, that our minds
will rave upon them in our Studies and Prayers, and in such cases God who knows
whereof we are made, better than we know our selves, will be so far from
imputing them unto us, that, if we manfully resist them, he will pity our
infirmities, and accept of the will for the deed. I make this remark, because
there is nothing more common than to find our modern Pharisees, with their
Mouths full of tragical lamentations, and complaints of the common infirmities
of human nature, without taking notice of their own, on their Parties
presumptious sins. Like this deplorable wretch, who heretakes pains to confess,
that he wanted not infirmities in doing of Duty, which no mere man ever yet
wanted, but says nothing by way of contrition for his Treasons, Schisms and
Rebellions, which is in plain English Pharise-like to swallow a Cammel, and
strain at a Gnat.
of Duty, I have not wanted my own sinful infirmities and weakness. So that I
may justly say, I have no righteousness of my own, all is like filthy Rags; But
What Episcopal Protestant does not think himself bound to bless God upon the
same account? or does not believe the same things of Jesus Christ? or has not
the same trust and affiance in him, though I hope better grounded than his is?
but he must make himself talk at this rate to insinuate to the People, that he
Suffered for preaching these Gospel Truths.
blessed be God, that there is a Savior, and an Advocate Jesus Christ the
righteous; and I do believe, that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am the chief, and that through Faith in his Righteousness I
have obtained Mercy, and that through him and him only I desire to have a happy
and glorious Victory over Sin, Satan, Hell and Death, and that I shall attain
unto the Resurrection of the Just, and be partaker of Eternal Life; I know in
whom I have believed that By citing part of this passage, 2 Timothy 1. 12. he
Jesuitically insinuates, as if the whole were applicable to him, and by
consequence, that he Suffered for the same cause, as the Apostle did, viz. for
Preaching of the Gospel. For the Verse begins thus: For the which Cause I also
suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep, that which I have
committed unto him (he means either his Preaching, or the Rebellious People to
whom he Preached) against that day, as if he were put to Death for Preaching,
and they were persecuted for hearing the Gospel Preached.
he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day; I And
do not Protestant-Bishops, and their Clergy Preach Salvation, in Christ's name,
and Christ's alone?
have in my poor Capacity Preached Salvation through his Name, and as I have
Preached, so do I believe, and with all my Soul I have Commended and yet I do
Commend to all of you the riches of See note i in the first Speech.
his free Grace and Faith in his name, as the alone and only way whereby ye can
be saved. It may be many may think (but I bless the Lord without any Is there
then no sollid ground to believe, that a man, who Blasphemously Preached
Rebellion in the name of God, and who preached it in Assemblies of Armed men in
the Fields, and who preached those Assemblies into a Marching Army, and who
Marched himself along with them in Arms, I say is there no sollid ground to
believe, that such a man Suffered as an Evil Doer, and not as a Martyr for
Christ?
solid ground) that I Suffer not as an Evil Doer, and as a busy Body in other
^ens matters, but I reckon not much upon that, (having the Testimony of my
Conscience) for it was the Is it not great Blasphemy in this Traitor to compare
his Lot first with the Lot of Christ, who was put to Death for asserting, that
he was Messiah, and the Son of God? And 2ly. with the Lot of his faithful
Witnesses, who were put to Death by the Jews for maintaining that Jesus, whom
they had Crucified was the Messiah, and that God had Raised him from the Dead,
and had made him the only Mediator betwixt God and Man, and that Salvation was
to be had in no other name but his; And likewise Suffered by the Gentiles for
preaching against Idolatry, declaring unto them, That God who made Heaven and
Earth was the only true God, and that Jesus whom the Jews Crucified, was raised
from the Dead, and was the great piacle for the sins of the World, etc. For
which of these Truths, or for what other Article of the Creed, or for what
Doctrine of the Gospel professed by the Catholic Church did this Blasphemer
Suffer, that he durst compare his Lot to that of Christ, and the primitive
Christians? It is not the Suffering, but the cause for which any man Suffers,
that can justify such a parallel; otherwise, all Malefactors might take the
confidence to Baspheme, as well as this Traitor and his Brethren, who pretend
to suffer for Christ, and be conformed unto him in his Sufferings, when they
are put to Death for most Heinous crimes. So that Execrable wretch In Ravilla^
Redivivus.
Mitchel, declared in the Speech which he threw among the Spectators, That he
died a Witness for Christ's despised Truth and Interest, which God called him to
seal with his Blood. So Naphtali page 226. brings in those, who were hanged at
Edinburgh, December. 7. 1666. for the Rebellion at P^^tland-hills, speaking thus,
We are Condemned by Men -- but this is our rejoicing the Testimony of our
Conscience, that we Suffer not as Evil Doers, but for Righteousness, for the
Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Would you know the
Righteousness for which they Suffered? It was their Covenant, the Presbyterian
Government, and the Supremacy of the King in Sion. Things and notions which the
Primitive Christians never knew, nor heard of, nor whereof one title is to be
found in their Writings, or in the Word of God.
Lot of our blessed Lord himself, and also the Lot of many of his eminent and
precious Servants and People, to Suffer by the World as Evil Doers, yea, I
think it, I have so far ground not to scare at such a Lot, that I count it my
Non-such honor, and (Oh what am I that I should have been honored so, when so
many Worthies have If the Worthies of the cause pant after this incomparable
honor, why does not their mighty zeal and ambition render them impatient like
some of the Primitive Christians, who not being able to stay till God called
them, presented themselves before the criminal Tribunals, fearing lest they
might want an opportunity to dye for the name of Christ. Did the Covenanters so
pant after the honor of Martyrdom, we should see the Rebels render themselves
in Troops to Authority, and here men not Arraigned cry out in the chamber of
criminal Justice, and we were at Bothwel-Bridge, we should see them throng to
bear their Testimony at the Cross, or in the Grass-Market of Edinburgh, where
Mr. Welsh has foretold, (and I hope in this he is a true Prophet) that he must
glorify God.
panted after the like, and have not come at it) and my Soul rejoices in being
brought to a Conformity with my blessed Lord, and Head, and so blessed a
Company in this way and Lot. And I desire to pray, that I may not be to any of
you to day upon this account a In the Scripture every thing, or Person, that is
an occasion of a Christians forsaking or falling off from Christ, or the
Christian Religion, is Metaphorically called, a Scandal, a Stone of Stumbling,
and a Rock of Offense, and any man (even our blessed Redeemer) who spoke, did,
or suffered any thing that accidentally deterred others from believing in
Christ, or that gave him occasion to desert him or his Doctrine, is said to
have offended (or Scandalized) them, or given them offense, in which sense 1
Cor. 1. 23. Christ is said to be a Scandal, or Stumbling Block to the Jews, and
Luke 7. 23. says our Savior, Blessed is he, that shall not be offended in me,
i. e. who shall not take occasion to disert, or deny me, at the time of my
Sufferings. (see also Matthew. 17. 27. 18. 6. 26. 31. 33.) Therefore this
Basphemer here applies to himself the very words of the Apostle speaking of
Christ crucified; nay, the very words of Christ himself, to induce the poor
People to believe, that the very cause of the Covenanters, is the very cause of
Christianity, and so deter them, upon the Execution of the Rebels, from
quitting the cursed Rebellious cause.
Stone of Stumbling or a Rock of Offense, and blessed is he, that shall not be
offended in Christ, and his poor Followers and Members, because of being
Condemned by the World, as evildoers. As for those things for which Sentence
has passed against me, I bless the Lord, my Is not this in effect to assert
with the Jesuits, That a good intention, or meaning, does hallow a bad Action.
heart does not Condemn me, Rebellious I have not been, neither do I judge it
to be Rebellion for me to have endeavored in my capacity what possible I could
for the born-down and He means by Episcopacy and Supremacy, with respect to the
former, of which the Interest of Christ was universally ruined from the time of
the Apostles till the French-Reformation, and with respect to the latter, from
the time of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, till the time when the
Popes under the pretended Vicarship of Christ, (the King of Sion) Subjected the
Empire unto the Church. And therefore (good Christian People) is not this a
blessed cause, which must have obliged Christians to separate from the
Catholic Church in the purest times, the age of the Apostles (for they were
Bishops) and the age next unto them, and to have rebelled under a pretense of
Religion, and defending the Interest of Christ against the first Christian
Emperors, to whom the Greek, and Latin Churches attributed as much Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Matters, and over Ecclesiastical Persons, as the English and
Scottish do to the King. They 1 Con. Nicen. by Constant. 1 Con. Constantinop.
by Theodos. Sen. Con. Ephesians. by Theodos. Junior. Con. Chalced, by Marcion.
convocated general Councils, fat in them among the Patriarchs, Bishops, and
Presbyters, made Syn. Oecumen. Octava. Where are the Speeches, and
Subscriptions of Basilius the Emporor, and Leo.
Or^tions upon Ecclesiastical matters to them, and by their Syn. Oecumen.
Octava. Where are the Speeches, and Subscriptions of Basilius the Emporor, and
Leo.
Subscriptions consented to, and confirmed, what was determined therein. And
Councils, wherein they did not sit, used always to beseech them to Epist.
Council. Constantinop. 1. ad Theodosium.
ratify their Decrees, (...). They had power to Can. 12. and 16. Council.
Chalced. Balsam. in 16. can. Council Carthag.
erect new Bishoprics, to abolish old ones, to As Theodosius in the Election
of Nectarius.
dispense with the Ecclesiastical Canons, and to order many things in
Church Matters, which were not defined therein, as is plain out of the Code and
Novelles, and the Capitularia, of the ancient French Kings. They were
Privileged to come to the 69. Can. Council. Sexti in Trullo.
Altar, when all other Lays were forbidden, and the Clergy to show how sacred
their Persons were, and that the concerns of the Church ought to be their chief
care Grot. de imperio summar. potest. c. 2. 7.
called them Priests, and Bishops, which in these days would pass for Episcopal
tantivies, as the traitorous Author of the Appeal thinks he wittily speaks.
There consent was requisite to the Election of Bishops, nay, they often
nominated the Persons to be Elected, and had power to Novil. 3. c. 1. Sancimus
igitur. The reason, which the Emperor Justinian gave for that Law, was the
excessive number of the Clergy, which was disproportionate to the Places, and
Revenue of the Church. The Law and the Preface to it, deserves to be considered
by the Right Reverend, and worthy Fathers of our Church.
forbid the Bishops to Ordain, which by the leave of the Romish and
Kirk-Writers, I take to be a Privative power. Lastly, They had a power to
suspend Novil. 123. c. 1. Sancimus igitur, quoties Episcopum opus fuerit
ordinari -- sed etiam illum qui praeter hoc persumpserit ordinare, segregari
uno anno a sacro ministerio.
Bishops, and Presbyters, and also to Cod. l. 1 Tit. 1. 6. Anathematizamus
Nestorium, 2. Eutychetem, 3. Apollinarium.
Anathematize Heretics, which signified a power of pronouncing them rightly
and duly Anathematized, and of doing many other things, with respect to the
Church Matters, and Churchmen, and because the two Sister-Churches and their
Clergy assert as much power to be due to the King in such Causes, as the Kings
of Judah, and the Christian Emperors had, therefore the Kirk-Preachers call
them The Author of the Apology.
Episcopal-Erastian Churches, and their Ministers, and Bishops,
Court-Parasites, and when they argue from the example of the best Judaean
Kings, and the most Pious Christian Emperors; Calder-Woods altar Dam^scenum.
Natura insitum est omnibus regibus odium in Christum. The same is to be found
in Rutherfords Lex Rex.
They can tell them by Authority that in all Kings there is a natural enmity
against Christ; nay, they tell the People, that the Bishops, and their Clergy
have ruined the Interest of Christ; and that if they will have Christ for their
King, they must rise up to destroy the Idol of Supremacy, and Antichristian
Prelacy which supports it; and therefore this miserable Wretch, being conscious
to himself of so good a Cause, says, His heart did not condemn him of
Rebellion, for having endeavored in his poor capacity to uphold the born-down,
and ruined Interest of Christ. I once had the diversion to hear a Kirk-Disciple
rail at the Rescinding Act, and Act of Supremacy, which gave me occasion to
show what great power the Greek and Latin Churches granted to be due to the
Christian Emperors in Church Matters, to which he answered me, That it was
always natural to Clergymen to flatter Kings, and Emperors, and great men,
just as I have read in one of the Letters which Mr. -- sent to all the Bishops
of Scotland, That Pride was always a natural sin to the Clergy, which he spoke
upon the occasion of their keeping of Coaches, and admitting of their Secular
Titles, for which I likewise find them censured by the Viperous Author of the
Reformed Bishop, Printed lately at London.
Ruined Interest of our Lord and Master, and for the relief of my poor
Brethren, Afflicted and It has always been the custom of Sectaries to miscall
the Execution of the Laws, by the odious name of Persecution, which common
People, who seldom consider, that the righteousness of the Cause, and not the
sufferings of the Prosecuted make Persecution, are apt to think is really such,
as often as men suffer upon a pretended The true notion of Persecution stated.
religious account. Therefore I will take an occasion from the abuse of the
word by this Deceiver, to declare from the words of our Blessed Redeemer, That
Persecution in the active sense is Inflicting, and in the passive, suffering of
Evil for Righteousnesssake. Whosoever then is truly Persecuted, must be
prosecuted for matters of professed Faith, or Principles, or for matters of
Practice. Upon the former account a man is Persecuted, when he is prosecuted
either for professing (under which I comprehend Preaching and Teaching) a true
Doctrine, which he is bound to profess, as the Apostles were persecuted by the
Jews for professing Jesus to be the Christ, or for remonstrating against a
false Doctrine, which he is bound to remonstrate against, as the same Apostles
were persecuted for opposing this Doctrine, that Moses his Law was to be
observed under-Christ. But whosoever is persecuted for matters of practice, is
prosecuted either for matters of Divine Worship, which concern the first Table,
or for Matters of Morality, which belong to the Second, for there is no
Righteousness, or Righteous cause, which is not reducable to one of these Two.
With respect to matters of Divine Worship, a man is persecuted either upon a
Negative account, for not Worshipping a false god, like the Three Children in
Daniel, or else for not Worshipping the true God in a false way; as St. Paul,
and the other Apostles were persecuted by the Sanhedrim, for not Worshipping
God according to the Jewish manner, after it was abrogated; and these are the
two Sorts of Persecution, which most ordinarily occur in reading the
Scriptures. Or 2ly. Upon a positive account for Worshipping the true God in a
true way, or to express it in the Sectaries own terms, for Serving of God, as
Daniel was cast into the Lions Den for Praying to God against the Kings Decree.
With respect to matters of Morality, a man is also Persecuted two ways; First,
Upon a Negative account, when he is Prosecuted for not doing something, which
is in its own nature, or by Gods positive Command Morrally Evil: as the good
Midwives were in danger of being Prosecuted by Pharaoh, for not Murdering the
Hebrew-Infants. Or 2ly. Upon a positive account, when he is Prosecuted for
doing some good Deed, which in such and such circumstances ought to be done, as
our blessed Lord was Prosecuted by the Pharisees for opening the Eyes of the
Blind, and healing on the Sabbath Day.
These distictions being premised, let us see, in which of these cases the
Covenanters are Covenantert not Persecuted.
Persecuted, or, which is all one, for what they are Martyrs: For no man is
Persecuted, but as far as he is Persecuted he is a Martyr, and by his
Suffeaings bears Witness to the righteous Cause, for which he Suffers.
First Then, they are not Persecuted, when they are Prosecuted for professing
the Principles of their Party; because they are False, Impious, or both. For
contrary to the Universal Church of God, they hold, that Episcopacy is an
Unscriptural, and Antichristian Constitution; That it is a sin to take
Episcopal Orders, or directly or indirectly to See the Apologetical Narration,
and the Apology.
own the Authority of the Bishops, and See the Apologetical Narration, and the
Apology.
unlawful to hear them or their Clergy Preach. Nay, That it is lawful to kill
them, if they For then they are Persecuting Prelates.
inform Authority, or Preach, or Write against them; That the Use of the A
great Apostle of the Covenant, Elder Brother to Dr. Owen, said, that the common
Use of the Lords Prayer was a Papistical Charm. And a Minister of Galloway
thanked God, that he had banished two Idols out of his Parish, Our Father, and
I believe in God.
Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments is Superstitious, and
Idolatrous, That the Common Prayer is an Idol; That the observation of See
Bishop Lindseys Narration of the Assembly at Derth.
Holy Days, (the four Apostolical not excepted) private Baptisms, private
Communions, and Confirmation, are unlawful, Superstitious, and Popish; That the
Presbyterian Government is of Divine Institution; That the The Apologetical
Narration, and almost all their Books.
solemn League and Covenant cannot be rescinded by any power on Earth, but
obliges us and our Posterity for ever; and that it is lawful to kill those
that This was the true ground of their implacable hatred to the Marquess of
Montross, and the late Archbishop of St. Andrews.
Apostatize from it; That the Oath of Allegiance in Scotland, and the Oath of
Supremacy in England, ought not to be taken; and That the The Apologetical
Narration, see Note y on the first Speech.
Act of Supremacy unkings Christ; That it is unlawful to appear at Bishops The
Apologet. Narrat. and Napht. page 126. says, That their Oppressions, and
grievances by reason of this Court alone, do far exceed the pressures, and
injuries of the Spanish Inquisition; whereupon the United Provinces have
justified their Revolt from the King of Spain.
Courts, or before the The Apologet. Narrat. and Napht. page 126. says, That
their Oppressions, and grievances by reason of this Court alone, do far exceed
the pressures, and injuries of the Spanish Inquisition; whereupon the United
Provinces have justified their Revolt from the King of Spain.
High-Commission-Court; That the Supreme Magistrate cannot silence a Minister,
nor indict a Fast, (which the good Kings of Judah, and Israel, and the King of
Nineveh did) That the Jus Populi Vindicatum. Apologet. Narr. Sect. 11.
People have a Right to defend themselves, and their Covenanted Religion; That
Apologet. Narr. Sect. 9. The Apology. Mitchels larger Speech in Rav. Red.
Though the Right of Patronage is far Elder than Popery, as is evident from that
Law of Justinian Novel. 123. c. 18. Siquis oratorii domum fabricaverit, and the
Council of Toled. 9. c. 2. decernimus ut quamdiu fundatores Ecclesiarum.
presentations to Livings in the Church, by Lay-Persons, and Collations by
Bishops, is Popish and unlawful, not to mention all their other Principles,
which are occasionally mentioned in these Animadversions. But if all these, and
their other Doctrines, which they profess in opposition to the Church and
State, be False or Impious, or both, as most assuredly they are, then they are
not Persecuted, but justly punished, when they are Prosecuted upon this
account. Q. E. D. This made my Lord Bacon truly say, That they are the men
which propagate Religion by Wars, force Consciences, yet cry out, their
Consciences are forced; that nurse Seditions, authorize Conspiracies and
Rebellions, and put the Swords in the Peoples hand; that Sanctify Tumults,
Preach off the Heads of Kings, and overthrow Constitutions, and Government;
that undermine Laws, and Settlement; that resist for Conscience Sake, and teach
others so to die for their Salvation; that make Christ a raiser of Sedition,
and his Religion a Firebrand; that despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities, and yet pretend to fear God. And therefore the Magistrate is so far
from Persecuting the men of such professed Principles, that he is bound by that
Trust which God has reposed in him, to Prosecute them with severe Punishments,
as being pernicious, not only to his Government, but the Souls of his Subjects,
who by virtue of these damnable Doctrines, will be in a constant disposition to
Rebellion in this World, and in danger of Damnation in the World to come.
Neither are they Persecuted for remonstrating against false Doctrines; For the
Doctrines against which they remonstrate, are but contradictions of their own
Principles, which I have already proved to be false. It remains then, That if
they are Persecuted, it is in being Prosecuted for Matters of Practice, either
upon the account of Divine Worship, which belongs to the First Table; or for
Matters of Morality, which belong to the Second. Upon this latter Score, they
cry out of Persecution, first upon a positive account, when they are prosecuted
for harboring, hideing, and maintaining declared and attainted Traitors, who
act according to the foresaid Principles, contrary to express Law; I say
Fallaciously: For as Cicoro writes lib. 3. Offic. Patria Praestat omnibus
officijs, filius patriae Salutem anteponet Saluti patris. and lib. 1. Offic.
omnium societatum nulla est gravior, nulla carior, quam ea, quae cum repub. est
unicuique nostrum, Cari sunt parents, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares, sed
omnes omnium Caritates patria una complexa est. Sed si contentio quaedam est
and comparatio fiat, quibus plurimum tribuendum sit officii; principes sunt
Patria, and Parents.
Fallaciously pretending, That common humanity and charity obliges them to
relieve, and assist such miserable Persons, who, it may be, are their* Fathers,
or Sons, or Brothers, or Ministers, to whom they are related in Christ; or for
not obeying lawful Authority, when they are called in his Majesty's name to
assist in Seizing of them, or Searching for them, and for not repairing to the
Kings Host, (according to the most ancient Law of the Kingdom) when the
Covenanters rise up to destroy the Government of Church and State. But if it be
a Sin to harbor a Traitor, be he who he will, or not to assist at his
apprehension according to Law, and to refuse in a time of Rebellion to repair
to the Kings Standard when legally called; If these things, I say, be Sins, as
every thing must be which is contrary to the Allegiance of Subjects, the Laws
of the Country, and the Duty which every Man owes to the Publick-Weal; then
they are not Persecuted, but justly punished, when they are prosecuted on this
account.
They also pretend to be Persecuted under this Head, upon a Negative account,
when they are Prosecuted for not See Note ( a) on the first Speech, and the
Apology Sect. 2. Where the Author compares this Act, to the Oath de super
inquirendis, used in the Inquisition.
deponeing in the matter of Field-Meetings, according to the Act of Parliament,
Caroli 2. Session. 2. Act. 2. which obliges them, (as they object) without
exception of Persons, the Father to inform against the Son, the Husband against
his Wife, etc. against Justice, Mercy, and Equity, and for not rendering
themselves according to the Kings Proclamations, and lastly, for not appearing,
when they are cited before the Courts. But if it is the Duty of the nearest
Quod si tyrannidem occupare, si patriam prodere conabitur pater, silebitne
silius? imo vero obscerabit patrem ne id faciat, si nihil proficiet accusabit,
minabitur etiam; ad extremum si ad perniciem patriae res spectabit, patr^ae
salutem anteponet saluti patris.
Relation; for example, of the Father to depone against the Son, when he is
required by the Father of the Country, the King, (with respect to whom they
are both Sons) or which is all one by the Law; and if it also be the Duty of
every For there is no other way left to satisfy the Law.
criminal Subject to render himself to Justice, uncalled; much more when he is
commanded by his lawful Sovereign to do it, and to For, not to appear, is
Contempt, and Contumacy.
appear upon due citation before his competent Judge, then these men who are
real delinquents upon these Scores, are not Persecuted, but justly punished,
when they are Fined, Imprisoned, Transported, Banished, or Outlawed, and
denounced Rebels upon the aforesaid accounts.
It remains then, That we require, whether they are Persecuted for matters of
Divine Worship, either upon a negative or positive account. First Then, they
pretend not to be Persecuted for not Worshipping a false God, because the
Church-Congregations worship the same God, and Savior, which they themselves
do. But then they pretend, with mighty cragical Exaggerations, to be Persecuted
for not Worshipping this true God in a false way; crying out, as often as they
speak of the breach of the Covenant, Napht. page 2.
Of Rebellion, Blasphemy, and perfidy against God, of Contempt of him, of
overturning the Work of the Gospel, of promoting the Kingdom of darkness, and
Antichrist; nay, as if the Church had turned Idolatrous, of Apostatizing from
God, of rejecting Christ, and overturning the Work of his Spirit, and Arm, etc.
and when all comes to all, they are so far from being Persecuted for not
Worshipping of God in any false, unfitting, or unscriptural way, (their own
Consciences being Judge) that the way after which the Church-Congregations
worship him, is the very same with their own, without Form in any Office, or
Ceremony of any sort. But if the Church of Scotland Worshipped God by one
prescribed Form, and had appointed Ceremonies as her Sister-Church, according
to the example of the Primitive-Churches, has done; yet, this would not prove
their Sufferings upon the account of Separation to be Persecution, unless they
could prove, that Forms, and Ceremonies in the general are unlawful, which can
never be proved; or that those particular Forms, and Ceremonies which they were
bound to observe, were unlawful; and then indeed their plea would be good.
Nothing can be replied to this, but that, though the manner of Worship be the
same in Churches, and Conventicles, yet the Ministry is not; but that the
Church-Ministery by Bishops, and Presbyters Episcopally Ordained is unlawful:
which Assertion supposes, that if it be lawful, then they are justly punished,
and not Persecuted for not going to Church; and either it must be granted to be
lawful, or else the Ministry of the Universal Church was unlawful for above
1500. years.
There remains then nothing, but to assert, That they are punished upon a
positive account, for serving of God, or for Worshipping of him in a true Way.
That the way by which they publicly Worship God, is a true way; as to the
substance of the Worship, were their Presbyterian, and Schismatical Ministry
valid, I would not deny: but then because there are many true ways of public
Worship, Subjects, like the Children, and Servants of a Family, ought publicly
to Worship God in that true way of Worship which the Supreme Magistrate, the
Father of the Nation, does appoint. I will put this case to the Covenanters:
There Is none of them dare deny, but that the French, and Helvetian Churches
Worship God in a true way, and that the reformed Church of Scotland likewise
worshipped him in a true way, when Mr. Knoxes Liturgy, which is almost the same
with that of the French Church, was in Use. Now therefore, I desire they would
tell me, That supposing the Presbyterian Government were legally Established in
Scotland, together with that unprescribed Formless way of Worship, which they
now use, Whether a Separating Party refusing to come to Church, because they
would Worship God according to the French Liturgy, or that of Mr. Knoxes, would
be guilty of Schism, or no? If they say, yes, as by their own Principles, and
in common reason they are bound to do; then I desire to know, Whether the
Supreme Power may not forbid their Separate Meetings, and command them to come
to Church under certain Pains, and Penalties, and might not most justly inflict
them, if they disobeyed? They cannot say no, by their own Principles, and
Practices, as well as out of common reason; and if they say yes, then they
acknowledge in another case, that they are justly punished, and not Persecuted
for meeting to worship God in Conventicles, against the penal Laws.
But furthermore, It is not sufficient, that the substance of public Worship
be true, unless the Circumstances of it be also due. It would (for example) be
a very punishable exorbitancy for any Party of conforming People in England to
meet illegally in Fields, or Houses, or at Midnight in Churches, to Celebrate
Divine Service by the Book of Common Prayer, although they pretended for their
Vindication, That it was against their Consciences to Pray or Communicate with
Profane Persons, who come to the Churches, or to have their Christian liberty
abridged by legal confinement to Time, and Place. This is the very case of the
Field-Fanaticks, who though they worship God in the same way as the
Church-Congregations do, as to the substance of the Worship; Yet,
notwithstanding their pretense, that they dare not own the Church-Ministery,
they are justly punished, and not Persecuted for their Irregularities, and
Transgressions in the legal circumstances thereof.
But lastly, Though the way in which they meet to Worship God, were not only
true, but as excellent as they imagine it to be; nay, were they the only true
Christians in the World, and their Magistrates Idolaters, or Atheists, yet,
they have no reason to say they are Persecuted, when they are punished on this
account; because the Laws, which forbid them to meet in such a manner, allow
every Family with a certain number of Strangers, to worship God in what manner
they like best; and were they of the Principles, and Temper of the Primitive
Christians, they would be so far from complaining of Persecution, that they
would be thankful to God, and the Powers, for so much indulgence, and strive by
their peaceable behavior to procure more.
But then, If they be considered as a People of Treasonable, Seditious, and
Schismatical Principles and Practices, that have long lived in a State of
Rebellion, and twice actually Rebelled in the space of 13. years; The
punishments which they complain of, will be so far from looking like
Persecution, that they must be acknowledged by all, but themselves, the just
Demerits of their Crimes. They complain indeed of Covenanters great Pe^secuters
and Tyrants.
Persecution, whereas they themselves have been, and are the greatest
Persecuters in the World. It is notoriously known, with what violence they
formerly Persecuted the Bishops, and all who durst adhere to them and the
Church. They Tyrannically Usurped Authority to depose, and Excommunicate them
all in 1638. because (as the Act bears) they had been Consecrated to the
Episcopal Office, condemned by the Confession of Faith, and Acts of that Kirk,
as having no Warrant in the Word of God; wl^ereas there is not one syllable
against it, either in the Called in the Harmony, Scoticana Confessio.
larger, or Called in the Harmony, Generalis confessio, and by the Covenanters,
The National Covenant.
shorter Confession of Faith. They usurped authority over Men's Consciences, in
a most Tyrannical Popish manner; not only by taking upon them to loose Men's
Consciences from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King, and of
Canonical obedience to the Bishops, (the last of which they declared to be
unlawful in their Assembly, December. 5th. 1638.) but they imposed the Covenant
on all men, under the penalty of Banishment, Forfeiture of Estates, and
Excommunication, taking away from all those who refused it, both Heaven and
Earth, as far as they could, at one Blow. Nay, as much as they could, they
forced the Conscience of the late King, of blessed Memory, not suffering him to
Serve God in his own Family according to his own way, which was by the
Common Prayer. The general Assembly in August 1640. made an Act against
Expectants, (or young Students in Divinity) who should refuse to subscribe the
Covenant, by which they declared them incapable of Preaching, Reading in a
Church, or Teaching School, or Residing in any College, or University; and if
they continned obstinate, to be Excommunicated; and yet they now complain of
the King, Parliament, and Council, for obliging Expectants, and Scholars, at
their Laureation to take the Oath of Allegiance, which is their Duty to do.
They were not only content to declare Episcopacy to be Popish, and
Antichristian, but in an Act of Assembly 1638. they declared, That it was
abjured in the National Covenant 1581. under these words, The Popes wicked
Hierarchy, (a Bull, or contradiction in Adjecto) which as they cite it from the
Council of Trent, includes the Orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; so that
if Bishops were abjured by them who took the National Covenant under the Popes
Hierarchy, how came it to pass, that they did not abjure Priests and Deacons
too? They made an Act of Assembly, August 3d. 1648. for Censuring of Ministers,
who spoke not to the corruptions of the time, i. e. for not Preaching, and
Praying against the Engagement for delivering the late King out of Prison; and
in Prosecuting this Act, Mr. William Colvill was deposed, though he was a most
learned and worthy man, for not reading the Causes of a Fast which they
appointed; which puts me in mind of what Queen Mary Stuart was used to say,
That she was as much afraid of a Fast of the Ministers, as of an Army of
Soldiers. In another Act of Assembly, July 20. 1649. they Ordained, that all
that had been accessory to the Engagement 1648. should be processed, and made
solemnly to renounce it, as sinful and unlawful, and in their Seasonable
warning, July 27. 1649. They call the Defeat of this noble and pious Design by
Cromwell, a great mercy to the People of God, and say, it ought to be
perpetually remembered, and that all men ought to bless God for it; and page 10.
they say, That if the King, or any for him shall Invade this Land, in order to
his Establishment, it will be a necessary Duty to resist and oppose him; and
page 11. so long as the King refuses to hearken to the desires of the Kirk and
State, it is consonant to the Scripture, Reason, and the Laws of the Kingdom to
refuse to admit him to the Exercise of his Government, till he give
satisfaction in these things; and in their Letter to the King, page 30. they
say, That his refusing to satisfy their desires, was nothing else but an
Opposing of the Kingdom of the Son of God, and a Refusing to let him Reign over
him and his Kingdoms; and That his Entertaining of James Graham, will bring on
him and his Throne the guilt of all the Blood that be, and his Accomplices had
shed; and page 31. they exhort him to lament for the iniquities of his Fathers
House, and especially for his opposition to Religion and the Cause of God, the
permitting and practicing of Antichristian Prelacy in the Royal Family it self,
and the Shedding of so much Blood of the People of God.
In one of their Acts, they inhibit the Lords Supper to be Administered to any
Person, but who should first subscribe the Covenant, which they also forced
young Students, and fresh men in the Universities to take; and if any of them
who were ensnared in it in their youth, chance to be Clergymen, especially
Bishops; then the Covenanters have a just ground to conspire their Destruction,
for being Apostates from the Cause. They (here I include their Predecessors)
Persecuted Queen Mary, King James, threatening to Excommunicate him, and his
whole Council, King Charles the First of blessed Memory, and his Majesty who
now Reigns, (and whom God preserve from Falling into their hands again) knows
by former and latter experiences, what a Persecuting spirit they are of. What
cruelty did they use against all those who refused to sign the Covenant, or who
broke it upon being convinced what a bond of iniquity it was? They were
declared to be Rebels, and denounced Enemies both to God and Man; Their Persons
were Seized, their Goods Confiscate; and in November. 1643. when some of the most
Eminent Nobility refused to Seal it; Commissions were given to Soldiers to
bring them in Prisoners, and to kill them if they made Resistance. What bloody
Tribunals were Erected at St. Andrews, Glascow, and Edinburgh? How many
Noblemen, and Gentlemen of good Quality were most Barbarously Murdered
(especially the Heroic Montross) for obeying their Sovereign's Commission? and
how did the Covenanters rejoice, when the Scaffolds were reeking with their
Blood; One of their Ministers Preached then, That the work of Reformation went
Bonnily on. Another in his Prayer Blasphemously said, Lord send us more
Scaffold-Work. A Fanatical Lady in the West, said, That the Covenant could not
be Advanced but by Blood. And many Ministers were then Deposed for not
Preaching for it, and for speaking Civilly to Montross, and Praying with him;
by name, Mr. Robert Tran of Eglesholm, and many others, as their own Registers
yet do show. And then for the Rump of the old Faction still remaining, how do
They Persecute the Church, and her Clergy with their utmost Malice and Power?
There was an Act of Parliament expressly made for Securing the Persons,
Families, and Goods of Ministers, 1669. and another against Assaulting of
Ministers, 1670. And the Author of Naphtali page 134. Exhorts all People, To
acquit themselves like Men, and pull the Bishops out of the Sanctuary, that the
Wrath of God may be averted in the Righteous Punishment of those wicked Men.
Accordingly, Mr. James Mitchel attempted to Murder the late Archbishop of St.
Andrews; and in his larger Speech in Ravillac Red. he says, They are all
Blessed, that shall take the Proud Prelates, and dash their Brains against the
Stones. And what he attempted was at last Successfully Effected by Viz. by John
Balfour of Kinlock, David Haxton of Rathillet, George Balfour in Gilston, James
Russel in Kettle, Robert Dingwall in Caddam, Andrew Guillan in Balmerinoch,
Alexander Henderson, and Andrew his Brother in Kilbrachmont, George Fleming in
Balbuthy.
10. Field-Zelots of the same Principles, whereof some had Ridden a long time
in the Field-Preachers Guards. And in the middle of last October, Three
Fanatic Ruffians knocked down one Mr. Malne a Church-Minister, in the Streets
of Glascow, when the Justice-Eyre was Sitting there. And I profess, when I
consider in what a Persecuted Condition the Bishops and Clergy of our
Sister-Church are, my heart bleeds for them; and methinks I hear them now
crying out with one Voice to his Sacred Majesty, as the Disciples cried to our
Savior in the Storm, Save us, or else we Perish.
Persecuted, not only in their Liberties, Privileges, and Persons, but also in
their Lives, therefore it was that I joined with a Or as some of their great
Apologists, and Patrons were pleased to represent them at London, A Poor,
Innocent, Peaceable fort of People, who only desired to serve God according to
their own Consciences; (and truly so they do when they rebel and Murder) but
how well they deserved this Character, the World saw, and his Majesty Felt, as
soon as they got into their great Evangelist Naphtalis probable capacity; and
had they won the first Battle, we should have seen and felt more.
poor handful; The Lord knows, who is the searcher of hearts, that neither my
Design nor Practice was against his Majesty's Person and just No, Not against
his Majesty's Person, but against his Evil Counselors, as he would have spoken
in the Covenanting Style, and not against his Just Government, but against his
Supremacy, and his Legislations against the Covenant, which make his Government
Unjust, and himself a Tyrant, an Idolater, and an Enemy to Christ; and then how
the People ought to deal with him under that Notion and Character, will be
worth the while to see. Buchanan in his Dialogue de jure Regni says, That it
is as Lawful and Meritorious to kill Tyrants, as Wolves, and Bears, and their
Whelps; and that those who do such noble Acts, ought to be rewarded by all Men.
He says also, That the Pople are more Excellent, and Greater than the King,
and have as much Power over him, as he has over any one of them; and that when
he is called to be Judged by them, a less is cited by the greater; and that if
he will not come to be Judged, they may kill him like a Night-Thief any way,
and That he ought to be compelled by Force of Arms. Napht. page 71. says, in
the words of Mr. Robert Duglass, who Preached at his Majesty's Coronation in
Scotland, That Breach of Covenant and Rebellion against God, was an old
continued Sin in the Kings House, which God had always severely Punished. If
therefore the King should not acknowledge Jesus Christ King of Sion, who is
above him, but Break the Covenant; Gods Controversy against the Kings Family
would be carried on to the Weakening, if not Overthrowing of it. Sam. Rutherford
the Author of Lex Rex, says, That the King is no King, (then a Tyrant) but
Covenanting-ways, and Conditionally; and that by the Covenant the People have a
Civil Claim against him, and may Punish him in Courts set up by themselves, and
may resume what Power be has; for he is but their Subject, and Vassal; And
page 178. calls Mariana his Elder Brother, (whom even Gavan the Jesuit in his
dying Speech seemed to Condemn) an approved Author. Knox in his History of
Reformation, pages 392, 393. says, That Subjects may not only Lawfully Oppose
themselves to their Kings, whenever they do any thing which oppugnes Gods
Command, but that they may also Execute Judgment upon them according to Gods
Law. So that, if the King be a Murderer, Idolater, Adulterer, etc. he shall
Suffer according to Gods Law, not as a King, but as an Offender; and Lex Rex
says, That the Sanhedrim ought, and should have put David (...) Death. And
page. 77, and 78. Knox also says, That it is not Birthright nor (...) of
Blood, that makes a King to reign lawfully over a People Professing Christ;
(...) Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, then Subjects are freed
from their Oath of Obedience, and may rise up against him in Arms. And one Mr.
Goodman one of Knoxes Companions, in his Book of Obedience, as Philanax
Anglicus cites him, page 50. says these words: It is a Duty incumbent on all
People, severely to prosecute all Idolaters, none to be excepted, neither King,
nor Queen, nor Emperor. This is Gods Commandment to the People, That in case of
such a Defection, they Seize upon their Princes that would seduce them from
God, and carry them away to the Gallows, and hang them up. Napht. in his
Preface says, That if the King, after the Example of Antichristian or Pagan
Nations, will institute and appoint Needless, Vain, Superstitious, Burdensome
Rites, no man needs denounce, but rather fear the Personal Doom Executed upon
Saul and Uzza, for Usurping the Priests Office; And page 150* he says, That
through the manifest and notorious Perversion of the great Ends of Society and
Government, the bond thereof being Dissolved, the Persons, one or more, thus
liberated from it, do relapse into their Pr^^eve Liberty, and Privilege; and
accordingly, as the Similitude of their Case, and Exigence of their Cause do
require, may upon the very same Principles again join, and associate for their
better Defense and Preservation, as they did at first enter into Societies. Mr.
Robert Blair when he was Regent in the College of Glascow, taught his
Scholars, That Monarchy was an unlawful Government, for which he was Preferred
at St. Andrews, Mr. Calderwood in his Altar Damascenum, did not only say in
general, That in all Kings, naturally, there was an hatred to Christ; but in
particular called King James, A most infense Enemy to the Purity of Religion;
and yet Mr. Baily in his Answer to Issachars Burden, page 65 says, That this
man was of greater Worth than all the Prelates that Scotland ever bred, put
them altogether. Conformable to these Principles, a Caball of the first
Covenanting Lords wrote a Treasonable Letter to the French King; some say, To
crave his Aid against their own Natural Sovereign Charles the First. The Letter
was Subscribed by Rothes, Montross, Lesly, Mar, Montgomery, Loudonne, and
Forrester; but by Gods good Providence, and the Abhorrence which another Lord
showed to Subscribe it, it was laid aside, and never so much as Addressed, Au
Roy tres Christien, although, as I have heard, The Earl of Trequaire, who
showed the King the Original, folded it up, and wrote upon it Au Roy. I have
heard, That Montross was the Penner of it, which I therefore observe, to show
how dangerous these Kirk-Jesuits are in the State, since they Perverted not
only the Common People, but so many of the great Nobility, and those who were
men of the greatest Parts. See Sir Richard Bakers Chron. page 507. and in page
536. he says, That the Irish Rebels to justify their Rebellion, alleged,
That they Rebelled against the Tyrannical Government that was over them, after
the Example of Scotland, which had got great Privileges by that Course. As if
they had declared in the words of this Traitor, That they had no Design against
his Majesty's Person and Just Government, but had always Studied to be Loyal in
the Lord.
Government, but I always studied to be Loyal to lawful Authority in the Lord;
I thank God my heart does not condemn me of any Disloyalty; I have been Loyal,
and I recommend it to all to be Obedient to higher Powers in He means according
to the Covenant, and as far as the King should favor the Presbyterian
Government, and submit his Scepter to the Scepter of Christ. Otherwise to Obey
him would be a Sin, for then he would go out of his Line and Order, so as to
Command contrary to God; and then the Subjects not Obeying him, is not
Disobedience to the Magistrate, but Obedience to God, who in this case becomes
their immediate Superior; and if the People do not thus Resist the Magistrate,
they Sin against God, and their own Souls. These are the words in the Second
Reason of the Covenanters Instructions for Defensive Arms, Printed 1638. So
Napht. page 157. says, That Disobeying the Powers, when they act in the right
Line of Subordination, is indeed Rebellion, and as the Sin of Witchcraft; but
to Resist and Rise up against Persons abusing Sacred Authority, and Rebelling
against God the Supreme, is to Adhere to God as our Liege-Lord, and to
Vindicate our Selves, and his Abused Ordinance, from Wickedness and Tyranny;
and page 151. Explaining these words of the Covenant, In our several Places,
and Callings; he says, That every man in his Station is thereby bound to
promote the Covenant, [not by all lawful, but] by all possible means; and if
any in higher Place would Seduce their Inferiors into Apostasy, then it is
their Duty to Resist such Wickedness and Violence, and their Calling, to
endeavor either the Reformation or Removal of those, who prove so Contrary and
Destructive to the Ends unto which they were Ordained. How contrary is this
Jesuitical Doctrine of the Covenanters, to the Profession and Practice of
Primitive Christians, and the Confession of Protestant Churches, and especially
of the Church of England? which Teaches, That Subjects are absolutely bound to
Obey their Sovereign, by actual Obedience, when his Commandments are not
Sinful, and when they are so, by Passive Obedience; after the Example of the
Primitive Christians, who patiently and meekly Suffered all sorts of
Punishments, and Torments, when they were in a most probable Capacity, if they
had Rebelled. In Tertullians time, the Infidels complained, That the Christians
were so numerous, 1. Apolog. and Cyprian ad Demetr. inde est quod nemo nostrum,
quando apprehenditur, reluctatur, nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestram
quam vis ^^nius and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur.
Obsessam vociferantur civitatem, in agris, in Castellis, in insulis
Christianos: omnem Sexum, aetatem, Conditionem, and jam dignitatem transgredi
ad hoc nomen moerent; and in his Second Apology, he appeals to the Heathens, If
they were not numerons enough to make greater Armies than any were then in the
World? telling them, That the Christians had left them nothing but their
Temples. Si enim and hosts exertos, non tantum vindices occultos agere
vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum. -- besterni sumus and
vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, Castella, municipia conciliabula,
castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, Eorum; sola vobis relinquimus
templa cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, -- and in the very next
words declares, That the Christian Religion taught them not to Kill, but to be
Killed. Qui tam libenter trucidamur, si non apud istam Disciplinam occidi magis
liceret, quam occidere. But the Covenanters on the contrary, assert, (see Lex
Rex, from page 313. to 322.) That no man is bound in Conscience to passive
Subjection under unjust Punishments inflicted by the Magistrate, more than to
active Obedience to unlawful Commands; passive Obedience in that case coming
under no Command of God. Nay, That it is a Sin against God to submit to an
unjust Sentence, and an Act of Grace and Virtue for a Man to Resist the
Magistrate Violently, when he does him Wrong; and Self-Murder, not to Resist
when he offers to take our Lives without Cause, though not without Law. Nay, He
Blasphemously mocks at the very notion of Passive Obedience, as a Chimera and a
Dream, forgetting who was brought like a Lamb to the Slaughter, and like a
Sheep that is Dumb before his Shearers, opened not his mouth. And Mr. George
Gillespy in the Preface to his Printed Sermon before the House of Commons, on
Ezekiel. 43. 11. he calls Preces and lacrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae, the new
Oxford-Divinity, to the immortal Honor of that University, which so malled the
Covenant; and where this Primitive Christian Divinity, (which he most
ignorantly miscalled new) will, I hope, be taught to the end of the World. I
take the more notice of Passive Obedience as ^rted.
this, because many of the late Seditious Pamphlets have Lampooned the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience, especially those which have been written against the
Succession of his Royal Highness; and the Pages 66. 67, 68.
Author of The History of the late Civil Wars, in his Censure of the Whole Duty
of Man. I shall for the Confutation of them all, set down some Texts of
Scripture, and the Sense of ancient Christians on this Subject; and then leave
my Reader to judge, whether it be not Blasphemy to scoff at the notion of
Passive Obedience, and Nonsense to say, That Rebellion may be justified
thereby. 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20. Servants be Subject to your Masters, not only to
the good and Ames. Parentem si aequus est, si iniquus, feras.
gentle, but also to the froward; for this is thankworthy, if a man for
Conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is
it if when you are buffetted for your faults you take it patiently; but if when
you do well, and suffer for it, you take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God, for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also Suffered for us,
leaving as an Example, That we should follow his Steps. And 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14,
15. But rejoice in as much as you are Partakers of Christ's Sufferings -- for if
you are reproached for the name of Christ, happy are you; but let none of you
Suffer as a Murderer, or a Thief, or an Evildoer -- yet if any man Suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf. Rev. 13.
10. He that kills with the Sword shall be killed with the Sword; here is the
Patience and Faith of the Saints. Hebr. 11. 35, 36, 37. They were Tortured --
Scourged -- Stoned, Sawn assunder, etc. which St. August, de civit. dei, l. 22.
Explains in these words, Neque tunc civitas Christi, quamvis tunc
peregrinaretur in terris, and haberet tam magnorum agmina populorum adversus
impios persecutores, pro temporali salute pugnavit; sed potius ut obtineret
aeternam non repugnavit. Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur, torquebantur,
urebantur, laniebantur, trucidabantur, and multipliclabantur, non erat ijs pro
salute pugnare, nisi salutem pro salute contemnere. So Lactantius, lib. 5. --
and ideo cum tam nefanda perpetimur, ne verbo quidem reluctamur, sed deo
remittimus ultionem. But the Thebean Legion which consisted of 6666. Soldiers,
all Christians, is beyond all other Example. They lay with the rest of the Army
at Octodurum, when Maximianus the Emperor Commanded, That Sacrifice should be
offered unto the Gods. This Command being given, the Christian Legion marched
away to a Village called Now St. Mauritz in Savoy.
Agaunum, whither the Emperor sent, to Command them to come, and Sacrifice with
the rest, but they refused, whereupon the Emperor Commanded, That every Tenth
Man through the whole Legion should be Slain; which was Executed, without the
least Show of Resistance against them who were appointed to put them to Death.
And Mauritius a Primicerius of the Legion, bespoke the Soldiers at the time of
Execution, Thus: I was very much afraid, Fellow Soldiers, lest any of you, as
it is very natural, especially for Armed men to do, should have Resisted under
the specious pretext of Self-Defence. And I was prepared to forbid you to do
so, in the Name and by the Example of Christ, who Commanded Peter, when he drew
his Sword, to put it up again; thereby Teaching, etc. -- The first Decimation
being Executed, the Emperor Commanded the rest to Sacrifice, who Answered him
thus: We are thy Soldiers, Caefar, and have taken up Arms to Defend the Empire,
and never yet were Punished either as Desertors, Traitors, or Cowards, and we
would now Obey thee in this particular, but that being Christians we are
obliged by our Religion not to Worship Demons, nor approach their Altars,
which are polluted with Blood. Thou have Commanded us to Sacrifice, or every
Tenth Man of us shall be put to Death. Know assuredly that we are all
Christians, who, as to our Bodies, are thy Subjects, but not as to our Souls,
which now look up to the Founder of our Religion, Christ. Afterward Exuperius
the Standard Bearer spoke unto them thus: You see, Fellow Soldiers, I bear the
Eagle, the Sign of Secular War; but it is not to these Arms, that I desire to
provoke you, nor in War of this nature That I would have you show your Valor;
but in another way of Combating, by which, and not by your Swords you shall win
the Kingdom of Heaven. He left also this Message to be sent to the Emperor:
That Desperation, which made all other men Valiant in Dangers, could not
prevail with them to use their Arms against his Majesty, who had refused to
Resist with their Swords in their hands, because they had rather Die, than get
an unlawful Victory; and perish in Innocence, than Survive in Sin. All which
shows, First, That Passive Obedience is no Chimaera, but a real Notion;
Secondly, That it is the indispensible Duty of all Christians when they are
Persecuted by Authority; and Thirdly, That it is so far from justifying
Rebellion, as the Author of Behem. foolishly Asserts, That it is the only
Doctrine which can keep Subjects who are really Persecuted and Oppressed, or
fancy themselves to be so, from Rebelling against their Sovereign; and
therefore the Popish, and Presbyterian Jesuits, who love to have it in their
Power to trouble the Government of Christian Monarchs, declare it to be as
great a Sin, as active Obedience to their unlawful Commands. And now, when all
Sects, whereof some are not Chistians, with great confidence call themselves
Protestants, upon the account of their Opposition, No Orthodon Protestants who
deny the Doctrine of Passive Obedience.
whether real or pretended, to Popery; I freely declare, That none of them are,
or ought to be esteemed so in a strict, and Orthodox sense, but such as Profess
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as strictly as it was both Professed and
Practiced in the Primitive Catholic Church. Nay, furthermore, seeing there are
some common Maxims of Christian Divinity, which were always professed by the
Church Universal for undoubted Truths, although they are not set down
expressly, neither in the Scriptures, nor in the Apostles Creed, and the truth
of which were never questioned but by some few Heretics, who had no proportion
to the rest; I also assert, That no Man nor Society of Men, how Antipapistical
soever they may be, ought to be looked upon as Orthodox Protestants, unless
they profess these common Notions of Christianity, without the Belief and
Profession of which, none could be counted Orthodox Christians in the Primitive
Catholic Church. These common Principles, wherein all Christian Churches
agreed, are these: That the Scriptures are the Word of God; That there are
Three distinct Persons in the holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and that these Three That Infant* are to be Baptized.
are one God; That Christ is both God and Man in the same Person; That the
Lord's Day, or First Day of every Week ought to be kept Holy; That a Solemn
Yearly Commemoration of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord,
and of the Descent of the Holy Ghost, ought to be Observed; and that the Church
Universal is to be Governed by Bishops above, and distinct from Presbyters.
There never was any Church from the Apostles, and downwards for above Fourteen
hundred Years, which did not consent to the Truth of These, and some other
Doctrines, and look upon them as the common Notions of the Christian Religion,
delivered down from its first Original, with the Articles of Christian Faith.
And therefore, as no Arrian, Photinian, Sabbatarian, or Aerian, how Opposite
soever they were to the Jews and Heathens, the common Enemies of Christianity,
were admitted for truly Catholic or Orthodox Christians, in the Primitive
times; but were Condemned, and Anathematized for Heretics; The true not* on of
Protestancy.
so now, no Society of Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Socinians,
Antidominicans, (for I will not call them Antisabbatarians) Antipaedobaptists,
Antiepiscoparians of what Denomination soever; and likewise no Society of men
professing the Observation of the Apostolical Holy Days to be Superstitious and
Idolatrous, how opposite soever they pretend to be to the common Enemy of the
Reformed Churches, ought not to be considered as Orthodox Protestants, who by
that name are understood to Protest against the Errors, Innovations,
Corruptions, and Usurpations of the Romish, but not against the Common
Doctrines of the Primitive Catholic Church.
the Lord. And that I Preached at Field-Meetings, which is the other ground of
my Sentence; I am so far from acknowledging that the Gospel Preached that way,
is a Rendezvouzing in Rebellion, as it is so termed; that I bless the Lord that
ever counted me worthy to be Witness of such Meetings, which have been
wonderfully Countenanced and owned, not only to the The Delusion of many
Thousands, as their numerous Field-Meetings do show.
Conviction, but even to the Conversion of many Thousands; yea, I do I observed
before, That the Covenant-Preachers are apt to speak mighty things of their
Party. So Naphtali, speaking of the Covenanted-Army, which rebelled at
Pentland-Hills 1666. says, That there has not been in Britain such another
Company of men joined in Arms for the Covenant, and Cause of God, for sound
Judgment, true Piety, Integrity of Heart, Fervent Zeal, undaunted Courage, etc.
Whereas they were for the most part Crack-Brained men, of broken Fortunes, and
such as had been processed for Fornications, and Adulteries; as all those who
went to Christ's Standard, out of the Parishes of Kilmarnock and Phimus, were
known to be, being in all Twenty Persons. And if any man will take the pains to
enquire into their Morals, they will find this Sect to be one of the wickedest
People, not only for Treason, Schism, and Rebellion, but for Sensual Sins, and
Abominations, that ever professed the name of Christ. They use all manner of
Care and Secrecy to Conceal their Wickedness; but yet, so many undeniable
Stories of their Privy Pranks are come to Light, as make them the Scandal of
the Christian name. Lysimach. Nicanor First Edition page 79. Tells us of one
Andrew Lesly, who forsook Ireland to come and take the Covenant, after which he
immediately left his own Wife, to live with a Whore, the Daughter of an holy
Sister at Edinburgh; who Blasphemously said, That her Child was fallen into an
holy Fornication with a Brother, not out of Lust, but Love, and therefore
resolved, That she should not Confess it, lest the Gospel should be
Scandalized; and that it was better to fall into the hands of God by
False-Swearing, than to fall into the hands of men by Confessing the Fact;
which appeared after she had Sworn, by her great Belly and Lying In. Chancellor
Louden, the great Pillar and Promoter of the Covenant, was known to all the
Nation for a notorious Whoremonger and Adulterer, both at home and abroad,
especially with Major Johnstons Wife, who bare him several Children; and yet he
was called a Saint among them. The Story of their Principal Saint, Major Thomas
Weir, so Infamous for Fornication, Adultery, Incest, and Bestiality, for which
he was Condemned, was lately Published in Ravillac Redivivus, to which I refer
the Reader. Mr. James Symson Minister at Airthe, a little before his Majesty's
Restoration, took a Woman's Oath before the Congregation, who had brought forth
a Bastard, in these words: That she never knew a man, more than she knew him;
which made the People suspect it to be his own, for almost every day she
brought cases of Conscience to him in his Chamber, which made his Wife Jealous
after she heard the words of the Oath. One James Foyer a Beggar, who passed for
so great a Saint among them, that he was Registered for a known Seeker of God in
the Presbytery Book of Glascow, was afterward found guilty of above an hundred
Adulteries, Incests, innumerable Fornications, and Witchcraft; for which he
should have been Hanged, had not the Glascow-Fanaticks made a Contribution, and
bribed the English-Judges to save his Life, so that he was only Scourged
through the Town. Afterward he Dyed miserably by a Ditch; when he Tempted
Women to Uncleanness, he said he would give them an holy Kiss, and if he knew
them not to be in the State of Grace, he would not meddle with them. Since his
Majesty's Restoration, Seven or Eight great Fanatics have been Burnt for
Bestiality, who always went to Conventicles, and refused to hear the
Church-Ministers Preach; and in the Parish of Govean, in Two Years time, Eight
Persons were found guilty of Incest, all Fanatics, who acted their
Abominations as they went to, and came from Conventicles, as they confessed
before the Presbytery of Glascow. Mr. Hugh Archibald Minister at Evandale a
Zealous Fanatic, was guilty of many Adulteries. And Mr. James Porter, a Famous
Conventicler, Son of Mr. James Porter Synod-Clerk of Glascow, got a Child in
Adultery, with Margaret Gilchrison in Gorbels, and thought to have Murdered it
at his Birth, but that he was hindered by some Women living in the lower Story,
who heard it cry. It was Baptized by Mr. Alex. Janison, and Mr. Porter himself
fled into Ireland. Mr. William Houston at Elskine, one of their Ministers, kept
a Servant Maiden, with whom he lay nightly till she brought forth a Child, and
then they both fled to Ireland. Mr. Sam. Rutherford their great Apostle, Mr.
John Karstaires, Mr. Matthew Rumsey, and Mr. John King, the Author of this
Speech, got their Wives with Child before Marriage; and for this last, many
doubt if he and his pretended Wife were ever Married at all. Mr. Peter
Paterson, a certain Fanatical Lords Chaplain and Chamberlain, begot many
Children in Adultery; and though it was their Custom to do all they could to
Conceal the Infirmities and Failings of their Ministers and eminent Professors,
to avoid Scandal, yet great is the number of such who were processed for
Adultery, as their own Presbytery-Registers yet do show.
One John Bridgeford in Michel Govean, a great Conventicler, and Married man in
the Year 1664. used to wait upon his Neighbors Wife to Conventicles, and Lie
with her in the Return; and Tempted her to it by the Example of David, and told
her it was the way to humble her, and make her a good Christian, as both he and
she judicially confessed before the Presbytery. Afterward he went to
Edinburgh, where he begot another Child in Adultery, and Murdered it and his
own Wife, for which he was Hanged there. Charles Petticrue a Married man in
Glascow, lay with a Woman in James Galts House in the Day, and was catched in
the Act; yet he was one of those Covenanting Zealots, who held it unlawful to
come to Church. The Wife of James Wallace of Badrean a great Conventicler, was
taken by her Husband in the Act of Adultery with his Man Servant. He brought
them both tied together in their Shifts to Pascly-Cross; She had the Bible in
her hand when she committed Adultery, and Tempted her man, who first refused
her, to the Sin, by Blasphemously telling of him, There was no Condemnation to
them who were in Christ. Balfour a Butcher in Kippin Parish, pretended, with
his Wife, to be Converted by Mr. John Law, a Conventicle-Preacher. Soon after
their Conversion, she ran away with his man, and took all his means with her;
but he followed, and overtook them at Dumfreis, recovered some of his Money and
Goods, and Sold them both to Virginia. I could instance in more, whom I forbear
to mention out of respect to their Families, and Relations. And since his
Majesty's Restoration there have been above an hundred Adulteries, and many
more Fornications committed by Conventiclers, within the single Presbytery of
Glascow, whose names shall be produced out of the Registers, if they be denied.
Ravillac Redivivus page 43. says, That there are more Fornications and
Adulteries committed in the West, where these Fanatics so much abound, than in
all the Nations besides; and particularly, That Seventeen of them of one
Parish, within the Presbytery of Pasely, did public Penance at one time. Mr.
Hamilton who has long been Captain of Mr. Welshes Guards, and whom they made
Lieutenant General to Jesus Christ in the last Insurrection, (for they
Bl^^phemously said, That Christ was their General) is notoriously known for a
Deb^^^he^* who spent the Estate which his Father left him, on Whores. About a
Year ^^^e, one Mr. Williamson a Conventicle Preacher, being searched for
betimes one Morning at the Lady Carrs House of Cherritry, came upon the first
Allarm to her Bedside, and (...) her he could be no where safe, but in her
Ladyships own Bed; whereupon she very charitably let him come to Bed to Her and
her Daughter; but the noise increasing, she went out to treat the Soldiers, and
by that means to divert them from a strict Search. After the Soldiers were
gone, she bethought her self of whom she had left in Bed with her Daughter, and
presently ran into her Chamber, where finding the good man still in Bed with
her Daughter, she called him names, and then fell furiously upon the young
Lady; but she fell a crying, and told her it was then too late to Chide, which
having found to be true, they were married together before he went from her
House. The Tragical Story of the Lord Forrester is now the Talk of the whole
Kingdom. He was the first man who took the advantage of his Majesty's late
Proclamation of Indulgence, to set up an House-Conventicle without the
Precincts of Edinburgh, Two Miles out of the Town. Thither his Lordship went
with his Concubine, who was his late Wives Niece, the first Sund^^, and ordered
Solemn Thanks to be given for the great Blessing of Indulgence; but ^^^n after,
some day of that or the very next Week she killed him, when he was Drunk, with
his own Sword, with which he had often threatened to kill her Aunt, his late
Lady* who was a great lover of the English Church. She was since Arraigned and
Condemn for the horrid Murder, and told the Court she was Married to his
Lordship, who for that purpose (she said) promised her to get a Dispensation
from the Pope. Ravil. Rediv. also says, That almost all, who are Executed for
Witchcraft, come from this holy People, as they call themselves. Most certain
it is, That the Five Witches, which bewitched Sir George Maxwell of
Nether-Pollock to Death, and the Four which bewitched Robert Hamilton of
Barnes, were all Presbyterians, who dyed owning that Party, and disowning, and
bearing Testimony against the Bishops and Curates, and against the Belief, the
Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, calling them Popish Trash at the Stake,
when they were ready to be Burnt. They were discovered by one Jannet Duglass,
who pretends to have the Second Sight; but is believed to have a Familiar
Spirit. And it is Observable, That both Sir George, and the Lord of Barnes,
both Zealous Covenanters, consulted with her for the recovery of their health.
In the beginning of November last, a Discovery was made of a great number of
Witches in Burrowstoness, a Port on the Forth, where the Fanatics think
themselves most Safe, and where they usually land the Arms which they buy in
Foreign Countries for the Service of the Cause. Five of them, all
Conventiclers, have freely confessed; and the chief of them one -- Vicar was a
most Zealous, and Celebrate Professor, and the greatest Convener of the People
to Conventicles, that was in all the Country.
I could say a great deal more of their other ungodly Practices, but I protest
I am weary with Raking in this Dunghill, and had not said thus much, but for
the same reason as some of the Primitive Fathers set forth the Practices of the
filthy Gnostics, to let the World see what a wicked Sect they are. And
therefore I dare assert with as much confidence, and more reason than this
Rebel and his Brother Kid asserted the contrary, That if ever there were a Sect
of Christians, That were not the People of God, and in whom his Soul took no
Pleasure, then these Rebellious Covenanters are such.
assert, that if the Lord has any purer Church and People in this Land, it has
been in and among these Meetings in Fields and I am glad of this occasion to
tell the Reader, That they used to meet Armed in the Houses, as well as in the
Fields; Nay, it has been a common Stratagem among them, to fill Houses with
Armed men, and then to give it out, That there were Conventicles kept in them,
That so they might have an opportunity to Murder the Officers, Civil or
Military, that were sent to seize them. Thus Mr. George Balfour (since one of
the Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews) having got together a company
of Armed Ruffians in an House near St. Andrews, served Captain Karstairs, and
Mr. Garret, the latter of which after many Shots and Stabs, they left for dead
upon the ground. Thus likewise about, January last, they served the Town-Major
of Edinburgh, as the Papists served Sir Edmondbury Godfrey in London; For,
having filled an House in Edinburgh with Armed men, they sent a Messenger to
the Major, to Advertise him of a Conventicle there; who according to his Duty,
having taken about Three or Four Assistants with him, went to the House to
seize them according to Law. As soon as he knocked at the Door, he was let in,
and was conducted to a Room, where he saw no body, till he was surprised with
Armed men, who rushed in upon them at two Doors and Shot at them, and then fell
upon them with Swords and Durkes, one of the Assistants was Shot dead through
the Back, they Slashed and Stabbed the Major in several places, and dragged him
out of doors, where they left him for dead.
Houses, so much now despised by some, and Persecuted by others. That I
Preached up Rebellion, and Rising in Arms against Authority, I bless the Lord
my Conscience does not condemn me in this, it being never my Design, if I could
have Preached Christ, and Salvation through his name; That was my Work, and
herein have I walked, according to the Light and Rule of the Word of God, and
as it did become (though one of the meanest) a Not a Minister, but an Usurper
of the Ministry: First, As Ordained by Presbyters, whom all See Can. 19.
Council. Sard. and Can. 4. Cont. Constantinopol. 1.
Antiquity never believed to have more power to Ordain a Presbyter, than for
Deacons to Ordain a Deacon, or Presbyter, or for a College of Laymen to Ordain
both. This is a certain truth, and if any ingenuous man desire to be satisfied
in this point, which implies the necessity of Episcopal Orders; let him read a
Book Entitled, A brief Account of ancient Church Government, etc. It is a full
Answer to Blundell, and all the Presbyterian Writers, and was Printed in 4o for
John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard 1662. Secondly, as being
Ordained by Schismatical Presbyters; whose Ordinations, had they had the same
power to Ordain as Bishops have, would by the Sacred Canons have been (...).
invalid upon the account of Schism and Sedition; and the Presbyters Ordained
by them in such a Factious and Undutiful manner, would have been deposed by the
Laws of the Catholic Church. And if the Rebellious Presbyters, the Fathers and
Grandfathers of these now living, who undertook to Ordain, were not guilty of
Schism in the highest manner, then the notion of Schism is a Chimaera, and
there was never such a thing in the Catholic Church. For they Assembled
together without their Bishops, cited them to compear before them, and declared
their Office to be Antichristian, and their Jurisdiction an Usurpation over the
Church. Lastly, They abjured them, and brought the People to do the same in the
Solemn League and Covenant, and Invaded their Office and Jurisdiction; and
their Successors, these Ministers, falsely so called, still persevere to do the
same. Thou art not then a Minister, Thou blind Guide! but (as a great Minister
of State, and the Bulwark of the two Churches told his Majesty, when he was
petitioned for thy life) an Usurper of the Ministry, a Rebel, a Traitor, a
Deceiver of the People, who must answer for the blood of a Thousand poor
Wretches, who perished in the Rebellion at Bothwel-Bridge.
Minister of the Gospel; I have been looked on by some, and misrepresented by
Called the Indulged Ministers. See Note (u) on the first Speech, and Section
the fifth of the Apology.
others, that I have been of a Divisive and Factious humor, and one that
stirred up Division in the Church; but I am hopeful that ye will all give me
now your Charity, being within a little space to stand before my Judge; (and I
pray the Lord, That he may forgive them that did so misrepresent me) but I
thank the Lord, whatever men have said of me concerning this, that on the
contrary, I have been often dissuading from such Ways and Practices, and of
this my Conscience bears me Witness; but here I would not have you mistake me,
as if I did approve of Ways and Practices contrary to the Word of God, and that
of our Covenanted and Reformed Religion; and as I ever abhorred Division and
Faction in the Church, as that which tends to its utter ruin, (if the Lord
prevent it not) so I would in the Bowels of my Lord and Master, if such a
feckless one as I may presume to exhort and persuade both Ministers Nor in the
Faith, or Profession of the Apostles; who both Taught and Practiced the
contradictions to the forementioned Doctrines, and whereof some (for See Romans
16. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. Gal. 1. 19. Rev. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 8. 23. Phil. 2. 25.
there were more Apostles than Barnabas, and Paul, and the Twenty two
especially so called) were Bishops, fixed to particular Diocesses; as St.
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 23.
John at Ephesus, St. Hierom. de Script. Eccles. and in Tit. c. 1.
Mark at Alexandria, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 4.
Titu^ in Cr^te, James called the Compare Matthew. 13. 55. 27. 56. Marc. 15. 47.
with John 19. 25.
Lords Brother, Son of Cleopas at See the Authors quoted in Spalat. l. 2. c. 2.
16. Hegesip. apud. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. Hierom de Script. Eccles. Gal. 2. 18,
19. Acts 12. 17. Gal. 2. 12. Acts 21. 18. Acts 15. All which places show, That
James was resident in Jerusalem, and had some singular Ecclesiastical
Authority, and Presidency there.
Jerusalem, not to mention Eusebius l. 3. c. 4. Hierom de Script. Eccles.
Timothy the first Bishop of Ephesus, and the Angels of the Seven Churches in
the Revelations, whom universal Tradition has delivered for Bishops of the
Seven Asiatick Churches.
and Professors, if there be any Fellowship of the Spirit, any Consolation in
Christ, if any comfort in Love, if any Bowels of Mercy; that ye be likeminded,
having the same Love, being of one accord, of one mind, in lowliness of mind
let each esteem others better than himself, Phil. 2. 1. 3. Harmoniousness and
Oneness in the things of God, can never enough be sought after, and Harmony and
Unitedness in things that tend to the He means the Presbyterian Government,
which, according to them, is Christ's Interest, Dignity, Crown, Kingdom,
Scepter, Government, and Royal Prerogative, by which he Reigns as King in Sion.
Prejudice of Christ's Interest, can never enough be avoided, and fled from. And
as I am willing to lay down my Tabernacle, so also I Dye in the Not in the
Faith of the holy Scriptures; which command every Soul to be Subject to the
higher Powers, and which neither teach directly, nor indirectly, That the
Episcopal Government is an Antichristian, or the Presbyterian by Kirk-Sessions,
Presbyteries, and Synods, a Divine Institution; or that the Magistrate has no
privative Power over Ecclesiastical Persons, or in causes Ecclesiastical; or
that Passive Obedience to an unjust Sentence, is as great a Sin, as Active
Obedience to an unrighteous Command, etc.
Faith of the Holy Scriptures, and in the Not in the Faith of the holy
Scriptures; which command every Soul to be Subject to the higher Powers, and
which neither teach directly, nor indirectly, That the Episcopal Government is
an Antichristian, or the Presbyterian by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and
Synods, a Divine Institution; or that the Magistrate has no privative Power
over Ecclesiastical Persons, or in causes Ecclesiastical; or that Passive
Obedience to an unjust Sentence, is as great a Sin, as Active Obedience to an
unrighteous Command, etc.

Nor in the Faith of the Primitive Christians, who looked upon the Bishops, as
the Successors of the Apostles, who derived upon them the same Ecclesiastical
Authority, which they received from Christ. Every one that is but tolerably
versed in the Writings of the Primitive Christians, must needs confess, that
this was the belief of the Primitive Catholic Church; but to confute the
shameful assertion of this ignorant Pseudo-Minister: let us descend to
particular Primitive The Office of a Bishop proved to be distinct from that of
a Priest; and of Divine Institution.
Writers, and see what They say upon this Subject. Ignatius in his Epistles,
insists wholly upon the avoiding of Heresy, and Schism; and the Avoiding of
Schism is every where inculcated by him to consist in this, That without the
Bishop nothing be done, and all with the advice of the Presbyters. Heretofore
some Paraphrastical Copies of this Fathers Epistles, have gone abroad in the
World, in which could not be found the many places which the Fathers quoted out
of them, at least in the same words; but since the Edition of the Medicaean
Greek Copy, by Is. Vossius, and the two old Latin Copies by Bishop Usher, which
differ from the former Copies, and agree with one another, and wherein are
found all the places quoted out of them by the Fathers, and in the same
Expressions wherein they are quoted; no tolerable reason has been given, why
they should not pass for pure and genuine, neither by Blundell, nor Salmasius,
(who probably had written their Books against Episcopacy, before they had seen
these latter Copies) nor our own See their two Answers at the Isle of Wight,
and the Appendix to the Jus Divinum Minist. Anglican. Prop. 3. page 108.
men, who still cry down these Epistles, without mentioning these latter
Copies, or distinguishing between them and the former. This Father who was
Bishop of Antioch, Anno Dom. 69. and contemporary with St. John in his Epist.
ad Magnes* says thus: Vos decet non concuti aetate Episcopi, sed Secundum
virtutem dei patris omnem reverentiam ei tribuere. Ad Smyrnens. omnes Episcopum
Sequimi^i, ut Jesus Christus patrem, and Presbyterium ut Apostolos, diaconos
autem revereamini ut dei mandatum. Nullus sine Episcopo aliquid operetur eorum
quae convenit in Ecclesiam -- illa firma gratiarum actio [Eucharistia]
reputetur, quae sub ipso est, vel quam utique concesserit. Ubi utique apparet
Episcopus illic multitudo sit, quemadmodum utique ubi est Jesus Christus illic
Catholica Ecclesia, non licitum est sine Episcopo neque Baptizare neque Agapen
facere, sed quod utique ille probaverit, hoc est deo beneplacitum, ut stabile
sit, and firmum omne quod agitur. Honorans Episcopum a deo honoratus; qui
occultum ab Episcopo aliquid operatur diabolo praestat obsequium. Ad Ephesians.
Concurrite sententia dei, etenim, Jesus Christus incomparibile nostrum vivere,
patris sententia ut and ipsi, [Episcopi] secundum terrae fines determinati Jesu
Christi sententia sunt, unde decet vos concurrere Episcopi Sententia. Ad
Magnes. In concordia dei studete omnes operari, praesidente Episcopo in loco
dei. -- Ad Tralles. omnes revereantur diaconos ut mandatum fesu Christi, and
Episcopum ut Jesum Christum existentem filium patris, Fresbyterion autem ut
[Synedrium] concilium dei -- valete in Jesu Christo subjecti Episcopo, ut dei
mandato, similiter and Presbyterio. Ad Magnes. He commends Sotion the Deacon,
Quoniam subjectus est Episcopo, ut Gratiae Dei, and Presbyterio ut legi Jesu
Christi. See many more citations to this purpose out of this Father, in Dr.
Hammonds Dissert. 2. Cap. 25.

Justin Martyr in his Apology to the Emperor Antoninus, written about 155.
speaking of the Customs of the Christians, writes thus: Postea [ 1 Timothy 15. 17.
(...)] praeposito panis, and aquae and vini poculum offertur, quibus ille
acceptis -- praesidens vero postquam gratiarum 1 Cor. 14. the holy Communion is
called (Eucharistia) giving of Thanks, (...).
actionem, [ Eucharistiam] perfecit -- deinde lectore quiescente praesidens
orationem qua populum instruit, habet, precibus peractis, panis offertur, and
vinum and aqua, and praepositus itidem preces and gratiarum actiones fundit.


Hegesippus a Christian Writer, who flourished Anno Dom. 140. is cited by
Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 22. giving an account of the Bishops of his days, where he
says, Se plurimos Episcopos Romae Convenisse, and ab omnibus unam eand^mque
audivisse Doctrinam; and particularly of the Church of Corinth, Corinthiorum
(inquit) Ecclesia in recta fide permansit [(...)] usque ad Primum Episcopum,
and Jerusalem, Postquam (inquit) Jacobus cognomine Justus Martyrium pertulit,
frater patruelis domini Symeon Cleopae filius Episcopus constituitur.
About the same time, or a little before, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth wrote
several Epistles, apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23. One to the Athenians, in which he
makes mention of Quadratus formerly their Bishop, and of Publius the Martyr,
Bishop before him, and then of Dionysius the Areopagite, St. Paul's Convert, as
their first Bishop. Another to the Gnossians, in which he exhorts Pinytus their
Bishop, Ne grave onus castitatis fratrum cervicibus tanquam necessarium
imponat. Another, Gortinensi Ecclesiae, in which he commends their Bishop for
the renowned courage of his Church, (...); Another to the Romans, wherein he
commends Soter their Bishop for his Charity and Hospitality.
Irenaeus, who flourished Anno Dom. 180. writing against the Valentinians,
Argues thus: Habemus annumerar^ eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi
in Ecclesiis, and Successores eorum iisque ad nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt,
quale ab his deliratur. Etenim si recondita mysteria scissent Apostoli, quae
seorsim, and latenter a reliquis perfectos docebant, his vel maxim traderent
ea, quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant, valde enim perfectos, and
irreprehensibiles eos esse volebant, quos and Successores relinquebant, suum
ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes. After this he gives a Catalogue of the
Bishops, who had succeeded Peter, and Paul, in the Church of Rome; after again,
he urges, That Polycarp made Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles, knew no such
Doctrine; Polycarpus autem non solum ab Apostolis edoctus, and conversatus cum
multis ex iis qui dominum nostrum viderunt, sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in
ea, quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia constitutus Episcopus, quem and nos vidimus. --
See also his Epist. to Victor apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23. Clemens Alexandrinus
Contemporary, which Irenaeus in the Story of the Debauched Young Man, who was
converted by St. John, apud Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 23. says, Quum ex insula Patmo
Ephesum rediisset Johannes, ad finitimas rogatus se contulit, partim ut
Episcopos constitueret, partim ut integras Ecclesias componeret -- vultu ad eum
verso, qui super cunctos Episcopos erat constitutus, hunc (inquit) testibus
Ecclesia, and Christo studiose tibi commend^ -- Afterward, agedum (inquit)
Episcope, read nobis depositum, quod ego, and Christus tibi commendavimus, sub
testimonio Ecclesiae cui praesides. And Strom. 6. mentions three Degrees of
Clergy, nam hic quoque in Ecclesia ((...)) progressiones Episcoporum,
Presbyterorum, Diaconorum sunt imitationes gloriae Angelicae; and Strom. 3. T^m
Episcopos (inquit Apostolus) oportet constitui, qui ex domo propria toti quoque
Ecclesiae praeesse meditati
Tertullian, whom I should have named before Clemens Alexandrinus, de
praescript. c. 36. affirms* That the Apostles Chairs or Apostolic Thrones,
remained still in his time, which was the latter end of the Second, and
beginning of the third Age. -- Percurre Ecclesias Apostol^^as, apud quas ipsae
adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesident -- proxima est Tibi Achaia?
habes Corinthum. Si non long es a Macedonia, habes Philippos, habes
Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Asiam tendere, habes Ephesum. Si autem Italiae
adjaces, habes Romam -- and c. 32. Edant ergo origines Ecclesiarum suarum,
evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones ab initio
decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis
viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraver^t habuerit auctorem, and
antecessorem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos differunt: sicut
Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum a Johanne collocatum refert, sicut Romano^um
Clementem a Petro ordinatum itidem, perinde utique and caeterae exhibent, quos
ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis traduces habeant.
And de Baptismo c. 17. dandi quidem habet jus summus sacerdos, qui est
Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri, and diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi autoritate.
After Tertullian, and Clemens Alexandr. Origin, who flourished Anno Dom. 230.
writes thus in 2* Hom. in Number. Putasne qui sacerdotio funguntur, agere omnia
quae illo ordine digna sunt? -- unde est, quod saepe audimus blasphemare
homines, and dicere, Ecce qualis Episcopus, aut qualis Presbyter, vel qualis
diaconus? and Hom. 16. in Matthew. Episcopi, and Presbyteri, quibus creditae --
and 7 Hom. in Hierom. Plus a me (Presbytero) exigitur, quam a diacono, plus a
diacono, quam a Laico, qui vero totius Ecclesiae arcem obtinet (Episcopus) pro
omni Ecclesia reddet rationem.
Cyprian, who flourished Anno Dom. 248. writes thus in his 27. Epist. Lapsis.
Dominus noster -- Episcopi honorem, and Ecclesiae suae rationem disponens in
Evangelio, loquitur, and dicit, Petre, ego tibi dico, quia tu es Petrus, and
super ipsam petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae inferorum non vincent
eam, and tibi dabo claves, etc. -- inde per temporum, and successionum vices
Episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super
Episcopos constituatur, and omnes actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos
gubernetur, cum hoc itaque divina lege fundatum sit, miror -- Epist. 68. he
calls the Ordination of a Bishop, sub populi assistentis conscientia
traditionem divinam, and Apostolicam observationem; and instanceth in Act. 1.
15. and Epist. 65. upon occasion of a Deacon reproaching Rogatianus his Bishop,
-- Pro solita tua humanitate fecisti, ut malles de eo nobis conqueri, quum pro
Episcopatus vigore, and Cathedrae autoritate haberes potestatem, qua posses de
illo statim vindicari. -- Meminisse autem diaconi debent, quoniam Apostolos, id
est Episcopos and propositos dominus elegit, diaconos autem post ascensum
domini in coelos Apostoli sibi constituerunt, Episcopatus sui and Ecclesiae
ministros; And Epist. 42. to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Hoc enim vel maxim
frater and laboramus and laborare debemus, ut unitatem a domino, and per
Apostolos nobis successoribus traditam, quantum possumus obtinere curemus.
Epist. 69. -- Christi, qui dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoc ad omnes praepositos,
qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt, qui audit vos, me audit.
Faith of the Apostles, and Not in the Faith of the holy Scriptures; which
command every Soul to be Subject to the higher Powers, and which neither teach
directly, nor indirectly, That the Episcopal Government is an Antichristian, or
the Presbyterian by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods, a Divine
Institution; or that the Magistrate has no privative Power over Ecclesiastical
Persons, or in causes Ecclesiastical; or that Passive Obedience to an unjust
Sentence, is as great a Sin, as Active Obedience to an unrighteous Command, etc.
Primitive Christians, and Not in the Faith of the holy Scriptures; which
command every Soul to be Subject to the higher Powers, and which neither teach
directly, nor indirectly, That the Episcopal Government is an Antichristian, or
the Presbyterian by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods, a Divine
Institution; or that the Magistrate has no privative Power over Ecclesiastical
Persons, or in causes Ecclesiastical; or that Passive Obedience to an unjust
Sentence, is as great a Sin, as Active Obedience to an unrighteous Command, etc.
Protestant Reformed Churches, and particularly of the Not in the Faith of the
holy Scriptures; which command every Soul to be Subject to the higher Powers,
and which neither teach directly, nor indirectly, That the Episcopal Government
is an Antichristian, or the Presbyterian by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and
Synods, a Divine Institution; or that the Magistrate has no privative Power
over Ecclesiastical Persons, or in causes Ecclesiastical; or that Passive
Obedience to an unjust Sentence, is as great a Sin, as Active Obedience to an
unrighteous Command, etc.
Church of Scotland, whereof I am a poor Member, that has been so wonderfully
Carried on against so much Opposition Athanasius, who flourished Anno Dom. 326.
writing to Dracontius Elected to a Bishopric, and refusing it, says, Quod si
nullam omnino mer^edem Episcopi functioni destinatam credis, servatoremque, ^ui
eam ita instituit contemnis --
Damasus, who flourished Anno Dom. 367. Epist. 4. de chorepiscopis. Nullus ex
Septuaginta discipulis, quorum speciem isti gerunt, nil de hoc quod Apostolis
eorumque successeribus (Episcopis) specialiter debebatur legitur assumpsisse.
Epiphanius, who flourished Anno Dom. 360. Haeres. 75. writes thus: -- Docet
divinus Apostoli sermo, quis sit Episcopus, and quis Presbyter, cum dicit ad
Timotheum, qui erat Episcopus, Presbyterum ne objurges. Ambrosd. de dignit.
sacerdot. writes thus: Claves illas regni coelorum in beato Petro cuncti
suscepimus sacerdotes, (i. e. Episcopi) for in the following Chapters he
asserts, That the Bishops in St. Peter received the Keys from Christ, and the
Presbyters from them.
Augustine, ad Quod vult deum de haeresibus, among other Heretical Opinions of
Tom. 6.
Aerius, reckons this for one, Quod docebat Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla
differentia debere discerni. De verbis dom. Sermon. 24. Dicit ergo, qui vos
Spernit meSpernit.) Si solis Apostolis dixit, qui vos spernit, me spernit,
Spernite nos, si autem sermo ejus pervenit Tom. 10.
ad nos, and vocavit nos, and in eorum loco constituit nos, videte ne spernatis
nos, and ne ad illum perveniat injuria, quam nobis feceritis. Ad Crescon.
Grammat. l. 1. Attend etiam quod quemadmodum ad Titum cum explicaret (Paulus)
qualis esse Episcopus debeat -- there he asserts Titus to have been a Bishop,
Non ergo solos, qui ex circumcisione sunt, sed eos maxim tales esse ait,
oportere tamen in doctrina sana redargui refellique ab Episcopo vaniloquos, and
mentis seductores indubitata praeceptione firmavit. There he says, That St.
Paul commanded all Bishops in Titus to exhort, and convince Gainsayers; And in
the next words he says, He looked upon that Precept, as given to himself, Unde
hoc etiam mihi jussum esse cognosco, hoc pro viribus ago, -- Enarrat. in Psalm.
44. (in our Translation the 45. 16. v.) Pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filii.
Quid est pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filii? patres missi sunt Apostoli,
pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi, Constituti sunt Episcopi. Hodie enim
Episcopi, qui sunt per totum mundum unde nati sunt? ipsa Ecclesia patres illos
appellat, ipsa illos genuit, and ipsa illos constituit in sede patrum
[Apostolorum] non ergo te putes desertam quia no* vides Petrum, quia non vides
Paulum, quia non vides illos, per quos nata es; de prole tua tibi crevit
paternitas. -- Contra literas Petil. lib. 2. c. 51. Cathedra tibi quid fecit
Ecclesiae Romanae in qua Petrus sedet, and in qua hodie Anastasius sedet, vel
Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae in qua Jacobus sedit, and in qua hodie Johannes
sedet -- quare appellas Cathedram Pestilentiae Cathedram Apostolicam?
Chrysostom in his Homily on Ignatius, says, he was Successor to St. Peter in
the Sea of Antioch, ordained by the Apostles, ut tanto principatu dignus; and
in his Homilie^ on Timoth. and Titus, he expresses his opinion of Bishops, as
of an Apostolical Institution.
Perhaps it may seem superfluous to show further how effrontedly this
Antiepiscoparian speaks, in saying, He died in the Faith of the Primitive
Christians; but because the Presbyterians have the confidence to represent
Hierom, as a Patron of their Cause, I will take a little more pains to show how
they have abused the World by this pretense; in demonstrating, that this Father
held the authority of Bishops to be above, and distinct from that of
Presbyters, and also a Divine Institution. For in his Catalog. Script.
Ecclesiast. 3. Gal. 1. 18. 19. Acts 12. 17. Gal. 2. 12. Acts 21. 18. Acts 15.
Jacobus frater Domini cognomento Justus -- post passionem Domini statim ab
Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus ordinatus -- Hegesippu^ vicinus
Apostolicorum temporum in quinto commentariorum libro de Jacobo narrans, ait,
Suscepit Ecclesiam Hierosolymae post Apostolos frater Domini Jacobus,
cognomento Justus. 11 Timotheus autem Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4.
Ephesiorum Episcopus ordinatus a beato Paulo -- 12 Titus Episcopus Cretae --
27 Polycarpus Johannis Apostoli discipulus, and ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus
ordinatus, totius Asiae princeps fuit. Com. in Galat. 1. 19. Paulatim
procedente tempore, and alii ab his, quos dominus elegerat ordinati sunt
Apostoli, sicut ille ad Philippenses sermo declarat, dicens, necessarium
existimavi Epaphroditum. -- Here he asserts, That the Apostles, who were chosen
by Christ, Ordained other Apostles, as Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 25. and Mark.
Catal. Script. Eccles. 15. Marcus discipulus and interpres Petri -- primus
Alexandriae Christum annuncians Bishops proved to be a distinct Order from
Presbyters.
constituit Ecclesiam, And Prooem. in Matthew. Marcus interpres Petri Apostoli,
and Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episcopus. -- Here by the way, it may be
observed in answer to NAKED TRUTH, That St. Hierom says, That such, and such
persons were Ordained Bishops by the Apostles; and surely in saying so, he
means, that they had a new Ordination distinct from that of Presbyters; for
it is most reasonable to suppose, that the Father used the word in the
signification it had in his own time, when, and long before there was a
distinct Ordination of Bishops, by a new imposition of hands, by three Persons
of the Episcopal Order. So in Eusebius. l. 6. c. 4. 3. Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
Anno Dom. 255. writes to Fabius touching the Ordination of Novatianus. Hosce
tres (accitos Episcopos) manuum impositione [(...)] Episcopatum ei dare coegit.
And the same Bishop to St. Cyprian, Epist. 46. Tantummodo circumductos se
quoque commisisse schismatica, ut paterentur ei manus qu^si in Episcopum
imponi. And Cyprian Epist. 68. plainly distinguishes the Ordinations of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, each from other. -- Nec hoc in Episcoporum
tantum, and Sacerdotum, sed in diaconorum ordinationibus observasse Apostolos
animadvertimus; and afterward, Ut ad ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad eam
plebem cui Praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi quique
conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur, plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam
plenissime novit, and uniuscujusque actum de ejus conversatione perspexit, quod
and apud vos factum videmus in Sabini Collegae nostrae ordinatione, ut de
universae fraternitatis suffragio, and de Episcoporum, qui in praesentia
convenerant, quique de eo ad vos literas f^cerant, judicio, Episcopatus ei
deferretur, and manus ei in locum Basilidis imponerentur. See also Cyprian
Epist. 52. and Eusebius l. 5. c. 6. of the like Ordinations, and Can. 1. and 2
Apost. Episcopi a duobus vel tribus Episcopis ordinentur. Presbyter ab uno
ordinetur and diaconus, and reliqui clerici. From all which it is plain, that
Bishops before St. Hierom's time had a different Ordination from Presbyters;
and if so, then the new Ordination must infer a new Authority* and the same
Authority which this Father understood to have been conferred on Timothy, and
Titus Bishops by the Apostles, the same he understands to have been conferred
on Polycarp, and Epaphroditus, and the other Bishops; and hence it appears,
that That notion of Blondels, which Mr. Baxter hugs so much in his
Nonconformists plea, of the Senior Presbyter's being a Bishop without new
Ordination, is a mere Fancy and Shift. But to go on with St. Hierom, in the
conclusion of his Epist. to Evagrius, which the Presbyterians rely so much
upon, Ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sump^as de veteri testamento, quod
Aaron, and filii ejus, atque Levitae in templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi,
Presbyteri, and Diaconi in Ecclesia sibi vendicent. Epist ad Nepotianum, esto
subjectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suscipe -- quod Aaron and
filios ejus, hoc Episcopum, and Presbyteros esse noverimus; and Epist 54.
speaking of the Bishops of his own Age; he says, Apud nos Apostolorum locum
tenent Episcopi. And in Psalm. 45. 16. Nunc, quia Apostoli a mundo recesserunt
habes pro his Episcopos filios, sicut and hi patres tui, quia ab ipsis regeris.
And Epist. 1. ad Heliodor. speaking of the Modern Bishops, he says, Stant loco
Pauli, tenent locum Petri; and Epist. ad Riparium adversus Vigilantium, Miror
Sanctum Episcopum, in cujus parochia esse presbyter dicitur, acquiescere furori
ejus, and non Virga Apostolica confrigere vas inutile, and tradere in interitum
carnis. Here he plainly asserts the Bishops Apostolical Rod, or Authority in
Excommunicating a Presbyter; and by that expression, Quid enim facit, excepta
ordinatione, Episcopus, quod presbyter non faciat? he asserts, That only
Bishops had power of Ordination; and from this Expression compared with the
Those who desire to see* more, may consult Dr. Hammond, di^^ert. 2. Cap. 29.
forecited passages, I appeal to any Presbyterian in the World, whether they
think that this Father durst have undertaken to have Ordained a Presbyter
himself, or durst have owned any Presbyter for such, made such only by the
Imposition of Presbyters hands. Nay in this very Epistle Ad Evagr. he says,
That the Greatness, or Littleness, Richness, or Poverty of Diocesses, makes not
one Bishop above another, but that they are all Ejusdem Meriti, and sacerdotii,
and Apostolorum Successores. And in his Prooem to St. Matthew. speaking of St.
John's Gospel, he says, The Apostle wrote it against the Cerinthians and
Ebionites, Coactus ab omnibus pene tunc Asiae Episcopis, and multarum
Ecclesiarum legationibus. The truth is, this Father being offended at the
arrogance of the Deacons of his time, and especially of those of Rome; wrote
this Epistle to E^agrius, Contra eos, qui diaconum Presbytero aequabant; and
had no ill design at all upon the Apostolical, or Episcopal Office, but only he
scrued up the dignity of the Priests Office to as high a pitch as he could,
which made him contradictory to himself, in asserting the original Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters in that Epist. and his Commentaries upon Titus 1. 5.
where he writes, Idem est ergo Presbyter and Episcopus, and antequam diaboli
instinctu Schismata in religione fierent, and dicerent in populis ego sum
Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae
gubernabantur; postquam vero unusquisque eos, quos baptizaverat suos putabat
esse, non Christi, in toto orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus
super poneretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertinere^, and
schismatum semina tollerentur.

Having now showed, that the Primitive Christians believed the Function of a
Bishop, to be distinct from that of a Presbyter, and Superior to it; and that
the Bishops were the Successors of the Apostles, and of Christ's institution, as
they were, I hope it is plain, that this Antiepiscopal Deceiver dyed not in the
Faith of the Primitive Christians, as he has the impudence here to profess.
From what I have here said of the Episcopal Office and Authority, I may draw
some Corollaries. First, that the Primitive Catholic Church acted in
Conformity to its own Profession, in declaring Aerius, as an Antiepiscoparian,
an Heretic. Secondly, that Church Government is not indifferent, but that the
Episcopos esse in Ecclesia debere tanquam institutionem Apostolicam, ac
ordinationem proinde divinam contra Puritanos* contraque Bellarminum semper
sensi, qui negat Episcopos a deo immediate suam jurisdictionem accepisse. Sed
nihil mirum a Puritanis eum stare, quum Jesuitae nihil, quam Puritano-papistae
^int. This was the Judgment of King James, as is observed by Becanus de Prim.
regn. Angl. c. 7. Jacobi regis praefat. Monar.
Episcopal is immediately of Apostolical, and mediately of Christ's institution,
and by consequence (at least) as unalterable as the Baptism of Infants, and
observation of the Lord's Day; which the Presbyterians with good reason declare,
that the Magistrate ought not to change, or take away. Thirdly, that it is
Blasphemy to say, that Episcopacy is an Antichristian usurpation over the
Church. Fourthly, that to assert with the Covenanters, that the
Presbyterian-Government is of Divine institution; is an Unscriptural,
Heretical, and absurd Doctrine, contrary to the Word of God, and the practice
and profession of the Holy Catholic Church.


And as this Jesuited Presbyterian died not in the Faith, or Profession of the
Primitive Christians, so he died not in the Faith of the Reformed Churches.
First, not of the Church of England, which is Governed by Bishops, like the
Primitive Churches, and after the warrant of their example has Instituted
Ceremonies, and worships God by Liturgical Forms. Nor secondly, of the Reformed
Church of France, which submits to the regulation of the Edict of Nantes, which
is a pure and Secular Edict, and which has always worshipped God by a
Common Prayer Book, and observes Holy Days, as Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsunday; and which reverences Protestant Bishops after the example of
Calvin, and Beza their first Reformers; and owns Ministers Ordained by them,
and are never without some such in their Church. And whose The Kings larger
Declaration page 75.
Pastors, especially those of Charenton, were offended at the Solemn League and
Covenant, as an indelible Scandal to the Protestant Cause; as also the
Professors, Ministers, and Consistory of Geneva; and their neighbor Reformed
Churches, as was certified to King Charles the First by his Public Ministers
abroad.
Nor lastly died he in the Faith of the Reformed Church of Scotland, which
never professed Episcopacy to be an unlawful, or Antichristian Constitution,
etc. as may be seen in the Larger, and Lesser Scoticane Confession in the
Harmony; but I suppose he means the Covenanted Reformed Church, that
Schismatical Military Church which was, and is the Reproach of the Protestant,
or Reformed Name.
by the mighty So he calls the incurable obstination of the Presbyterian Party
in Schism against the Episcopal Church, and Faction, and Rebellion against the
State.
Power, Goodness and Wisdom of God, I bear my witness and Testimony to the
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of the Kirk of Scotland by A great
Presbyteries Trial page 50.
Apostle of the Covenant said in the Pulpit, that the Angels, and Saints of
heaven, if they could leave the sight of God, would be glad to come down, and
see the admirable order of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland by
Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods. Which Platform being no where to be
found in the Scripture, made many that had cried up the Presbyterian Discipline
for a Divine Institution, tu^^ Independents, Quakers, and Atheists, and condemn
it (as in truth it is) for a mere human invention. Which, if Mr. Calvin had not
hit upon, and set up in that exigence in Geneva, had never been known to the
Western, no more than to the Eastern parts of Christendom; at least to great
Britain, where it has been taught in both Kingdoms, without any ground in the
Scriptures, or Antiquity, for the sole indispensable government of the Church.
King Charles his larger Declarat. page 67.
The National Covenant is that which in the Harmony is called Generalis
Confessio; it was first Subscribed by King James of blessed Memory, and his
Household 1580. and by Persons of all Ranks 1581. by an Ordinance of the
Privy Council, and Act of General-Assembly. It was Subscribed again by all
sorts of Persons 1590. by a new Ordinance of Council at the desire of the
General Assembly, with a general Bond for maintaining the true Religion and the
Kings Person; and so far, Authority permitting, or commanding it, all was well.
But then afterward in See the Declaration in (w.) on the first Speech, and the
Kings larger Declarat. page 68, 69, 70.
1638. without the Kings Authority, or Commission from his Council, they
imposed it again according to a new Interpretation of their own, although no
Authority can interpret any Oath, Law, or Rescript, but that which made it, or
those, whom they who made it have Constituted Interpreters, and Judges thereof.
The new Interpretation was, That this Confession was to be interpreted, and
understood against all the pretended Innovations, as if every one of them had
been expressed therein, viz. The Five Articles of Perth, the Service Book, the
Book of Canons, the High Commission, and Episcopacy it self, although these
things were neither named, nor hinted at in that Confession; whereof the first
Framers only abjured in it those Romish Corruptions, which in their time had
infected the Church. Besides all this, they altered the Bond, which was annexed
to the former Confession, by adding these words without authority, A mutual
defense of one another against all Persons whatsoever; by which, what they
meant, the King by woeful experience found. The Copy of this Confession may be
seen in the forecited larger Declaration of the King.
Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and General-Assemblies. Also I bear my
Witness, and Testimony to our Covenants, National, and Solemn-League betwixt
the three Kingdoms, which Sacred and Solemn Oath, I believe, cannot be
dispensed with, nor loosed by any person or Party upon earth; but are fully
binding these Nations, and will be so ever hereafter. Also I bear my Testimony
to our public Confessions of Sin, and engagements to Duty; and that either as
to what concerns the Reformation of our Families, or Persons, or the
Reformation of the whole Church in general; As also to the Causes of A
Seditious and Blasphemous Book so called, which was burnt in Scotland by the
hand of the common Hangman. See Poormans Cup, page 19.
Gods wrath: (the rejecting of which is to be feared to be one of the greatest
causes of Gods wrath this day against the Land.) I do also bear Witness and
Testimony to the Protestation given in against the Controverted Assemblies, in
the public Resolvings for bringing in the So he calls the Loyal, and Episcopal
Party.
Malignant Party into places of Power and Trust, contrary to our solemn
Engagements and Obligations to God; Also I adhere to our See Note (13.) on the
first Speech.
Confessions of Faith, larger and shorter Catechisms. I witness my Testimony
against Popery, which is so greatly increased, yea so much Countenanced, and
professed openly The Scottish Oath of Allegiance.
by many, and that without the least I For Testification of my faithful
Obedience to my most Gracious Sovereign Charles, King of Great Britain, etc.
Affirm, Testify, and Declare by this my solemn Oath, that I acknowledge my said
Sovereign only Supreme Governor of this Kingdom, over all Persons, and in all
Causes; and that no Foreign Prince, Power, State, or Person Civil, or
Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power, or Superiority over the same; and
therefore I do utterly renounce, and forsake all Foreign Power, Jurisdictions,
and Authorities; and shall at my utmost power, Defend, Assist, and Maintain his
Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid, against all Contra omnes mortales.
deadly: and shall never decline his Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as I
shall answer to God.
punishment. I bear witness also against the Antichristian Prelacy now
Established by Law, contrary to our Vows to Almighty God; And against the
Rescinding of our solemn Oaths and Engagements, as a thing that calls for
Divine Vengeance; And against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to our Covenant and
Engagements, especially that Oath of So the Presbyterian Jesuit, calls the
Scottish Oath of Allegiance: This is the Form of it, and let the Protestant
World judge if it be an Oath, That calls for the Vengeance of God.
Supremacy, the Sea Note (w) on the first Speech.
Declaration against our Covenant, and that Bond called the That is, The Bond
for keeping the Peace, whereby the Taker obliges himself only to live
Peaceably, and not to rise in Arms against the King. This Bond was tendered to
the Rebels taken in the Battle at Pentland-hills, and refused by many of them,
who were Hanged, and are since reckoned among the Martyrs of the Cause. It was
likewise tendered to the late Rebels, who were taken after the Battle of
Bothwel-Bridge, but about 300. of them refused it, and are since Transported;
but five more especially, who were accomplices with the Murderers of the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and who would not confess that the Killing of him
was a Sin, or Murder, when they were asked in both Terms by Authority, if it
were so? were Sentenced to be Hanged in Chains at Magus, the place where that
Execrable Murder was committed. Was it ever heard in any other Christian
Nation, That any men refused to dye by the hand of the Executioner, rather than
engage not to rise in Arms against their lawful Sovereign? The Christians under
the Turks would not dye Martyrs, if they Suffered upon that Principle. Lord
Jesu pity the madness, and delusion of this People. Amen. Amen.
Bond of Peace, and that This is the Form of it, and let the World judge,
whether it deserves the name of horrid, or no:
horrid Bond so frequently imposed against the Meetings of his People in Fields
and Houses, intended for the down bearing of the Gospel and Interest of our
Lord and The Form of the BOND.
Master, with all other Bonds public or private, contrary to our I -- --
underscribing, do faithfully bind, and oblige me, That I, my Wife, Bairns, and
Servants respectively, s^^ll no ways be present at any Conventicles, and
disorderly Meetings in time coming, but shall live orderly in Obedience to the
Law, under the Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament made there-anent.
As also I bind, and ^blige me, That my whole Tenants, and Cotters respectively,
their Wives, Bairns, and Servants shall likewise refrain, and abstain from the
said Conventicles, and other illegal Meetings not authorized by Law; and that
they shall live orderly in Obedience to the Law. And further, That I, nor they
shall Recept, Supply, or Commune with forfeited Persons, intercommuned
Ministers, or Vagrant Preachers; but shall do our utmost Endeavor to Apprehend
their Persons. And in case my said Tenants, Cotters, and their foresaids, shall
Contrave^^, I shall take, or apprehend any Person or Persons guilty thereof,
and present them to the Judge Ordinar, that they may be Fined, or Imprisoned
therefore, as is provided in the Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Otherwise
I shall remove them and their Families from my ground; and if I shall fail
herein, I shall be liable to such Penalties, as the said Delinquents have
incurred by the Laws, consenting to the Registration hereof in the Books of his
Majesty's Privy Council, or Books of any other Judges Competent, that Letters
and Executorials may be direct hereupon in Form as Effeirs, and Constitutes my
Procurators.
Obligations and Covenants to God; also against all such that Connive at, or
Complie with, or Strengthen the hands of this Prelatical, Malignant, and
Persecuting Party; As also against all Errors, Schisms, and Heresies, contrary
to our Engagements to God, especially against that Ruining, and Soul-deluding
Evil, or rather This is the Tenor of that Bond, which the Fanatics railed so
much against; and lest the force of it should be Eluded, the Privy Council Rav.
Rediv. page 50*
Enacted, That every Heritor, who should receive into his Lands, or Service,
any Tenants, or Servants of any other Heritor, without a Certificate from him,
or the Minister of the Parish where they lived, That they lived orderly, as to
the matter of Conventicles, should be subject to such Fines, as the Privy
Council should think fit to inflict, to punish them for their Crime, and repair
the damage that should accrue to the Heritor or Master, whose Tenants, or
Servants they did receive.
While the Feuds were kept up in Scotland, it was usual for the King to bind
the Chief for the Peaceable behavior of the whole Tribe, or Clan; and because
the Heritors, or Landlords of that Country have such a despotical power over
their Tenants, it has been the immemorial practice of the King, Privy Council,
and Parliament, upon occasion to bind Landlords of all qualities for the
peaceable demeanor of their Tenants, and to give them Power, and Warrant to
take Bonds from them, or upon their refusal to remove them from their
possessions, if they were Rack-renters; but if they had Leases, to denounce
them Rebels by Letters raised under the Signet of the Privy Council. But
because in England, where Tenants are not so dependent on their Landlords, such
proceedings are not (nor indeed ought to be) practiced; therefore an
inconsiderable party of men, whom the Covenanters look upon as their Patrons,
misrepresented this Bond in that Kingdom, for an Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and
Illegal Proceeding, though some of the chief Complainers had themselves
consented to the Enacting of the like, but more rigorous Orders in 1666. and in
1677. as may be seen in the True Narrative of the Proceedings of the
Privy Council in Scotland, etc. Printed at Edinburgh, and Reprinted by
Authority at London, 1678.
The Field-Preachers damned this Bond with Bell, Book, and Candle; and
particularly Mr. John Welsh, Preaching somewhere about Lanerk, and in Carrick,
after he had severely reproved the People, for not coming Armed to the
Conventicle, with Swords, and Pistols, to defend the Gospel; He said, The
Taking of this Bond, was a renouncing of their Baptism, and making a Covenant
with the Devil more express, and worse than that of Witches. And Mr. John
Dickson, Preaching at a Conventicle May 26. 78. said, That those who had taken
it, had committed a greater Sin, than the Sin of the Holy Ghost, and were
already in Hell.
Those who have read the Books of Keith, and Barclay, the Scottish Quakers,
know the reason why the Presbyterians of that Country are so angry at that
Sect. For they, and their Brethren by the help of their Books, pelt the
Covenanters on all occasions, with such unanswerable vexatious Arguments, as
these: That they ought not to object the Surplice, nor the imposition of other
Ceremonies against the Church of England, who obliged Penitents for Adultery,
and other Crimes to appear in Sackloth, which was both a Symbolical, and Jewish
Ceremony.
Devilry of Quakerism, so much connived at, if not allowed and countenanced by
many, whose Office it is to restrain it; as also against all the steps and
courses of backsliding and defection which have been and now are on foot in
this Land, and against all the Branches and parts thereof, under whatsoever
name or notion. Moreover, I bear my Testimony to all the Testimonies given both
formerly and of late by our Suffering, and Banished That the People of God
called Quakers, have as much reason to say, That they Preach (which is to speak
from God to men) by the Spirit; as the Presbyterians for asserting they can
Pray (which is to speak from man to God) by the Spirit. That they therefore had
the notion of Immediate Inspiration from them; or if by that Phrase of theirs,
Praying by the Spirit, they understood not Inspiration of matter, and words in
their Devotions, which they (the Quakers) profess to have, that then they ought
to pray to God by prescribed Forms in public Worship, as the People of the
Communion of the Anglicane Church do. It being the height of Impudence and
Blasphemy, for an Orator of a Congregation not Inspired, to undertake to pray,
when he is not certain, either what, or how he shall speak. That therefore,
there ought to be no Medium betwixt prescribed, and inspired Devotions in
public Worship; and that either the Church of England, or the People called
Quakers are in the right, and Extemporarians, not Inspired, certainly in the
Wrong. That the Presbyterian Preachers are great Deceivers and Hypocrites, in
pretending to their own People to Pray by the Spirit, and denying to others in
close Argumentation, that they Pray by Inspiration; and that it appears from
their own Writings, that their way of long praying was mere Art, Artificial
Method, or Logical Contrivance, which any witty Boy shall learn and perform, as
well as a Man.
That they of all other Christians cannot be the People of God, who set up, and
maintain their Religion by shedding of Christian Blood; of which they have shed
more in a few years within this little Isle, than was shed in the first Ten
famous Perfecutions within the vast circumference of the Roman Empire; and that
the want of the Spirit of Meekness, and Passive Obedience, (which is as
eminently seen among them, [ the Quakers] as among the Primitive Christians)
plainly declares, they are not Christ's.
That they have no reason to condemn the Church of England for human
Inventions, for that their Prayers before, and after Sermon, and before and
after Baptism and the Lords Supper, are human Inventions; That their Solemn
League and Covenant is an human ( or rather a Diabolical) Invention; Nay, That
their Church Discipline by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods, is not only
an human, but a new Invention, which has no ground neither in the Scriptures,
nor Ancient Christian Writers; whereas Church Government by Bishops (which they
condemn) was a very ancient, universal Constitution, and has far more to say
for it self, than theirs.
That the Bishops, and their Clergy and People, are far more Civil, Kind, Meek,
Affable, and Charitable, than the Ministers and People called Presbyterians,
who have always been of a Violent, Furious, Proud, and Persecuting Spirit, apt
to exclude all from Salvation, but themselves. That they ought not to complain
of legal Rigours, and Persecution, who Persecuted the People which call
themselves the Church, without, and against Law, by all manner of ways, and
with the greatest rigor that men could be Persecuted; and therefore whatsoever
they can suffer from them now, is but what themselves most unjustly inflicted
before. These and such like, are the ways of Arguing, whereby the Quakers vex
and expose the Presbyterians, who therefore, call them (for they have an
excellent talent that way) Devilish, Satanical, Damned, and all other names
that belong to Hell.
Witnesses, and to all the Testimonies of our See Note (3.) on the first Speech.
first Sufferers, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ministers, and others, that have
Suffered in this City and Kingdom, who cheerfully laid down their lives with
admirable See Note (b) on this Speech, and (d.) and (f.) on the first Speech.
Divine assistance; and to all those that have laid down their lives, either
formerly or of late in the Fields; As also to those, who have sealed their
Testimonies, either with Forfeitures, Particularly their Ministers in the Bass.
Imprisonment, or Banishment on this Account, Score, and Quarrel; And
particularly I bear my Testimony against that horrid Violation, done to our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that by usurping upon his Royal Prerogatives, and in
spoiling him of his Crown, Scepter, Sword, and Royal Robe, by taking those
Princely Ornaments to invest a man with, whose Breath is in his Nostrils,
through that woeful See Note (7.) on the first Speech.
Supremacy so much applauded to, and universally owned, even of such of whom
better things might have been expected; I mean the The Hill-Preachers call the
Indulged Ministers (of whom more in Note ( u.) on the first Speech)
Council-Curates, and they represent them to the People as Traitors to Jesus
Christ, because they Preach under Restrictions by License from the
Privy Council; and the Followers of the Field-Ministers hate them as bad as the
Bishops-Curates, (so they call the Church-Ministers) especially those among
them who conscientiously keep the conditions upon which they are permitted to
Preach.
Indulged, and such as Countenanced them in that way, even to the Ruining and
Renting of the Church; which alas is too evident by sad and doleful
experience; As also I bear my Testimony against the Sea Note (18.) on the first
Speech.
Test imposed by the late Convention of Estates, whereby the Enemies of Christ
and his Church are supplied with all necessaries for the utter Extirpating of
the Interest of Christ and his Church. There is one thing more I would say, The
Lord seems to be very wroth with this Land. The causes are many; First. The
dreadful Slight the Lord Jesus has received in the From the Field-Preachers.
Offers of the Gospel; Secondly, The horrid Prophanity that has overpassed the
whole Land, that not only Meetings in Fields, and Houses.
Religion in its Exercise, but even The Scots are naturally a very Civil
People; and where the Covenanting Principles have not soured their Tempers, as
much Civility and good nature may be expected from them, as from any other
Nation in the World. But among the Presbyterian Party, there is nothing but
pure Barbarity to be found toward those, who are known to favor the Church;
especially toward the Bishops, and their Clergy, whom they treat upon all
occasions with all imaginable rudeness; insomuch that I wonder, that this
Gentleman should complain of the want of common Civility, which he could do
upon no other account, but that from the time of his Apprehension, to the hour
of his Execution, he was treated, as Traitors and Rebels usually are under all
the Governments of the World. Certainly, he had forgot his own Party, when he
made this Complaint; and therefore, though he be gone, I shall refresh the
memory of his Brethren, that they upon the same occasion may not make the same
groundless Complaint.
Let them then remember their inhuman usage of Montross, their insolent and
undutiful carriage to his present Majesty, when he stood in need of their
Assistance; the barbarous manner in which they Murdered the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; the barbarous indignities which they offered to the dead Body of
an Officer called Graham, (whom they killed at that Conventicle which began the
late Rebellion) upon the account of his Name: The insolences which they
committed in regular Ministers, and Loyal Gentlemen's Houses, as they Marched
along the Country to Glascow; particularly, in Stabbing, Cutting, and Gashing
his Majesty's Picture, wheresoever they found it; as by name in the House of
the Lord of Hagges: Their barbarous behavior in the Archbishops House at
Glascow, where they burnt his Books, cut in pieces his best Hangings, and
Furniture, and almost killed a Gentlewoman with Blows, who was left to keep the
House, only for saying these words, Gentlemen, I hope you will remember that you
are in the Archbishops House: Their barbarous, and sacrilegious behavior in
the Cathedral of Glascow; where finding a Tombstone over the two Children of
the Bishop of Argyle, with an Inscription of a Modern date, they dug up
their Bodies, run them through with their Swords, and left them lying above the
ground.
The barbarous Lies, and continual defamations with which they Persecute the
Duke of Lauderdale, because he stands as a Bulwark betwixt them and the Church.
Their most barbarous usage of the Church-Ministers, as is evident from the two
forecited Acts of Parliament, for the security of their Persons and Houses: not
to speak of lesser indignities, as of laughing, scoffing, and flouting at them
when they pass the Streets, and refusing to Salute them, when they meet them in
other company; and saying of Grace to themselves at Tables, where they are
called to say Grace for the whole Company, as if they had taken Gods name in
vain, or not concluded the Blessing in the name of Christ.
Nay, The Presbyterian Women of all sorts, not excepting those whose Quality
and Education should have taught them more Civility, would not many years
since, rise up, or bow, or make a Curtesy or drink to a Bishop, till their
Interest obliged them to comply, with a great, and better Principled Lady,
whose example has much reformed them in this Point.
common Civility is gone; Thirdly, There is the horrid perjury in the matters
of our Vows and Engagements; It Is to be Indeed it is to be feared that the
Covenanters will once more bring a Sword upon these Lands to avenge the Quarrel
of the Covenant; and we all know, that the Sword of the Presbyterians, as well
as that of the Jesuits, is the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, which was the
Word, when they rose up in Rebellion to pull the Popish Octavians from King
James in Edinburgh, when he was rescued by the Hammermen, Presbytery Displayed,
page 49.
feared, the Lord will bring a Sword on these Lands which shall avenge the
Quarrel of his Covenant; Fourthly, There is a dreadful Formality and Supineness
in the duties of Religion, which is introductive to that Woe which came upon the
careless Daughters. Fifthly, Horrid ingratitude. What do we render to him for
his Goodness? is not the most of all that we do, wickedness, and to strengthen
our hands to do evil? Sixthly, The want of humility under all our Troubles; We
are brought low, yet we are not low in the sight of God. And a Seventh thing
is, dreadful Covetousness, and minding of our own things more than the things
of God, and that amongst all Ranks. Would to God that there were not too many
amongst us, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and mind Earthly things;
and yet I dare not say, but that there are many faithful and precious to him in
Scotland, both of Ministers and Professors, whom I hope God will keep steadfast,
and who will study to be sound and faithful to their Lord and Master, and whom
I hope he will make as When God immediately called any man to any Charge, or
Business, that would find Opposition from Wicked Men, or Devils; he was wont to
inspire him with supernatural Courage, and Confidence, which by the Jewish
Writers, is called the Spirit of Might; and as More Nevoc. p. 2. c. 38.
Maimonides observes, it was always conferred upon the Person sent, and
Employed by God after the Promise of 1 Hccha any, or Ehjeh gnimmach, Go, and I
will be with thee. This Promise was solemnly made to Moses, Exodus 3. 12. to the
People of Israel, who were called to Fight against Nations greater and stonger,
than themselves, Deuteronomy. 31. 6, 8 to Joshua and the People together, Josh. 1. 5.
to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9. where God assured him, That he would make his
Face strong against their Faces, and his Forehead strong against their
Foreheads, and harder than a Flint or Adamant, so that he should not fear them,
nor be dismayed at their Looks, though they were a Rebellious House. Lastly, To
the Prophet Jeremiah, who told God, That he was no more able to deliver
Prophetical Messages, than a Child; upon which, God assured him, That he would
put his words in is mouth, and be with him; and bid him not be afraid of their
faces, for he would make him a Defenced City, an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls
against the whole Land, both against King and Priests, and Princes and People,
c. 1. 8, 9, 17, 18. and c. 15. 19, 20. which are the very words, which this
Dec^iver Blasphemously here applies to the Covenanted Party, as if the Spirit
of Impudence, Rebellion, and Resisting the Magistrate, which rests upon them,
were that Spirit of Supernatural Courage and Confidence, which God was wont to
give to those whom he sent and employed about Business of his own. So in the
New Testament, when Christ sent out the Apostles, after his Resurrection, he
solemnly made this Promise unto them: All power (says he) is given unto you,
both in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore, and Teach all Nations Baptizing
them, etc. and Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded
you, and lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the World. Accordingly
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, who were the Prophets of the New
Testament, with what invincible courage and resolution those poor men appeared
before the Jewish, and Heathen Tribunals; and with what astonishing Presence,
both of body and mind, they bore the name of Jesus before the Kings and
Princes, and People of the Earth. I have been the more full in the explication
of this notion, because the Presbyterian Ministers have been so guilty of
applying these Promises of Divine Presence, and Assistance to themselves, and
of talking and acting at such an arrogant rate; as if, like the Prophets, they
had been sent, and employed by God. By this means, they have brought a great
Scandal on the Ministerial Office, and made People loath the Pulpit, and the
Church. How often do we find King James in the Sixth Book of Spotswood's
History, complaining of the Sawciness, and Presumptuousness of the As Welsh,
Bruce, Blake, Balguan, Oud. Davidson, and the Ministers of Edinburgh. See also
Presbytery Displayed, page 36. and 37. in the Story of James Gibson, who called
the King to his Face before his Privy Council. Persecutor, and Jeroboam, and
that he and his Children should be rooted out, and conclude the (Royal) race.
Ministers? with what confidence and authority did they presume to impose their
own Injunctions, and Prohibitions upon him, and denounce Judgments against him
in Gods name, as if they had been sent to him by Gods express Call, like Nathan
to King David, Moses to Pharaoh, and Elijah to Ahab, etc. and he had given them
Foreheads of Adamant and Flint. And as they treated him with a Counterfeit sort
of Prophetical boldness, liberty and zeal, so their Successors who had, and
have a double Portion of that rude and insolent Spirit, have treated his Son,
Charles the First, and his Grandson, Charles the Second; and so they will treat
all the Kings that shall sit on this British Throne, as long as there can be
found in the Bible any Prophetical Message, Promise, or Enterprise, which they
can with any color apply to themselves.
Brazen Walls, and as Iron Pillars, and as strong Defenced Cities, in the
following of their Duty in these sad and evil Times: but it were to be Wished
that there were not too many, who strengthen the hands of Evil Doers, and make
themselves Transgressors by studying again to To set up Episcopacy, which
before they had thrown down.
build that which formerly they did destroy. But let such take heed to that
Zachar. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Prophet relates the Vision he had of the flying
Roll, which was twenty Cubits long, and ten broad, full of Curses on one side
against Thieves, and on the other against False-Swearers, which this Deceiver,
affecting (as the manner of this sort of Preachers is) Prophetical Expressions,
and Confidence, abusively applies to those, who set up, or contributed to set
up Episcopacy, which they had most sinfully abjured. But if the Prophet saw a
Roll full of Curses twenty Cubits in length, and ten in breadth, against the
Thieves, and False-Swearers in the Land, the wicked Covenanters may justly
expect as many Curses to fall upon their heads, as a Roll ten times longer and
broader can contain. Their Rebellions, Treasons, Murders, Assassinations,
Railings, Slanderings, Perjuries, Blasphemies, and Schisms will make it appear
at the day of general Judgment, that all the Curses in the Law are due unto
them, when as many of them, as dye without Repentance, shall be damned for
those very Sins which they blasphemously call Graces; and when Jesus Christ for
all their LORD! LORD! have we not done and Suffered such things for thy Name,
and thy Interest, shall say unto them, I know ye not, depart from me ye
Hypocrites, ye Blasphemers of my Name, into everlasting Burnings, prepared for
the Devil and his cursed Angels.
flying roll in Zechary, and let all the Lords Servants and Ministers, take
heed that they watch and be steadfast, and quit themselves like men and be
strong, and that they set their Trumpets to their mouths, and give a seasonable
and faithful Warning to all Ranks concerning Sin and Duty, especially against
the Sins of the sinful Time. It Is to be lamented, and it is sadly regrated by
all of the Behold the Pride, the Spiritual Fast, and Self-Conceit of the
Presbyterian Sect, who in all their Printed Books, Sermons, and Discourses,
commonly Style themselves, The People of the Lord, The Godly Party, The Saints,
etc. as if all others of Reformed Episcopal Churches, and Communions, were a
wicked, or at best but a mere formal sort of Christians, who did not belong to
God. They agree in this Spiritual Arrogance not only with the Arrians,
Donatists, and Novatians of old, but with the Papists themselves, who proudly,
and uncharitably call themselves Catholics, and exclude all others from that
Title, and from Salvation, but themselves.
Lords People, that there has been so much silence and fauting even amongst
Ministers; of how great concernment is it now in this sad juncture, that
Ministers consider well, what it is that God calls for at their hands, not to
be silent, now especially when so many horrid and cruel things are acted, when
they are so much called But* to return to the Lords People; I dare boldly say,
That never any Reformed Bishop did yet equal, nor any Pope ( --) exceed the
Pride and Insolence of many of our Presbyterian Beckets, as may be seen in
Spotswood's History, not to mention others, which I have had occasion to cite.
Was ever any Answer more Insolent than that of Mr. Robert Bruce, to King James?
Your Majesty shall either lose the Marquess of Huntly, or Me; and yet this
Answer is defended by Mr. Robert Bailly in his Dissuasive from the Error's of
the Times. It is notoriously known in Scotland, That Mr. Robert Duglas of
Edinburgh, and Mr. Patrick Gillespy of Gl^scow, were more haughty and insolent
in their behavior, than all the Bishops (I will not except Cardinal Beton)
that ever were in the Land. But to proceed; from the Pride of single men, let
us reflect a little on the Insolence of their Spiritual Judicatories, the
Presbytery, Synod, and General Assembly. It is notoriously known what great
state the Presbytery, or Consistory kept with King James, and it is upon Record
in the Presbytery-Books of Edinburgh, how his Presbytery Displayed, page 7, 8.
etc.
Majesty not once, but often has sent Persons of Honor, and great Quality,
demanding, or rather requesting some things of them, who have heard the
Commissioners propose the Kings mind; but then to keep the power and place
which the King of Sion had given them in that dignity which was suitable to so
high a Trust, they have dismissed the Noblemen sent by the King, without
Answer, and by Order of that Spiritual House, have appointed one or two, as
Commissioners of the Presbytery, to go to the King with their Will, and
Pleasure, losing nothing of Christ's Authority, and carrying themselves with the
King, almost, as if two Free States, or two Free Princes had met to treat
together.
The Presbytery of Edinburgh, as many yet alive remember, attempted to censure
the Merchants for Carrying Wheat to Spain in a time of Dearth, because it was
to feed Gods Enemies; but above all to Transport Wax to Spain, for that was to
be accessory to Idolatry, because the Wax for the most part was employed in
making Tapers, and Candles to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints.
The Presbytery Displaid, page 9. 10.
Presbytery of St. Andrews threatened to Excommunicate a man, who had gotten a
Judgment from the highest Civil Judicatory in the Kingdom, against another who
ought him a Sum of Money, if he persisted to put the Judgment in Execution; and
he for fear of this dreadful Court and Sentence, desisted from his Pursuit.
Many instances might also be produced of this holy Sunhedrim's repealing of
Royal Grants confirmed by Law, and of citeing Noblemen, and Gentlemen before
them, for Commencing Civil Suits against their own Tenants, because it bred
Strifes, withdrew the People of God from their lawful Vocations, and hindered
the progress of the Gospel, as may be seen in the Author cited in the Margin.
They also undertook to Remove, and Transplant any Minister at pleasure, though
never so learned and unblameable, upon a pretense, That it was for the Good of
the Church, or, That the Congregation was not edified by his Preaching; as may
be seen in the same Author, and as many yet alive can tell.
In their Provincial Synods, which consisted of Commissioners chosen out of all
the Presbyteries within the Province, they extended their power in proportion
to the dignity of the Court; and the Commissioners at their Return home, were
to see that every Minister of their respective Presbyteries, were to Preach as
the Synod did direct, and command. The Nobility and Gentry were forced to court
these leading Ministers, and make Addresses to them, as to so many Popes, to
strengthen themselves and their Party, with the Spiritual Sword. In their going
to, and coming from the Synods, the most Eminent of the Nobility, and Gentry
used to meet them, and invite them to their Houses, lodge them in their best
Chambers, and set them at the head of their Tables; and never any Bishops in
Scotland entered Cities with such Convoys, and attended with such great
Personages, as these Arch-Presbyters used to do. When Mr. Robert Bruce came
from his Visitation in the West, or South, he made his Entrance into Edinburgh
like a Prince, or like an Ambassador, or like the Pope into Rome: insomuch,
That King James once looking out of the Window in his Palace, and seeing his
Cavalcade, said with indignation, which extorted an Oath from him, Mr. Robert
Bruce, I am sure, intends to be King, and declare himself Heir to King Robert
Bruce.
Their General-Assembly was composed of Commissioners sent from all the
Presbyteries of the Kingdom. It was the Supreme Sanhedrim, wherein the King of
Sion sat in the highest power and glory he could upon Earth. It was there,
where Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, and Infallibility was to be found, and
concerned it self in all Temporals, in ordine ad Spiritualia. The authority
they exercised in it, they pretended to have by immediate Trust from Christ;
and declared, That whosoever obeyed not this Sovereignty, be he King or Subject
(it was all one) was to be Excommunicated. They allowed the King (or his
Commissioner) to sit there, but he had only one affirmative Voice, and if the
greater part of Voices determined contrary to his Voice, or his Conscience, he
was bound to put it in Execution. In this Court, the Spiritual legislative
power was seated; it was the highest Tribunal, and Judicatory of Christ upon
Earth, from which no Person, no Office, no Condition of Creature was
Privileged, and from whence no Appeal could be had.
The King had no power to appoint the time or place of this Assembly, but once
a Year it must necessarily meet, and oftener if the Commissioners of Assembly
thought fit. They Contemned, Usurped, and renounced the Sovereign Authority as
it served their Turn; they denounced the same War against their Enemies, which
God commanded Israel to execute against the Canaanites; all the Ministers of
the Church were to Preach as they directed, and a Minister Preaching Treason,
was to be censured by none, but themselves. They challenged to themselves a
power of Condemning, Annulling, and Repealing Acts of Parliament, and of
subjecting the Supreme Civil Judicatory of the Nation to them; as in the case
of Graham one of the Lords of the Session; and if any man doubt of the truth of
these Assertions, let him read the 6th. Book of Spotswood's History, or the
Author of Presbytery Displayed in the General-Assembly.
In their General-Assembly 1648. July 28. page 7. they made an Act, and
Declaration against the Act of Parliament and Committee of Estates, and against
all Oaths and Bonds imposed in the common Cause, without the Consent of the
Kirk. They also Ordained all that engaged in the late Kings Relief, to incur
the wrath of God, and to be processed with the highest Censure of the Church,
which was the height of Blasphemy, Insolence, and Pride.
This Self-Conceit, and Persuasion which they had of their own Spiritual
Excellence, and dearness to God, is the true reason why they indulge themselves
the liberty of speaking so Contemptibly, Disdainfully, Slanderously, and
Reproachfully of the Church, and all that are of Episcopal Communions, without
any regard to the Functions or Qualities of Men.
Naphtali rails at the late King of Blessed Memory for a Papist, and having an
hand in the Irish Rebellion; and at his Present Majesty, for not punishing the
Papists for Burning of London, and compares him to Nebuchadnezzar, for setting
up a Golden Image to be Worshipped, and to Saul, and Uzziah, for Usurping the
Priests Office, and to Julian the Apostate, for destroying the Christian
Religion, page 9. 26, 28. He also calls the Appointing the 29. of May, a
Profane Institution, and says, That the Native issue of the Prerogative is the
Establishing the Kingdom of Antichrist, and an Usurpation of the Prerogative of
Jesus Christ; and says, That the King Erects a Papacy in himself more absurdly
than the Pope did; and says, That he is a stated Antichrist. Pages 39, 40, 41,
90.
He Reproaches the Parliament page 86. saying, That they made the Kings Throne
the foundation of Perjury and Apostasy; and page 87. he says, That they
Blaspheme the Spirit and Work of the Lord, in the Act For the Anniversary
Remembrance of his Majesty's Birth and Restoration; and pages 2. 93, and 94*
he accuses them all of horrid Apostasy, and Rebellion against God, and of
appointing a Declaration of high Impiety to be Signed; and says, They were the
Rebuilders of the Kingdom of Antichrist.
As for the Privy Council, he calls them Murderers. Page 123. and page 91. he
says, That they have set the King in Christ's Throne. He rails at the City of
Edinburgh, for the Engagement they took of their Burgesses against the Rebels
at Pentland. Hills, p. 166, 167. and accuses them of Apostasy, and Rebellion
against God, and threatens them with the Burning of London; and pages 177, 178.
he tells them, They had made a Conspiracy against the Lord, and against his
Anointed.
As for the Church-Ministers, he calls them Wolves, Thieves, Graceless
Hirelings, and Plants which God never planted; and says, It is the
indispensable Duty of the People to drive them away, and root them up, page 108.
The Author of the Apologetick Narration, calls the Honorable Senators of the
College of Justice, Perjured Men, and the Vilest of Men, from whom no Justice
can be expected, and who are not worthy to be Judges among the Heathens, etc.
and all because they have taken the Declaration against the Covenant. Pages
328, 329.
The General-Assembly 1648. in their Supplication to the late King, ( August
12.) who was then under imprisonment, has these words: It shall be your
Majesty's Wisdom in this, as in all that has befallen you these Years past, to
read the righteous hand of the Lord, writing bitter things against you: as for
all your provocations, so especially for your resisting his Work, and
authorizing by your Commissions, the shedding the blood of his People; for
which it is high time to repent, that there may be no more wrath against You,
and Your Realms. And page 58. of that Supplication, they say: Had your Majesty
hearkened to our Counsel some years ago, the blood of many thousands, that now
lies upon your Throne, might have been spared.
The Assembly and Parliament in their Declaration against Montross, Printed
1649. pages 7, 8, etc. call him Excommunicate Traitor, Viperous Brood of Satan,
Child of the Devil, perfidious proud Atheist, and Traitor, though he had the
Kings Commission for all that he did, and was a man of as eminent Piety, as
Valor.
The Assembly of Divines at London, with the Scottish Commissioners drew up a
Letter in Latin, and the same did the General-Assembly in Scotland, which by
order of the English House of Commons, (for so they called themselves) they
sent to the Belgic, French, Helvetian, and other Reformed Churches; wherein
they assure them, That the King made it his whole business to root out the
Protestant Religion, and used all means possible to reduce the Nation to Popery
again.
I know a Gentleman, who has a Letter pretended to be written from Paris in
the name of the French-Church, dated June 5. 1662. wherein they call the
Parliament of Scotland an ungodly Assembly, a Seed of Evil Doers, that gather
themselves together against the Souls of the Righteous, and condemn Innocent
Blood; that slay the upright, and breath out Blasphemies against the Heavens,
etc. But the Style of this Letter demonstrates, That it was written by some
Western Fanatic, and Fathered on the French Church.
In the Declaration of the Lords and Commons of England, sent to the
General-Assembly 1643. page 9. they affirm, That the King and the Prelatical
Party in England were in Arms for the ruining, and destruction of the
Protestant Religion, and all the Professors thereof; and in the English
Ministers Letter to the Assembly page 10. they call the King, and his Party, a
generation of Brutish, Hellish Men; and page 17. they affirm, That the
Prelatical Party are combined for the universal depression of the true
Protestant Religion in Europe.
Naphtali page 117, 118. says, That the Bishops are favorers and encouragers
of all Profaneness, Drunkenness, Adultery, Blasphemy, and that they have heaped
together in their own Persons the Dunghill of vilest Vices, and transmitted the
same over all the Land; and the whole Fanatical Gang rail just now at the
present Bishops, as their Predecessors did at the Bishops 1638. Page 300. he
accuses Archbishop Burnet, (now the most worthy Archbishop of St. Andrews) of
furious Zeal, Pride, Ambition, and Contempt of his Clergy, and domineering over
them; though he is known in both Nations to be one of the most Moderate, Meek,
and Humble Men on the Earth, and one that loves and cherishes his Clergy like a
Father, and as a Father is beloved and reverenced by them again. He also calls
the Bishop of the I^les, who is a man of eminent Temperance, a Glutton; and the
Bishop of Dunkell, who was a most Pious Man, and lover of true Piety in other
Men; an hater of Godliness, and Good Men. And as for the Curates, (as he calls
the regular Clergy) he calls them in general, Men void of the Fear of God,
Drunkards, Whoremongers, and what not? page 302. And at this rate the whole
Sect talks of Bishops, Episcopacy, the Clergy and the Church; and he that can
speak with most Venom and Malice against them and the King, and the Duke of
Lauderdale, is counted the greatest Saint
Mr. Andrew Cant, Eldest Son of old Mr. Andrew Cant, and the true inheritor of
his Fathers violent Spirit, was deposed by the Synod of Aberdeen, from his
Ministry at Banchrie, for railing at the King, the Queen, and the Bishops, not
long after his Majesty's Restoration. He said, The Maintaining of Bishops
against Gods Will, had tried the Kings Predecessors, and if he should be so
foolish as to set them up again, down he should go, do what he could. He said,
That her Majesty was a Vagabond Woman, compassing Sea and Land to prosecute her
wicked Designs, and (like a true Presbyterian Cursing Meroz) Wished the Cross,
if not the Curse of God to accompany her.
Mr. Welsh, as Ravill. Rediv. relates, page 45. in a Preachment to a Multitude
of 7000. People, spoke these words, The King, the Nobles, and the Prelates are
sure the Murderers of Christ; and then sitting down in his Chair, he said, Oh
People I will be silent, speak oh People, and tell me what good thing the King
has done since his home coming; yea, has he not done all the mischief a
Tyrant could do? At another Conventicle not long after, he spoke thus, or to
this purpose, That God would yet assert the Cause of Pentland-hills, in spite
of the Curates, and their Masters the Prelates, and in spite of the Prelates,
and their Master the King, and in spite of the King, and his Master the Devil.
This Spirit of Railing, Slandering, and Reproaching, has always been the Gift
and privilege of this People of the Lord, from their first Original to this
day. For, John Knox in his Appeal and Admonitions Printed 1644 calls Queen Mary
Stuart, a Wicked, Mischievous, Proud, False, Dissembling, Unconstant Woman, a
breaker of Promises, a Traitoress to the Crown of England; and call her Reign,
a Monstriferous Empire of a wicked Woman, an Usurped Government, etc and old
Mr. John Welsh, Grandfather to the Villain before mentioned, in a Sermon said,
That King James was possessed with the Devil, and compared him to a Mad Man, etc.
And Mr. Blake in a Sermon at St. Andrews 1596. as Spotswood cites him in his
6th. Book page 423. said, That all Kings were the Devils Bairns, That the Kings
heart was Treacherous, and That the Devil was in the Court, and Guiders of it;
That Queen Elizabeth was an Atheist; That the Nobles, and Lords were
Miscreants, Godless, Degenerate, Dissemblers, and Enemies to the Church; That
the Privy Council were Holliglasses, Cormorants, and men of no Religion. For
all which, notwithstanding, the Kirk would not let him be questioned, because
it was delivered in the Pulpit.
Accordingly, we still find how that evil Spirit haunts the holy Sect at this
day, in Lying, Slandering, Reproaching, and Backbiting all that love, or
defend the Church. In particular, I cannot but observe, what monstrous and
malicious Lies and Calumnies they and their Patriots have for some years,
almost daily raised against the Duke of Lauderdale, for no other reason, but
because he stands as a Work of Defense between the Projectors against the
Government and the King, between Presbytery and Episcopacy, Popery and the
Church. And therefore we need not wonder at that Speech of King James (who was
experimentally acquainted with the Presbyterian Spirit) to Dr. Reinolds at
Hampton Court, who begged of his Majesty a Presbytery, or a Constitution very
like it: Stay I pray you for one seven Years before you demand that of me, and
if you find me pursey, and fat, and my windpipes stuffed, I will perhaps
hearken to you: for let that Government once be up, I am sure I shall be kept
in breath, and then we shall all of us have work enough, both our handfulls;
but, Dr. Reinolds, till you find I grow lazy, let that alone. Presbytery
Displayed page 7. And so much for the Lords People.
and ought to be concerned to As if they were Apostles, and the Christian, or
Protestant Religion depended upon their Breath.
speak even upon the peril of Life. It Is certainly a dreadful Sin in the sight
of God. I shall only desire that God may open the mouths of some of his
faithful Servants, that with all Impudence; See Note ()
boldness they may speak out the mind of their Master, that so the Work,
Interest, Crown, and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ may not be destroyed, and
that the As if the Salvation of the People depended on the mouths of these
Blasphemous Pseudo-Ministers.
Souls of poor People which are precious to God may not be, without a
Testimony, Ruined. I shall add but 2 or 3 words more; First, all that are
profane, I would exhort you seriously that ye would return to the Lord by
sincere repentance; if ye do, iniquity shall not be your ruin; if not, know
that the day of the Viz. By the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon; for as this
People think themselves the People of God in as peculiar a sense as the Jews
were: so, like them too, they pretend to be Carnifices gentium, which made them
call their Standard, Christ's Banner, and march with Gallows of the common Make
for the common sort of the Enemies of God; but for the Nobles that durst Oppose
Christ and his People, they had invented a new sort of Machine, with Hooks and
Spikes, whereupon, first they intended to Hang them up, and then to set up
their Quarters and Heads as Traitors and Rebels to Jesus Christ.
Lords Vengeance is near, and it hastneth on. O know for your comfort, that
there is a door of mercy yet opened, if ye be not despisers of the day of
Salvation: and ye that have been and yet are Reproachers and Persecutors of
Godliness, and such as live Godly, take heed, take heed, sad will your day be,
when In the Old Testament, Jewish sense, to scatter his Enemies by the Sword of
his People.
God arises to scatter his Enemies, if ye repent not of all your ungodly
deeds. 2ly. All those that are Gallios, if their own private Interests prosper
and go well, they care the less for the Interest of Christ, take heed, be
zealous, and repent lest the Lord pass that Sentence, I will spue you out of my
mouth. 3ly. As for the truly Godly, and such as are lamenting after the Lord,
and are mourning for all the abominations done in the City and in the Land, and
are taking pleasure The Rubbish, and Ruins of the Presbyterian-Government,
upon which they strive to build the whole old Fabric again, as the Jews
endeavored to Rebuild the Temple on its old Foundation in Zion, till
Earthquakes, Fire, and Lightnings made them desist from the cursed Work.
in the rubbish, and stones of Zion, be of good courage, and cast not away your
Confidence; I dare not say any thing to future things, but surely the Lord has
a An handful of Precious, Zealous, Militant Saints, of whom every single man
thinks he can chase Ten of Christ's Enemies, and Two put Ten thousand of them to
Flight.
handful that is precious to him, whom he will be gracious to. This is a dark
night, how long it may last the Lord knows. O let not all the sad disasters,
that his poor People are trusted with (though very astonishing) terrify them.
Beware of Snares that abound; cleave fast to your Covenanted reformed Religion;
do not shift the Cross of Christ, if ye be called into it, it is better to
Suffer than to Sin; account the Consider how blasphemously this Text is applied.
Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of the World. In the
last place, let not my Death be grievous to any of you; I hope it will be more
profitable both for you and for the Church and Interest of God, than my life
could have been; I bless the Lord, I can freely and frankly for give all men
the guilt of it, as I desire to be forgiven of God. Pray for them that
Persecute you, and bless them that Curse you. As for the Cross of Christ, I
bless the Lord, I never had cause, nor have cause this day to repent for any
thing I have Suffered, or can now Suffer for his name. I thank the Lord who has
shown mercy to such a vile Sinner as I am, that ever he should have advanced me
to such a high dignity, as to be made a He was never made a Minister, either
immediately by God, as the Apostles were, or by men Commissioned from God, as
the Episcopal Ministers are, nor by men not Commissioned by God, I mean by
Presbyters in a case of absolute necessity, (which is the only case that can
justify Presbyterian Ordination;) but by men who were themselves Shismaticks,
and Usuppers of the Ministry, even as he himself is.
Minister of the Blessed and Everlasting Gospel, or that ever I should have a
He calls the Delusion of so many poor People, in following him into the Hills,
and from the Hills into Rebellion, The Seal of his Ministry upon their hearts.
According to which Sense, the Anabaptists, Quakers, and Missionary Jesuits, nay
Mahomet himself, may be said to have had a Seal set to their Ministry upon the
hearts of the ignorant Multitudes, whom they deceived.
Seal set to my Ministry upon the hearts of some in several corners of this
Land. The Lord visit Scotland with more and more faithful Preaching, and send a
reviving day to the Work and People of God; and in the mean time be patient, be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, and live in love
and peace one with another, and the Lord be with his poor afflicted groaning
People that are left behind.

Now Ibid farewell to all my Friends and dear Relations. Farewell my poor Wife
and Child, whom I leave on the good hand of him who is better than Seven
Husbands, and who will be a Father to the Fatherless. Farewell all Having
finished my Animadversions, I now proceed to give a true, and brief Narrative
of the horrid Murder of the late Archibishop of St. Andrews, as a further
Commentary on the Whole.
Created Comforts, and Welcome Everlasting life, Everlasting glory, Everlasting
Love, and Everlasting praise; bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within
Me, praise his holy Name.

John King.

A True and Short NARRATIVE Of the Horrid MURDER Of the Reverend Father in God,
James, Archbishop OF St. Andrews, Primate, and Metropolitan of all SCOTLAND,
And one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, On the Third of May
1669. Drawn out of the Records of the Privy Council of Scotland, and from the
Depositions of many Witnesses Examined upon Oath before that Honorable Board,
and the Sheriff-Deputy of Fife, in which Shire the Murder was Committed.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, in the Year 1680.

A True and Short NARRATIVE Of the Horrid MURDER Of the Reverend Father in God,
James, Archbishop OF St. Andrews, etc.
THere was a true Account of this Horrid Murder Published by Authority in June,
or July last 1679. it was Printed at London for Andrew Forrester, next door to
the Miter Tavern in Kings-street Westminster, and was drawn up by a learned
Gentleman, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in Scotland, who
concealed his name, as all men have reason to do, who write any thing that may
offend, or provoke the Bloody Sects. He wrote it to correct a Scandalous and
Lying Narrative, which according to the Reports that had been spread about
London by the In particular by Dr. J. and Dr. B.
Presbyterians and other Sectaries there, related, That the Archbishop was
Killed by -- -- Hackston, whom his Grace had cast in a Suit at Law, and some of
his oppressed Tenants, who Conspired together out of private Revenge, to take
away his Life.

But because many notable Particulars relating to this Murder are come to light
since the True Account of it was Printed; I hope I shall do Service both to the
Public, and the Memory of that great Man, in giving a more full, and exact
Narrative of the Assassination of his Sacred Person, which, excepting the
Solemn Paricide committed on the most Sacred Person of our late most Gracious
Sovereign, will perhaps appear to be as Barbarous a Murder, as ever was
committed upon a mere Man.

My Narrative will consist of three Parts; whereof the first shall be a plain
Relation of the Matter of Fact, without any Rhetorical Exaggerations, which
serve for nothing but to render the Historian suspected, and misbecome the
simplicity of the Historical Style. Secondly, I will show out of the
Presbyterian Writers, the Bloody Principles upon which this Murder was
committed: and in the Conclusion I shall show by what steps, and degrees of
Cruelty and Sedition they arrived at such a desperate undertaking as this
Murder was, and the Rebellion which immediately followed thereupon.

I shall begin the first part with telling the Reader, That the Archbishop had
been attending his Majesty's Service in the Privy Council at Edinburgh; from
whence he went over into Fife in the Afternoon, on the Second of May 1679. That
Night he Lodged at Captain Seatons House in a Village called Kennoway, which is
in the midway betwixt Bruntisland and St. Andrews. About Midnight, as the
People of the Town report, two Men well Mounted and Armed, came thither to
enquire if the Archbishop of St. Andrews was Lodged at Captain Seatons; and as
soon as they were informed that he was, they presently Rode out of the Town
again. The next morning being the Third of May, several Parties of Horsemen
were seen to traverse the Road betwixt Kennoway and St. Andrews, who doubtless
were the Assassins, who watched for an opportunity to effect the Murder, which
they had long designed. But the Lord Primate, who was a Man of great Natural
Courage, and whom so many Deliverances, for almost Twenty Years, from the hands
of those Bloody Zealots, had now brought to an entire Confidence in Gods
Protection, took Coach about Nine of the Clock, without any presage or
apprehension of Danger. He had none but his Elder Daughter to Ride with him in
the Coach, and only three Servants on Horseback to attend him; one of whom he
had sent before he was Assaulted, to pay his Respects to a Person of Honor, by
whose House he passed on his Road. He advanced in his Journey in great
security, till he came to a little Countrey-Village called Magus, two Miles
distant from St. Andrews, betwixt an Eleven and Twelve of the Clock in the
Forenoon. There he first perceived himself to be pursued by an Eleven or Twelve
Men barefaced, well Mounted, with Pistols Cocked in their Hands, and drawn
Swords hanging in Strings from their Arms. As soon as he spied them, he bid his
Coachman Drive as fast, as his Horses could Gallop, but alas too late! for the
Assassins furiously pursued him, and in their Pursuit Shot at him several times
in the Coach, running as fast as Six good Horses could draw it. The Coachman
(who discovered the Villains before his Lord, and had thereupon begged leave of
him, but was not permitted to Gallop away) had certainly outdriven them, if one
Balfour of Kinlock, Mounted on a very fleet Bay Horse, had not overtaken them;
who not daring to Attack the Coachman, because his Whip did fright his spritely
Horse, rod up to the Postilion, whom he wounded with his Sword in the Face,
Shot one of the foremost Coach-Horses, Ham-stringed the other, and so stopped
the Coach. By that time this was done, the rest of the Murderers came up, and
one of them Fired a Pistol, or a Blunderbuss so near his Breast, that his
Daughter rubbed off the burning which stuck to his Gown. Then they called to
him by the name of Dog, Villain, Apostat, Persecuter of the Godly, Betrayer of
Jesus Christ and his Church, and bid him come out of the Coach to receive what
he deserved for his wickedness against the Kirk of Scotland. Upon this his
Daughter got out of the Coach, and fell on her knees, begging her Fathers Life;
but they regarding neither her Prayers nor Tears, threw her down several times
upon the ground, trampled upon her, and wounded her; which her tenderhearted
Father seeing, after much reproachful language and many threatenings, came
meekly out of the Coach, and with calmness said unto them, Gentlemen, I know
not that I ever injured any of you, or if I did, I am ready to make you
reparation; and therefore I beseech you to spare my life, and I promise I will
never pursue you for this Violence, and I pray you consider before you bring
the guilt of Innocent Blood upon your selves. The reverence of his Presence,
and his undaunted courage in addressing himself so resolutely, and gravely unto
them, surprised them, and made them stand a little while, as it were unresolved
what to do; and one of them relenting, cried to the rest, Spare these Gray
Hairs: but their cruel Zeal overcoming their natural Pity and Justice, paused
not long before they replied, He must dye, he must dye; and then again calling
him Traitorous Villain, Judas, Betrayer of the Interest of Christ, Enemy to God
and his People, said unto him, Thou shall now receive the reward of thy
Apostasy, and Enmity to the People of God. Then seeing them determined to take
away his Life, he begged a little while to Pray, telling them, He would pray
for them; but they scornfully told him, That they cared not for his Prayers,
being sure that God would not hear so base a dog, as he was. Then looking
steadfastly upon one of the Assassins, whom he seemed to know, he kneeled down
before him, and said unto him, Sir, You are a Gentleman, and I must beg my last
favor from you, That since you are resolved that I must dye, you would have
pity upon my poor Child here, and spare her Life, and for this, Sir, give me
your hand. And thereupon stretching his hand toward the cruel man, he had for
a return a very great blow with a Shable, which almost quite cut off his hand,
and the Villain redoubling his Stroke, gave him another violent Wound upon the
left Eye, which cut him two Inches above it, and one below. This Stroke knocked
him down, but getting upon his knees again, he said, Gentlemen, it is now
enough, you have done your Work, and holding up his hands (as well as he could)
to Heaven, he fervently cried out, Lord Jesus! have mercy on my Soul, and
receive my Spirit. While he was in this posture of Devotion, they wounded him
in his hands, which he held up to Heaven, and in other parts of his Body, till
in a kind of composure he laid down his head upon his arm, saying, God forgive
you, and I forgive you all. These were the last words which he uttered, like an
excellent Christian; after which they gave him no less than sixteen Wounds on
his Head, insomuch that it seemed to be all one Wound: and pieces of his
shattered Scull, and Brains were some days after found on the ground, that
unhallowed Golgotha, where he was Slain. Having thus hackt, and cleft his Head,
some of them as they were going away thought they heard him groan, which made
them go back, and to make sure work, stir about his Brains in the Scull with
the points of their Swords. Having finished their long desired Murder, they
made his Servants solemnly Swear not to discover them, and then bad them in
derision take up their Priest; and having said so, Rode back to Magus, where
they first assaulted the Coach, and one of them, by name John Balfour of
Kinlock, as he passed by that Town, was heard to say very audibly, and
distinctly, That now Judas was killed.

What I have here written concerning the manner of this execrable Murder of the
Primate, his devout behavior toward God, and his meek carriage toward his
Murderers, and the several mild Expressions in which he addressed himself unto
them, and the most rude unchristian language in which they replied, is taken
from the Information of the young Lady, who Rode with him in the Coach, and the
Depositions of his Graces Servants, whose Examinations were taken upon Oath
before the Privy Council, in whose Registers they may be seen. And as for the
savage manner in which they did wound him, I shall here set down, for the proof
thereof, the Certificate of a Doctor of Physic, and three Surgeons, who by
order from the Privy Council did view, and embalm his Body.

WE underscribers being called to visit the Corpse of the late Lord Archbishop
of St. Andrews, do find, That he had received a Wound by a Sword over the left
Eye, extending two Inches above, and one below, making a great Suffusion of
Blood upon the Cheek, and upper and lower Eyelid. Next we found many Wounds
upon the Posterior part of his Head, insomuch that the whole Occipital bone was
shattered all in pieces, and a part of the Brain lost thereby upon the place,
which certainly being so great, could not but occasion his present Death. There
were only two Wounds to be seen upon the Body, the first two or three Inches
below the right Clavicle, betwixt the second and third Rib, which was given by
a Shot not reaching the capacity of the Breast. The next was a small Wound upon
the Region of the Kidneys, given by a small Sword. Likewise we found three
Wounds upon his left hand, which might have proved mortal, though he had
escaped the former. Also another upon the right hand as dangerous as the
former: as Witness our Hands, at St. Andrews the Fifth day of May 1679.

Sic Subscribitur. George Petullo M. D. William Borthwick Chir. Henry Spense
Chir. Ja. Pringle Chir.


I desire the Reader here to observe, That the Archbishops Body was pierced by
a Shot, betwixt the second and third Rib, which the Author of the False
Narrative did industriously deny; and for the truth of his Assertion,
impudently appealed to William Borthwick, one of the three Surgeons, who
subscribed the Certificate above written. The reason why that malicious man had
a mind to make the world believe, That the Bullets did not pierce the
Archbishops Body, was to insinuate to the People, that he was Shot-free, and by
consequence had that privilege from the Devil, or at least had recourse for
his security against Bullets, to Magical Talismans, and Charms.

The Privy Council had no sooner received the news of this horrid Mur(...) they
proceeded with all imaninable care and diligence to dis(...)ation of the
Archbishops Ser(...) out the following Proclama(...)wn.

A PROCLAMATION Ordered by His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, upon the
Horrid Murder of JAMES late Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate and
Metropolitan of all Scotland, and one of his Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council of that Kingdom.
At Edinburgh, Sunday the Fourth of May, 1679. CHARLES By the Grace of GOD,
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, or Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting:
We being fully and by legal Proofs assured of the late Horrid and Bloody
Murder committed upon Saturday last, being the Third Day of May instant, by
Ten or Eleven Fanatic and Execrable Assassinates, upon the Person of the most
Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES late Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate of all
Scotland; which Barbarous and Inhumane Assassination will (we doubt not) spread
Harrour and Amazement in the Hearts of such as believe that there is a GOD, or
a Christian Religion; A Cruelty exceeding the Barbarity of Pagans and Heathens,
amongst whom the Officers and Ministers of Religion are reputed to be Sacred,
and are by the respect born to a Deity whom they Adore, secured against all
such Bloody and Execrable Attempts; A Cruelty exceeding the belief of all true
Protestants, whose Churches have justly Stigmatized with the Marks of Impiety
all such as defile with Blood those Hands which they ought to hold up to
Heaven; and a Cruelty equal to any with which we can reproach the Enemies of
this True and Reformed Church! By which also not only the Principles of Humane
Society, but our Authority and Government (the Archbishop of St. Andrews being
one of Our Privy Council) is highly violated, and Example and Encouragement
given for Murdering all such as serve Us faithfully according to the Prescript
of Our Laws and Royal Commands: Daily Instances whereof We are to expect whilst
Field-Conventicles, those Rendezvouses of Rebellion, and Forgers of all Bloody
and Jesuitical Principles, are so frequented and followed, to the scandal of
all Government and the Contempt of Our Laws; and which Murder is, as far as is
possible, rendered yet more detestable by the unmasked Boldness of such as
durst openly with bare Faces in the midst of Our Kingdom, at Midday assemble
themselves together, to Kill in Our Highway the Primate of Our Kingdom, and
one of Our Privy Council, by so many Strokes and Shots, as left his Body as it
were but one Wound, and many of which being given after they knew he was Dead,
were remarkable Proofs they were acted by a Spirit of Hellish and Insatiable
Cruelty:

Have therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit hereby to
Command and Charge all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs of Regalities and
Bayliaries, and their Deputies, Magistrates of Burghs, and Officers of Our
Standing Forces, to Search, Seek, Take, and Apprehend the Persons Guilty of the
said Horrid Murder, or any saspected by them, until they be brought to Justice;
and all Our good and faithful Subjects to concur in the Taking and Securing (as
far as is in their power) those Assassinates. And in respect there is a Company
of vagrant and skulking Ruffians, who, to the great Contempt of all Government,
do Ride through this Our Kingdom, Killing Our Soldiers, Deforcing such as put
Our Laws in Execution, and Committing such Horrible Murders, who might be
easily Discovered, if all such, amongst whom they Converse, did, according to
their Duty, endeavor to Apprehend them, or give Notice of their Residence: We
have therefore thought fit, Conform to the 144 Act of Parliament 12, King James
6. to Command and Charge all Our Subjects, that whenever any unknown Men or
Vagabonds happen to repair amongst them, That they with all possible speed
Certify any of Our Privy Council, Officers of Our Forces, or any having Trust
under Us, thereof; With Certification to them, That if they omit the same, they
shall be punished with all Rigor, Conform to the said Act. And since several of
the said Assassinates are known to have been Tenants in the Shire of Fisse,
whose Faces will be known to such of the Witnesses as were present; We hereby
Require and Command all the Heritors and Masters of the said Shire of Fisse and
Kinrosse, to bring their Tenants, Cottars and Servants, living in the
respective Presbyteries, upon the several days, and to the places following,
viz. To St. Andrews, etc. There to be seen by the said Witnesses, and to
continue there until they be Examined; With Certification to such of the said
Tenants, Cottars and Servants as shall be absent, they shall be reputed as
accessory to the said Crime; And the Masters, if they produce them not, or if
hereafter they harbor any that shall not Compeer, they shall be reputed as
Favorers of the said Assassination. And whereas there are several Persons
under Caption and Intercommuning in the said Shire for several Causes, and lest
Persons, who are innocent, may be thereby debarred from appearing, We have
thought fit hereby to sist and supersede all Execution upon any Letters of
Caption or Intercommuning, or any other Warrant, for securing of Persons for
the space of Forty eight hours, after the said Diets of appearance. And to the
end the said cruel Murder may be the more easily discovered, We do hereby
offer and give full assurance of Our Indemnity to any one of the said
Assassinates, who shall discover his Accomplices, and such as hounded them out,
and present payment of the Sum of Ten Thousand Merks to any who shall inform
who were the said Assassinates, if upon his Information they, or any of them
can be Apprehended, that they may be brought to condign Punishment. And We
Ordain these Presents to be Printed and Published at the Market-Cross of
Edinburgh, and other Places needful.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourth Day of May 1679. and of Our
Reign the One and Thirtieth Year. GOD save the KING.
But though this Proclamation Printed at Edinburgh by Authority, and Reprinted
at London, was sufficient to convince the World of what Principles* and Sect
the Lord Primates Murderers were, yet the Patrons, and Favorers of the
Scottish-Presbyterians at London, had the Confidence to give this Public Act
the Lie, and say, (as indeed they dare take the Confidence to say any thing)
That it was drawn up at Whitehall by the Duke of Lauderdale, and sent by him to
the Privy Council of Scotland, who will Publish any thing which he shall order,
and in any Form which he shall prescribe.

After the issuing out of this Proclamation, the Privy Council were very
diligent in Examining the Inhabitants of Magus, and many others upon Oath,
whose Depositions are extant in the Registers of the Privy Council; and very
many were Examined also in the Sheriff-Court of Fiffe, according to the tenure
of this Proclamation, and their Examinations are kept in the Records of that
Court: From whence it was made apparent, that the Bloody Assassins, and many
others who were strongly presumed to have been Abetters, and Contrivers of the
Murder, were notorious Fanatics, Frequenters of Field-Conventicles, and
Followers of Mr. Welsh and other Traitorous, Intercommuned, and Rebellious
Preachers. Nine of the Actors in this Tragedy were discovered by their Names
and Sirnames, which, as it is fitting to set forth the horror of such a Murder,
I shall here set down in Letters of Blood.

John Balfour of Kinloch, David Hackston of Rathillet George Balfour The Names
of the Murderers.
in Gilston, James Russel in Kings-kettle, Robert Dingwall a Farmers Son in
Caddam, Andrew Guillan Weaver in Balmerinoch, Alexander Henderson and Andrew
Henderson, Sons to John Henderson in Kilbrachmont, George Fleming, Son to
George Fleming in Balbuthy.

The Depositions of the Witnesses, who upon Oath proved these Persons to have
been Actors in the Archbishops Murder, ly upon Record as abovesaid, to satisfy
any, who perhaps may doubt of the truth of what is here said; more particularly
it was deposed by one James Anderson Farmer, at a Farm called Teuchits, That
George Balfour abovementioned, came after the Murder to his Brothers House at
Gilston, and told him it was done, and that the rest ( of the Murderers) waited
for him on Taces-Moor; and that he having returned to them, they went all Nine,
and possessed themselves of the Barn at Teuchits about Three in the Afternoon,
from whence they parted about Seven, when all of them spoke with the said James
Anderson, who knew them all particularly, and named them, as they are
abovementioned.

Thus far the Discovery was made, when the late Rebellion broke out on the
Twenty ninth of May, which forced the Privy Council to desist from their
vigorous pursuit of the Murderers, and apply themselves to the Suppression of
that Insurrection, which carried with it the fate of the three Kingdoms, and
would have certainly very much shaken the Government, if the Rebels had got the
first Victory, or could but have maintained their ground. But they were no
sooner Beaten, and the Kingdom Resetled, but the Privy Council resumed their
care in pursuing the Discovered Murderers of the Lord Primate, (who also had
all taken Arms in the Rebellion) and issued out this following Proclamation the
Twentieth of September following, for the Apprehension of them.

A PROCLAMATION Anent the Murderers of the late Archbishop of St. Andrews, and
appointing Magistrates and Councils of Burghs Royal to Sign the Declaration at
Michaelmas next.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, or
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting: We taking to Our Consideration how much the
Protestant Religion, and the Honor of this Our Ancient Kingdom are stained by
that Barbarous and Horrid Assassination and Murder of the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; whereof We have by several Proclamations expressed Our Abhorrency,
and prohibited the reset of these Murderers whom We have excepted from Our
late Gracious Pardon and Indemnity: And albeit it was the Duty (not only of
those in Authority under Us) but of all Our Subjects, to use their endeavors
for discovering and bringing to Justice these execrable Persons, Enemies to all
Humane Society; yet We understand, that these Murderers, and likewise diverse
Heritors and Ministers who were engaged in the late Rebellion, and are excepted
from Our Indemnity, have been harbored and reset in some places of this
Kingdom, to the great Reproach of the Nation, and Contempt of Our Authority and
Laws: Therefore, We with advice of Our Privy Council, do Command and Charge all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities, and Baylieries, and their Deputes,
Magistrates of Burghs, and others in Authority under Us, to Search for, Seek,
Take, and Apprehend the Persons afternamed, viz. John Balfour of Kinlock, David
Haxstoun of Rathillet, George Balfour in Gilstoun, James Russel in Kettle,
Robert Dingwal* a Tenants Son in Caddam, Andrew Guillan Webster in Balmerinoch,
Alexander and Andrew Hendersons, Sons to John Henderson in Kilbrachmont, and
George Fleming Son to George Fleming in Balbuthy, who did perpetrate and commit
the said horrid Murder; and also, any Heritors and Ministers who were in the
late Rebellion, and any Persons who have Reset and Harbored these Murderers
and Rebels, wherever they can be found within the Bounds of their respective
Jurisdictions, and put them in sure Ward and Firmance, until they be brought to
Justice: And in case these Persons flee out of the Shire, That they give notice
thereof to the Sheriff, or other Magistrate of the next Shire or Jurisdiction,
that they may in like manner Search for, Apprehend and Secure them until they
be brought to Justice; With Power to the Sheriffs, and other Magistrates
aforesaid, if they shall find cause, to call to their Assistance Our Subjects
within their Jurisdiction, or such a number of them as they shall think fit,
who are hereby Required to Concur with, and Assist them, under all highest Pain
and Charge. And We expect, That the Sheriffs and other Magistrates aforesaid,
will use exact diligence in the Premises, as they will be answerable on their
highest Peril. And seeing by the Fifth Act of the second Session, and the
second Act of the third Session of Our first Parliament, The Magistrates and
Councils of Burghs are Ordained at and before their Admissions to the exercise
of their Offices, to Sign the Declaration appointed to be Signed by all Persons
in Public Trust, under the Certifications therein expressed. Therefore, We with
Advice aforesaid, do Command and Require the Magistrates and Councils of the
respective Burghs of this Kingdom, who shall be chosen at the next ensuing
Elections, to Sign the foresaid Declaration, as is prescribed in the said Acts,
and to return the Declarations so Signed by them to the Clerks of Our
Privy Council, betwixt and the third Thursday of November next; certifying such
as shall not give Obedience, that they shall be proceeded against, and censured
conform to the said Acts of Parliament. Our Will is Herefore, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Market-Crosses of the Head Burghs of
the several Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance
of the same. And We Ordain these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twentieth Day of September, 1679. And
of Our Rign the Thirty one Year. Will. Paterson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save the KING.
But by this time the Murderers, and Rebels had fled the Kingdom,
notwithstanding all imaginable care and diligence to prevent their Escape; and
while the Covenanting-Army, as the Rebels Styled themselves, lay at Glascow,
one of the Balfours, as a very creditable Gentleman, who was then in the Town,
told me, openly boasted of the Murder as a glorious Fact, and said, holding up
his Arm, This hand helped to kill the Fox. And it has been already Published
to the World, That five of their Accomplices, Complotters, and Abetters of the
Murder, chose to Dye, and be hung up in Chains upon the place, rather than
confess the sinfulness of the Action, by acknowledging it was Murder, or a Sin.
The Fanatical Party foretold it in several places; and the Morning before it
was committed, one of the Assassins, like a Jesuit Consecrated to an Heroical
Act, after a solemn Sacrilegious Form of Devotion, held up his hand, and Swore,
That that hand should kill the Arch-Prelate, upon which the holy Sister, his
Hostess, kissed him; and it is notoriously known in Scotland, that he, who
commanded the Foot for Mr. Welsh upon Reupar-Law, (that famous
Field-Conventicle) owned that their Friends thanked God for the Archbishops
Death, which neither they, nor their Abbettors in either Kingdom will call
Murder, when they have occasion to speak thereof.

Having absolved my first part, I proceed to show out of the Presbyterian
Writings, the Principles, upon which they ground this bloody Practice of
Assassination; in performing of which, I must go up as high as the Murder of
Cardinal Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews, who was Assassin'd by private
Gentlemen, as the late Lord Primate was, only with this difference, that the
Cardinal was Murdered in his own Palace, the Castle of St. Andrews, and the
Primate in the open Field. The names of his Murderers were Norma^ Lesly, John
Lesly, Peter Carmichael, and James Melvil, who with Sixteen or Seventeen more
seized the Castle, and when they had entered the Cardinals Chamber, Lesly and
Carmichael fell violently upon him, but James Melvil withheld them, and said,
This Work and Judgment of God, although it be secret, ought to be done with
great gravity. And upon these words, presenting unto him the point of his
Sword, said, Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of the
shedding of the blood of that notable Instrument of God, The first Martyr of
Scotland.
Mr. James Wiseheart, which albeit the flame of Fire consumed before men, yet
cries it Vengeance against thee, and we from God are sent to revenge it: for
here before my God I protest, That neither the hatred of thy Person, nor love
of thy Riches, nor the fear of any trouble thou could have done to me in
particular, moved, or moves me to Strike thee, but only because thou have
been, and remainest an obstinate Enemy against Christ Jesus, and his holy
Gospel. And the meek Man of God (as Knox calls him) having so spoken, Struck
the Cardinal twice or thrice with a Stog-Sword, although he cried out pitifully
for mercy, saying, I am a Priest, you will not Slay a Priest; and though he
exhorted him to Repentance, yet he allowed him no more time for it than was
spent in his Grave and Godly Harangue. I have taken this Relation out of Knoxes
History, to which I refer the Reader, Pages 143, 144, 145. or to the 28th. page
of Presbytery Displayed, where it is also related in this manner: And from the
whole it is apparent, that Melvil committed this Murder, Gravely, Deliberately,
and in Cold Blood, declaring, That he was sent from God to do it, not for any
private end, but to revenge the blood of Mr. Wiseheart, and because he was an
Enemy to Jesus Christ and his Gospel. Knox commends this direful Action of Mr.
James Melvil, for a Godly Fact; and so the bloody Field- Presbyterians have
applauded the Nine Murderers of the late Lord Primate, and will doubtless
Canonize them, as they did Mitchel, who attempted to Assassin him Eleven Years
before.

And Tyranny and Popery, pa. 27.
Goodman, Knoxes his Companion, whom I cited before, page 30. says, That all
men are bound to see the Laws of God kept, and to suppress and resist Idolatry
by force: Nor is it sufficient for Subjects, not to obey the wicked Commands of
Princes, but they must resist them, and deliver the Children of God out of the
hands of their Enemies, as we would deliver a Sheep that is in danger to be
devoured by a Wolf. And if the Magistrate shall refuse to put Mass-mongers and
False Preachers (and now all Bishops and Church-Ministers in their esteem are
such) to Death, the People in seeing it performed, show that Zeal of God which
was commended in Phineas.

Gilby Sings to the same Tune, and says, That Kings, Princes, and Governors
have their Authority from the People, and upon occasion the People may take it
away again, as men may revoke their Proxies and Letters of Attorney. It is
lawful (says he) to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants. The Subjects did kill the
Queens Highness Athalia, Jehu killed the Queens Majesty Jesabel: Elias being no
Magistrate, killed the Queens Majesty's Chaplains, Baals Priests.

John Knox in his debate with Lithington, Hist. of Reformation, page 390.
Justifies the killing of Tyrannical Princes, and men in public places by
private persons, from the example of Phineas, whom he asserts to have been a
private person, and tells us; He had not only a large Reward for his fact,
Numb. 25. 12, 13. but an ample approbation for it, Psalm. 106. 31. So that it
was accounted to him for Righteousness, i. e. as a Righteous action; and
affirms, That it is to he imitated by all those, who prefer the the true Honor
of the true Worship and Glory of God, to the affection of fleshly and wicked
Princes; nay he says, That his example approved by God, stands to us instead of
a Commandment; for as God in his nature is constant and immutable, so can he
not condemn in the ages subsequent, that which he has approved in his servants
before us.

Naphtali Justifies the Rebellion at Pentland-hills 1666. from the same example
of Phineas, and Blasphemously ascribes it to the holy Spirit of God, asserting
that the Rebels were no more to be condemned as Traitors, than Phineas ought to
have been for a Murderer, seeing they were led by the same Spirit, and had as
good warrant as he. See page 21. 22, 23, 24, etc. This Doctrine, and both John
Knox, and the Author of Naphtali the maintainers of it, are industriously
defended, and vindicated by the Author of Jus populi vindicatum. cap. 20. from
page 409. to page 426. And upon this principle it was that Mr Mitchel acted,
when he attempted to Assassin the Lord Primate. An. 1668. Ravillac Redivivus.
page 18. 19. And though he failed in his Attempt, as the Rebels before him had
done in theirs, (which never any person or persons did, or could do, that were
moved by God to do an Heroical Act;) yet still he believed that the
irresistible Diabolical impulse, which he felt in himself, came from God:
exactly according to the Doctrine of the Jesuits, who in the Apology for John
Chastel assert, that an Act is nevertheless Heroical, although the undertaker
fail in the Attempt. The Title of the Book is, Apology pour Jehan Chastel
Pari^ien and les Peers, and Escholiers de la societe de Jesus, etc. contre l'
Arrest de Parliament done contre eux a Paris le 29 Decembre 1594. L'a^ 1595. It
consists of 5 parts, and the 11 chapter of the third, bears this Title, L'acte ne
laisse d' estre heroique, quoy que l'entreprise ne vienne a Chef. Jus populi
vindicatum, and Naphtali are the Pocket-books of the Field-Conventiclers, and
the common people read the latter especially, as much as the Bible, or as much
as the common people of the Church Communion read formerly the Practice of
Piety, or now The whole Duty of man. I know a Scottish Gentleman an Officer,
who meeting with a single Country-Fellow going to a Conventicle, examined and
searched him, and in one of his Pockets found Naphtali, and the other a
Pocket-Pistol charged with two Bullets, the Doctrine, as the Gentleman
ingeniously, said in one Pocket, and the Use in the other; and as I have been
Credibly informed, that Cursed Book was found about most of those who were
slain at Bothwell-Bridge.

Thus have we found out the damnable principle upon which the Jesuited
Presbyterians found their practices of Massacres, and Assassinations. When the
Magistrate will not put to death the enemies of Christ, his Gospel, his People,
or of the Kirk, private persons may do it, by the example of Phineas, nay, they
ought to do it, without hesitation when they feel themselves moved thereunto.
But if the Magistrates themselves be such, then any other person not in Office
may, and ought to rise up to do Justice upon them *the King not excepted) after
the example of Phineas, that the Wrath going out may be stayed, and the
judgments of God averted from the Land. And notwithstanding this Doctrine
(says the Author of Jus populi page 412) All persons have sufficient security
of their lives, except such as are guilty of dreadful Apostasy (with which
they charge all that have renounced the Covenant, or that took it and do not
keep it; in particular the King, and the late Lord Primate) causing the Plague
of God to break out upon the Land, and page 414. To prevent all these fears,
let his Majesty, and other* Magistrates Reform their ways, and turn to the
Lord, and execute judgment on him (the Bishop) and his accomplices, and all the
rest who now pretend to honor the King, and to fear God; but in effect do
Deifie a Creature, and renounce their homage to the King of Kings, and so
provoke him to destroy both them, and their King by their Apostasy and wicked
defection, and that openly before men, and Angels, as David hanged up the sons
of Saul before the Sun, and then they need not fear either Dag, or Dagger,
Pistol, or poisoned poinyard, a Spanish-fig, or any such secret applications.
Again page 415. he infers, That the fact of Phineas was a laudable act of
Justice, and a precedent for Judges, and Magistrates in all times coming, and
that by his example any member of the Counsel (for Phineas rose from among the
Congregation) might lawfully rise up and execute judgment on this wicked wretch
(the Archbishop) and his Cursed Fraternity, who have brought by their Apostasy
and defection from the Covenant, and cause of God, the wrath, and curse of God
upon the Land.

Hence all the Kirk-Writers since his Majesty's return, such as Naphtali, Jus
populi, The Apology, and Apologetical Narration, The Poor Man's Cup, The History
of the Indulgence, etc. call the Bishops Apostates, Perjured Prelates, A
perjured Fraternity, Traitors to Christ, Enemies to his people, Idolaters,
Backsliders, etc. So that whosoever shall like Phineas rise up and do Justice
upon them, shall do a laudable act, such as shall be accounted unto them for
Righteousness, and have the approbation of God. Hence Mitchel in his answer to
the Dean of Edingburgh, says confidently, that he refers the Manifestation of
his Fact to the day of Gods Righteous judgment, Rav. Red. page 18. and in his
shorter Speech page 19. he declared, That he laid down his life willingly in
opposition to the perfidious Prelates, and in testimony of the Cause of Christ.
And in his larger Speech, wherein he declares, that the King and Estates, and
every single man is bound to endeavor to extirpate the perjured Prelates, and
abjured Prelacy by force of arms; and threatens them all, with the furbished
Sword of the Lords indignation for not executing vengeance upon them; he says
most Blasphemously, That blessed are all they who take the proud Prelates and
dash their brains against the stones.

But it is not the Bishops only, whom they think it laudable to Murder singly,
or Massacre in Companies, if they could, but all that own their Authority, as
the Church-Ministers, and all that any ways Protect and Support the Church and
Clergy; from the King himself upon the Throne, to the meanest Officer Civil or
Military, who faithfully executes his Laws and Commands. And yet as bloody as
you see these Field-Sectaries are by their Principles, some Discontented
Persons of great Quality, whom out of respect I shall not name, had so little
Conscience, and sense of Honor, and so much Confidence, as to report, That
they were a Poor, Innocent, and Peaceable sort of People, who only desired to
serve God according to their own Consciences, and were neither able, nor
inclined to commit such Outrages, and make such Disturbances at their
Conventicles, as was here reported they did. And therefore, for a further
illustration of their bloody Principles and Practices, I proceed in the last
place to show by what Steps and Gradations of Sedition and Cruelty they arrived
at length to Murder the Archbishop, and shortly after Rebel; for this damnable
Doctrine of The only remedy against Tyrants is Ehuds Dagger; to which, as the
Supreme Court of Justice, Moses brought the Egyptians; Phineas, Zimri and
Cosby; Ehud, Eglon; Samson, the Philistmes; Saul, Agag; and Jehojadah, Athalia;
Buchanan de jure regni.
Heroical impulse has poisoned the whole Sect, and instigated them to many
other Inhumane Butcheries and lesser Rebellions, before they imbrued their
hands in the Primates sacred Blood.

For shortly after, they began to Conventicle in such formidable numbers, and
in such an Hostile manner in the Fields, upon the Duke of Lauderdales going
down in June 1677. they openly threatened the Archbishops and other Bishops, and
such of the Kings Ministers, as they thought were most vigorous in putting the
Laws in Execution against them. This gave occasion to the Privy Council to
order the Trial of Mr. James Mitchel, that the rest by his Punishment might be
deterred from Practicing upon others Heroical Attempts. As soon as his Trial
was ordered, the Fanatics threatened more than before; and knowing that Sir
George Mackenzy his Majesty's Advocate, was bound by his Office to Prosecute
him, they sent him nameless Letters, to tell him, That if he pursued Mr. Jamees
Mitchel, it should cost him his Life, which it undoubtedly will, if ever he
fall into their hands.

While the Miscreants Trial was depending, (for it lasted four days) there were
Letters also sent to the Archbishop, (for attempting of whose Life he was
tried) threatening him, That if Mr. James were put to Death, it should certainly
cost him his Life, which I believe might be one reason, why his Grace
afterward in Council endeavored to procure his Reprieve.

A little after his Execution it was, That to prevent the Rising of the
Fanatics in the West, the Highlanders by the Advice of the Privy Council, ( as
the Marquess of Athol had first proposed) and by his Majesty's express
Authority, marched under the Conduct of their respective Lords, with the
Standing Forces into that Country, after the Heritors in a meeting had sent
word to the Council, That they could not under take for the Peace. While they
Quartered there, (which was not (...) two Months) the cruel Fanatics lay in
wait upon all occasion to their blood, which made them, that they durst not
walk abroad, (...) such numbers, as might secure their Lives. After they had
leav(...) home, they marched not together as an Army, but traveled (...) nies
as they thought fit, and a small Party of them going P(...) the Road, somewhere
about Sterling, were set upon by a band of (...) Phineases, who killed some of
them, and wounded more.

The Summer ensuing, his Majesty called a Convention of the (...) Estates, who
gave him Five Months Tax for five Years following, to maintain a Regiment of
Foot, three Troops of Horse, and three (...) of Dragoons, which was to be added
to the other Standing Forces, (...) more effectual Suppressing of
Field-Conventicles. These Forces (...) raised, and distributed into their
Quarters, the Fanatics watched (...) as Ravenous Birds, or Beasts watch their
Prey, endeavoring to (...) them by night in their Quarters, or at any other
time, when their (...) security made them unable to defend themselves.
Particularly in (...) last 1679. a Company of them came upon a very small Party
of Soldiers Quartered in or near Maclin about Midnight, or early in the Morning
on the Lords day, and most barbarously Massacred them in their Lodgings. The
Assassins when they came to the door knocked as Friends, and kindly asked for
the poor Soldiers, as Camrades are wont to ask for one another. And they not
thinking of any harm got up, and opened the Door, which was no sooner done, but
without speaking one word, they Shot one of them dead through the belly, and
wounded the rest so mortally, that they left them for dead. Nevertheless, as it
is credibly reported, these Heroical Butchers went straight away to a
Field-Meeting, where they partook of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, if I
may call that a Sacrament, which such utter Usurpers of the Priests-Office
Sacrilegiously Administer, and Schismatics, and Rebels take.

And about March last 1679. Twenty six or Twenty seven of these Heroical
Pseudo-Zealots having met Armed in a private Lodging, at the further end of a
remote Lane in Edinburgh, sent a Messenger, who was of the Conspiracy, to tell
the Town-Major, who was always diligent in his Office, and faithful to his
Trust That there was a Conventicle in such a place. The Major with three or
four men, whom he called to his Assistance, went immediately upon the
Information to the foresaid House, where the Inspired Heroes, after many Shots
from both ends of the Room into which they had trapand the Major, fell upon the
Major in particular, whom having wounded, as they thought beyond all
possibility of recovery, they left for dead, and made their escape. One of the
Assistants they Shot dead through the Reins, and bruised and wounded the rest.
While they beat and wounded the Town-Major, they called him Enemy to Christ,
Instrument of Satan, etc. and urged him to Swear that he would never disturb
their Meetings, or seize any Person at them again, and protested withal unto
him, That not any private Quarrel moved them to kill him, but because his
Employment was to discover their Meetings, and execute the Tyrannical, and
Antichristian Laws against them. The House wherein this Riot was committed, was
kept by an holy Sister, a noted Fanatic, who frequently entertained the
Rebellious intercommuned Preachers, and such like Enthusiastical Cutthroats as
these. She is Sister in Law to one Andrew Turnball in Broomhall, one noted
among a Club of Assassins, who combine to Murder his Majesty's Officers; and,
as many Witnesses examined upon Oath before the Privy Council May the Fifth
1677. declared, he and his Son were two of those, who rescued two Fanatical
Criminals from a Sergeant, and four Militia Soldiers, in which rebellious
action they discharged several Pistols at them, and wounded them with Swords as
well as Shot, calling them Dogs, etc. and telling them, that those whom they
served were Devils, and deserved to be worse used than they. But to return to
the Story of the Major: The day of the Week, in which this Massacre was acted,
was Tuesday, and the Sunday before, Mr. Cameron that famous Field-Preacher,
Preached twice in the same House, where were present most of the Murderers, as,
by Examination of several Witnesses before the Privy Council, it afterward
appeared.

I have passed by many other Stories of this nature, as that of the bloody
attempt which they made upon the Ensign and Soldiers of the Bass, at a
Conventicle near Dumbar in Summer 1678. whereof some being afterward
Apprehended, were tried, and one was put to death.

But they were never moved with stronger impulses to kill any sort of men, than
the Leviers and Collecters of the Cess, which the Convention had granted for
erecting and maintaining the foresaid additional Forces. The Murderers of the
Archbishop did also lay in wait for those who gathered this Tax, which they
said, was given to drive Christ out of the Kingdom; and the Soldiers whose
Murder I related above, were some of those, who were commanded out to Convoy
the Gatherers of the Cess. At the same time, by way of preparation of what was
to follow, they made almost daily Musters of their Forces at their
Field-Meetings, as at Lesmahago, and Munkland, in Clidsdale, Rubber-Law, in
Tiveot-dale, and several parts of Sterling-shire, where they refused to
dissolve their Meetings, when they were required to do it in the Kings name,
and dared his Majesty's Forces to their faces, speaking in their hearing
reproachfully and disdainfully of the King, the Privy Council, and the Bishops,
which made all considering men forebode the Rebellion at the same time, that
some of our Contrymen at London bore the World in hand, that the accounts of
these disorders which were sent up from time to time, were all Fictions, or
Hyperboles, and that there was no danger of Rebellion at all.

While they were in this evil Disposition, and committed these Cruelties, and
Disorders, there was published a Libel said to have been spoken in the House of
Lords, March 25. 1679. it has been Printed twice already, once in a single
sheet, shortly after it was said to have been spoken, and afterward in a
Collection of diverse remarkable Proceedings in Parliament, and because it
accidentally had such a mighty influence in stirring up this People to the
Murder and Rebellion, I think my self bound by my undertaking to give it a
third Edition in this place.

The SPEECH.
My Lords,
YOU are appointing of the consideration of the State of England to be taken up
in a Committee of the whole House, some day next Week. I do not know how well
what I have to say may be received, for I never study either to make my Court
well, or to be Popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the Dictates of
the Spirit within me.

There are some other Considerations that concern England so nearly, that
without them you will come far short of Safety and Quiet at home: We have a
little Sister, and she has no Breasts, what shall we do for our Sister in the
day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a Wall, we will build on her a
Palace of Silver, if she be a Door, we will enclose her with Boards of Cedar.
We have several little Sisters without Breasts, the French Protestant Churches,
the two Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland; the Foreign Protestants are a Wall,
the only Wall and Defense to England; upon it you may build Palaces of Silver,
glorious Palaces. The Protection of the Protestants abroad, is the greatest
Power and Security the Crown of England can attain to, and which can only help
us to give check to the growing greatness of France. Scotland and Ireland are
two Doors, either to let in Good or Mischief upon us; they are much weakened by
the Artifice of our cunning Enemies, and we ought to enclose them with Boards
of Cedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes one goes
first, sometimes the other, in a doors, but the other is always following close
at hand.

In England, Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow.

I do not think your Lordships or the Parliament have Jurisdiction there. It is
a Noble and Ancient Kingdom; they have an illustrious Nobility, a gallant
Gentry, a learned Clergy, and an Understanding, Worthy People; but yet we
cannot think of England as we ought, without reflecting on the Condition
therein. They are under the same Prince, and the Influence of the same
Favorites and Councils; when they are hardly dealt with, can we that are the
Richer expect better usuage? for it is certain, that in all Absolute
Governments, the poorest Countries are always most favorably dealt with.

When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there cannot enjoy their Royalties, their
Shrievaldoms, and their Stewardaries, which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several hundreds of years; but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as are
their known Enemies.

Can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long under the same Persons and
Administration of Affairs? If the Council Table there can imprison any Nobleman
or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to Trial, or giving the
least reason for what* they do; can we expect the same men will preserve the
Liberty of the Subject here?

I will acknowledge, I am not well versed in the particular Laws of Scotland;
but this I do know, that all the Northern Countries have, by their Laws, an
undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties and Properties; yet Scotland
has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their Lives,
Liberties and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of those
that Govern. They have lately plundered and harrassed the richest and
wealthiest Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the barbarous
High-Landers to devour them; and all this without almost a colorable pretense
to do it: Nor can there be found a reason of State for what they have done; but
that those wicked Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any Rate; which
as they managed, was only prevented by the miraculous Hand of God, or otherwise
all the Papists in England would have been Armed, and the fairest Opportunity
given in the just time for the Execution of that wicked and Bloody Design the
Papists had; and it is not possible for any man that duly considers it, to
think other, but that those Ministers that acted that, were as guilty of the
Plot, as any of the Lords that are in question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this the plainer, because, till the pressure be
fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me, or any
thinking man, to believe that good is meant us here.

We must still be upon our guard, apprehending that the Principle is not
changed at Court, and that these men that are still in place and Authority,
have that Influence upon the mind of our Excellent Prince, that he is not, nor
cannot be that to us, that his own Nature and Goodness would incline him to.

I know your Lordships can order nothing in this, but there are those that hear
me, can put a perfect Cure to it; until that be done, the Scottish Weed is like
Death in the Pot, Mors in olla; But there is something too, now I consider,
that most immediately concerns us; their Act of Twenty two thousand Men to be
ready to invade us upon all occasions. This, I hear, that the Lords of the
Council there have treated, as they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a
standing Army of Six thousand Men. I am sure we have reason and right to
beseech the King that that Act may be better considered in the next Parliament
there. I shall say no more for Scotland at this time, I am afraid your
Lordships will think I have said too much, having no concern there; But if a
French Noble man should come to dwell in my House and Family, I should think it
concerned me to ask what he did in France: for if he were there a Felon, a
Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him to live elsewhere; and I hope your
Lordships will do the same thing for the Nation, if you find the same cause.

My Lords, Give me leave to speak two or three words concerning our other
Sister Ireland: thither, I hear, is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us
against the French. Besides, I am credibly informed, that the Papists have
their Arms restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered
from being the suspected Party; the Sea Towns as well as the Inland, are full
of Papists: that Kingdom cannot long continue in the English H^nds, if some
better care be not taken of it. This is in your Power, and there is nothing
there, but is under your Laws; therefore I beg that this Kingdom at least may
be taken in consideration, together with the State of England: For I am sure
there can be no safety here, if these Doors be not shut up and made sure.

By the very next Post after this Speech was said to have been spoken, Forty
written Copies of it were sent from London, by the Gentlemen of the Party to
Edinburgh; and the Fanatics grew so insolent, and so daring upon it, that
several Loyal Gentlemen wrote up Accounts, to what height of Insolences this
Speech had blown up the Enemies of the Church, and the Monarchy; and that they
had just reasons to fear, that very dangerous attempts, if not a downright
Rebellion, would speedily ensue thereupon. But these reports found not too much
Credit at London, where the World was made believe by men, (whose Interest it
was that they should not be Credited) That they were but the Inventions of the
Duke of Lauderdale, for whose advantage in that conjuncture it was that they
should be believed.

But what we would not then believe, we shortly after saw verified; and the
event falling out so contrary to the expectation of men, who had been deluded
by the Duke of Lauderdales ungrateful Enemies, made many of them who had spoken
publicly and done much ill against him, declare since, That they were sorry
for it, and for the time to come would do so no more. But to return to this
pretended Speech, which emboldned the People to such wicked Attempts: I find it
very difficult for my self to believe, that the Right Honorable and worthy
Person under whose name it was Published, could be the Author of such an
Harangue that reflected upon a Peer, whom he once esteemed so much, and owned
for the greatest Statesman in the World. Nay one must needs think, that so
Wise and generous a Gentleman, who has so great an Estate to lose, and who was
so true to the Kings Service and Interest, while his Majesty was pleased to
Employ him, should speak nothing in that August Assembly, which should fire the
Disaffected of either Kingdom, and consequently endanger the Government, and
involve us all in a common Confusion again.

But if he did speak it to discharge any private Resentments, which might
overruled the generosity of his Nature, yet I am confident he would not have
done so, had he known the true state of Scotland, which few Englishmen do, or
foreseen the evil effects, which it immediately had, in encouraging the
Covenanters to Assassinate, Massacre, and Rebel. For now they began to look,
and speak big in Edinburgh, and many of them were heard and seen upon the Crown
of the Causway, who had skulked about in darkness before. And as for the
disaffected parts of the Country, they now Displayed the Banners of Jesus
Christ (as they blasphemously called their Colors) at their Conventicles every
where; and their Preachers now told them, That the time of their Deliverance,
and of Gods taking Vengeance upon his Enemies, was now at hand, only they must
repent, and be strong, and of a good Courage, and fight the Battles of the
Lord. They also threatened in all places such as they thought were seriously
active against them, talking of great Changes and Revolutions in England; and
in public places dropped Lists of the names of those men, whom they had a mind
should fall by Heroical hands. Particularly at Cupar the Shire-Town in Fiffe,
there was found in the Streets a threatening Declaration, while the
Sheriff-Depute was there demanding the legal Fines from those, who had been
convicted of frequenting Field-Conventicles, and entertaining declared, and
attainted Traitors, and fugitives, and intercommuned Rebels. The Declaration
was thus directed.

To all and sundry, to whose hands these Presents shall come, but especially to
the Magistrates and Inhabitants of the Town of Cupar in Fiffe.

BE it known to all men, That whereas under a pretext of Law, though most
falsely, there is most abominable, illegal, and oppressive Robberies, and Spoils
committed in this Shire by Captain Carnegie, and his Soldiers, by virtue of a
precept from William Carmichael, etc. he being authorized, and held on to it by
that Perjured, Apostat Prelate Sharp, who, etc. These are therefore to declare
to all that shall any ways be concerned in this Villainous Robbery, and
Oppression, either by Assisting, Recepting, Levying, or any manner of way
Countenancing the same, that they shall be holden as guilty thereof, and
however they may think themselves for the present secured, being guarded by a
Military Force, and those that are thus Robbed despisable; yet let them take
this for a warning, that they shall be handled severely, answerable to their
Villainies, and that by a Party equal to all that dare own them; and that
shortly, as God shall enable and assist them, whose names may be read in these
following Letters, A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. U.
W. X. Y. Z.

The Archbishop is mentioned by name in this Declaration, which prepared the
way for his Murder; for according to the tenure of it, they very shortly after
handled him severely in the bloody manner which you have read. Mr. Carmichael
was neither Counseled nor Authorized by him to Levy the Fines, as they most
invidiously asserted in their Declaration; but he was in their account an
Apostat, and therefore was to be represented as the Author of all public
Proceedings against them, that the direful Vengeance of the whole Sect might
fall upon his head. They Murdered him, as I have related, on the third of May
1679. and on the Twenty ninth following they began the Rebellion; because, as
their first Declaration bears, it was appointed a day of Solemn Thanksgiving
for setting up an Usurper to destroy the Interest of Christ, and assume the
Power which is proper to him alone. I would here set down this treasonable and
blasphemous Declaration at large, but having some thoughts hereafter to write
the History of this Rebellion, I will not prevent my own design.

FINIS.
Added for the further illustration of what is said in the Animadversions, o,
u, y, 10, 18, on the first Speech, and 23, and 24, on the second.
Extracted out of the Epistle to The History of the Indulgence, Printed 1678.

NOw then the Indulgence is embraced, and thanks to the givers are rendered by
the takers. I ask therefore First, If they could after this their acceptance
and giving of thanks to the Council, have withdrawn from that appearance, and
^isted themselves before Christ Jesus, the King of his Church, and with a sweet
serenity of Soul have had confidence to offer their thanks to Him, for being
helped to witness a good Confession against the wickedness of this Invasion,
made by the Overtures o^ his work, upon his Royal Prerogative, who built the
House, and must bear the Glory; for it was either then or never, that it was to
have been done. Secondly, Let me ask; Are they so very clear and confident in
the case, as they can, not only in dealing with men, hold up their face, and
affirm, without hinck or hesitation, that this is their rejoyceing, even the
testimony of their Conscience; that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but the Grace of God, they have had their Conversation before
all men, and more abundantly toward these backsliding Rulers, before whom they
appeared, now declared Enemies to the Work of God, and Invaders of His Throne
and Prerogative. But are they also content to be carried before the Tribunal of
Christ, with this acceptance from those, who have exautorat their Lord and
Master, in their hand; and to have the quality of their Love to the coming of
His Kingdom, and their Loyalty to Christ Jesus, now opposed and put from the
exercise of his Royal Government by the Party Indulging, in this very
Indulgence, tri^d by such a Test? It were fit, sure, to think on this, and lay
it to heart; for each receiver may lay his count with it, that soon or syne he
shall be put to it. Thirdly, Let me ask (though I put it out of doubt, they do,
and far be it from me to think otherwise) whether they believe, that Christ,
who purchased His Church, and bought his Crown with His precious Blood, lives
also to make Intercession, and to plead his own Purchase, and Procure, by
virtue of the Price He has paid, the execution of the written Vengeance upon
all, who will strive with him for State and Supremacy in ordering the Affairs
of his House, the Church of the living God; or who will, in their desperate
dareing and rage, revost and exautorat Him by their Law, (which is a legal and
explicit bursting of His Bonds, casting away His Cords from them, and, in
contempt of, and Contradiction to the Christ of God, a formal taking of His
house in Possession) as our Rulers have done; to the out-doing, in this affront
to Jesus Christ, all that ever went before them; or as if they were resolved
never to be outdone by any, who should come after them, in a copeing with the
Mediator, and a downright denial of Him to be King; (for now they have put
Caesar in his Place) sure, the Indulged Brethren neither can nor will deny
this. Then they must give me leave to assert and subsume (what has been, as
often upon my Soul, as I thought upon their carriage at that appearance (yea, if
they speak consequently to the supposed concession, they must agree with me in
it; That with the same objective assurance, I believe the Right that Christ
has bought, to be Sole and Supreme, in regulating all the Affairs of His own
House, to have none to share with Him in the Autocratorick, Architectonick and
Magisterial Power of making Laws, to oblige the Conscience of His Subjects, nor
to be in case to give a Ministerial Power besides himself; And as I believe the
firmness of the stipulation betwixt Jehovah and his Anointed, to secure unto
him his Throne, and take Vengeance on all His Adversaries; and as I belives he
lieve to make Intercession; so I must believe also that, at that very instant,
when the Indulged stood before the Council, and by their mouth made such a
Harangue; The Mediator, who is set down, at the right hand of God, was
interceeding and pleading by His Blood, by His Wounds and Passion, for the
Execution of the purchased and promised Vengeance upon such, who by the complex
of this very deed, in a defiance to the everlasting Decree, whereby his Throne
is Established, declared, they had taken unto themselves His House in
Possession. Ah; my dear Brethren, can the thoughts of such a discord and
discrepancy betwixt His Intercession in Heaven, and your Harangueing on Earth,
enter into your Soul, (and I give you the defiance to enter into the serious
thoughts of the matter, and hold them out or be reflected upon, without
Terror, Trembling, Confusion of face, Shame and Astonishment.

Now my reverend and very dear Brethren, may I not, upon this occasion, make
bold to fall upon you as prostrat, and with the tear in mine Eye, (for I have
confidence to say it, I scarce see my Paper, while by my Pen I make this
Address unto you,) humbly and earnestly beg of you, request, beseech and obtest
you, for your blessed and glorious Masters sake, who is now Crucified again
amongst us, from whose Head the Crown is taken; for His Churches sake, whereof
he has made you Ministers, and so magnified you amongst men, in sending you
into the World, under the Character of his Ambassadors; for your poor broken
hearted and bleeding Brethrens sake, as ever you would be amongst the restorers
of our breaches; as ever you would again be as some of you were in times past,
as the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel; as ever you would wish to be brought
again to keep Viz. Parochial, or Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and
General Assemblier*
his Courts, and to Judge his House; and, when that work is over, to have a
Place amongst them that stand by; as you would not be the occasion of the
rupture and utter ruin of the small remnant (for God and all good and
understanding-men will refound this distracting and remnant-destroying
Division, that is amongst us, upon this Indulgence;) as you tender the good of
the Posterity, and would give an unquestionable evidence, how intensely you
desire, that Jesus Christ may Reign and Rule without a competitor, when you are
gone; As you love to live at peace with God, and enjoy, as feeding Pastors and
faithful Witnesses to your Lord, a sweet serenity of Soul; Nay as ever you
expect to go off the stage in good terms with God, and have your Masters welcome
of well done good and faithful Servants, and be emolled, when you are gone,
amongst the Confessors of his name, and holders fast of the word of his
Testimony, and such as had obtained mercy to be valiant for the truth: Let me,
I say, upon all these, and many other accounts, make bold to beseech you,
without more debate, without more delay, to deliver your selves; to deliver the
Church; to deliver your wounded, weeping and overwhelmed Brethren; and to
deliver the Posterity from the snare of that Cause-Destroying, Church-Ruining,
Remnant-Dividing Indulgence.

A Jesuitical Letter sent to the Covenanters in the West of Scotland, who
lately Rebelled.
I Have been much surprised to hear, that almost all the Suffering Ministers of
Scotland, of late (for formerly I never heard nor dreamed of such a thing)
begin to speak in favor of this Indulgence; (which to me ever was, and yet is
the bane of our Cause, and that which has given the bleeding Interest of
Christ in that Suffering Church, a more dreadful stroke than all that Prelacy
has done) some so far as they will not have it mentioned a Sin upon the Land,
nor preached against; others so far as they will have none so much as hinting,
what iniquity lies wrapped in hearing and countenancing these Indulged
Persons, yea, (I say the generality) for any thing I know, are come that
length, to be ready to question and censure such as preach against it, or
preach upon the ground where any Indulged Minister is. Oh where are we now!
when it is come to that, and what will be the end of this prodigious fainting
and change? are we so in love with the Supremacy, the like whereof was never
heard of in any Christian Church, no not in the Church where Antichrist sits,
nor was ever arrogate by any Magistrate, either Heathen, Turk, or Christian,
which is our shame, and should be our sorrow, and will prove such a provocation
in the sight of the Lord, that he cannot pardon till Vengeance be executed upon
the Land, and Posterity, in a degree proportionate to the unparallelled height
of that Abomination and Desolation? are we (I say) so inamored with that Image
of Jealousy, which provokes to Jealousy, that we must plead so much for that
woeful Spirit, come out of that bitter root, after we have seen and felt the
lamentable effects of it? woe is me, if this be all our Zeal for God, and his
Christ this day, when his Prerogatives are incroached upon by men who have sold
themselves to destroy (so far as they can) all the Interest of Jesus Christ,
and to banish himself, his Kingdom, and all his Concerns out of the Land. Who I
pray among these Indulged Men, (I say) as such (for otherways I honor such as
are known to me, and shall entertain charitable thoughts of others) can be
called the Ambassadors of Christ? who depend as to the actual exercise of the
Ministerial Function, or such who never were immediately entrusted (even as to
kind) with Church Power, receiving Injunctions, Limitations, and Authority, not
Interpretatively, but expressly, and In terminis from them; and so acting under
the Magistrate in a Subordination, as directly and formally as an Inferior
Civil-Court, or Magistrates do, for any thing I can observe. And who dare say
that this is consonant to our received, and avowed Reformation? How may, can,
or dare any be silent, and not lift up their voice like a Trumpet, not only to
exoner their own Consciences, and bear full witness against this Sin, when now
by reason this universal condemnation of all public appearance against the
Indulgence, as becoming in a more plain undeniable manner the Sin of the
Suffering Church, whereas before it seemed to me to be only the Sin of the
fainting People, who had contrary to their Oath and Vow departed from the
Suffering Brethren, to the weakening the hands of the Suffering Remnant, and
strengthening the oppressing Adversaries; but also, so far as in them lies,
are for the Peoples altogether lying by and compliance with this Evil, to the
further provoking the Lord against the whole Land. Is it reasonable for us now
in the day of the Lords contending, to be thus tender of a few men, (how worthy
soever otherways) and untender of the grand Concerns of the Lord our Master?
I'ts strange to me, that any should plead for it directly, or indirectly, and
it were directly designed to countermind the Lords wonderful appearance in and
by these Assemblies of the Lords People, now named Conventicles, and
blasphemously, Vid. Animadvers. p. 11.
Randevouzes of Rebellion, and that now after the Lord has counter-wrought
these Enemies to the astonishment of all. I look upon this and taking the Bond
lately tendered, and Submissive payment of this Exaction Money; for all the
three were and are contrived, designed, pressed, and carried on expressly and in
plain terms to burden, and keep down the work of God by Field and
House-meetings, Randevouzes of Christ's Militia, where he as King, and
Generalissimo is Leading, Ruling, and Mustering his faithful Soldiers, nor can
I see that such, who are so favorable to the Indulgence, can (speaking
consequently) condemn the taking of the Bond, or the payment of this Imposion,
which is to me a practical compend of all former compliances with this Enemy,
and a plain practical declaration of their engagement to root Chirist and all
his out of the Land. Tho it is true, there is a Magis and a Minus that may be
yielded, yet there is nothing that can alter the kind. Wherefore dear Brethren,
hitherto God has helped you, go on in the strength of the Lord, contending
against all flesh for your Lord and Master, who is able to make all grace
abound; beware of all formal or material, and virtual yieldings unto any
compliance with any contracts whatsoever, that have a tendancy to weaken
Christ's Interests, either in it self, or in the mind of any faithful, for he
who is faithful in a little, will be followed with dominion over many Cities.
The Spirit of Zeal would make us wise as Serpents, and resolute to stand upon
Foots or Inches, for as not a light Skirmishing with fore-parties, but the main
Battle, (ad triarias v^ntum in est) and the yielding of one foot, may occasion
the losing the whole day. O Lord God of Hosts arise thou, and then thine
Enemies shall be Scattered, and strengthen the weak things that remain, when
the things that once were are now as it were disappearing, and plead thy own
Cause, and determine that long depending Controversy in thy own time and way.

Let me hear from you my dear Brother, His Grace be with you,

Yours in the Lord, Subscribed, J. B. Supposed to be one John Brown a
Field-Preacher and Traiter, who fled into Holland, where he is an Agent for the
Covenanting-Party.

Amen.
THE INDEX For the Animadversions.
A.
Accommodation absolutely refused by the Covenanters, 15. Acts of Parliament
damned by the Covenanters, 8, 9, 10. St. Andrews.
Presbytery of St Andrews its Papal way of Proceeding, 50. Late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; the true ground of the Covenanters hatred to him, 25. in Marg. g.
his Murderers, 29. 63. the manner of his Murder, 56, 57. his Meek Carriage to
his Murderers, 57. his last words, 16. his Murderers lay wait for the
Collectors of the Cess, 16. Five of their Accomplices Hanged up in Chains at
the place where he was Murdered, 44. Present Archbishop of St. Andrews, 52. his
House Plundered by the Covenanters, and his Housekeeper beaten, 47. Scottish
Oath of Allegiance, 43. The Apology for the Persecuted Ministers, etc. 1. 14.
24, 25, 26. The Apologetical Narration, 25. 52. Apology pour Jean Chastel,
written by the Jesuits, and practiced by the Covenanters, 67. Mr. Hugh
Archibald his Adulteries, 34. Bishop of Argyles Children, 47. The Principles of
Assassination out of the Presbyterian writings, 66, 67, 68.

B.
Balfour the Converted Butcher, and his Wife, 34* 35. Cardinal Beton his
Murder, and Melvils Speech to him, 66. John Balfour the Assassin, 36.
Bestiality.
Seven or Eight Conventiclers put to death for that Crime, 34.
Bishops.
The Successors of the Apostles, their Office distinct from that of a Priest,
and of Divine Institution, 38, 39, 40. they had a new Ordination distinct from
that of Presbyters, 41. Mr. Robert Blaires Divinity, 30. John Bridgeford his
Adultery, and Blasphemy, 34. The Bond for the Peace, 44. Rebels choose to be
Hanged, and Transported, rather than take it, 16. The Bond tendered in 1677. and
1678. what the Covenanters said of it, 50, 51. Mr. Blake his Pride, and
Blasphemy, 53. Mr. Robert Bruce his saying to King James, 50. what the King
said of him, 51. Buchanan 13. in Marg. his Doctrine of Kings, 29. and of Ehuds
Dagger, or Heroical Murders, 69. in Marg. Burning of London assigned as a
Divine Judgment, for burning the Covenant there by the hands of the
Common-Hangman, 8.

C.
Mr. Cameron, 70. Mr. Calderwoods Altar Damascenum, 24. 30. Mr. Andrew Cant,
7. Mr. Alexander Cant, 53. Solemn League and Covenant, the great Scandal to
Foreign Reformed Churches, 42. The National Covenant, 43. Churches.
Greek and Latin attributed as great a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters to
the Christian Emperors, as the English and Scottish do to the King, 23. Church
of Scotland has no Liturgical Forms, or Ceremonies, 26. is in a state of
Persecution, 28.
Covenanters.
They refuse to answer, when examined by Authority, *1 12. their blasphemies
about the Covenant, 7. 26, 4^. and against the Act of Supremacy, 9. 25. They
reckon Wariston, Guthry, and Mitchel, etc. for Martyrs, 10. their ignorance and
wickedness, 12. Their Jesuitical Doctrines, 13, 14. 66, 67, 68. They impose new
Articles of Faith, 13, 14, 25. They Prea^^ against the Five-Months Tax, 16. 71.
Their Pseudo-Martyrs dyed Drunk, 18, 19. They aggravate the common infirmities
of Human nature, and take no notice of their own presumptious Sins, 21. They by
their Principles must have separated from all Churches since Christ's time till
the Reformation, 23. They call Episcopal Churches* Erastian Churches, and their
Ministers, Court-Parasites, 24. They assert the use of the Lords-Prayer, Creed,
and Ten Commandments to be Superstitious and Idolatrous, 25. They condemn the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, 25. The true cause of their hatred to
Montross, and the late Lord Primate, 25. in Marg. g. They are not Persecuted,
but justly Punished, 25, 26, 27. They are great Persecutors and Tyrants, 27.
28. They, and their Predecessors Persecuted Queen Mary Stuart, King James, King
Charles the First, and the Second, 28. Their Treasonable, and Jesuitical
Principles about Government, 29, 30, 31. They mock at the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, 32. They speak great things about the holiness of their own Party,
33. Their wickednessess and debaucheries, 12. 34, 35. They Murder at Houses as
well at Field-Conventicles, 36. Their incivility, and inhumanity, 47. Their
Sawciness and Impudence, 49. Their Pride, and Spiritual Fast, Lying,
Slandering, etc. 51, 52, 53. Their agreements with Arrians, Novatians,
Donatists, and Papists, 50. Their Assassinating, and Massacring Principles, 66,
67, 68. Cess granted by the last Convention; The Field-Preachers Preach against
it, 16. 47, 71. Jesuitical Letter, Post finem. Primitive Christians, and
Christian Churches, the common Doctrines wherein they all agreed, 33. All
Protestants ought to confess them as the common notions of Christianity, 16.
Consistory of Geneva, and Charenton Scandalized at the Covenant, 42. Cup of
cold Water, a Book, vid. Poor Man's Cup.

D.
Desertion.
The Doctrine of Desertion not grounded in Scripture, 34. The Scottish
Declaration against the Covenant, 8. Mr. John Dickson, his blasphemies, 8. 12,
45. Jannet Duglass, 35. Mr. Robert Duglass, his Papal Pride, 50. Earl of
Dundonalds Servant, the cause of his Distraction, 16.

E.
Episcopacy proved to be a Divine Institution, 38. 39. etc. Christian Emperors.
Their Supremacy and Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, and over Ecclesiastical
Persons, 23. City of Edinburgh railed at by Naphtali, 52.

F.
Field-Meetings proved by many instances to be Randevouzes of Rebellion,
against Mr. Kid, 11. Lord Forrester his Tragical End, 35. James Foyer, the holy
Beggar, 34. The right notion of Free Grace, 4. 5. The fulfilling of the
Scriptures, the blasphemies of that Book, 19, 20. French-Church scandalized at
the Covenant, 42. a Letter forged by the Western Covenanters in the name of the
French-Church, 52.
G.
Gallows of two sorts invented by the late Rebels; one for the common Enemies
of Christ, and the other for the Nobles, 54. Geneva.
The Reformed Church there scandalized at the Covenant, 42. General Assembly,
the Papal Tyranny thereof, 51. Sir Edmondbury Godfreys Murder paralleled, 50.
Goodman, Knoxes Companion, his Rebellious, and Murderous Principles, 30. 66.
Causes of Gods wrath; a Book so called, 43. Mr. Alexander Gibson Clerk of the
Privy Council, his Certificat, 12. Grayham the Apostat Bishop of Orkney, 16.
Mr. Patrick Gillispie his Papal Pride, 50.

H.
Mr. Hamilton Captain of Mr. Welshes Guard, afterward General of the
Covenanted Army, his Debaucheries, 35. Robert Hamilton of Barnes, 35. Mr.
William Houston, 34.
I.
King James.
His opinion of Bishops, 42. in Marg. he complains of the Sawciness of the
Presbyterian Ministers, 49. The Papal State, which the Presbyterian kept with
him, 50. His Sarcasm against Mr. Robert Bruce, 51.
Incest.
Eight Fanatics convicted of that Crime in one Parish, 34.
Indulgence.
The Field-Preachers absolutely against Indulgence, 6. 14, 47. Addit. post
finem, they write and preach against the Indulged, 16. The Information for
Defensive Arms, 14. 31. The Irish justified their Rebellion by the example of
Scotland, 30. Jus populi Vindicatum, 68.

K.
Mr. John Karstaires, 34. Mr. Kid pretends to miraculous assistance, 2, 3. The
King no otherwise to be obeyed than according to the Covenant, 31. Mr. John
Kings Jesuitical way of answering, 20. his blasphemous applications of
Scripture, 21, 22, 23. got his Wife with Child before Marriage, 34. dyed not in
the Faith of the Primitive Christians, 37. nor of the reformed Churches, 42. as
he told the People he did. King Charles the First his larger Declaration, 42,
43. Knoxes Hist, 13, 14. in Marg. 30. 66. Knoxes Liturgy, 27.
L.
Duke of Lauderdale, 11. 47, 73. Andrew Lesly his Murder, Adultery, and
Blasphemy, 33. Leightons Sions plea, 14. Archbishop Leighton censured for his
Articles of Accommodation, 15, 16. Lex Rex; The treasonable and blasphemous
Doctrines of that Book, 30. it commends Mariana the Jesuit, 16. mocks at the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, 31. A Letter in the name of the French Church
forged by the Fanatics, 52. London.
The burning of London and the last great Plague, assigned as a Judgment for
burning the Covenant there, 8.
Lords-Prayer.
Called a Papistical Charm, 25. Bishop Lindseys Narration of the Assembly at
Perth, 25.
Covenanting-Lords.
They wrote a Letter to the French- King* which Montross penned, 30. Lords (
discontented) who went to London March 1678. prayed for at a Field-Fast, 11*
Chancellor Loudon, 34. Lysimachus Nicanor, 13. 33.

M.
Mr. Hugh Mackell his Blasphemy, 7. Mariana approved by Lex Rex, 30. Mr. Malne,
29. Martyrs.
Miraculously assisted by God; Mr. Kid pretends to that miraculous assistance,
2, 3. the Pseudo-Martyrs of the Covenanting Cause, 10. they dyed Fudled or
Drunk, 18, 19. Mary Queen of Scotland, her saying of a Presbyterian Fast, 28.
Sir George Maxwel bewitched to death by Witches, who were Fanatics, 35.
Covenanting-Ministers.
False Ministers, or Usurpers of the Ministry, 36. They assume Prophetical
boldness, 49. Prouder than any Bishops, the Pope not excepted, 50. Mr. Mitchel,
his Blasphemies, 22. 68. blasphemously compared with Samson, 10. Mrs.
Mitchelson, a Ministers Daughter, a pretended Prophetess, her Basphemy, 7.
Marquess of Montross at first a Covenanter, 30. The Covenanters cruelty to him
afterward, 29. the reasons thereof, 25. in Marg. g. Murderers of the late Lord
Primate, 29. 63.

N.
National Covenant, 43. Naked Truth refuted, 40. 41. Naphtali, 7. 13, 25, 26,
29, 30, 31, 33, 51, 52. see Probable capacity.
O.
Passive Obedience.
Asserted against the Jesuits, Covenanters, Mr. Hobbs, etc. 31, 32. the
profession of that Doctrine* a badge of true Protestancy, 33. Ordination of
Bishops unto their Office, distinct from that of Presbyters, Oxford-Divinity,
Preces and Lacry^^, etc. so called, 31.

P.
Scottish Acts of Parliament damned by the Covenanters, 8, 9, 10. Mr. Peter
Paterson, 34. Patronage of Ecclesiastical Livings, elder than Popery, 25. in
Marg. m. Mr. James Porter, 34. Presbyterians, vid. Covenanters, their Preachers
abusive, and blasphemous applyers of holy Scriptures, 3. 8, 9, 19, 20, 21, 23,
48, 49. Protestation of the Covenanters, 1638. 13. in Marg. c. Protestant.
Is a Papist reformed into a Primitive Christian, 33. who true Protestants, and
who not, 16. An account of the Army at Pentlandhills, 33. Hugh Peter's dyed
Drunk, 19. The true notion of Persecution stated, 24.
Phineas.
Or Heroical Murders justified by the Presbyterian Writers, 66, 67, 68.
Probable Capacity.
That Doctrine, 29. contrary to the practice of Primitive Christians, who were
in a most Probable Capacity, 31. The Poor Man's Cup, etc. 9, 10.

Q.
Quakers; Why the Presbyterians are so angry at them, 45. their unanswerable
Arguments against the Presb. 45, 46.
R.
Ravillac Redivivus, 12. 14, 22, 34, 35. Mr. Henry Rollock, 7. Mr. Rutherford,
34. Remish Testament, 1. Mr. Matthew. Rumsey, 34.
S.
Scriptures.
Blasphemously, or abusively applied by Fanatic Preachers, 2, 3, 9, 19, 20,
21, 23, 48, 49. Spotswoods History, 13. in Marg. 14* 49. Soldiers murdered in
their Quarters by Fanatics, 70. The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, 48. 54.
Supremacy condemned by the Covenanters, 9. 25. Addit. Post finem. Mr. James
Symson, 34.

T.
The Thebean Legion, 52. Earl of Trequaire, 30. Town-Major of Edinburgh, Sir
Edmondbury-Godfreyed by the Fanatics, 36. 70. Mr. Robert Tran of Egglesholm,
29.
W.
Wandering thoughts will interpose in Devotion, as well as in Studying; if
resisted, not sins, 21. The seasonable warning; the treasonable and blasphemous
language in it, 28. Mr. Welshes Prophecy of himself, 22. his Impudence, 53.
Major Thomas Weir, 34. James Wallaces Wife, her Adultery and Blasphemy, 34.
West of Scotland, where Fanatics abound famous for Fornications, and
Adulteries, 35. Whole Duty of Man vindicated against the Cavil of Mr. Hobbs,
32. Mr. Williamson a Conventicle Preacher, and the Lady Carrs Daughter, 35.
Witchcraft, a reigning Sin among the Fanatics, 16. Witches of Burrostoness,
all Conventiclers, 16. Causes of Gods Wrath, a Book so called, 43.
ERRATA.
In the first Speech.
PAge 2. line 11. him, page 13. line 2. wide, 10. wish, 35. those* page 17.
line 22. fed.

In the second Speech.
PAge 47. line 9. Cess, page 54. line 47. tristed.

In the Animadversions.
PAge 23. l. 41. (...), p. 25. Marg. (e) Perth, p. 29. l. 23. (9) l. 25, Milne,
p. 36. l. 10. John in marg. (...), p. 42. l. 23. purely, dele and, p. 48 l. 30.
Ittecha, p. 49. (3) in marg. Balcanquel, p. 53. l. 8. Alexander.

There are other Errors of less moment, which the Reader may be pleased to
Correct.


