HACTENUS INAUDITA: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS Upon the new found way of Curing the
Small Pox.

-- Etenim si dare vitam proprium Dei munus est, certe datam tueri, jam ue
fugientem retinere, Deo proximum fateamur oportet. (and e contra) Eras. in
laud. Artis Med.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Io. Martin, and Ia. Allestry, at the Bell in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1663.

IMPRIMATUR,

Ex Aed. Sab. 7 October. 1662. Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat.
Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domestic.

FOR His highly Honored Friend Mr. N. N.
SIR,
THere is herewith sent you the Case of your lately deceased Friend, which you
may perceive was stated by one Physician, and resolved by another: If there be
any thing else wherein I may serve you, pray spare not to command,

Sir, Yours, etc.

SIR,
YOu know it is grown to an Adage, Medico and Iudici hominem occidere impune
licet: What need then is there of all this trouble about one particular, may
those say who understand not the full drift and scope of the Proverb? But let
the Interpretation thereof be what you please, yet I am, for mine own part
thoroughly persuaded, that if cap. 83. de vanit. Scien.
Agrippa his scoff -- Saepissime, and fere semper plus periculi sit a Medico
ac Medicina, quam ipso morbo -- have any truth in it, it is as often evidenced
in the case of the Small Pox as in any other whatsoever: If therefore I present
you with such a Method for the curing of them as perhaps till now you never
heard of, pray in lieu thereof give me leave to beg a view of your judgment
concerning it, that so I may see how far the lash of Agrippa's Censure reaches
my self: For I do here ingenuously protest, that some have dyed under mine
hands of the same disease, whose lives possibly might have been preserved, if
this Method, and such Medicines be indeed so very proper in the foresaid
Malady, as is pretended.

My presumption without dispute is very great, but your Candor is so well
known to me, that that I Will venture; it would be improper in the highest degree
to appeal to any of those who are by lib. 7. Epist. cap. 2.
Manardus called Medici ex Commentario, or by lib. 3. de Comp. Med. per Genesis c.
2.
Galen (...): No, no, recourse must be had to a true Son of the Art, who walks
the Via Regia on the Legs of Reason and Experience (to use lib. 8. de Comp.
Phar. Secund. Loc. cap. 6.
Galen's similitude) and knows how to make use of the Crutch of Analogisme,
when the other two are at a ne plus ultra. This, Sir, was it which pitched my
thoughts upon you, whom though it has been mine honor to know for diverse
years, yet could I never discern which of your foresaid Legs craved the Crutch:
Your Reason and Experience being so equally paired, that, without the least
arrogance, what was said by him of old may be said by you: (...).

On Tuesday the third of June last a Gentleman sending for his usual
Apothecary, June 3.
acquainted him that he had got cold (as he conceived) by leaving off some
clothes, and desired something that might dispose him to sweat, hoping thereby
his distemper might be removed, as formerly, in in like cases, he had
experienced. The Apothecary being willing to serve his friend, and
understanding he was very costive, advised him to admit of a familiar Clyster
in the afternoon, and to bedward he should be furnished according to his
desire; whereupon an ordinary Clyster was given, which moved twice, and at
night this Draught -- Rec. aqu. card. ben. rutae a^ i ss aqu. cordial. Saxon.
i. aqu. theriacal. vi. spiritus croci gutt. iv. syrupi Lujul. papav. erratici
a^. vi. Toward morning he fell into a breathing sweat, and found much ease; but
supposing that more stools would do him the more good, he took (of his own
accord) some Infusion of Damask-Roses in Whey, and had two motions more. That
afternoon he sent for the Apothecary again, June 4.
told him that he was somewhat better, but withal desired to have what he
further judged proper in that case; who presently perceiving that the Small Pox
were coming forth very fast, wished him to go into bed, and send for a
Physician; to both which motions of his the Patient forthwith yielded, and did
accordingly: I must here only tell you, that the Gentleman was about 39 or 40
years of age, of a good (save somewhat inclining to a full) habit of body; very
temperate he was, one that used much and moderate exercise in overseeing his
great store of business: In short, his constitution, before this distemper,
came as nigh to that they call Temper amentum temperatum, as at such an age,
and in such an habit, you usually meet with.

The Physician finding him in this condition, June 4.
prescribes as follows; -- Rec. aqu. papav. rhead. lactuc. a^. i. ss. syrupi
garyophil. diacod. a^. vj. olei vitrioli parum, misce, capiat per parts hac
nocte. Rec. aqu. cord. frig. saxon. ros. damasc. a^. i. vini albi. iij. syrupi
garyophyll. violarum. a^. i. ss. confect. alkermes. ij. olei vitrioli ad
aciditatem intensiorem. Capiat cras ad libitum.

On Thursday nothing else was directed; June 5.
but on Friday these things were ordered; -- June 6.
Rec. Vini Hispanici iiij Aqu. Papav. rhead. fragror. a^. i. ss. ros. damasc.
i. aqu. theriacal. vi. syrupi garyophyll. diacodii. a^. ij. confect. alkermes.
i. olei vitriol. ad aciditatem intensam, capiat per cochlearia: And because
great store of sleep was conceived very useful, Rec. diacodii iiij. olei
vitrioli ad aciditatem, misce, capiat cochlearia duo in bera hora somni, and
sic augendo per cochlearia, si minus dormierit.

Rec. herb. salviae. fragr. aquileae, pentaphyll. ros. rub. a^. TH iij. Coqu.
in aqu. f. qu. s. Cola lbi. ss. add diamor. mell. ros. a^. iiij. alumin. pi^l.
ij. M. F. Garg. Cap. saepe, and diglutiat aliquantum.

That day and night all the Iulap, and the fou^ ounces of Diacodium, were
taken; but not finding him the next day to have slep^ as was expected, June 7.
the Iula^ was renewed with tw^ ounces of Diacodium, an^ four ounces of
Diacodiu^ more, with Oil of Vitriol as before; which four ounces, a mischance
happening (if you will call it so) wa^ lost in the carriage; so tha^ having nothing
all that day besides the Iulap, but ^ common Poisan, and no^ yet sleeping as
was desired the Pox began to flat, (surely it was for want of the four ounces
of Diacodium and all things else run t^ loss and ruin.

To retrive which, on Sunday this Prescript was given, June 8.
Rec. Diacodii: iiij Ol. Vitriol. ad aciditatem intensam; with Directions
likewise to drink Sack now and then, to send them forth again: But that being
likely to prove more days work than one, expectation was patiently had till
Wednesday, (the great business of procuring sleep being by this four ounces
likely to be obtained,) save that on Tuesday the former gargle was repeated.
June 10.
On Wednesday therefore to do his work effectually, June 11.
the Oracle dictated thus; Rec. Diacodii: iiij Ol. Vitriol. qu. s. this was to
be used as formerly: There went then also Diamori. mell. Rosac. a^ ij. and the
next thing sent for was a Coffin; for on Thursday he fell into a Delirium, June
12.
and on Friday about twelve at night he died. June 13.


This, Sr, is the Case I implore your Judgment in; and to it shall only add,
That there was neither decay of strength, nor bad symptoms concomitant, other
than are before spoke of, which I humbly conceive are not so horrid as in the
foresaid disease (at such an Age) Physicians very familiarly meet with in their
practice.

I should here, Sr, have put a period to your present trouble, but that I have
a scruple or two more to propose to you; the first is, concerning something
that was done before the Physician came; and the next will be a Quaere or two,
concerning what happenned after.

Much blame there was laid upon procuring of Stools by the Clyster, and
Infusion, because purging in this case cannot but be dangerous, as well as
Bleeding or Vomiting; witness all the good-wives in a whole Country: What
wonder then if the Doctor's Prescripts failed, when the Patient was so
strangely Physick'd er'e he came at him?

It is not my design to vex you with craving satisfaction to all the questions
which are put about Bleeding, Purging, and even Vomiting in this Disease, (the
Judgment of all the Learned Physicians, whose Practice I ever conversed with,
has fully convinced me, that it is possible for Indications to be so strong as
that all three may by a skilful Artist be sometimes profitably used,) but I
pray, Sr, tell me whether such Purging, at such a time, and in such a case as
this, could be indeed so very hurtful?

He had about four Stools in those two days before the Pox appeared, and one in
about forty hours after, throughout his whole sickness; now what great injury
that could do is in my opinion as hard to be imagined, as what good it did, or
might have done, is obvious. However I think it may be questioned, whether
those Stools (if they did any harm) were not more occasioned by the great
quantity of Narcotiques, than by the Clyster, and Infusion, as we shall hear
anon from the Learned Mercurialis? And the same may be proposed concerning
sleep; it seeming rational to me, that he must have rested better if the Pox
had been thrown out, than he possibly could with all this Diacodium, which kept
that within his body which must inevitably cause all manner of bad symptoms;
and if Sanctorius made his observations aright, this cannot be otherwise, it
being one of his Stat. Medicin. Sect. 4. Aph. 10.
Aphorisms, That Acrimonia perspirabilis retenti, vel saepissime petit caput,
turbat somnum, and partium superiorum perspirationem divertit.

I take it at present for granted, that our Variolae, and Morbilli, were, in
general, known to the Greeks under the names of Exanthemata, and Ecthymata, (as
Foesius, Gorraeus, Manardus, and indeed almost all agree,) and to Celsus,
Pliny, and other Ancients, by Papulae, Pustulae, Pituitae Eruptiones, etc. Now
upon search it will appear, that what their Judgment was is summed up thus by
Lib. 7. Synops. ad Eustath. cap. 7.
Oribasius, -- Qui hoc morbo vexantur, per cutem sunt vacuandi: nec procul est
in altum attrahendum, ut per alvum aut vomitus fiat evacuatio. Sed nemo cogitet
me id consilii dare, hujusmodi humores non esse per alvum evacuandos, quia in
quibus humorum plenitudo infixa est, primum est adhibenda purgatio; quod si
quis non faciet, sed prius discutere aggredietur, humores obstruet potius quam
per cutem eva^uabit. And that this was Galen's judgment also, will appear, if
one consult the Case of Lib. 6. Epidem. Comment. Secundo T. 30.
Simon, who labored under the (...) there he tells us plainly, that if there
be any matter redundant it must be taken off by bleeding, or purging, before
any discussing Medicines be at all used: Nay, when the Lib. 5. Meth. Med. cap.
12.
Exanthemata were pestilential, all his Patients recovered who purged (and some
who vomited,) before the Pustulae appeared.

My next scruple is concerning the manner of Natures throwing out these
humors, viz. Whether it be not by way of Crisis? I stand not upon the terms of
Ebullitio, Fermentatio, Fusio, Coagulatio, or any other whatever, but only
Quaere if there be not from the Principium (Eruptionis) to the Status one
continued Crisis? Hipocrates tells us in the foresaid case of Simon (Textu 22.
See. Foesium) that (...), and Henricus gives the Reason, -- In Aph. 20. lib. 1.
Quia illa Simonis Exanthemata nihil aliud erant quam Crisis quaedam in cute
vestigia. Fracastorius tells me it is, -- Lib. 2. De Morb. Cont. cap. 2.
Quaedam quasi Crisis a natura facta: And Amatus Lusitanus quotes Avicen thus,
-- Cent. 3. Curat. 18. in Sehol.
Avicenna inquit, and post eum caeteri Medici testati sunt, quod Variolarum,
and Morbillorum ad cutem eruptio, quaedam a natura non solum constituta, sed
destinata Crisis sit: Well then, if this be true, will it not rationally
follow, still to use his words, -- Quod quando natura eam (Crisin) conficere
tentat, tunc Medicus materiam fluere dispositam, condensare, aut a via sua
cohibere non debet, sed magis ipsam disponere, ut per eam viam incedat, per
quam natura conatur expellere juxta illud Hippocratis, Quo Natura maxim
vergit, per loca conferentia, eo ducere oportet; which same Aphorism, says
Cardan, may be understood two ways, In Aph. 21. lib. 1.
Vel de materia quae jam excerni incepit, vel quae solum est in motu; which, if
I mistake not, reaches the present Case very fully.

If then Nature ought not to be hindered in this Critical Evacuation, what need
could there be imagined of so vast a quantity of Diacodium? (except it were to
lull him into a fools Paradise, like the Alpius de Med. Egypt. lib. 4. c. 1.
Egyptians upon eating Affion, or Opium) to pass by the medley of simple and
compound Waters, Wine, Alum, etc. where the coupling seems something to
resemble that of Mezentius, whose Cruelty it was to yoke the living with the
dead. And if it be as true, that Instante Crisi nihil temere movendum (which is
to be understood, as I humbly conceive, of any preposterously superinduced
motion, and not only of purging, vomiting, or bleeding) but at that time the
Physician should rather be a Spectatour then an Actor; what great need could be
then of White Wind, Sack and Alkermes, when Nature was doing her own work as
well as could be desired?

What use there may be made of Wine in Fevers is not now the question; they who
altogether condemn it are as much, I think, beside the Cushion as Helmont is,
when he cracks how in few days, nay in few hours, he was wont to cure all
Fevers, de victus Ratione.
Continuatas and Intermittentes, by rejecting Phlebotomy and giving wine; for
there is a time for every thing -- Et data non apto tempore, vina nocent: But I
would know of you, whether Forestus hit not right when he thu^ determined it in
this particular disease? -- Vinum lib. 6. Observe. 64. in Schol.
aliquo modo concedi debet, i^ ne quaquam rubrum sit: imo propter febrem, licet
etiam sit album, in principio dandum non est, nisi post tres aut quatuor dies,
cum jam inceperint Variolae apparere. Ac hoc us que tempus (inquit Guainerius,
capite proprio) Vinum omnino vitandum est* Et si Vinum dandum est in delicatis
ac divitibus post apparitionem Variolarum, debet esse album, aqueum* atque
lymphatum (eodem sic dicente) potius medicinaliter quam cibaliter, ut
Variolarum juvet egressum, idque in parva quantitate. Vbi tamen febr is
vehemens est, and dolor capit is insignis, ab eo abstinendum, ne in delirium
aegri rapiantur.

But what now to quaere concerning the Diacodion I do not well know, there
appearing nothing, in my mind, urgent enough to require so much of it: 'Twas
conceived he did not sleep enough, that is, he did not sleep always, and what
wonder in that? Galen. in Aph. 71. Commen. 4.
Vigilant enim magna ex part, and graviter se habent, ac febriunt vehementius
aegri, quanto propius ad Iudicationem accedunt: Nay, pray tell me if it be not
much better for the Patient to sleep somewhat less then usual, whilst this
disease is in Augmento, then on the contrary?

Hippocrates has rendered Drowsiness very suspicious to me in acute Fevers;
there are but few cases, and those must be well timed, in which I can afford it
a good word, because I find that he gives it so many bad ones: in Coac. and
alias.
(...), I should think was ill enough, (especially in his sense) and yet it
seems to be but a favorable expression in his mouth, who frequently calls it
(...), yea and (...) too; so that I ever judged it so far from laudable, that I
never durst procure it on set purpose: Not that I am one of those who decry
Anodynes; for Opium is, in mine esteem, the best of Medicines (you have heard
what a courtesy four grains of Laudanum Paracelsi did me some years since) in
some cases, if given in due time and dose; but Corruption optimi pessima holds
here too; for the sharper a sword is, there is the more danger when it comes to
be wielded by the hand of a mad man: But shall we hear Galen treating how to
order Symptoms? After a large and learned Discourse the result is this -- lib.
12. Meth. Med. cap. 1.
Si fas est iis remediis, quae morbum sanent, utendo, quod optamus, efficere,
abstinendum a sapientibus medicamentis est, quae vocant (...). Sin ex vigiliis,
and viribus resolvendis, ad mortis discrimen aeger tendat, tum profecto
tempestive ejus modi medicamentis utare* scilicet non ignarus corporis habitum
nonnihil ex his laedendum: laesionem tamen, quam mortem, potius elegendam. And
soon after -- Hac nimirum persuasione ipse quoque, tametsi omnium maxim ab usu
graviter sopientium abhorrens ( consule lib. 5. de simpl. Med. Facult. cap. 19.
for it is of this kind of Anodynes he now talks) aliquando tamen ea and
Colicis exhibeo, and iis qui vel oculorum, vel aurium, vel aliarum partium
vehementissimo dolor cruciantur. Interim vero and cum aeger ex tenui
destillatione, vigiliis, and vehementi tussi urgetur, Pauxillulum ejusmodi
medicamenti offero, etc. And what they are, he there tells us, viz. Quae ex
papaveris succo, Styrace, etc. But elsewhere he gives us the Dose of this
Diacodion, and the manner of using it, as well as how to prepare it: He
approves of Crito and Soranus, their Compositions, one whereof allows ten Heads
to every Sextary of water, and the other fifteen Heads to two Sextaries; as
also of the middle way, wherein eight or nine Heads are to be macerated in each
Sextary: He shows us how he made it both with Sapa and Mel, and the different
use thereof; and then adds, de Comp. Pharm. sec. Loc. lib. 7. cop. 2.
Opus habent maxim hujusmodi Pharmacis ii, quibus tenuis fluxus a Capite ad
asperam Arteriam destillat, non permittens dormire ob consequentem tussim: He
tells us it is never to be given but when the symptom is urgent; and that is
Vrgens, quod majori auxilio opus habet; and in such a case Diacodion nay be
given to the quantity of two large spoonfulls, -- Augebis autem, and minues
hanc copiam ad magnitudinem corporis cui exhibiturus es, respiciens item ad
aetatem, and anni horam, etc.

But what, I pray, might Galen's largest spoon contain? The reason why I ask,
is, because I cannot yet find that it held more than two drachms: To wave many
places, consider a little Libr. 7. Meth. M^d. cap. 11.
one, where discoursing of Hiera Picra, and its use, he tells us, -- Vtiliusque
est eo (Pharmaco) sicco ex aqua uti duorum parvorum Cochleariorum mensura, ubi
mediocriter, and medio quodam modo, eo uti studemus; nam maximus ejus modus, ac
Absolutissimus, est duorum non utique Parvorum, sed Magnorum, potio in aquae
temperatae Cyathis tribus: Minimus unius parvi: Whence, I think, this inference
may be made, That if Galen's largest spoon contained four drachms, then he gave
of Hiera Picra an ounce at a dose; which I never yet could see proved; but if
four drachms of it was the most he used to give, then his largest spoon
contained but two drachms: You must excuse me for calling it Galen's greatest
spoon, (though I think indeed it was his greatest,) whereas he uses only these
three, Magnum, Parvum, Minimum. Sylvius, Lacuna, and others, will have it to
hold but one dram, half a scruple, two grains, and two fifths of a grain;
others set it at two drachms; but there are none that I see put it er.

Paulus Aegineta, Trallianus, Actuarius, and many more, do follow Galen, both
in the manner of preparing Diacodion, and in the dose; only Aetius ( after he
has also told us, -- Datur moderata mensura duorum cochleariorum; and that we
may increase or take from that dose, according to the condition of the Patient,
etc.) is something more positive, proceeding thus, -- Tetrabib. 2. Sermon. 1.
cap. 133.
Certe ex eo quod ex capitibus Papaveris Thebaici praeparatur datur ad summum
uncia una, talis est descriptio Galeni hujus Pharmaci. Exhibeo autem ipsum non
solum somno indigentibus ad vesperam, and ad tussim; sed etiam insania labor
antibus post venaesectionem, and febrientibus vehementer, and quibus os ventris
intolerabiliter perustum est, etc. Et non solum semel, sed iterum; and non
solum in febrium vigore, sed etiam ante vigorem, and ante manifestam
concoctionem, in quibus Vigiliae, aut caliditas acris and magna hominem
affligunt; and then tells us, how he tempered it with Acetum, Mulsum simplex,
Mel Rosaceum, Omphacomeli, etc. as he judged fitting.

De Antid. lib. 3.
Mesue prepares it somewhat otherwise, (and his composition we do mostly
follow,) allowing sixty drachms of each kind of the heads, black and white, to
four pounds of rainwater: We allow eight ounces of the white, and six ounces
of the black, so that there is but the difference of eight drachms in the whole
composition, in case that defect be not made up again in the preparation:
Compare out two Dispensatories: Mesue tells us only that it is, Syrupus ad
catarrhum, and tussim, causam insomnii; but Annotat. in Mesu.
Sylvius is more particular, -- Somnum quoque conciliat, tum per se
refrigerando and humectando, sumptus unciiduabus hora somni; which is the
largest dose I have yet read of.

Sir, I have traced thi^ Diacodion through so many Ages, on purpose to ask you
this one question, viz. Whether you judge it warrantable and safe to give six
drachms of it, (in such a Patient as is before described,) with such other
things as are before spoke of, the first day the Pox appear; and on the third
day to give six ounces of it; and two ounces every day, for five or six days
following? So much was taken at least, and more intended; for of twenty ounces
and six drachms which were directed, four ounces miscarried. Might it not have
been the safer way of the two to have closed with Galen, treating of this very
symptom? -- lib. 13. Meth. M. cap. ^1.
Iure ergo, cum in summo incremento sunt, iis vitiis, quae Pervigilio, and
Delirio infestant, Perfufiones ex papaverum capitibus applicabimus.

But there is one thing must needs be spoke to, which I foresee may be
objected; much of what is aforesaid is grounded upon the supposition that our
Variolae, and Morbilli, were known to the Greeks under the Exanthemata, etc.
which Mercurialis has learnedly endeavored to disprove, (to pass by the
contest betwixt Manardus and Valeriola about the Herpetes veterum, whether they
be our Morbilli; and that betwixt Marcianus and Valesius, concerning the
Peticulae) It Is true he has so, and therefore we will not fall out about the
name, it being readily confessed that the knowledge we borrow from the Ancients
in this Disease, is as small as, almost, in any other: But yet if I make it
appear that Mercurialis his judgment, as to the Nature and Cure of them, was
the same with other men's whom I have cited, then certainly that Objection
signifies the very next to nothing; Let us therefore hear that most learned man
speak for himself; lib. 1. de Morb. Puer. cap. 2.
Variolae and Morbilli solent plerunque ad salutem terminari, eo quod plerunque
etiam est veluti Criticus Naturae Motus: then discoursing about Phlebotomy, and
approving of it, he at length comes to Pharmacie in this manner -- Nequaquam
utendum est medicamentis vehementioribus, tum quia Medicus semper vocatur,
quando jam fervor and ebullitio est in sanguine: tum quia medicamenti operatio
turbat materiam ab opere; Cum enim motus ille sit pene totus criticus,
praeceptum habemus a Medicis omnibus, Movente Natura nihil agendum esse, nisi
ipsa imperfecte moveat; intelligere vero an perfect moveat in initio non
possumus. -- Vtor autem Clysteribus, and Glandibus, ad alvum ipsam subducendam.
Soon after thus, Reliquum curationis horum morborum totum videtur esse positum
in auxilianda Natura expellente, which is agreeable to what he said before --
Quandoquidem Cardo hujus Curationis est hic, ut a partibus internis ad externas
revellantur ichores morbidi. Nay he goes higher, Caeterum si rem exact
aestimemus, multum abest, ut ulla praeservatio his morbis debeatur,
quandoquidem statim atque praecognoscitur hoc genus morbi, duos tantum scopos
solent habere Medici; unum, ut auxilientur Naturae expellenti: ut praeservent
quominus in hac expulsione parts internae, and externae corporis, aliquid
patiantur, -- A vino abstinendum erit, donec penitus finita sit febris, and
omnia accidentia: quod si Pueri, ut morosi esse solent, vinum velint,
concedendum est parcissime, pauciferum, atque in ipso immaceranda sunt olera
refrigerantia, ut Endivia, etc. -- Moderatus somnus esse debet, and potius
vigilandum, quam dormiendum: Abstinendum autem maxim ab ole is omnibus, a
Narcoticis, atque etiam ab emplasticis: A Narcoticis, a Refrigerantibus, quia
repellunt materiam intro, and consequenter Fluxibus Intestinoru^ (might he not
also have said Vigiliis?) occasionem praebent; which scattered pieces being
laid together seem to bespeak the Authors free consent, that the Ancients and
he agreed in the Thing, only some difference they had about the Name of it.

But a Caution, or two, will be here requisite: First, I do acknowledge that
vid. Arist. in Probl. Sect. 2. 16.
sleep promotes sweat, and insensible Perspiration, and consequently that
Narcotiques, if rightly used, do also prove Diaphoretiques: Sanctorius has
observed, as indeed all do, that Sect. 4. ^ph. 46.
Somno concentrantur humores, unitur calor influens innato, etc. Nay, that
Perspiration is so furthered by placide sleep, that in seven hours space no
less then ^^h. 1. Sect. ejusd.
fifty ounces may exhale insensibly through the pores of a man's body; And
Platerus his reasons, beside every days experience, do so sufficiently evidence
the truth of the latter, that I shall not need appeal to the famous
Compositions of Theriaca, Mithridatium, Philonium, Diascordium, etc.

In the next place I am apt to yield that Narcotiques are, as they call it,
corrected by Vinegar, and those things that are Acide; which is done, (as some
phrase it) Sulphuris narcotici vim infringendo, by breaking the strength of,
and as it were, fixing the Narcotique Sulphur: but whether Oil of Vitriol have
the same effect I much question, especially if de Atram. descript. 6. cap. 15.
and 17
Caneparius says true; he tells us that Vitriolum est integra Medicinae
Officina, and that its Spirit Universal est remedium, quod maxim ad omnia
fere conducit, and amongst others this for one, -- Spiritus acidus vitrioli
(which comes off betwixt the Phlegma and the Corresive Oil) vigilias aufert,
conciliatque somnum; and I dare say he was as well skilled in the Spagyrical
Art as our present Doctor: But pray then tell me, whether the giving of
Narcotiques with wine does not very much quicken their operation? I am sure
Diascorides says, that Hemlock given with wine works stronger, that is, kills
sooner; perhaps as much because Wine it self is a Narcotique, as for any other
reason; and this conceit seems to be favored by those who are the greatest
Patrons of Wine; for Whitaker says that -- Vinum dilutum (I suppose he means
the truly (...) of the Ancients, by Praedominat cum naturali aquositate in se)
videtur remedium febri specifice ordinatum -- de sanguin. Uvae. pa. 71. 72, 73.
Nam ejus qualitate Narcotica colligat sensus, and somnum reconciliat, etc.
However, it may be asked, I think, upon very good grounds, whether soporiferous
Medicines given disorderly do not sometimes occasion Deliria and Madness?
Observators show some examples; and, if I mistake not, this is of the same
Nature.

The Oil of Vitriol you see was given in no small Doses, it was directed ad
Aciditatem intensam, and intensiorem: I can indeed subscribe to a great deal of
Caneparius his Encomium, Siaeque administretur Spiritus acidus vitrioli,
omnibus fere corporis praepurgati affectibus medetur, putredinem enim aciditate
sua arcet, ac summa partium tenuitate obstructiones pellit, sanguinemque
impurum reficit, humiditates superfluas absumit, etc. But then may not some
question be made concerning his -- Si aeque administretur? I cannot in this
case say (though I wish I could) that too much of it does make way for an
Hectique; but considering what lib. de vict. rat. in Aeut^.
Hippocrates and Comment. 3. in eundem Text. 24. etc. ad 38.
Galen judge of Oxymel, and its use, me thinks this scruple may be proposed;

If it be true that the more diluted Oxymel be most proper in acute Fevers, and
that which is less sharp ((...)) be the best -- Os faucesque humectare, sputum
educere, sitim sedare, flatum discutere, urinas movere, and least hurtful to
the Intestines, Lungs, etc. (parts, of all other, most subject to
inconveniences in this particular Disease) And if the stronger Oxymel, being
more intensely Acide ((...)) does in some cases do hurt by hindering
expectoration (notwithstanding that in the general it is a great Incider, and
even in stuflings of the Lungs may be very useful, (...)) and rendering the
humor viscous, glutinous, tenacious, or what you will call it, ((...)) being it
does more potently dry, bind up as it were, and streighten: Nay, considering
that even de Victus rat one.
Helmont tells us how he suffocated Fevers by but giving some of these
penetrating drops (aliquot guttas) in the Patients drink, (not in so large
measure as Crollius would have it, whose only boundary is, quod Dentes non
stupefaciant) and that all Acidity, save that in the stomach, is Blas hum.
praeternatural and inimicous as infallibly curdling the Cruor, especially when
it is extravasated, as in Plurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, etc. (I think
he might have added the small Pox too) and that no Remedies in such cases are
proper but those which take off this adventitious Acidity ( peregrina^
aciditatem conceptam in Archeo, as he Pleur. Fur.
there calls it) Quae tollunt acorem, and ad diaphoresin disponunt cruorem,
dolorem pacant, quia aciditatem extinguunt; And withal remembering that Non
Calidum, aut Frigidum, etc. sunt Morbi: sed Acidum, Acre, Acerbum, etc.
according to Hippocrates; may not I say, upon those and the like
confiderations, this Scruple be proposed, viz. whether Septalius his Caution be
not here of some use, Lib. 2. Sect. 37.
who in Acute, and Malignant Fevers, advises that acide medicines should be
given moderately, to the end they may cool, attenuate, absterge, resist
putrefaction, promote sweat, and by penetrating, make the more way for other
apt Medicaments; but if taken over liberally, do they not by their too much
austerity, binding and drying, frequently pervert the designs of Nature, and
(amongst other bad effects) occasion incurable obstructions, etc.

There are some other particulars in the abovesaid Case, which might not
improperly be taken notice of, but as the learned Casaubonus (animadverting
upon Athenaeus) seems not much to mind the description of Hercules his greedy
eating till he comes to the shaking of his ears, and there fixes a Notemius, --
Lib. 10.
Pingit autem Epicharmus (...) Herculem tuburcinantem: qui prae vorandi
aviditate faucibus, maxilla dentibus omnibus and naso quoque sonum edat: Sed
Notemus quod ait, postremo: (...) nam reliqua plus (...) habent quam miraculi,
So shall I at present pass by things of less remark, which would be troublesome
to you in making me the more tedious, contenting my self with the expectation
of your definitive sentence in those which do not altogether seem to be less
then wonderful.

You see, Sir, how easy a thing it was to have patched this Rhapsody (if you will
not play the Critic) up to the form of a set Discourse, which yet on purpose I
have declined; not that I am of the number of those who (as Sennertus somewhere
has it) had rather tell tales with the Ancients, then speak truth with Moderns,
(profiteri non erubuerunt, Se malle cum Aristotele, vel Galeno, errare: quam
cum Recentiorum aliquo verum dicere) but that if it be my fortune to be out of
the way, I ever loved to have good Company: However, for fear of being hit with
Loqui nescit, at tacere non potest, I shall but once more beg your pardon, and
then take leave to subscribe my self,

July 10. 1662. Sir, Your etc.

SIR,
NOthing but Obedience can excuse my meddling with a Province that has been
already by you so perfectly administered: It being as much as to say, to offer
to water the Sea, or light a Candle to the Sun. Indeed you, having forestalled
the Market, have saved me the labor of speaking any thing to the purpose; so
that no impertinence of mine can want a colorable plea, I being enjoined to
deliver my opinion, and yet nothing left me to discourse on. Otherwise though
it be justly questioned whether Hippocrates, Galen, and the rest of the truly
ancient, had any explicit knowledge of the Small Pox and Measles; yet because
Nurses and old women do pretend to speak Aphorisms of them, and to be able to
cure them as dexterously as the best Physicians, I might make bold to put in
with that crowd, and venture my rude and crude conceptions of this subject
amongst the true Idiotae, the vulgar of the vulgar. And, I know not by what
fate, Physicians of late have more lost their credit in these diseases then
ever: witness the severe judgment of the world in the cases of the Duke of
Gloucester and the Princess Royal; so that now they stick not to say, with your
Agrippa, that at least in these a Physician is more dangerous then the malady:
And I wish this late scandal by you related have not strongly helped to confirm
them in their misprision. Neither the shortness of my reading and memory, nor
the thinness of my Library will suffer me to deal in Quotations so plentifully
as you have done, nor is it your desire: I shall therefore only follow your
Commission, and briefly and plainly deliver my thoughts concerning the method
that was observed in the cure by you related, regulating my self more by my own
small reason, and the experience of these latter Ages, then by the Authority of
the Ancients, who seem in no diseases so obscure and imperfect as in these.

As to my opinion of the Doctors Prescripts, in general, truth forces me to
say, that they are extremely confused; a mere Chaos of Medicines,
immethodically thrown together: Frigida ubi certant calidis, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus. For cooling you have, Aqu. pap.
lactuc. frag. ros. dam. diacod. for heating, Alkermes, sufficiently bridled by
the coolers, for fear it should do good; and, that they may want nothing, there
is Sir. Violar. for a purger. For the rest, I shall Answer according to your
Quaeries particularly.

First, You demand whether Variolarum eruptio be not a critical motion of
Nature, and therefore to be promoted, not hindered. I answer in the
affirmative; and if I err in this, I think I err with all mankind; I am sure,
with all that I ever heard or read: What can it be less, when it is evidently
that evacuation by which, if it rightly proceeds, Nature constantly terminates
the disease, and clears the mass of blood in its malign putredinous ferment,
and without which it never fails to sink into ruin?

The next Quaere consequent to this is about the use of Diacodion in this case:
Truly, though I am so far convinced by Plater's arguments, and experience, that
I cannot wholly condemn it, because, at least with other Medicines, it provokes
sweat egregiously; yet this I humbly conceive it does not as proper
sudorifiques do, by its heat and tenuity of parts, but by accident; that is,
partly by giving truee to Nature in easing pain, and procuring sleep, by which
the spirits are recruited, and so better enabled to separate and throw off the
matter by the pores; partly by uniting and concentring the same spirits, and,
not a little, by stopping all other evacuations, as Purging, Vomiting, etc.
besides that, it is a known and confessed truth, That sleep it self, which it
procures, qua sleep, hinders all other evacuations but those by the skin; only
transpiration and sweat it increases.

This is certain, that Diacodion does extremely thicken, and, as it were, quag
the humors; and this appears, first by its consistence, and modus substantiae;
for it is Mucilaginous and Unctuous, next to Emplastick: Secondly, from its use
amongst all men; hence it is given in suffocative Catarrhes, and all manner of
violent Fluxes, where the indication is to condense an over-thin and turgent
humor. You have very learnedly and largely proved, That all the Ancients, (you
might have added, all the Moderns that are in their wits) never use it but
sparingly, and urgente symptomate plusquam morbo: but here, by your relation,
was no such necessity, no tendency to a Delirium or Phrenitis, no intense
Fever, but his eruptions at first kindly and hopeful, only that he did not, it
seems, sleep altogether so soundly as when he was in health. And though I
commend not the Doctor's giving six drachms of it, at the beginning, upon so
small an account, yet it might better have been endured, if he had not joined
it in Commission with other vehement coolers, which yet more restrained and
praecipitated that perfective and depurative ebullition and fermentation, by
which Nature is enabled first to separate, and then to exclude the peccant
humor: Nay, though that might be excused, yet after that, to make it his
Patients constant diet for some days together, and that in those extravagant
doses, I cannot imagine from whom he should learn it, unless from the Turks,
when he was at Constantinople; and they, you know, make Opium, Diacodions elder
brother, their daily bread.

As to your next Quaere, of the use of Wine in this Fever, I find all that I
meet afraid of it, because it increases the Fever, and incites the ebullition
too much, and withal drives the humors and vapors to the head, to the great
endangering of a furious Delirium or Phrenitis, to which this disease is very
subject, it being its most usual Catastrophe, when it proves fatal. Those that
speak most favorably of it, do rather indulge than commend it, and that, as
you judiciously observe, only after the eruption, very small wine, and very
little of it, much diluted, and that too most in respect of the custom of the
Patient, according to that Aphorism in Hippocrates, Consueta licet paulo
deteriora melioribus non consuetis minus molesta sunt. Nor is your conjecture
improbable, that Wine, partly by its proper narcotickness, and partly by its
thinness of parts, serving it insted of a vehicle, may make Diacodion more
stupefying then it is by its self; and possibly upon that account the old
Athenians poisoned their condemned persons with Hemlock mixed with a little
Wine; though on the other side Authors report, that good store of Wine is
Hemlocks proper Antidote: But we will not blame the Doctor for this, seeing it
was his principal scope to stupefy and procure rest.

As to your Quaere of this Oil of Vitriol, (I hope he meant the Spirit, for
there is great difference) I cannot believe Caneparius that Spiritus virioli
acidus does cause sleep: If that were so, it would be seen every day, its use
being so ordinary; and, I could never see any thing in practice to favor such
a conceit* Perhaps Caneparius (and, you know, Chemists love to speak
mystically) means Extractum Vit. Narcoticum, or Sulphur Vit. Narcoticum, or the
like preparations of it; Nor do I think the Doctor so much a Chemist as to add
this Spirit for a corrector of Opium; I suspect him of no such subtilty, nor
possibly would so rude and imperfect a mixture be able to do it: However, if
that were his design, he may thank himself that his Patient never slept quietly
till he slept his last; for, it seems, by this he so over-corrected his
Narcotique, that he totally disarmed it, and pulled down with one hand what he
built with the other. Nor can I absolutely prohibit the use of Acid things in
this Fever, because, as Willis says, they coagulate the blood; for, if so,
how could they be permitted in other pestilent Fevers, which all, as well as
this, depend upon coagulation, according to him; and what more ordinary in
those fevers, then the use of Acids, as Succus, Limon. Citri, Lujulae, Aurant:
Spiritus Diatrion, etc. Nay, he himself with great success uses Spiritus Corn:
cerv. Nay, if Acids produced this sad effect, they would not be safe in any
kind of Fever, no not in state of health. Nor does his experiment evince,
that, because these Acid Spirits being poured upon blood reaking hot, and newly
taken from the vein, do produce first an Ebullition, then a Coagulation of it,
therefore they must have the same operation upon the mass of blood, being taken
inward; for, as Helmont pertinently observes, they come to the blood much
broken and altered by the concoctions and ferments of the parts that they pass
through in their long journey. Nor do I, with the Chemists, deifie these Acid
spirits and Liquors though on the other side, I cannot persuade my self to
believe what Galen, and the rest, say contrary to all experience and
themselves, that the stronger Oxymel does (as you cite them) as it were curdle
the Serum sanguinis, and render it viscous and tenacious; for besides that
Oxymel is reckoned by themselves, and all men, a great incider and attenuater
(which is just contrary to curdling) if it had that faculty, both they and we
were made to give it in Asthma's and other stuffings of the Lungs by tough
humors, besides all contumacious obstructions of the Viscera, which I conceive
depend upon nothing else but viscous and coagulated serum. Nay more, we see
Vinegar not to coagulate, but to attenuate serum out of the body; we see how it
dissolves other viscous bodies, as the most tenacious gummes that are: Nay
more, how it and its Spirit dissolve the hardest stones, and other cognate Acid
Liquors, as Spiritus salis, Nitri, Aq: Reg: Fort: etc. open and dissolve the
closest metals: Yet I do not deny, but that over much Acidity by accident may
thicken the serum and phlegm, that is, by streightening of the Lungs, so
occasioning the retention of it so long, that by the heat of the part it is
made thick and viscous. In sum, my quarrel to the use of Spirit of vitriol in
this great quantity is, That being aded to cool Liquors, by its pierceingness
and subtilty of parts it renders them far more cooling, and withal, by its
astringency (which is eminent in Vitriol, and more or less in all Acids) it
beats down and praecipitates that defaecative fermentation of the blood before
mentioned, and moreover hinders Expectoration, which is so necessary in this
Disease, the Lungs being here always much oppressed and afflicted, as appears
by the dyspnoea almost always accompanying it, and the Cough which for the most
part does both attend it, and long survive it* not neglecting your other
Exceptions against it, as its galling and exulcerating the stomach, Guts, and
other parts, etc. but passing them over as by you pre-occupied.

No wonder then if they flatted and sunk in, I mean the Pox, and the matter
running to the head, there insued first deliria, and then death, there being so
much industry used by Narcoticks, Coolers, and Stypticks, to thicken the
humors, restrain the perfective Ebullition, and bind in the Spirits, the only
way to hinder Eruption; No wonder, I say, that the humors thus retained caused
first continued watching, then Deliria or Phrensy, etc. Nor can he clear
himself by charging it upon the Clyster; for, in the time of Ebullition,
clysters are commended and used by all men, both to keep the Fever from
immoderate increasing, and to rid away part of the matter, that nature may be
the better able to expel the rest; besides that, it is Natures proper Method;
for we see, for the most part, this Fever begins with Vomiting, Stools, or
both, which, if they cease before the Eruption, make the Disease the shorter
and easier, and the Pox the fewer. Moreover if this Clyster, or the Patients
own Purge of Whey and Roses, had done this mischief, it must have been by
causing a looseness (which never insued) and the Pox would presently after have
flatted, not at so great a distance of time, whereas then they came out pretty
well, and never sunk in till the Doctor had for some days tried his experiments
on him.

Thus I have furnished you with Narcotick Bumfodder, fit to be preferred to the
same Physical place that Mr Doctors Prescriptions richly deserve: I must plead
a just excuse from your command, and my own, and your want of time; and rest

Your affectionate and devoted Brother.


