GREGORY, Father-Greybeard, With his Vizard off: Or, News from the CABAL In
some REFLECTIONS Upon a late PAMPHLET Entitled, The Rehearsal Transprosed.
(After the fashion that now obtains) IN A LETTER to our old Friend, R. L. from
E. H.

London, Printed by Robin Hood, at the Sign of of the He-Cow I. O. if it be not
a Bull, on the South-west and by West end of Lake-lemane and sold by Nath.
Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. 1673.

REFLECTIONS Upon a late PAMPHLET, Entitled The Rehearsal Transprosed. In A
LETTER TO Our old Friend, R. L.
SIR,
ONe would think you were at certain with the Company of Stationers, and, as
their Pensioner, retained in constant Pay; For of late a man cannot write a
private Letter to you, but forthwith you Print it: And though All of you be in
the fault, yet the Innocent Sheet does the Penance on the Book-seller's Stall;
Or stands, like a poor Greek, or some Mountebanks Bill, at every Pillar and
Post, to be gazed on, if not laughed at.

I know what you will say; that all this modesty I now put on, is but a mere Copy
of my Countenance; and that indeed and in truth, (you keeping the Key to the
Press,) I had not writ to you above all others, but on purpose that you might
open the Press-door, and let me in, with Imprimatur R. L.

Which Passport had been set down in the first place, (as commonly it is,)
like a Ticket, in hand, to get into the Playhouse, but that the Booksellers
like it not.

For they, (honest men,) knowing the worth of a Book only by the ready sale,
perceive the people have got an opinion, (and then there is no beating it out of
their heads,) and have taken such a prejudice against Books so marked in the
forehead, that construing it to be a Brand of Infamy, they will scarce ask the
price of them, or bid a penny:

Taking it for granted, the Author so licensed, was some dull Phlegmatic
fellow, and either wanted wit or honesty to vouch himself.

To tell you the plain truth on it, and not to lie; It was neither the
Importunity of friends, of the Stationer in particular; nor the near approach
of the next Term; nor very much against my will; nor to Cancel the obligations
many and great to his Worship, her Lady-ship, etc. neither as a Testimony of
great thankfulness; nor out of penury and want of a better Offering; nor any of
the like stale Pretexts, that now set my Pen a work:

But of my own accord, mere motion, and advice; mine own dear fingers itch'd to
be at it; till I had finished and dispatched the Packet, in this Express.

Wherein is enclosed and wrapped up a bundle of serious and honest Truths, as if
held forth from Pulpit it self.

But (I confess) they are, (like my self) merrily disposed; yet purposely so
dressed, that the wholesome food therein contained, not disgusting the Palate of
this humorsome and frothy Age, might relish the better, and go merrily down.

Indeed it is a Quelque-chose, here and there a little Tart sometimes, but
without gall or Bitterness; and here and there a Bit so sharp too, as, (like
mustard,) to bite the Tongue of a sinner; but it is only to make his eyes
water, and bring him to repentance; and the better digestion of his former
crudities.

If you suspect the Truth of all this, as related by a Party concerned, (for
who is not in Love with his own Issue, though Crouch-back'd, or Crook-legg'd?)
then read not one Syllable more, it is alike to me, for I shall not get a penny
by your custom; neither do I desire it. For I am well and warm; and wish all
Mankind so; and to do what in me lies for the common Bene^t do I now write.

Praying that all men were of my Religion, (contained in this Letter) and then
the world would need neither stocks nor Gaol; neither Inquisition, nor
Surrogate; neither Act of Indemnity, nor Uniformity; neither Drums, nor
Colors; Swords, nor Helmets; Fireballs, nor little Cutto's; Red-Coats, nor men
of War: nor have any great use of those two lately-found out Inventions,
Printing and Gunpowder; (and whether of them has most troubled the world, I
will not take upon me here to discuss; yet I think the latter has not proved so
mischievous as is supposed; Battles having been before the use of Gunpowder,
the most bloody.)

But if you think, this Preface is all but Quack, and promises more, like an
Empiricks Bill, than can be performed upon Trial and proof; and has more in the
Contents than in the Chapter; then let the rest alone, for I write not to an
Infidel.

Yet the greatest part of the world is so: and a pretty quantity of the lesser
part is inhabited, (some think) by people, that either have foreheads of brass,
or no eyes in their foreheads: I mean Knaves and Fools.

Knaves will not, and Fools can not understand my meaning in this following
Letter.

And thus far by way of Preface.

At the Rainbow-Coffee-house the other day, taking my place at due distance,
not far from me, at another Table sat a whole Cabal of wits; made up of
Virtuoso's, Ingenioso's, young Students of the Law, two Citizens, and to make
the Jury full, vouz avez, one old Gentleman: his bald Pate covered with a
huffing Peruke, without an Eye of gray in it, or one gray-hair.

But I knew him to be Old, because they all laughing heartily and gaping, I
took that occasion, to look him in the mouth, and knew his Age, for indeed the
mark was out of his mouth. I was tickled to know the cause of all this mirth,
and presently found, it was a Book made all this sport; the Title of it, The
Rehearsal transprosed.

Look you here, says one of them, do not you see, p. 309. how smartly he
ferrets the old Foxes, the Fathers of the Church? (as in biting Irony, he calls
the old Bishops:) and how he claws off one of them by name, A. Sparrow D. D.
Bishop of Exon? nay scratches one out of the Grave, L. Andrews late Bishop of
Winchester? He Is a notorious bold fellow, I Will warrant him, says another; he
takes up the old Fathers like so many Schoolboys; and like a stout Pedant, or
Priscian himself, he whips one of them publicly, and gives him chastisement
for his worthy cares, because he had no better plied his Book.

But he goes a little higher, says a Third, if in the same page, you look a
little lower: and turns up his Majesty's Evil Counselors, and gives one slash
at a great Minister of State, with great courage pulling the dead Lion by the
beard.

I like it not at all, and the Author much worse, says the old Gentleman; it
sounds so like the old cry of London-Town in 1642. Down with the Bishops, Down;
Down with the Evil Counselors,

That do so keep us off, we cannot come at the King; and therefore it is we can
never have him at our wills, to deal kindly by him, for his own good, and for
reformation, to make him then a glorious King; therefore, down with the
Bishops, down with Evil Counselors.

The man is desperately disingenuous and unnatural, (I think) whosoever was the
Author; he plays the Tarrier, by his falling on so fiercely upon the old Foxes,
the fathers of the Church; and by that, should be some Vicars son.

For the Tarrier you know, is a monstrous beast, begot of a bitch, by a Fox,
and so is half-dog, and half-fox: but there is no such enemy, in the world, to
a fox, as is the Tarrier which is a part of him, though an Amphibious and
degenerate Issue.

I think, (replied another) he is rather a Jaccal, (which is an Arabian beast,
but more monstrous in the odd humor of his rapacity) robbing the graves, and
scratching up for a prey the dead Corpse, that lay decently interred, as by name
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Bramhall, Archbishop Usher, Archbishop Laud; and a
glorious Martyr, worth them all, King Charles I.

It is a marvel (says another) what you will make of this New Author, at the
long run; for you have made him a Ferret, a Tarrier, and a Jaccall already; The
Gentleman himself has reduced thus many Metaphors within the compass of one
bare sentence, p. 49. setching a Conjurer, a Playhouse, and a Ferret to make
it up: sure his Rhetoric was born in a time when Metaphors were cheap; for
though they be far fetched, yet sure they were not dear bought, he is so
prodigal of them.

Well said (says a young Lawyer) I will bestow one Metaphor the more upon him
for his liberality: He seems to me, to be a Cotswould-Hare, he is so well
breathed, he has stood three or four Courses already; the first, called
Rosemary, that was slipped at him, made more have than good speed, and scarcely
had poor Watt in view during the whole run: The Latter gave him fair Law, yet
withal gave him so many smart turns, so nimbly and so quick, that I wonder how
the poor fool shifted for it self.

And now I hear there is one will have another Loose at him, if it be but for
sport, and yet it is an even wager he will click him up in good earnest.

Look to thy Hits, poor Watt:
Thou had better have sat
For ever on thy Squatt,
Than Hunted at this rate.
The Ostrich wings has got,
For Legs alone help not;
This last, though set out late,
Intends to show thy fate;
And make thy Bonny Skutt
A Trophee for the Hut,
And there to be laughed at.
Hold, good Gentlemen! says one of the Citizens, you have made beast enough of
him already in all conscience: but truly, verily, and indeed, that Gentleman
there, who made a Jaccall of him, in my opinion has sampled the Pattern to the
life. As there is a Law in England against wolves, so, if I were a Parliament
man, I would move for a law against Jaccalls.

This Jaccall is an unsufferable beast in our Soil, especially when no dead
corpse pleases his Palate so much, as those sacred Relics of Archbishop Laud,
especially those of Englands Martyr, King Charles 1.

For he that beheaded these two was not half so barbarous, nor did do them half
so much harm, as this Gregory Father-Grey-beard, who with his utmost malice and
inveteracy strikes at their Innocence and Honor.

For which cause, (though such a Barbarian ought not to be Christened, yet) He
having no name, the Company did, (as He did to Mr. Bays,) give him a name, by
which he was known amongst them to this day, calling him, for his merits-sake,
(as we do hereafter) Gregory Father-Grey-beard; or, Mr. Gregory, and sometimes
plain Greg.

For certainly the Heads-man Father-Grey-beard was incomparable less
mischievous than this villain; the natural lives of those two glorious Martyrs
being mortal, but their Innocence (by this vile man here assassinated) should
be immortal, and King Charles himself was more tender of these, than of his
life, valuing his dignity above his Crowns; saying, in his own unparalled
words, (I shall never forget them) (...). cap. 15.

I can more willingly lose my Crowns, than my Credit; nor are my Kingdoms so
dear to me, as my Reputation and Honor: Those must have a Period with my Life,
but these may surviveto a glorious kind of Immortality, when I am dead and
gone; and a sweet consecrating of them to an eternity of Love and gratitude
among Posterity.

Those foul and false aspersions were secret Engines at first employed against
my peoples Love of me, that undermining their opinion and value of me, my
enemies and theirs too, might at once blow up their affections, and batter down
their Loyalty.

This in practice, (what ever be the design) is endeavored in this Book p.
301. with as much venom as can be spit; asserting there, that the whole Reign
of King Charles 1. was deformed.

We had a good wise King (the while) then, and fit to live and Reign, that
would suffer his whole Reign to be deformed. Thus making him a Pupil, rather
than a Prince; and one that of himself regarded not what was good; but was kept
during his whole Reign under a Tutor and Guardian, or rather Governor; and he,
viz. Arch. Bishop Laud, one of the worst too, for he says, he seemed to know
nothing but Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring: with that he begun, and
with that he ended, and thereby deformed the whole Reign of King Charles 1. p.
301.

Thus he makes our Solomon, a Rehoboam; namely a child at forty years of age.

By Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring; whatever they be in themselves,
this Author represents them as very vile, wicked and ugly things, because they
deformed the Kings whole Reign. And therefore he concludes thereby, that King
Charles 1. had no wisdom to understand the vileness, wickedness, and ugliness
of these three things, Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring, whereby his
whole Reign was deformed; or else that King Charles understanding the evil
nature of these things that did deforme his whole Reign, had not honesty, nor
innocence enough to keep them off, from deforming his whole Reign.

So choose him whether, for this Author determines him necessarily in these
words, to be either so much a fool as to suffer his whole Reign to be deformed
with Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring; and to be led by a man, that
seemed to know nothing else; with which he begun, and with which he ended, and
thereby deformed the whole Reign:

Or else, knowing these things, and how they deformed his whole Reign; he makes
him a vile and wicked King that would not save and deliver his whole Reign from
deformity.

By the former he makes him a weak prince, without wisdom; the contrary
whereof is known to the whole world, and was never suggested before this time,
by any but the Rebels in the beginning of the late Civil-wars, to withdraw the
affections of his people from him, as from a man that had not wit nor
understanding enough to govern them, but was led by the Duke of Buckingham and
Archbishop- Laud.

But if he mean the latter, that all this deformity was his own doings, and
that though his Reign was deformed, it was himself, his own Inclinations and
bent which contrived, at least concurred, in making his whole Reign deformed;
then and even then, it is the old cry of the Rebels, who when they had got
their wills of the Earl of Strafford; and Archbishop Laud, and left the King
no Counselors, nor Kingdoms, nor so much as liberty; then changed their note,
and justified the Evil Counselors, more than the King himself; saying he
himself was his own wicked Councellor, and a Tyrant, and ought to die: And
though their words (like these of this Author) were devilish and malicious;
yet they were as good as their words, and condemned him for a Tyrant, and cut
off his head. It Is indeed (answered another) all you say is infallibly true,
and undeniable to a Tittle; but that which is admirable, and a greater Marvel,
is the skill and cunning of the man.

He does the feat so cleaverly, as if he shot with white Powder; did execution
indeed effectually, but makes no noise, or evil Report; (like other unskilful
and bawling Phanaticks;) for though you stare about, you shall not see the
Executioner, nor know whence the shot comes; or if you do, he puts his vizard
on presently, and looks, (like Faux) in disguise. Or, as the Mountebank,
keeping a man, who is content to be slashed and cut, that his master may
thereby show his Dexterity and skill in the Cure; so this Virtuoso wounds and
cuts (but indeed with design) mortally; and with matchless courage and
boldness, (disdaining trivial force) fights neither with small nor great,
(except they lie in his way and detard Royal assassination) but only the King
of our Israel; against whom when he has spit his venom, and with bold and home
thrusts assaulted his Innocence and honor;

Yet he has his Plaster at hand, (though it be without virtue) and would seem
to make all whole again, with crying, Oh Lord! Sir, I beg your pardon; and
then; as you were: All is well again.

The Plaster (which he would make Alexipharmacal for the wounds with which our
late Sovereign is attempted, and made, together with his whole Reign,
deformed,) is the neatest of all; and clapped on as soon as the blow is struck,
p. 301. deformed the whole Reign -- of the best Prince that ever wielded the
English Scepter.

A contradiction in terminis, and as barbarous as absolute.

For how could he possibly be the best Prince that ever wielded the English
Scepter, except all the Princes that ever wielded the English Scepter had their
whole Reigns deformed, either by their carelessness or folly; or, (which is the
less affront to be called Knave rather than fool, because one may be helped,
the other is remediless) by vileness and wickedness doing the work themselves,
and deforming their whole Reign.

Again, if he be the best Prince that ever wielded the English Scepter, and yet
either did deform his whole Reign, or suffered it to be deformed with
Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring;

Then these three Reign-deforming Buggs, Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and
Manwaring are very consistent with the best Prince that ever wielded the
English Scepter.

And if so, then these three Reign-deforming Buggs, are indeed but Buggs, and
fright men more than burt them, and can scare none but children and fools.

For that the best Prince that ever England had, owns, cherishes them, or at
least permits them to be owned and cherished above all other things; and owns
(above all other men) the man that seemed to know nothing else but these
Ceremonies, Arminianisme, and Manwaring; with which he begun and with which he
ended.

And all this must necessarily follow, or else those good English Princes that
kept off, or expelled out of, their Kingdoms, these same three ugly
Reign-deforming things; were better Princes than He that either brought them
in, kept them in, or suffered them to stay in, and thereby deformed his whole
Reign.

And if they, (in doing so well, and much better than he) were better Princes
than he; how could he be the best Prince that ever wielded the English Scepter?

So egregiously confident, and self-conceited is this Virtuoso Author, this
new Politician; that, (through the high value he has for himself; together with
the mean and low esteem he has for all others) thinks so slightly and easily to
Gull them; and casting a little mist before their eyes, hopes to lead them
about, like fools by the nose.

Otherwise this foolhardy man would never have been so lost to all modesty and
discretion, as to think to impose upon men, and be juggle them by such
transparent mists, and easy Legerdemain; namely plain downright Nonsense and
Contradiction.

Alas! the man is not master of his Trade! And yet, as if he only, and the
rest of the new Politicians and Virtuoso's, were like the Chinenses and had two
eyes in their heads; but all the rest of the world blind; or, (at least) the
best of them but single-ey'd men; who with but one eye are not so very
quick-sighted, especially if you come upon them on the blind side.

The Company seemed wonderfully well pleased with this discourse; all of them
but the Virtuoso's and Ingenioso's; who were but four in all, and they too
answered not one word: whether troubled with the Fret, and at the heart too mad
and enraged to utter a word, hearing themselves thus checked to the face; and
their Brother Virt -- (who but a little before they had cried up for such a
Prodigy and Marvel of wit) should so suddenly be charged home with so
unavoidable a shock; whilst they stood by, and idly looking on, had neither
ability nor wit enough to make resistance, nor knew how to help themselves nor
Him: yet, (to see how soon the wind turns! and how suddenly smiling Dame
Fortune can knit her brows!) if he had but come into the Room one half hour
before, the whole Clubb had roused at the happy surprise of this wonderful wit;
and had carried the Bugg upon their shoulders (like the Knight of the shire on
Election-day) in Triumph about the Room: and had given him as many thanks for
his great pains in this admirable Book, as the Authors friend I. O. and the
Conventicle did, when they sent him for these his happy endeavors, the
Gratuity, gathered amongst the Churches as a due offering; with all hearty
Acknowledgments and the Thanks of their house; especially for promoting the
good old Cause, modern Orthodoxy, Liberty, Indulgence, and Reformation: but
particularly for setting the old Cry (against Bishops and evil Counselors) to
a new Tune; not the old whining, snivelling, canting Leer-away; (now somewhat
stale, detected, and out of fashion) but the fashionable, that most taking and
admired new, new Tune, the pleasant Droll-away.

The Brethren and Black-caps faced with white, having not vivacity nor wit
enough for that way; the virtue of Sack-possets having not hitherto proved
effectual nor spritely enough to raise their Phlegmatic and insipid Tempers to
any semblance of elevated and Mercurial Style.

At least these Virtuoso's would have clapped him on the back and spit in his
mouth; because it did so double and spend, when this Mopsus did open so well
upon the hot scent against Bays p. 150. with whoop, Holla, Holla, whoop; ten
times one after another; and with so full a mouth, that sure he has been used
to it; and has some Thestylis to his Mistress, whose Nephew Amyntas is out of
his wits.

Or whether the Arguments against their friend were all ad hominem, and made
the Indicted and Criminal to prove the evidence against himself, and by his own
mouth and confession, or acknowledged all under his own hand; and thereby
necessarily stopping their mouths, as if they had been silenced by a Bishop, or
Thunderstruck.

Or lastly, whether they were afraid to be laughed at the more, by answering
nothing to the purpose, and thereby once more shame the Author, their order,
and themselves; as being loath further to stir in that (Sir Reverence) that
already was so noisome, and smelt above ground; I cannot tell.

But now they answered only with a Countenance made up 'twixt wrath and
discontent, having not altogether so great an eye of scorn and self-conceit in
the mixture; and truly I was glad to see it, for mine own sake.

For being but a plain blunt fellow my self, I did wish with all my heart, (led
thereunto by (that that rules the world) Interest,) that some good body would
take them to do; and so effectually humble them, that a homespun Countrey-grey
and Friez-coat (though it be not a French-coat, nor bedaub'd with Lace) (and is
sometimes worn out, or sold in Long-lane, before it be paid for;) might pass
the streets quietly by them without a scoff or huff.

But though they were mute, the Gentleman went on that spoke last and so well
of the Plaster, that proved not big enough to salve the Kings honor and
Innocence, if the wounds had been as truly as maliciously given him; nor can in
the least salve this Authors honor and Innocence if ever he had any. Nor can
keep him undetected, or protect him from the stroke of Justice, and the
smitings of his own conscience; if he keeps any awake, for any other end but to
laugh at, and Atheistically to jear at.

And as his own Tongue has given it self the lie in reference to King Charles
I. so as palpably and plainly does it the same in relation to the account he
gives of Archbishop Laud.

As if the man resolved to make a Book of Prodigious contradictions in every
Page, and sometimes (as already we have instanced) in the same Line

Making one Repartee against the Bishop, to clash with another Repartee of his
own for the Bishop; fighting with a two-edged Sword, that cuts both ways; and
slashes Pro, and Con. For the Archbishop, Repartee Pro fights in the van, p.
281. in these words: Arch Bishop Laud, who if for nothing else, yet for his
learned Book against Fisher, deserved far another sat than he met with, and
ought not (mark that!) ought not to be mentioned without due honor: well
charged Pro.

But here, come hither Repartee Con, and make him eat his words, or cram them
down his throat; in p. 301. He seemed to know nothing but Ceremonies,
Arminianisme, and Manwaring; with that he begun, and with that he ended, and
thereby deformed the whole Reign of the best Prince etc. Well struck Repartee
Con, I knew thou would make him recant these words, namely ought not to be
mentioned without due Honor.

But to him again Repartee Pro. p. 301. I am consident the Bishop studied to do
both God and his Majesty good service; his will was good then. What say you to
that, Repartee Con? I say in the same page and next following words: he was so
learned, so pious and so wise a man; a man may be pious indeed, and have a good
will to do well; but if he want learning and wisdom he knows not how to effect
it; this Archbishop had both (he says) learning and wisdom, piety, good
intentions and diligence, studying to do both God and his Majesty good service,
and yet presently after denies all, he said no such thing; no not a syllable
on it; he neither said he had a good will and endeavors for God and his King,
nor any such thing, he never acknowledged his learning, piety, wisdom, and
honor that was due to him; for the Archbishop had not one jot nor tittle of
any of them, or any other thing that was good in him; why? He seemed to know
nothing but Ceremonies, Arminianisme and Manwaring, with that he begun and with
that he ended. Nay, continues the young Gentleman (he was a Student of the
Laws) I will show you how almost every page contradicts the other; but the
company desired him to forbear a little; because the old Gentleman (his tongue
being tired with lying still so long) desired he might be heard.

That which he was so big with, and did so long for the happy time of being
delivered of it, when it came to the Birth, was nothing but an old Proverb.

For, like as when a churlish Mastiff worries a strange Curr and tumbles him in
the dirt, every dogged little Curr will have a snap at him when he is down, so
this old Gentleman that not long ago had with the same mouth cried up this
strange new Author, convinced now of his former folly, shows the truth of his
conversion by his zeal; and since the Company generally did now cry him down,
the old Gentleman had scarce patience thus long to forbear him; and because
that, wanting teeth, he could not bite him, yet as well as he could, the old
Cur mouths him with a Proverb, Proverb against Proverb.

The Proverb of this strange Author that thus provoked him and stuck in his
stomach, did lie in p. 294. of the book. It was Jack Gentleman, Jack Gentleman.

Which, says this old Gentleman, is a mere lie of his own making: though the
Author on it, for fear of detection and shame, dares not own his own Issue, but
makes it filius populi, a Bastard, of I know not whose begetting, only saying,
they tell me, they tell me -- It was come they tell me to Jack Gentleman. They
tell me? continued he; what they? I am sure if it was any body, but the Author
himself, it was Nicholas Nemo. For no body knows the old Proverbs of those
times better than my self; and indeed, (says he) I confess there was, and yet
is, a Proverb something like it, but this Author clips it, and then new coyns
it, and would make it pass for Current, with they tell me.

The Proverb, in those times was not Jack-Gentleman, but Jack would be a
Gentleman, if he could speak French. And was of old, and ye^ true; and made of
those that being upstart Gentlemen, and having more money than true honor,
their Fathers leaving and bequeathing to their sons Gentlemen's Estates, but
could not leave them (what themselves had not) a Coat of Arms.

For supply whereof upstart gets himself a French coat, a French wit, a French
head, a French wigg, French legs, French cringes, French Tongue, and all other
members about him (in apish and mimick imitation of the French) frenchefyed,
thereby to be taken for a Gentleman; whence the Proverb, Jack would be a
Gentleman if he could speak French.

At which, so probably related by the old Gentleman, most of the company
laughed heartily; and concluded that this new Author, designing in his whole
book to promote again the good old Cause, which he calls modern Orthodoxy; and
sometimes the cause too good; resolving right or wrong, to plead the Cause of
the Non-Conformists, which since he has espoused, he is not ashamed of; and
therefore confesses p. 282. that if he can do the Non-Conformists no good, he
is resolved to do them no harm; and we will believe him without swearing.

To carry on this goodly design, he bespatters the present Government, with
unparalled malice endeavors to stain and blemish the late Kings whole Reign
as deformed, rails at Bishops and evil Counselors, dead and alive, justifies
Schism, (as shall shortly appear) cries up Indulgence, and liberty, Breda,
Breda; Reformation, Reformation; and with bitter sarcasmes and invective
taunts, prosecutes the present Parliament, (Rallery being the most biting and
insufferable Railing) and all this with as little fear as wit.

Rather than not have a fling at the Parliament, and pinch it till it recant
all, (especially the Act for Uniformity, or any Act against the good old Cause
and Non-Conformists) to twit it home, as wittily and effectually as he can; he,
p. 110. confounds nature to create a Joque; turns the Parliament Men into a
Parliament of women, on purpose to break a jest upon them, which had otherwise
missed them, viz. Superfoetation of Acts.

And new-mints a word, Trinkle, trinkle the members; rather than his beggarly
wit should have nothing current. It would make a man sick, to see this little
Tantalus catch and gape for a jest and a little Rhetoric; And (alas!) it will
not come.

And at other times to see him make a Lions face and grunt and groan to send
forth a little wit, but it is right Presbyterian, it will not come; for the man
is as costive as one of the old Assembly of Divines; or Smec. or Tom Dumby-low,
who died because he was so.

And all this pother is for an old Cause that stinks above ground in the
nostrils of every honest heart, both here and all the world over.

Yet commend me to the men for one thing, they are as restless and
indefatigable in their endeavors to promote it; (though so often baffled by
God and man) that they still cease not to move every stone, bribe and flatter,
threaten and frown, fight and rayl, cant and recant, pray and lie, preach and
slander, snivel and whine, exhort and blaspheme, in public, in private, in
City and Country, in Churches, in Conventicles, with License, and without
License, by your leave, and in spite of your teeth; As if old Knox himself was
again metempsuchos'd in every one of them.

To this purpose, in this Author, they assault the Church and State, with the
old weapons new furbish'd; and to make you believe their old cause was good,
they make the old Kings cause bad, and this bold man dares, in this juncture of
affairs, with implacable inveteracy, prey upon the dead, not permitting to rest
in the bed of Honor our gracious and blessed King, Englands Martyr,

That sacrificed his own life, rather than to live in infamy by betraying his
people, the laws, and his own just rights. And, though we can scarce believe
our own eyes when we see the matchless Impudence of this Author thus to
traduce him and his whole Reign; and the present Parliament with Taunts as
bitter as bold: yet to make all this seem but a jest, when he casts
firebrands, arrows and death, like mad; he seems to say, Am not I in sport?

In an affected, but taking and fashionable Drolling way, insinuating into
every man's humor to carry on the work; Cajoling the Rabble with liberty,
Indulgence, Breda, Breda; Cajoling the Yeomen and Corporations with Interest
and Trade; and propriety, invaded with fears of Sibthorpianisme, Ceremonies,
Arminianisme and Manwaring.

Cajoling the Gentlemen and noble men, with the dangers that again threaten
their Reputation and Honor; and make them feel for their Cutto's, and draw
upon poor Cassock and Lawn-sleeves, for fear it should come again to the
Proverb (of his own making) Jack-Gentleman.

But I being suddenly called away, was no longer happy with the further
discourse of this Cabal of wits; only I took notice before I parted, that the
Virtuoso's all this while made not one Repartee; or if they did, it was but one
little one, answering mostly with a countenance composed, and made up of
magisterialness and high conceit, mixed with some pity but more scorn, and a
little smile, now and then, proceeding from both.

But with such a paltry and surly grace, that I could scarce contain my self;
and I had much ado to forbear kicking the Coxcombs.

And they had certainly felt the Print of my toes, but that I was not so angry
as to hold from laughing right out, at such affected gravity, they looked so
scurvily.

With Head tossed up, but bridling in the chin,
As if with half cheek-bit and Curb reyn'd in.
Mumbling a little sometimes to themselves, as the poor ass does, when feeding
upon Thistles, the sharp pricks gawl his Chaps.

Whether, like right-bred Cocks of the Game, they kept their best strength for
the Reserve and last Close: or, that they were good Husbands of their wits, and
would not spend it, but in better company, some Cabal of their own; or, thought
that the Moderators place was their own by Patent and just right; determining
all at the last; or, did not at that time carry their wit about them, as loath
to wear it out; or, like old true hunted Hounds, would not open, but when the
scent was certain; or, whether they had some peculiar endearances for the
Author, I cannot decide.

But I was so netled with what I had heard of this new Author, above all
admiring the stupendous contradictions and double-Tongue of the man; that,
though I had read in Diodorus Siculus of an Island in Arabia, where the
Inhabitants have two tongues in a head, but loath to go so far to see them; yet
since I might see the Marvel at home, (more prodigious than the child, at the
Swan by Charing Cross, with two heads) I was resolved, though it cost me a
shilling, to see what I could find in this mavelous Book; and readily finding
one at the next Stationers: the Bugg almost startled me at first, it had such a
Porten^ous Title, The Rehearsal Transprosed.

The Rehearsal Transprosed? Some of the Common Herd of mankind, that never paid
six pence yet at a Club of the Virtuoso's, nor so much as once got the word for
that night, would quietly (if not frighted with the Goblin) pass by this
Title Page, (when starched up with the Playhouse Bills,) as unconcerned and
hopeless, as if it were Copti or Syriack.

Or if he should be so daring, as to venture to spell it, and put it together,
it would stick in his throat, like Welsh or Irish.

This it is to be mortal, and not free of the Company of Wits, who, (as Gregory
Father-Grey-beard (for so I Will style this whisler for his meritssake, and
sometimes for brevity sake, plain Greg.) intimates p. 51, 52, 53. 2d. Imp.)
feast at a Club on nothing but conceits reeking hot, and with a pretty smile or
so, till it be grown almost as good as a Play, at last laugh right out, and
(saving your Reverence Sir) turn their breech ('it is his own smutty Language) at
all the world besides, that live (poor souls!) on their leavings, viz. cold
conceits and not enough matured.

Oh Hudibras! Droll Laureat! Wits-Common-wealth! or which is more, friend to
Trans! Poor wit might have slept quietly, (as she has done time out of mind,)
but that Hud took her napping, gave her a twitch by the nose, and made her wait
on him in the shape of a Droll, draws a Circle and conjured her, henceforward
never so much as to look at a Cassock, a Quoif, a Gown, or a Bulls-cap; but by
no means on a Black-Cap white-fac'd, nor so much as to come within sight of the
Cradle upon Kings-Colledge-Chappel, but be confined henceforth for ever to the
Coffee-house, Clubs, Drolls, Virtuoso's, and Ingenioso's; who now, with the
help of the Press, Coffee, and the Wine Press, want nothing but Ink and
Elbow-grease, (as Trans threatens the trembling world,) to do more harm than an
hundred Systematical Divines, with their sweaty Preaching.

What a dull Thing was he that writ The Advancement of Learning? (If he could
but have hit on it) It had been but converting the Colleges and Halls into
Laboratories, the Inns of Court into Coffee-houses, the Doctors into
Ingeniosos; then changing their Books for Limbecks; Crucibles, Furnaces,
Coffee-pots, and China-dishes; the Canonical Black for a light Drugget,
Aristotle for Hobs, Ecclesiastical Policy for Contempt of the Clergy, the
Friendly Debate for our Friend Greg. Chopping Logic, and all antiquated Terms
of Art, into Tuants, Flambos, Ragousts; Risques, Intrigues, Harangues,
Comfortable Importance, Remarks, Repartees etc. above all keeping the head warm
the while with a Perriwig instead of a Square Cap, and the business had been
done, the Circle squared; the Longitude, Pepetual motion, and the true
Philosophers Stone of wit had been found out.

He that presumed the Pope was a Niggard if not very hard-hearted, because he
could as easily have fetched all the poor Prisoners out of Purgatory at once,
as one or two now and then, if he had listed; would certainly have had as
little charity for Greg. and his Corporation of Drolls, for engrossing all the
Wit and Learning in the world, except that little they retayl out to the frail
world that half starved gape for it, when they may so easily (if they had the
hearts) by the help of a new Dictionary for their new-coyn'd words, enrich the
world with light wit by wholesale, and free it from darkness.

Yet I Will assure you; Dear Sir, I shall never endeavor to bring these Wit^alls
within the statute against Monopolies; I do not envy them, nothing of this
moves my spleen, but that they are grown so spleenatick, and cannot be content
to have all the wit in the world, but must needs become petulant, and with
scorn trample upon all mankind.

This insolence of Greg. Father-Grey-beard against Bays, moves me; ^or not
contenting himself with exposing our learned friend, as impudent and
Counterfeit, p. 2. a Preface-monger, a malepert Chaplain, p. 4. a dangerous
fellow, p. 11. Arrogance, p. 19. Cutthroat, p. 41. Ecclesiastical
Draw-can-sir, p. 42. Peniten^iary universal to the reformed Churches, and
ridiculous Buffoon-General to the Church of England, p. 44. Daw-Divine, p. 45.
Opprobrium Academiae et pestis Ecclesiae, p. 46. Interloper, Prodigy, and
prodigious person, p. 47. (yet by way of Irony) Pink of Cou^tesie, p. 9. and
Overseer of Gods highway, p. 76. a Creature most obnoxious; yet m^ despicable,
p. 48. a mad-Priest, fit for nothing but Bedlam and Hogsdon, p. 61.
Cock-divine, C^ck wit, p. 64. mad man in Print, p. 66. Hebrew Jew, p. 73. one
that has strewed Arsehick in every leaf, p. 79. Spy and Intelligencer, p. 92. a
Writer of a paltry Book, p. 105. a Buffoon, p. 106. a Hypocrite to God, and a
Knave amongst men, p. 115. with the like Drivill, in twice as many pages more;
but by degrees to render him an enemy of mankind, like a raging Indian, running
a Muck, and stabbing every man he meets, p. 59. and killing whole nations,
friend and foe, Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, and a great part of the Church of England, and
all Scotland, p. 42, 43.

Bless me (startled I) the drawing-on world is just now at the last gasp; but I
was so much the more astonished and surpised, because I found not one word of
all this in Englands fate, happily and piously discovered in two Prophetical
Books, one called Annus mirabilis, It has a Greek name too, but in English it
heights Mervail's year, 1661. and the other, Annus mirabilis secundus, 1662.
(who was the Author you may ghess.)

But having some skill in Astrology, I had more than a months mind to see the
face of the Heavens, to know whether by their lowering looks, they boded all
this terror.

With a trembling hand therefore ^king down the Ephemerides, and the table of
the dignity of the Planets, together with Will. Lillyes Introduction, I drew my
Scheme, and I found the Heavens looked just thus.



My fears brought me near enough to an ecstasy, which is next door to rapture
and Poesy, my fancy meeting by chance with a Drolling Muse, represented the
Scheme thus.

Sol's near his Exaltation,
Where Mars will welcome him anon;
Mars his own house does dignifie,
Englands brave Prince is blessed thereby.
And Saturn in his own House lies:
All these are happy Auguries.
Mercury Virtuoso close
Is in Conjunction nose to nose
With Venus: (poor Girl!) fair, but frail:
Their Meeting House, the Dragons Tail;
The sting, did make me quake for fear,
I saw in the Dragons Tail stick there.
But forthwith all my fears were over,
Because this Omen does discover,
Mars being Lord of the eighth house,
(Which by Astrologers is ch^se
As fittest for) the House of death,
In language of the stars, it says,
Some Lord by Hector Virtuoso
May in a Duel die, or so, so.
Mars being placed too in the Ram,
He dies a Cuckold too. I came
From thence to the tenth House, to spy
In what posture Venus did lie
Snugging so close to Mercury.
Which speaks the loss of Mayden-head;
No, Hold; alas! it is not so good;
It Is the loss of all modest sense,
And speaks unparalled impudence.
But Jove being uncombust and free,
With the Lords of the Triplicitie,
In no Azimenes; they, thence
United in their Influence;
And in the tenth House, where do lie
The Drugs of cheating Chemistry;
From thence it plainly does appear,
The Heavens will knit their brows this year
On Virtuoso's great and small,
Hogens and Mogens too, That Is all.
A Bearded Comet next appeared
(I knew him only by his Beard,)
Which was a dreadful bush of hair,
Right under Cassiopeia's chair;
And, which presaged some little harm,
Andromeda held him in her Arm;
His Tail too did not much befriend us,
I took my Optic of Gassendus,
And looked him right up in the face,
But found I much mistaken was;
For that which seemed a Beard so big
Was not a Beard, but Perriwig:
The color as it first began,
Still continued pale and wan,
Because he lodged in Capricorn,
Which in the skies is the sign of the Horn:
His face with Wig so dreadful made,
I scarce saw any face he had:
Whether he was ashamed to show
A face so bad, I do not know.
The Dog Star lent him influence,
His Bushie-locks he had from thence:
Which shows, that water-Dogs and Irish
Greyhounds shall make Gentlemen flourish,
With all the Hair that they can spare,
To make Jack-Gentlemans wig of Hair:
How near the Gallants nose will come
To the Hair that covered Shag'd-Dogs Bum
Yet that in Honor does surpass,
Hair clipped from Scab'd-head Countrey-Lass;
Or hair clipped off by Gregory
From Tyburn-Thief's-head, as his Fee:
The self same head of hair I saw
Twice hanged at Tyburn; Is this Law?
Good my Lord Judge! Hang Jack no more,
His Head has been hanged twice before;
And sold to Barber, by 'Squire-Dun,
To make a Jack a Gentleman;
When Upstart, Honor true to have,
The soft place in his he^d does shave.
Who, more Star-Perriwigs does lack,
This year look Lillies Almanac;
Who Heavenly wigs can trim, (as well
As I,) by old Prophetic skill,
And long acquaintance with the stars:
Foretelling this year, that in the wars
The French King did get, to his praise,
Forty Dutch Towns in forty days;
The Witch in his Almanac foresees it,
Saying there venit, vidit, vicit:
Presaging what the French did get,
As truly as last Junes Gazett.
Whether this Witchcraft hangs him or no,
He ought to have been hanged long ago,
As much for villainy, (as I have heard)
Against King Charles as now Father-Grey-
I posted thence, from North to South, (beard.
In haste to view the Poles hoth;
Surveying the Worlds Axes too,
Whether the Hinges held or no.
I found them both, and either Pole
In every motion, safe and whole,
Loosened but by one Pin: Pox on it,
(To make up Rhithme;) now I have done it.
And I think I have done very fair for my self; for all my fears forth with
vanished. I took heart of grace, and found that all this pother made by our new
Author, was but right down railing set off with a little Droll, the more
takingly to calumniate and cast contempt on the Clergy, which he endeavors to
wound, (through the sides of Mr. Bays,) Bishop Bramhall, and Archbishop
Usher; and if his malice had gone no further than the Clergy, I had now left
them to shift for themselves; for there is but few of them inferior to Greg. in
any thing but this his own unparalled Rhetoric of Barking.

Is It not a marvel who this same Gregory Father-Greybeard is? The thing should
be female by the Billings-gate Oratory of scolding; But then -- whoop Holla;
Holla whoop; some ridiculous common Hunt; by fears and jealousies, by his
apology for I. O. and the brethren, it should be some R. B. or snivelling
whining Black-cap underlay'd with white; by its busy interm^dling with
State Affairs, some Sir Politic would be; by its half Jests, quarter Jests,
and half-quarter Jests, it would be thought to be some little Droll, and by its
plea for Corporations, some candidate against the next vacation for a Burgess
place in Parliament. But let the thing be what it will, the stroak's not so
terrible as the crack. I do not deny though, but that one of the Ingenioso's
has found out of late, that all the Land, Mountains and Groves were once Sea;
and all the Deep (now an Ocean) was once inhabited with men, women and
children, as populous as now the world in the Moon; and that this same Sea
shall be Lind again, and the Land Sea; but fear not, for he promises moreover I
thank him, that this great change shall be the work of a six thousand years
Revolution.

And therefore I dread no more the ruin of Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia,
Poland, Savoy, Scotland, France, etc. (I will not say for the Netherlands.)
than when the Quaker cried Overturn, overturn, overturn.

And though Greg. and his Virtuoso's seem to themselves to be Vertical and
Cock-a-hoop ^risking and kicking, laughing and jearing, fretting and railing,
at the poor Clergy especially; for my part I neither envy him nor them that
jolly employment.

For, (as Alvarez de Luna, chief Favorite to the King of Castile, used to say
to those that admired his fortune; so say I of these men that are so scornful,
secure and culminant) commend not the Building till it be finished. Ante obitum
nemo: (I will make use of my dear ends of latin verse; (as well and as
decently made use of, as Italian patches are by Greg.) though I know the Wits
laugh at them; and have jear'd them to death, as St. Patrick did the Rats in
Ireland, l. 65. Sti Patricii.)

I grant there are such wise fools in the world, and so audacious, as, (like
the old Giants) to bid Heaven Battle; casting dirt, and flinging stones at the
stars; But he that sits in the heavens does but laugh them to scorn; and the
stones fall usually on their own Pates.

But Aquila non capit muscas, Greg. turns Tail from the Ecclesiastical
Politician, as a Prey too puny, and to show the courage of his wickedness lets
fly with indignation, at two most reverend and Learned Prelates of our age,
Bishop Bramball, and Archbishop Usher, Lord Primate and Metropolitan of all
Ireland: (that was so once, I mean,) for (thanks to such as Greg. and his
friends I. O. and the rest of the modern Orthodox) the good Bishop stripped of
all but his Priesthood, (that indelible character) was glad to crouch and pray
that he might be suffered in one of the Priests offices, that he might eat a
piece of bread.

Which Greg. calls p. 26. the height of the honest man's ambition, satisfying
himself, (happy he that could, and holy he that would be so satisfied) with
being admired by the white and blew Aprons, and poynted at by the more
judicious Tankard-bearers.

Thus Greg. adds scorn to the afflicted and affliction to his grief. Happy
England in such Governors and Politicians as this Father-Grey-beard, it is
pity he was not one of the Committee for Plundered Ministers in the late
confusions, he is so tenderhearted.

How would he have mump'd and frowned upon the poor Nuns, if he had been
Comrade-Inquisitor with Cromwell in Hen. 8. days? when the verdict was given in
wittily enough for those times, (for then keeping to the Letter, and Latin
scrapt were not cried down by the wits) Primi Pravi, Episcopi Aposcopi,
Cardinales Carnales, Canonici Cenonici, Praepositi praeposteri: Oh Monachi,
vestri Stomachi! I know not what a kind heart to the Nuns Greg. might have
proved, but I am confident he would have made no bones on their Lands: and all
this picque at the Clergy is not without design: Is not the band of -- with
thee in all this?

Is there never a fat Manor of the Bishops-Lands next Hedge to his little
field, I mean, it would help the Prospect a little better in his own ground, if
he could persuade to another dissolution: Beshrew me he has done fair to put in
for a share; and to be remembered in the dole.

Besides, his necessities may possibly plead for him; for great Gamesters,
(such as he makes himself p. 283. playing no less than Pieces at Picquet, and
haunting the Ordinaries) are usually great losers: which unhappy chances if
they fall out to be Gregory's Lot, and blank him and bilk him, then sui
profusus must be alieni appetens.

And of whose goods then can this Free-booter make a prize on more lawfully and
with more justice, than upon the Churches Dignities? a Dignitory of Lincoln he
tells us, p. 282. having cheated him already of his Pieces, and fingred his
money. Is It not pity his Majesty does not give him a Letter of Mart, to
reimburse himself upon that people, by some of whom he was robbed?

Is not his Book a Prologue to his Revenge? foaming and raging against the
people of God, (as proud Homan did,) and vowing their destruction and total
extirpation of all the dignities in the Church, only for the affront of one
Mordecai, alleging (as wicked Haman did) that it is not for the Kings profit
to suffer them.

For render but the Bishop's office useless, especially as to Episcopal
Grandeur useless; (as indeed it is if there be no discipline, all indulgence;

Then praesto comes me in Judas with his old speech, (made just 1640 years
ago,) To what purpose is this wast? Had not these fair Manors and Bishops
Lands better have been sold and given to the Poor? Poor Soldiers, or poor
Courtiers rather than fail.

If a Gentleman has consumed his body, or wasted his estate, with gaming, riot,
and wenching; would not it wonderfully comfort his bowels, refresh, and cheer
up the man's drooping spirits and despair, To have all healed again with the
Lands of the old Bishops, or Prebends, that never knew how to lead a Dance, hand
a Mistress, tread in a Masque, or pick the teeth with bonne Grace; nor so much
as knew how to set the Periwig and Galloshoes, much less the true timing and
accenting of a Rapper, and double swinger.

And though these accomplishments, (not to be despised,) are worthy
consideration, and may plead some merit; yet an Hospital, one would think,
should be the height of such men's ambition, and if it were not for charitysake,
more than their due.

But if their merits were never so impulsive and supererogating, yet good men,
like God, should hate robbery for an offering.

When the Levellers in the late times, set up their Standard at Burford-heath,
and also erected a Court of Chancery, (so called, for the Equity of its
design,) inviting all Christian people to the Confederacy; for is there any
equity or good Conscience, said they, that a Lord or Gentleman should have
5000, 10000, or 20000 pound per annum, when 20000 men have not so many pence?
Oliver thereat took so hot an Alarm, that he never did either more or better
bestir himself, saying, If these men be suffered, there will be no living by
them, either for Gentlemen, yeomen or tradesmen: But it is written, thou shall
not steal.

When the dumb beast opened his mouth, saying, Am not I thine Ass? He did
thereby in right and good reason stop the mouths of all those that should gape
after the goods belonging to the Prophet, though a wicked one:

And this Ass shall serve to reprove the madness of this Father-grey-beard, who
p. 309. by trampling on the fathers of the Church, and rendering them useless,
as wantonizing away their time and opportunities to do good; and as Tyrants,
chastising them for their worthy cares, and afterward striking at those of
them that are privy Counselors, with unparalled pertness and daring, would
thereby render them incapable of, and unfit for their great places and revenues.

And all this in so palpable and signal a manner, that every vulgar eye may
readily see through his design, and guess at the success, if his Book had come
out in 1642, as it does in 1672. Yet the Government being so well settled, it is
evident he labors in vain, and Balaam's Ass may silence him, these Places and
Revenues (belonging to those Prophets) are their own.

And by as good Right, Reason, and Law, as any other men can show for their
estates.

Indeed it is as needless as difficult for one of my quality to pass a judgment
upon the merit and worth of the present fathers of the Church; and much more
insignificant is any Testimonial of mine to vouch them.

Yet in despite of Father Grey-beard or Envy it self, and as far from
flattery, we must say, that there are none, that are honess sons of the Church
and legitimate, that have any cause to be ashamed of the present Fathers of the
church of England, which

Cl^ros inter habet nomina clara viros,
Still as of old, makes good the Proverb, current all the Christian-world over,

Clerus Britaunious stupor mundi.
The English Clergy are the worlds wonder.
Worthies we have many, of whom this ungrateful and frothy age of the world is
not worthy.

But granting (what Greg. endeavors should be taken for granted) that some of
the Fathers of the Church were good for nothing but to fill and keep the Bag,
must all the Apostles be decry'd for one Judas?

Nay granting that all the Lords spiritual minded nothing but wickedness, yet
they have as good right to their Estates as any wicked temporal Lord of the
laity, or profane Gentleman can have to his.

And they must be very bad indeed if they deserve not their places, as well as
the most others do; or even as well as this Father Grey-beard himself does
merit his places or Lands, if he ever had any, or has any yet left, since he
begun to frequent the Ordinaries, and play pieces.

And if he do not look well to his hits, it is more than an even lay, that I
shall beat him out of his play, before I have done. Yet I would have had more
wit in mine anger, and favored him the more, if he had not so unmanly and
disingenuously played upon the dead.

Not to mention again here those already mentioned, our late Sovereign,
Archbishop Laud, Archbishop Usher and Bishop Bramhall; to his own eternal
reproach already by him violated, but most to his own shame;

I cannot but here take notice how he again abuses himself, by contemning by
name, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of Winchester; one that never produced
any thing misshapen or deformed; but all so lovely, and with general liking and
applause admired; that Greg. by dispraising any thing that was his Issue, does
but betray his own judgment, blinded with folly or implacable malice against
all the Clergy.

To whom he confesses p. 283. he bears a great grudge, ever since he was nuzled
by one of their Coat; as if it was such a marvel, Jonye should be choused, when
he comes to Commence Gentleman and Gallant, by being made Free of the Company,
with his pocket full of pieces at an Ordinary.

From which if he had abstained and kept still in his Chamber, himself and his
Book (writ it seems in revenge of his great loss) he had been a wiser man, and
richer too, by saving his Pieces and his Credit, which (if not quite lost) is
at desperate hazard, and at the last stake.

But if the sins of this Nation should ripen to the like fatal Revolution, in
making havoc and sale of the Kings Lands, and Honors; the Lands of all his
friends as well as the Bishop Lands, and Father Grey-beard to his wish, should
live to keep his own Court Baron in one of my now Lord Bishops Manors, it
cannot be said in shri^t for the Rapine as at the dissolution of Abbeys --
Possidebant Papistae, (For Greg. himself assoyls our Prelates of Popery, p. 35.
not for any great hatred they have to the Popes great head, but for fear of his
large throat, that swallows a whole Patriarchate at a Breakfast, and then if
they be within reach and too near him; swoop goes Lambeth at one
mornings-draught, like an Egg in Muscadine.)

Yet Greg. with all his Arts will not be able to purge himself then, from his
filthy share in the Rhyme and the reason too of the other part of that old
Proverb -- Possident Rapistae. But Sacrilege is but a Bugg to a wit and a
Droll, especially if he have a kindness for modern Orthodoxy; which vouches
that crime: It is but (as they use to Dr. Bruges.
preach) the Israelites robbing the Egyptians: It is possible it may be done
again therefore, for it has been done; and some whaat else that I Will acquaint
Mr. Gregory with by and by, which he shall not be able to ward off, with his
nonesuch weapon, called p. 281. (in his hide-bound Rhetoric) the Butt-end of
an Archbishop, meaning Abbot.

But I Will make him that he had as good have chose the Hinder-end of an
Archbishop, as the Butt-end of that Archbishop, to mouth with, before I have
done.

But I have not yet done with him in reference to the other Archbishop of
Armagh, already stigmatized with his saucy Pen; calling him with much Arrogance
and scorn, p. 26. Honest man, who was deep gone in Grub-street and Polemical
Divinity, and troubled with fits of modern Orthodoxy: nay which is worst of
all, be undertook to abate of our Episcopal Grandeur, and condescended indeed
to reduce the Ceremonious discipline in these nations to the primitive
simplicity.

So that Polemical Divinity, modern Orthodoxy, the abatement of Episcopal
Grandeur, and primitive Simplicity, are, (if not terms aequivalent, yet all put
together,) the great undertakings of this Primate, after he was past the
sucking-bottle, and had so much strength and agility as to leap over a straw.

Yet how meritorious soever this precious work was in the Primate, the honor
of it lights upon our friends J. O. etc. for J. O. and the confederates were
prompted by zeal pure-pute, but the honest Primate stooped when he could not
stand tip-toe any longer, and in spite of his teeth, let go what he could not
hold: Thank him for nothing.

I perceive He might have had, on all sides, as much thanks for his great
pains, though he had not changed his name, of Primate and Metropolitan of all
Ireland, to honest James Usher; and instead of his new dalliance with strange
lovers, and making love to his new beloveds (the white and blue Aprons) had not
forsaken his first love. And thereby have verified the Anagram, that, with more
autumeing hope than truth, was given him when he was, James Bishop of Mead in
Ireland,

James Mead.
Anagr.
I am the same.
The Archbishop did not stand fast, because he did not stand on good ground,
but on the Pinacles of the Temple, Episcopal Grandeur, and some Devils tempted
him either to throw himself down headlong, or else they themselves would take
the pains to do it, to save him a labor; He must needs go, when the Devil
drives.

Why? But does the Devil drive men to modern Orthodoxy? I beg your pardon Sir,
if I mistake a little, nevertheless it puts me in mind of the Indenture made at
Edinburgh in Scotland the fourteenth day of the second month in the first year
of the reign of O. C. Protector, betwixt Archebald Mac. Dougal, (aged 72 years,
and burnt for a Wizard in the same year under Edinburgh Castle) (I saw him
burnt) on the one part; and the great Fiend Beelzebub on the other part, etc.
But Arche. confessed then and there that two of the Articles which the Devil
chiefly stood upon, (before he would seal,) was that Arche. should deny his
Baptism and the Covenant, solemn League and Covenant. With much ado Arche. was
content to deny his Baptism, but rather than deny his geud Covenant, he would
never be Wizard whilst he lived; Nick, seeing the man peremptorily resolved,
blotted out, The denying of the geud Covenant, and sealed notwithstanding;
saying the matter was not great, for he himself was at the making of the geud
Covenant.

By all which it is as evident and true (as is the Manuscript of Archbishop
Abbot, which Greg. so impudently imposes, and asserts as dogmatically and
magisterially, as if he had stood at the Bishop's elbow when he writ it) That
this same modern Orthodoxy (he must mean the Directory, and the geud Covenant,
(its zinee) for which his whole book instead of a ^bining, (which now takes not
so well) is a Drolling Apology, as he confesses, (truth will out) p. 282. If I
can do the Non-conformists no good, I am resolved I will do them no harm.) I
say, it seems this same modern Orthodoxy and primitive Simplicity of
Father-gray-beard, and the great Fiend, were about that time and year, at no
great Feud, at least not of malice forethought.

I know not how deep-learn'd Mr. Gregory is in modern Orthodoxy, yet I durst
lay my Spectacles, he never read of a King standing on the stool of Repentance,
in the Primitive Simplicity: in the old Records whereof I have seen Lawn
sleeves, Rochet, square Cap, and Cassock writ in as fair and legible a hand, as
Coat in Querpo, Black cap white faced, Breeches and Doublet, Stockings and Hat,
Band and Cuffs, Cabala, Luggs flappant, Hourglass, Pulpit, blew and white
aprons, Simars, Peruke, or new-fashion'd Cloak.

For that Roman Penula which St. Paul left at Troas, had neither black buttons
nor cape: though Greg. p. 236. admires it above that in 1 Cor. 14. 40. And to
tell you the plain truth on it, I do not believe that St. Paul ever left his
Cloak behind him at Troas in his life: he was not so rich to have two suits to
his back.

For this same Cloak, that is so talked on, (which some Greek Copies read
(...), some (...), and some (...), and some (...), and lastly, some (...),
which) if you nip so hard as to make it cry (...), Penula, then you may make a
Roman Cloak on it indeed, but not otherwise.

For the Syriack, (...) signifies a Satchell which he left at Troas to put his
books and briefs in; and therefore the learned Estius renders it arculam libris
chartisque refertam; others scrinium. scriniolum, and domum scriptorum. Some
scriptorum repesitorium, so Drus. some thecam librorum; I confess indeed
Hesychius says it was a kind of Cloak, and also that it was lined with Fur to
keep out the cold and the rain; and yet presently stands in a Quandary, and
doubts whether indeed it was not scriniolum, a Satchel still.

So that if this be true, we shall not in the primitive simplicity so much as
find the old Cloak so much talked of; how many Cloaks soever you find in the
modern Orthodoxy.

Yet if the Non-conformists be angry that I should thus rob them of their
beloved Cloak, (which was worn threadbare in the Pulpit) I can lend them three
for it if I list, that shall fit them as well; and every Cloak fetched out of
the Wardrobe of the primitive simplicity, (if they do not dislike the fashion)
for they are all Canonical. The first and second I am sure they will like, If. 59.
17. They were clad with zeal as a Cloak. The second is I These. 2. 5. a Cloak of
Covetousness; and the third is in 1 Pet. 2. 16. a cloak of maliciousness; and
the stuff that then and there this Cloak was made of, you may see was, Liberty;
I know they will like it; if it be but because this stuff is in fashion.

What kind of stuff this same liberty is, I Will show you by and by, I am sure,
if it be not Bays, it is not Perpetuana.

Truth says it, a Kingdom divided cannot stand, and the fatal consequence of
this liberty and Indulgence, we see for example if we look at the Netherlands,
where their division and nonconformity is their ruin, their confusions their
confusion, the heads crazed and distracted, the hands feeble and the heart
saint; yet Barnabee-Greg. will not take it for a warning.

But we go not so far, we will look nearer home, (and all within the memory of
man,) what pitiful stuff this liberty and Indulgence proved (all the Proof's
in the wearing) for one twelve years, when we had no King in Israel, but every
man spoke and did what was right in his own eyes.

Rake Hell, view the ghastly apparitions and evil spirits that walked ever
since the primitive simplicity, (but bound down by wise Antiquity) and tell me
if they did not all walk again in those twelve years of modern Orthodoxy,
liberty and Indulgence. I deny not but they were Spirits, (Oh Spirit!) but I
say they were evil spirits, (laid and charmed down by a form of wholesome and
sound words) which being rent and torn apieces by the modern Orthodox, Hell
broke loose, and almost frighted us out of our wits.

Which some people that have bad memories and worse consciences have now forgot.

Did not the evil spirits of Donatus, Priscilian, Pelagius, Arrius, and Aerius,
(for I care not to set them down in order) the Apostolicks, Adamites, the
family of love, Carpocratians, Henricians, Valentinians, Heraclians,
Anabaptists, Contobaptites, the Manichees, Monetarians, Cresconians,
Macedonians, Nestorians, Samosatenians, Circumcellians, Severians, Ebionites,
Pharisees, Essenes, Flagelliferies, Fratricellians, and the Gnostics, (which I
should have first named) so long dead, tread our English stage again, as if the
old Sects and Heresies, were all metempsucho'd?

Had we not spirits that denied the Kings supremacy in all causes and over all
persons? as did the Fratricellians and Manichees. (Aug. contr. F aust. l. 22.
c. 74.) and the Flagelliferies. (Prateol. Here Is. de Flagel.)

Did they not Allegorize the Scriptures, the Passion, and Resurrection of our
Savior? as did the Valentinians. (Iren. l. 1. c. 1.) and the Family of love.
(H. N. Instruct, ar. 4. s. 17. 29.)

Had we not the fatum Stoicum from Priscilian? (Aug. de Haeres. c. 10.) Did not
some (I name no body, I would not willingly give offense) did not some I say
make a Covenant against Authority, without Authority, forswearing all former
lawful oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, but being tender in conscience (good
men!) scruple to renounce unlawful oaths and Covenants of disloyalty and
Schism? and did they learn this modern Orthodoxy out of the Primitive
Simplicity? or from Donatus? (Optat. de schism. Donatist. l. 4.)

Did they not learn to oppose Bishops from the Contobaptites? (Niceph. l. 18 c.
49.) and from Aerius? (Aug. de Haeres. c. 53.) And did not Donatus teach some
to make addresses to the weaker Vessels, and to lead Captive silly women?
(Optat. de schism. Donatist. l. 4.)

Did not some promote the designs and Plots of their Cabal by a common Purse,
and thought it Religion so to do? as did the Apostolicks. (Aug. de Haeres. c.
40.)

Did they not confine the Church of Christ to their Conventicles? as did
Donatus. (Optat. de schism. Donatist. l. 1.)

Did they not gnash their teeth at the Surplice? as did Pelagius. (Hierom. adv.
Pelag. l. 1.)

Did they not deny all superiority and didistinction of Persons and quality? as
did the Anabaptists. (Sleidan. Com. l. 5.) Did they not measure the dignity of
the holy Sacraments by the worth of the Minister, as if those holy Seals were
the Seals of the Minister and not of Christ? as did Donatus, from whom also
they learnt rebaptization. (Optat de schism. Don. l. 6.) Did not some make
themselves equal to Christ and the Apostles, and so denying the Lord that
bought them? as did the Nestorians. (Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 27.) and the
Ebionites and Macedonians. (Theodoret. Haeret. l. 4.)

Did they not deny Salutations, or bidding God speed, to all but their own
fraternity? as did Donatus. (Optat. de schism. Don. l. 4.)

Did they not cry down all Holy Days and Fast-days, (except long-Parliament
Fast-days, and Thanksgiving-dayes for a bloody victory? as did Aerius. (Optat.
de schism. l. 4.)

Did they not learn to Cant, and ascribe every motion of their own spirits, to
be the motion of the Holy Ghost within them? as did the Samosatenians. (Confess.
August. 5. Ar. 8.)

Did they not undervalue Scripture-Authority? as did the Circumcellians. (Aug.
Cont. Pet. l. 1. c. 27.)

Who taught them not to value, or at least, to undervalue the Testimonies of
the old TeTestament, but the Manichees and Severians? (Trithem. de Eccles.
Scrip. and Bulling. contr. Arnab. l. 2. c. 14.)

Did they not learn that the Jewish Sabbath was none of the Ceremonies
abrogated by the Apostles of Christ, but moral and perpetual, from the
Sabbatharians? (Doc. Sab. l. 1.)

Did not some lie and say they had no sin? as did the Adamites, Pelagians and
Donatists. (Aug. Cont. Petil. l. 2. c. 14. etc. 19.) and also the
Carpocratians. (Iren. l. 1. c. 24.)

Who taught them to cry up the Pulpit, and Sermons only, and decry Sacraments
and Prayers, and Charity, but the Eutichites? (Theodoret.) Did they not deny
Infant Baptism, and some the Baptism of those Infants whose Parents would not
be examined by the Lay Elders, nor take the Covenant, (I mean) such as were not
of their fraternity and Gang, as did the Heraclians, Henricians, and Pelagians.
(Magd. Eccles. Hist. Cent. 12. c. 5. Aug. de verb. Apost. de bapt. parv.).

Did they not declare that private men have Authority to order and reform the
Church, call Assemblies and Councels, and need not tarry for the Prince and
Magistrate? as did the Monetarians. (Test. Rhem. Annot. Hebr. 13. 17.) and the
Cresconians. (Aug. cont. Cresc. gra. l. 3. c. 51.)

Did they not declare it unlawful for the Magistrate to punish heinous offenses
with Death, or to go to War whether offensive or defensive? as did the
Manichees. (Aug. cont. Manich. l. 22. c. 74.) Did they not declare that no man
has proprietary in Goods, Lands or Wife, but all should lie common, and without
Enclosure? as did the Pelagians and Apostolicks. (Magd. Eccles. Hist. Cent. 5.
fol. 586.) and the Manichees. (Aug. de mor. Eccl. Cath. l. 1.)

Would they afford either an Alms or Charity, or so much as a good word or look
to any but their own Sect and Faction? so neither would the Manichees. (Aug. de
mor. Manich. l. 2.) Were they not pure in their own eyes, but abominated as
Dogs all but themselves, and their friends? (so called in Enmity to all others)
as did the Pharisees. (Luke 18. 11. Is. 65. 5. Prove. 30. 12, 13) And the
Donatists. (Optat. de schism. Donatist. l. 4.

Did they not count it unlawful to swear, though in truth, in righteousness,
and in judgment? As did the Essenes, the Jewish Puritans. (Philo Judaeus.)

Thus old Heresies (long ago condemned and dead and buried) by the Indulgence
of our late licentious times, have found an unhappy Resurrection.

And cannot these evil spirits be bound down again to the infernal Pit, from
whence they came to deceive the Nations, as formerly they were by the wisdom
of our Ancestors, when Hell broke lose?

Simon Magus and his followers the Gnostics (which in English signifies, the
People of light) as they proudly enough called themselves) came at last, from
one error to another, indifferenter utendi foeminis.

And do not our Gnostics that pretend to all the light, fall away from one
delusion and Enthusiasme to another, till they come to be Ranters, Atheists,
and what not?

Is there no eye to pity these, nor house of Correction to be found? words are
lost upon them, they are possessed and prepossest.

We, we have lived to see that all this noise for the Gospel, Reformation,
modern Orthodoxy, liberty, primitive simplicity, and abatement of Episcopal
Grandeur, does but bluster on purpose to blow down Church and State, upon
pretense to new-build them better and more fashionable after the Geneva-frame.

Thus the Kite flies up to Heaven, but her design and eye is upon the Prey,
and, but that the Buzzards (like thieves) fell out amongst themselves, true men
had not so soon come to their own. But his Majestic promised Indulgence I am
sure (says Father Grey-beard) in his Declaration from Breda.

Let honor for ever wait on his Majestic and his Royal word; but know, that
the best, honestest and most learned Casuists will tell us, that if Thieves and
Robbers take a man's purse and rob his house, and not herewith satisfied, but
they threaten also to kill him and every mothers son there, if the honest man
do not promise and vow, nay swear, to give them more; yet when he is got out of
their clutches he is also free of his oath.

In the name of God what would this people be at? Is It not enough that they got
his sacred Majesty's Father, and all his loyal friends, body and goods, that
they could get into their clutches, and have they not done unto them whatsoever
they would?

Is It not enough that they robbed him of his Kingdoms and drive him to straits,
that he had not where to lay his head?

And have they not cause to bless God and the King every day they rise, that
they are not hanged, drawn and quartered, as was Baanah and Rechab? But must
they capitulate? setting down a stool of Repentance for him to sit on whilst
they expostulate the matter.

Oh but Indulgence, and Liberty, liberty of Conscience!

By liberty of conscience must be meant either a liberty to do what we should
do, or a liberty to do what we would do. If they mean a liberty to do what they
should do, spur on, up and be doing, in the name of God. The Reins of
Government will neither check nor curb you; take my yoke upon you and learn of
me, (says our blessed Savior) for I am meek and lowly, and came not to do
mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

That Is it (says Greg.) the Non-conformists would be at, they desire only
liberty to do the will of God, not their own wills; and to worship God in his
own way, in Gods own way, though it be not the Kings highway.

But what if the Kings Highway be not out of Gods way, will you be so
wretchedly unsociable and singular, as to separate and go out of the way, when
it is the Kings Highway? The truth is, I have no great skill in Divinity, (my
Education not designing me that way) yet as the times are, in a man's own
defense of his Christianity (for to be sure now if he walk but out as far as a
Club or a Coffee-house he shall be sure to be assaulted on that side) so much
Divinity to defend it always in readiness, becomes as necessary for a
Gentleman, as the little Tool behind to save reputation, and much more
honorable; and without any great accoutrement, I may soon have Divinity
enough, to try it out with Father Grey-beard, I. O. and the rest of his
friends; and can easily prove that the worship of God, so much prated of, and
contained in the first Table, the four first Commandments, is in order, and
made for the very nonce, and for no other thing or end but that men might obey
the second Table, and six last Commandments. Start not, for I Will prove it as
clear as the Sun at Noonday.

And that though sometimes comparisons are odious, yet between Gods
commandments, to weigh and compare which is the greater and which is the
lesser, is of absolute necessity to every godly man, when Gods Commandments
seem to justle for precedence, and strive for the place.

As they often do: and no man can truly fear God and obey him as he ought, that
understands not these Laws of Honor, and rules of Precedence.

We cannot err when our Savior is the guide and leads us the way: I Will
instance in a few cases for example.

The Pharisees of old, (just like our modern Pharisees in their modern
Orthodoxy) were mavelous men for the worship of God, and Gods day of worship,
the Sabbath Day, Oh the Sabbath Day! and then for prayers, long, long prayers,
sacrifice, and indeed for all the worship of God prescribed in the four first
commandments, who but they?

Good, very good thus far; who can otherwise think but that these who are so
much for God, and his glorious worship, should be Gods own People, the Godly
Party, and Almighty God as much for them?

Who dare check them, lest he seem thereby to fight against God? Who dare speak
against their ways, lest he seem to bid heaven battle, and speak against Gods
ways?

The Lawyers amongst them, who were the chief Preachers, took it wonderful
hainously, that even our blessed Savior himself should dare to reprove them;
and when he made so bold as to do it, they took it as a very high affront, Thus
saying thou reproachest us also; us also, and reproachest, (not reprovest, but
reproachest us also; taking for granted that to reprove, was to reproach them.)

Yet for all this, in the first Sermon our Savior makes, he assures his
Auditory, That except their righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God.

What? Would not the worship of God in his own way bring them to God? No. Would
not a zealous and holy keeping Gods holy day bring them to God? No. Would not
the being cried up for the most pure and godly party bring them to God? No.
Would not prayers many and long, and good too; and preaching many Sermons, and
full good and Orthodox and saving Truths, bring them ^o God? No, Yet our
Savior gives them his Testimonial, that they did not only preach well, but
also nothing that was ill, (whatsoever they bid you observe, do.)

And to give those Pharisees their due, they did not only go Heaven-wards, but
they did far over-go many of our Pharisees and Preachers, Heavenward.

For the Pharisees sat in Moses's chair, preached Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, whereas, Bind your Kings with chains, and your Nobles with fetters of
Iron, This honor have all the Saints -- Curse ye Meroz, etc. and many other
good Truths, were miserably wrested (you know) by many, nay most of our godly
Party, (that pretended above all others to fear God) on purpose to dishonor
the King.

But I lay not the stress upon that, but granting that any man preaches, and
prays, keeps Gods holy day, and worships him, how divinely, truly and sincerely
soever; yet all this exceeds not a Pharisee, nor shall ever bring him to the
Kingdom of God.

Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out
Devils? Depart from me, says our blessed Lord, I know you not; What? not know
thine own Preachers, prophesying in thy name, and such as have prayed too,
Lord, Lord? No. I know you not (says he) why? Ye are workers of iniquity.

Workers of iniquity? Who are they? or rather who are not so?

In respect of the first Table, the four first commandments, the Pharisees (of
all men living) were not so, workers of iniquity.

And in respect of the four first commandments, such as prayed and preached in
Christ's name, stood for the Lords worship, and consequently Gods times of
worship, and the Lord's Day, were (of all men living) the least workers of
iniquity.

Therefore since Christ knows not these, there is a greater thing than Gods
worship awanting, and which is the one thing necessary, and what is That?

Our Savior tells us, in the same Sermon, even to do to others, as we would
they should do unto us, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. That
is to say, The sum and great design of the Law, and the preaching of the
Prophets have all but this one scope and end, to prevail with mankind to keep
the second Table, or six last commandments, which do more particularly direct
us how to observe this great general rule, Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them.

So that as food and ^ayment is for the preservation of the body, Preaching
Gods holy word, Prayers, keeping days holy, and all the worship of God
whatsoever has but one main scope and end, even to make men good, good to our
own bodies and souls by temperance and sobriety, good to others, by demeaning
our selves peaceably, justly and mercifully one toward another, as we are
particularly directed in the six last commandments.

Which six last Commandments God himself, our blessed Savior, and the
Prophets, and Apostles, do therefore prefer much above the first table, and
four first Commandments; in so much as the end is more noble than the means to
that end; as the life is more than meat, and the body than raiment; meat and
raiment being but the means designed for that great end, namely the
preservation of the body and life.

Therefore as he that clothes himself with raiment, how good and warm soever it
be, and presently throws it all off again; and he that eats, and eats, and
eats, and either presently vomits it up again, or that the meat Lienterically
pass through him without alteration, and digestion, must needs be starved; so
he that takes in never so much of spiritual food, and digests it not according
to the great design and end for which God sent it, namely to observe the six
last Commandments, that is, to be good to himself and others, he must needs
have a ruined and starved soul. The Doctrine (how wholesome soever) being
worthless for want of the use: and these great Sermon-mongers are at best but
the great-eaters, the spiritual Maynards, and Wood of Kent, Mr. C. of Norwich,
W. B. of Yarmouth. For can all our worship of God, prayers, praises, and
preachings, observing Lords-days and Sacraments profit God? Is he the better
for them? Job 35. 7. 8. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what
receives he of thy hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy
righteousness may profit the son of man: but cannot profit God.

Therefore when Almighty God first promulgated his sacred Laws, he tells his
people wherefore he ordered them to keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy 10. 13. even
for their good, not his own.

And excellently does his Prophet Micah tells us to this purpose, the great
duty of man, Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how
my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-^fferings? etc.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

And when the Pharisees (that prided themselves so much in looking so carefully
after Gods worship and Gods day) were offended so highly with the liberty which
our Savior and his disciples took to themselves upon the Sabbath Day, in not
keeping it so strictly, as these Hypocritical Puritans deemed they ought to
have done; our Savior tells them of a superior Law and of far greater
concernment than the four first Commandments put together, Mat. 12. 7. and that
was the Law of charity and mercy, which if the Pharisees had understood, they
would not have condemned the guiltless.

Even God himself dispenses with his own Law for worship, in the old Law, when
mercy and charity plead against it; for sacrifices and offerings were then part
of Gods worship, which were very chargeable; therefore for mercys sake and
charitys sake, at the Purification whereas the woman by Law ought to offer a
Lamb for her cleansing, yet if she was a poor woman, and not of ability,
Almighty God abates of his due, and is content with what, without any great
charge or trouble, she might easily get in that Country, namely, two Turtles,
or two young Pigeons.

So that the Question is not so much which are Gods Commandments, as which are
the greatest Commandments, and best deserve preferment; not the first Table,
but the second; for to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord
than sacrifice, Prove. 21. 3. and to obey, is better than sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.
22.

Therefore we must conclude, That though the worship of God be good, yet to do
good and communicate good to others is better; though to observe the four first
Commandments be good, yet to observe the six latter is better; Though faith in
God be good, yet charity to our selves and others is better, 1 Cor. 13. 13. and
all faith and worship without this charity is not worth a pin, nay is just
nothing at all, though a man preach like an Angel, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

This being granted for a great Truth, and which all the whining Tribe, though
they lay all their heads together, are not able to disprove or gainsay, may
silence the Non-conformists Prayers, and stop their mouths more than St.
Bartholomew yet has done.

For though to meet together to pray and preach, and worship God according to
the four first Commandments be good; yet to obey the Commands of a Christian
Magistrate, and submit to his Laws according to the first Commandment in the
second Table is better; and ought to be preferred by every truly Conscienc'd
Christian; and in so doing he is safe in that submission and obedience.

But, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye, says St. Peter, Acts 4. 19. For we cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard.

This Text has been damnably abused, and as the same Apostle says of other
Texts of Scripture in St. Paul's Epistles, wrested, put upon the rack, (as the
word signifies) and made to speak what it never thought; and will never
justify our Non-Conformists either before God or man in the least. To whom
does the blessed Apostle speak? Act. 4. 5, 6. to the Rulers, and Elders, and
Scribes, and Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas, etc. who condemned our Lord
Jesus to be crucified, and if they might have had their wills, would have been
the death of all Christianity with him.

And is his Sacred Majesty, and his two Houses of Parliament no better in your
esteem than Annas, and Caiaphas; they are mightily beholden to you for your
good opinion of them.

And if that be not your opinion, that Text is nothing to your case, nor to the
purpose: but point blank against you.

For whether it be right to hearken unto God, judge ye. God had never given
Laws for his own worship to mankind, but for the good, peace and welfare of
mankind: God had never made the first Table of the Law, but in order to, and
for the better observance of the duties of the second Table: If Subjects would
never have been disobedient to their Prince and Governors, nor children
disobedient to their Parents, nor servants to their Masters; if men would never
have coveted their neighbors goods, nor their neighbors wife, nor servant,
nor have robbed, and murdered one another, but would have lived soberly,
righteously, and therefore godlily in this present world, the Allelujahs of
Angels had been the great worship of men: But since it is otherwise, and that
the wickedness of man is great in the earth, and the imagination of the
thoughts of his heart so bent to evil, and that continually, therefore God
established his Laws, in the first Table by worship, sacrifices, etc.
Typically, in the Old Testament, for expiation of the guilt of sin, and
justification; and sent his Son, who was made a sacrifice for us antitypically
in the New Testament for expiation of the guilt of sin and justification, as
our Priest; and to show us how to live well, as our Prophet; and to exact our
obedience, as our King.

But none are benefited by his Priestly Office, but such as obey his princely
Laws, according to his Prophetical Injunctions: none are justified, but such as
are sanctified; for this is the great will of God, our sanctification.

Our Sanctification therefore is the grand design of the Law and Gospel,
Prophets and Apostles, and that sanctification being summarily concluded by our
Savior, in doing as we would be done by; and all lesser holy duties of prayer,
praising, hearing, Sacraments, being in order to the great holy duty of doing
as we would be done by, and particularized in, and reducible to, the second
Table, prove in all cases of conscience, the truly godly must do the greater
duty rather than the less, and the duties of the second Table rather than the
first, so that he do but continue his faith in Christ the while, and in so
doing.

Now cannot the Nonconformist Preachers continue to be Christians, though they
do obey the fifth Commandment, and submit to their Governors Injunctions; nay
can they obey God (who is the author of the fifth Commandment) if they do not
obey their Christian Governors; does not God prefer the peace and tranquillity
and welfare of mankind, before his own worship, and will not you prefer it?

In obeying, and submitting in quietness to the supreme and Christian powers,
you obey God, and that obedience is better than sacrifice; and proves
evidently, that that which Greg. sets down, p. 100. for Apochrypha in the
Ecclesiastical Politician, is an undoubted truth, namely, that moral virtue
being the most material and useful part of all Religion, is also the utmost end
of all its other duties; And all Religion must be resolved into Enthusiasme or
Morality. The former is m^er Imposture, and therefore all that is true must be
reduced to the latter.

In an unlawful and forbidden Conventicle, you may pray possibly to God, and
preach of God, and hear Gods Word; this worship of it self good becomes evil
and a sin, because though doing a duty which is good and great, in it self, yet
thereby transgressing a duty of the second Table, which is better and greater
and of a higher concernment, your worship then and there is but as the cutting
off of a Dogs-neck, and God will say, who has required these things at your
hands?

When ye disobeying the fifth Commandment in your forbidden Conventicles appear
before God, and spread forth your hands, he will turn away his eyes from you,
yea when ye make many prayers he will not hear: Why? Your hands are full of
blood: Your actions are Bloody; Schism, and Rebellion has filled the Land full
of blood, from one end thereof unto another already, and therefore this liberty
you cry up so, and cry so much for, and the calling of your forbidden
assemblies God cannot away with: It is iniquity, even your solemn meetings,
Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20. And know that the great duty of a truly
godly man is to cease to do evil, to learn to do well, to seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, plead for the widow, and to be willing and obedient;
and ye shall eat the good of the Land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured by the Sword, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Oh but the Ark, the tottering Ark, what godly heart would not tremble for the
Ark of God, as old Eli's did? 1 Samuel 4. 13.

What considering heart would with Democritus hold from laughing, till his
sides ak'd, to see the madness of the people, and the Priest; or rather, (with
the other weeping Whitaker) weep at the folly and delusion of poor souls, so
dismally bejuggled?

If a Conformist Minister, with all his Aaronical weeds on, or barely attired
in the linen Ephod should but name such a Text in a Christian Congregation,
how would the frighted Brethren run out of Church, and cry out, Types,
Ceremonies, shaddows, Levitical, Old Testament Spirit!

Is this your Gospel Minister? Is this Primitive simplicity? Is this modern
Orthodoxy? Is there one word of the Spirit in all this Text? Is it not froth as
applied? and nothing to the purpose?

But comes me godly Mr C. precious Mr. C. persecuted Mr. C. Bartholmew Calamy,
and then all must be Gospel that he speaks.

And though we poor souls understand not the Cant, yet the cunning Gypsies know
well that by the Ark of God is meant the Bartholomew Babies; By the great
scarlet Whore is meant the Pope; (but then whisper I to my self, this same
great Whore if it be the Pope, can be none of them possibly but only Pope
Joan.)

By Babylon is meant Rome that shall be destroyed with fire and plagues in 666.
the name of the beast, and the number of the name: But the mischief on it was,
that Prediction, how ever aimed, yet light upon poor London, (God knows)
instead of Rome; so hard it is to construe the Revelations, and so fatal to
peep into the Ark, and to pry into Gods secret judgments; such usually pay for
their peeping, that (unlike to the good and true prophet Jeremiah 17. 16.)
hasten from being a Pastor to follow God, to follow their own inventions, in
desiring the woeful day upon others; O Lord, thou know.

Then by Babylon and Antichrist is not only meant Rome, (that stands still, and
above a thousand miles from Babylon, yet) take but one jump more, and but half
so far, and you do only make Babylon in the Land of Shinar (where the great
Tower stood, Genesis 11.) shake hands with Rome in Italy; but with a small stretch
more into Little-Brittain, you may make Episcopal Grandeur, Lawn-sleeves,
Cross, Cringing and Surplice confederates in the complement.

Would not Balaams Ass (if alive) open his mouth again, to rebuke the madness
of these Prophets?

And a greater marvel it is to me, that the poor people should be such Asses,
besotted and gulled to their faces by so easy and stale a Legerdemain of these
juglers,

Who endeavor to turn the world upside down, topsiturvy; embruing all nations
in blood and ruin (as we have found to our cost, and by dear-bought
experience.)

And all these Hocus-Tricks is but to scrape up a sneaking and beggarly living;
(unworthy a man of parts or honor;) and to avoid the Statute against Beggars,
Fiddlers, Gypsies, and Pick-pockets, (like sworn Brothers of the Blade,) they
clap on the Vizard of Religion and Liberty, with so much art and cuning, that
though you hear the Gypsy Cant, you would almost swear he was a Saint:

And as soon suspect your own hands, as his, though you find them in your
pocket; The sleight of Tongue doing the seat instead of sleight of Hand, and
with much more safely gets a richer prize.

To whom Mall Cutpurse her self was but a fool, for the Knave shall look you
right in the face all the while he is at it, and cutting your Purse.

And as if Egypt was broke loose hither in a new fashion, these vagrants shall
wander from town to town, all the kingdom over by droves, and in this new
guize, laugh at the Constable, Beadles, Justice of the Peace, House of
Correction, the Stocks, the Whipping-Post, and the Jail, crying out, Liberty,
Liberty; Indulgence, Indulgence; Breda, Breda.

Would it not make a man's heart ache, and his hair stand on end, to see whole
multitudes trepan'd by these spiritual Juglers, into Rebellion and Blood, to
the ruin of souls and bodies?

Indeed the Apostle Saint Peter prophesies of these times, and these tricks, in
2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. saying that false Teachers shall privily bring in ((...),
sneakingly, by stealth, furtim, clam and subdole, speciem pietatis praetendens,
creeping into Houses and leading captive silly women, with) damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them.

Which those only do that pretend to Christianity, but deny Christ's Religion,
that is, deny Christ's word or great Religion, (the sum of all Religion, that
is of Christ's making,) viz. To do as we would be d^ne by: And though their ways
lead to destruction, yet many shall follow these pernicious ways; This great
way of truth being evil spoken of (as m^er morality or the like,) by those that
through covetousness and with fcigned words ((...) Fictitious, Canting,
New-coyn'd, Fanatic words, as (...) signifies,) they shall make Merchandise of
you; (...), they shall make their money of them; or these men that pretend so
to the spirit shall be spirits indeed, but evil ones; Spirits, such as catch up
men, women and children to make money on them through covetousness.

If it were not foretold that many shall follow their pernicious ways, we might
well wonder that such flocks should follow these evil spirits to their eternal
damnation, as well as temporal loss of body and goods: But we have lived to
see, and yet do see whole shoals caught with this bait, (...) nothing but a few
canting new-coyn'd words; and with these they have made shift to get the good
old Coin out of their Pockets; and sometimes Plate, Bodkins, Thimbles, Horses,
Arms, and Silver-spoons, or whatsoever comes is welcome: All is fish that
comes to net, whilst these Hugh Peter's, Baxters, Marshals, and Owens laugh in
their sleeves to see how soon the fools and their moneys are parted; and how
parted? do they not know of the going on it, and how it is laid out, and what
they get for it? Yes, they tell the poor souls they get Christ for it; Oh get
Christ! whenas indeed they get nothing but a little canting, new-coyn'd,
Fanatic, phrase, or so; there is all.

Be not offended that I call this expression, [get Christ, get Christ] mere
canting, juggling and delusion, beguiling unstable souls; for I will give you a
reason for it, unanswerable by all the Canters and Cabala of Juglers in
England; with whom and the best of them or all their great heads put together,
I am not afraid to encounter in vindication of all and every thing in this
Letter (occasioned by the bold undertaking of their friend Gregory Graybeard,
who puts for Apochrypha, (and so sets it down in a different Character) the
great Truth that Christ our Lord ever delivered to the world, viz. To do as we
would be done by; which is the great end of the Law and the Gospel; namely the
best regulation of our manners; or, as p. 100. Moral virtue being the most
material and useful part of all religion; which has but two parts, Phanaticism
and Morality.

Which last is comprehended in that great way of Truth so much evil spoken of
by some Christians; as being the practice even of some heathens, and therefore
not the sum of Law and Prophets.

But let me live and die like such Heathens, rather than live and die like such
Christians, as dare prefer any thing above this, or any part of Religion
above this; which my Savior has told me is the sum of all.

And he that believes Christ in this word, as a true Prophet; and conforms his
life and conversation to this Law as given by his King Jesus, shall assuredly
find him a Priest to pardon and forgive him, and bring him to glory, where he
now sits.

And this is that which in the beginning I called my Religion; not but that
many others are of it, yet but few where I live.

For I dwell in New-Amsterdam, where Satan's seat is, the Headquarters of the
Legions, and the Randevouz of Hell; the very Sink of all heresies and sects,
and the Kennel where all the neighboring fil^h of Religion disgorges its self
and disembogues.

And as we never read of any Pharisee converted by our Savior, except one or
two, yet very many Publicans and Harlots; so here we find true that of our
Savior, that Publicans and Harlots shall get into the Kingdom of Heaven,
before these our modern Pharisees (in English) Separates or Schismatics, as
the word signifies.

And the great Reason why this great Rule and sum of Christ's Message or
Gospel was no more believed by the Pharisees, than now by our modern Pharisees,
or Schismatics, called now modern Orthodox, is, because the heart of this
people is waxed fat, and their cars are dull of hearing; and s^eng they see and
not perceive, and hearing they hear and not understand.

They say they believe Gospel; show them Mat. 7. 12. and ask them if they
believe that, that Rule before their eyes is the sum of all; and they will rail
presently at you, and cry out, good works, good works, the man presses us to
good works and merit, Popery, Arminianism, and Manwaring.

They say they believe St. Paul's Epistles to be God's word; show them 1 Cor.
13. 1, 2, 3. and the rest of the Chapter, and ask them, do you believe that
your Preacher, (you so cry up for a precious man when he tells you of incomes,
and experiences and getting of Christ) is a mere empty Kettle, a mere canting
juggling noise, a mere feigned new-coyn'd sound, if he does not preach up good
works and charity to you, all contained and included in doing as you would be
done by?

They will presently fly out in rage and wrath against you, saying, you rail at
Gods Ministers, God ways, and Gods people; and look upon all you say, as
profane, and coming from a profane and loose spirit. Though with never so
much meekness you entreat them to take heed, how in so saying they blaspheme
God and his holy spirit, who says altogether so much as I have said, in that
first verse. Though I speak with the Tongue of men and Angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cimbal; that is, a mere
empty Kettle, sound and noise; yet they see this with their eyes, and yet will
blaspheme and will not believe.

Tell them further that this precious Preacher does not yet speak with the
tongue of an angel, let his whinings, and snivellings, and gruntings, and
groanings be never so tuneable; they will not believe you, but when for the
good of their immortal souls you bid them beware of the juggle, and take heed
they be not cheated with new-coyn'd and feigned words, mere Canting, as Gypsies
that have a peculiar dialect and phrase of their own;

Yet then they will revile you, rendering you hatred for your good will,
slandering you in blaspheming Christ and the truth you declare to them; and
think all this while they are lying, standering and railing you (which is far
from Charity) that they do God good service, and vindicate precious men.

Ask them further, whether those be not ^eigned, fictitious, new-coyn'd words
(as the Apostle St. Peter says false prophets make merchandise, or make good
markets with, through covetousness) which the Holy Ghost in Holy Scripture uses
not, and which Gods Holy word is not acquainted with; and they will confess
that they must be new-coyned and feigned by false prophets and juglers, if not
coined there by the Holy Ghost.

But then say, these expressions, viz. incomes, get experiences, look over your
experiences, get Christ, and the indwellings of the spirit, and such like, many
hundreds of them produced with a wonderful long whine and twang, are neither
the words of the Holy Ghost, Prophets, Christ, or his Apostles, and therefore
are feigned words which these spiritual merchants get money with, as Gypsies do
by Cantting and Singing; And they will blaspheme and rail at you, though you
say no more than St. Peter has done; and though they cannot find one such
new-coyn'd word in all the Bible.

Is not the heart of this people hardened? and seeing they do not see, they will
not see nor perceive, but like the Pharisees, look upon all your reproof to be
a reproach to them and the ways of God.

They cannot be converted, because not convinced; they are not convinced,
partly by reason their Preachers are not faithful to their souls, but instead
of showing them the way to Heaven, fill their poor heads with nothing but sound
and noise and whining and feigned words: and partly do they continue
unconvinc'd and unconverted, by reason they think they are converted already;
and yet have as little reason to think so, as if they were Turks, Jews or
Heathens: nay, I Will maintain it and avouch to be true before God and men, that
I have by my own experience found more goodness, more kindness, more truth,
more honesty, more sincerity among man-eaters or Cannibals in India, and Turks
in Arabia; than amongst the best of these Professors. Read Jam. 2. 14, 15, 16,
17, 20, 21, 22, 24. Mat. 16. 27. Ephesians. 2. 10. Tit. 3. 8 Phil. 1. 27. Nay put in
their Preachers and all into a sack together, and the first that comes out
shall have incomparably more pride, malice, wrath, lying, slandering, and evil
speaking, and rejoicing in iniquity (when they can hear of any faults or
judgments with which any are overtaken that are not of their gang,) than any
Turk, Jew, or Indian Man-eater that ever I converst with, and I have converst
with thousands; and if these be the people of God, the Lord in his mercy
deliver me from them, and the evil way they walk in by Companies, running
headlong to the bottom and end of that way, eternal destruction, and striving
who should first come there and run the fastest, (as if they were afraid they
should not come at the Devil in good time.)

Whereas my Religion, namely, this of my Savior in Mat. 7. 12. like the Sun in
his full strength and light, carries its own evidence and speaks sufficiently
for it self, leading men into unerring paths, bringing quietness and peace and
light to mankind; nor can any man walk in darkness or do any thing of the works
of darkness that walks by this rule, but peace must be upon them, as upon the
only true Israel of God; no canting, no hypocrisy, no feigned words needs
here; but Righteousness and Peace embrace each other, both here and to Eternity.

In which Religion I doubt not by Gods grace to continue all the days of my
life; for of all the Idols of the Heathens, there is but one true God, and of
all Religions, there is but one true one, one Christ, one way, one truth, one
life, one light; and this is it.

Would God, think you, leave men a way to Heaven, revealed by his Son, if it
were not to be found without a great many Fathers, decrees of Councils,
Glosses, Homilies, Sermons, infinite, and as large and of as little purpose the
most of them as the writings of Mr. Prin? Whereas this way of Christ is soon
found, soon got my heart, easily remembered, readily applied. And if no other
Text had been preached upon this 30 years, and practiced, England had seen no
wars nor bloodshed, ruin nor rapine, murder and rebellion, that had almost
quite destroyed us; neither had the war been carried on with a few canting
words, and misapplyed scriptures, prating and praying, seeking of God as
Cromwell called it, when he went to prayer with the Officers of the Army, to
seek God and know his mind, whether he should murder the King or no, whereas he
had resolved it long before; like Jezabel, seeking God by prayer and fasting,
when the bottom and design of all is nothing but rapine and covetousness to
take Naboth's life, that thereby she might get the better footing in Naboth's
vineyard.

But if this little Rule be practiced, down goes Diana of the Ephesians, and
the Idols, fictions and imaginations of the heart of man.

No man could steal nor covet, nor be a rebel, nor disobedient to his
superiors, if he keep to this Rule; Why? because he would be loath to be so
served himself; loath men should take away his goods, his servant, his daughter,
his wife, or his lands, or good name. No man would be a rebel or disobedient to
his superiors that is of this Religion; Why? because he would not endure that
his servants, his children and family should be disobedient unto him; there
would be no living, no keeping house with them, if they did not obey; for if he
command one son, in seedtime, to go plow, and another to sow, and his son or
servant say nay, but it is better to thrash, or fan, and more needful; this
disobedience will make them all smart for it in a little time; a house thus
divided cannot stand long,

Nay, in spiritual things, the master of the family calling his servants and
children to prayers in the morning, at noon, or night, he will not permit a
servant or a child to be hallowing and playing abroad, whilst he is praying,
nor to lie lolling upon a couch or chair, laughing and jearing with his hat on,
whilst he is praying and kneeling, or singing of Psalms; there is not a
Phanatick in England will suffer this, but will reprove, rebuke, exhort and
chastise such a jearing, irreverent son or servant, and, thinks God requires it
at his hands, and would send judgments upon him, and his family, with a
grievous curse, if when his sons are vile, he restrain them not; (though they
tell him it is their conscience to be vile, and irreverent.) And tell them
moreover how God punished old Eli, for neglecting to restrain his sons, let
them pretend what conscience they will, he will likewise have the liberty of
his own conscience, which tells him, if it be their conscience to be thus
disorderly, vile, irreverent, and disobedient, it is also his conscience to
restrain their vileness, irreverence, and disobedience: and will further ask
them, if they were in his condition, and were masters of a family, whether they
would be content that their servants and sons should do what they list, and
what was right in their own eyes, and whether it is possible a house so divided
can stand long This every Phanatick in England pleads to his family, and brings
the fifth Commandment to confirm and warrant all that he says to them; adding
that it is the first Commandment with promise, (as the Apostle calls it,) that
is with promise of present reward in this life, even length of days; whereas
men by disobedience to their natural fathers, or spiritual or temporal fathers
in Church or State shorten their lives, as the rebels Baanah, and Rechab,
Achitophel, Absalom, Sheba and the rest of them in all ages.

Now apply this that I have said; examine thine own heart, call it to account
seriously before thou come before Gods Tribunal to receive thine eternal Doom
when it is too late to amend, and try in any particular where thou disobeyest
thy superiors in Church or State, whether thou would suffer such
disobedience in thine own family.

First as to Ceremonies, which are but the outskirts, the suburbs of true
Religion, (this one true Religion I am speaking of) yet it is a sign that thou
art an enemy to the City of God and holy hill of Sion, if thou burn, plunder or
pull down the Suburbs; not because the Suburbs are the City; or Ceremonies of
true Religion, the true Religion it self, and Gods holy Sion; but yet the
Governors in the City will watch over thee, punish thee and keep thee off,
because thou art an enemy to the holy City, to the true Religion, or else thou
would not have overturned and trampled upon the Suburbs.

If you understand this, you have the true notion and understanding of a
Ceremony; if you do not, I will not further explain my self.

Will thou not suffer thy child to loll and jear with his hat on, whilst thou
art praying and kneeling with thy hat off, though he pretend conscience for his
disobedience; and will thou not kneel then, when they bid thee kneel, that are
thy Superiors in Church and State? and be uncoverd, when they bid thee be
uncovered? Have thou power to enjoin Ceremonies in thy family? and have not thy
Superiors as much power to ordain Ceremonies in the Church? Do thou that
pleadest the fifth Commandment against thy wicked disobedient son and servant,
never plead it against thy self? Do thou say to thy son and servant, you must
needs be subject and that for conscience sake? and do thou never send that
Scripture home to thine own heart? thou that say a man should not steal, or
be disobedient; do thou steal? art thou disobedient?

What need of Jayls or Acts of Indemnity or Uniformity, Licenses or Liberty,
Indulgence or no Indulgence? It is all one to him that is of this Religion;
which will not suffer a man to pray and lie, slander and preach, fast and
murder, talk of incomes and getting Christ whilst he goes the way to hell.
There can be no Rebel-Saints of this Religion.

I Will tell you in one word how truly to get Christ, whilst Canters belabour
you with a sound and an empty noise.

To get Christ, is to get to Christ; and there is no getting to Christ, but in
his own way; his own way is what he taught himself for the sum of all Religion,
Law and Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. which we have been treating of, which is ready at
hand, always to direct thee in thought, word and deed, believe the Creed, say
the Lords prayer, and the Liturgy, frequent Sacraments, and this is religion
enough to carry thee to Heaven.

But you will say perhaps, and object against me, that if this be my religion,
why do I not practice it? and again ask me whether in this Letter I have done
to others as I would they should do to me; that is, would I be willing to be so
sharply reproved and checked, as I sometimes check Father Grey-beard, and the
Canters.

To which I answer, I not only would be content to be so used, but if I were
such a wretch to trouble and confound the Kingdom where I live, with arts and
methods that do tend, and (as by sad experience we have found) have tended to
blood, ruin, wars and desolation;

I would esteem him the best friend that I had in the world that could either
convince me, and the people seduced by me of our villainies; or laugh me and
them out of such fopperies, by representing me and them upon the stage in as
ridiculous a posture if it were possible as ever they were acted by me or them,
or Hugh Peter's himself, when multitudes of poor fools strove who should first
part with their silver-bodkins and Plate, body and soul for the Good O^d Cause.

And if it were not to do both the seducers and seduced good by this plain
dealing, I had not writ a word in this Letter; for I know my reward from most
of them is that hatred for my good will, railing, lying, and slandering me as
the worst of men; and yet cannot evidence in one particluar, where I have
transgressed this great rule of doing as I would be done by, this ten years.

Which I speak not as a fool or a Pharisee to boast of; for fame, nor honor,
nor dishonor, riches, nor poverty, good report, nor evil report, safety or
hazard, can seem to me, or any that are well grounded in this religion of
Christ, (of doing as we would be done by,) any thing to move me toward the
least desire of applause; for I know this justification of my self is the way
to create great envy, and great reproach against me, in those that know no duty
so great as the four first Commandments; namely, the worship of God, his days,
Sermons, mysteries, discourses and disputes of their ways of worship; they are
full of that, but yet can envy, lie, slander and rail; and then I tell them,
(but they believe not,) that all their praying, hearing, keeping Sabbaths, are
not worth a Louse, nor their faith neither; though it is the very words, at
least the sense of what they read with their eyes, 1 Cor. 13. 2. only here is
the difference, I speak more worthily of their prophesying, and their faith,
than the Apostle does allow to such idle mysteries, where charity is wanting,
for he says, such a man as has the gift of prophesying, understands all
mysteries, all knowledge, has all faith, without charity is nothing: whereas I
only say, such a man's gifts, knowledge, mysteries and faith are not, without
charity, worth a Louse.

So that I have therein out-bid the worth of them, a Louse is good for
something, (I will not tell all its virtues) it is good for the Jaundice, etc.
but all knowledge, mysteries, prophesying, and faith, without charity, the
Apostle makes good for nothing at all.

Away with men's prate of Religion, and admiring this and that precious man,
this and that precious piece of worship, when it only puffs men up, makes them
more proud, more scornful, more headstrong, more cruel, more bloody, more
rapacious, greater liars, greater slanderers, more malicious than they were
before, and more a Devil, than any man in the world is, Turk, Jew or Cannibal.

Show me not the meat, but show me the man; if these people that prate of their
precious heavenly food they have had in these late times, have in the mean time
such starved souls, empty of all goodness, (but a little outside holiness and
vizard of worship,) but are full of such horrid sins, as envy, malice,
injustice, lying, cheating, defaming, and sometimes murdering and plundering
and sequestring; that on this side Hell there is no such treacherous, false and
unsociable villains; then by this it is evident, that like Ephraim, they sed
upon the wind, lived like Camelions upon air, sound, whineing, canting, feigned
words; and if perhaps they have cast out some one Devil of swearing or
Sabbath-breaking, they have entertained in the room seven other Devils more
wicked than the former, and the last state of that man is worse than the first.

I know with this plain dealing, I stir in a nest of wasps, and because I have
cried down these feigned words, (with which craft these silver-smiths and
juglers get their wealth,) these dearly beloved tones and whinings, that did so
affect the silly women, thus undervalued, spoils the trade: G^e me pen and ink
and paper, will the juglers say, this must not be suffered, we must use some
course speedily to blacken, I say blacken the author, and impair the value of
his Letter, or our trade is gone.

Join your forces, up and be doing, truth is strongest; ye fight against your
Savior, S. Peter, and S. Paul to the Corinthians; if you quarrel me for this;
come meddle then if you dare.

And if you do provoke me, I will not only spoil the sale and market of your
new-coin'd feigned words; but I Will cry down your market day too, on which you
sell your empty sounds to fill your pockets.

Not that I am against preaching up charity and goodness; and faith and hope
too in order unto charity, and upon the Lords day too, if so be that preaching,
praying, or worship, hearing, or faith does not hinder better duties, viz.
works of mercy, mercy to my own body, to my beast, to my family, to my
neighbor.

But if keeping any day of worship, or performing any duties of worship hinder
any of those greater duties; then I sin in doing those duties of worship, which
hinder those greater duties of mercy.

Yet I say if I can do both, (both worship God and keep a holy day to him, and
also perform the greater duties of mercy,) then both is better;

God has joined them together, let not man put them asunder; faith is a good
grace, and hope is good, and charity good; and preaching, and prophesying,
knowledge and mysteries are all good, it is a pity they should be parted; but
if we want charity, we want the great accomplishment, the greatest of these is
charity.

And if any body think that I herein speak too slightly of keeping the Lords
day, let them know, that if they think so, they do but censure amiss, and like
the Hypocrites and Pharisees condemn me for that, that was the very cause why
our Savior himself was accounted a sinner; as you may see Jo. 9. 14. 16. 24.
The Sabbath day, and all other days were made, as all things else, and as all
Commandments were made, viz. only for the good of man, not for his hurt and
damage, (if you will believe our Savior.) The Sabbath was made for man and
not man for the Sabbath.

If my neighbors house be on fire, as I am going to Church, I ought to get my
bucket and throw water and help to quench it, for all going to a Sermon; and
God likes me better, with my pail in my hand at that time, than the Bible in my
hand, or a prayer in my mouth, when charity to my neighbor supersedes my
worship of God, as being superior to it; as our Savior tells the Pharisees
upon the like occasion, Mat. 12. 9. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, that
is, not sacrifice when it hinders the greater duty of mercy.

And if a flood be coming down, ready to flow my meadows, when my Hay had need
be carried away with my cart, or else it will be carried away with the flood, I
should sin at that time, if going to Church, or any worship of God should
prevent me from harnessing my horse and going to cart on the Lords day: and my
servants should sin grievously with going to Church, when a work of mercy to my
poor family and cattle called them another way.

And though our modern Pharisees and Hypocrites will condemn me herein, yet
they cannot tell how to confute it by Scripture nor reason; and if they had
known the true Religion, or what this means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, they would not have condemned the guiltless.

I might give many other instances, in making ready food in mercy to my body; I
mean not only necessary food to keep life and soul togethet, as we vulgarly
say, but such food as is most convenient, good hot victuals, and good drink on
the Lords day; for watering a man's Horse and Ass on the Sabbath day is not
necessary for life; they will live (as hunting horses often do) a longer time
without water; but it is not convenient so to make them fast, and being a work
of mercy, though but to your beast, therefore does not every one of you think
it lawful to do this convenient good on the Sabbath day? That is, supposing the
fourth Commandment had the same force and efficacy, that other Ceremonies and
Types had in our Saviors time. But alas! the case is altered now; those types
and shadows are now of no more force than Circumcision, and new Moons; which in
respect of Gospel discoveries are but weak and beggarly elements; whereunto our
modern Pharisees desire again to be in bondage, and lest the hope of their gain
should be gone, they are wonderful zealous for the morality of the Sabbath; and
the morality of the fourth Commandment; that yet are the most unmannerly,
saucy, peremptory people under the Heavens; endeavoring to show morality no
where but in their market day, where they get much gain with as light frothy
ware, as ever was sold; poor people are cheated and have a hard pennyworth of
it, as ever men had, if they give a penny for these fictitious words, such as
this, the ten moral Commandments, and the morality of the fourth Commandment;
which all the art they have can never prove; nor that there is since Christ's
death, any more intrinsecal holiness in one day than another; nor any more
holiness in the Lords day, than any other Holy Day, mentioned in the Act of
Parliament for that purpose; wherein are these words, -- These days shall be
kept holy, namely, every Sunday in the year, then follow all the Saints days,
and holy days, to which the King and Parliament may add more holy days if they
please; and as they have done; and as they are of humane institution, can also
take away some if they judge convenient.

Nor ought any man to keep the Lord's day, in conscience or duty, more than any
other Holy Day.

And the ground of a man's keeping the Lord's Day and all other Holy Days, is in
obedience to the fifth Commandment, not the fourth Commandment.

Which if it were moral, i. e. perpetual in their sense, it is not in the power
of the Church, nor King nor Parliament to alter the day from the seventh to the
first; but all Sabbath days were like the new mons, and other Jewish
festivals, mere shadows of things to come, but the body is Christ; which being
come, the shadows vanish.

And those that zealously affect men with this Jewish conceit, of keeping days,
etc. do zealously indeed affect men, but not well; nor honestly.

I know men are apt enough to take liberty to themselves in this licentious age
to any profaneness; but I deny that it is profaneness for me to dress convenient
food for my self and family, hot and good if I can get it, on the Lord's Day;
and Greg. does acknowledge himself and all that he knows of his party to be of
this opinion herein; in this one thing then we do agree; and this is the first
particular we have concurred in, since we met.

Also I deny that it is unlawful for me, (but rather a duty incumbent upon me,)
to give my servants lieve to play and recreate themselves with any honest
sport, upon the Sunday, or any other Holy Day at convenient times; for I ought
in mercy and charity, to be merciful to my beasts, my ox or my ass, in
watering them, which is not necessary, but only expedient for life;

Much more ought I to be merciful to my poor Prentice, my servant, my
Hand-maiden, that have drudg'd and trudged to slave and work for me on working
days, when Sunday or any other Holy Day comes; if I be of Christ's true
Religion, and do as I would be done by.

Nay, I ought, if I am able to let them drink better liquor, and eat better
meat, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, as Nehemiah speaks; and send portions
thereof to the poor according to my ability, on those festivals; at least, give
them, what I give my beast, ease and rest on those vacation-days; a pennyworth
of ease is worth a penny. And the contrary opinion is hypocritical,
pharisaical, hard-hearted, apocryphal and profane; and contrary to the great
Law of charity and mercy; and contrary to those infallible and unanswerable
reasons rendered excellently in that proclamation for lawful sports on Sundays
and all other Holy Days published by the Command, and well settled judgment of
King James, King Charles I. to that purpose.

And agreeable with the opinion and practice of all Christians, Nations and
Kingdoms in the world, and even of Geneva it self; and contradicted by none but
our senceless, hypocritical, modern orthodox Rebels, that write in this
particular, after nobody but Knox, that grand Rebel and Innovator.

Oh but did not these fellows arm the rabble against the King and Bishops upon
this very account?

They did so, the more profane wretches they, by laying a yoke upon the necks
of the disciples, which God never imposed; through their own superstition; or
rather perverseness.

Wheedling the silly rabble with pretense of Religion and Gods-day; which is
not a day that the Lord has made, more than any other day; nor more holy, than
so far forth, as the King and Parliament have made it, and set it apart for
holy uses, as they have done other Holy Days; namely, vacation-days from
servile and worldly toil, that men might be now at leisure, for Gods worship,
merciful and charitable works to our selves, our neighbors, our servants, our
handmaidens, our Ox and our Ass, and the like, which are the proper duties for
a Sunday and other holy days.

And because we are a trading, covetous, having, worldly minded people, if the
King and Parliament think fit to allow us no other Holy Days but Sundays, and
half a dozen more in a year, I am content. And the late wrethced Rebels might
with more right and good reason have taken occasion to rebel, as Massin^lla and
his mutineers in Naples did by the spilling and overturning of a basket of
Apples; than from that honest Proclamation for sports published by King James
and King Charles I. of blessed memory, for lawful refreshments and recreations
on Sundays and Holy Days after Divine service;

So consonant to the doctrine and practice of all Christendom, and so agreeable
with the great Law, of doing as we would be done by.

And there is never a one of these spleenatick, peev^sh, morose, unsociable,
and hypocritical Pharisees, but in their practice do as much contradict their
own doctrine for the Sabbath, as that so much talked of Proclamation has done,
every Sunday when they leave their maid at home, carefully to look to the pot
and the spit; that all be ready piping hot precisely against the time, that
Lungs comes home, when his Auditory is tired perhaps more than himself.

Binding heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and laying them on other men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers:
and saying, as John of Leyden did, (upon the rack confessing the true cause of
his Fanaticism and Impostures,) The people love to he cheated with
Superstition, and love them h^st, that gull them most.

Thus have I as briefly and as fast as my pen could write, given an honest and
downright account, why and how true Christians should keep a Sunday or other
day holy, (though not according to the hypocritical and modern orthodox; but)
consentaneous with all the truly Orthodox Christians in the world.

And in answer to what Father Grey-beard in a different character sets down as
the Apocryphal opinion of the Reverend Bishop Bramhall, but is an infallible
truth, p. 38. namely, he maintains the public Sports on the Lords day by the
Proclamation to that purpose, and the example of the Reformed Churches beyond
Sea: and for the public dances of our youth upon Countrey-Greens on Sundays
after the duties of the day, he sees nothing in them but innocent and agreeable
to that under-sort of people. And he takes the promiscuous License to
unqualified persons to read the Scriptures, far more prejudicial, nay more
pernicious, than the over-rigorous restraint of the Romanists. And he took it
well, in so taking it.

For though no man can have a more sacred esteem and value for the holy
Scripture and Gods word than I have; knowing that it is profitable for
instruction, and to make the man of God perfect thoroughly furnished unto every
good work,

Yet this good work of instructing out of it properly belongs to the man of
God, it is his province, not incumbent upon every man, nor possible to be
undertaken by every man.

Because our English Bibles are not in every particular the word of God; nor in
any one thing the words of the Prophets, of Christ and the Apostles, who not
one of them spoke English, except perhaps S. Bartholomew, and the modern
Orthodox have no great kindness for that Apostle, because of a certain Reason.

But chiefly because neither he nor any other Apostle delivered the mind of
God, and holy writ in the English tongue. The English Bibles in the Translation
at best being but a paraphrase, or Homily of the word of God; nor all that
neither for these reasons that are unanswerable and infallible.

First, because the English Bibles are in some places erroneous; Secondly, They
are in some places scarce sense; and of dangerous consequences, when every
pert, bold and conceited fellow, (that only understands English) takes upon
himself to raise doctrines and opinions thence, contrary to the sense and
meaning of God in his holy word; contrary to the mind and meaning of the
Holy Ghost, as well as contrary to the sense of the Church and truly Orthodox.

I love not this discourse, and could wish it were any bodies task and
employment rather than mine, it is so ungrateful and generally displeasing; yet
since this bold Greg. has given the occasion by reflecting upon the honest
words of the most Reverend and learned Bishop Bramhall, in these odd
animadversions, in things far above his shallow pate, apprehension and reach;

Therefore now my hand is in, though I could fill a Volume upon this excellent
subject, so needful to be explained in these times, when people have run a
madding with the English Bible in their hands, and brought to vouch their
Exorbitances and horrid villainies; I need say nothing of the mischievous
consequences of this promiscuous License of reading the Bible; those that
thumb'd it so much having proved themselves the most execrable Villains and
Heretics that ever the Sun shone upon: but shall only give two or three
instances, for what I have said.

Which when people have weighed and seriously considered, they will not so
stare and stamp, and cry out; Oh, this man would rob us, not of our goods, our
wives, our good names, and our lives, but that which is dearer to us than all
these, he would rob us of our dear English Bibles; then come the days of
darkness again, and of ignorance; oh look to him he robs us of our Bibles, is
not here a Popish plot?

And you will have cause to thank him for it, more than all the Sermons that
ever you heard from modern Orthodoxy; for this has ruined everlastingly the
souls of millions of poor people guided with that frenzy and zeal, and has also
shortened their days by duckquoying them into Rebellion and blood, blood being
therefore given them to drink for they were worthy: But the trepanning Priest
deserved the greatest punishment here and hereafter, by drilling them into
Rebellion and blood; by wresting and misapplying of Scriptures, such as those
-- Curse ye Meroz -- Bind your Kings with chains, and your Nobles with fetters
of Iron; such Honor have all the Saints. -- Babylon the great is fallen; and a
hundred of the like temper.

Whereas, all that I say, makes righteousness and peace to kiss each other,
makes useless Swords and Guns, brings again the golden age; where every man
sitting under his own Vine and fig tree, leads a holy and happy life here and
hereafter, has a Heaven upon earth, breaking their Swords into Plowshares, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks; there being no use of Armory, if the world
were of my Religion herein contained; or rather of the true Christian Religion;
the sum and scope whereof our Blessed Savior delivered with his own mouth,
and epitomized in one verse and sentence, Mat. 7. 12. as abovesaid.

But some instances I promised to give, to evidence that the English Bible is
in some particulars erroneous, scarce sense, and of ill consequence. As, in
part of our Saviors first Sermon, is rendered Mat. 5. 41. And whosoever shall
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

From this story and fiction, (by our English Bible,) fathered shamefully upon
our Blessed Savior, a Christian is bound, if he meet with any man that being
stronger than he, forces or compels him, (though he be in post-hast, or going
for a Mid wife, a Doctor or Surgeon upon life and death, or whatsoever
occasion,) yet he must go another way, quite out of his way a mile, and may not
call for the help of the Constable, or neighborhood, or other good body, to
defend him from this violence, but in a quiet submission and obedience, he must
(thus compelled) go a mile; which way soever the compeller pleases, he must
make no resistance; but that is not all; he must go another mile of his own
accord; and being thus easy to be fooled, at the two miles end, if the man
compel him again further another mile, away he must trudge; and so along all
England over, and the world over; for there is no end of this obedience, if a
Christian meets but with any compeller; or freed from him, happens upon
another, that leads him about and about like an ignis fatuus, and all this by
virtue of your English Bible, and in as plain words, as any that are in it, and
as easy to be understood; without Metaphor, Allegory, figure or parable.

What do you say to this now, you with your English Bible?

Whereas, I say, it is false and untrue, and our Savior never spoke such a
senceless word in his life.

For all that he said, as to this, was (...).

And Theodore Beza, (a better critic than a man,) renders truly -- Et quisquis
te angariabit ad milliare unum, abi cum eo duo, that is, in English, Whosoever
by virtue of an order or warrant, from the Magistrate under whose Jurisdiction
thou live, shall compel thee to go with him a mile, go with him twain.

And signifies no more than that ready and cheerful obedience that is due to
Authority, from every Disciple of Christ, who himself not only thus preached,
but practiced; there was no rebel Christians heard on, that fought their
Christian Kings, nor so much as Heathen Kings or Heretic Kings, till Calvin,
Knox, Hugh Peter's, Richard Baxter, J. O. Father Grey-beard, and modern
Orthodoxy.

Constantius, Valens, Valentinian, Anastasius, Justinian, Heraclius, were all
Arrian Heretics and Emperors, yet the Christians their Subjects never
confederated in a Holy League and Covenant, to reform by arms in spite of their
teeth; the Church militant in those times did not prove their Texts with Sword
and Gun; The Good Old Cause was not then in those days old enough for the
swaddling clouts: nay afterward when Julian the Apostate was Emperor, there
was no army of Saints, nor holy Redcoat-Christians that pulled off his Crown,
or cut off his head.

Perhaps you will say, thank them for nothing; their wills might be good, but
their arms were too short; or perhaps they had no skill in their weapons, and
though Christians and Saints, yet not Army-Saints.

Yes, that they were, Army-Saints; but not Rebel-Saints; Army-Saints they were,
and there were more Christians in Julian the Apostates Army, than all the
Heathens and himself put together:

As is evident by their choosing his successor, Jovinian, to be their Emperor,
because he was a Christian, (but not till the Apostate was dead,) saying, one
and all, one and all, Jovinian, Jovinian, for we are Christians.

And our Blessed Savior, as he preached this cheerful obedience, and also his
Apostles, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. -- 1 Pet. 2. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 2. so did
our Savior practice.

There was a Holy Day made, (by the Chief Priest, who then was Chief Jewish
Magistrate,) and no mention of it in Gods Law; but he declaimed not against it,
but quietly observed it himself, namely the feast of the Dedication, Joh. 10.
22, 23.

He did indeed miracles to get better drink and meat, when poor people wanted
it; but he never did a miracle to get money, or Coin, but only to pay his
Assessment, Royal Aid or Poll-money, call it which you will, for it was each of
them, and all of them, Mat. 17. 27. And all this only, by his example, to show
true Christians, that they ought to make no resistance, nor give offense.

Thus you see I have made very good sense, and good use of Mat. 5. 41. which
your English Bibles make ridiculously useless, and no sense consistent or
compatible with our Blessed Saviors Honor, and Innocence.

Again I Will instance in Mat. 28. 19. which though it be sense, yet it is of
dangerous consequence; and as interpreted by the Anabaptists, has made a great
bustle in the world; and besides it seems somewhat a hard Chapter, That God
Almighty should give a Sacrament to the Jews, namely that of Circumcision, as a
Badge or token (as the word Sacrament signifies,) that all that wore that
Livery, belonged to him, were his visible servants, in which he comprehended a
man and his house, and would not so much as suffer one of the little boys, to
go above eight days without this Badge and Livery.

And yet notwithstanding our Savior in the Gospel should take away all these
old Liveries, and give his people no new-ones, as good at least, and as large
and as many, even for the children too, fitted as well as in the old Law:

Or that our Blessed Savior, under the Gospel which was to have larger
extents, even to all nations, should take care only to mark his Sheep, and not
the Lambs, by this Holy Badge and Sacrament of Baptism; and which was, and has
been in all ages the Livery of all Christian people, nations and languages;
excepting here and there, a bold, pragmatick, self-conceited Coxcomb, building
his says upon this Text, and construeing it in his own sense, knowing only the
English Translation, nor scarcely that; not being able to speak or write true
English.

Look you here, says he, look in the Commission, if it be not first teach, and
then baptize -- Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Indeed this, as we translate it, and read it in our English Bibles, has some
color, and looks plausibly.

For though it is false, when they say Christ said, first teach and then
baptize, -- yet we put down in our English Translation Teach, in the order of
the words, before Baptize.

And though that do not prove any thing, nor move a rational man, that none
should be baptized before they be taught, any more than to persuade him that a
Bullocks Horns do grow and put forth before their Hoofs, because it is said in
the Psalm 69. 31. Bullocks that have Horns and Hoofs:

Yet we have to do with people that know not the meaning of (...), and having
their English Bible, they will stamp and stare with it like mad, thinking it is
on their side, because it is in their hand.

Then come I, and pluck it out of their hand, and say away you bold impudent
fellows, audacious Blasphemers, do you call this Gods word, it is not Gods
word, Christ never said teach all nations, baptizing, etc. away to your
Shop-boards, your Looms and your Comb-pots; and that will be more beneficial
and advantageous both for your souls and bodies, than thus blasphemously to
abuse Christ, by calling that his word, that he never spoke; if you heard the
words he spoke, you understand them no more, than you do Greek or Syriack;
therefore be not busiebodies, mind your own business, and do not like Gregory
Father Grey-beard, argue of Divinity and policy, and tell the King what he
should do, and the Clergy what they should do; for these are things above your
shallow capacities, of a higher orb and motion, above your reach, above your
sphere.

Now Pragmatick will not believe a word of this, though it is wholesome, and
futeable and good for him, and fits every thing about him but his pride; yet he
will cry out, he is undone, he is robbed, (as Micah holla'd, when he had lost his
foolish Images and Idols,) Judge. 18. 24. You have taken away my Gods which I
made, and the Priest and you are gone away, and what have I more? And what is
this that you say unto me; what aileth me?

Poor man! What, lose all? lose that thou made a God on? thy English Bible,
which yet is not God, nor his word altogether: what, lose that which thou did
idolize and adore, and ask counsel of, and was thine Oracle, nay and lose the
Priest too of this English Translation, the good Tailor, the good
Chimney-sweeper, the good Miller, the honest Tinker, the honest Weaver and
Cobbler, that left the vocations whereunto they were called, to become poor,
barebone, English Priest to the great Idol, English Translation; and all he
says is Oracle, and taken for Gospel; away go the women after him, and some
silly men, and here and there a crafty knave; that when he and all his
relations are almost broke, then to get custom and credit, after them goes he
too; and the truth on it is, he has the best on it, together with the crafty,
lazy knave that holds forth, for these rule all the other, are the Judas's and
keep the bag, and the offerings and gatherings of their Church, yet throwing
down their Half-Crown or an Angel at a time among the rest, by their liberality
to drill on the rest, (the gain returning tenfold by such a venture,) For they
keep the stakes, and though they open their purse wide, and their mouth for the
nonce, yet they can soon make up their mouth again.

Now I confess these crafty knaves will be cut at the heart, and cry out as if
they were killed or robbed, at this my plain dealing; and open their mouths
wide, and set the poor fools which they make their dogs, to fetch and carry for
them, and bark, and bite if they durst at whomsoever they clap their hands; but
I am above them and their malice, safe in my charm for them -- Deo confisus
nunquam confusus. Which they no more understand, than they will do this my
honest and faithful dealing with them, for their own good, if they consider it
and weigh it without passion or prejudice, in the balance of the Sanctuary;
where I am as safe from their clamorous noise, as is the Moon from the jaws of
the barking Currs.

And if they would but hold their barking, till they do but hear me speak, I
should stop their mouths more than any modern Orthodox Presbyter has done upon
this Text, Mat. 28. 19. that ever I heard of.

For, my honest friend, have a little patience, believe me that knows more than
thy English Translation, more than Cobbler, Weaver, and Chimney-sweeper, thy
Bare-bone Priest, whom thou idolizest; and when thou have adorned him and hung
thy ornaments about him, then like the Israelites, thou admirest him as they
did their Calves, and say of him and thy English Bible, These are thy Gods,
Oh Israel, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Popish Egyptian
darkness; I was baptized when I was a child, because in those times of darkness
my Parents knew no better, but here is the man, and here is the Bible, and here
is the Text, Christ's own Commission, which has brought me out of that error
and darkness.

Alas! poor soul! deluded, bejugled, gulled, abused and misled poor soul!

Christ never said, Teach all nations baptizing them, etc. but said (...), etc.
in English, Disciple all nations, or make Disciples of all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, etc. then follows, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I commanded you.

So that now baptizing goes before teaching, how do you answer this Mr.
Black-coat Chimney-sweeper? your Idol cannot save you now, for it is the
workmanship of man's hands, and subject to corruption.

But perhaps you will say, were not the Translators of the Bible as good Scholars
as I am? and as honest?

First, I answer, I am glad you see there is an absolute necessity of
Schollarship, more than a bare understanding and reading of English; an
absolute necessity to keep up and give encouragements to a Learned Clergy, and
that you lose your own eyes, at least your own spectacles, your own lights,
when you contemn them, despise them; it is as the blind man despises his guide,
but if he were gone, he would be glad to call him again, if not for love of
him, yet for the need he has of him, he cannot get home without him, nor keep
out of the pit without him;

Or if he should call his guide again, and instead of him, one as blind as
himself should happen to be near him, they might talk a little together, but
this other blind man could not help his fellow home, nor keep out of the ditch,
nor avoid the stumbling blocks, although this same, or both of the blind men
were bedaub'd with gold and silver lace; or if their heads were adorned with a
huffing Peruke, but wanting eyes and a guide, they must necessarily both fall
into the ditch.

And if any think that this reflects upon Gentleman himself, indeed I say it
does, and is intended against those upstarts, which are Jacks rather than
Gentlemen; for true bred English Gentlemen use to love and practice Learning
themselves, did study to adorn their heads with brains, rather than a strumpets
hair, and loved and honored Learning and Learned men.

But our frothy Upstarts want wit and manners too, know no Gallantry, but what
I can adorn mine Ass withal, when I list; only here is the difference, mine Ass
is good for something, gives good milk for a Consumption, and is a repairer and
restorer of the wasted body, and the Pockey Bones; whereas your Ass-Gentleman
is good for nothing, but is a waster instead of a repairer, does no good in his
generation, so much as the beasts, seeming to be born for no other end, but to
run squeaking up and down like the Rats and the Mice, and to gnaw cheese and
Parmasin; and eat up the victuals.

Yet he shall catch at a phrase, chew to a Crumb some chemical term of Art, or
a new-coin'd word picked up at a club; and away he struts, repeats to himself,
admires his own Improvements, laughs at the Clergy, dictates policy, talks of a
new wo^ld in the Moon, and about goes the earth with a whip in a trice;
Aristotle a Block-head to Copernicus, his Politics dull to Machiavel-Greg.
Galen a fool rather than a Physician; then nothing less contents him than to
sublimate his silver into vapor and smoke, to be a Virtuoso; and with new
experiments confound all Order, Government and Policy, and thereby commence new
Politicoso; and wast body and bones with a Pockey Ingenioso. And there is your
Gentleman a la mode.

And if I might persuade the Clergy, if it were not to do good in their
Generation, and serve it, and keep it from the ruin, such as these, like
Father-Grey-beard, do threaten it with, these fellows should have Elbow-room,
and have rope enough, to scope as they list in Church and State, and Court, and
Councils; why should you be their Cooks, since they rule the roast? when there
is scarcely the worst of you, but is more useful than a hundred of them.

For as when there was no King in Israel, in England, every man did that which
was right in his own eyes, their liberty, they longed for, reduced them to such
confusions and streights, that they were forced for their sakes and benefits to
call in the King, whose own right it was:

So let but these new Politicians play their pranks, with their new Experiments
of Licentiousness, and in Church, and State, and Court, and Councils do all,
(as far as his Majesty will suffer them) as well as do ill, and we shall soon
see them bring such confusions upon the Kingdom, and such streights upon
themselves, they will be glad to call Clergy into favor again for their own
sakes, as well as for the sake of their Posterities.

Which certainly will suffer, if these men's folly be suffered and indulged; for
who will bring up his son to be a Clergyman, when Gregory Grey-beard shall be
more countenan'cd than the best of them: it is a shame to tell, but it is too
true; and a greater shame it should be so, than to say so.

Omnia cum liceant non licet esse pium.
For though no Clergyman gets either love or thanks, more than any other
Minister of State, by concerning himself in the great affairs of State; (those
that inhabit the temperate Zones, having more ease, and less sweat and danger,
though not so near the Sun and his directer Beams,) yet certainly it is good
for the King and Kingdom, that they should have (as by Law their due,) a
considerable influence upon and inspection into the great affairs of State.

And I am of Gregory's opinion in that p. 301. That they make the best
Ministers of State in the world, if they keep them to their Bibles; it is true,
all men have errors, but they are in probability more like to keep to their
Bibles, than any other sort of men.

God therefore at first gave the Government to Priests, and Prophets, and
Preachers, such as Moses was, and Samuel, David and Solomon, and made the
Kingdom happy under their oversight; as England has been made as happy by their
influence in Government, as by any other sort of men whatsoever, till the
Kingdom's happiness fell with them, by the advance of modern Orthodoxy.

And it is worth the remembering, that when the House of Lords voted the Bishops
out of the House, and from the seats to which they had as good right as
themselves; they did but thereby become their own Cryers, and made Proclamation
to dissolve their own Court; the Spiritual Lords only first going out at the
door, and showing the rest of the Lords the way down stairs; and the most of
the House of Commons followed soon after.

But my pen runs like Mr. Prin's, I have almost forgot where I was; Oh! at the
objection, why did not our Translators of the Bible, render the Original more
exactly into English?

To which I answer, the Translators in King James his time, did well and
learnedly; mended many things that were amiss, and deserve great Honor and
thanks; but they did but cobble some things, Bernardus non videt omnia; and
some inconveniences in wording it, they did not, nor could not foresee: such
as this of the Anabaptists mistake, and misconstruction in this particular. Yet
the word bearing two significations, and Laymen in those times, not so
audacious and impudent, nor the reading Scriptures so promiscuous and frequent
as of late, of which sad consequences we have too much experience.

But does not our Savior bid men search the Scriptures? Jo. 5. 39. I answer,
no, he does not; he said only to them that were learned in the Scriptures,
(...), or to whomsoever of his auditors that were conversant in Scriptures, in
the Indicative Mood, ye do search the Scriptures, because in them ye think to
have eternal life; and they are they that testify of me, yet ye will not come
unto me that ye might have life. As if our Blessed Savior should say, as he
does in another place, seeing you see, and yet you do not perceive; and hearing
you hear, and do not understand; ye search the Scriptures, thinking to find
this eternal bread, that I am preaching of, namely, eternal life by Christ, and
there you may see me, for they testify of me, yet ye will not come (for so is
(...) rendered Jo. 1. 10. tamen, sometimes sed) unto me that ye might have life.

I know the same word (...), may be taken in the Imperative Mood, but that it
is not so agreeable with the context, nor signifies any thing, if it were so,
to prove this promiscuous use and license of reading the Gospel and New
Testament, of which not one word was then writ.

Indeed no man in the world can desire more than I do, that all people did
understand the Scriptures, the mind and will of God, by reading and searching
into the Scriptures themselves, and also into the English Bible, so they read
and search with the spirit of meekness, for instruction, and not for cavil and
disputes, raising controversies and horrid new opinions out of difficult places
of Scripture, not knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Those controversies should be left to those of greater abilities, and of more
sober spirits than themselves.

There are plain places of Scripture enough for edification and to direct us in
the way to Heaven, by living soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world.

And he answered smartly and well to a Fanatic, but a light heel'd
Gentlewoman, that was mightily perplexed with finding out the meaning of
Daniel, Ezekiel and the Revelations; that she had been better employed, if she
had considered the meaning of those plain Scriptures; Thou shall not commit
adultery; and Fear God, and Honor the King.

I wonder what rational account any man that understands only the English
Translation, can give why the Pharisees should find fault, Luke 6. 1, 2. with
Christ's Disciples for plucking the ears of corn, as they passed through the
corn fields, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands? did not the Pharisees
eat on the Sabbath days? yes surely, and if they eat any thing, could not eat
less, nor more easily made ready, than rubbing the Corn out with their hands,
and eating some of the grains; meat ready dressed in, and to their hands.

And though some Sabbath days were kept with more abstinence than others, and
more solemnity; yet the English Translation help us to no discovery, calling
that Sabbath only -- The second Sabbath after the first.

The second Sabbath after the first! what is that? If the Jews had a Sabbath
that was called the first Sabbath, (as indeed they had,) namely, the Feast of
the Passover when the first day thereof fell on a Sabbath day; then by this
translation this Sabbath day, (when the Disciples plucked the ears of Corn and
did eat,) must be the second, and next following Sabbath to it. But that is not
true, because it is not the meaning of the original word (...), neither helps
at all to solve the doubt, as being but an ordinary Sabbath, on which it was
lawful to eat a Breakfast: but it was not lawful to eat a Breakfast, or drink
any thing by the Jewish Canon, until the sixth hour, (which we call Noon, or
twelve a Clock,) (...), Luke 6. 1. which our English Translation renders very
imper^ectly and untruly, the second Sabbath after the first, and Beza renders
it much worse, namely, Sabbato altero primo. And not at all to the purpose.

The incomparable Grotius renders it best, and gives the best reason for that
reddition; namely, the second Prime-Sabbath: that is, the day of Pentecost, on
which it was not lawful to eat a breakfast, or eat or drink till twelve a
clock; and therefore did the Pharisees find fault with the Disciples, not for
eating upon a Sabbath day, as every body did, as well as their beasts; but for
eating upon the second Prime Sabbath, the day of Pentecost.

And this thus explained gives a very good account of the strength of S.
Peter's argument, to prove that the Disciples were not drunk, as some did
suppose, when they spoke with new tongues upon the day of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1.
15.

These are not drunk, seeing it is but the third hour of the day, or nine a
clock.

Why? Is It not probable men may be drunk by nine a clock? yes, on other days,
but not on that day the day of Pentecost, or second Prime Sabbath, when none
were suffered to sell any wine or meat, or drink, nor taste any thing till
twelve a clock, or the sixth hour.

A great many more imperfections there are in our English Bibles, which I had
rather were mended, than discovered: these Instances are sufficient to abate
the confidence of those bold companions, that instead of being teachers of
others, had need learn more humility and modesty themselves; and not be so
desperately devoted to a new opinion built upon false grounds, whose foundation
is not laid upon the rock of ages, Christ and his word; but upon the sandy
bottoms of self conceit and the English Bible.

I hope therefore that without any Paralogism I have evidenced that what the
Reverend Bishop Bramhall has asserted concerning the promiscuous License of
unqualified persons reading the Sciptures is, (though a Paradox in this
hypocritical age, where the appearance and profession of piety is more prized
than the truth, yet) not Apocryphal, nor Popish: as Father Grey-beard
maliciously insinuates p. 30. rendering him thereby an enemy to the Laity.

Whereas indeed and in truth he is the best friend to them, that wishing them
well, and desiring their good more than their good will, would not willingly
have them take that in their hands which through unskilfulness they cannot
manage, and through weakness they cannot weild; name (...) Scriptures, sharper
than a two (...) Sword.

But is the Good Old Cause (which (...) thought had taken its last sleep,)
awake again? Does not Greg. revive the Good Old Cause again, under the name of
modern Orthodoxy? and give it strength, as well as life, by the same methods
now, as in 1640?

Did they not then, as he now, endeavor to enrage the people and rowze them
again, (when they are tired and willing to be quiet,) with new jealousies and
fears, fears of Ceremonies, fears of losing their Bibles, and their Sabbaths?
rendering the Eminent Bishops dead and alive, friends in their hearts and
doctrines too to Popery, but for a certain reason, rather making love to it,
than espousing it? He sets not down these opinions of Bishop Bramhall's with an
intent to confute them, ('it is beyond his ability,) but only notes them with an
Asterism as bordering upon Popery, as pernicious to the Laity; to beget in them
new heats against the Church, by exposing the deformities of King Charles I.
and all his choicest Bishops for the love they bore to Ceremonies and
Arminianism; and making all their Religion, (both of those deceased, and of
those yet in power and alive) to be wholly trivial if not profane.

Which brings to my mind that observation of his Sacred Majesty's in his (...).
c. 15. concerning the same practices, that now this Greg. does again renew.

It was a great part of some men's Religion to scandalize me and mine, they
thought theirs could not be true, if they cried not down mine as false.

It has always been the method of Atheists and Hell, by scandalizing the
Clergy, and bringing them into Contempt, thereby to foil all Religion and bring
God into Contempt. He that violates the Ambassador is not afraid of the King
that sent him.

Plato was of an opinion that no man that went into a dark dungeon an Atheist,
and staid there two hours alone, could come out an Atheist.

Because though company and frolicks may drown the secret whisperings of the
soul, that the natural instincts of the truth of the Deity cannot be heard; yet
when the soul is left to an undisturbed conference with, and reflections upon it
self, (an opportunity it seldom wants, when the hour of death is at hand) it
must needs determine in the behalf of God Almighty, and against its own vanity:

As that Scotch Secretary of State that lived Atheistically, died more
wretchedly with these last words,

Heu! miser aeternos vado damnatus ad ignes.
Muzzle the Conscience some men can, and keep it from loud barking, but the
longest practice upon it cannot altogether so stop its mouth, but it will make
them hear sometimes, if not gnaw them, yea enough to make them weary of life,
to be rid of such a troublesome companion; but neither live nor dye can they
with comfort; such a precious life leads an Atheist; his head is at variance
with his heart; his wicked life and fears of an after-reckoning make him wish
there was no God, but cannot long make him believe there is no God.

Tantum optat nullos esse putare Deos.
For this reason it is that their words and actions fall out by the way, and
are so often contradictory: sometimes laughing at all Religion and then
presently apologizing for it: sometimes railing, and then immediately
condemning all railng: commending what they condemned, and condemning what they
did commend: like brothers of the blade, that when they have robbed in one
disguise, change their Vizards, and shift themselves into another shape for
^ear of the Hue and Cry: which puts me in mind of this Gregor. Who did ever see
so much railing in so little a book as his? was ever any man prosecuted as he
does the Ecclesiastical Politician with such variety of style in such
prodigious railing, as we have already noted in part? what can be said more to
defame the memory of King Charles I. Than to say, his whole Reign was deformed
with Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Sibthorpianism, and Manwaring? Has not his
present Majesty our Gracious Sovereign as high interest in, and concern for,
his Blessed Fathers honor, as his Crowns? can any violate the Majesty of the
Father, and the Son be untouched and unconcerned? and if this be true that
Greg. suggests, That the whole Reign of King Charles I. was deformed, the Duke
of Buckingham stabbed by Felton, had a great hand in that deformity; and then
does not this malicious invective seem to plead for the justice and equity of
that horrid violence that deprived his Majesty and the Duke of their lives?
Could they fall desired and beloved for their innocence, that lived for nothing
but to deform the whole Reign? Father Grey-beard reads his own sentence against
himself, the same Book that evidences his villainy, craves justice against it,
any I Will join with him in his wishes, p. 187. I could wish that there were some
severer Laws against such villains, who raise such false and scandalous reports
of worthy Gentlemen, and that those Laws were put in Execution: and that men
might not be suffered to walk the streets in so confident a Garb, who commit
those Assassinates upon the reputation of deserving Persons.

That King Charles I. was a deserving person, he confesses when he calls him
the best Prince in the world; that Archbishop Laud was a deserving person, he
confesses, when he says he is confident he studied nothing more than to do his
Majesty and God Almighty good service, and withal was so learned, so pious, so
wise a man; and that he ought not to be mentioned without due honor, and that
he deserved a far better fate than he met with; and yet notwithstanding all
this merit and honor due to him, he makes him the cause of the Rebellion begun
in Scotland, as he would make us believe, by imposition of the English Liturgy,
p. 303. And surely the King had a hand in it too, or else he makes him a cipher,
rather than a King; sure this man was by when the Inditements were contrived
and drawn up against our Blessed Sovereign, and Archbishop Laud; for then they
lay to their charge all the innocent blood, as they called it, shed in England
and Ireland; and who could expect any better should come on it, when they seemed
to know nothing but Ceremonies, etc. with that begun, and with that ended, till
the whole Reign was deformed.

And yet for all that this Gregory double tongue, makes one a Pious, Learned,
wise man, and the other the best Prince that ever wielded the English Scepter.

Was not this Greg. begot by some Proteus of a Camaelion, an Oedipus cannot
riddle him: he fights backward and forward, sometimes for the King, and
sometimes for modern Orthoxy; he slashes with a two edged Sword and cuts both
ways; brandishes against the enemy, and then falls foul on his own party, and
the Good Old Cause; but it is with pickeerings and flourishes, rather than
close fight, and good earnest; and therefore he gives the Good Old Cause, a
good new name, and because the old one is odious, he calls it sometimes
Primitive Simplicity, sometimes modern Orthodoxy, and p. 303. the Cause too
good.

A Cause too good? too good for what? too good to be burnt does he mean? as it
was by the common Hangman; or too good for the Rebel Saints? I Will assure you
they did not think so; nor yet would, if it would please God and the King to
entrust them with it once more; no, no, that is not this Authors meaning; he
says it is the Cause too good to be fought for. Sure he thinks (as his friends
H. P. J. O. etc. blasphemed in that horrid Rebellion (begun by the Scots, but
occasioned and caused by Bishop Laud and consequently the King) That the battle
was the Lords, and that men should standstill, (I wish they had,) and see the
salvation of God; and that the stars in their Courses would fight against
Sisera, (which they construed,) the King and Cavaliers.

Sure this Greg. thought the King and Archbishop, for sending the English
Liturgy into Scotland, did thereby involve themselves and the Kingdom in so
much guilt, that the Cry thereof would go to Heaven (for less he cannot mean)
and that God ought in justice to have taken the cause into his own hand, and
destroyed us (as he did Sodom and Gomorrah) with fire and brimstone, and
thereby have saved the Rebels a labor, and the Scots a long march into
England. Greg. would have been an happy instrument to have persuaded the Scots
to put up their pipes, for the cause was too good to be fought for.

Yet it seems it is not too good to be writ for, nor to good to be commended
again to the world; this man's a great friend to the King, to the Bishops, to
the Government, to the English Liturgy, which he represents to have been so
mischievous in former times; and now he quarrels with the Letany, because the
word Schism is added: he does not like that men should pray against Schism; I
am afraid one great quarrel and irreconcilable, he has against the Liturgy, is
the same as of old, because it makes men pray so often for the King and his
Family, to which some men's hearts cannot say Amen.

He might as well have quarrelled the Letany for another word there added;
namely, Rebellion: But that had been to rob without a Vizard: the Picque now is
only against Schism. And why? and why? he tells us, It spoils the Music, and
cadence of the Period.

Men that never intend to repent of their Crimes, love not to hear of them;
sure I am, Schism in the Letany there added, spoils not the Music so much, as
it does the Kingdom; which by it alone has been quite out of tune.

I wish with all my heart though, that the King and his two Houses of
Parliament would take Gregory's advice, p. 304. After all the fatal
Consequences of that Rebellion, which can only serve as Sea-marks unto wise
Princes, to avoid the Causes. And what were the causes? (if you will believe
his hint) they were Archbishop Laud, and consequently and much more King
Charles I. p. 302. the English Liturgy, p. 303. and the zealous assertors of
the Rights of Princes, who are but at best, well-meaning Zealots, p. 303.

Is It not pity but this Gregory should be called to the Helm of Government?
it is Pilots own self, he shows wise Princes all the Sea-marks; here is Scylla,
there Charybdis; here lies the flats, there the Beacon; here the Buoy, there
the Fire-house; here lies Dogger-bank, there the Galloper; and that sand with
the two horns, is the spits, that beyond, Goodwin Sands, but here, here, whoop,
holla, holla, whoop, p. 150, 151, 152, 153. the Kings Channel.

Good Skipper! so much skill, and so much pains, such a Politician, and a
Virtuoso to boot, thou shall have a new Perry-wig, and once more another
Gratuity sent thee from J. O. and a new Thanks-giving-day appointed by the
Churches, with another gathering at the end on it, to that purpose; beshrew me,
it came seasonably for an use of great comfort after you had been chouc'd at
the ordinary and played pieces.

Is it not meritorious enough? he super-erogates; gratifies the Churches by
shriving them, and laying all the blame upon that odious and hated thing the
Liturgy, that was the cause of all the bloodshed, all the wars and ruin; that
the rock on which we split; mind the Sea-marks, wise Princes, avoid the causes,
if you will avoid the sad and fatal consequences.

It Is but lost money now to fee any Courtiers to put in a seasonable word for
Indulgence and modern Orthodoxy; Father Grey-beard for all. Is there never a
Corporation that sends Burgesses to Parliament, that (upon a vacation, the late
member being dead) may cry up Greg. and get him into the House?

The Cabala cannot but approve the plot, Greg. is greater than a second Moses,
he is a second Samson, can carry the whole house before him.

Methinks I see him at it: and addressing himself to the Speaker, makes this
following speech in the Parliament House, composed out of his own book; (for I
scorn foul play;) nor will I add one material word of mine own, to make him
look more ridiculously or seditiously, than he has already with his own hand
pourtrayed himself in his book; (only to make it to look more handsomely, I
have dressed it in the fashion in this following Droll a la mode;) in forty
pages of his incomparable book, (like that self-conceited bookish Philosopher,
that undertook to read Lectures to Hannibal) puffed up with the beloved esteem
he has for himself, takes upon him the Pilot's place, directing wise Princes
how to govern the Helm, stear their Course and observe the Sea-marks.

And I have stinted my Muse to his very words in all particulars that come most
home to him, choosing rather to injure my fancy, than him; or lay to his charge
more than what is proved to his face under his hand.

Mr. Speaker,
I, that spoke here but once before,
Must now speak, though I never spoke more:
When the Seas swell high as the Poop,
Shall not your Pilot, holla, whoop?
And rowze Tarpollians, that lie sleeping,
Never dreaming what cause there is for weeping,
Fasting and Prayers of the Churches?
Now Orthodoxy left in the lurch is,
And swallowed up, for ought I know:
Prick up your ears, I Will tell you how;
There is one Bays (and shall I tell ye?)
He has a thousand Seas in's Belly,
Another Hobbs Leviathan,
Swells and will drown us if he can;
The Netherlands and Hungary
Are under water already, (p. 43.)
And so is France, Bohemia,
Sweden, and Transylvania,
Denmark, and Savoy, that by'th' Alps is,
All Scotland, England, 'xcept a small piece;
Geneva by Lake-lemane, Poland,
I think at last he will leave us no land;
Look to your Ship then, hard at Helm,
Starboard, or else we overwhelm:
Ease the Shrowds there, Breda, Breda;
There never was such a flood since Noah:
Take the Topsail in, do what you may,
The Mizen on the Prow gives way.
Down with the Kings flag, (you nere mind,)
And let her spoon before the wind.
All stands aloft; swack, swack; no near,
For we have sprung a Leak I fear.
There'r Goodwin Sands, Tom and John too;
We Have escaped them though with much ado.
Rummage the Ship, throw overboard
What in the Ship may best be spared:
There; you have done finely, (have you not?)
Thrown away the best, the worst forgot;
The Masse-Book there, (do you not see?)
With the Act for Uniformity,
Lying in the Chaplains Cabin there:
Founder the Ship they will, I fear:
The Surplice too, (I think y' are blind,)
You always leave the worst behind;
Orthodoxy's gone already,
We Are sunk, if you do not steer steady.
There Grandeur lies: (you are so dull,)
Hand all the Sails, and let her hull.
Keep your Loof, Hold; we have sprung a Mast;
This it is to bear more sail than Ballast.
Ply the Pump there, for I am told
Five foot of water's in the Hold.
Now, Master Speaker, if there be,
Within you so much Repartee,
As to ragoust now what I mean,
By this Harangue tuant and clean,
This English Ship of the first Rate,
(The Hieroglyphick of the State,)
Is saved from wrack, by Virtuoso,
Ingenioso, Politicoso.
Thus have I taught you in Parable,
Now for the Moral; the other was fable;
I meant plainly to say; Wise Princes,
Viewing the fatal Consequences
Of the Rebellion, look out; spy
Where the Sea-marks and Buoys do lie;
That ye may guide us right, and even;
Not tossed and wracked as we have been.
For to say truth, 'twas Bishop Bramhall,
Laud and King Charles, who did deform all;
With Ceremonies, Arminianism,
Manwaring and Sibthorpianism;
Also the English Liturgy,
And Schism, in the Letany,
May (grieving the Saints,) again put soon
Us, and the Music out of tune: (p. 306.)
Put out that word then, (as is fit,)
Or put it all out every whit;
And (if y' are wise,) all the Liturgy,
It makes some Saints in prayer to lie,
And against conscience, say a thing
That checks them, Praying for the King.
These made the whole Reign ugly look,
I dare be sworn. (Give him the Book,
Says Master Speaker, kiss it, so on.)
But presently, as in a swoon,
Or Planet-struck, poor Greg. was dumb,
He hawk'd and hum'd, nothing would come.
At last said; I Will not break my Oath,
Further to lie I would be loath:
For never I, since I was born,
Did break my Oath or was for sworn,
Nor, since I took the Covenant,
Can for my heart or blood recant.
Therefore now I Am upon my Oath,
Not one word will I speak but troth.
The Good Old Cause should bear the blame,
Where the sin lies, lay there the shame;
'Twas neither good, nor yet too good,
Nor so ought to be understood.
Charles the best Prince was, (truth to say,)
That er^ did English Scepter sway.
Archbishop Laud was wise and pious,
And learned too, and virtuous:
Who dares charge him with Popery,
His learned Book gives them the lie;
Nor is it just he should be blamed,
Nor without Honor due be named,
Who studied always, what he could,
For God, the King, and Kingdom's good;
Therefore deserved a better fate,
Than he (good Martyr!) did come at.
And he that dares these truths deny,
Is a bold Villain, and does lie.
Only I could wish, that there were (p. 187.)
Some honest Laws made more severe
Against such Villains, who do raise
Such false reports; and do dispraise
With Scandals worthy Gentlemen,
Either alive or dead: And then
We should not helpless thus grieve, when
We such Assassinats do meet,
In Garb so confident in the street,
As if no harm at all the had done,
Murdering Reputation.
Why should the Wolf be hanged up, when
The Jaccal Scot-free goes? Poor men
That for necessity do prey,
And take a purse on the Highway,
Your Law hangs up, but he that does,
Like Staphyla, rob Graves, he goes
Without control, because the Laws
Are dumb and silent in this cause.
To you it therefore does belong,
To keep the Tombs secure from wrong.
Lastly, it is known to all the world,
This Realm was blessed, till overhurl'd
With the now Modern Orthodox,
That Gulled this Land, with Calvin, Knox.
And -- -- -- -- -- --
But here I fancy he is interrupted, speaking so maliciously and inveterately
against the blessed memory of King Charles, and saying his whole Reign was
deformed, in so great a Presence as this Parliament, which, (be it spoken as
far from envy, as flattery,) yields to no preceding Parliaments for Eloquence
as well as Loyalty, and therefore commands Mr. Greg. to the Bar, not
questioning him for the good he had spoken, but for the evil.

For he that spit in the face of that blessed Martyr did not thereby do him the
hundredth part of that ignominy and harm; nor showed half so much venom
harbored within.

This Father Grey-beard not contenting himself with what our late Sovereign, in
vindication of his peoples Laws and Liberties, more than his own, has suffered
from the hands of tyrannical and blood-thirsty men, but (as in the Enditement
against him,) he charges him again with deforming his whole Reign, and by
Sibthorpianism, affecting an absolute Government, upon which rock, (he is bold
to say) we all ruined, p. 302. It seems then this rock of absolute Government,
which the King surely affected, if he countenanced it so much as this audacious
man would make us believe, for which the Rebels in no worse, but plainer terms,
called him tyrant, and lay to his charge the guilt of all his innocent blood
shed in England and Ireland.

I am sorry this man should again rip up the old sores, which we thought had
been cicatrized without any deformity on the Kings part.

And therefore he does with unparalled confidence attempt to talk so much of
Sibthorp, Manwaring, Montague, etc. It is the business of many pages, from p.
285. to p. 304.

And to evince all this, the first and choicest weapon he brings upon the
stage, is as unresistable, as terrible: there is no fence against a flail; he
falls in pell-mell, without giving one volley, to close fight, Handygripes, and
Butt of Musket: (which he calls p. 281.) the Butt-end of an Archbishop, (that
was) Abbot, of Canterbury.

Now, (think I,) woe worth the day, look to thy hits, poor Bays, and beat but
this Butt-end of an Archbishop about his ears, and I Will warrant him spoiled
for a fencer whiles he lives again.

To make room, and heighten the expectations of this matchless onset, he would
make men believe, p. 280. that the wounds that shall be given to his Majesty,
Archbishop Land, and the Government at that time, (by proving against them the
guilt of Sibthorpianism and absolute Government,) are the wounds given by a
Friend:

Against which there is no fence, we keep no guard against him, and being
secure on that side, the thrusts (like that of Joab's into the heart of Abner,
and Amnen,) are certain and deadly; as being made with as little difficulty, as
truth; and as easily and readily as basely and treacherously.

And such is this Butt-end of an Archbishop; it admits no answer, cannot
possibly be warded, it is the testimony of Arch -- against Arch -- the testimony
of a friend.

And I confess the testimony of a man's friend, (though but his supposed
friend,) against him, shall find credit though false; whilst the evidence
given in by an enemy, (through true,) is not believed, (like words of a
frequent liar, though he tell truth sometimes,) because all is construed the
effects of practice, malice, or design.

And if this Butt-end of an Archbishop be indeed Abbot's Butt-end, which is
not credible, (as I Will show by and by, where indeed it was forged, and out of
what Armory Greg. fetches this unavoidable dead doing tool; it is a hundred to
one that we find that it came out of the Arcenal of Modern Orthodoxy; because
Greg. (who is skilful and learned in nothing so much as that way) does bring it
on to the stage, with mavelous prowess, to this Encounter;) yet the blows it
can possibly give, will neither bring smart, nor infamy either to his Majesty,
or Archbishop Land, in the judgment of any By-stander, that knows but the
temper of Archbishop Abbot, what he was; and also the nature of this weapon,
this same Butt-end.

I need not give you the History here, (nor is this a place for it,) of the
plottings and contrivances of the modern Orthodox in King James his time, from
whose wardship though the King was set free by the privilege of his English
Crown, yet he was never emancipated from the importunities of those busy, and
unweariedly troublesome spirits; and t^ough he condescended to the Conference
at Hampton Court, where they, as well as his Majesty, saw themselves baffled:

Yet these are not men that will give over so; but King James would many times,
(whether for old acquaintance, or not quite forgetting his former pupillage
under their imperious and pedantick tuition, nor altogether at all times
clearly remembering that now he was quite free, and sui juris; or whether, (as
indeed very often he did,) to be rid of them and their busy intrusions) grant
them very great favors; which he seems to repent of in his Basilicon Doron,
when it was too late;

Such was this advancement of Abbot to the Archbishopric, voic'd and carried
up so high by the Cabal of the Puritans, or Modern Orthodox, who were gratifyed
herein by that good natured King, not without too late repentance, though Abbot
frustrated the expectations of both parties: for when he was got into Gods
Blessing and the warm Sun, and so near the Court, he grew an absolute Courtier,
yet not altogether forgetting his friends and Creators in the height of his
fortunes.

King Charles did not make him, but found him, Archbishop of Canterbury; the
place being for term of life, and both the King and he had too much innocence
to shorten it, before God and nature had put it to an end.

Yet the Archbishop by reason of age, and the many infirmities and diseases of
his mind and body, was very unmeet for Council or Court, being very way-ward,
peevish, morose, and unsociable for the reasons aforesaid.

His Majesty's affairs no more than nature could admit of this vacation,
(occasioned chiefly by his decrepit age and diseases:) it was thought fit
therefore that his place should be supplied by others, of more health and
ability both of mind and body to do his Majesty service.

This prepared the way to Laud's advancement, who then was but a young Cour^
and in no great esteem either with the King or Duke of Buckingham, (though
before the unhappy blow given that Favorite at Portsmouth, he was high in his
favor, as well as his Majesty's, King Charles.

Who, notwithstanding whatever Greg. does all along suggest, was no fool, but
had the most piercing eye and judgment of any man's parts and behavior about
the Court.

And therefore Laud (Doctor of the Laws, yet no Civilian but a Priest,) could
not long at Court be neglected or obscure; being so virtuous, so pious, so wise
a man, that his Majesty could not but discern his Accomplishments fitted for
the greatest conndence of his Prince, and to which he arrived after the death
of the Duke of Buckingham, but not before; and therefore if King Charles his
whole Reign was deformed, it was not by him all the while, (here if I durst, I
had told Greg. hoc est falsum, or restat probandum, or-in phrase of He, he
lies; but I am more modest, at least more wise, out of fear rather than
ingenuity; he makes himself such a terrible Hector, p. 153. and p. 210.) But
certain it is the Duke of Buckingham, whilst he lived, bore all the blame, if
any was due, as well as the shame.

But after his death, what should be done to the man whom the King delights
to honor, but make him chief Favorite! and who more deserving than Laud, who
studied to do both God and his Majesty good service, and was so pious and wise,
as aforesaid?

But envy, envy, (the shadow of greatness, inseparably attending those most who
live in the brightest beams of Royal Bounty,) soon found out this great
Minister of State.

And envy it is, more than miscarriages, (to which all mortal men are subject,)
which either shortens, or miserably disquiets the favorites of Princes; nor
was ever any man therefore known to be a Favorite to two Kings immediately
succeeding one another, but the Duke of Buckingham; which he did owe to
himself, more than his fortune; of which he was a miracle indeed, but a greater
miracle of nature; and seemed to be made for the very nonce, in so incomparable
a complexion of mind and body, which seemed to disagree in nothing but a happy
contention for precedence; the beauty of his large mind seeming to strive with
that of his incomparable body, which should be more amiable and sweetly
ravishing; his prudence and gravity being adorned with a ready wit, and command
of his tongue; which never had a denial of what it craved, even when he was by
resolved and combined impeachments prosecuted in Parliament, where he had more
admirers than friends.

But a wiser than he has told us, who is able to stand against envy? It is
probable the Duke of Buckingham and Archbishop Laud after him, did some
things, as well as the Earl of Strafford, that were not altogether approveable,
or in strict account justifiable: induced thereunto rather by necessities than
any evil disposition of their own.

Nor do men of inferior rank know the reasons of State, and necessity of
affairs, which might plead for Loans and Ship Money too, as our Savior does
for David (in his transgression of the Law, by virtue of a greater Law than
Magna Charta, or the Petition of Right and necessity.) Have you not read what
David did when he was an hungered, and they that were with him, how he entered
into the house of God, and did eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him
to eat, neither for them which were with him?

Nor do these bold men know what are the pressures and urgent straits of a
Kingdom, that cannot stay sometimes, without apparent ruin, the due redress of
a Parliament.

Especially when our wise King Charles could not but foresee, by former
experiences, those heats of passion and sparks of prejudice that by some
incendiaries were likely to be kindled, and threatened those combustions in the
Kingdom, which afterward by sad experience and trials we found too true, and
for very many painful years remedilesly groaned and labored under.

Not but that a Parliament is looked upon by every honest English man, a most
safe as well as acceptable constitution, both for the Prerogative and the
Crown; as much as the peoples just properties and liberties.

Yet at best it is but good Physic, and proves unsuccessful and unhappy for
the body politic, when perpetuated and made a constant food; of which truth we
have in our age a fatal Probatum est.

And only proves that some diseases are with less pain and hazard tolerated,
than irritated by putting the body into a constant course of Physic, in order
to cure: which many times besides the trouble, does sooner and more certainly
hasten that death, which before we did but fear.

And sure I am that whatever is the meaning of Sibthorpianism, Manwaring,
Arminiauism, Montague, Absolute Government, or Loans, or any such frightful
Bugs, (now brought again to scare the people with fears and jealousies,) yet
put together, and at the worst they be no bigger than the little finger, in
comparison of those thicker loins of pressures and grievances, with which to
the death we were oppressed and tyrannized over many years together in pretense
of remedy, and even still thereby our burdens are of nec^ssity become so much
the greater.

But were Archbishop Laud and the Sibthorpians never so much to blame; were
those sores and grievances never so great, by what authority, or to what good
end does this bold Greg. now rip them up again when they are healed and
cicatrized?

His design must be either to create jealousies that his present Majesty or
some great Favorites about him are again about to tread in Sibthorpian steps;
(if this could be proved against him, he deserves to be hanged:)

Or else not satisfied with the indignities his blessed Father and the other
Martyrs suffered, crucifyes them again in Effigy; or as himself expresses it
p. 280. And the detestable sentence and execution of his late Majesty, is
represented again upon the Scaffold.

And thus much for the temper of that Archbishop Abbot, in answer to his
charge against Laud, if it were truly his charge and narrative under his own
hand: as Greg says it was p. 281. And if it was so, what great matter does it
signifye, That an old morose man, peevish by complexion and age, and improved
to a far greater height of malice by the old Leven of modern Orthodoxy,
fermented by his own passions and sufferings, through the loss of his Place at
Court and the Kings favor, his exercise of the Office-Metropolitan being also
suspended, and the profits of the Archbishopric to better use, sequestered;

Occasioned by the intelligence he kept with the factions, and not for refusing
to license a Sermon, (as is suggested,) as improbably as idly, whether by
other men's fictions or his own is not worth the enquiry.

But such a deformed Issue may shame either the Archbishop Abbot, or any body
else, that should pretend to father it; not but that some of its parts are
truly formed, but many of them are monstrous untruths; as if it were needful, I
will demonstrate, and begin at the first three lines.

But Greg. has picked these few that seemed most for his turn out of that,
(which indeed goes under his name, The Narrative of Archbishop Abbot, etc.

This audacious man as boldly calls it so, as if he had stood at his elbow, and
saw him write every syllable, which he must have done, or else he is very
impudent thus to impose upon men, that which he can but guess at, and has as
little ground to build this faith of his upon, as ever any man had, that
declared so audaciously, and confidently, as he does here, that any such
Narrative in Print was another man's handwriting.

The truth is, Greg. his prime Talent lies in modern Orthodoxy; there he is
best read, and there we find this Narrative, etc.

And if he can show me this Narrative any where else than there, (which I defye
him to do;) then will I confess that this Butt-end, (which in his hand he does
so terribly brandish and flourish,) is indeed the Butt-end of an Archbishop;
and when he has done, since it is but the Butt-end of that Archbishop, at best
is but an Abbots opinion, which is now no more credited, nor more Orthodox,
than are the railings of Greg. or other the discontents of modern Orthodox.

You may find it, if you will waste so much time as to read an old Diurnal, for
such stuff is this, composed in a History forsooth, dedicated to Queen Dick,
which was (in style of modern Orthodoxy) Richard by the Grace of God, Protector
of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. Anno Domini 1657.

By your Highness humblest and most obedient Servant,

John Rushworth,

Chief Secretary in the Army, to General Fairfax, and afterward for pious
Declarations penned upon all occurrences for the satisfaction of the people,
upon every new turn or change of Government, by that worthy Gentleman; for such
good services related to, and preferred by Oliver Cromwell and his son Richard.

This terrible dead-doing Tool the Butt-end of an Archbishop, thus brandished
again by Father Grey-beard, for the Good Old Cause, was taken out of that Holy
Arcenal; let him deny it if he dare or can tell how.

I cannot but smile to see this Huffe, buffetting himself with this Butt-end of
an Archbishop; as at other times, he meditates his own ruin, (when I in mercy
and poor pitys sake would step to the man, and stop him, laying violent hands
upon himself,) in several pages of his own book; namely, when he says p. 8. Nor
was there any thing that could more closely import him, than that the race and
family of the Railers should be perpetuated among mankind. And p. 18. I am the
more obliged to repair in my self whatsoever breaches of his (Bishop
Bramhall's) credit, by that additional civility which consecrates the Ashes of
the deceased. And p. 23. For all men pretend a share in Reputation and love not
to see it engrossed and monopoliz'd, and are subject to enquire (as of great
estates suddenly got,) whether he came by all this honestly, or of what credit
the person is that tells the story. And p. 41. He never oils his Hone but that
he may whet his Razor, and that not to shave, but to cut men's throats. And p.
49. Though an ill man cannot by praising confer Honor, nor by reproaching fix
an ignominy, and so they may seem on equal terms; yet there is more in it; for
at the same time that we may imagine what is said by such an Author to be
false, we conceive the contrary to be true. And p. 49. He propagated an
original waspishness, and false Orthodoxy amongst all his followers. And p. 48.
But unluckily, in this fatal year of Seventy two, amongst all the Calamities
that Astrologers foretell, this also has befallen us. And p. 68. Which meeting
with the former fracture in his Cranium, and all the concurrent accidents
already mentioned, has utterly undone him. And so in conclusion his madness
has formed it self into a perfect Lycanthopy. He does so verily believe
himself to be a wolf, that his speech is all turned into howling, yelling and
barking: and if there were any sheep here, you should see him pull out their
throats, and suck their blood. And does so verily believe himself a Jaccal,
that if there were any dead Corpse here interred, you should see the beast
scratch up their graves, and tear them out, to in^omb them again ignominiously
in his nasty Guts. And p. 77. That after they have done or suffered legally and
to the utmost, they must still be subjected to the wand of a Verger, or to the
wanton lash of every Pedant; that they must run the Gantelope, or down with
their breeches as often as he wants the prospect of a more pleasing nudity. And
p. 85. Speaking to the little comfortable importance, (called for variety of
phrase, p. 12. closer importance, Parthenope, whose mother Sir, sells Ale by
the Town wall,) as you love your self, Madam, let him not come near you, he
has been sed all his life with vipers instead of Lampreys, and Scorpions for
Cray-fish; and if at any time he eat Chickens, they had been cramb'd with
spiders, till he has so envenomed his whole substance, that it is much safer to
bed with a Mountebank before he has taken his Antidote. And p. 136. (For I am
weary of noting the stabs he gives himself,) as much as possible I would not
expose the nakedness of any person so eminent formerly in the Church. And p.
139. Perhaps he said so only for evasion, being old excellent at parrying and
fencing. And p. 139. He has face enough to say or unsay any thing, that it is
his privilege, what the School-Divines deny to be even within the power of the
Almighty, to make contradictions true. And p. 155. Whereby you may see with
what Reverence and Duty he uses to speak of his Superiors, and their actions,
when they are not so happy as to please him. And p. 164. But of all his three
bolts, this was the soonest shot, and therefore it is no wonder if he missed
his mark, and took no care where his arrow glanced. But what he says of his
Majesty and his Council. And p. 146. He confounds himself every where in his
reasonings, that you can hardly distinguish which is the whoop, and which is
the holla, and he makes Indentures on each side of the way wheresoever he goes.
And p. 275. But such as you it is, that have always strove by your leasing
(gently good Hec. as you love me,) to keep up a strangeness and
misunderstanding betwixt the King and his people; and all the mischief has
come on it does much lie at your doors.

And whether all the invectives against the whole Reign of King Charles I.
(deformed, (as he says) with Sibthorpianism, absolute Government, the rock on
which we split, the imposition of the English Liturgy, the cause of the
Rebellion, Ceremonies, Arminianism, Montague and Manwaring, libelling the
Reverend Bishops for their worthy cares, sentencing Ministers of State, Privy
Counselors, jeering the present Parliament with being trinkled, and bringing
forth Superfetation of Acts, as if he had a Commission to be chief Censor,
prying into all Offices, and Officers, and condemning all that stand in the way
of M^dern Orthodoxy, and the Good Old Cause and Nonconformists, without mercy
or fear, dead and alive, and all this in seventy two, and with as many
selfcontradictions as impertinences,) can have any other meaning than by such
Leasing to keep up a strangeness and m^sunderstanding betwixt the King and his
people, judge you: Is It not pity but he should have his own wish, p. 187. Only
I could wish there were some severer Laws against such villains, who raise such
false and scandalous reports, etc.

Sure I am he gives himself often enough to his shame the B^stinado, and if
they are not all Butt-ends, yet they are dogged Counter-buffs, with the least
whereof he hits himself a vile box on the ear.

And instead of encountering the enemy, lets fly at all adventure, and the
random shot rencounters his own party, and being overcharged, the Butt-end of
his Gun bumps his own breast, and fells him with the Recoil.

A sad accident; like that, (but much more fatal than that,) which befell an
honest wellmeaning Zealot, our friend and acquaintance, W. S. Who, good man!
conceited of his own Prowess and Gallantry, and taking ^he Alarm at -- The
Contempt of the Clergy, musters up presently all his force, in a Letter to a
Friend, with design to vindicate the Clergy from Contempt, and the fury of that
Charge.

But in his wrath and rage, mistaking his way, and to oblige his friends by the
next Term, makes more haste than good speed; and missing also his Rest in the
height of his Career, coming to the Grapple, fights in the Shock, hand over
head, for the enemy against his own party:

In an Answer, so incongruous to the design, confessing all, asking
forgiveness, and crying for quarter, before the enemy had any thoughts of
hurting him, and all this in language so insipid and ridiculous that he made
the Clergy, (they thank him,) so much the more contemptible, and both himself
and the Clergy the more laughed at:

Producing nothing but a mere black Patch, (aimed indeed against, and clapped on
too upon the face of his adversary, but) only thereby rendering the enemy so
much the more a Beauty, who indeed was lovely enough before.

So that my dear friend, if ever the mad hair-brained humor of Scribbling
possess you, as it has done Greg. and W. S. so that nothing can hold you, but
you must needs come out in Print, tempted by the Dog Star, the Stationer, or
the near approach of the next Term, In a Letter to a friend: let me beg of you,
as you tender your Reputation and Honor, that you take care, not to subscribe
it of all the Letters in the Cross-Row, with those in the Fag-end of it, W. S.

And be sure you put not in the Superscription one syllable of -- The Rehearsal
Transprosed.

Lest thus marked, the Hue and Cry pursue you, upon suspicion of folly, and
selfconceit, for the former; and upon suspicion of folly, self-conceit and
sedition, for the latter: and punish you, as self-condemned by your own gross
self contradictions, for both.

But especially take heed that you have not the least resemblance of Greg. who
does so often with his own hand foil and baffle himself and the cause he
designs to promote.

The man's a Fanatic, and by certain Paroxy^s, as pleases the Planet that
governs him, Lunatic with Modern Orthodoxy, and talks like Oliver's (...), now
in Bedlam, crazed with a notion on that side the head.

Name but Bays, he cries out (like that Hypocondriack that fancied he had
Noah's flood in his belly, and if he pissed, should drown the world,) falls
into a fit, rages and frets, foams and stamps, stares and rants like mad, all
are dead, dead as a Herring, drowned every mothers son, p. 42, 43. in Hungary,
Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden
and all Scotland, and a great part of the Church of England.

Then as is meet, rails at him, calls him a Prodigy, p. 47. a Marvail, a
Prodigious Person, a creature most obnoxious, Hebrew, Jew, Cock Divine,
Cock-wit, Daw-Divine, Spy, Buffoon, a dangerous Fellow, Cut^hroat, Madman, fit
for nothing but Bedlam, and Hogsdon, etc.

Then can any charity believe otherwise but this poor Greg. is crazed? and
cries Holla Bays, Whoop Bays, Holla Bays, Whoop, Whoop; name but Bays and
his fit comes:

Or name but Schism, and it works immediately; as much as the name Cromwell does
upon the mad Porter, who forthwith falls a praising his old master, and talks
of nothing but Crowns and Councils, Scepters and Bishops, and Preshyters; then
rambling into a discourse of Divinity, talks of Superstition, Ceremonies,
Profanation of the Sabbath, Schism, the Cause and the Covenant.

So my Gentleman, when the word Schism is but named, he extolls it to the
skies, or at least says it is no such frightful thing, as the World takes it to
be; take it into your hand, touch it, do, touch it, it will not hurt you; it is
but a Theological Scar-crow, and rather frights than hurts; then like the mad
Porter commends his old Master to the skies, ever since he had the honor of
his acquaintance, when he was a Schoolboy at Eaton; O Mr. Hales of Eaton, how
does Beauty and Majesty like two twins sit in thy large forehead with
admiration?

I should be as mad as he, if I should go about to answer seriously in Divinity
with such a mad-cap, and do no more good of him, than upon the aforesaid
Porter; if I thought he was not past hopes, I would give him a hundred Divines
for his one; the worst of them all of far more learning, and less partiality
and prejudice, than Mr. Hales, without any disparagement or just offense to his
Master, that differ from him upon good reason in every thing that Greg. brings
him to prove in reference to Modern Orthodoxy; all which Mr. Hales recanted
after his conversion.

If I thought any wise man would concern himself, in good earnest, with what so
trivial a pen as his scribles in Divinity, I would lengthen this letter upon
that subject, though I am quite tired already with his Impertinencies,
Contradictions, and Leasings.

A word he taught me, but if he grutches me any thing of his own, I pretend no
propriety in it, he shall have it again, for one thing he says, p. 219. For,
without the sign of the Cross, our Church will not receive any one to Baptism
-- Mr. Greg. This is your Leaseing, if by our Church, you mean the Church of
England.

I know you were better skilled in your Modern Orthodoxy, than the Liturgy,
which gives rules for Private Baptism without the sign of the Cross; and
declares that a Child so baptized, In the Name, etc. is lawfully and
sufficiently baptized; and ought not to be baptized again -- etc. afterward
follows, Then shall not He (the Minister) christen the Child again, etc.

Are not you an Honest, true man, Father Gray-beard? True of hand and tongue,
and have kept your hand from picking at and stealing away the credit and good
name of your betters? Have you kept your tongue from evil-speaking, lying and
slandering? I wish you would confess to the Church of England, if indeed it be
your Church, who it was, whether tempted by the instigation of the Devil, your
own evil heart, or devilish men that hired you to these Leasings.

Hold up thy head, man! there, thou do not use to have too much modesty; come
answer to this in your next Mr. Greg. I had rather hear of your honest
Confession and Contrition, than any more Leasings, by which such as you are,
strive to fill the peoples heads with Proclamations of Ceremonies,
Superstition, put them in fear they cannot come at the Sacraments, the Church
does so rayl it in; making them jealous and fearful with your Arminiansme,
Montagueisme, Manwaringisme, Sibthorpianisme, and such frightful words; that
though they know not the meaning of them more than your Nepotisme, Putanisme,
etc. yet they believe these are some ghastly things, and you do very ill to
scare them.

This is the way to perpetuate and keep up a strangeness and misunderstanding
betwixt the King and his People; for the people are good people, and will hear
reason, if it be spoken; but when such as you hold forth, and represent the
Church of England, in such a frightful Dress, the people cannot find in their
hearts to make love to her; but run from her, like mad, frighted out of their
Wits and Religion too, by such Boutefeaus and Incendiaries.

And all these mischiefs and all these dirty doings do lie at your doors,
cleanse your self of them as well as you can.

As Schoolboys have a Book of Phrases, collected out of the most fluent Latin
Authors, which they bring in to every Theme, and upon all occasions; so Greg.
has here and there, amongst his mad Harangues, a smart expression now and then,
which he and the Virtuoso's at a Club have chewed to a Crambe, and now having
gathered up the scraps, bunch'd them, and bound them together, he dishes them
up in this Book for a Public feast.

But alas Greg. does not consider that one man's meat is another man's poison,
and that which suits one man's temper may kill another; especially in this age,
when so many people, like Mithridates, or the Maid in Pliny, live upon that,
laugh and grow fat with that, that would ruin others.

Perhaps amongst your Crew and Gang, such venomous expressions, as you disgorge
in your Book against the Innocence and good fame of the late King, Archbishop
Laud, by the deformity of the Reign, with absolute Government, Ceremonies, etc.
and perhaps amongst your selves you do securely jeer and scoff at the
Parliament, the Church, Sacraments, Fathers of the Church, and
Privy-Councellors, and great Ministers of State; thinking you speak under the
Rose, and so all goes merrily down.

But I Will assure you these works of darkness, and words that are fit only for
the place of darkness, malicious leasings, and consequently devilish and
venomous words and discourses may not safely come abroad and be vended; though
you pretend never so much mirth and innocence in your design. Apothecaries will
not sell poison to any but those they have great confidence in, not willing for
a little gain to be so much as the remote occasion of mischief, not having
Antidotes in all their Shop prevalent enough to check the malignity and energie
of a little poison.

And truly all your Peccavi's come too late, because no body can believe that
the same tongue does in good earnest, in one breath speak contraries, and blow
hot and cold together at the same time.

Indeed the man that blew his Pottage to make them cold, and blew his fingers
to make them hot, came something near in likeness, to your mouth; but the Story
says, it was at several times, and he made two blasts on it; and two Periods.

But you in one sentence and breath, without stop or comma, talk of a whole
Reign deformed by the best Prince that ever wielded the English Scepter, and
the like of the Archbishop; you outdo all that ever I heard of.

And worse than the cruel Panther, that allures and entices his Prey to come
near him, by sending forth a sweet scent and savor from his mouth, 'till the
silly brutes (thus trepan'd) come within his grasp, and the reach of his bloody
paw.

Your breath is not so entirely perfumed, but has two savours; I wonder any
body that have their senses entire, should be in love with you; and but that
you are incomparable in your own conceit, I wonder you are so much in love with
your self.

And nothing do I admire more, excepting always your own unparalled
confidence, than that any body should admire you for such a tall fellow, and
tough Champion for Modern Orthodoxy, which you so often by your
self-contradictictions betray, as well as therein your own weakness and
infirmities.

Indeed you manage a Cause that is plausible enough (God knows) in these days,
when you strike at the Bishops, who have not at present too many friends, and
they themselves scorning to be grave with a Buffoon; (it is his own phrase) and
having not many that I see to take up the Gantlet in their defense so readily
as my self, though (I confess) with great disadvantage to my own fame.

The Argument I undertake being not so plausible and taking in defending them
now a days, as your jolly opposition and affront; in which particular alone you
have the advantage of me; mine is the better, though yours be the more
acceptable Cause; and this alone makes you to be cried up for a Sampson,
because you smite the Church and Clergy Hip and Thigh, though it be (be not
angry) with the Jaw Bone of an Ass.

Is it not possible there should be true honor and virtue under a Cassock or
Lawn sleeve? Has Holland shirts, Perrywig and light Drugget got the Monopoly of
true Nobility?

As the Noblemen and Gentlemen would be affronted, if the Clergy should despise
them, with your Proverb, Jack Gentleman: so why should not the Reverend Bishops
and others be as much offended, when such a Pick-thank in a whole discourse
seems to cry Jack Clergyman?

The King alone is the Fountain of Honor, and are those streams of honor that
flow from him, more pudled in a Clergy than a Lay-Channel? Does not the man
forget his own Father?

I hate the folly as much as the pride of such Upstarts, that because in their
Pride, Jollity, and Atheism, they would cast contempt on the Clergy; in their
folly they think they may and should cast contempt on the Clergy.

Who in the opinion of Greg. himself, are the fittest to make the best
Politicians in the World, if they keep to their Bibles.

Which none probably does or can better understand, nor any in like probability
better observe; it is true they are men, and subject to frailties, but all men
as much, and in all likelihood more than they.

And now I am upon it, I will but make trial, what virtue there is in Perriwig
Father Gray-beard, above all others, to make a Politician of.

For he often ope's and gapes at Politic Lectures, like an Oyster, against the
coming in of the Tide; it is his very element, and he is either there good, or
no where worth the opening.

I can scarce forbear smiling to my self to see how prettily he sets his face,
and makes up his mouth, with such caution and gravity before he begins to read
to Princes his Politic would-bees.

First, blaming the Ecclesiastical Politician, (he must not be forgotten) for
offering at that which was none of his Province, p. 61. Instructing Princes,
like Sancho, how to govern his Island: And p. 206. He had put all Princes upon
the Rack to stretch them to his dimension: And in another place, I am ashamed,
Mr. Bays, that you put me on talking thus impertinently, for Policy in us is so.

Now think I, we cannot be far off this Politic Lecture, it is either in front
or rear, before or behind, it is hereabouts, look; for Greg. his whole book,
then and there most condemns what he is forthwith about to practice; as
formerly is instanced in the case of railing.

To make the King and Parliament secure, he would lull them asleep with saying,
p. 252. That men are all so weary, that he would be knocked on the head that
should raise the first disturbance of the same nature,. A new war must have,
like a book that would sell, a new Title.

In the front of his Book, you have a strange and unheard of New Title, here he
gives you the reason of it, he resolved there should be something in his Boook
to make it sell.

And what if a man that had a mind to raise a disturbance should give the Good
Old Cause a new Title, and call it the Cause too good, or Modern Orthodoxy, are
not those Titles as new, and as ready made to a man's hand, as the the new Title
to his book, and by the same hand too? this man cannot for his life, but he
must confound himself.

But he that should raise the first disturbance of the same nature would he
knocked on the head: would he so? I do not believe any man likes it so well, as
to be willing to be knocked on the head, except those knocks be fine gentle
knocks, not Scotch Knox, nor Modern Orthodox knocks: they did knock so gingerly
that not any man I know would be so knocked with his good will however.

I suppose by, would be knocked on the head, he means, he ought or should be
knocked in the head; and that is somewhat deeper than on the head; it is as
much as a man's life is worth, to be knocked in the head, but to be knocked on
the head, may be but a Tailors blow, a knock with a Thimble, a Prick-Louse Rap.

But not to play further with his words, the thing means as plain as it can
speak, that the first Rebel that should make disturbance, must needs be knocked
in the head.

Therefore disband your Red and Blue-Coats, you need not fence where there is
no fear; the Modern Orthodox that use to be so busy and indefatigable, are now
('it is very strange, and news you tell us,) weary.

As soon as ever I read this news, thought I to my self, and whispered, this is
all Leasing, the Factions and Modern Orthodox weary? it is impossible.

As they are the Modern Orthodox, so they are the never-to-be-tired modern
Peripateticks: what they that wearied two Kings; and one Queen; Queen
Elizabeth, King James and Kng Charles, now themselves weary?

Are they that would travel as far as Holland, Savoy, Piedm^nt, nay to New
England, rather than not have their wills, now weary?

Are they that are so incessant to this hour in their Cabals, meetings, sending
out Spies and Intelligencers into all Quarters, now on a sudden weary?

Are these modern Pharisees that compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte,
and when he is gained, make him more a child of Hell than he was before, now
weary?

Does the Father of lies walk to and fro through the earth, and like a roaring
Lion seek whom he may devour, and yet is never tired with doing mischief; and
can the children of lies so degenerate? can those evil speakers, liars and
slanderers, (in the French and Greek Languages, Devils,) now be weary and shame
the stock they came of?

I should not believe this fair tale Greg. tells, though I did not by sad
experience know to the contrary: for though I did not live among such men, nor
know the men and their communication, yet I know the nature of the men, the
Devil must be weary of tempting, before such natured men be weary of acting.

If Greg. did but know the boldness, impudence, confederacy, contrivances,
designs of these men so well as I do, he could not with such impertinent and
ridiculous Lullabees, pass his word for the Nonconformists, (how much soever he
loves them,) if his word be any thing worth.

Not that I think truly that they either can or will bite, but thanks to his
Majesty's vigilance, they dare not; the wolves in Ireland assault not, nor
attempt upon any man that is well armed for them, but his nature is
nevertheless as rapacious and wolfish.

Nor can he be a friend to public tranquillity, that by persuading to too much
security, renders all unsafe.

I am sure King Charles I. never gave them an Inch, but they took an Ell, and
found (too late, and to his cost,) how irreconcilable to all gratitude, and
good nature, that sort of men continue, and says in (...).

(To which Book (as Greg. says of the Bible,) whatever Englishman keeps, for
this generation at least, makes the best Politician, without Controversy; and
of that happy and holy Book I Will say,

Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempora chartas
Huic peperere librum saecula nulla parem.)
In one Edition Printed in Octavo 1649. and in page 204. c. 27. to the Prince
of Wales:

I cannot yet learn that Lesson, nor I hope ever will you, that it is safe for
a King to gratify any faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the public interest, and the good of the Community.

I have offered all for Reformation and safety, that in Reason, Honor and
Conscience I can, reserving only what I cannot consent to without an
irreparable injury to my own soul, the Church and my people, and to you also,
as the next and undoubted Heir of my Kingdoms.

Never repose so much upon any man's single counsel, fidelity and discretion in
managing affairs of the first magnitude, (that is, matters of Religion and
Justice,) as to create in your self and others a diffidence of your own
Judgment, which is likely to be always more constant and impartial to the
Interests of your Crown and Kingdom than any man's.

Next beware of exasperaring any factions by the crossness and asperity of some
men's passions, humors or private opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon
the differences in lesser matters which are but the skirts and suburbs of
Religion.

Provided the differences amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws and
Government, or Religion established, as to the essentials of them, such motions
and mincings are intolerable.

Time will d^ssipate all factions, when once the rough horns of private men's
covetous and ambitious designs shall discover themselves; which were at first
wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation and Liberty.

None will be more Loyal and faithful to me and you, than those subjects, who
sensible of their errors and our injuries, will feel in their own soul most
vehement motives to repentance, and earnest d^sires to make some reparations
for their former defects.

Keep you to true principles of Piety, Virtue and Honor, you shall never want
a Kingdom.

And p. 35. c. 7.

But common civility is in vain expected from those that dispute their Loyalty.
And p. 21. c. 4. as swine are to garden and orderly Plantations, so are Tumults
to Parliaments, and Plebeian Concourses to public Councils, turning all to
disorders and sordid confusions.

And p. 201. So order affairs in point of Power that you shall not need to
fear, nor flatter any faction.

For if ever you stand in need of them, or must stand to their courtesy, you
are undone.

The Serpent will devour the Dove: you may never expect less of Loyalty,
Justice or humanity than from those, who engage into religious Rebellion; their
interest is always made Gods; under the colors of Piety, ambitious Policies
march not only with greatest security, but applause, as to the populacy; you
may hear from them Jacob's voice, but you shall feel they have Esau's hands.

These indeed are Politics, fit to be read to wise Princes, that observing the
Sea-marks, they may avoid the fatal consequences, that excellent Prince
experimented to his cost; It is pity goodness should ever prove evil, or that
the Sunshine of Royal Bounty, should the more harden some sorts of men.

Who, like true Sheba's, sons of Belial, that will endure no yoke, no restraint
of Laws, no Reins of Government, grow headstrong, and getting the bit in their
teeth, away they run neck-break over hedge and ditch, till they throw
themselves and their rider both into the ditch.

And then, (not till then,) at their wits end, tired with their own licentious
wantonness, they entreat their rider to get up again and guide them and govern
them.

For indeed the Crown is more beneficial to the people, than to him that wears
it; for he has more cares, more hazards, more perplexities; and yet neither
eats, drinks, nor sleeps better than millions of the people, nay sometimes as
much in debt as any of them.

So that I have sometimes wondered with my self that ever any man who had wit
enough to be a knave, and was knave enough to be an Usurper, should have so
little wit as to wade in blood so deep only to get the pleasures of a Crown.

Which how steady soever it sits on any Kings head, is yet weighty and more
troublesome than gay; and thousands that behold him have less cares and
hazards, and yet wear as good cloths, and eat and drink as well as he, or any
man can; for to swoop like the Gipsie-Queen a dissolved Jewel worth ten
thousand pound for a mornings draught, is not now deemed a Cordial.

And if Ambition and Faction were not Monsters, one would marvel that Greg.
should so disquiet himself with Picques at the Privy Counselors and Bishops:
who by their great places have greater cares and perils, and are to be pitied,
rather than envyed.

And then for him to do all this with Politick-scraps gathered up when let fall
at a Club in the Tavern or Coffee-house, bound up with patches out of Diurnals,
old Parliament and Army Declarations, Mr. Hales of Eaton his account of Schism,
and Rushworth's orts, is intolerable presumption through a ridiculous conceit
of his own abilities by such improvements.

He had hit it, and had more seasonably transcribed Rushworth, if he had given
us a report out of the speech of Mr. Glanvile, a great Lawyer and excellent
Orator, which quadrates the March-Declaration to an inch; in telling us how far
the Prerogative may lawfully entrench upon an Act of Parliament, p. 578. and
579. There is a trust inseparably reposed in the persons of the Kings of
Euglond, but that trust is regulated by Law, etc. Statutes incorporate into the
body of the common Law, over which (with Reverence be it spoken) there is no
trust reposed in the Kings Sovereign Power and Prerogative Royal to enable him
to dispense with them, or to take from his Subjects that Birthright, or
inheritance which they have in their Liberties by virtue of the Common Law, and
of these Statutes.

And I believe there is not a man in England but admires the goodness and
wisdom of his Majesty and his Privy Council in that March Declaration for
Indulgence; as a new experiment, to make trial upon the modern Orthodox once
more, how good so much goodness will make them, who hitherto like clay in the
Sun, have been the more hardened by the Beams of Royal Bounty.

For sad experience has instructed us, that the Headstrong Jade, rides with
the greatest grace, when rein'd in with a Curb.

Yet for all this, as if this Greg. our young Machiavel, had the Law in his own
hand, he tutors our wise Princes, shows the Sea-marks, and reads
Politick-Lectures 12 pages together.

The great design he promotes is to teach his Prince the art of forge-fulness;
not the art of memory, but the art of Gentlemen's memories; by which he means,
(if he have any meaning) a loose, flashy, watery memory, that will hold no
Print, nor retain impression.

And though to help the impression and memory of some things forgot, he
insinuate Sibthorpianism, Manwaringism and Montagueism, and Laudism; yet to
remember that ever there was a Rebellion or harm in Modern Orthodoxy, then p.
253. believe him Kings as they have Royal Understandings, so have Gentlemen's
memories.

Nay, he will not suffer His Majesty, our gracious Sovereign, so much as to
retain any good nature, or gentle impressions of his Father's being murdered;
if he has, Greg. makes him sorfeit his Gentility; he ought to have a
Gentleman's memory.

And is it so indeed good Greg? Cannot a King be Gentile, though he retain his
nature? And cannot he be gentile except he bid defiance to all good nature too?
And can a man retain any good nature, if he quite forget he had a Father and
murdered too? Or if he must be disciplined by you into that forgetfulness, why
should his memory be supplied with those ungrateful Resentments and Impressions
of Sibthorpianism, Manwaringism, absolute Government, the deformity of his
Father's whole Reign?

Indeed Father Gray-beard you are a very hard hearted and cruel Tutour as ever
Prince submitted unto for Pupillage and Instruction.

And why shall not his Majesty keep in memory, (except in Gentleman's memory)
that his Dear Father was murdered? Why do you say? For a great many whyes? J.
O. for one, can tell you a great many: and his friend Greg. can also tell you a
great many wherefores.

Not wherefores only, why the King should not remember that his Father was
murdered; nor only, who plotted, contrived, and were accessories thereunto;
but also wherefore he should look to himself also for fear, and take heed,
special heed of offending those that having been fleshed and bloodi'd already
in the Royal Chase, are the more terrible. This is Gregory's Policy.

Whereas Almighty God teaches Princes, who are Gods on earth, by his own
example, with the froward to show themselves froward, Psalm. 18. 26. and as Job
29. 17. Break the Jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of their Teeth.
The Hebrew word there rendered Jaws, signifies the Grinders, or the Jaw-teeth;
and is an allusion to the practice men use to cursed currs, and mastives that
are man-keen; they break their Teeth, their sharp Grinders; a toothless Dog
bites not much more than a dead dog: as if Almighty God by these things should
say to Princes, Courage! Regum est parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos;
Be not afraid of a Curr-dog or grinning Rebel; knock their teeth out, disarm
them, trust them and hang them; or, as our King's blessed Father says as
aforesaid; If ever you trust them, or must stand to their courtesy, you are
undone.

But comes me Greg. reads quite another Lesson, and instead of breaking the
Teeth of the ungodly, and smiting his enemies upon the check-bone, (as God by
King David's Army did the Rebels in Absalom's Army, Psalm. 3. 7.) he would
persuade the King into a Panick fear, and to flatter the factious rabble, as
unmanly as unwise: Nay, not so much as to remember, but quite forget his
Father, or that he was murdered; and since it is past, so let it go.

This must be the meaning of p. 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249,
250, 251, 252, and 253. or else they are nonsense, and have no meaning in
reference to what he retorts upon the Ecclesiastical Politician, p. 241. He
goes a great way at first setting out for an Instance of this New Divinity and
Policy; and truly so he had need; for such examples are rare in History, wise
Princes were wiser than so; and though he finds one Prince in England, since
Modern Orthodoxy came up, and got the upper hand, Charles I. that had not been
treated so ill, if he had not been so good; yet this supererogating goodness is
seldom sound in story.

The first instance he fetches as far as Rome, and 1700 years ago, (excepting
two months and three days, seven hours, seventeen minutes to a second) in
Augustus Caesar whose Father too was murdered.

Too was murdered? This must relate and can relate only to the King whose
Father too was murdered.

But first I deny that Augustus Caesar's Father was murdered: and that it is
as false as that King Charles I. his whole Reign was deformed.

Now is Greg. gravelled, I feel him at the first step he takes, and knows not
how to go a foot further, except lamely as he goes halting all along.

And if Augustus Caesar's Father was not murdered, though he had never so much
a Gentleman's memory, yet it is nothing to the case in hand.

Augustus Caesar's Father died in his bed, the thread of his life was spun out
as long as it would run naturally; there was neither Ax, nor Gregory, nor
Father Gray-beard, nor Bradshaw, nor Sword, nor Dagger, nor Senate House, nor
Brutus, nor Cassius in the Case.

Why? then says Greg. (I know his refuge) His Uncle was murdered: Oh my
Nuncle! But why does Greg. then say, his Father too was murdered?

This is Greg. his own self, he has heard in a Coffe-house, or a Play-book that
Augustus Caesar succeeded Julius Caesar in the Empire, and so he takes it for
granted he was his Son; and because Julius Caesar was murdered, therefore
Augustus his Father too was murdered.

But Augustus Caesar was not so near a kin to him neither, as Brutus that
stabbed him, who was also his Nephew, and some say more than his Nephew; and
though it was not so commonly known till after his death, yet Caesar's last
words to Brutus, (...), made the credulous world believe that more than
brotherly familiarity, of which before they were only jealous; which was the
reason perhaps that Augustus Caesar his Nephew and Successor was not so much
as appointed by Caesar's last Will and Testament to be his Heir.

The Triumviri sharing the Government amongst them, 'till they had destroyed
Brutus and Cassius, and all the Confederates in that bloody Conspiracy, not
leaving a man alive that had a hand in Caesar's fall.

And what Greg. can make of this, or Augustus Caesar for his purpose, for my
part, I do not know; for let it go so, that Augustus Caesar's Father too was
murdered; then (I also add) his Father's Murderers were killed for that
murder; But either this latter part of the story was not in the Play, or else
Greg. did not stay to the end of it, to hear whether the Comedy (which he
thinks makes for his sport and design) did not end in a Tragedy; namely, the
death and destruction of them that murdered Caesar -- But that did not make
for his purpose; but would have spoiled all, and the King's murderers would
not have thanked him for his Plea.

Because then he must have spoke against them instead of speaking for them; and
if he had spoke the story out, he must have said -- His Father too was
murdered, but his Successors did hang up and destroy those murderers, every
mother's Son. As that King did, Matt. 22. 7. not for murdering his Father, but
a far less fault, the murdering only of his servants; and therefore he
destroyed those murderers and burnt up their City, for an example to all the
King-killers in the Christian World.

I wish Greg. had not named for his purpose this Augustus Caesar, whose Father
too was murdered; and it is ten to one but he has as ill luck in all the rest;
for never did blind Archer more over-shoot himself, than does this Greg. But
now his first Bolt aimed indeed, and designed at the Eccles. Politician, but is
lodged in the gore-blood of the King's murderers; if Greg. loved me never so
dearly, I would not engage on his side; for there is more danger from him than
an Enemy; he has an unlucky hand as ever managed the Modern Orthodoxy.

Yet do not I deny but that Honey licked off a thorn, Wool picked off a hedge,
and Phrases picked out of a Comedy, Diurnal, Hales, Clubs, Rushworth's
Speeches, and Army Declarations are very good things in themselves, and as
useful in compiling some Books, as is Thesaurus Poeticus to help Fancy, both
with matter and words, when a Schoolboy composes a Copy of Verses.

And looks like Gazette; wherein though you find things of grand Importance,
and may sooner come at your Watch or Horse when stolen by the Intelligence it
keeps in all Quarters, than if M^ll Cutpurse her self were alive; yet if you
expect coherence and connection there, you look for what it pretends not unto:

But Mr. Greg. pretends a sailable Book, fitted with a new Title for the nonce;
and yet his Letters are as contradictory as are sometimes those in a Gazette;
you cannot pair them, you cannot sample them, they are of sveral Parishes, and
look ugly, because not alike.

Resembling a Cambridge-Schollar's riding furniture, which though good and not
out at elbowes, yet it is a sorry dress because unsuitable: The whole garb
being diverse to it self, and as different as the Gentlemen of whom they are
borrowed.

Therefore the next time Greg. writes an Apology for Non-conformists and Modern
Orthodoxy, I advise him to take time till he can accoutre himself with his own
store, lest he again contradict himself so often and egregiously, to the hazard
of his same as well as something else.

From Augustus Caesar he skips into France, and makes Rome and Paris, and 1600
years meet together in the turn of a hand; it is well leaped, nevertheless if it
be but for his purpose, i will think it worth his while.

Henry the Fourth of France, and his Predecessor, (that was Hen. III. of
France, if I have not forgot, for it is a long time since I read the story, and
I have not my Monsteur de Serre's now by me, nor is the matter great) Hen. IV.
and Hen. III. his Predecessor were ass^ssinated. Gregory's words p. 241. are --

Or, (to come nearer both to our times and your resemblance of the late War,
which you trumpet always in the ear of His Majesty) had you (meaning the Eccl.
Politician) happened in the time of Hen. IV. should not you have done well in
the Cabinet? No Mr. Bays, you would not have been for their purpose. They took
other measures of Government, and accordingly it succeeded with them. And His
Majesty, whose Genius has much of both of those Princes, and who derives half
of the blood of his veins from the latter, will in all probability not be so
forward to hearken to your advice as to follow their example.

Let any man judge by his words, if Greg. does not intend by all this, that His
Majesty should in the case of His Father's murder, take example at Hen. IV. of
France, and his Cabinet-Counsel, rather than follow the advice of the Eccles.
Politician, His Majesty being so much the more obliged to write after the Copy
of those two Princes, especially his Genius having much of both those Princes,
but to the latter he is a very near Kinsman by the half-blood.

And if this be the meaning of his words, (which I think neither he nor any man
can construe otherwise) let us consider how aptly the Gentleman fits the story
to our King, and the Case of His Father's murder.

If the murderers of Hen. III. and Hen. IV. of France were mercifully dealt
withal, and not prosecuted to the utmost; then indeed, and not otherwise does
it plead at all for the murderers of His Majesty's Father; so that if His
Majesty deal but by them, as his Kinsman Hen. IV. of France, and his
Cabinet-Counsel have left him a glorious Pattern to imitate; then I perceive
there is no great fear but His Majesty may still continue in Father
Gray-beard's good favor.

Hen. III. was stabbed with a dagger, and so was Hen. IV. of France; the former
by Clement a Monk, (either in revenge of the death of the Duke of Guise, and
other the confederates in the League, whom that King having once caught them
in his net, put them to the pot; or whatsoever other bloody motion animated
this cursed Monk to that horrid Deed.)

Hen. IV. his Successor and next Kinsman with much ado, and by the help of his
Protestant Subjects, and our Queen Elizabeth conquered all opposition, and was
happily crowned; but leaving the Protestant Religion wherein he was educated,
but not altogether his affection and kindness to the Protestants, Ravilliack
stabs him to the heart at one blow, as he sat in his Coach, and the Villain
being put upon the Rack, to the very last denled that he had any Consederates
in that bloody assassination, but of his own accord and design alone was moved
thereunto by reading of a Book writ by a Span^sh Jesuit called Mariana.

Both these murderers were tortured, their flesh by piecemeal nip'd off with
red hot pincers, and lastly drawn in pieces with four Horses.

Ravilliack had a Father and a Mother alive, but not the least suspicion of
confederacy with their Son in that fatal stroke could be laid to their charge;
but in detestation of such a monster brought forth into the World, his parents
were for ever banished, and the house wherein the villain was born and brought
forth into the World was pulled down and made a Dunghill unto this day.

This is the truth of the story; if it be not, let Greg. if he can or has
impudence enough, deny it; and if so, then Mr Greg. must either conclude that
his Majesty and Cabinet Counsel are very shallow, and meanly conversant in the
History of his Progenitors and Neighbor Nation, and so believe the groundless
insinuations of this impertinent man; or else he falls upon the party he has
espoused with another terrible but-end and counterbuff, by persuading his
Majesty to follow the example of his Kinsman Hen. IV. of France, and his
Cabinet, and not leave one of our Kingkillers alive; or if there be any on whom
the innocent blood of his Father still calls for vengeance, that he would first
put them upon the Rack, and make them confess who it was besides the Devil and
their own wicked hearts that did instigate them to so horrid a villainy, and
then pinch off their flesh from their bones with burning pincers, and pull
their four quarters asunder with wild horses, and make their names as hateful
as themselves, banish their parents, and make their houses a perpetual dunghill,
in example of Henry IV. of France, and for an everlasting pattern to all
King-killers unto the end of the world.

And this is all that our Nibler at History gets hitherto by his sly
insinuations, and indigested impertinencies in the behalf of his minions.

Now let us proceed and follow him to his next instance, for I am resolved I Will
take a brush with all the Butt-ends in his book, if it be but for curiosity, to
try the metal of this vapouring Huff; as well as to prove what metal his weapon
is made of.

And now stand clear, the next is a nonesuch, a Goliah's Sword, They (Kings)
observe how the Parliament of Poland will be their Kings Tailor, etc.

For which unsufferable affront to his Majesty our Gracious Sovereign, his
Crown and Dignity Hereditary, and not Elective, and at the good will either of
people or Parliament, as is the Polish-Crown, I leave him to be chastised by
those whom it does so highly concern.

Leaving the consideration to their Comments upon this bold intrenchment and
invasion of our Kings Prerogative, and Title to his Crown by a comparison so
odious, as well as false.

And so much the rather do I wave any enlargment upon this, and the rest of his
ridiculous instances, (which would tempt any man alive, if he has any laughter
in him, to laugh and droll upon this foppish Greg. the most impertinent thing
that ever offered to tell a story,) but that I know he must shortly be
disciplined for them by another hand, which (by turning up all, for want of the
Prospect of a more pleasing nudity,) will make us as good sport, with Greg's
following Stories that were Nuts to Mother-midnight.

Go say thy Prayers Greg. and tremble at the rod that is coming upon thee,
except thou think the wisest way, in brief, is some way or other to save the
Hangman a labor, and so be as insensible of the blows that are coming upon
thee, as is thine old Masters head, Bradshaw's or Father Grey-beard's, (your
namesake, as well as Fellow-sinner's) heads, when the Jack-daws sh -- upon
them: and be thankful likewise that thou have escaped my fingers too, whose
Dexterity in flashing, more than any of the former Pedants, to your smart, you
may yet further feel, when you give me far less provocation, than in these idle
instances of your Politic Abilities.

I tell you true, I do not think it was worth your while, to go so far as
France, nay as Italy, for a sample of a King that had a Gentleman's memory, and
could not so much as remember that ever his father was murdered; our
King-killers, for whom you plead so heartily, might have made better escape, if
you had never gone beyond Sea, to find out Kings to be for the murderers of a
King, Royal Advocates, viz. Henry IV. of France, and Augustus Caesar whose
Father too was murdered.

And now am I so weary with following this Wild-goose-chace thus long, that if
I would be knocked on the head, I cannot write one Page more, till I throw my
pen away, and laugh a little at one pretty word: he has many on them, but this
pretty word does so jear the Parliament, and flear in their face for the Act of
Uniformity, and the superfetation of that Act, p. 310. I cannot but admire the
sagacity of his Raillery. It has been observed that whenever his Majesty
has had the most urgent occasions for supply, others of them (Fathers of the
Church) have made it their business to trinkle with the members of the
Parliament, for obstructing it, unless the King would buy it with a new Law
against the Fanatics. And this is that which of late years has caused such a
Superfetation of Acts about the same business.

Modern Orthodoxy still; tooth and nail, fly at King and Parliament; all, dead
and alive, that have a hand, or has had an hand in the Act of Uniformity, that
bane of the Good Old Cause, but quite desperate by the Superfetation-Acts,
about the same business.

But this is no laughing matter, that which does tickle me spite of my teeth,
is the word: the new coined word, by Greg. his own self, minted, is Trinkle;
trinkle with the members of the Parliament; some of the Fathers of the Church,
when his Majesty has had the most urgent occasions for supply, did make it
their busisiness to Trinkle, to trinkle with the Members --

I wish for all that Greg. had not said trinkle, Trinkle? it does so run in my
mind like a new tune, that I cannot write one jot more till I have eased my
hypochondriack sides, and laughed at this same Trinkle a little, with my little
Droll:

A Mistress I lately made love to, only for the sake of her dress, it is so much
in fashion, and looks prettily;

But I never entertain her above half an hour at a time, having better employ,
and always after dinner;

And that is the reason my Minerva is Crassa, and my wit so gross; yet it is but
little neither for its age;

For which cause my little Mistress Droll does not much care for me, for fear I
should get nothing but a race of Pigmies, and therefore coy, and seldom comes
at me.

Her Iodgings are in the Middle Temple, there she keeps with the ingenuous
Hudibras; and in good earnest I think she loves him above all English men.

Holla! nine Sisters! you! Clio,
Melp. Thal. and the rest! come hither, Ho!
But stay, of late you're grown so common,
Send little Droll, your waiting woman;
You get the Hiss, but She the Hum:
Droll then, my pretty Houswife, Come.
What is it? (if thou be Oedipus,)
To Trinkle Members of the House?
Come, scratch thy noddle Girl, and guess:
Riddle me, riddle me what it is.
To trinkle members, is meant here,
To round the members in the ear;
No, no; for they have thrown off their Round Heads,
And now got Perukes, and more sound beads.
To trinkle members is perhaps,
To cure the members that have Claps:
Yet now that cannot be meant here,
For Harry Martin sits not there.
To trinkle members, then must be
Some new, new term of Alchymie;
And does in phrase of Virtuoso,
Speak Royal Aid, supply, or so, so:
Then trinkle members is get Glasses,
Limbecks, Charcoal, Stills, Furnaces,
(To crock your faces be not sorry)
Turn the house to a Laboratory:
Bring Luna, Venus, Quicksilver,
Mars, Saturn, Sol and Jupiter;
Sulphur, Saltpeter and Petrol,
Bole-Armonack and Vitriol,
Ceruse, Minium and Red-Oker,
Pitch, Chalk, Ars'nick and Synoper,
Alum, and Salt, and Antimony;
(To find the Mine where does lie Money:)
Casting off Caput mortuum,
Try for the Stone, if it will come:
So trinkle members, as I Have heard,
Is nothing else but what I feared.
Fire the House, with honest Fellows,
Trinkle the members, blow the Bellows.
Thus trinkle the members, (as I am told,)
Is turn the members into Gold;
And so those Bishops were Midas's,
And some of the members golden Asses.
Or, trinkle members, is, Get on,
Hey, for Superfetation!
These two last senses the meaning is,
Or, Trinkles is nonsense, I wis.
And Greg. had better far been hanged,
Than thus with lasting Droll be banged.
And if Greg. takes it in Dudgeon, that I thus set my little Droll upon him,
and soil him; let him the next time bring either better weapons, skill and
strength; or more humility, submission and manners.

Lest she that has now banged him in Meter, give him the next time no more
Quarter than the old Irish Rimes do their Raise.

But indeed it would be better on all hands, if he would keep him quiet, and
within doors; and not, (as now) so weakly and and wickedly Rhodomantade for a
baffled cause.

By challenging his Betters, whether dead or alive, to come if they dare;
whether King or Parliament; Fathers of the Church, or Privy Counselors; to
play the prize over again once more, at the same old weapons, (jealousies and
fears, vile aspersions, crying, down with the evil Counselors, and the
Liturgy,) to fight for Reformation, Liberty, Indulgence, modern Orthodoxy and
the Covenant.

Thus far I thought the design of the man was to fight neither with small nor
great but only with the King and Parliament.

But now his hand's in, he will play at small games rather than sit out, if it be
but for l^oksake, and to that purpose, in the next page 311. makes one step to
the Ordinary.

Have you never a little Clergyman here, for a Gentleman to play with? never a
Droll, or boon companion with a Cassock on? that forgetting his serious office,
will make a Gentleman merry, and rather than fail, with a Joque upon Scriptures
make a little Play? that I may pass upon him once or twice: and with a lucky
hit, (or as he phrases it, p. 312. with an unlucky Repartee,) jear the Parson,
make him a scorn, a tail and contempt to the people.

His words there are; But his, (the Eccles-Politician's) zeal spends it self
against the Atheists, because they use to jear Parsons. That they may do, and
no Atheists neither. For really, while Clergymen will, having so serious an
office, play the Drolls and Boon Companions, and make merry with the
Scriptures, not only among themselves, (who neither having Perukes on their
heads, nor Swingers, and Repartees at their tongues end cannot possibly be
Gentlemen) but in Gentlemen's company, it is impossible but that they should meet
with, at least, (if not a swinger and a rapper two or three, yet) an unlucky
Repariee (oh! I thought it would come) sometimes, and grow by degrees to be a
tale and contempt to the people: (or as it is in the Original Our people,
namely, the modern Orthodox do make themselves a tail of an old Orthodox
Divine.

And (p. 314.) I know not by what fate every day one or other of the Clergy
does, or says, some so ridiculous or foolish thing, or some so pretty accident
befalls them, that (in our Authors words) a man must be very splenetick that can
refrain from laughter, (it should have been quite contrary, A man must not be
very splenetick that can refrain from laughter, for Splen ridet -- It is the
seat of laughter, always while you live, so much spleen, so much laugh.)

But it would make a man laugh spite of his teeth: (though he had scarce any
laugh to spare) at what? To see how every day one or other of the Clergy does
or says, or some accident befalls him, that a body cannot c^use but laugh.

Thus the Tassil-gentle, once upon the wing, for lack of a Heron, or some noble
prey, rather than fail, makes a stoop at a Jack-daw, or a Mag-pye.

It Is a merry world with Greg. he says, every day some one or other of the
Clergy (either by word, or deed done by him, or done upon him) is as good to
Greg. as Jack-pudding himself, or Wild, or Merry Andrew to make him laugh.

When will it come to my turn (think I) to wait, and make the Gentleman sport? I
am afraid he will not like my Droll, I shall never please him; or if he do
laugh, I shall, with some unlucky repartee, make him laugh but on one side of
his mouth.

Let me see; give me mine Almanac: since that Greg. has his every day sport
(and laughing, and jesting at one or other of the Clergy) How long will it be
before it comes to my turn?

For you know, my dear friend, Father-gray-beard will find no great comfort in
me, exc^pt to laugh at my Cassock and Girdle; but let him and all the Virtuosos
in England laugh how they will, whether with open mouth, or in their sleeves;
they can never be able to laugh me out of my Coat.

Indeed I am none of these merry Greeks; I can neither pergraecari, nor laugh
now; I Am not in the humor; they only can best laugh that win.

But I must be serious, and mind the great business in hand, to see when it
will come to my turn to wait upon Father-grey beard, as one of the Clergy to
make him laugh.

Let Us count. Every day? How many days is there in a year? Ask poor Robin.

According to the Julian account 365 days. Fanatic Calender 366 days, for
there is a mystery in 66.


Well then; 366 days in a year, and above 1^000 Parishes in England; of which I
have but just four Parishes, neither more nor less. How long then will it be
before my turn comes for one or other of these four Parishes to make sport for
Greg. and make him laugh, who is not one day without the company of one or
other Chaplain (new as the day) to say grace for him, and make him laugh? At a
venture, I Will say, it will not come to my turn (to tickle and trinkle him till
he laugh again) above once a year, and to the most of the Clergy (who have but
one Parish) once in four years.

Now what great Marvail is all this, in reproach to the Clergy, that every one
or other of them, (some once a year, and some of them (of the most wary and
poorer sort, that have but one Living, and that scarcely a Living neither) once
in four pears) does or says, or at least some accident befalls him or them,
that a merry man and full of spleen (sure he means a Phanatick) cannot hold
from laughing?

Nay, if there were a whole thousand of Clergymen so ridiculous, that once in
a year, or at least once in four years, did do such a ridiculous action, or
else spoke such a ridiculous word, or (at least) some gave him a twitch by the
Girdle, or some other sad accident befell him, that might make a Gentleman laugh;

Why are all the rest of the eleven thousand Clergymen thereby any more
blemished and made contemptible, than were the eleven Apostles for one Judas?

Or, than all, All the Lords, Parliament Men, Gentlemen and Tradesmen, because
a certain Lord, (he shall be nameless) and a certain Parliament Man, (I name
none) or a certain Gentleman, and also fourthly, and lastly, a certain Citizen,
that either did or said, or else some accident befell him or them, or at least
befell the wife of him, or one of them, so ludicrously and ridiculously; that a
man (merrily disposed) could not but laugh, as if he had seen a pair of Horns
upon the head of him, or them, or one of them, (a sad accident!) or, that a
certain Lord, Parliament Man, Gentleman (I forgot to say the Knight) or Citizen
with his Perywig off; either plucked off, or struck off, or box'd off, or
fourthly and lastly (by some other sad accident) fallen off.

Now what a blot in the Scutcheon would this be, to all the Lords, Parliament
men, Gentlemen and Citizens in England? if Greg. was their Adversary, or should
come to be Garter King at Arms?

Oh! yes, a very great blot and blurr to Honor and Reputation; of which the
Gentlemen of England are so tender, that it is two to one, if Greg. had not ten
thousand Gloves sent him, all left handed; if he had dared thus to confront
persons of Quality, and men of Honor.

But to put the affront upon the Clergy, great and small, poor and rich, long
and short Gowns, Lawn Sleeves, or no Sleeves, Cassocks silk or Cassocks
threadbare, from the Ordinary, to the Rector, Vicar or poor Curate, from the
silk Girdle with four Livings, to the worsted Girdle with poor one Living, it is
all one to Greg.

He dares all, slights all, jears all, nay huffs, and struts, stands a tip-toe,
and looks big; shakes his Perywig, and stamps, scolds, rails, swells, frets,
and rages like a professed Hec. at all of them, as a pack of puny Gown-men, a
Pen and Ink-horn-crew, a sort of spiritless and cowhearted milk-sops, dastards
and white-livers, and dare not send a Gentleman the length of their sword.

Excepting this, there is nothing tends to the contempt of the Clergy in his
whole relation and invectives, any more than what, changing the name, may with
as much ease and unavoidably make a thrust at Reputation of Lord, Parliament
man, Gentleman or Citizen.

Some one or other of the Clergy, nay a thousand of them may be black; and yet
both the Churchmen and the Church continue comely.

I wish indeed, with all my heart, that all the whole company of Divines in
England, were a Divine company: I wish that the Clergy, and all other men, (of
what quality soever) were without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; that
might tempt either a light heart to laugh, or a good heart to weep.

But though I so pray, I have no cause to believe it will be so; or any great
ground for hope that it ever shall be so, whilst we are mortal, although Modern
Orthodoxy and Hugh Peter should be rediviv'd.

The Modern Orthodox! Oh! there is your man!

Iste regit dictis animos --
-- Nec long scilicet Hosts
Quaerendi nobis, circumstant undique muros.
These are the men that can make

Candida de nigris and de candentibus atra.
(I Will fit you for ends of verse; and I Will use them as I list, and when I list,
for all you, Father-gray-beard.)

Greg. tells us not of one Daw-Divine amongst the Modern Orthodox (no, he says,
that if he can do them no good, he is resolved, he will do them no harm) nor
tells us of one Buffoon, or mad Priest amongst them; not one Cock-wit, Hugh
Peter's, J. O. Smec. or Cock-Divine, etc.

Thus, Asinus scalpat asinum.
The treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously, yea, the treacherous dealers
have dealt very treacherously.

But though there be not one of the Modern Orthodox (that pretend to fear God)
who does truly honor the King:

Yet I wish (if wishes would do) that there were not one of the old Orthodox
Divines (who truly honor the King) but would also truly fear God.

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Which I english thus:
Great Doctors sins (when Doctors fall)
Just like their Robes, are scarlet All.
Not but that I think, that evil Ministers, if men of Parts, may possibly
minister some good; a cracked Bell may serve to ring others to Church, though it
self must be cast into the fire; or, like Noah's Carpenters, who made a shift to
build an Ark of Salvation for Noah and his Family, though themselves were
drowned.

A dull whet-stone may serve to set an edge upon a knife; and the life-less Sun
does yet enliven other Creatures; and (in this sense) denies the old Axiom,
Nil dat quod non habet; speaking, like the Magick-head of Brass, with honest
words; like the Devil in Samuels Cassock, 1 Samuel 28. 14. And the weeds that may
now annoy the Churches Garden, may yet prove medicinable, virtute officii,
though not virtutis officio.

Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, (as our Richard the Third) were good Emperors,
though bad men; and it is possible bad men may yet sometimes be good Preachers:

Yet we may say, as of weeds, they do more harm than good in the Garden of God,
they make the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, and stain the Surplice they
wear.

Being the Churches Opprobrium, Romans 2. 23, 24. the scandal of their Profession
and high Calling, putting Religion to the Blush.

For when we compare their profane lives, with those of the good Apostles,
whom they succeed; we may say as that Painter replied to a Cardinal (who was
angry with him for painting the faces of St. Peter and St. Paul so red) I do
it, says he, for the very nonce, that they may be thought to blush at the
lives of their Successors.

He was in the right on it, that of old complained, that formerly the Church had
wooden Chalices and golden Ministers; but now, says he, we have golden
Chalices and wooden Ministers. Such Drones, so they get the Honey, care not who
labor, or under what discouragements they labor, that is work for the poor Be.

Thus Damasus, (the Scholar to St. Hierom) stepped up into the Infallible Chair,
whilst poor St. Hierom ended his days in a Cell at Bethlehem.

Yet it is more true Honor, to deserve Honor and want it, than by Simony or
smock Simony to bluster in swelling Titles without merit. Cato had rather men
should question why he had no statues erected in honor of his great worth,
than why he had any?

True Piety and Virtue is vera nobilitas, its own ornament; and needs not the
varnish of dear-bought Heraldry to set it off.

And if true Piety be required in any man, much more in a Clergyman, whose
escapes (like a City upon a Hill, and the ointment of the right hand) cannot be
hid, especially in these times, when men watch for advantage against them, and
like the Devils rejoice in iniquity.

A little spot is seen in white, in a Swan, not so in Swine; fine Lawn is
sooner stained than course Canvas; every little flaw spoils a Diamond.

The people are affected opere more than ore, exemplis plus quam verbis, more
with Examples than Precepts; more with deeds than words, except they be very
flattering words, and pronounced by such glozing Parasites, as will lick up the
peoples spittle, in hopes of gain or fame: humoring them to the life, but to
their own and the peoples everlasting death; like Demas, that forsook St. Paul,
to be further preferred to the favor of the rabble, and in the Idol Temple at
Thessalonica.

They therefore that tread in high places, had need look to their steps, that
they walk uprightly, especially when they have many followers and dependents;
lest they be accessory to other men's fall, as well as principally to their own.

As the due place of the Clergy sets them above many others, Heb. 13. 17. 1
These. 5. 12. so should they be more eminent than others in Learning and Piety;
Gods high Priest of old had Pomegranates for smell, as well as Bells for sound.

King Solomon the Preacher call, himself Koheloth, the Preacheress, of the
feminine gender; and Preachers are called wisdoms Maids, Prove 9. 3. And the
Apostles are called Joh. 3. 29. Christ's Nymphs, to teach the Clergy purity, as
Virgins.

The longer their Gowns and Robes are, the more apt to contract dirt, and
therefore the more carefully to be holden up; lewdness in a Virgin is
insufferable.

Epicurism and Libertinism prevailed in the World, not for the goodness of the
Doctrine, but because of the sober and austere life of the Doctor that brought
it, Epicurus.

And I am confident that rebellion and schism (which is factions libertinism)
had never prevailed so far in the hearts of the people of England, against so
righteous a King and Laws; but for the austerity of many of the most vile
incendiaries, and the looseness and remissness of others, who went not so
steddily, though walking upon better ground.

Thus you see, my friend, I am not possessed with a spirit of contradiction,
right or wrong to oppose all that Greg. does say; I can be content to accept
truth, even when it comes from the father of lies: and all I have now writ
toyou, upon this occasion given me by Greg. is only out of my hearty well
wishes to the Clergy, that the enemy (by standing on their ground) may have no
advantage over them; for we are not ignorant of his devices; endeavoring to
foyl, and always twitting a good cause, where he finds the least resistance and
defense.

Though in the greatest latitude of Charity, no man can imagine that
Father-Gray-beard exposes the looseness of any of the Clergy, for any love he
has to a more strict conversation, either in himself or them.

That which is most admirable in the man is the pregnancy of his fancy in only
one Art; to wit, the superfetation of wit in all the kinds of railing; the
worst Butter-whore is to seek, and may well go to school to Trinkles, he and
she both being so sertile, sure the brood they engender will all be Marvelous
railers.

With what exuberancy of style and variety of invectives does he prosecute the
Ecclesiastical Politician, Bishop Bramhall, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Sparrow,
Bishop Andrews deceased, Arch bishop Laud deceased, King Charles deceased; with
many sinister reflections upon his gracious Majesty and this happy Parliament?

How falsely does he charge the Church of England, when he says it admits none
to Baptism without the sign of the Cross? whereas the sign of the Cross is not
the Cross in Baptism by her Constitutions: But the Cross after Baptism, when
the Godfathers and Godmothers vouch for the visibility of the Child's
profession and education in Christ's Religion; and is a practice as ancient as
innocent amongst Christians, who, being scofft by the Heathens for believing in
Christ, crucified on a Cross, they did ever since the Apostles time thereby
testify, and openly, and courageously justify to the World, that they were no
Gnostics, but like St. Paul, not ashamed of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And whereas he makes it such a horrid thing to keep men from the other
Sacrament of Christ, viz. the Lords Supper, because they will not kneel and
stoop to a Ceremony; let him know they do justly and warrantably in so doing,
granting there is such an Humane Law, and Ordinance for the same: which ought
to be, lest men left to their liberty, some would out of novelty, singularity
or capriciousness, loll, or lie upon the ground, in unseemly, if not in
immodest postures, and consequently tempt some to abhor the offering of the
Lord.

And whether we stand, or keep walking all the time, as many Calvinists do, or
sit, as do some other Calvinists, or kneel, as do the English Protestants, one
is as warrantable as the other, and all alike; and all unlike to the posture of
our Savior at the Institution of it; if he leaned his head upon St. John's
Breast, as he did at Supper; which yet cannot be proved, that that posture of
Discumbency was his posture at the celebration of this Sacrament.

But much more credit had it been to Trinkles, and much more good had he done
in his generation, if instead of hollaing and whooping against the
Ecclesiastical Politician, he had been hollaing and whooping his Dogs, his
Hogs, his Geese, or his Sheep; and leave discourses of Divinity and Policy, and
censures upon the Doctrine and Fathers of our Church, King and Parliament, to
men of greater abilities, and more modesty; greater reading, and better parts:
Or, if his antipathy be great (as it seems to be) to all Clergywen, forgetting
his Father; let him, concerning Sacraments, learn of that almost matchless Pen
of Sir William Morris, in his Coena quasi (...), by which like a true English
Gentleman, and not an upstart Virtuoso, he has gained a more lasting and
glorious name, than a Kingdom could have given him without such
accomplishments; and as much honor by every page of that his Book, as
Father-gray-beard has got dishonor by his: And that is enough in all
conscience, in the judgment of all Learned men, always excepted the Modern
Orthodox, who I know would be angry, to be excluded quite from being thought
(at least) to be Learned men; though the truly Learned men of the world, by
long expectation to see some of their Learning in their works or words, are now
grown hopeless, and despair of it, it is so long a coming, a deaf man would be
glad to hear it, as much as a blind mind would be glad to see it; chiefly,
because their Learning consists in sounds and tones, cantings, groanings,
noise, clamours and whinings, which would be convenient for a deaf man to hear:
And likewise in thumping the Pulpit, and there traversing all the whole
postures of a Master of Fence, and has frighted some (that used to sit near the
Pulpit) from their feats, being so often menaced with visage grim and fierce,
and Bible heaved up, lest at last they should be knocked on the head, with
Geneva and Knox.

And truly at this taking Oratory they are old excellent, and for this alone
cried up and followed by the rabble, in as great multitudes as Jack-pudding
himself has about him at a Fair.

And though I know not one knowing man of Quality in England, that is a
Phanatick, (except upon design, as a crafty Mountebank companies, and plays
the fool with his own Jack,) so the rabble and multitude are generally as much
pleased with one of these Phanatick Jack-puddings, and part with their moneys
as freely to them, and flock about them in droves, as great and numerous about
them, as about Merry Andrew or Poet Wild.

And they will follow this foolery, till their pocket's emptied and picked pretty
often, and the jest grow stale, (as indeed it is very sour already to all
understanding men and women;) and though they did flock hand over head with
their Plate, Thimbles, Bodkins, Horse, Arms, Spoons, Gold rings and Beakers, to
those Jack-Puddings in the late times, Hugh Peter's, and the rest, preaching
upon Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz -- as if they were afraid the Devil would take
the hindmost; yet it would not be so taking now, as then, except the Hocus's
devise some new Antic Tricks, (fools and children being delighted only in
change and novelty) though the Text, Curse ye Meroz -- will serve still now for
the feat as well as ever it did, when occasion serves.

Though to all but Fools and Knaves, it is such a Text for Loyalty and
Allegiance, such a Text for the King and Cavaleers; that Almighty God has not
furnished us with such another in the whole Bible:

Yet these villains could turn it to the quite contrary sense, wresting the
holy word of God by their Interpretation, as blasphemously as atheistically;
for they were not all of them so besotted, but they could not but know that
they did lie to the Holy Ghost.

I confess indeed there are abundance of Texts, besides the fifth Commandment,
that plead for Allegiance and Loyalty, but none like this of Curse ye Meroz --

Other Texts require us not to think evil, nor speak evil of Dignities, much
more not to entreat them evilly; For who can lift up his hand against the
Lord's Anointed and be guiltless? Though the Lord's Anointed be as wicked as
Nero or Saul, and have a Devil in him as King Saul had; yet we must not be so
devilish as to lift up our hands against him. David, that did not cut off King
Readiness head, yet his heart smote him, and his conscience smote him for cutting
off Readiness skirt.

But this Text -- Curse ye Meroz -- denounces a heavy Curse -- not only as
other Texts do for rebelling against the King and taking up arms against him,
and sending in money and plate to the Rebels to comfort the hearts and bowels
of Traitors; --

But here they are by the Angel of the Lord accursed, that like Meroz sit at
home, and will neither come nor send in their Horse and Arms, and Moneys to the
help of the Chief Magistrate and Chief Judge of the Land, as Deborah then was;
and Meroz was accursed by the Angel of the Lord for not coming to help her
against her mighty enemies: Where note too, that the helping thus the Chief
Magistrate, (as Deborah was) is called helping of God, or the help of the Lord.

No man that has his wits about him, or has any sober sense, enough to keep him
from slavering, can deny this meaning I put upon it; and let Greg. and all the
Modern Orthodox, if they dare, offer at any other Interpretation, or mitigate
the force of this sense I put upon it if they can; and they are daring enough
even now, as well as formerly, not only as T. G. and R. B. upon that Text,
Touch not mine Anointed, but as many others of them, and Greg. amongst the rest
does, p. 120. upon that Text, Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

Which Text because the Eccles. Politician interprets it, Rebellion against the
King -- Greg. says (for fear he would be knocked on the head, if he should deny
it) he does allow him that interpretation;

Nevertheless (he say there) that Text of Scripture will scarce admit it. And
though we know by that what true affection he bears to the King, (against whom
who rebels, rebels against God; We have sinned against Moses and against thee,
say the People; for the sin of Mutiny and Rebellion immediately against Moses
is acknowledged Rebellion against God) so that that evasion will ease the
tender consciences of no Rebels, but such of the Modern Orthodox, like Father
Gray-beard, that thus mince it: as R. B. and J. O. did Romans 13. 2. making
damned in that Text sound more comfortably.

But let J. O. and R. B. that writ Oliver's Maxims of Policy and damnable
Treason, and the poison to the Antidote of his Saints Everlasting Rest;
together with all the Modern Orthodox, and your self (in the first place I
should have said) Mr. Greg. alleviate and take off the weight of this
interpretation of Curse ye Meroz -- which I impose upon you, and all of you put
together have not Art enough to shake it off; Though thus you are bereaved of
your Darling-Text, that sent so many poor souls to the Devil, so many thousands
to an untimely and desperate end, and so many millions of blood and treasure
cast away and lost by your leasings and lies told so speciously upon this Text.

I know I had better have stirred in a Hornets nest, than thus to fret and
anger the Modern Orthodox, the Leven of whose Religion makes them waspish,
peevish, touchy, clamorous, and malicious slanderers and backbiters; But I am
as much above the reach of their malice, as above their low and base
Principles, and unmanlike as well as ignoble and effeminate Practices.

Answering a man's Arguments with a Libel upon his Person, and clapping upon
him such a beastly character, (as did the Heathens when they arrayed the
Christians in Bearskins) on purpose to set their dogs at them; according to
their keeness either to bite or bark.

Let them oppose the strength of my Arguments and reasonings with answerable
skill and force, and then the danger is over as soon as it appears, though the
Cabala club for the shot; as the whole Assembly of Divines did six years
together with joint and united forces, to make only at last a Catechism for
little children, when Ball's Catechism new printed had done the feat much
better.

These are brave fellows, for whose sakes the Government and Laws must give
place, and bow which way they please.

I know wise men know them well enough, but because some look upon these
Demagogues and Incendiaries, as the great Lights and Luminaries against
Ignorance and Atheism, (as Greg. suggests, p. 313.) i will but draw the picture
of one of them in the pulpit, and barely represent the words that a thousand
witnesses yet alive are ready to depose unto, as the very language of the
Pulpit, of Hugh Peter's particularly, when they gulled the people of their
souls, bodies, money, arms and plate, by their damnable doctrine from that
blessed Text, Judge. 5. 23. -- Curse ye Meroz. --

It had been happy for England, the King, Parliament, people and themselves
too, if they never had preached, nor ever should be suffered to preach on any
other Text, than Matt. 7. 12.

And because their Pulpit Buffonery on so sacred a Text, as -- Curse ye Meroz
-- was all drolling stuff, I have suffered my Muse to make use of her Rhyme,
but not her Fancy in this Pourtraicture; in which I can plead no propriety
other than the Chronologer does in the villainies of Wat Tyler or Jack Straw,
the bare Historical relation.

I neither have nor can claim any right or share to this representation and
interpretation of that sacred Text, nor this following Se^mon of Hugh Peter's
thereupon, more than he that writ Sermon-notes after him, to which I have added
only the Rhyme, and abridg'd Hugh Peter's idle Tautologies and some slovenly as
well as prophaner expressions, unworthy my pen.

The Historical relation and dress is mine own, but the Buffoonery is well
known to be the Pulpit stuff of Hugh Peter's in many Congregations, thwack'd
full all the Kingdom over, to listen to that profane Hocus, and paid him well
for his pains.

They shall have it therefore as freely as ever it was mine, they have bought
it and paid dear for it, and therefore do I give it them, and put it in print
for them, that keeping it by them, they may yet have something for all the
Plate, Thimbles and Bodkins, the poor fools gave him with such a liberal hand;
I am sure I deserve more for representing it in Droll; but they will be far enough
before they will give me so much as one silver spoon for my pains, or perhaps so
much as thanks, which is all I look for or need (I thank God) though my design
is purely for their good, and to show them their folly and madness in so
desperate a cause, to throw away their estates, body, and soul for such
foppery, as

Hugh Peters's Sermon upon Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz -- Represented, like it
self, in this Drolling Pulpit-stuff.
HId in these words, it plain appears,
Lie men and arms, against Cavaliers:
I see them, clear as any thing,
Both Foot and Horse, against the King:
Couchant, I grant, Perdue they lie;
Nor seen indeed by Carnal eye;
Because they lie in Ambuscade;
But ready are for a Parade:
Armed Cap-a-pee; and One and All,
To come when we do beat a Call.
Drum-Major I, on Pulpit Drum,
Am therefore now, beloved, come,
With Bible in Geneva Print,
To turn up All, this Text has in it.
In which two Parts, at least, I c^unt,
Here Is Gerazim, there is Ebal Mount:
Here lies the Blessing, there the Curse:
Take you the better part; the worse
Is good enough for Cavaliers;
And such as dare not show their ears,
As Roundheads do, in good Old Cause,
For Liberty, Religion, Laws:
For which, who dies, is cursed never,
From which, who flies, is cursed ever.
For which, who dies, is blessed ever,
From which, who flies, is blessed never.
Since I was with you last, I Have been,
To tell you Truth, in Hell and Heaven:
You Will say perhaps, it is a great way,
Yet to the first, it is a neat way;
And to be found out very easy,
And down-hill all way to it, an't please ye:
Nor is it far off, ye may come to it
In one day, though you go on foot:
And Barefoot, without shoes or hose.
Of all days in the week, I chose
The Sabbath (taught by Master Gurney;)
To speed the better in my Journey:
For one may preach, and cant, and pray;
Yet never be out of the way:
When I came there, who (do you think)
I spied, as I stood at Pit's brink?
Except the Cavaliers, not one:
And only one Committee-man,
With Sequestrators three, at the door;
Only condemned for being poor,
And ba^king of a Bishop's land,
Sentenced for ever there to stand.
My foot stood just at brink of pit,
A little more I Would been in it:
Truly I durst not come too near,
As I good reason had to fear:
Long Prayers there are no assistance,
I therefore still did keep my distance:
And loath to stay, the fiends to shun
Like H^re before the Hounds, I run,
And I, though fat, away did hie,
To see what I in Heaven could spy.
And to that purpose I did gather
In Arabs a great Phoenix feather
To fly withal, a pretty thing,
Daedalus never imp'd such a wing;
Resolving with my self to fly
Above the Clouds, and starry sky;
Hoping the better to get in,
Because my namesake is in Heaven,
St. Peter at the door: yet I,
Thinking on it better, (^th to fly
So high a Pitch) had cause to fear
I never should find entrance there,
On that acount (but was to blame)
Peter was not my Christian name.
Besides, I feared St. Peter should
Owe me a Grudge, because I would
Often (for which I now am vexed)
Make a holdsally from my Text
Against the Pope, who is allied
To Peter by the surer side.
Fearing success, and loath to climb,
I put off 'till some other time
The Journey: I desisting then
Can tell you no great News from Heaven:
Therefore I Will keep me to my Text,
That with some d^ubts is much perplexed;
But I Will resolve All out of hand,
And first, in order as they stand,
Curse ye Meroz -- What is Meroz?
Some Infidel will not come near us,
Nor to us will Horse and Arms bring,
But rather send them to the King,
And go himself, and men to boot;
But for the Cause not stir one foot.
This is that Cursed Meroz, that
To the Parliament will send no Plate,
But from us if he can will lock it,
And keep his money in his Pocket.
So much for that. Another word
There is to clear: -- Help of the Lord.
Help of the Lord! What Is that? Lord Bishop?
Or House of Lords? Not so, I hope:
Nor Lord Newcastle, nor Lord Goring;
(With whom the wicked go a whoring;)
Help of the Lord, is, One and All
Help the Lord Essex, General.
But that is not All, for moneys are
The Nerves and Sinews too of War;
For Powder must be had for Gun;
(We had as good else never begun;)
If the Red-coats have not their Pay,
They Will from their Colors run away;
Nor will they willing be to die:
Nay, and perhaps may mutiny
For want of Pay, where are we then?
We may go hang our selves for men,
Except we money have. The Gold
Must here be found; as I Will unfold;
Help of the Lord then, is Dear honeys,
Help the poor Red-coats with your moneys.
Down with your Dust then; come, be nimble,
Plate, Bodkins, Tankards, Spoon, ^r Thimble:
All these (then as if at a stand,
And into pocket putting his hand)
All these (like Barber's Teeth, being strung
On Red cloth, ready as they hung)
(Holding forth, said) all these (good People!)
From Colchester St. Peter's steeple
Are all clear gains; and I assure ye
As many more I got at Bury.
Then (lest the people should discover
His sleight of hand, and so give over,
Finding the Juggle out, and mock it)
He put his hand in the other pocket,
As feeling for some other strings:
(But in the interim flyly flings
His right hand into the left behind,
And then the better them to blind,
His hands met under's cloak, in brief,
As the receiver with the Thief)
He held it out then to be seen,
(As if some other string 't had been,
And said) This other string of Plate
I, from the Wives of Ipswich got.
The Butcher's Wife did freely give
All the poor soul had, I believe:
I got all to her very Plackit,
And can have more still when I lack it.
Help of the Lord then, is, Dear Coneys!
Help us dear Petticoats with moneys.
List; for I hear this Text plain lie,
Fine Ends of Gold and Silver cry:
(Beggars must be n^ chusers) whether
Silver broken or whole; bring't hi^her;
Good Wife or W^nch; the Widows mite:
Oliver C. shall you requite;
If you will not credit what he says,
I Will give you then the Public Faith.
Methinks I hear the Proverb started,
A fool and's money is soon p^rted:
That Proverb does belong to those
That part with money to ou^ foes.
Help who? the King? No. Nosuch thing,
Help Parliament, not Help the King:
When we say, King and Parliament,
The Parliament alone is meant.
So much for this time then I say.
Desiderantur Caetera.
By this you have heard how the juggle has been done; the story is good,
because it is true, and thousands to this day witness it to their cost, to the
loss of their goods, plate and estates, and which is more to the loss of the
bodies, and souls too, (it is too probable,) of their dear relations.

Was the holy word of God ever before in any age or Kingdom so vilely abused by
such abominable wrestings and interpretations, and to such base and bloody ends
and designs, as by these Peter's, Owens, Marshals, Baxters, etc. are not these
worthy cares for the Fathers of the new Church of modern Orthodoxy? are not
these within an inch and a half at least as bad as a Rationale upon the sacred
Common Prayer? could the Devil of hell ever abuse and wrest the Holy
Scriptures, as these modern Orthodox: juglers and Sermonmongers have done? nay,
the Devil to give him his due, was not so impudent, Mat. 4.

For though he was Devil for taking the sacred word into his mouth, since he
hated to be reformed; yet those Sermon mongers in these times were much more
Devils in that particular, and outvyed Beelzebub himself.

For He, Mat. 4. quoted the Scripture truly, but not fully, omitting in the
sixth verse of that Chapter, as his children used to do, in the seventeenth
verse of 1 Pet. 2. the latter clause, as that which made not for their turn.

But these children have outdone their Father in hellish craft upon those
Scriptures, Curse ye Meroz -- give them blood to drink -- Bind their Kings with
chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron -- and a hundred the like; not, in
concealing the full sense of them, as the Devil did; but being more devilish
and out witting. Hell it self, in wresting them to a quite contrary sense, the
Devil went not so far, these modern Orthodox herein making the Devil an Ass.
Are not these worthy cares, Mr. Gray beard, for your Learned Fathers?

Considering therefore these things with my self, as one whose fate it was to
be born and bred up in schismatical times, and a factious University, (sucking
in Schism with my mothers milk, in two s^nses,) and consequently when I was a
child, did as a child, and was gulled and cheated into their Fopperies, as much
as I must needs have been into Mabometanism, if I had been born and bred up
amongst the Turks, whom yet I have found the honester of the two, though both
bad; I say, considering with my self, when I came to years of consideration,
what devilish bloody and rapacious villains these Modern Orthodox Preachers
and Sermon-mongers were, so that Hell it self could not match them; and withal
considering that those people that most haunted those Preachments, Sermons,
Lectures and Stories, were above all mankind whether Turks, Cannibals, Indians
or Jews, the most false, malicious, revengeful, slanderous, envious, liars,
cheaters, treacherous, bloody, perfidious, rapacious, plunderers,
Sequestrators, Oliverians, Committeemen, Gifted-men, cruel, Dissemblers, Lovers
of their own selves alone, together with them of their gang, covetous,
Boasters, proud, Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,
Traitors, heady, high-minded, Lovers of pleasures more than Lovers of God,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, etc.

Presently I think with my self, if these be the people of God, who the Devil
will have for his people, I cannot tell; for in all my travails upon earth, I
never met with such villains and wretches amongst Turks or Indians; praying, as
the Indian did, (when the Friar told him to what place after this life the
bloody Spaniard went) that my soul may never go to that place, whither those
bloody villains go, except they repent of their deeds.

For thought I, how can these people be the godly party, whose deeds are
blacker than hell, more bloody than those of that roaring Lion, as great Liars
and Slanderers, (...), as the Father of Lies can be, or make them to be; one
may know by their Looks what breed they are of, they are so Father-like, as
like him as ever they can look':

And tell them of these things, instead of giving you thanks, or repenting and
amending, they rage and rail, slander like mad, or the Devil himself.

Therefore finding them characterized and prophesied of in the latter days by
the Apostle 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Oh! thought I, now I have found you Traitors,
heady, high-minded, etc. Lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God; having a
form of godliness, but denying the Power thereof, etc.

Indeed and indeed -- will they say -- have you found us Traitors, heady,
high-minded, etc. but I pray who is characterized by the next words, lovers of
pleasures -- mark that -- more than lovers of God; having a form of Godliness
-- who is sor forms, I pray, come tell us that, are we for forms, etc.

Now the poor souls think they have hit it. Alas! poor souls! the characters of
Traitors, and the rest of them do not seem to fit these modern Orthodox
altogether so well as these two last, for they seem to be made for them for the
very nonce, on set purpose, nothing can be more apposite or proper for them.
Lovers of pleasures, the Apostle says, (...), voluptuosi, Lat. voluptueux,
French, voluptuous, (voluptas comes from voluntas) and sounds thus much, Lovers
of their own wills and pleasures, a people that will have their wills and
pleasures to be done, as if they were Kings, or more than Kings, a wilful
generation, that what they list to have, they will have, or they will mingle
Heaven and earth, ruffle Kingdoms, turn all to blood and ruin; Kings shall
stand upon the stool of Repentance, Kingdoms shall be laid waste, millions of
men and moneys lost; and the best of Kings if they stand in the way of their
wills and pleasures, down they must, let God and Laws say what they will, for
they are (...), more in love with their own good pleasure, than Gods good
pleasure: God says, Fear God, Honor the King, Submit to every ordinance of man
for Gods sake, be subject, you must needs be subject for conscience sake, or
you shall be damned: no matter for that, let God and man say what they will,
they will have their wills; yet these wilful people never want woe; nor those
Kingdoms that are troubled with them; they misersably disquiet themselves as
well as others.

But these Modern Orthodox are not more signally described by that character,
than the next -- Having a form of godliness -- (...).

(...), translated here the form, is of the same signification with (...),
whence the Latins, by way of Anagram, have their word forma, and the English
do nearer anagrammatize the Greek (...), in our word here -- form.

(...) signifies the face of any thing, exterior rei facies, the Vizor, the
Mask, the Image, the resemblance of a thing.

So that the form of godliness here is the face of godliness, the Vizor or Mask
of godliness, the resemblance or Image of godliness, but denying the power
thereof. Such a Mask as Jezabel put on, when she proclaimed a fast, but denied
the power of godliness, when she murdered Naboth to get his Vineyard.

And thus these Modern Orthodox put on the Vizor and Mask of godliness in their
Old Parliament fast-days, their noise of Reformation, multiplicity of Sermons;
yet these zealous Sermon-mongers, these gifted-praying men, these Jewish
Sabbath-men, if they had had the power of godliness, they had not, durst not
have run into Rebellion, Blood, Schism, Robberies called Plunderings and
Sequestrations, Murder, Oppression, Lies, Slanders, Blasphemies, Pride, Malice,
Envy, Hatred and all uncharitableness; and murder, which makes them odious to
all mankind, but themselves, namely, King-killing.

But not a word of this as you love me, this must not be remembered, learn
herein to get Gentlemen's memories; but if you will remember, remember Schism in
the Letany, extinguish it, Letany and Liturgy, the cause of all the wars,
together with the King and Council that imposed it, remember that -- but as for
the poor harmless Lambs, if it were a failing to murder the King and his
friends, come, it was but a failing, an infirmity in the Saints, be Gentlemen
and forget it.

Yet for my part, in the most impartial scrutiny, that I can make, I do not
perceive that these Modern Faux's had their Vizors truly on, when they went
about those deeds of darkness; I do not find that their way of Sermons,
Prayers, Jewish Sabbathizings deserves so much Honor as to be called the true
face, form, mask, vizor, or resemblance of Religion; it is so far from true,
that it is not so much as like the true way of godliness, and Gospel
discoveries by Christ and his Apostles.

First for their way of Sermons, Preachments, two, three, four or ten times a
week, the running of an hourg-lass or two at a time, in Lectures on Sundays and
week days, Lectures in the morning, Lectures at noon, and afternoon, Lectures,
Lectures, Sermons, Sermons, Oh Sermons! I am sure it is not a Gospel way, nor
so much as the true face, form or semblance of the preaching of our Savior and
the Apostles.

Our Savior in his first Sermon upon the Mount in the 5, 6, and 7 Chapters of
S. Matthew, all not half an hour long, yet speaks of twenty or forty several
subjects: not confining himself to one subject, one Text, Doctrines, Inferences
and Uses, but thought he should not need to beg pardon, though he went from one
subject in discourse to another of a Random nature; which our modern Divinity
men would have called R^mbling, at least; and it is well if it escaped so; our
Blessed Savior speaking what was most useful and seasonable for his auditory
at that time, and more than ever he spoke at any other time, in one continued
discourse.

To say that all his Sermons are not set down, is bold, impudent, precarious,
and daring: the Apostle John says, the signs or miracles he did are not all
set down, but for his words as they were all saving, so we have cause to think
he did not grutch them to posterity; for certainly novelty in religious worship
and variety was not then in fashion, he preached and so did the Apostles the
best that they could, and the best that could be; and if they had not preached
the same things over and over, over and over again, they must have preached one
time better than another; which is not safe to say of our Savior; therefore
when his Disciples desire him to teach them to pray, he tells them no other but
what he had told them in his first Sermon, when ye pray, s^y, Our Father, etc.
And when he was in his Agony, and prayed most earnestly, the third time, it was
short not like the Pharisees, nor our modern Pharisees, but to the purpose, and
saying the same words, the same words --

Our Savior never took a Text but once, and then the Sermon he made of it was
not so long as the Text. S. Peter converts three thousand with a Sermon, Acts
2. And all the whole Sermon was but half a Chapter, and yet the longest that
ever he made; that in the tenth Chapter of the Acts was scarcely half so long.
I might give many more instances to show that this way of Sermons that now
obtains and is the fashion, is not the way of Christ, if this was intended for
a set-discourse, for that purpose; but I mention it now only to show that these
Sermons, Sermons, Lectures, Preachings, as they that m^st haunted them and
cried them up, have been and still are the greatest villains, cheats,
treacherous, deceivers 'under the Cope of Heaven; so it does but still evidence
the more that it is not the way of Christ; brought into the Churuch by two or
three talking men some hundred of years after Christ, but they shall be
nameless; it is sufficient to say they could talk well, and they loved as all
good Orators do, to hear themselves talk; but that this should be any argument
that now therefore we must, (let the weather be never so cold,) sit it out
forsooth, till an impertinent idle prating fellow has brought down Moon, Stars
and Glories to show us how hard he studied the week before for this
Hour-glass-Harangue, seems to me very strange, that the world should be so
still bejugled; especially these tedious speeches being at best but smiled at,
if not quite laughed out of countenance, where men speak best, viz. in the
Parliament House, Councils, Universities, Inns of Court; but the Pulpit must be
the last that will learn more wit and grace; though we pretend these are such
Gospel times too, and will take our Savior and the Apostles for a pattern.

When they can infer any thing with more sense than yet I have heard, from Acts
20. 7. S. Paul's continuing his discourse until Midnight, the only objection in
the Bible against all that I allege, I will give them an answer, if they will
tell me how many hours of that night St. Paul and the Disciples did spend in
eating and breaking bread, v. 11: and raising up Eutychus; and also if they
will promise me, (in one thing more) to imitate that Holy Apostle, namely when
they preach an hour, two, three, or till midnight, or all night, I care not,
upon condition, these Modern Orthodox will also depart from us on the morrow
for ever, to try how much we shall wet our Handkerchiefs, when they tell us, we
shall see their face no more.

They would be happy indeed, for themselves perhaps, I am sure happy for the
Kingdom that has been so unhappy already, occasioned chiefly by their sweaty
preaching.

If they have wit enough, let them answer this, and to purpose too, or else
down goes Bell and the Dragon; but if they answer as insignificantly, as they
used to preach, when they cast so many long looks upon the slowly-sliding sands
in the hourglass; if not angry shaking it for its sloth, then will their
answers tire me as much as ever did their Sermons, and that is enough in all
reason and conscience, and I shall scorn to honor them by taking notice of
such impertinents.

If St. Peter was alive again, and had not gone to school to some of these new
Holder-forths, how would little Pulpit-man despise him for preaching the same,
the same, and the same Sermon perpetually, when he could show him for a need
three or four hundred or a thousand Harangues in his Budget.

A wicked, foolish, perverse and hypocritical generation we live in, when men,
nay Ministers rather endeavor to seem good Preachers, than be good Preachers
in imitating Christ and his Apostles; and not by idle inventions, prefer what
is plausible before what is profitable, rather pleasing men than God; therefore
they have their reward: and have plunged themselves into perplexities, or into
Parson slip-stockins extravagancies; choosing rather impertinencies commended
for their variety, only by an idle loose people given to change, than to speak
often to the same purpose, over and over again, though never so necessary,
profitable, and to good purpose.

Nor will the Clergy ever free themselves and their Sermons from contempt, till
they follow the Copy and Pattern for preaching set them by Christ and his holy
Apostles: and if Priest and people find really and truly that these Hourglass
discourses are as uneasy and troublesome, as unprofitable to both; let them
learn of their Masters, Christ and the Apostles, and the Primitive Fathers, who
in their preachings went to question's and answers, that is, catechizing, or
ecchoing answers to questions; our blessed Saviors usual way of preaching; to
which Catechizer, as the right Gospel Preacher, St. Paul charge; the Galathians
6. 6. to allow him all good maintenance or a good Living, (...); Let him that
is catechized in the word communicate to him that catechizeth in all good
things; and not --, let him that is taught in the Word -- For the words of St.
Paul ought to be, and are now properly translated, Let him that is catechized
communicate to him that catechizeth -- For though all catechizing is teaching,
yet all teaching (Modern Orthodox, Pulpit-harangue teaching for Example) is not
catechizing, which was the usual way of teaching practiced by our Savior, the
Apostles and Primitive Christians, and in England too, till this superstitious,
hypocritical Modern Orthodoxy intruded, and impudently thrust its betters out
of Church, and put it out of countenance with a brazen forehead.

Didymus Optatus was called the Catechist, or Catechizer, (...), or Doctor
audientium, Cyp. ep. 24. in the Church of Carthage; Cyril the great was not
ashamed of that name at Jerusalem, nor Hierocles at Alexandria, and many more,
of the most famous men, of the World, as well as England, thought it no
disparagement to Catechize, though I can give good reasons, that usually, (as
in many places of Christendom at this day) any man may propound a question to
the Minister, and desire to be resolved, and therefore should the man of God be
able and thoroughly furnished unto every good work and word, to give a pertinent
and ready answer to such as hearing him, asked him questions too, if they
pleased, as the Doctors with our Savior, Luke 2. 46.

So that those worthy cares of the Fathers of Modern Orthodoxy in their
Preachments has not so much as the face, true form and resemblance of Christ's
Sermons; but is a whimsey cried up so long by themselves, till it has justled
Sacraments, Prayers, Catechizing quite out of the Church; having not the power
of godliness, in that there are no such villains (as I said before) as these
Sermon-mongers upon the face of the earth, as every body must acknowledge and
confess, except themselves, who are always apt to find fault with other men for
superstitious, when they themselves are the most superstitious people, I know,
in the world, as I Will show more fully on some other occasion; superstitious, (at
the best) their sermonizing is, and has been; but that is not all, it has been
blasphemous, atheistical, damnable and profane, as I have shown in their
debauched interpretations and comments on Holy Writ; and I fear it is so yet,
they do not use to amend. And God looks upon these Devotions of theirs, that
they keep such a puther for, but as the cutting off of a dogs neck, and will
say to them one day, who required these things at your hands? it is iniquity,
even your solemn meetings: And they may thank the King and Parliament with all
their hearts, if like careful Parents, they will not suffer these wilful,
foolish, headstrong people have their wills, no longer be gulled by a pack of
cheats; not permitting the blind Cobbler, Tinker, Weaver, Tailor,
Chimney-sweeper, etc. nor the wilfully blind, but crafty canting Presbyter to
lead the blind, lest they both fall into the ditch remedilesly. If I were to
commend a Father, it should be him that has a care of his Children, and keeps
them from hurting themselves spite of their teeth; and that chooses rather to do
them good, than get their good will: when they come to discretion, (which is
not likely till they have wiser and honester guides) then they will thank this
good Father for his care. Alas! if they were in their right mind, durst they
blaspheme the Holy Ghost, when they father their impertinent, nonsensical,
blasphemous ravings in Prayer, upon the Holy Ghost; calling it the spiritual
gift of Prayer, and the Spirit of Prayer, and I know not what good titles on so
ill a deserving faculty; obtained at best but by custom, use, confidence, and
volubility of words; which (I can speak as experimentally of it, and knowingly,
as any Modern Orthodoxman, yet do I not account my self for it a jot the better
man,) being an Art of which every Porter, Cobbler, Chimney-sweeper, or Hector,
may easily be a Master, and attainable by every common Billings-gate-scold. I
say again they lie to the Holy Ghost, and blaspheme the Spirit of God, that
call such pitiful, low, easy and beggarly gifts, the gifts of the Spirit,
other than of a confident, foolish, rash, impudent, blasphemous spirit, that is
rash with his mouth in uttering any thing before God, before whom our words
^ught to be few, Eccles. 5. 2.

Which brings to my mind that bold and seditious Petition which a Scotch
Minister put up in his Prayer before Sermon in St. Peter's Church at Colchester
two or three years ago, when he was about to pray for his sacred Majesty, and
our gracious Queen Katherine, in these very words -- Good Lord, bless the King
and Queens Majesty's, and keep them from aw Lownery, but confund aw their
Images and Idols, good Lord -- whether having none of the Kings Images in good
white Syller in his awn Pouch, he was in hopes to get some amongst the factious
crew, so much the more by this libelling prayer, or having the Kingscoyn in his
pocket he never feared that God would hear his prayer in confounding those
Images of the King; sure I am he made a shift to chouce many of the Fops of the
King's Images in good coin, and away he run with his Scotch Frow that followed
him. But yet I cannot think that the extravagancies of bold men in prayer, even
for the King, are to be allowed or trusted to; excellently provided against in
our Liturgy, to which I think all public Preachers ought strictly to be
limited.

And though many Ministers usually pray for the King in their invented Prayers
before Sermons (harmlesly, one would think at the first blush) yet upon
stricter examination, their Petitions for the King, are but a kind of railing
and blasphemy; as when they beg of God, that he would be pleased to overruled
the Kings heart, and make him a chaste, pious, wise, holy, just and temperate
Prince, and a thousand such like expressions, and of worse nature, not fit here
to rehearse, but infinuating and hinting as if he was a Prince that needed
their Prayers in those particulars; and sounds little better than Treason, in
rendering him to their utmost odious to his people.

For to pray in the spirit, is to pray in the mind or spirit, that is, to mind
what we pray, and heartily beg the same of God in my mind or spirit, (whether I
use words or no words in private prayer the matter is not great) so that
whether with words or without words, my mind or spirit intercedes for mercies
at the throne of Grace, where the spirit of God helps our infirmites; other
prayer by the spirit there is none, but all other than this is pharisaical
babbling out of ostentation, covetousness, or some base design unworthy of, and
inconsistent with so holy a duty, whether in words placed in wonted order, (as
most certain and profitable) or in words of order diverted, subject to rash,
uncouth, if not nonsensical sometimes and blasphemous expressions.

And they that understand not this, know not what it is to pray in spirit, not
knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, whilst these gifted brethren
lie to the Holy Ghost, as Ananias did, how can they escape the judgments of
God? Father forgive them, they know not what they say.

But when men Pray in Public, as the Church did, Acts 4. 24. then they should
render him the calves of their lips, with one mind and one mouth too, Romans 15.
6. Glorifying God, all speaking, as in our divine Letany and Liturgy, (at least
all saying Amen) lifting up their voices (...) with one accord, as the Church
did, Acts 4. 24.

And that you may be assured it was by a Common Prayer Book at that time, in
set words, known to all, it is said there, they did lift up their voices with
one accord, which is imp^ssible to be done but by a Liturgy; otherwise one of
the Church might be praying for faith, hope, or patience, whilst others were
praying for charity, temperance, or chastity, etc. and one would have done his
prayers, whilst another was scarcely heated at it, or had not half done; but to
end the Controversy, their set form of prayer is there registered upon Record
in the 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30. verses of that Acts 4.

I wish the Modern Orthodox would show us how they can answer this, with all
their cavils, cheats, evasions and tricks; that we might have another occasion
to render them as ridiculous as they are already in themselves, to all the
ingenuous of Christendom.

And that which makes devout men own the Common Prayers of our English above
others, is that a great many prayers are taken out of the Mass book englished;
that we might not pray, as many Papists do, in an unknown Tongue; taking out of
it only the Jewels, which are (for ought I know, or any body else alive)
Apostolical, and almost as old prayers, as the Lord's Prayer; it is an
unanswerable Schism, to depart from the Church of Rome, Antioch, or Greek
Church, in any thing but wherein they depart from Christ and the Apostles.

But these fiery, headstrong and wicked Modern Orthodox instead of sweeping a
house, pull it down, and consequently make more work, as well as more bad work,
'till they have quite erazed the very foundations of the House of God.

Nor did the Race or Religion of these Modern Orthodox ever come into any
Kingdom, but they filled it with blood and ruin; sad instances whereof we have
at home, in Scotland, in France and Germany, etc. desolated by their means a
hundred leagues together, in more places than about Munster; their desolations
and depopulations to be seen at this day, a sad spectacle whereof I have often
had, which makes me the more loath their abominations.

And every good man, as well as every worthy man, that has either honor or
estate to leave to his Children and Posterity, had need be careful not only to
leave his Lands and fields to his children and posterity; but likewise use his
utmost care and diligence that those fields be not Akeldama's to his children,
fields of blood; which they must needs be, if these Modern Orthodox men be not
kept under, and muzled as you do a cursed curr; for when ever and in what
Kingdom soever since the first Rebel of them Calvin broached their Religion,
they have mouthed and bit so keenly, where they had liberty, that the blood
always followed, you may see the print of their teeth yet; good Lord deliver us
from them, and the father of lies, from the Devil, his children, and all his
works;

(...), says the Apostle to Titus I. II. Speaking of unruly and vain talkers
and deceivers, spiritual Gypsies, cheats and Juglers -- It is very fit that
their mouths should be stopped, says St. Paul: It is not fit that their mouths
should be stopped, says Gregory Father Gray-beard; Indulgence, Liberty, Breda,
Breda.

And what a rare fellow this Gray-beard is, you may know by the opinon he has
of Calvin, p. 59. whom he calls a good Scholar and a honest Divine, calling the
Calvinists, p. 69. our Calvinists.

They may be Calvinists, Father Gray-beards Calvinists, because they are always
bloody Headsmen, wherever they have room to strike, and a sword in their hand:
But they are not our Calvinists, I assure you Greg. let them be your Calvinists
then, it is pity you should be parted.

And for Calvin's being a good Scholar, I doubt you would scarcely be mightily
in love with the Jesuits, though they should approve themselves, as many of
them have, far better Scholars, that is, men of better parts and better read
men, and have shown more schollarship in their Works; and yet I think many of
their principles have been as destructive to the peace of Kingdoms, even almost
as Calvin himself; called therefore Lucian, so meritoriously anagrammatized 100
years before Father Gray-beard was born.

For my part, I hate to undervalue any man's scholarship; but I hate the folly
as much of those men that argue so ridiculously; that because Calvin was a good
scholar, therefore he could not be a Knave, or as bad as a Jesuit.

This must be Greg's meaning, or else his scholarship does not at all vouch his
Divinity: Perhaps Greg. is more acquainted with Calvin's scholarship than I am;
though I think I have seen and read all his Works; the most famous (the
Calvinists themselves say) is his Institutions, designed for a Confession of
Faith, the Adjuster of Controversies, the Oracle of his Followers, and as if
pronounced e Cathedra, unerring Divinity, and infallible; dedicated to that
purpose, to his King (that once was so, I mean) Francis, the French King, whom
he there in his Epistle Dedicatory styles the most Christian King; yet though
he therein gave his own cause and his own heart the lie; yet not altogether to
forget himself, and to show he was still John Calvin, he threatens him with the
strong hand of the Lord, which shall without controversy come in time, and
extend it self armed (I looked for that) both to deliver the poor out of
misery, and to take vengeance on the despisers, which now triumph with so great
confidence.

Sure this great Divine was a great Prophet, or rather he knew well, he had
laid in that Book such grounds of and for sedition, that his Followers would
with strong hand stretch forth themselves to take vengeance, and call all this
-- The hand of the Lord, and the help of the Lord. -- Curse ye Meroz -- to
this, is but the second part of the same tune.

Some men have had such a Reverence for this same Calvin, especially being
dead; O! de mortuis nil nisi bonum; that it has been thought as bad as
sacrilege to tell truth of the man.

No man can have greater Reverence to urns than I have; nay though a man die or
be hanged for his crimes, yet when the law is satisfied all good men ought to
be so;

But in hayn^us murderers, Parricides, and Traitors the Law is not satisfied
with their deaths, but their horrid heads and quarters are set. up as long as
they will last, not to scare crows, but to scare men from the like villainies.

There is as great difference therefore betwixt my speaking truth of Hugh
Peter's and John Calvin, and betwixt Father Gray-beards speaking lies of our
glorious Martyrs Charles I. and Archbishop Laud, as betwixt light and darkness,
truth and falsehood, honor and infamy, innocence and villainy, heaven and hell.

Except bold Greg. that assassinates the Innocence and Honor of these sacred
Persons deceased, do likewise say, that the Law was not satisfied, except they
also had been quartered, as well as beheaded; and more I could say, but that
the grief of my soul is so great, to think such a bold villain as this Greg.
should dare now, now that his Son, our Gracious Sovereign is happily returned,
to aspe^se the sacred memory of his Father and friends and the whole Reign,
infamously as can be spoken, in saying against them and the Reign, that it was
wholly deformed; and if so, who is guilty of the Innocent blood which those
King-killers laid to the charge of our Sovereign in that unparalled
Indictment against him, and Archbishop Laud; sure Gregory Grey-beard was not
far off when that Indictment was drawn up; but I am astonishd that he dares
write thus now; or that any loyal subject of his Majesty's should be jolly,
laugh, and rejoice in Greg's Book; God preserve his Majesty from all Modern
Orthodox men, and from all that have been Modern Orthodox men, if they give not
better proofs of their Repentance and Loyalty, than caressing and joying in
Father Gray-beards, or any of the race of John Calvin, as great a Scholar and
Divine as he is.

The greatest scholarship that John Calvin has left behind him, as a
Testimonial of his Learning or Rhetoric, is, That his Institutions are writ in
pretty clean Latin; which sounds no more to me, nor any scholar that I know,
as an argument of learning, than if they had been writ in clean French, Welsh,
or Irish.

One language signifying no more of scholarship than another; no, though you
add the admired Greek, and ever to be admired Hebrew (a language that no man
alive understands, nor can attain to) into the bargain.

Languages being nothing else but helps to discourse with men, or acquaintance
with Books, as our occasions, trade or business does require.

And a Calves-head is still a Calves-head, though it have a neat tongue in it,
whether Latin Tongue, Welsh Tongue, Greek Tongue, French Tongue, English
Tongue, or Hebrew Tongue; which last though, I say, is not now to be bad for
love nor money; it is utterly lost, and was so before our Savior's time;
Mazoreth it self cannot retreive nor retrench it; nor do we read that the Holy
Ghost that descended in so many cloven Tongues, gave the Disciples one Hebrew
Tongue amongst them all; but that is all one to me.

All that I urge this for, is, that that clean Latin style in which Calvin's
Institutions is pencill'd, whether by himself or any other linguist, it matters
not, nor signifies any thing to entitle him or any man else; A great Scholar.

But if we may judge of his scholarship by his Divinity, it is (to say no more)
right Presbyterian, and Knox his own self.

Who, (as Calvin made a Religion, fitted only for the Horizon of Rebellion,
wherein it was born and bred; so) Knox that devilish Rebel, thought he could
not find a fitter for the Innovations, blood, usurpations, rebellions and
confusions, which he and the bastard Murrey, intended, contrived and brought to
pass in Scotland, when they imprisoned their lawful Queen, threatened her upon
pain of death to resign her Crown, which she was forced to do, to save her
life; with which Modern Orthodoxy Scotland and afterward England, as well as
other Countries, has been disciplined, 'till weltred in blood and ruin, as is
known by woeful experience.

Knox outdoing his Master Calvin in nothing, but his new superstition, of the
morality of the Sabhath, and Judaizing therein, not more ridiculously than
mischievously; that whimsee being one of the spiritual and hypocritical
colors, laid on to varnish their Holy War and Rebellion in Scotland and
England, to make the rotten Old Cause flourish with that; which, like their
Preachments, Sermons, and Lectures, and gifted pharasaical, long, nonsensical
prayers, are and have been as mischievous, I say, as superstitious and
unwarrantable; having not so much as the true face, vizor, or form of
Godliness, much less the power thereof;

Yet with these they have long led captive silly men and women, laden with
sins, subverging whole houses and Kingdoms, though they ^e men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith; but (I hope) they shall proceed no
further: It concerns all good men, and all that have either religion, peace,
estates or consciences, honor or interest in Posterity, to take care to their
utmost that they proceed no further.

I hope, that even yet the Modern Orthodox men will consider these things, and
the evil of their ways, as well as evils that their ways have lead unto; yet
some people think, they will be hanged before they amend, repent, or recant, they
are so rooted in pride, stonyheartedness, and opinion of themselves, and their
ways, though (God knows) they have as small reason to be self-conceited, as
ever men had.

I my self can show (and in several particulars have already shown) such a
mystery of iniquity amongst them, and such a damned cheat, in what they most
especially call Religion, that their Trade will be quite spoiled; yet when they
see the hopes of their gain is gone, they will rage and rayl, like the
silver-smiths for their Idol-shrines and Diana's, as Gregory does at the
Ecclesiastical Politician; but good Mr. Gregory! good Father Gray-beard, old
Gentleman your Idol shall not stand long, as your Brother Hugh said upon a more
dismal occasion.

Gypsees (some say) do understand
By lines they read in face and hand,
How long, when, how, where you may dwell,
Can every way your Fortune tell:
All these mysteries, with their blessing,
You have for six pence, or a less thing.
So, -- Holder-forth -- (now indeed licite
Indulged) cries out, friends -- Benedicite:
With Canting Terms, cheating Tom Pops;
The silly-women and the Fops;
With both hands stretched out, open, to show
He plays fair, and above-board to you,
And never minds your purse, his eyes
Looking another way, to the skies;
Yet he shall do the feat completely,
And get into your Pocket neatly,
Not with sleight of hand, but tongue,
Merely with a bare Harangue;
(An Art, Mol Cutpurse neves tried,
This Art was found out since she di'd;)
Telling you stories, that shall fit right
And good, as Nuts to Mother midnight:
All the while, looking in your face,
And telling, News of Acts of Grace,
Telling Fortunes, Predestinations,
Decrees, Elections, Reprobrations:
(Of which, he no more Truth can tell ye
Then Gypsies can, or William Lilly:)
Peeping into the covered Ark,
Construing the Revelations dark,
Times hid, and seasons known to none,
But to Omniscience alone;
When spiritual Gypsee thus is at it,
Take my advice, look to thy Pocket.
Right Preaching's Catechizing, And, Sirs,
Our Savior went to Questions and Answers,
When he preached to the Pharisees,
Publicans, Sinners, Sadducees,
Nor was his Auditory vexed,
When he digress'd often from his Text;
Which, we never read he took, but once;
And then straight went again to Questions,
And Answers, called Catechizing,
Which, Saints of old counted a wise thing,
For this same Hourglass canting cheat
Has been invented but of late:
Though it be young, it is Giant grown;
Baffling all other Religion:
Yet far from enlightening the mind,
It rather has made men stark blind:
Like Pearl on eye, 't must not be touched:
I wish the Cataract though was couched.
For men by it, to deeds have run,
Which Cannibals by nature shun.
Millions of Sermons, Holder-forth rehearses,
Have not such good in them as these six Verses.
Where are they? You Will say, these same six Verses that are worth millions; they
are better sure than golden Verses. If the near relation I have to them do not
enhance the price and value of them in my opinion, by some self-interest
endearances, The six Verses are worthy to be writ in Letters of gold, on the
outside of every Church in the Kingdom, because if the Sermon therein
contained, be but remembered and put in practice, not one Modern Orthodox man
will stay without door, or content himself with a bo-peep hearing at a Church
window, but into the Church he must come, and must say, that if these six
verses be but observed, it will certainly bring him and all men living to the
kingdom of Heaven, and bring peace on earth and good will toward men; nor is
it necessary for any man, I Will justify it, to hear any other Sermon than these
six verses, so that he practice them; nor can any man go to Hell that observes
them, nor can there be rebellion, robbery, murder, evil-speaking or evil-doing,
but by transgressing some particular in this Sermon, contained in six verses.

Some men are so fantastical and phanatical, that they like and esteem
nothing, but what is far fetched and dear bought; All the Sermons preached by
Modern Orthodox this thirty years in England, I Will maintain it against the best
of them, have not been so soul-saving, good and free from all harm, as this
little Sermon: indeed some people will value those more, because they cost more
than these six Verses you have so cheap, whilst the Modern Orthodox men's
Sermons cost some people their plate, and moneys, and some their hearts blood:
But this Sermon shall cost you nothing, esteem it not the less for that, the
worth of it consists not in the Cabinet or dress, but in the Jewels wrapped up
and contained within these six Verses, which are the Iliads in a Nut-shell, the
Bible in Epitome, and show the nearest way to heaven, and heaven upon earth.

By the Liturgy learn to pray;
So pray, and praise God every day:
The Apostles Creed believe also,
Do as you would be done unto.
Sacraments take as well as you can:
This is the whole duty of man.
And is this all? Yes, this is all, and enough to bring thee to peace internal,
external, and eternal; peace in thy conscience and soul; peace with all good
men; and peace with God, my soul for thine; or, rather believe not me, but him
that is the Author thereof, Mat. 7. 12.

Now do I know what these Modern Orthodox men will say, as well as if I were in
their bellies; away goes -- to his Congregation, calls a meeting, sends about
Tickets and Messengers throughout the City and Lines of Communication, as at
Caryls Funeral, to assemble the Elders, and gather the Churches to a general
Randevouz (the word is proper enough, for most of them have been Military men,
Soldiers wives and widows, and following their Husbands into Scotland, good
honest Leaguer-ladies there) Holderforth, that is best accoutred with mouth and
lungs, speaking to this purpose. Friends, we are here gathered together, in the
sight of -- and the face of this Congregation to join together (Pish, pish,
these Common Prayer Book Phrases have put me quite out, and made me quite
forget my old canting style; hold, try again.) Friends, Do you see, friends,
(I, now I am in and at it) as I said before, friends, do ye see this Book? writ
against us, friends; and against our friends; and against Mr. -- our friends
friend; by one E. H. What is this E. H? Oh! (no, it it does not spell, Oh!)
surely, then surely, verily friends, this E. H. is one of the race of cursed
Meroz. He is so far from helping us, that he has robbed, to his utmost robbed us,
for ever, friends, even as I said but now, friends, do you see? he has robbed us
in the first place, of all our hopes of Plate, Bodkins. Sack possets, Thimbles
and Church-gatherings, friends: Nay, do ye see, friends? Secondly, he has robbed
us of our English Bibles, our dear English Bibles, and then, you know, as for
our parts, though I, your speaker, am somewhat ashamed to say it, yet you all
know it to be true, that if he take the English Translation from me and you, he
may keep all the other to himself if he will; it is all one to us, as if he had
robbed us, dear friends, of all the Bibles in the world, friends.

Thirdly, do ye s^e, friends? he has robbed us of our Sabbaths, our
foe-annoying Sabbaths, our gain-procuring Sabbaths, our heart-refreshing
Sabbaths, our heart-chearly Sabbaths, and our spiritual market day Sabbaths.

Fourthly, friends, he has robbed us, as I said but now, this same E. H. has
robbed us of our very Sermons, our dear Sermons.

Nay fifthly, friends, he has robbed us of our Lectures, our Tantlin Lectures,
our soulreviving, our soul-comforting Lectures; our every way profitable, and
gain-procuring Lectures, our enemies confounding Lectures, those soul-ravishing
opportunities, of you especially dear sisters, dear hearts.

Sixthly, friends, what shall I say? friends, moreover, do ye see, he has
stripped us naked, left not a fig-leafe upon poor Modern Orthodoxy, but has robbed
us even, as I may so say, and with reverence be it spoken, this E. H. has robbed
us of our very Prayers; making nothing of them but an impudent Harangue,
Pharisaical, Nonsensical, and (what shall I call?) Hypocritical.

Seventhly, More than all this, friends; he makes us, friends; us, I say us; he
makes us that have been esteemed, in our own and other men's accounts, the godly
Party, to be the most treacherous, cheating, lying, bloody, malicious, envious,
splenetick, slanderous, deceiful, dissembling, covetous, rapacious, and
damnable villains, that ever the earth groaned under; and says, He has trod
upon many parts of the earth, but no such wretches are to be found amongst
Jews, Turks, Pagans, and other men, with hard names, Cannibals, King killers,
and man-eaters; sure this E. H. is no Gentleman, because he has not a
Gentleman's memory, as Brother M -- most gravely hints: that wicked clowns
should remember these things, friends.

Eighthly, Moreover, friends, he says, this wicked ^e, this E. H. friends, says
that Paul seems to mean us, above all mankind, when he prophesies, 2 Timothy 3. 1.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. That in the last days perilous times shall come, and
men shall be just such men and women, as you and I are, and all of us, friends,
and all our friends there pourtrayed, as if the Apostle bad an eye upon us,
friends, when he did draw our Picture there, so to the very life, as if it had
been made for the very nonce, friends, and on purpose for us, friends, do ye
see! it does so fit us, friends.

Ninthly, he robs us of what I thought the whole world could not have robbed us
of, friends, he robs us of our very pretenses, our dear pretenses, our very
vizors and masks, our very forms and faces of godliness, mark that friends, do
you see? we cannot keep a mask for him; this same E. H. will not allow them to
be so much as masks, true forms, nor faces of godliness, nor so much as like
the primitive face of Gospel-holiness; advise and consult dear friends, what we
shall do for our masks, and our vizors of holniess; how shall we look, when we
shall not have so much as Jezabel had to paint with? with what face can we call
our late happy times the times of Reformation and Gospel days, when it will not
be allowed that they were so much as the resemblance or likeness of
Gospel-days, and Gospel Worship? our forementioned seize, friends,
wherein through mercy we get glory, must not now be admitted to serve for so
much as a vizor, a mask, a cloak of Religion: nay, he makes the very cloak,
friends, the cloak at Troas, to be no more canonical, than a Gown or Cassock:
these are heart-piercing and heartbreaking discouragements, friends, what will
become of us?

Tenthly, Beloved, And is it so? Then the use we should make of all, should be
to begin with an use of enquiry, who this same E. H. is? that we may blacken
him, friends, as brother Harrison said upon another occasion, I say friends, we
must blacken him, blacken, I am sure must be the word.

Eleventhly, friends, further enquire, How shall we blacken him? was not the
father of this E. H. some Jesuit? and his mother a Strumpet? was not the
whore-son born at Tripoly? and one of the three that came over in four Ships?
Has he not a mole above his chin? and another on his left knee? enquire after
that friends; if it be so, then Beloved, our friend and cause-advancing
Brother, William Lilly will tell us, that there is no dealing with him,
especially if this E. H. was born as I hear he was, in the very same year and
month with Charles II. before whom we have begun to fall; and then, I must tell
you friends, I that am your Prophet must then tell you, dear friends, with a
sad heart, (as the wise men and Zeresh his wife told Haman,) that then we shall
never prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.

Twelfthly, Again enquire and seek out from among your selves in this nation
and Commonwealth, as I may so call it, friends, among our selves, friends,
here is none here, I hope, but friends; I say, enquire and seek out for a
Commonwealths man, and a modern Orthodox man, for some brother well gifted, to
defend us, and our Holiness, which E. H. makes a nothingness; nay, not worth a
Louse, as being neither so useful, virtuous, nor so hard to be acquired,
especially in some Countries, enquire therefore for some man amongst us that
may endeavor to weaken at least the Authority of his Letter, and be sure to
blacken him.

Thirteenthly, Friends, I think, (I only give you my advice, but) in mine
opinion, there is not of our Party, any so well qualified to deal with him as
J. O. if He be not too much out of credit already; or rather, what think you of
brother Wild, he has some cause to be netled, and therefore will the more
readily undertake this E. H. who has taken him up already, a little smartly;
and indeed all of us that were at brother Caryl's Funeral, I think we had as
good have staid at home; Friends, yet since it is, as it is, friends, as I said
but now, there is none of us have so much wit for the work as our brother Wild,
but the mischief on it is, this drink, by this drink, friends, by this vile
beastly drinking, friends, brother Wild has now made his brains as foul and
slubberly with his Guzling as are the foreskirts of his doublet; what therefore
shall we do? dear friends!

Fourteenthly, enquire still I say, friends, I am upon the use of enquiry,
whether or no, it will not be our wisest course to sit still, and never offer
at an answer to this Letter from E. H. who, I perceive, is a merry man, and
would joy in another opportunity to make us more ridiculous, a scorn and a
Proverb; now that his hand is in, I wish it was off.

Yet Fifteenthly, Beloved, since this E. H. has robbed us also, (which I had
almost forgot,) of that never to be forgotten Good Old Cause, mark that,
friends, that Cause, I say, which we have fought for, over head and ears,
resisting even to blood, dear friends; and since this E. H. has made it an old
rotten Cause, that stink^ above ground, saving your presence, friends;
Therefore, I say, therefore some course or other must be taken to answer him,
if it be but for the Cause sake, which now, with modern Orthodoxy lies (it
would pity ones heart to see it, friends, thus lie) a gasping.

Sixteenthly, What think you friends; I only propose it; what think you of
making another Gathering among the Churches for our friend -- The Author of The
Rehearsal Transprosed, to cheer up his drooping spirits, for I hear he is
crop-sick, and his spirit, like Nabal's, almost dead within him; but a little
encouragement from you, I only give you my thoughts, would perhaps make him
still get some more Ink and Elbow griese, and spend it briskly once more in
behalf of modern Orthodoxy, and the Good Old Cause; which, though he says, is
now too good to be fought for, (be not angry at him, friends, for he means no
harm to us, nor it, so long as he does not think it a Cause too good to be writ
for, so he do but vindicate it the second time with his pen, we expect no more
from such white-livers; let us alone to vindicate it with the Pike.

Seventeenthly, and lastly, Beloved, one use more and I have done, it is an use
of Exhortation; you have heard what E. H. has done in robbing us, and making us
naked and bare; you have also heard several enquiries, what may be thought fit
to be done in our defense, which I leave, friends, to your consideration: which
if you think useless, fruitless, goodless, and purposeless; then in the last
place let me exhort you never to repent as long as you live, let them say what
they will, or laugh their hearts out. Repent! and recant! that would be pretty
indeed, that would be as much as to confess this Indictment, and acknowledge
our selves to have been guilty of all the innocent blood shed in these nations,
Royal blood and all; and also to acknowledge that brother Oliver deceased had
no Right to White Hall, nor we to the rest of the Kings-Lands, Bishops-Lands,
Lords-Lands, and Gentlemans-Lands, sequestered and sold to us in those happy
Gospel times: the very thoughts whereof, (friends, do you see?) makes me weep,
so that my eyes dropping so fast, my words can no longer drop as the rain, I Will
sob out a little more though in the conclusion of this so necessary use of
Exhortation, namely, that you would, friends, abhor this Book, or this Letter,
call it what you will, from E. H. so that you abhor it as much as the
Apocrypha, or as the Tabernacle of a Robber, or as that lewd woman's house you
read of, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away, for there are
charms in it, I speak mine own experiences, there are charms in that Book, that
will force your wills, ('it is strange!) to be ruled by your understandings, (and
then farewell blind zeal for ever;) and if you do but read and consider what he
says, there are charms to make you believe all he says to be true, in spite of
your teeth; he has spoiled us many a good Sermon, wherein we use to inveigh
against the Cross in Baptism, and against Baptism of any, until they be taught,
and against kneeling at the Sacrament: having given us a spiteful Go-by, which
I never heard of before; calling it the Cross after Baptism, as if the Church
of England held Baptism sufficient without it, and before it be used: and also
denying, (which we know not how to help,) that Teaching goes before Baptizing
in the words of the Commission, asserting that Christ commands his Disciples,
to make Disciples by baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. and then
says, in the following verse comes in Teaching, time enough. And then for
kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords Suppper, he says it is as easy to prove
it the posture of Christ and his Apostles, as is sitting, lolling, lying,
standing or walking; making no matter which, so there be decency and and order,
friends; saying there is no more Ceremony in kneeling then, than at any other
Devotion; nor more a Ceremony than when the Quakers in token of Respect, Love
and Reverence when they meet, wring one another by the hands; but we know,
friends, the Quakers are the silliest and most foolish Sect that ever was in
the world, for denying all Ceremonies, because it is impossible, whilst we
have bodies and are in the flesh, but we must use some posture or other of
body, when we are at our Devotions; and one posture is as much a Ceremony as
another: and also we must needs be covered with some vests, or vestments, when
we are at our Devotions, except we meet naked; at which the women laughing, he
concludes.

Thus have I constrained my self thus long into a snivelling Cant, to show
those that never came at a Conventicle, what Comments, (I am sure,) will be
made of my Letter; though I protest I have not writ a syllable in it, whether
jest or earnest, but in a sober, true-hearted design for the good of those poor
souls, bejugled and cheated of their Estates and more precious souls by modern
Orthodoxy, carried on to the ruin of Kingdoms by Spiritual Gypsies, Fiddlers
and Juglers that wander all the Kingdom over, seeking whom they may devour and
make a prize and booty of; and if I were a Lawyer, I think, I could find Law
enough against them, and bring them, for all their shifts and Legerdemains,
within the compass of the Statutes against Vagrants, Fiddlers, Juglers and
cheaters, if not Wolves, though in Sheeps clothing.

And I have manifested more true love in this Letter to beguiled and unstable
souls, than he does that picks their pocket.

Such I mean, as Hugh Peter's, of whom they have had as good an opinion, as they
now have of any of their precious, godly men, who can scarce hold from
laughing, (as Hugh Peter's did,) to see how soon the poor fools and their moneys
were parted.

Of which precious snivelling, whining chapmen, if any be so foolhardy as to
plead for their Baal's and Diana's, here defied; let him but put his name to
what he writes, and I Will promise him I Will tell him if he desire it, what E. H.
(at the end of this Letter subscribed) does signify, and who claims that name,
which those Letters here stand for; because I Will justify every word I write;
and I would also beg of such an one, (if at least such an one there be, so
daring as to defend Modern Orthodoxy, whose admirers did use to expose
themselves in Print as readily as ridiculously, and as pertly, as malepertly,)
that he would place his words, as right as that disorderly scribbling Tribe of
Adoniram use to do; and let me not have one such tempting word, as Trinkles,
Tuants, Un: hoopable jurisdiction, or ferreting upon the stage, and the like to
sport with; as he loves me, my ease, my quiet and repose.

Left complaint be made by those of the Kings and Dukes Playhouse, that, for
less money, to their great hinderance and want of custom, we entertain men in
Afternoons, with our Repartees, till it be grown almost as good as a Play; as
Father Gregory phrases it p. 35. very jocundly.

Gregory himself allows a man once in his life to change his Party, p. 91. for
which I could almost approve one thing he says; and indeed otherwise he would
have condemned S. Paul and all mankind, who are born with their backs
heavenward; but when he says, they may change sides either for safety or
preferment, he discovers the sow, beggarly and ignoble principles that act him;
it is Greg. like, Gregory's own self, for so he came to be an executioner,
either for safety (to save his own neck from the Gallows) or for Preferment to
so high an Office.

Come take my advice Greg. learn at last to be more wise, and leave this
scribbling, to which your stars are averse; and because I am in the counselling
humor, I also advise you, (better late thrive than never) abjure this
villainous game Picquet, which you say, you but lately learned; haunt not the
company of Lincoln Dignitaries, nor those rooking Ordinaries, where you say you
were chouc'd when you played pieces, for fear that though you never have grace
to repent and return from Oliverian Orthodoxy, yet it is more than an even lay,
that such lewd courses will in spite of your purse, make you a turn-Coat, a
Profession that I was never so needy and threadbare to be of; for my Buff-coat,
though turned two or three times, will scarcely make so neat a Cassock, as I
now wear, though the Kings Tailor himself take it in hand; Modern Orthodoxy,
under which I was born and bred, and to which I was childishly led, being now
abhorred by me, through more ingenuous and generous principles, than either
safety or preferment.

Neither of which was either designed, obtained, or like to be obtained in the
change by me, who could, if I had listed to have been so base, have picked the
peoples pockets, with canting long snivelling sermons, as cleaverly as the best
of them, with many thanks for my great pains therein, besides applause and
renown too into the bargain alive and dead: whereas the party I own, is of
another Cue, and Preferments, designed by our noble Ancestors with a liberal
hand to men of most merit, being biased many times with little Picques and
self-interest, run right upon the Jack, that if he paid not for it before he
had it delivered, yet paid dearer for it by marrying cousin Abigail, or
blear-eyed Leah our daughter: whereas more safety and preferment (as the Non-
conformists know well) flows plentiful upon the Oliverian Orthodox, whilst the
truly Orthodox Clergy fall into contempt universal, and by reason of envy to
some of the Great Ones, and scorn to such as are too deservedly despicable
amongst the Clergy, very few men do cordially concern themselves therein.

Enough to deter men from those so little plausible Truths, which I have owned
in this Letter, with such candor and freedom, according to that Primitive
Orthodoxy of our Savior, the Apostles, the Primitive Church, and the present
Church of England, if they durst speak out, for fear of being houted at with
such as Greg. and scurrilous companions of Oliverian Orthodoxy; who hang
together on one string, stand by, defend, and encourage one another by gifts
and preferments, too strong temptations for narrow and degenerous souls to
resist, thereby betraying discountenanced Truths;

Whilst, on the other hand and party, men are so unconcerned in any thing but
private interest and little picques, that a despised truth may go a begging for
all them, let the Church and Truth sink or swim, they will save one, little
considering that neither their private Cargo's nor themselves can possibly be
safe in a wrack.

Which this Kingdom and Church has suffered lately already by a rebellion
countenanced and vouched by Gospel-discoveries, in their Lectures, Preachments,
rash Prayers, called blasphemously, gifts of the holy Ghost, all which I have
proved to be no gifts, otherwise than as Physicians call their Medicines doses,
gifts; yet men pay dear enough for these doses, and so have these doses, if
they be gifts, cost these Kingdoms dear, even their best heart blood; God keep
us from their doses, and the Jewish thraldom of sabbathizing, by which
Hypocritically and Pharisaically they impropriated a day from works of mercy,
that they might have more leisure to sell their doses or gifts, as they falsely
call them, helping themselves at once with a market day, on which they may sell
at leisure all their Apostate wares and Impostures; and perhaps sell the same
wares two or three or four times on the same market day, first in a Morning
Lecture at one Chureh, in a fore-noon Sermon at another Congregation, in an
afternoon Sermon at another place; and then fourthly and lastly, a Crambe
Repetition of the same Sermon, though pitiful ware, God knows, as ever cost so
dear, having been paid for dear enough in conscience, at the first part of the
day, when it was exposed to sale in the morning Lecture.

And also this Superstitious Sabbathizing (though contrary to all the reformed
Churches in the world, and all Christendom, whether they follow the Greek,
Muscovian, Roman, Lutheran, or Calvinian Churches, yet) here in England alone
admired by these Modern Orthodox, partly for their gain-sake, partly for
pride-sake, glorying and braving their betters with that silly superstitious
vizor of Religion; but making more damnable use of it, by arming the people,
bejuggled with their pretenses of serving the Lord in their care of the Lords
day against the King and Church, that (hating to lay greater yokes and burdens
upon the necks of the disciples, than Christ, the Apostles, Primitive Church
and all Christendom does impose) proclaimed that due liberty, to which Christ
had set us free by abolishing that Type Sabbathical (both weekly and yearly
Sabbaths) amongst other hand-writings of Ordinances Ceremonial that were
against us.

Yet these Modern Orthodox men, fairly pretending for God, and preaching up his
day, though superstitiously and Ceremoniously, Jewishly, Pharisaically and
Hypocritically, made the silly people believe all was gold that they made to
glister, and nothing could be superstitious which they cried up, who used to
cry down superstition with a filthy wide mouth; and as wide from Truth,
Scripture, Right Reason, as Heaven is from Hell, or Truth from falsehood.

This Jewish superstitious Sabbathizing then furnished them with one whole day
in a week to vend their wares, and get gain; (though afterward their insatiable
greediness got them weekday Lectures too) also furnished them with a new cloak
of Holiness to cover their knavery, rebellion, jugglings, pride, covetousness
and schism; and also furnished them with an Artillery of men and arms, with
adjutant supplies of money to boot, to fight against the King and Church, and
fill the whole Land with blood and ruin, fighting for superstition under the
colors of holiness, and the Lords day; and all that oppose them herein, must
needs be fighters against God, and profane.

Which opinion of the people is still so settled in them, and so little hopes
there is, that they will be capable of better information, and so little thanks
(however) for the pains; (unpleasant truths being never so welcome as pleasing
errors and superstitions;) that I once resolved (with the old Politic Monk,
sinere res vadere vt vadunt) to let people think and do what they would for all
me.

But when I considered the mischief that this Jewish superstition alone has
occasioned in the Kingdom, and that either King, Church and Kingdom must deny
their own light and knowledge, and thus Judaize, or else there is a weapon
always at hand ready for the Modern Orthodox plausibly to assault again our
Peace upon all occasions; and till mutiny be ripe, there is in the interim a
sufficient calumny always ready, by way of preparation thereunto, wherewith to
reproach the King and Church as debauched in principles and practices profane,
when if the truth was but known, and the question determined, the profaneness
must lie, where the superstition lies; yet if Greg. had not hinted it in
reproach to Bishop Bramhall, I had not meddled with it now, though I bless God
for the occasion, and that he has put so much courage and honesty in my mind,
as to study more to get my Countrymen good, by avowing the Truth, than to get
their good wills, by betraying Truth, through slavish and base designs of
applause and profit, against both which as to mine own particular affairs I now
speak in this particular concern for Truth, as you (knowing my Profession so
well) do very well know. And I am afraid some of the Clergy of the Church of
England will give me little thanks for some passages, and a hundred to one if
some little pert Gentleman do not briskly stand up and say, You! with your
Sermon of six verses, which you commend so highly to the skies, as that which
alone will carry a man to heaven, if he do but practice that Sermon, (then he
follows me on with Latin sentences -- Laus proprio sordet in ore -- etc.) And
must we burn all our Sermon notes? Four or five hundred Sermons I have now by
me of mine own making, at least transcribed all with mine own hand; and some I
intend for the Press, some to dedicate to the Right Worshipful my Patron that
gave me this Living: some of the better sort to the Right Honorable my Patron
(I hope) that shall be, in giving me a better Living. And do you think I will
lose the opportunities of publishing my thankfulness to one Patron for the
Living I have, and of procuring my self a better Living by the Simony of
Praises, a whole page full, in an Epistle Dedicatory to my Patron that shall
be, I hope; you, with your six verses, what do you say to these things?
besides, I owe you an old grudge for the market day you speak of a little too
slightly by your favor, Sir, as if we of the Church of England too made an
advantage of that superstition by Morning Lectures, and fore and after noon
Sermons and Repetitions, besides weekday Lectures; and all these perhaps but
one and the same Harangue sold often after it was paid for fairly and
delivered, in the presence of many witnesses; I must tell you, Sir, you are
another Bays, you kill friend and foe, Hungary, Transylvania, etc. all
Scotland, and a great part of the Church of England; besides, Sir, whilst I
have a Hebrew tongue in my head, I must speak in the behalf of Hebrew, a tongue
it seems (you say) you understand not, nor any body else, taking measures of
others by your own shorter scantlings; that would be a pretty jest indeed, what
is Hebrew tongue nothing with you, Sir? I have spent my money and my pains
finely indeed, and Mr -- the old Hebrew Professor that has had many a fair
piece, besides collations at my chamber for reading Hebrew to me; the Mazoreth
notes and all, you make nothing of, nor of the Jewish University at Tyberias,
in Fa this is fine, very fine, very fine indeed; and all this, because one
Vessius prefers the Septuagint, as (he says) Christ and his Apostles did,
before the Hebrew Text, or Tongue, which you say of all Tongues (at the gift of
Tongues) was neglected as a Language lost and needless, as not being the Mother
Tongue of any people in the World, since the irrecoverable Captivity of Israel
and Judah into Babylon: What do you say to these things E. H?

I will say, noble Sir, nothing with a good will to offend your Mesship, your
Priscianship, your Pedantship. Come on, I Will try your scholarship presently;
I Will pose you, in the first place, can you form (...), or amo? No. Ha, ha, he,
I knew what a Scholar you were: Can you cap Verses? No. I am no Po -- It seems
then you want a Hebrew Tongue? No. I say, no, still. Then you have a Hebrew
Tongue in your head: No, neither. Then you would surely take my Hebrew Tongue
away, would you? No. I long for no such Tongue, much good may it do you; but
for my part, I say, hang it; it is dry meat, when all is done. But I mean, you
say to my Hebrew Tongue, Tongue thou lie, thou lie in the Throat. Yes, that
I do say, where else should it lie but in the Throat. I mean, you deny all
Hebrew Tongues, Hebrew Texts, and Hebrew Jews. No. I do not deny but there may
be one Hebrew Jew, for Father Gregory tells us of one at Malmsbury, but
excepting that one, not yet six months old, I say again there is not one more
Hebrew Jew that I know of in the world; if by Hebrew Jews you mean Jews that
Vernacly speak Hebrew; or that do certainly understand it. Did you ever
converse among the Jews? Yes, as far from this place as is Jerusalem and the
Land of Jury, and much further off. And are not those Jews Hebrews? I mean do
they not understand Hebrew? No, no otherwise than as you and I understand it;
some of their Levites have a little insight into the Masoreth notes and rules
of canting that Lauguage: Their University at Tyberias, to make some little
show that there is, or at least was such a Nation undispersed, invented those
Masoreth notes, to give some light to that dark language, but thereby they have
only of that Tongue made any thing rather than any thing certain; and to this
day the Jews own the Chaldee Paraphrase especially; invented about our
Savior's Time; By Onkel^s for the Pentateuch; and for the Prophets great and
small, by Jonathan; on whose paper, whilst he was writing it, if a fly chanced
to light casually, fire from Heaven came immediately to consume her, the
Rabbis say.

Had the Jews no Chaldee Paraphrase before that time? Yes, Esdras, who first
reduced the Old Testament into the Canon, as we have it now, immediately after
the Return from Babylonish Captivity, turned the Old Testament into Syriack,
but for your Hebrew Text, that, as a great secret, was only known to the
Priests, who expounded all to the People from the Syriack or Chaldee, Nehem. 8.
7, 8.

Why, is Syriack and Chaldee all one? Yes, I think so, differing only in
Dialect, as did also the Antiochian or Maronites pronunciation, the Galilean,
and Jerusalem Dialects; which yet were all one Babylonish Tongue, honored by
being the Mother Tongue to our blessed Savior (when in the flesh) as also to
the Apostles; all these Dialects differing only as Scotch, Yorkshire,
Devonshire, and Kentish pronunciations amongst us; or as the Dorick, Ionick,
Aeolick, etc. among the Greeks.

But, I say still; did not Adam speak Hebrew? I do not remember, it is a great
while ago, but I think he did not; the Learned Grotius says, that that Language
which Adam and all the world spoke 3400 years together, before the confusion of
Tongues at B^bel, was indeed one Language, but it is now lost, and dispersed
amongst all Languages, dividing that Primitive Tongue to every Nation a piece,
till it had never a bit left for it self; and no matter, it lasted long enough
in all conscience for one Tongue; without a miracle no one Tongue can be
epidemical and universal 100 years together, different climates will make
different pronunciations: English and Dutch was the same Tongue in our
Forefathers the Saxons, we scarce understand Chaucer's English, nor do the
Dutch born in England readily understand the Dutch spoken in the Netherlands,
and yet can speak a Language which they themselves call Dutch here in England
amongst themselves.

Do not the Jews at this day make most use of the Hebrew text of the Old
Testament? No. Our Savior, the Apostles and all the Jews in that time admired
most, and made most use of the Septuagint, which was given (say some) by divine
Inspiration; however, though the autographical Copy (laid up carefully in that
famous Library of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, (who set the 70 to work) when, in
Julius Caesar's time (half a hundred years before our Saviors time) was burnt
at Alexandria with all the rest of that glorious Library, yet the Apographical
Copies were taken for the most certain and authentic Text of the Old
Testament, and therefore quoted upon all occasions by Christ and his Apostles,
sometimes in places differing from the Hebrew Text, as we have it, there being
thirteen signal variations betwixt them; the Chaldee Paraphrase not then having
obtained that due credit it now has got; and the Jerusalem Targum, invented
about 1500 years ago; and the Megilloth Targum, not above 1200 years ago, all
in Syriack, and now generally owned by the Jews, all of them at this day?

But were not the Talmuds both of them writ in Hebrew, the Pharisees saying
they were delivered unto Moses upon mount Sinai with the Law? No, They were the
Invention of R. Jehuda, surnamed for his holiness, Hakkadosh; but in the
Chaldee Tongue, and as spurious and adulterate rejected by our Savior.

Which do you think is the most Authentic apographical Copy of the Septuagint,
the Vatican or Alexandrian? Much alike; yet the Alexandrian is usually
preferred; we call it the King's Manuscript, because it was sent to our King
from Constantinople by Cyril Lucaris Patriarch there, and brought with him as a
famous monument from Alexandria where he was Patriarch till advanced to the
higher dignity, the Patriarchat of Constantinople; from whence our Leiger
Ambassador there Sir Thomas Roe sent it to our King.

The Greek Church heard of no other Bible but this Septuagint 400 years after
Christ, when St. Hierom first divulged commonly the Hebrew Text; at which the
African Bishops, St. Augustine especially was so offended, that he interdicted
that Hebrew Bible, as did also the Greek Bishops; which forced St. Hierom l. 2.
cont. Ruffinum; and in Praf ad 2 Chronicles. to beg their pardon, saying, he had no
design by that Promulgation, to confront the sacred Septuagint.

And for my part, I think (if you will not be angry) that the Vulgar Latin is a
more certain Interpreter, and as old (I believe) as since the times of the
Apostles, being writ by them, or some of their Disciples for the use of the
Church of Rome, to whom St. Paul writ an Epistle; and even Beza, as well as
Grotius acknowledges it, so much the more credibly authentic for that old as
well as odd Latin in which it gloried, before St. Hierom's time.

For he indeed pretended to amend and correct it by putting forth another
Latin Translation, concordant, as to the Old Testament, with his Hebrew Text,
encouraged thereunto by Pope Damasus, and both his Latin Version and the old
Vulgar Latin were confirmed by Gregory the Great: But because they made a
distraction in the Church, they were by the Authority as well as pains of
Clement 8. concorporated, and now are known by the old name; (given before St.
Hierom was born) The Vulgar Latin: To which Learned men I Will assure you give a
great deal of Credit and Reverence; therein consenting with Baronius,
Bonfrerius, Serrarius, etc. though they differ in other matters.

But I speak of my Hebrew Tongue, now that it is mended by the University at
Tiberias, the Masoreth: What say you to that? I say nothing to it, I told you
before, I love no Tongues when the goodness is quite dried out of them, I value
them no more than a chip, though for want of better accommodation they usually
serve some vain People to make a show with, thinking they are better than
nothing, if you will believe a grave and learned Author called Hudibras.

For Hebrew Roots, although the are found
To flourish most in barren Ground, etc.
Be not offended Sir, I do not think you Sir, nor a thousand more such Hebrew
bablers as your self are, at all concerned in the Sarcasme; you carry Hebrew
only a little at the tip, and Tongues end; they are no small fools, I can tell
you, that can produce the Roots of that Tongue.

What Language spoke our Savior? Only one, the Syriack, or Babylonish, his
Mother Tongue according to the flesh; though as God he understood all Languages
and things; but he never traveled, during his Incarnation, out of the Nation
and Language wherein he was born, that we read of. When our Savior and the
Apostles quoted Scripture out of the Old Testament, did they not follow the
Hebrew Text? No certainly, but the Septuagint, as it is evident: Nor was the Old
Testament composed into a Canon, as we have it, until Esdras first did it,
after the Captivity: And the Samaritans own no Scripture to this day, nor in
our Saviors time, but the Pentateuch; the minor Prophets, as we have them, not
till Esdras his time composed as now; and some of the Holy Scripture is yet
quite lost to us, namely the Prophecies of the Prophets, Iddo, Nathan,
Shemajah, etc. Besides most part of the Prophecy of Daniel was writ in
Chaldee; so also Ezra chap. 4. and some other Parts of Holy Scripture, that I
list not here to recite: And St. Augustine l. 18. c. 13. de civit. Dei. tells
us, the Grecian Christians knew not in his time whether there were any other
sacred Original but the Septuagint.

Happily made more intelligible, if not more legible, by the concurrent
Testimonies of sacred Apographical Versions and Copies, Syriack, Armenian,
Indian, Vulgar Latin, Aethiopick, and the Mungrel Tongue Coptick, partly
Greek, partly Old Egyptian; (as to some Books of the Bible, Persian) Chaldee
Paraphrase; by the Providence of Almighty God, and the indefatigable pains of
Learned men preserved and collected, namely, St. Hierom, Cyril, Eusebius, and
Pamphilus, Mercer, Buxtorf, Sixtus Senensis, Pradus, Nobilius Flaminius, Abbas
Apollinarius, Stephanus, Vilalpandus, Azorius, Simon de Muis, Lindanus,
Kircher, Casaubon, Bochartus, Usherus, Fullerus, Erasmus, Grotius, Beza,
Morinus, Breerwood, Vatablus, Munster, Hutter, Junius, Fabritius, Boderianus,
Masius, above all Cardinal Ximenius the Toletan Primate, for the first great
Polyglot Bible, enlarged by Arias Montanus at the charge of Philip King of
Spain, commonly called; the King of Spain's Bible; but augmented since by the
Parisian Bible, at the cost and care of Michael de Jay; and now all of them
outvied by the Late Polyglot Bible Printed at London with as incomparable
profit as pains.

But do we not find the old Hebrew Tongue in those Bibles? Yes; Yes; But that
which is rather construed by comparing with other Languages more certain and
better known; especially since the old Hebrew that had anciently but three
Letters that stood for Vowels, we may now make a nose of wax of an old Hebrew
word, now that we have got a Baker's dozen of Vowels, besides Dipthongs added
to the former.

And indeed all those vowels, notes, and points, are not only uncertain, but of
less standing in the University, than Greek accents and aspirations, a new
invention too of the Grammarians: yet both of them are of much longer standing,
than the distinction of the Holy Books inter Chapters and Verses; which yet are
useful, if they be not always too much insisted upon: of all the new Hebrew
additions Dagesch pleads the greatest seniority, being as old (some say) as the
Letter N. But most old Hebrew Copies neglect him, and leave him out.

In what Language was the New Testament first indicted? In Greek, all of them
Autographically, as the most universal Language; and also in other Languages
Autographically, as Latin, Syriack without controversy, and one or two Books
thereof (some say) in the Hebrew Tongue: indeed the Apostles could speak all
useful Languages; but although some ancient MS. say, that Matthew's Gospel was
writ in the Hebrew Tongue for the Jews at Jerusalem, cited by the Learned
Doctor Hammond in his Annotations upon Matt. 1. 1. yet because it is certain
the Jews then at Jerusalem understood Hebrew at that time no more than you and
I, by the Hebrew Tongue there, must be understood the Language of the Hebrews
then spoken at Jerusalem; which was Syriack; which Theodoret and many other
Learned Antiquaries say is an ancienter Language, as well as more certain, than
your Hebrew Tongue; and being, as was said, the Mother Tongue to the Apostles,
many Autographical Copies of some Books in the New Testament writ in Syriack
were acknowledged for Holy Scripture, before some of those sacred Books were
indicted, at least before they were generally received into the Canon of Holy
Writ; namely, the Second Epistle of St. Peter; the Second and Third Epistles of
St. John; the Epistle of St. Jude, and the Revelations of St. John.

The Sun's face when long wrapped up in a cloud
More beauteous shows, having cast off that hood:
The English Genius mourning many a year
In sniveling black, now grows more debonair.
Rome as she thrive in Arms, so thrive in Arts;
So England too; since she got Loyal Hearts;
More brisk all Learning's grown, lately deformed,
And must the Pulpit be the last reformed?
In Parliament, and Inns of Court, Long Speeches
Are reckoned little worth but to wipe br --
He best does speak, that speaks plain, short and sweet:
Is not right Eloquence for the Pulpit meet?
Great is Diana, great long Sermons snivelling,
By which Craft Holder forth sneaks for a Living.
Be gone base canting Tribe with your New Lights
That only teach men to be Hypocrites;
Long winded Preachments being now forlorn,
A Dress now out of fashion, being worn
Threadbare by whining Pharisees alone,
Or it is the Jews-trump of Religion.
And is it not deservedly in disgrace?
It never yet had so much as a good face
Or form of Godliness, far from the Power;
The Primitive Sermons not one jot like your:
Christ and his Servants, holy Writ records,
Converted thousands with a few plain words.
But still I fear little Priscian pursues me; and perhaps will say, I wonder
what work you will cut out for the Ministers of the Church of England, now you
have clipped away all, (but your own Sermon of six verses,) as well as Modern
Orthodoxy.

Truly, truly Generous Sir, I have cut out more and better work for you and all
Gospel Ministers, than you are well aware of, or can readily accomplish. though
all the shreds and parings, as rubbish be thrown into Hell, except what is
included in these six verses; and you shall do your work more profitably and
honorably to your selves and the people, if you keep your selves within the
limits of those six verses, do as much good as ever you did, and have as much
work too, and yet neither do nor say any thing mischievously and impertinently:

For first your conversations (at which the enemy is so scandalized as well as
your selves) will be unblameable by doing as you would be done unto; you cannot
then chouce poor Gentlemen of their moneys when they play pieces at an
Ordinary, this Principle will keep you from cheating tricks, or being cheated;
will keep your hands from picking and stealing and defrauding; and your tongues
from evil speaking, lying and slandering; why? because you would not willingly
be so served by others; but you must by this principle behave your selves
soberly, in reference to your own bodies in temperance, righteously in
reference to all other men, by justice, and godlily in reference to devotion
toward God in duties of Religion and holy worship: which is made up of five
particulars, namely, Faith, the Seals of Faith, Prayers, Praises and Ceremonies.

Unto which some add Swearing: but not well advised therein; For though God
Almighty says to his people, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and
serve him, and shall swear by his name; yet the last clause is not exegetical
of the former; nor do men serve God by swearing; nor is it any part of Heavenly
Liturgy, other than as when we serve truth and our generation, being called at
Courts of Judicature, to attest truth, calling God to witness, and to judge us
according to the truth of what we averr; and if this be done cordially, it
assoils such a man of Atheism, but not of irreligion; if by Religion we mean
religious worship; which I say has but five parts, as abovesaid: and all
included in my Sermon of six verses.

Now says little Modern Orthodox; are you there again with your Clypticks?
having neither accepted Sermon nor Lecture into your holy worship? I hope
Sermons that have had all the room in the Church, (when your Liturgy, and your
Sacraments, and your Ceremonies were turned out of doors,) shall yet be taken
in for one share, part and portion of religious and holy worship of God.

No, not a bit, I admit no Sermons, Lectures, Preachments, nor Harangues, no
not mine own dear Sermon of six verses to have any part or lot in this matter
of religious worship; I know they have turned all religious worship out of the
house of God, so that now Sermon is taken to be the All of Gods worship and so
understood in common phrase; Is there a Sermon this Afternoon, or to day? is
sermon done? were you at sermon to day? etc. meaning, were you at Church? or
serving God to day? sermon, sermon for all; and if no sermon, then there is
nothing at all, that amongst silly men and women can sound like religious
worship.

Whereas I come and say quite contrary; namely, that Ceremonies, Sacraments,
etc. are religious, necessary, and holy worship of God; but Sermons, Lectures
and Harangues are not at all the religious and holy worship of God, when they
are never so good sermons; but the usual sermons of Modern Orthodox, that
justled true and holy worship out of the Church, did not so much as tend to
holy worship consisting in Ceremonies, the Liturgy, Sacraments, etc. those men
being so far from preaching up those parts of holy worship, that they preached
them down, and consequently, the more sermons, and the more eloquent sermons of
that nature, were the most devilish works of darkness and Hell, and the more
men heard and believed those sermons, the more they were children of wrath and
darkness, if so be that those five particulars aforesaid contain all the parts
and portions of holy worship; and that sermons, the most admired Preachments be
not allowed therein any, (not so much as the least) share; sermons at best
being only in order to Gods worship, as they plainly and honestly comment upon,
and exhort unto Ceremonies, Faith, Seals of Faith, Prayers and Praises; this
ought to be the height of the Ambition that sermons can lay claim unto; only to
be subservient and serviceable to these high and mighty Devotions, Faith, the
seals of Faith, Prayers, Praises and Ceremonies, which three last you have most
Evangelically in our Holy Liturgy.

And all sermons that tend not to the preaching up of these, (how worthy cares
soever Father Grey-beards do esteem them,) are whimsical and extravagant at
best, in relation to instructing people in Holy and Gospel worship: but if
those sermons cry down these, or any of these five particulars, established in
the Church, then those sermons, and sermon-mongers are diabolical,
schismatical, hypocritical, seditious, false, foolish and Hellish; and such
sermons in the Church, are like Baal, an Idol in the Temple of God, and such
Sermon-mongers, Baals Priests.

All whom here I defy in the Name of the Living God, to come out, if they dare
try it out with me in this particular, and plead for their Baal: so I call
those sermons that men have not only made Idols of, but those Idols have been
set up in the house of God, ever since Modern Oliverian Orthodoxy was set up,
and all true and Holy Worship has been quite thrown out of the Church, to make
room for this Baal.

Not that I (neither) would have the Pulpit thrown out of the Church; since it
may be so useful by Exhortations and honest Instructions from thence, how men
may demean themselves in the holy Worship of God, and in Temperance, and
Charity, and Justice toward themselves and others. But still I say, though I
allow it a place in the Church, yet only such a place as the Seat of
Ecclesiastical Judicature, those judicial Benches you see in some Churches,
when Discipline was in fashion; namely, those Benches and the Pulpit are only
for Direction, Correction and Instruction, and as much, and more need of the
former than the latter; if those Seats and Benches of Discipline were, as they
should be, filled with honest and able men, not with Salesmen, Brokers and
Hucksters. But neither Spiritual Courts, nor Sermons, neither Discipline nor
Doctrine are any parts of the holy Worship of God; though by reason of men's
infirmities, they have, like Physic to the Body, or Laws to a Nation, been
found useful, when well managed: But still, they are happiest people that need
fewest Laws, and the healthiest people that need the least Physic, and the
holiest and wisest people that need the least Doctrine or Discipline, Sermons
or spiritual Courts.

Both which, I confess, have proved pretty gainful Trades, as some have gone to
work, to the peoples great loss, as well as great disparagement and reproach to
them; there being no greater sign of a Dunce, than that he is taught, and
taught, and taught his Lesson over and over again, and yet can never say it,
take forth, or turn a new leaf; ever learning but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, as those silly women St. Paul chastises, 2 Timothy 3. 6,
7. But that our men should be so silly too, they may be ashamed of their dull
pates, if they have any shame in them. Besides, like Blockheads and illthriven
lean Jades, they also shame their Keepers, Teachers and Masters, who, if they
had the right art of teaching, could not but make better Scholars.

Perhaps the hypocritical Oliverian Crew will think I speak against Hourglass
Sermons out of a lazy self-interesting Preservation, owning here plain and
short Pulpittalk, thereby to vouch my own negligence and sloth.

Let them think so still, I care not: but though they think my Sermons too
short, I Will make them amends in another bargain. I am sure they think my
Writings and this Letter (in particular) long enough; if they do not, perhaps
they will think so upon the next occasion they give me to hold forth against
them.

Besides, my Sermons are not Hourglass Sermons; for I give order to my Clark
and Sexton to turn the Hourglass in their Pew, that a great quantity of the
sand may be run out, (under the Rose be it spoken) before they set it up in
view upon my first approach to the ever-to-be-adored Pulpit; choosing rather to
whet than dull the appetites of my hearers, and leave them rather a longing for
more, than cloy their affections with tedious stuff: it is healthful at such
meals to rise with an appetite.

And indeed I and my Auditory are pretty well agreed for that matter; most of
them (I hope) having not so ill been taught, or so learned Christ, but that
they had rather be good than seem good: and so they have but the Worship of God
(in our sacred Liturgy) to the full, they are more indifferent for those Pulpit
after-drops; of which yet they have not been scanted, nor have they wanted any
of their due and wonted measure, this fortnight that I have spent in this
Letter, more troublesome to my Amanuensis than my self; costing more pains and
time in the Printing and Press than in the Composure.

However, my Congregation, for the generality of them judge not the worth of a
Sermon by the Quantity but Quality thereof; an ounce of meat being worth a
pound of poison, as much as an ounce of Gold is worth a pound of dull Lead:
choosing rather to have a profitable and plain Sermon, though short, than an
impertinent story antiquely told, though never so long; they coming not to
Church to see Tumbling tricks and Hocus juglings, with Cloak hung by, Buttons
scracht open, Hands heaved up, with wide open Mouth and Cheveril Lungs, with
Teeth bitingly set and grinning, with such apish Peter's, Rogers,
Dedham-Jack-Pudding Tricks; willing to leave those to modern Pharisees,
Sermon-mongers, Hypocrites and Oliverian-Orthodox, the Head and Body of whose
Religion is made up like a dismal Monster, in which nothing appears eminent but
sowcing great Luggs and a Mouth greater, without Brains, and without any Face
like true Religion; and if the Devil did not possess men strangely, with greedy
Covetousness, Pride, Blood and Singularity, no man could be in love with it.

But if any of these Mad-caps will be so hardy, as to venture a fall or foil in
behalf of their monstrous Mistress of modern Oliverian Orthodoxy; and undertake
against me, to prove that she has a portion and share in religious and holy
Worship; and also endeavor to prove that she has decent Features, if she be not
a Beauty, and has more eminent and protuberant parts than Mouth and Ears, let
him come out as soon as he will; for her credit and his, and all the credits of
good Old Cause men, lie desperately in jeopardy and at hazard. Therefore the
sooner they show their courage and strength the better it will be for them, and
not much the worse for me; now my hand is in, I long to try again what metal
they are made of, or where their great Sampson's-strength lies, which Fops only
admire: For we never could find yet that their strength lay in their Brains or
any Excrement that their Brains put forth or hitherto produced. Their Talent
lies in chucking the white and blew Aprons; and if the Husband be Novice enough
to be cullied into the bargain, there is so much saved: but if he be too crafty,
like a cunning old Bird, that will not be caught with such Chaff; in that Case
it is lawful for the dear heart his Wife to filch religiously, and cheat her
Husband for God's sake.

And so let them address to Petticoat, that is the height they can go, and plot
how to make their approaches to her Pocket; and for the great pains of Brother
Precious therein get a Maudlin Courtsee, and thanks, very lovingly, with great
Cake and Posset too, over and above; mouthing in conclusion most savourly with
Hopkins and Sternhold, which, in modern Gypsee-cant, sounds -- Loath to depart.

These are worthy cares for those Fathers, (so called in good earnest, it is no
laughing matter, they become sometimes at such Meetings, Fathers, by right and
good Reason.) But to fool themselves in Print, it renders them to all ingenuous
men, but so much the more ridiculous, who were ridiculous enough (God knows)
before, in all conscience.

Like that little Adventurer, who to satisfy Wife, who longed to see dear
husbands name in Print, and therefore desired him to put forth a Ballad: No,
quoth he, dear chuck, none of us have wit enough to make a Ballad, except
Brother Wild, whose fancy now (wants tilting, even for Ballad-wit, it) runs so
low, and is so sour and stale withal, its briskness, such as it was, is now
with its spirit quite gone, he is drained now to Taplash Tap-droppings: What
think you then husband, said she, of the story, the pretty story you told me in
bed last night of Puss-cat? what think you of putting that same Cat into the
Press? Oh! dear love, replys he, I thank thee for that, it is very true, the
story of the Cat, -- that same, that, that, that, and away with it to the
Press, a whole sheet full of Cat.

Cat? what Cat, do ye think? House-cat? no, Church-cat, he would have said, but
that he forgot it (in his Letter to a friend.) And what news of the Cat? Why,
says he, to this purpose, (for I cannot write so slovenly as his words are, it
is too much honor to take notice of such a Scribler, except after dinner to
laugh a little for digestion sake) This same Cat, says he: Very good, what of
the Cat? Why, once upon a time there was a Cat: Good! go on: this Cat came into
the Church -- good still -- and when she came there she was a Ratcatcher, a
Rat-trap, and a Mouse-trap: well, so far good; and this same Church-cat stood
in spiritual Hieroglyphick, for kneeling and the Cross in Baptism, those two
hateful Ceremonies to honest Gentleman, Modern Orthodox man, who has an
antipathy to that same Church-cat: Well, go on, what of all this? what? Judge
you, Gentlemen, which is most civil, to keep that Cat in the Church, and
thereby loose the good company of honest Gentleman Cat-hater, or else seal a
lease of Ejectm^nt against this Church-cat, otherwise Modern Orthodox starts up
in a fright, saying, Sit you may, Gentlemen, I cannot stay in the room, I have
a natural antipathy to that same Cat.

In fa, what an antipathy? where is Hopkins the witch finder? search him for a
teat, or any such imp-suckler, any marks of natural antipathy to this same
Church-cat can be found about him;

Well, it is done, come give in your evidence; have you upon search found this
same antipathy-teat about honest Gentleman? No, he is free and clear for that
matter: But I find an ill habit of body and mind, contracted by humor of
singularity, pride, envy and lean-chapt malice, which is the only cause of this
dislike against this Church-cat of his own making; and only speaks this same
Cat-hater to be (...), a lover only of his own will, and good pleasure in Gods
service, that is all.

For (to keep to the Allegory) since Ceremonies (which he calls the Ratcatcher)
must needs be in the Church one way or other, in one form or other; whilst we
have bodies, we must serve God either in the posture of kneeling, etc. (which
he calls the Ratcatcher Cat) or else in the posture of sitting, lolling, lying,
etc. (which I Will call Ratcatcher Owl) to which I and millions more of honest
Christians in these days, and ever since our Saviors time have had an
antipathy; to retort therefore upon this wise disputant, and beat the Cat about
the Owls-head of the Bouby; judge you, Gentlemen, which is most civil, to keep
the Owl in the Church, by the Ceremonies of sitting, and lolling with hat upon
skull, etc. the like irreverent postures, to which Church-owl, I and millions
of honest Gentlemen have an antipathy, or rather fright this Ratcatcher Owl out
of the Church, for with her howtings and scrietching she spoils the music and
harmony of Spiritual Worship; so that I, and millions of such Owl-haters by
antipathy must otherwise avoid the Room and be gone.

We live in a Foppish Generation, Hugh Peter's ghost yet walks; he used to tell
a story of Pus-cat, and Puss in her Majesty: It took wonderfully, and this
nonsensical story of the Cat, because she made a mouth and mewed against
Ceremonies, was as good (at first) to some, as are nuts to Mother-midnight.

What wicked design men can have in blurring paper, and make it dear at this
rate, I cannot tell; but sure I am the greatest purchase they get by it, is
only infamy, amongst all wise men, by rendering themselves in print public
laughingstocks, a scorn and a proverb.

The truth is, I find a great deal more difficulty in persuading my mind to
stoop so low, as to take any notice of such despicable fellows, or what they
print, than to consute them: Why? tell me seriously, was there ever any
argument so vilely ridiculous, as this of the Cat?

A sordid crew! what never a Modern Orthodox man that can write like a man or,
a Scholar? can they play the men only to the women? I Will assure you, now that I
have here thrust out Sermons from Religious Worship, that used to thrust out
all Religious Worship, and have introduced Ceremonies as a necessary part of
Divine and Holy Worship; they had need rally all their forces, or they, are
routed for ever. And to encourage the best of them to the Ran-counter, I Will help
them with a weapon, from Mat. 15. 9. Let them manage it and flourish it as well
as they can.

But I would not have them, for their own credit, to tell the world, any more
lies in print; and say, I speak against Preaching and Faith, and Sermons the
means of Faith; if they should, they tell a damned lie; I would not have
Sermons (so they be plain, honest and seasonable) at all undervalued, or
disused when occasion calls for it, and the peoples ignorance or negligence;
But I will not yet let them take place in Gods Worship, Sermons being but man
speaking to man, or at best, when Gods assistance concurrs, it is but heavenly
influence upon man, which is another thing than Gods Holy Worship, which ought
to be our daily sacrifice, in exercises of Faith, the Sacraments as occasion
offers, constant Prayers, Praises, and Ceremonies, according to our holy,
heavenly and incomparable Common Prayer Book.

Ceremonies, will Greg. and the rest of Oliverian Orthodox say, Ceremonies,
they are one ground of our quarrel with your way of worship, and the great
ground, as being superstitious, and but bodily worship.

But bodily worship? why? what would you have? I make them no more But bodily
worship; yet that But, is such a But, that it will prove a But-end against
Modern Orthodoxy for ever, to all that honestly, and with a good heart, free
from partiality, prejudice and passion, do consider, and believe Gods Holy Word
and their own eyes.

How does the Apostle beg of the Romans, with many imprecations, for the
Ceremonies of bodily worship, in Gods holy Worship, as a most reasonable
service to him, A holy acceptable and living sacrifice unto God, Romans 12. 1.
And bids them all to open their mouths together in Prayer, Praises, and Worship
of God, as if they had but one mouth among them all, as well as one mind in
glorifying God, Romans 15. 6.

And also calls upon the Corinthians not only to do the great duty, but the
lesser duty; not only to glorify God with their spirits, but with their
bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And that for a very good reason, because the body is Gods
purchase, as well as the soul; Christ has bought both, paid a price for both;
both therefore, body as well soul must glorify God, by reverent postures and
gestures, as kneelings, bowing, sometimes even to the very ground, after the
Pattern and example of our Savior, Mat. 26. 39.

These blasphemous wretches of Oliverian and Modern Orthodox would have called
our Savior superstitious, and as well too St. Paul kneeling, Ephesians. 3. 14. and
St. Peter bowing down to the ground, Luke 5. 8. and kneeling, Acts 9. 40. St.
Stephen at last gasp kneeling, Acts 7. 60. with many other devout men, in the
Old and New Testament, Dan. 6. 10. Psalm. 95. 6. Acts 20. 36. Acts 21. 5. It Is
true, the worship of the mind is more profitable than of the body, which
profits but a little; yet that little, since it much helps the reverence of my
mind and spirit, ought I not to follow the Example, Precept and Pattern of the
Holy Ghost in Scripture? who sure best knows what is spiritual worship, after
the Holy Example of our Savior, the Apostles and all Saints, in the Ceremonies
of kneeling, bowing, etc. in bodily worship; rather than to follow the Precept
and Pattern of new Oliverian Orthodox men, Dissemblers, Murderers, Hypocrites,
Cheats, and Antic Foppish Jugglers, and wresters of Holy Writ, as ever did
gull silly souls,

Ceremonies then are one part of Spiritual worship, and Sermons are none; much
less are their Sermons any, that have been full of trumpery, and railing
against Ceremonies; thereby also railing against our Lord and Savior, and all
holy men: Let Baal look to his hits, he is gone else for ever from the Communion
of Saints and ingenuous men, for this Generation, that yet feels the smart of
their delusions and jugglings, and knows, to their cost, all I say to be true
by lamentable experience.

As for Faith, you find all its Articles in the Apostles Creed; believe but
that and be saved, so far as faith can save you; but faith without good works
can never save you, but is a dead faith, if you will believe your own eyes,
Jam. 2. more than those Juglers, that cast a mist before you, to keep you
blind, and lead you by the nose, by calling good works, (without which no man
shall go to heaven or be happy either in this world or the world to come) most
blasphemously, popery, superstition, and I know not what; but be but so good as
to give them your Moneys, your Pla^e, your Bodkins, your Thimbles, etc. Oh!
then it is no Popery nor Superstition; but stroaking the tools on the head,
gives them a coaks and a flap with a Foxes tail, and makes them believe they do
a very good work, and help the Lord also; and if they can persuade some old
fop, man or woman, to part with a good Estate to maintain a weekly Lecture, or
else mouth will not open, except that same annuity be in the case; and then,
the old Fox dies a charitable good man, not guilty of popery by that good work,
no not he: He that gives to Monks and Friars, and English Clergy, he is popish
and and superstitious: but to give to Modern Orthodox for a weekly Lecture and
Sermon; Oh heavenly! thank you lovingly.

As for the seals of Faith, you have the Sacraments; Initiating, Baptism,
strengthening, The Supper of the Lord.

Prayers and Praises, which both for private, Family, and public Devotions are
incomparable, and without fear of nonsense, rashness or blasphemy, contained in
the Liturgy, which should be the daily sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving
either in your houses, or better (if you can get company) in your Churches,
every morning and evening, as well as once a week, and always was frequented by
Holy Church, till Modern Orthordoxy, that abomination of desolation (spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet) was set up in the room thereof, etc. the Holy Liturgy
taken away, contemned and despised by wicked men, thereby to set up themselves
their own superstitions and inventions.

If in the Explication of the Liturgy, Sacraments, or Creed, or that Text,
Matt. 7. 12. Thereby to order men's conversations aright, you speak as
pathetically, fully and plainly as you can, whether in the Church or from house
to house, catechizing the ignorant, on Sundays, or other. Holy Days or
working-days; whether on a single Text, or (as our Savior usually did) on
twenty several subjects, in delivering Truths most seasonable and most useful
to your Hearers; whether an hour, half an hour, or half a quarter of an hour,
according to your discretions, what and how long may be most profitable and
convenient; Fear not but in so doing you do the work of an Evangelist with true
honor and approbation of God and all good men.

And leave canting, stories, whimsees and and cheats to the Modern Oliverian
Orthodox, they are unworthy the high calling whereunto you are called, and the
benefit of the Clergy of the Church of England; and only fit for Tailors,
Weavers, Cobblers, Chimney-sweepers, and such spiritual Juglers, Canters and
Gypsies.

I have comprised in those six Verses the best things and all that are needful
things which accompany salvation; of which now I will not further speak.

It had been happy for the King, Kingdom, the People and the Prayers too, if
they had kept themselves to that Divinity alone contained in those six Verses,
infinite treasure and blood had been saved, which has been spent and spilt,
through the whimsees and superstitions of these Oliverian Orthodox men.

Can any wise or good man imagine that the Almighty and merciful God would
leave the way to Heaven so hard to find, that no body can find it out, but he
that has heard twenty, or a hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousand Sermons.

Foppish and bejuggled mankind! Our Savior and his Apostles converted millions
with a few, short, plain words: Religion is the work of the whole man, all the
days of his life, consisting in the constant practice of piety; and not in
prating of piety, in idle and endless questions, disputes, glosses,
controversies, Lectures, whimsees, stories and Harangues, set off with antic
twangs of the nose, wry faces, mops, mows, split jaws, sparrow-mouths,
grunting, lions faces, hems, haws, yawnings, gapings, snivellings, whinings,
and mock-gypsee cantings and juglings, by spiritual Hocus Pocus, and Oliverian
Orthodox, being Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of their own wills and
pleasures, more than Gods will and pleasure, having a form or face of
godliness, and that no good one neither, but denying the power thereof: For of
this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden
with sint, led away with diverse lusts, etc.

Now will they have the impudence to say I rayl and reproach them in this
reproof; no matter: so said their Predecessors to my Savior, when he
denounced a woe to these Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites: Besides they are not my
words, so much as the words of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.

What can be said too smartly and home to such malignancies, as these Foppish
stories, Lectures, whimsees, wrestings of sacred Scripture, by Hugh Peter's and
the rest of the Tribe, which has undone us once already; he that cheats once
it is his fault, but if I am cheated twice with the same Juggle, Interpretation
and Legerdemayn, though from another Hocus or pick-pocket, I may thank my self;
no matter; Look better to the pocket another time.

Aftertimes, (for envy, (like hollow friends) accompanies every man that is
worth any thing, till he comes in his Grave, and then it leaves him) (when
prejudice and passion does not bribe the judgment) will best determine, which
of these three (Greg. Trinkles, or Hugh Peter's) thus in their colors
pencill'd, have the best Physnomy.

Indeed they all three face one way, go one way, and follow one and the same
Modern Orthodoxy, but with a different style, and under a different name.

Hugh Peter's held forth and managed Modern Orthodoxy under the name of the good
Old Cause; but Father Gray beard follows it under the name of the Cause too
good.

Hugh Peter's rendered the good Old Cause good enough to be fought for; but Greg.
has a higher value for it, at least seems to be so chary and tender over it,
that he says, it is too good to be fought for.

But both of them agree in fundamentals, and with joint forces inveigh against
the King, our late Sovereign, and his whole Reign; rendering it and him
despicable, and deformed all over with Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Manwaring.

Both of them agree against the Common Enemy, Bishops and Evil Counselors;
both of them quarrel with the Cross after Baptism, and kneeling at the
Sacrament.

Only Hugh Peter's does more tolerably pretend to Controversies in Divinity, as
not being out of the Road of his Profession: But, certainly this same Greg.
whatever he be, is no Divine.

It would almost tempt Charity to very hard thoughts of him, whilst he, like
Julian the Apostate, prosecutes so vehemently and maliciously Religion and all
religious men.

If Plato's transmigration of souls were true, I should conclude that Cham was
again in him Metampsuchos'd, he does so turn up the Fathers of the Church, and
exposing their nakedness to his Power, slashes them for their worthy Cares.

But his Rod does most wound his own face, and his own malice, and betraying
its self, becomes his own Executioner.

For certainly if his conscience were awake, it would fly in his face, and make
him recant, (with St. Paul for a less defamation unawares) I wi^t not Brethren
that it was God's High Priest.

God's High Priest -- and yet a wicked man, and then too going about a wicked
action; and yet St. Paul does ask forgiveness.

But Certainly Greg. can have no call to pass a censure upon either Ministers
of State, Councils, Fathers of the Church, their Actions, Councils, or Books;
sure if the way were good, and the good Old Cause never so good, yet certainly
Greg. it is not your Road, and therefore (if for no other cause you are out of
the way) as much you are when you talk Politickly of Augustus Caesar, Hen. IV.
etc.

Your Policies are like your Divinity, but neither of them taken out of the
Bible, which (you say) will teach a man the best Politics.

You might learn other measures of Government out of the Bible, then
displeasing or pleasing the People.

Herod to please the People killed James, and because he saw it pleased the
People, he put Peter in Prison also, Acts 12. 3. Pilat to do the Jews a
pleasure, delivered our Savior to be crucified; and Foelix willing to do the
Jews a pleasure left Paul bound. Argumentum turpissimum est Turba, faith Seneca.

These soft and unmanly Rules of Government and Policy, may perhaps agree with
your own effeminate temper; but they are not grounded upon Reason nor Religion.

Indeed when the light of these are obscured and Hood-winked with fear and
cowardice, the man is no more a man, much less a Governor, nor with these
circumstances capable of direction; for fear frights' h^ out of his wits, and
how can he govern others, that cannot govern himself?

But Almighty God does usually give large and noble souls to them that are
designed for Government, and not capable of such puny impressions of fear, that
mollify and unman vulgar and narrow spirits. The threatening ^llows daunted and
amazed Julius Caesar's waterman, till the great courage of Caesar revived the
poor spirited man with Caesarem and fortunes, and fetched him to life again,
and made him tug it out.

This noble spirit of Government is called in Holy writ, the spirit of God,
which came upon Soul when anointed to be a King, and upon the seventy Elders,
Numb. 11. 17. when they were appointed to be Counselors of State.

Indeed those Independents, Numb. 16. 3. Korah, Dathan, Abiram and their Crew
thought themselves as good as the best, and as holy as the best, and as good as
their Governors, but Moses presently showed them the difference on it.

There are many incomparable instances in the Bible, which will teach
Governors better policy, than puny and narrow hearted Greg. dares think on,
for all the commendations he gives the Bible, for the most absolute
accomplishment of a Politician. The people mutiny'd, were displeased with Moses
their Governor, and rebelled, Exodus 32. now if Greg. had been at his elbow,
how would he with fearful S. Peter have advised Moses, as S. Peter did our
Savior, Master spare thy self: how would Greg. have read politic Lectures to
him, and have entreated him to look to himself, and shift for himself, and not
hazard himself among the Rebels and tumults? Hell was broke loose, the people
swarming in uproars, and terrible in threatenings: or if he could not have
persuaded Moses to run away, he would as he does to our Governors, insinuate
the Wisdom and necessity of pleasing the people, coming with cap in hand,
rather than sword in hand, and beg of them for Gods sake to be quiet and they
should have any thing. But Moses Gods servant was not so, he was faithful to
himself and the true measures of Government, and knew if he had rendered himself
to their mercy, and yielded to their rage, it had been but offering his throat
to be cut; a sad instance whereof I could give you in these late times; But
what does Moses in this case? Exodus 33. 26, 27. who is on the Lords side? whose
for me? let him come to me. There came none to him but Gown-men neither; only
in those days the sons of Levi wore swords, and it seems knew how to handle
them, as well as bluffer Gallants, for Moses had no sooner given them the word
of Command, but they fell upon the rabbble, cut and slew till they had left
three thousand dead upon the spot; and this the Holy Ghost calls the
consecrating or sanctifying of a man's self by slaying the Mutineers, and there
is a Blessing from Heaven promised to be bestowed upon them for their valor
and good service in the ^9. v.

Such a white-liver'd Politician as Mr. Greg. durst not receive such measures
of Government as these into his breast, for fear they should fright him out of
his wi^s; and if Englands Martyr Charles I. had hearkened to his own courage so
much as he did to softer Councils; if some Pantaloon and Mu^se Courtiers that
had better courage to lead a dance or a young Lady, than head a Troop, had been
away, and if in their stead he had had a Company of Swiss for his Courtiers, or
gallant English Gentlemen with English Courages, and with them sallyed out upon
the Tumults which flocked about his Gate, he had in all probability crushed the
Cockatrice in the Egg, and sent the Prentices home (as O. C. did) to their
shop-boards with a vengeance to them. However it could not possibly have fared
worse with him than it did: those softer Politic Lectures bringing the good
King in conclusion to die afterward at the same place; the more's the pity,
and pity it is that mercy and kindness are not always good nor fit; as that
good King found to his cost, and therefore tells his son, If ever you trust to
them (meaning the factious Reb^ls) or must stand to their Courtesy, you are
undone.

To manage the Reins of Government thus with a steady hand, and to ride with a
Hank, is the best of all both for King and people, as we have found:
headstrong Jades would kill themselves, if you lay the Reins upon their necks,
it is their happiness and ease to be rid with a Curb: a licentious Government
is no Government, it is contradictio in^adjecto, or (as Greg. phrases it p.
83.) it is another J. O. an He Cow, that is to say, a Bull.

And it is worth the while here to remember the clean fancy of that
incomparable English Poet --

A King by yielding does like him and worse
That sadled his own back to shame his Horse.
And because Mr. Greg. has put me upon it to answer his Politic Lectures out of
the Bible, I Will but give two Instances out of it, not to instruct my Governors
and tutour Kings, I thank God, I was never such a conceited thing, nor so lost
to all modesty and sense of humility:

But it is (in my Sphere) to instruct people what a blessing attends their
Obedience to their Supreme Governors, if when they command some things in
Religion, which in Circumstantials of Religion are poynt-blank against God's
own Law; and yet God likes it well, blesses the people for such obedience,
though the Command of their Governors (persuaded thereunto out of good Reason,
some great convenience or Necessity) was directly different from the Command of
God.

When the King and his Council made an Order to keep the Sacrament of the
Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 2. together with the advice and concurrence of the
Parliament therein, called there, all the Congregation, it must be meant in
their Representatives: for all the People, nor the thousandth part could not
come to hear, or know what was done at the great Council, much less give their
votes; I say, this King Hezekiah with his Council and great Council of the
Congregation made a Decree to keep the Passover in the second Month.

This is worse than the Cross after Baptism and Kneeling at the Sacrament; for
we can find no beginning when they entered into the Church, and therefore have
as much cause to think it was the posture of Christ and his Apostles and their
constant practice, if not more cause, than to think the contrary.

But here in 2 Chronicles. 30. 2. is an Act of Parliament (I Will call it so, for the
better understanding of it in English phrase; for it is of the same nature)
quite contrary to the Law of God concerning the Sacrament, as to one
Circumstantial of Time.

God commands to keep it in the first Month, and positively reiterates the
Command, and bids them keep it in that appointed season, Number. 9 2, 3, 5.

The King and Parliament say to the People, we command you for certain good
reasons and motives to observe the Sacrament in the second Month.

Now says Modern Orthodox, hang me, draw me, quarter me, imprison me, fine me,
do your worst, I defy the D^vil, and all the Laws of men contrary to God's
Law; here I Will live, here I Will die. So you may (say I) and be damned too in all
probability; lose your Soul, as well as your Life, Liberty and Estate, as wise
as you are, and as wilful as you are.

And you may go on railing your Governors and the Fathers of the Church, and
tell them they sit in the seat and temple of God, and as if they were God, nay
above him, make Laws different from God's Law; and therefore call them
Antichrist, the Be is it and the false Prophet, and whether it be right to obey
God or man, judgeye.

Thus accepted was that Law of the King and Parliament in Hezekiah his time, by
the Zealots that had more heat than light, and more passion than knowledge and
true spiritual wisdom. For if our Governors be never so bad, they cannot be so
bad as the Devil himself, and Michael the Archangel (...), he was not so
impudent or audacious as to rail at the Devil, when contending about an honest
Cause with him: nor was the Devil his superior, but because a Dignity, a
Principality, an Angel, though a black one, St. Michael was not so audacious as
to blaspheme the Devil, (...).

What desperate wretches then are those devilish people, that pretend to the
greatest sight of Religion and Knowledge of God, and yet censure, rail,
blaspheme, lie, slander, revile, and speak evil of Dignities and their
Superiors, without any remorse or check of Conscience? and these people will
talk of Consciences! Consciences, and liberty to tender Consciences; then the
nether Millstone, the Adamant, the Rock is tender, if these men have tender
Consciences, that make their faces harder than a Rock, impudent foreheads, hard
hearts, hearts of stone, consciences seared with a hot iron; that though the
poison of Asps is perpetually under their lips, and they spit their venom
against their Superiors, yet recant not, repent not, nor do their tender
Consciences feel any remorse or regret.

Thus Ver. 6. when the Post went out with the Letters from the King and his
Princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the Commandment of
the King, requiring the people to Conform, and not to be stiff-necked, v. 8. as
their fathers were, but yield themselves unto the Lord -- so is the Law of the
King and Council there called. But what entertainment did the people give it?
This is the question at this day.

Truly the people were then as now, some of them Conformists, and some of them
Non-conformists.

The Nonconformists, were Ephraim wholly, and part of the Tribe of Manasseh,
and part of Zebulon, v. 10.

The Conformists, were all Judah, part of the Tribe of Ashur, part of Manasseh
and part of Zebulon, v. 11, 12.

Here stand the two Pparties; the Non-conformists jearing and laughing, and
scorning and mocking at the Messengers or Ministers of the King declaring the
Kings pleasure, and the Law, v. 10. And the Ministers were right served (I am
sure) Father Gray beard will say, he would have chastised them for their worthy
ears; nay, I fear he would have cried out ruin and desolation, all Scotland
and part of the Church of England, etc. is quite undone; Here is man's Post
against God's Post, man's Threshold against God's Threshold, Antichrist against
Christ, and the King's Law against the Positive words of God's Law.

But perhaps some will say, Hezekiah though a good King, yet had his faults,
and so might his Council too; tell us not what they did, but tell us how God
did approve and like of what they did, in making a Law against his Law: who did
God own, the Conformists or Non-conformists can you tell us that?

Yes, that I can, 2 Chronicles. 30. 12. This commandment of the King and the Princes
against the positive rule of God's Law, being made for a good reason moving the
King and his Council thereunto, is not withstanding called the Word of the
Lord, and the band of the Lord was with the Conformists, God is on our side may
they say: For the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the Commandment
of the King and of the Princes, by the word of the Lord. Thus tempting of
Moses, is called tempting of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9.

This I had not now urged but that Greg. and such fellows as he, will take upon
them to read Politic and Divinity Lectures to the World in Print, when they
know nothing but Modern Orthodoxy; read Books, and hearken to Preachers of
their opinion, wherein thus confirmed, they admire their Gigantick
Improvements, and then bid defiance, like furious Orlando's, to all mankind;
when indeed they are big with nothing but a soft pate huft and blown up with
their own dear humors of self-conceit.

Nor do I think Governors have warrant from that instance to disannul Gods
Sacraments, but as to Circumstances and Ceremonies of time, place, habits,
gestures, and the like, according to their Judgment and necessity, or
convenience moving them, have an unanswerable Right.

Let Greg. and his Modern Orthodox men mitigate this too, I fear them not, nor
all their snivellings and whinings, which no body admires, but blew and white
aprons, and the more ingenious Tankerd-bearers.

And let them consider without prejudice, and in the fear of Almighty God, that
when the Sons of Jonadab, the Sons of Rechab, in obedience to him their
Superior, submitted to his Humane-law in drinking no Wine, nor building
Houses, nor planting Vineyards, (which certainly are all very good things, and
God likewise tells man that all the good creatures he made on purpose for him
and his use, every herb bearing seed, and every tree bearing fruit, commanding
it should be to mankind for meat, etc.) yet in obedience to the first
commandment with promise, they would not take the liberty and privilege
warranted to them by God and his Word, but would obey the commandment of
Jonadab their father, and keep all his precepts: And God did so love them for
it, that he blesses them for it, saying, Jer. 35. 18, 19. Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab
your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according to all that he has
commanded you: Therefore, thus says says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, Jonadab the son of Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for
ever.

Happy would it be for the people of England, in soul and body, and estate,
here and hereafter, on earth and in heaven, if they would observe these thing,
rather than the wily wrestings of Holy Writ by crafty Seducers that have no way
to cheat the people and be admired by them, but by such Artifices as cheat them
of their souls too, and make the Kingdom so disturbed, and their followers too;
and the bottom of all these juglings is but to get a paltry sneaking
livelihood, and a little popular applause.

And then must our Governors, and the King in especial be therein happy too,
and verify every way the Anagram of his name in Latin,

Carolus Stuarte.
Anagr.
Clarus sort tua.
When Nero set Rome on fire, he played upon the Ho-boy all the time, and laid
the blame on the Christians; and thus Greg. J. O. and the rest of his friends,
the Modern Orthodox set these three Kingdoms on a flame with a brand fetched
from Geneva and the Covenant, and yet they make themselves merry with our
misery, lay all the blame upon King Charles, Archbishop Laud, Ceremonies, and
Imposition of the Liturgy; assassinating again those two glorious Martyrs in
their Honor and Innocence, and endeavoring to justify the bloody Villains
that murdered them.

Nor must his Majesty so much as think of their bloody and unparalled
Cruelty, because Augustus Caesar's Father too was murdered, and his Kinsman,
Henry IV. of France likewise, and Henry III. and such Gentlemen's Memories had
their Successors and the Cabinet-Council, that they let the murderers escape
scot-free; and if piety and good nature would move for a stricter vindication
of his Fathers death, yet in Policy, have a care, displease not the Villains,
as you love your Kingdoms, for a sturdy Swiss, and a malepert Fisher-boy in
Naples overturned all by a basket of Apples.

With such stuff as this does Father Grey-beard and his Modern Christians,
wipe their mouths with the whore in the Proverbs, and say, they have done no
wickedness; but all the fault is in thine own people, in King Charles I.
Archbishop Laud, Fathers of the Church, Superfetations, Parliaments, and evil
Counselors.

And if I have beat all these Butt-ends of his upon his own Pate, and
vindicated King Charles I. his Reign from that deformity, wherewith both it,
his Majesty and Archbishop Laud are by this bold Author, as falsely and
maliciously, as well as most unseasonably, in this Juncture maligned, I have my
end.

But who this Malignant is for my part I am not solicitous, nor did I ever see
any man that was taken for him upon suspicion.

I have dealt with him all along, as is prescribed in the method for cure of
unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, Tit. 1. 13. namely, rebuked him as
sharply, (...) cuttingly, to the quick, as near as I could, with honest design,
by such harmless incisions to let out the impostumated Quitter, and prepare for
his cure; odi vitium, non virum.

And now I have done; and (to write after him, p. 325. but withal to set him a
better Copy) I shall think my self largely recompen sed for this trouble, if
Greg. and others shall learn by this Example, that it is not impossible thus
long to be merry and angry, as he was; but to be merry and angry, and yet not
sin by, traducing the most innocent and honorable Persons, dead and alive, by
such superfetation of Railing, as he has done.

I am Your servant, Edm. Hickeringill.

FINIS.

