NO KING But JESUS: OR, The walls of Tyranny razed, AND The foundation of
unjust Monarchy discovered to the view of all that desire to see it.

Wherein is undeniably proved, That no King is now the Lords Anointed, but
JESUS: And the design of God now upon the face of the earth, is briefly laid
open: And the Rulers of the Nation, with their present Power and Authority,
plainly proved to be of God; and therefore ought to be honored and obeyed by
all men living under them.

Being considered in the following Particulars.

By Henry Haggar, a servant of Christ, and of the Commonwealth of England;
sometimes belonging to the Garrison of Stafford.

Woe to the Crown of pride -- For, the Lord of hosts has purposed it, to stain
the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the
earth. Isai. 28.1. with 23.9. And behold, a King shall reign in righteousness,
and princes shall rule in judgment. Isa. 32.1. London, Printed for Giles
Calvert, at the sign of the black Spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1652.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHosoever thou art that love either peace or happiness, here or hereafter,
To thee, in all love, I commend these ensuing lines, with an earnest desire
that thou may profit by them.

And to that end, let me entreat thee to read and consider them impartially;
try and measure them by that true Touchstone, and infallible Rule, which is
the Word of God: ask him for wisdom to discern between things which differ; and
the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

The mark I chiefly aim at, is, to unfold the fraud and deceit of the man of
sin, and to lay open that mystery of iniquity in which he works by his
instruments, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, to deceive the hearts
of the simple; and to show what Rights and Titles he does falsely claim in these
evil days; and how grossly men mistake, in giving him what is proper to God,
both in Church and Commonwealth.

I know thou can not be ignorant of the great Change that God has wrought in
this nation, in a few years; for which cause, many men do gnaw their tongues
for anger, and are ready to blaspheme the God of heaven, being not afraid to
speak evil of dignities and powers which are set up and established by God,
(who pulls down one, and sets up another, whom he pleases.) And for want
of knowledge in these things, men perish as in the gainsaying of Korah, being
found fighters against God, and are brought into the pit of destruction
unawares, to the ruin of body, soul, and goods. Which things having been by me
considered in some measure, according to the understanding the Lord has given
me, I find my self in conscience bound, and by love and pity constrained, to
speak what I know and am sure of, to others; having learnt it chiefly out of
the Scriptures, and somewhat by considering the times, and the conditions of
men in these days of danger and peril, in which so many make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience: I therefore am bold to present these lines to the view
both of friends and enemies; by which I shall discharge my duty toward God and
man in some good measure, and shall be at peace in my self, when I know I have
not hid my talent in a napkin, nor kept back any thing that might be profitable
to my countrymen and acquaintance amongst whom I live.

But it may be some will say, that it is too weighty a piece of work for me to
meddle with; I should have left it to some wise and learned men, that are
better able to distinguish between things which differ.

To which I answer: What I have done well, was not too hard for me to do.
Secondly, it hinders none of the wise and prudent of the nation that fear God,
from doing more. Thirdly, these are the days in which God is pleased to choose
and make use of foolish and weak instruments in the worlds account, to confound
the wisdom of the wise, and to bring down the strength of the mighty, and to
bring to naught the understanding of the prudent: and if God make choice, let
Men take heed how they refuse. Therefore, courteous Reader, let not the
weakness of the instrument cause thee to slight any thing that may be
profitable; but what is agreeable to truth and sound Reason, receive in love;
and what is contrary, reject.

And thus with my unfeigned love to all that wish themselves happiness, I rest,
being ready to serve them in all things lawful and convenient to the utmost of
my power,

Henry Haggar.

The EPISTLE, To the SAINTS in the order of the Gospel, with all that truly
fear God: Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be multiplied to you, through the knowledge
of God, and our Lord and Savlour Jesus Christ.
Dearly Beloved,
SEeing it is the portion of the Saints, and children of God, living in this
generation (especially in this our Nation of England) to partake of such great
mercies (from God our Father, and from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) as to
live under such Rulers; and that the Lord has set over us such in Authority,
as are for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of evil
doers; so that under them we may live a quiet life in all godliness and honesty:

It is therefore expedient, that we and all that truly fear God, should labor
to walk worthy of these mercies; and to show forth our thankfulness by our
obedience, both tawards God, and those men whom he has set over us; that so
the Lord may still delight in us, and rejoice over us to do us good, and to
bless us with all manner of blessings; both spiritual and temporal: that we
being thus delivered from all our enemies, may serve him that has wrought this
great deliverance for us, without fear, in holiness and righteousness all our
days: walking as his children, blameless and harmless, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crocked and perverse Nation, shining as lights in the world, holding
forth the pure word of life.

Therefore I exhort you, and every of you (professing godliness in sincerity)
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the mercies that we have received
from him, and by him from God our Father, that we may with all diligence labor
and exercise our selves(as our beloved brother Paul has given us an example,
Act. 24.15, 16.) to have always Consciences void of offense, both toward God,
and toward man. And for as much as we believe with him the resurrection of the
just and unjust, and the eternal judgment, that shall be at the appearing of
our Lord and Savior Jesus christ: Seeing we look for such things, let us
consider what manner of persons we ought to be, in all holy conversation and
godliness, looking for, and making have unto the coming of the day of God:
knowing, that we which patiently continue in well doing, shall then receive the
reward of righteousness, which is a Crown of righteousness and glory; that in
due time we shall reap if we faint not.

Therefore, dear friends, let not us be ignorant of Gods great work, which he
is now a working upon the face of the earth; but let us that be children of the
day, be sober and watch; knowing that these are the days of vengeance, in which
all things must be fulfilled that are written in the Prophets: and the signs
of the coming of the Lord are upon the face of the earth; even distress of
Nations, and perplexity, Kingdom against Kingdom, and City against City; and
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth: but yet let us remember the promises, Romans 10.13. It shall
come to pass that whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be
saved: and again; Heb. 13.5, 6. he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, The Lord is our helper, and we will
not fear what man can do unto us; therefore let us remember the words of our
Lord Christ, Luke 21.28. When these things begin to come to pass, then look up
and lift up your heads, knowing that your Redemption draws nigh. Wherefore
this is my humble advice to all that fear the Lord, that we labor now to
approve our Consciences before God, by being to him that Redeemed us, a
peculiar people, zealous of good works; knowing that is the end of our
Redemption and preservation, Tit. 2.14. Let us therefore consider, that Christ
is that great Prophet, by whom God has spoken to us in these last days, Heb.
1.12.

And that we are commanded to hear him in all things whatsoever he shall say
unto us, Act. 3.22, 23. And his sheep are they that hear his voice, and follow
him, Joh. 10.27. and the voice of a stranger will they not follow, verse. 5. and
we are his friends if we do whatsoever he has commanded us, Joh. 15.14. and he
that has his commandments and keeps them, it is he that loves him, Joh.
14.21. for this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his
commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

But he that says he loves Christ, or knows Christ, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2.4, 5. with Joh.
18.24. and whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ,
has not God; 2 John 9. and if any shall come to you and preach any other
doctrine then what is already preached, receive him not, ver. 10. yea, if we,
or an Angel from Heaven shall preach any other Gospel then that which we have
preached to you, (says Paul) let him be accursed; as we said before, so say I
now again, let him be accursed Gal. 1.9, 10. for how shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation as was first preached by the Lord himself, and was
confirmed to us by them that heard him: God bearing them witness both with
signs and wonders, and diverse gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
will? Heb. 2.3, 4.

Wherefore, dear brethren and beloved in the Lord, let us contend earnestly for
the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, Jude verse. 3, 4. even as it
was delivered at the first by the Lord himself, and his holy Apostles: For
there are certain men crept in unawares, which do turn this grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ into wantonness, and deny the Lord that bought them, in their
actions, although they confess him in their words; and do also think to make us
forget and deny him, by their dreams, which they tell every man to his
neighbor, as the Lord says Jer. 23.27. Let us therefore, seeing we know these
things before, beware lest we also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from our own stedfastness; but let us grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: let us abide in his love, by
keeping his commandments, Joh. 15.10. and continue his friends, by doing
whatsoever he has commanded us, ver. 14. so shall we have a good conscience,
void of offense toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and boldness and
access with confidence through faith in his blood, unto that throne of grace,
where he ever lives to make intercession for us. To him be glory for ever.

Lastly, we must exercise a good conscience toward man, even by doing to all
as we would they should do to us: but in a special manner, we ough to have
respect unto the Magistrates whom God has set over us, to do to them even as
we would they should do to us; viz. If we would that they should protect and
preserve us in well-doing, we ought also to assist and aid them, both with
persons and estates, without which they are not able to suppress wicked and
ungodly men; they being, without us, but private or particular persons:
Therefore I desire that all christians may be put in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, and to obey magistrates; to be ready to every good
work, and not to speak evil of any man; to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing
all meekness to all men, Tit. 3.1, 2. We know also, that there is no power but
is of God; for the powers that be, are ordained of God: and therefore, he that
resists them, resists the ordinance of God: especially when Rulers are not
a terror to good works, but to the evil; therefore we must needs be subject to
such, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: let us consider them
as the servants of God, set over us for our good, to take vengeance and execute
wrath upon them that do evil. Let us render to all their due; tribute to whom
tribute is due; custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor
belongs: see Romans 13.

But I know some will object, that we ought indeed to pay tribute and custom to
whom it is due, and to give honor to whom honor belongs: but it belongs not
to this present Power and Authority; for the Scripture says, that we should
Fear God, and Honor the King, and that we should be subject to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, and to the King as supreme: But these have rebelled,
and slain their King; therefore neither honor, obedience, nor tribute belongs
to them.

To which at present I answer, That to the end this stumbling block may be
taken away, and a right understanding may come in the place, and a true
affection to these present Rulers may be begotten in the hearts of those people
that stumbled, and a general reconciliation might speedily be brought forth
amongst all men; I have presumed to present these ensuing lines to their view:
knowing before that enemies will except against the most perfect Truth, and
soundest Reason, (witness their excepting against the Word of God) but friends
will bear with infirmities. Wherefore I desire you that are friends, when you
have read and considered what I have written, and tried it by the Word of God,
if then you shall find any thing too light or useless, that you will impute it
to that imperfect part which in some measure does dwell in all men; and remain
fully assured, that what I want in words and expressions, is fully made up in
my affection toward the State and Commonwealth in general.

Thus, destring that what is according to Truth and sound Reason may be
profitable to all, I commit what is written to your serious consideration, and
impartial judgment; and you into the hands of the Lord; and remain, to the
utmost of my power,

Your faithful brother, steadfast in the faith of the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
And his servant for your sakes, HENRY HAGGAR.

The Particulars of the Book are in order at follows.
I. THat it is God alone that rules in the Kingdoms of men, and they have
nothing to do to question him how; whether it be by Kings, as supreme Heads, as
in and after the days of Saul, David, and Solomon; or by the Elders of the
people to rule and judge them, as before there was any King but God himself in
Israel. II. What it is to rule with God. III. What was the original of Monarchy
amongst men; or whence it first came, that a man should bear the name of King
over the people of God. IV. Who is of the Royal blood. V. Who is now the Lords
Anointed. VI. What is Gods desine against the Kings and Rulers of the Nations
in these last days. VII. Wherefore he will destroy them. VIII. What they may or
should do, to escape the hand of God lifted up against them. IX. What the
Saints and people fearing God, should do in these days of vengeance. X. Their
duty to this Present Power acknowledged, and they vindicated from the
reproaches and slanders falsely cast upon them by wicked men; Viz. That they,
are the false Prophets of the last times, and those that cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and the ignorant and unlearned
that Peter speaks of, which wrest the Scripture to their own destruction, and
despise Government, and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, and will not
obey Magistrates, but have slain their King, etc.
No King but JESUS, etc.
ANd now, according to the method propounded, I shall proceed to show first,
that it is God alone that rules; and men have nothing to do to question how:
whether it be by Kings as supreme heads, as in and after the days of Saul,
David, and Solomon; or by the Elders of the people to rule and judge them, as
before there was any King but God himself in Israel.

But now let me not be mistaken and abused, as if I went headlong, without
wisdom or the fear of God, to rail against kingly power, or Kings; like those
that spoke evil of things they know not: for I approve of Kings and Rule by
Kings, as well as of ruling or judging the people by Elders; but it must always
be considered, in all ages and generations of the world, what Rule and Rulers
God does approve of: for it is he that sets up one, and pulls down
another; and he it is that rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will; yea, and sets over them the basest of men, Dan. 4.17.25.

And now let us consider, if the God of heaven did in that age take away the
Kingdom and Dominion of the whole earth from Nebuchadnezzar, that head of gold,
and turn him out a grasing among the Oxen, and give his kingdom to whomsoever
he pleased; then let not men in this generation think it strange, though God
Almighty has taken away the kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland (which
are but a small part of the earth) from Charles Stuart, and given them to the
honorable Parliament, which were indeed at first confirmed by him, before his
evil Counsel had drawn him away from them; therefore none can say they gathered
together without him, to conspire against him; for they gathered together to
him, and were confirmed by him, and with him, and he with them; and so were a
lawful Assembly of Magistrates according to the Law of God and a lawful
Parliament according to the Law of Nations; and from this lawful Assembly, and
powers ordained of God, he withdrew, and by evil Council rent himself from
them, and would come no more at them, notwithstanding all the invitations they
gave him in all humility, as will yet appear by their Propositions and
Remonstrances: all which plainly shows the immediate hand of God against him
and against his family; his sins and the sins of his forefathers being now at
the full.

And further, let it be considered, that God will have the living men to know
that the most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; yea, and settetth over it the basest of men, Dan. 4.17 Now if the Lord
will take a Kingdom from a King, and give it to the basest of men; how can the
most honorable of men help it?

They may gnaw their tongues for anger, and blaspheme the God of Heaven; yea,
they may be found fighters against God, as many have been; but they shall not
prosper: as we see they have not in our days (consider it:) for it was not
because they wanted the noble blood; for they had the King himself, and the
greatest Nobles in the Land with them: neither was it because they wanted stout
men of resolved spirits; for they had of the prime of the Nation, as they
themselves have oftentimes boasted; and for the number of men they far
exceeded, and the affections of the Country were generally toward them;
therefore it was the immediate hand of God against them, who in his time
pulls down one, and sets up another, whom he pleases; who at this time
has pulled down the King and Lords of this Nation, and has and will make the
Elders thereof Rulers and Judges in their places; and who can say to him, What
do thou?

Be wise now therefore, O ye kings, and be instructed, ye that are judge's of
the earth, Psalm. 2.10. Be still and know that he is God: learn to know that The
Lord of hosts is with us, and the the God of Jacob is our refuge, Psalm. 46.10,
11.

Again, that God alone is King, and rules the Nations how he pleases, or by
whom he pleases; is evident, by considering that in 1 Samuel 12.12. where the
Lord by Samuel reproves the children of Israel for choosing another King
besides himself, in these words:

And you said, Nay, but a king shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was
your king. And again he says, When they said, Give us a King, they rejected
the Lord that he should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7.

Therefore the Lord lamenteth over them, saying, O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thine help. I will be thy king for there is none other
that may save thee in all thy Cities, Hol. 13.9, 10.

Again, the people of the Nation of England, need not so much to wonder and be
disturbed at what the Lord has done: for it was always Gods way and work, if
any King displeased him, he would pull him down, and set up another, whom he
pleased; yea, even the basest of men: therefore says Dan. 2.21. He changes
the times and seasons, he removes kings: Witness also his dealing with the
Kings of Israel.

First, his rejecting of Saul from being King, and rending the kingdom from
him, and giving of it to his neighbor, 1 Samuel 15.23, 28.

Secondly, The Lord rent the kingdom again from David's house for Solomon's
Idolatry, 1 King. 11.11. and gave it to Jeroboam his servant; which came to
pass, ver. 30, 31.

Thirdly, The Lord took away the kingdom from his house, in the days of his son
Nadab; and gave it Baasha the son of Ahijah, 1 King. 15.25, 26, 27, 28.

Fourthly, He took it away from him, and gave it to Zimri his servant: See 1
King. 16.2, 3, 15. And for his wickedness he gave it to Omri, chapter 16.22, 23.

Again, The Lord took away the kingdom from the house of Omri: in Ahabs days it
was prophesied and accomplished in the days of Joram. See King. 9.6, 7, 8, 9.
to the end,

Thus it is clearly proved that God alone rules in the kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he pleases.

But it will be Objected. That God did this to them for their wickedness; but
who can say King Charles was so wicked?

Answ. As for his wickedness, it is possible to make it appear he had some, but
I shall leave that to God to judge of: only this I dare assirm that some of
the forenamed Kings were as good and as holy men as King Charles and did as
many good things for the honor and glory of God in their generation as ever he
did; and had as much of the knowledge of God in them, and more then ever he
had; as it appears by Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. David and Solomon.
Therefore, for shame, let not that be pleaded: for if Saul, only for sparing
the sheep and oxen with a good intent to offer sacrifice to God with them, and
for showing mercy to Agag King of the Amalekites, must have his Kingdom rent
from him, 1 Samuel 15.19, 20 21, 22. because he had left undone the commandment
of God; surely then it may be proved, by the things already declared against
Charles Stuart in print, to the view of all men to which I refer you, that he
was so great a sinner, that the great God that searches the hearts, and is a
true, beholder of the inward parts of man has seen so much evil in him, as
might in justice move him to take away his Kingdom and Dominion from him, and
lay his honor in the dust; and will without question, at the great day, make
it appear to the faces of all them that do oppose him; to whom I leave it with
what is written, and proceed to the second, which is to consider what it is to
rule with God.

We read, Hos. 11.12. the words of the Lord by the Prophet are these: Ephraim
compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah
yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints. From whence I thus
reason: That that power, which is faithful with the Saints, or to the Saints,
to protect them in well-doing that Power does rule with God.

Secondly, those people that do the good and acceptable will of God, by keeping
the holy and righteous commands of God given by Jesus Christ in these last
days, Heb. 1.1, 2. with Act. 3.22, 23. they are the righteous and holy people,
and the Saints of God; and that Power and Authority that protects and preserves
such a people in so doing, does protect and preserve the Saints. But the
present power and Authority of this Nation of England do protect such a people
in so well doing: Therefore they rule with God, and are faithful to the Saints;
and do hereby honor God, by having respect to his children, and them that fear
him: And they which honor me, I will honor, says the Lord; but they which
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.50. And such a Power we must
needs be subject to, not only for fear of wrath, but also for conscience sake:
for they are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Again, those Rulers
that are a terror to good works, do not rule with God: for Rulers And Powers
ordained of God, are not a terror to good works but to evil. See Romans 13.1, 2,
3. Therefore, says the Lord, ( Prove. 29.2.) When the righteous are in
authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked bear rule, the people mourn.
And the truth is, were it not to suppress the wicked that would destroy the
Saints, as Cain slew his brother Abel, there should need no Power nor Law
amongst men, but the law of Love: for the law was not made for the righteous
man, but for the lawless and disobedient, etc. And the powers that are ordained
of God, were not ordained to be revengers of wrath upon good men that keep the
Commandments of God, but upon evil men that break them.

And thus it is plain, that those Magistrates and Rulers which are faithful
with the Saints, to preserve and keep them in well-doing, That Power is of God
and rules with God; and it shall stand against all opposers. And we may safely
conclude, That that Power which is used to vex persecute and destroy the Saints
and honest men searing God, is not of God; and therefore it shall not stand.
But the Power in King Charles his days was so used, as many honest
conscientious men can testify by woeful experience: therefore it was not of
God, and is thrown down.

But it will be objected, that now since the King is gone, there is as great
persecution, taxing, and oppressing of men, as ever.

To which I abswer, I positively deny that honest conscientious men that fear
God, and desire to live in peace, are persecuted as before: But indeed, if any
conspire and rebel against this present power of the Nation of England, so
wonderfully set up and preserved by God himself; it is their policy and good
wisdom to suppress such malignant spirits, by confining their persons to such
places as they may do least hurt in and by sequestring their estates, to make
use of them for the best advantage of the Commonwealth. And indeed, to that end
they are a power ordained of God, even to take vengeance and execute wrath upon
them that do evil. Therefore if any man would not fear the present Power, let
him do that which is good, and he shall have praise of the same. See Romans 13.2,
3, 4.

Secondly, whereas many complain of Taxes, and oppression by Taxes more then
ever;

I answer, There was never such occasion for Taxes as is now, in any man's days
now alive: and we all know, That Necessity has no law. Therefore if the
Magistrate do require more then ordinary of us, to supply our present wants,
and to deliver us out of such great dangers and troubles as otherwise would
come upon us, even to the destroying both of persons and estates of all that
fear God, we must not call this Oppression, nor murmur against the Magistrate:
for in so doing we shall murmur against God; for it is he that sends these
wars and troubles upon us for our sins; who then can give us peace? It Is not in
the Magistrates power, until the Lord please. As for example: if the Lord
please to send a famine of bread in the Land, and make us buy our food at an
extraordinary rate, shall we therefore murmur at the Magistrate? or will that
do us any good, until the Lord be pleased to send plenty?

So now also, if the Lord be pleased to make us buy our peace at a dearer rate
then ordinary, let us not murmur against the Magistrates; but rather let us
consider our ways, and labor to find out the cause why the Lord does thus
chastise us, and to remove it, that so these evil effects may cease.

And truly, if we consider well what the Lord has done for us, in giving food
and raiment in such a plentiful manner, and that England is yet a Nation
inhabited by its own children, notwithstanding those fierce and bitter wars
that have been even in the bowels of it, we shall have more cause to praise the
Lord for his mercies then to murmur at his chastisements: for he has not dealt
so with every nation. How often has he chastised his people Israel with sorer
chastisements then we have yet felt, praised be his Name! as we may read in 2
Kings 6.25. when an asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the
fourth part of a kab of doves dung for five pieces; and when women boiled their
children and eat them, because of the siege, and straitness thereof. I suppose
England has not yet tasted so deep of this bitter cup: Chap. 10.

But there is a generation of murmurers and complainers, as Jude says, that
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, which remain still in the body of
the Nation, and disturb the peace thereof; and will do, until they be purged
out: the Lord is a doing of it; for the head and the tail must go together,
Isai. 9.14. He has already cut off the head, which is the ancient and
honorable; the tail must follow, which is the prophet that teaches lies, and
does daub the Princes of the Nations with untempered mortar; seeing vanity, and
divining lies, saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken. See
Isa. 9.14, 15. with Ezekiel. 22.27, 28, 29.

You may know them by their fruits: These are they which teach the people to
murmur against the present Powers, and to complain of the great Taxes and
heavy burdens that are now in the Commonwealth; when indeed they were the men
that first caused them, by stirring up the people, crying out, Curse ye Meroz,
curse bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not out to help the
Lord against the mighty: and, Cursed be he that keeps back his hand from
shedding of blood. And are still the only continuers of these bitter wars,
(which cause the Taxes to continue) by stirring up sedition, and causing
division amongst the people. Whereas, if they would as much labor to make
peace, there would the sooner be an end of these troubles, and a removing of
the heavy burdens and Taxes necessitated thereby.

But these men it is to be feared, have a further design in hand then all men
know: for, if it be observed they could in the beginning of the wars list up
their voices like a trumpet, cursing. Meroz. bitterly; using the aforesaid
words, to stir up men to go and fight against the King. And in those days, they
could pray heartily, even with tears, for the prosperity of the Parliaments
Army; and as heartily give thanks for the overthrow and destruction of the
Kings party; and teach others so to do: (let them deny it if they can.) And
this zeal continued, so long as they thought, that, if their forefathers the
Bishops, and the rest of that brood, had perished with him that then they
should have been heirs of their inheritance, viz. of all their Lands and
Revenues, and so of all their honor, pride, and vainglory; and to have had
the Scepter committed to them. to rule and tyrannize over the consciences of
men fearing God While this hope remained, their zeal burnt hot as fire, and all
was well, and the Parliament was a power ordained of God: But when the
honorable and prudent Rulers of this Nation denied them these things, and
especially that they might not tyrannize over the conscience, to make all men
be of their Religion, to see with their eyes and go on their legs, and believe
as they believe, even as they do at Rome: when this is denied, then they are
the men that first complain of persecution, because they themselves may not be
the persecutors: and now they cannot in conscience give thanks for shedding of
blood; but when the State desired those that feared God to give him thanks for
that great deliverance and victory over the Scots at Dunbar, there was scarcely
one in five miles compass to be found: and some of those that did meet, by
relation of some that are honest which were among them, they told the people
that they had more need to keep it as a day of Weeping, Mourning and
Humiliation, then a day of Thanksgiving; with many other scandalous words,
tending to the disaffecting and disengaging of the hearts of the people from
the State. Therefore let it be well considered, who are they that despise
dominion, and are not afraid to spoak evil of dignitses.

These are they which in all ages had the praise of men generally: therefore
says Christ Luke 6.26. Woe be to you when all men speak well of you: for so did
their fathers of the false prophets, These were they in Ahab's days which
deluded him and all Israel, teaching them to forsake the Commandments of the
Lord, and to follow Baalim; when Elijah, that one Prophet of the Lord,
discovered the folly and deceit of four hundred and fifty of them at once, 1
King. 18.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

These are they which again in King Ahab's time deluded him, and caused him to
go up to Ramoth-gilead to fight, when that one Prophet of the Lord, Micaiah,
withstood four hundred of them to their faces, and warned Ahab not to go up;
yet he believing the four hundred false Prophets, rather then that one Prophet
of the Lord, went up, and was slain. Thus we see, that through their lies and
delusions, they bring even Kings and Princes to destruction both of body and
soul.

These are they which in our age, and in this Nation of England, have done the
same to Charles deceased, which their forefathers did to King Ahab in stirring
of him up to war against his subjects, especially against those that most
feared God; and so have brought him to destruction. And these are still at this
present time deluding his ignorant son, calling of him Charles the second;
having his person in admiration, because of advantage, as Jude says, v. 16.
and by this means they stir up him, and his poor deceived supposed subjects to
war against the Powers of this Nation of England, so wonderfully set up and
established by God himself, and powerfully preserved and defended by his
immediate hand, against all enemies whatsoever; which all that have but eyes
open may easily see: and yet these Seers are so blind, that they cannot see
the hand of the Lord lifted up against them, and that Kingly power, as they
call it, which has always joined with them (being deceived by them) to
persecute the Saints and children of God; of whom God is now taking vengeance:
yet they are still leading their King whom they have chosen and his subjects
whom they have deceived, into the pit of destruction without remedy, they
themselves being certain to fall with them: for, if the blind lead the blind,
they shall both fall into the ditch, Matthew. 15.14.

Therefore let the honorable Parliament of England beware of them; let the
noble and valiant Army take heed of them, and watch them, as the worst enemies
they have: For, what Satan and his instruments cannot do by tyranny and
strength, that they will accomplish by treachery and deceit, if possible.
Therefore let the Commonwealth of England in general, with all the noble
Governors and Officers, and honest plain-hearted Countrymen, learn to watch
them with a single eye, lest they seduce you, and cause you to divide, and so
bring you to destruction before you are aware.

Therefore; dear Countrymen, take heed of being deluded by them again to war
and bloodshed, lest you provoke the Lord to anger and so the whole Nation be
drowned in blood without remedy: for then, they that now complain of some Taxes
necessitated by these present troubles, stirred up first by them, will have
cause to complain for want of bread to eat, and clothes to put on. Therefore,
having food and raiment, let us be therewith content, and serve the Lord our
God with gladness and joyfulness of heart, for the abundance of all things,
lest he give us up to serve our enemies which he shall send against us, in
hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things; and he put
a yoke of iron upon our necks, until he have destroyed us. See Deuteronomy. 28.47 48.

Thus have I, in some measure, discovered who are the instrumental causes of
our unhappiness. I shall proceed to the third particular, viz. Whence the
original of Monarchy did spring.

And in the clearing of that, I shall not make use of the worst of people, viz.
the Nations of the world; for they were enemies to God, and given up to work
all manner of wickedness with greediness, although they had Kings, as appears
by their adulteries, abusing themselves with mankind, and with beasts, and
causing of their children to pass through the fire to Molech, allowed of by
their Kings, like the wicked Rulers of Sodom, Levit. 18.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and God in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14,
16. therefore they are no example for us to walk by: But we shall look into the
ways of the children of Israel, God's peculiar people: for I know that the
people of England in general would gladly be counted the people of God, and
would be offended if we should deny them the name of Christians.

We shall therefore consider how there came to be a King in Israel at first,
over the people of God; Whether it was by the commandment of God, and so
according to his pure mind; or whether it did not spring from a corrupt
principle in the people, and was the pride and wickedness of their hearts, and
not the least, but the greatest of all the sins they committed, to choose any
other King to rule over them but God only. For the clearing of which, I shall
examine these following Scriptures.

1 Samuel 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. we read that all the elders of Israel gathared
themselves together, and came to Samuel, and said, Behold, thou art old, and
thy sons walk not in thy ways; now make us a king to judge us, like all the
nations. Here we see the pride and wickedness of their hearts, in that they
would have a King to judge them, like all other nations, whom God had given up
to walk in their own ways, and according to the lust of their own hearts.
Therefore observe what followed: first, it displeased Samuel the Prophet of the
Lord: secondly, he prayed to the Lord, and sought him about it: thirdly, the
Lord answered, saying, Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they have
said unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me,
that I should not reign over them: according to all the works which they have
done since they came out of Egypt, even to this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee. Now therefore
hearken to their voice: howbeit, yet protest solemnly unto them, and show them
the manner of the king that shall reign over them.

Thus we see, that though they pretended good in it, namely, that it was
because Samuel's sons were wicked; yet the Lord was angry with them, and said
that they rejected him in so doing: notwithstanding he gave them their desire,
which was a King, but it was in his anger; and he took him away again in his
wrath. See Hos. 13.11.

Again, when Samuel had declared the manner of their King, and told them that
they should cry out in that day because of their King which they had chosen,
but the Lord would not hear them; yet still they refused to obey the voice of
Samuel, and said, Nay. but we will have a king over us, to judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles; that we may be like all the nations.

So Samuel rehearsed all these words again in the cars of the Lord, by which he
was provoked, and said in his anger, Give them a King. And here is the beginning
of Kings amongst the people of God.

And thus have I showed plainly, that it was not at all of God; but contrary to
his holy will, that any should have the name of a King over his people but
himself; and it did arise from the pride and corruption of the people, as
further appears in these words: And Samuel called the children of Israel
together unto the Lord to Miz^eh, and said, Thus says the Lord God of Israel,
I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hands of the
Egyptians, and out of the hands of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed
you; and you have rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your
adversities and tribulations; and you have said to him, Nay, but give us a
king: Chap. 10.17, 18, 19.

Surely I might now take up the complaint of Moses against them, Deuteronomy. 32.6. O
foolish people and unwise! do ye thus requite the Lord? Is he not thy Father
that bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? Remember the
days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he
will show thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee, etc.

I desire to apply it to England. Dear Countrymen, consider it in time, before
you provoke the Lord to anger. Has not God himself now of late years done as
great things for us? Has not he by his immediate hand delivered us out of all
our troubles, and out of the hands of all that hate us, so as they do not rule
over us? Consider the condition the Nation has been in within these few years,
and how the Lord has remembered us in our low condition, and changed it; and,
beyond all expectation has given us Peace and Plenty, in stead of War and
Famine in our Land. Consider how he has prospered all things under the hands
of this present Authority, both at home and abroad; and all that rise up
against them are confounded and brought to nothing, and that by weak means;
which shows the immediate hand of God amongst us. Let us therefore take heed
that we do not requite the Lord evil for good, like a foolish and unwise
people, by desiring a King, to satisfy our own lust pride, and vainglory: for
the Lord is now our King; and will be, if we do not reject him, and cast him
off, by choosing a Man in his stead to reign over us, judge us, and fight our
battles.

And to that end, let us again consider what a great wickedness it was in the
people of Israel, and how mightily the Lord was displeased with them for asking
a King. See 1 Samuel 12.16, 17, 18, 19. in these words: Now therefore stand still
and see this great thing which the Lord will do before your eyes. Is it not
wheatharvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, (says Samuel) and he shall
send thunder and rain; that you may perceive and see that your wickedness is
great which you have done in the sight of God, in asking a king. So Samuel
called unto the Lord, and the Lord sent thunder and rain: and the people
greatly feared the Lord, and Samuel. And all the people said to Samuel, Pray
for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not: for we have added to
all our sins this evil, to ask us a king. And his answer was, (verse. 23, 24,
25.) God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you.
But I will teach you the good and right way, (which is) only to fear the Lord,
and serve him in truth, with all your hearts, and consider what great things he
has done for you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed,
both ye and your king.

And thus we have considered, from the beginning to the end, what great sin and
abominable wickedness it was, for the people of God to choose any other King but
himself, to rule over them, judge them, and fight their battles.

And it is considered to that end, that we the people of England, professing
our selves to be the people of God in our generation, amongst whom also the
immediate hand of God has been lifted up, and his arm made bare for us: I say,
that we run not headlong into such sin and wickedness as to ask us a king, when
the Lord has taken away our King in his anger, and is become our King himself.
Let us remember from what principle it did arise, and from what root it did
spring, that a Man should be chosen King, and bear the name of King over the
people of God: it was from the pride and corruption of their own hearts: and of
all their wickedness and sins that they had committed, there was none like
this, that they should ask another King, and reject God; as is formerly proved
by these Scriptures; 1 Samuel 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Verse. 19, 20. Chap. 10.17, 18,
19. Chap. 12.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

Therefore he gave them a King in his anger, and took him away again in his
wrath, Hos. 13.11. And seeing they would have a King, the Lord would have him
of his own choosing; and therefore he chose David his servant, a man after his
own heart, and took him from the sheep-folds, from following the ewes great
with young, he brought him forth to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance, Psalm. 78.70, 71.

But I am afraid that if the Lord should now take a young shepherd from
following the ewes great with young, and set him over us to be our King, even
those that so much desire a King, would be as much displeased then, as they are
now. What shall the Lord do to please these people? He must not reign over them
himself, although he have all power in heaven and earth in his hands, and their
own lives also; but they reject him, saying, Nay but give us a king: and he
must not choose a man after his own heart for them, but he must be a man after
their own corrupted hearts: And who is that? Truly one of the Blood Royal, one
that is by descent come out of the loins of the Lords Anointed, as they
apprehend. Therefore seeing it is such a hard thing to please these people,
that God himself cannot please them, (except he should let them walk in their
own ways, and give them up to their own hearts, lusts, as he did the Nations in
times past which he destroyed) Why then should I, or any man under heaven,
think to please them by speaking the truth? Yet notwithstanding I will perform
my duty at this time, to my countrymen and acquaintance according to the
flesh; and would gladly make use of the talent or mite which God has given me,
for their profit, and his glory.

Therefore I shall speak a few words to these two things so stumbled at amongst
men, viz. the Royal Blood, and the Lords Anointed. It may be, if these
stumbling blocks were taken away, men would walk more uprightly, and in less
danger. And first, I shall speak of the Royal Blood.

I would gladly learn of any man, from whence the Royal Blood came first. Not
that I deny that there is Royal blood, or persons noble and honorable, and to
be honored more then others: but my question is, How they came so; whether by
Generation, or Exaltation. If by generation, and so must continue, then I shall
easily prove that, all the men in the world are of the Royal blood, and so have
all right to be Kings and Princes, one as well as another, if that give them
right. And if it do not, why do men plead it? But it is evident that the Noble
blood comes not by Generation: for God has made of one blood all nations of
men to dwell upon the face of the earth, Acts 17.26. Now if they were all made
of one blood that was either Noble blood, or Ignoble. If it were noble, then
all men were noble: for he made them all of one blood; and so they continue,
and will continue, until the end of ages.

Therefore it is by Exaltation, namely, when God exalts men (as the Prophet
says, Psalm. 113.7, 8.) out of the dust, and lifts them out of the dunghill,
to set them with princes, even with the princes of his people; then they are
honorable, and not before.

Again, if the same God will cast down the same persons for their wickedness,
whom before he exalted, and pour contempt and shame upon them and their
posterity, and bring them again to dishonor; Who can give them honor? It is
not in the power of all the men of the earth to do it, if they should stand up
for one man: for it is God that pours contempt upon princes, and causes them
to wander in the wilderness; where there is no way, Psalm. 107.40. and it is God
that changes times and seasons, and removes kings, and sets up kings, Dan.
2.21. And it is God that turned out the greatest King that ever reigned upon
the face of the earth, to grasing among the beasts; and made him, even that
head of gold, more contemptible then the bafest of men, Dan. 2.38. with Chap.
4.25. And it is the same God that exalts the needy out of the dust, and
takes the poor out of the dunghill; that he may set him with princes, even
with the princes of his people; and then they are of the Royal blood: if men
will plead for it, let them. But yet I humbly conceive, that it is the virtue
of all the honorable of the earth, to consider from whence they were taken;
(and though they be called Gods, Psalm. 82.6, 7. yet they must die like men, and
return to the dust; and after that comes Judgment:) that so, when they shall
come to give up their account to God at the Great Day, they may be able to do
it with joy: for then comes that everlasting honor and glory which shall not
be taken away from them that shall once be counted worthy to be made partakers
thereof. And thus much concerning the Blood Royal, who are of it, and how they
came so.

And now I shall come to speak of the Lords Anointed; whose name we ought not
to take into our mouths, but with reverence and godly fear.

But I know that Ignorance has been the mother of Devotion in this thing also;
and men have put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, and called Evil
Good, and Good Evil; speaking evil of things they know not; calling the Lord
Bishops Anointed, the Anointed of tne Lord; and have thrown down Christ the
true Anointed, and, as much as in them lay, have labored to lay his honor in
the dust; reviling and persecuting him, in his poor Saints, wheresoever they
found him, even to the death; not remembering the words of our glorious Lord
Jesus, Matthew. 25.40. considered with 45. by which words we understand, that
what is done to his Saints, is done to himself, be it good or evil; according
to his words to Paul, Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? which was
his Saints, and holy people which contended earnestly for that faith once
delivered by himself. And thus have the kings of the earth stood up, and the
Rulers have taken counsel together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
as it is written, Act. 4.26. Therefore now the Lord that sits in heaven, is
laughing of them to scorn, and has them in derision, and is vexing of them in
his fore displeasure, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. staining the pride of all their
glory, and is bringing into contempt all the honorable of the earth: and thus
the pours contempt upon Princes, by casting down and destroying of them, even
by men that have been and are base and contemptible in their eyes. And thus the
Lord is vexing of them, and will vex them in his sore displeasure, until he
have destroyed them from off the earth: because they have vexed, persecuted,
and shed the blood of his Saints, therefore he will give them blood to drink:
for they are worthy. And thus will God the Lord let his King upon his holy hill
of Ston, and learn all men to know who is the Lords Anointed.

For the clearing of which, I would gladly be answered this Question, if any
will or can: (namely) How King Charles, or any of the Kings of the Nations,
became the Lords Anointed? or when, or what day was it? What was done to them,
by which they were made the Lords Anointed? But this I confess that when the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury anointed Charles the first (deceased) to be King
of England, that then he became the Lord Bishop of Canterbury's Anointed; but
no other Lords Anointed that I know of: and therefore we may observe, that when
that Lord that anointed him lost his head, he that was anointed by him could
not keep his long: And so their old Proverb was verified, No Bishop, no King.

But I much wonder what Lord's anointed Charles the second is, seeing there was
no Lord Bishop in Scotland to anoint him. Surely, the highest Title he can
claim; is but Sir John Presbyter's Anointed.

But, for the further clearing of this thing, I deny that any King, whatsoever
he were, since the Lords Anointed (Christ) came in the flesh, was ever called
the Lords Anointed. See Acts 10.36, 37, 38. with Chap. 4.25, 26, 27. And let
any of the most wise and zealous people in the Land for that thing, prove it if
they can: and if they cannot, let them confess that they have been zealous, but
not according to knowledge.

Another Question is, Where ever any were called the Lords Anointed before
Christ came in the flesh, but only those that had the rule and dominion over
the Jews, which were the people of God, and Abraham's seed according to the
flesh, of whom (as Paul says) Christ, or the Lords Anointed, came. See Romans
9.4.5. And therefore they were called so in the type, as they were figures of
(Christ) the true Anointed, that was to come, and be born of the Jews, Matthew.
2.2.

If any shall object, and say, that Cyrus was called the Lords Anointed, Isai.
45.1. I answer, That is the same which I said before: for he was at that time
King, and had rule and dominion over the people of God, Abraham's seed: and the
Lord tells us (in verse. 4.) wherefore he calls him so, in these words: For
Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by name,
and surnamed thee, though thou have not known me. And thus the Lord himself
has fully answered that Objection; and it is clearly proved, that none before
the coming of Christ did ever bear the name of the Lords Anointed, so much, as
in the type, but only those that were Kings; and had rule over Gods own
peculiar people, Abraham's seed: which teaches us thus much, That none are now
the Lords Anointed, but he (only he) that is Lord and King over the house of
Israel, Abraham's seed; which in (Christ) the Lord, that was borne King of the
Jews, Mat. 22. whom God has Anointed himself; not with oyle-olive sweetly
perfumed, but with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb. 1.9. even with
the Holy Spirit of wisdom and understanding, and of Counsel and might, and of
knowledge and the fear of the Lord. See Act. 10.30. with Isa. 11.2, 5. he is
the Lords Anointed; to whom God has given a name above every name, and him
has God highly exalted, and set him at the right hand of his Majesty on high,
far above all Principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, Psa.
2.9, 10 11. with Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. And to him has God committed all power in
Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.10. to give commandments, to the sons of men for
whom he has, dyed, Act. 3.22, 23; 24. and also to reward them that observe and
do them with the things promised; which is to partake of the same eternal life
and glory with himself, that the Father has given him; according to these
Scriptures, Psalm. 103.17, 18. Romans 2.6, 7. chap. 8.17.1 Pet. 1.3, 4 Rev.
2.26.27. chap. 3.21, 22, chap. 22.14. and to reward those. that know him not,
and obey not his holy Gospel, according to their works, Romans 2.8 9. To those
that are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, he will
render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man
that does evil, whether Jew or Gentile: and will destroy them with an
everlasting destruction from the presence of God, and the glory of his power.
And this honor and glory he received from God the Father in the holy mount,
when Peter, James, and John were eyewitnesses of his Majesty; and that voice
they heard that came from the excellent glory, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. This is the Lords Anointed; who
is the only King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; by whom Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice, even all the Judges of the earth. Counsel is his, and
sound wisdom; he is understanding, and he has strength, Prove. 8.14, 15, 16.
he loves them that love him; and those that seek him early, shall find him; But
those his enemies that will not that he should Reign over them, shall be
brought and slain before him. Luke 19.27.

And thus have I shown, and clearly proved by the Scriptures, that Christ is
the Lords anointed King only and alone; and none of the Kings of the Nations
can have any right to such a title any otherways then the Saints and all that
fear God in general have; which is, by partaking of the same anointing Spirit,
through believing, as it is written, The anointing that ye have received of
him, abides in you; and you need not that any man teach you: but as that
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, 1 John 2.27.

And again he says; We have an unction from the holy One; verse. 20. and, he
that stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who has
also sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor.
1.21, 22. and this anointing is as proper to a Beggar, as to a King, if he be a
believer: and if a King be an unbeliever, he has no Right at all to it; for
there is no respect of persons with God; but he has chosen the poor in this
world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom prepared for them that love him,
James 2.5. And he has revealed his Truth to Babes and Sucklings, and hid it
from the wise and prudent; Insomuch that Paul says, that none of the Princes
of this world knew it: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. Therefore says James 1.9, 10. Let the Brother of
low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but the Rich, in that he is made low:
For God will raise them both up, to sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. And he will make them partakers of his fullness; and members of
his Body, of his flesh, and of his Bones, Chap. 5.30.

Therefore let the Kings, Princes, and Rulers of the Nations, be wise, and
learn to know what the Lord means, when he faith, Touch not mine Anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm: For he that once reproved Kings for their sakes,
and slew great and Famous ones for them, Psalm. 105.14.15. with 136.17, 18. is
now about to reprove all the Kings upon the face of the Earth for their sakes;
as I shall now make it appear, by showing Gods dedesigne against them, in these
last days.

And first: The design of God and his purpose is (in this last age of the
world) to stain the pride of all their Glory, and to bring into contempt all
the honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23.9. and to pour contempt upon Princes, and
to cause them to wander in the wilderness, where there is no way; and to set
the poor on high from affliction, and to make him families like a flock; Psa.
107.40 41.

Again, the purpose of the Lord is to sacrifice the flesh of Kings, and mighty
men, and the Chief of the Earth; and to give their flesh to be meat to the
fowls of Heaven, Rev. 19.17, 18. with Ezekiel. 19.17, 18. where he says. They
shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and d^ink the blood of the Princes of the
earth.

Now if the Lord will do these things to the great and mighty Kings, and
Princes of the earth; who then can give them honor and, deliver them in the
day of his wrath? And that the Lord will do it, consider further what is
written, Jer. 25.31, 32. A noise shall come from the ends of the Earth: for the
Lord has a controversy with the Nations; he will plead with all flesh: he
will give them that are wicked to the sword. Thus says the Lord of hosts,
Behold, evil shall go forth from Nation to Nation. This the Lord will do,
until he have stained the pride of all their glory, (viz.) until he have
taken away their Kings, wherein they glory, and of whom they so much boast.
That this is so, consider the foregoing words: They shall eat the flesh of
Kings; and Princes, and mighty men, and chief Captains, and of all that stand
up with them against the Lord. And for further confirmation of these words,
consider what is written, Ier. 25.15. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of
Israel, to me, Take the wine-cup of this fury at mine hand, and cause all the
Nations to whom I send thee, to drink it. Consider what Nations, ver. 18.19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

First, Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, and the kings and Princes thereof,
to make them a desolution, an astonishments, and hissing, and a curse, (as it
is at this day.) We are sure this is true, that they are a hissing and a curse
at this day: why then should the other be so incredible, (namely) that he will
destroy all the Kings of the Nations, with their honorable Princes, if they
stand up against him, and against his Anointed; as follows.

Pharaoh King of Egypt, and his Servants, and his Princes, and all his people;
and all the mingled people, and all the Kings of the Land of Vz, and all the
Kings of the Land of the Philistines, and Ashkolon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and
the remnant of Ashdod, Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon, and all the
Kings of Tyrus, and all the Kings of Zidon, and the Kings of the isles beyond
the sea: Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that are in the utmost corners (the
Lord will find them out:) and all the Kings of Arabia, and all the Kings of the
mingled people that dwell in the desert: and all the Kings of Zimri, and all the
Kings of Elam, and all the Kings of the Medes, and all the Kings of the north,
far and near, one with another; and all the Kingdoms of the world that are upon
the face of the earth, etc. To all these was the Prophet sent, to declare to
them the words of the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, (namely) that they
should drink and be drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because of
the sword, which I will send among them. The certainty of it does further
appear in the 28, 29 verses; where he says, If they refuse to take the cup at
thine hand, to drink, then shall thou say to them; Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Ye shall certainly drink: for lo, I begin to bring evil upon the City
which is called by my name ( viz. Jerusalem) and shall ye be utterly
unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all
the inhabitants of the earth, says the Lord of hosts.

Thus is the design of the Lord of hosts made plain by the Holy Scriptures of
truth, and not by any cunning devised fables, or fancies of my own brain: These
sayings are faithful and true; therefore they will come to pass in their
appointed times. And that they are not yet come to pass, is plain to all that
do understand: for most of the Kings of the nations are yet in their pomp and
glory, and are enemies to the Lords Anointed; therefore he will avenge himself
upon them speedily: for these be the days of vengence, in which all things that
are written in the Prophets against the enemies of Christ, must be fulfilled,
Luke 21.22.

And now in the earth is distress of nations, and perplexity; and men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after the things that are coming on the
earth. For the signs of the coming of the Lord are now amongst us, even here
in England; and the beginning of sorrows is in the nation: the Lord has now
begun to make us drink of this bitter cup; and it will be great mercy if we
drink no deeper: notwithstanding some murmur and complain; it is because their
eyes are not open to see God's design now upon the face of the earth: if they
did, they would see more cause to give thanks to the Lord for his mercies, then
to murmur against him for his favorable and gentle chastisements; he has not
dealt so with every nation: and if England escape thus it will be very strange
to me; and so I believe it will be to all that rightly understand what God is
now doing, and his work which he will accomplish upon the face of the earth,
yet before the end: for he has not yet made a man more precious then fine gold
even a man then the golding wedge of Ophir. Isa. 13.11, 12. neither has he
made the earth empty, and laid it waste, and scattered the inhabitants thereof,
Is. 24.1, 2, 3. but when it shall thus be in the midest of the land among the
peoples, there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning of
the grapes, when the vintage is ended: they shall lift up their voice and sing
for the majesty of the Lord, ver. 13.14.

Therefore let the wicked and ungodly men, that know not Christ, and obey not
his holy Gospel, but are enemies, and will not that he should reign over them;
let them howl for sorrow of heart: for their sorrows are begun, and the day of
the Lord is at hand; and it shall come as a destuction from the Almighty: then
shall all their hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt, and they shall
be afraid; pangs of sorrow shall take hold of them: they shall be in pain as a
woman in travel: they shall be amazed one at another, and their face shall be
as flames. Isa. 13.6, 7, 8.

But let those that fear the Lord, and keep his commandments, rejoice, and
lift up their heads; for the day of their Redemption draws nigh. For it shall
come to pass (even in those days) that whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved; Luke 21.28. Act. 2.21.

The next thing in order to be observed, is, wherefore God will destroy them.

Answ. Because in all ages they have been his enemies, and the persecuters of
him and his Saints.

Those they were that in the time of the Law, being deluded and blinded by the
false prophets, did persecute and kill the prophets of the Lord; as in Ahabs
days, Zedekiahs days, and Jehoiakims days, Ier. 26.29. chap. 37.12, 13, 14, 15.
with 1 King. 9.9, 10. and chap. 24.25 26, 27. They also were the men in Christ's
days, which by wicked hands brought him to his end; as it is written, Act.
4.26. The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ: for of a truth against thy holy child
Jesus, whom thou have anoninted, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and people of Israel, are gathered together etc.

This is the generation the Lord speaks of, Mat. 23. calling of of them
Serpents, and generation of vipers; saying to them, How can you escape the
damnation of hell? because they had slain the Prophets and righteous men that
lived in their days, and in the days of their forefathers.

This is that wicked spirit of persecution which all along from Cain to the end
of the world has reigned, and will reign in the hearts of all ungodly men and
women, to persecute and kill the Saints: Therefore says Paul, Gal. 4.29. As
then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit, even so it is now: and Christ says, The time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think he does God good service. And, these things will they
do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me, Joh. 16.2.3.

And indeed, who have been the chiefest actors in it, but the Kings and Princes
of the nations, which, as Paul says, knew not God, nor the hidden wisdom of
God: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1
Cor. 2.7, 8. and the reason why they did not know it, was, because they
suffered the wicked priests and false prophets of the times to blind the eyes
of their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine
into their souls, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. And this they effected, by handling the word
of God deceitfully, and changing the truth into a lie; teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men, in stead of the commands of God given us by Christ: So
walking in cratiness smoothing over their deceits with a company of good words,
and false speeches; thereby deceiving the hearts of the simple: and through
covetousness and sained words, have made merchandise of their souls, Romans 16,
17, 18 with 2 Pet. 2.2, 3. and indeed, it is no marvel though it be thus: for
it is the policy of Satan to gain the Kings and rulers of the nations to him
self; for by that means he can easily suppress the people of God living under
them, and also delude and deceive those that have not the knowledge of God
amongst them, by the examples of them in authority: for look what religion the
Kings and rulers of the nations are of, the same generally the people are: as
for example, The Kings of Israel, and the rulers there of, if they were good,
the people were the better; but if they were evil, the people were generally
wicked: and therefore it is said, 1 King. 14.15 16. The Lord shall smite Israel
as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good
land which he gave to their fathers: and he shall give up Israel because of the
sins of Jereboans; who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.

We may likewise observe the same in Judah, in the days of Rehoboam the son of
Solomon, 1 King. 14.21, 22, 23, 24. in these words: And Judah did evil in the
sight of the Lord and provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had
committed, above all that their fathers had done, etc.

The same things may be observed by us of late days here in England: for in the
days of Edward the sixth, the people were Protestants; but in Queen Marys days
they were Papists; for she and the Rulers were soland in Queen Elizabeth's
days, again Protestants; for she and the rulers were so. Thus we see it is the
fashion of the nations, and of our nation of England also, to be of that
Religion that their Kings, Nobles, and Rulers were: and great reason: for,
first, its praiseworthy, and highly commendable in the sight of men, to be so;
secondly, it is the way to live in peace, and to escape the crose of Christ.
But let us remember, that what is highly esteemed in the sight of men, is
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.16.

Again, the Lord will aveng^ himself upon them, because they have persecuted
his Saints without a cause; as is written, Psalm. 119.161. Princes have
persecuted me without a cause: and because they have given their power to the
beast, and suffered that serpentine and viperous generation of false prophets
and deceivers, to make use of them to persecute and destroy the Saints and
Children of the most high God; notwithstanding he has said, Psa. 116.15. Right
dear and precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints; and
that he will require it at the hands of this generation, Mat. 23.33, 34 35 36.
with Rev. 18.24. where he says, that in her was found the blood of all the
Saints and Prophets, and all that are slain upon the earth.

Eighthly, It is to be considered, what the Kings and rulers of, the nations may
or should do, to escape the hand of God lifted up against them: for although
there be a general destruction pronounced against the Kings and Princes of the
nations (their sins, and the sins of their forefathers, being at the full)
without respect of persons; yet it is not without respect of their conditions,
but except they repent (as Christ says) they shall all perish, Luke 13.5. as
we also see in Jon. 3.4. When the Lord by the Prophet had pronounced
destruction to Nineveh within forty days; yet we see when they acknowledged
their sins, and humbled themselves before the Lord, he was pleased to forgive
them, and spare their King and their City, according to his gracious promise,
as we may read, Ier. 18.6.7 8.9, 10. in these words: At what instant I shall
speak concerning a Nation, on a Kingdom, to pluck up or to pull down and
destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil
I will repent of the evil, I thought to do unto them. And at what instant I
speak concerning a nation and a Kingdom, to build and plaint it; if that nation
do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the good
wherewith I said I would benefit them.

Thus we see, the Lord has graciously left open a door of repentance for them
to escape through; although its to be feared that very few will make use of it:
notwithstanding my humble advice is to all in general, that they will let the
counsel of the Lord be acceptable unto them which in these words is expressed:
Be wise now therefore, ye Kings; and be instructed, ye that are Judges of the
earth: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, Psa. 2.10, 11.
Break of your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor, if it may be a lengthening of your tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. for who
can tell whether God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that they perish not? Seeing also he has said, Jer. 18.8, If that
nation against whom I have spoken, turn from their evil, I will repent of the
evil that I thought to do to them.

But more particularly, I shall apply my self to the honorable Rulers of this
nation; whose happiness, with the prosperity of the whole nation, I much long
after, and daily pray for the continuing and perfecting of: and to that end, I
shall make bold to put your Honors in mind of these following particulars: not
as one proudly taking in hand to teach you, but humbly and in the fear of God
to advise you; as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord:

First, That you will fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your
hearts; and consider what great things he has done for you: for if you and the
nation shall still do wickedly, we shall be consumed, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25.
consider therefore how he remembered you in your low condition; and when you
were little in your own eyes, he chose you, and made you the heads of the
nation, 1 Samuel 15.17. and ever since, has gone before you, and fought your
battles, and given you the victories: and now at present, he has given you
rest, and a breathing-time, to sit down and consider how he has wonderfully
delivered you out of the hands of your enemies: so that they which hate you do,
not rule over you; but he has delivered them into your hands, and you rule
over them: which is a double mercy. Now therefore in the fear of God, while you
have time, sit down and seriously consider how the Lord has dug and planted
you, and how he has fenced you and made an hedge about you: and what could men
fearing God desire more for a temporal safety and deliverance, that he has
not done? as he said once to Israel, Isa. 5.2, 3, 4. now therefore is the time
that the Lord looks for fruit; and now is the time that the Rulers of the
Nation, and the Judges of the people ought to be instructed, and to learn
wisdom; to serve the Lord (that has thus delivered them) in fear, and to
rejoice before him with trembling.

Secondly, take heed therefore lest now, when the Lord looks for judgment, he
behold oppression; and for righteousness, he hear a cry: which may justly cause
him to take away the hedge, and pull down the wall that he has built about us,
and lay us waste, as he did his people Israel, Isa. 5.5, 6. I speak not these
things to accuse any, but to warn all, in time to take heed; for as Paul says
in another case, Romans 11. If God spared not his people Israel the natural
branches, let us take heed lest he also spare not us: and it is for you that
are the heads of the people and Princes of the nation; I say it is for you to
know Judgment; and of you that the Lord requires these things, Mic. 3.1.
Therefore let all that are in authority in the nation, Consider their ways;
And, wash you, and make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before the eyes of the Lord; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
Judgment, relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless, plead for the widow:
then you may have boldness to draw near, and to come and reason together with
the Lord; and though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow:
if you will be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the Land;
but if you refuse and rebel, you shall yet be dovoured with the sword: for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

You may do all this now, you have time enough; no enemies to trouble you. In
time of distress you promised well: the people hoped you would perform, and
therefore were willing to put to their hand to help in time of need: and now
the storm is over, the eyes of all your friends in the nation are upon you,
expecting these things from you; which the Lord requires of you, and his
people do believe you will perform, although we thus speak, to stir up your
minds by way of remembrance.

Thirdly, and you Honorable, Noble and valiant men of the Army, whom God has
crowned with so many Victories; you that have seen the works of God, and his
wonders in delivering you in most eminent dangers, and covering your heads in
the day of battle, and made your hearts and hands strong, and your faces bold,
to look upon your enemies in the height of all their pride, and gave them into
your hands when you were in your lowest condition, (remember Dunbar;) be not
now faint-hearted, but remember, and forget not to look your friends whom you
have fought for in the faces, and petition to them, and plead with them for
just judgment, and equity; that the Nation may be established in
righteousness: then may you sit down in peace, and enjoy the fruits of your
labor and hazards. But think not that the work is already done, because you
for present have done fighting: its true, the Lord has delivered you, and all
the Magistrates in the Land, out of the hands of your enemies; but it now
remains that both you and they strive together (and that while you have time)
to deliver the oppressed from oppression, and the poor and needy out of
trouble: for God has delivered you to that end, that you, as instruments in
his hands, may deliver them: and he has prepared yet another blessing for you,
against you have done that work; as you may see, Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. in these
words: Blessed is he that considers the poor and neeby; the Lord will deliver
him in time of trouble: the Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he
shall be blessed upon the earth: and the Lord will not deliver him into the
hands of his enemies; but the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing: yea, he will make his bed in all his sickness.

Thus we see how good and acceptable a work it is in the sight of God, and what
the Lord has promised to those that faithfully labor in it: therefore they
that are already about it, let them not be weary of well-doing: for in due time
they shall reap, if they faint not. And those that are not about it, let them
up and be doing: and Lord that has promised to be with them.

Therefore let none say, The former Laws and Statutes of the nation do hinder
them in this work: for if they be corrupt, why are they not taken away? who
hinders you, or can hinder you? Is not the Lord with you, while you are with
him, doing of his will and work? and has he not given the power into your own
hands? Be sure therefore he will require these things at your hands that are in
authority, and have the power in possession.

But men are very prone in these things, to frame their work according to the
politic Law of Nations, rather then to measure it by the perfect Law of God:
therefore my humble advice in the next place is, that your honors will,

Fifthly, be pleased to consider David, that man after Gods own heart, who
ruled the people prudently with all his power: consider, I say, how he
meditated in the Law of the Lord day and night, Psalm. 1.2. and how he sought
him with his whole heart, that he might not wander from his commandments, Psalm.
119.10. for by them he was made wiser then all his enemies, and had more
understanding then all his teachers: because he meditated upon the testimonies
of the Lord, and because he kept his precepts, he came to understanding more
then the ancients; verse 97.98, 99, 100. And these things are written, and left
upon record, for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come:
therefore let us be instructed by them, and especially you that are in high
places; for the God Israel has said, They which rule over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God; and as the light of the morning, when the Sun
arises in a morning without clouds; and as the tender grass springing out of
the earth, by the clear shining after rain, 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.

And truly there has bin a great shower upon the nation these many years; but
now it is ended: therefore the Lord grant that after you may so spring up and
grow in works of Justice, and mercy, and righteousness, that by them you may
shine forth in the nation: So as both your selves, and they which do behold
you, may have cause to rejoice, and glorify God. Otherwise, I for my part am
very Confident that Englands miseries are not yet done; but the Lord will again
chastise us with chastisements seven times worse then before: but I hope for
better things, although I thus speak.

Sixthly, The example of Solomon is worthy of serious consideration, who when
the Lord had made him ruler over his people, he then besought him for an
understanding heart that he might discern between good and bad, and that he
might know how to judge righteously between man and man and how to go out and
in before so great a people: and this thing pleased the Lord so, that he did
not only grant him his request, but also gave him riches and honor, which he
did not ask, nor cover after: and promised him further, that if he would walk
in his ways, and keep his statutes and commandments as his father David did, he
would also lengthen his days, 1 King. 3.5 6 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12 13.

Now, would the honorable Rulers of this nation know how to discern between
good and bad, and to judge righteously between man and man, and how to go out
and in before this great people which the Lord has set them over? Would you
have honor and riches here, and true happiness hereafter, with God in glory?
Then ask it of the Lord, as David and Solomon did: meditate in his law, and
exercise your selves therein day and night: learn out of that, what is Justice,
and Judgment, and equity, and the Lord will be with you, and give you wisdom
and understanding in all things: for he is no respecter of persons, but gives
to all that ask in faith, freely, and upbraideth not, James. 1.5. Therefore,
Right Honorable, despise not these sayings because of the weakness of the
instrument who at this time puts you in mind of them, but let the counsel of
the Lord be acceptable to you: it may be as Daniel says, a lengthening of your
tranquillity, Chap. 4.27 therefore let all that are in authority labor to be
such as they ought to be, (namely) men fearing God, and hating covetousness:
(for if any be otherwise minded, let them know, the Lord will have such to rule
before he has done:) and ask the Lord for wisdom (even that hidden wisdom,
which few or none of the Princes of this world have attaind unto) 1 Cor. 2.8.
that, so you may wise and understanding hearts, to judge the people
righteously: for without this wisdom, who is able to go out and in before so
great a people as God has set you over? especially when the eyes of most of
them are upon the Rulers for evil, and do watch for their haltings.

Be wise now, therefore, you that are the Rulers of the Nation; and be
instructed, ye that are the Judges of the people, and remember that although
you be called Gods, yet you must die like men; and after that, comes the
righteous and impartial Judgment of God, to whom you must give account at the
great day, of all your actions.

Therefore take heed ye be not conformable to their Image which God has cast
down by you, and do not tread in the footsteps of them whom God has destroyed
by your hands, for their pride, vainglory, covetousness and oppression: which
wickedness in them, was now come to the full. But especiaily, take heed of
persecuting the Saints, and men fearing God, for conscience sake in the things
of God, the which they were deluded and led into by those wicked Antichristian
Ministers which attended upon them in the Bishops days; a great part of whom is
left amongst us to this day, and some of them so transformed into Ministers of
righteousness, that they will hardly be discerned from them: but this need be
no wonder; for Paul says, the Devil himself is transformed into an angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. but by their works they may be known.

Therefore if there be any secretly enticing your Honors to persecute men
fearing God, which make the holy Scripture a rule both for their faith and
obedience, you may be sure they are of that old generation the Lord Christ
speaks of: you may read their genealogy, and see whose children they are,
Mat. 23.27, 28, 29 30 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. compared with John 8.44. But
I know by woeful experience, they have so much of the wisdom from beneath as to
call us Heretics, and pestilent fellows, and movers of sedition; and ring
leaders of sects: for after the same manner they accused Paul, Act. 24.5. But
his answer is sufficient for all those which tread in his footsteps, and
contend earnestly for that faith which was once delivered to the Saints in
Paul's days; which answer is written, Act. 2.4.13, 14 15, 16. in these words,
They cannot prove the things whereof they accuse me: but this he confessed (to
Felix) that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my
fathers, beleiving all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets; and
have hope toward God, which they themselves allow, that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. And herein do I exercise
my self always, to have a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward
man. From which words of Paul, I observe these things.

1. That they which persecuted him, did themselves allow that it was lawful
for him to believe all things written in the Law and the Prophets; and yet they
accused him for an heretic: even so do men in these days: they will allow us
to believe all things written in the Law and the Prophets, and all the gracious
words of Christ and his Apostles; but if we practice them, they will accuse us
for heretics. 2. Those which do believe all things written in the holy
Scriptures, and acknowledge the resurrection of the just and unjust, and labor
to keep good Consciences, void of offense toward God and toward man; they are
no Heretics: let them believe and do what they will, if it be no more then is
written in the word of God to believe and obey. Therefore let all men take heed
how they persecute any for believing or practicing any thing written therein,
although it be never so contrary to their judgment. 3. If any be Heretics, it
must needs be they which do not believe and obey the things written and
commanded in the holy Scriptures: for, as Christ says to the Sadduces, They
err, not knowing the Scriptures. 4. I understand that the great difference
amongst men lies in the practical part of Religion: for the Devil and wicked
men do not care how much truth men know and believe, so they practice none; for
the greater is their condemnation: But if any come to practice it, by keeping
the commandments of God, by which doing they exercise a good conscience toward
God, and are blameless and righteous before him, as Zacharias and Elizabeth
were, Luke 15. then presently perfecution arises: for Satan well knows, that
to believe and obey both, will bring a man to happiness in dispite of him: and
therefore it is, that the poor Saints are so much persecuted for practicing
nothing but what is written in the word of God, and was practiced before in the
days of Christ and his Apostles. But let men take heed how they offend those
which earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints; not in King
Henry's or Queen Elizabeth's days only, but I mean all that was first preached
and practiced by the Lord and his holy Apostles; even as it was delivered at
first.
Therefore my prayer shall be for all those in Authority, That, they may learn
to know that they are ordained of God to judge between man and man, and not
between God and man; and to to rule over men's bodies, not souls. But this I
speak in the behalf of those which go not beyond the Scriptures, and do not
presume above what is written: but if any deny them, I have nothing to say for
them; they must answer for themselves when they are called to it.

Thus hoping that the Magistrates in general will be as willing to protect all
people fearing God, and walking according to the rule of his word, as they are
willing to pray for and assist them in time of need; I shall conclude this
matter, and proceed to the next particular (viz.) to show what is the Saints
duty, and how they ought to behave themselves in these dangerous days and
perilous times, briefly in these words.

First, let not our hearts be troubled at the wars and rumors of wars,
distress of nations, and perplexity that is now upon the face of the earth:
for all these things must come to pass; but the end is not yet, Mat. 24.6, 7,
8. for these are the beginnings of sorrow, and the days of vengeance, in which
all things must be fullfiled that are written in the Prophets, Luke 21.22.

Therefore the second thing we are to be exhorted unto, is, to take heed to our
selves, lest at any time our hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so we be taken unawares in that
snare that shall come upon all them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth
(which do not take heed:) Therefore let us watch and pray always, that we may
be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass on this
side the grave, and that we may have our part in the Resurrection of the Just,
and stand before the Son of man with great boldness, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. for
they which have their part in the first Resurrection, are blessed and happy,
and shall shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father, when our vile
bodies shall be changed and made like the glorious body of the Lord, as it is
written, Rev. 20.6. Mat. 13.43. with Phil. 3.21. But the wicked shall not be
able to stand in the Judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the
Righteous in that day, when the Heavens shall depart, or pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with servent heat, and the earth, with the
works therein, shall be burnt up. At which time, the dead, both great and small
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to
their deeds done in the flesh, whether they be good or bad. The consideration
of which righteous judgment to come, made Felix tremble, although he was a
judge: therefore, dear Christians, and all that fear God, and believe that all
these things shall come to pass; let us, us as Peter says, 2 Pet. 3 10, 11,
12. consider what manner of persons we ought to be, in all holy conversation
and godliness: looking for, and making haste unto, the coming of this great day
of God: for it is the property of the wicked to put the evil day far from them:
but let us, so much the more as we see the evil day approaching, prepare to
meet the Lord, by putting off the work of darkness and putting on the armor of
light, walking honestly as the children of the day: Laying aside all
superfluity of naughtiness, and receiving with meekness that ingrafted word of
God, which is able to save our souls. And forasmuch as we know that godliness
is great gain, having both the promise of this life, and that which is to
come; let us put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, and let us be clothed with humility; then shall we be fit and
ready to meet the Lord at his coming, and to look death in the face, whenever
it shall approach. Let us take heed of lying and deceit:and let no corrupt
communication proceed out of our mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying and building up each other in our most holy faith: and let all
bitterness, and wrath and evil speaking, filthiness, foolish talking, and
jesting, be put away from us, and not once be named amongst us: as becomes
Saints: for, for these things sake comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience:let us not therefore be partakers with them, but see that we walk
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, children of the light; redeeming our
time, because the days are evil. And in a common calamity many times all things
fall out alike to all; and as dies the wiseman, so dies the fool; and there
is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the clean, and to the
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, and to him
that swears, as to him that fears an oath: so that no man knows either
love or hatred by all the things that arc before him in this present evil
world, Eccle. 9.1, 2, 3. But this we know through believing, that our Lord
Jesus Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from them, and
all the corruptions and pollutions that are therein through lust: and by him is
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by them we might be
made partakers of the divine nature. Let us therefore give all diligence to add
to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to that temperance, and
patience, and godliness, and brotherly kindness, and love; that we may be
fruitful in the knowledge of Christ, and abound in the work of the Lord, for
as much as we know our labor shall not be in vain; and if we do these things,
we shall never fall, but an entrance shall be opened to us abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1, so that we
may stand by says, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, even that
eternal weight of glory the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 41.6, 17, 18. which
will make our affliction seem light and momentary: and though our outward man
should perish, yet our inward man will be daily renewed. Let us therefore
consider these things, lest we faint and be weary in our minds; and that we may
lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing the day of our Redemption draws nigh.

Thus having labored to stir up your pure minds in some measure by way of
remembrance, I shall proceed to the last particular, namely, the vindication of
the Saints from the false aspersions cast upon them by wicked ignorant men.

First, they assirme that we will not obey Magistrates, but have rebelliously
rose up against, and prevailed over the King to the taking away of his life:
and therefore they conclude that we are those that despise dominion, and ars
not afraid to speak evil of dignities.

To which answer: This is no more true then that which Ahab spoke of Elijah,
when he told him that it was he that troubled Israel, 1 King. 18.17.18. and
therefore the same answer may well serve us, (viz.) That it is not we that have
troubled the Nation, by fearing God, and keeping his Commandments, which are
written in his Word of Truth; for that is the whole duty of man, Eccle. 12.13.
but it was he, and his fathers house, in that he had forsaken the commandments
of the Lord, and brought in the commandments and traditions of men in stead
thereof, as Ahab followed after Baalim: and therefore in vain did they worship
God, as Christ faith.

But let our accusers remember those profane days of Liberty, which were set
up by Authority, and Books of liberty read in stead of preaching, by which they
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that they could not turn from their
wickedness: for they thought all was well so long as it was set up and allowed
by Authority, and read by the Parish Priest.

Secondly, Let them remember the persecuting of them that feared the Lord in
those days, by banishment, imprisonment, and spoiling their goods, and some by
death, whose blood cried for vengeance in the ears of the Lord, with the
prayers, sighs and groans of the other banished out of their native Country
from friends and acquaintance, and those in Prison; the wife being separated
from her loving husband, and the husband from his dear wife; the children from
their parents, and parents from their children: being thereby made incapable of
getting a livelihood in the world; even to the utter undoing of many: and all
because they would but search into the Scriptures for eternal Life, further
then the Bishops, and the King and his counsel would have them. By all which it
is evident, that it is the just hand of God that has taken vengeance upon his
Teachers and Counselers, and will yet find out more of them; and that not only
in this Land, but in other Nations also, until he has stained the pride of
all their glory, and brought into contempt all the honorable of the earth: the
which is sufficiently proved before, in the sixth and seventh particulars of
this Book.

Thirdly, Let them consider the abundance of wickedness that was at Court in
his days; what gluttony, drunkenness pride, swearing, lying, whoring, carding,
dicing, and all manner of unlawful gaming, allowed of, practiced, and
maintained by him, his Courtiers, and their attendance: all which, with the
reft of their wickedness, procured the just judgment of God upon them: for,
because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 67.

Again, whereas they accuse us of speaking evil of dignities, and for
resisting of powers;

I answer, It Is false: for there is no power but of God, the Apostle says,
Romans 1.3.1, 2. And how to know what power is of God, he shows in the 3and4
verses, in these words: for Rulers and powers (that are of God) are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil. Therefore if thou do that which is
good, thou shall have praise of the same: for he is the servant of God to thee
for good: and is for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of
them that do evil. And, says the Apostle, To such a power we must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

Object. But the powers that are, be of God; and must be obeyed, though they
should be wicked.

Answ. I deny it: for wicked men in Authority commanding wicked things, ought
not to be obeyed, but opposed; either actively, by doing; or passively, by
suffering. Therefore said the Apostle to the Magistrates, Act. 4.19. Whether it
is right in the sight of God, to hearken to you more then to God, judge you.
And again, Chap. 5.28, 29. Peter and the other Apostles told the Magistrates,
they ought to obey God rather then them. Thus we see Magistrates are not to
feared and obeyed because they are Magistrates and powers, but because they are
good Magistrates, and powers ordained of God; such as are for the praise of
them that do well, and a terror to them that do evil, 1 Pet. 2.14. Therefore
says the Apostle, Romans 13.3. they that do well shall not need to be afraid of
the powers that are of God: but we know by woeful experience, that those that
did well, had most cause of fear, and were in greatest danger: therefore that
power was not of God, and is cast down.

Again, if we must understand it in their sense, (viz.) that all powers are of
God; and must be obeyed because they are powers; then we shall prove the Devil,
and all wicked men, as theives and murderers, must be obeyed: for the Devil is
both a Prince and a power; even the Prince of the darkness, the Prince of the
powers: of the aier, the Spirit that now works in the hearts of the children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. but now I hope none will say, that because he is a
power, that therefore he ought to be obeyed, or that he is of God. But if the
other argument be true, this must needs follow: but men reason thus, because
they are ignorant, and are indeed of the number of those that speak evil of
things they understand not: and shall utterly perish in their own corruptions,
except they repent, 2 Pet. 2.12. for indeed, these men know not, neither do
they consider what God has done in former ages; much less what he is doing,
and will do, yet before the end of all things: and therefore speak they evil of
things they know not: and, as Peter says again, they think it strange that we
run not in the same excess of riot with them; and therefore speak they evil of
us: but let them know they shall give an account to him which is ready to jude
the quick and dead, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.5.

Obj. But there are many Noble, wise, and prudent men in this Nation, and most
or all of the Kings and Princes of other Nations that take part with them; and
who dares say that they are such?

Answ. Most or all of the Kings, Princes, and nobles of the World are ignorant
of the knowledge of God, and of his great design and work that he has to do
upon the earth: for had they known it (says Paul) they would not have
crucisied the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 22.8. And did those Princes and great men
in our days know it, they would not crucify him in his members: but, as Christ
says, These things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father nor me, Joh. 16.2, 3. And indeed, the world by wisdom knew not God:
therefore says Paul, The wisdom of this world, and of the Princes of the
world, comes all to naught, 2 Cor. 2.6. But as for the wisdom of God, that
shall endure for ever: he reveals it to them that fear him: and his Covenant
is to give them understanding, without respect of Persons, Psalm. 25.12.13, 14
with James 1.5. And there is not many wise, nor noble, nor mighty, that God
has chosen; but he has chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and
heirs of his Kingdom, James 2.5. and God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise; and weak thing of the world, to confound the
mighty; and base things, and things that are despised, has God chosen; to the
end that no flesh should glory in his presence. See 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.
Therefore says Christ, I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to
babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Luke 10.21.

Thus having shown the reason why men salsly accuse us, and speak evil of us,
as of evil doers; I shall proceed to vindicate my self and others from the next
reproach and slander, (namely) that we are the false Prophets that shall arise
in the last days, and deceive many.

In answer to which, I shall proceed in order thus:

First, we will consider which are the last days in which they should arise.

Secondly, how we may know a false Prophet from a true one.

And first, I affirm, that the last days in which the false Prophets should
arise, did begin in the time when Christ and his Apostles were upon the earth:
which is cleared by considering the world in its three Ages: the first days of
it being from the creation till the Flood, and after till Moses, by whom the
Law was given: the second days, or middle age of the world, being from Moses to
Christ: the last days, from Christ to the end: which days shall be shortened,
for the elects sake,

Now that the false Prophets did begin to arise when Christ was upon the earth,
and his Apostles is evident, first from Mat. 24.4, 5, where Christ warns his
Disciples to take heed that no man deceive them (...) for many shall come in my
name and say I am Christ; and deceive many: therefore those were the last days
in which deceivers should come, because he warned his Disciples then in the
flesh not to be deceived.

Secondly, that those were the last days in Scripture Language appears, Act.
2.16, 17. in these words. This is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel,
that it should come to pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out my
Spirit upon all flesh, etc. And this was then fulfilled: Therefore these were
the last days.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke to our fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son, etc. Therefore those days in which Christ was in the flesh, and
spoke to us the mind of his Father, were the last days in which the false
prophets should arise: for, says Peter, As there were false prophets among the
people, (namely, the people of Israel under Moses;) even so shall there be
false teachers amongst you: (namely, under the Gospel.)

Fourthly, that those were the last days in which false Prophets should arise,
and did arise, is undeniable, 1 John 3.18. in these words, where he speaks in
the present time, thus: Little children, it [is] the last time: and as you have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even so now there are many Antichrists; by
which we know that it [is] the last time. Therefore the false prophets and
teachers did arise in those days, and that out of the Church of Christ: for,
says the Apostle, verse. 19. They went out from us: and again, (says Paul) The
mystery of iniquity does already work, 2 These. 2.7. And I know (says he) that
after my departure grievous wolves shall enter in among [you,] not sparing the
flock. And of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them, Acts 20.29, 30. Thus we see when the last days
began, and when the false prophets did arise; and ever since that, they have
continued and increased in the world. And, without question, the Pope may from
hence well plead his antiquity, and so his succession: for I believe they might
be in times past in the true Church at Rome: for we see that false prophets and
teachers had their rise out of the Apostolic Church, in the Primitive times.

But there is another Prophecy to be fulfilled in these last days of all,
(namely) that Christ will consume and destroy them with the spirit of his
mouth, and the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 28. this compared with Micah
4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. in these words: In the last days it shall come to pass, that
the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and exalted above the hills: and people shall flow unto it. And many
nations shall come, and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,
and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he shall teach us his ways, and we
will walk in his paths: for the law shall go out of Zion, etc. And the Lord
shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they
shall break their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. But every man shall sit under his vine, and under his
fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. For all people will walk every one
in the name of his god, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for
ever and ever. These things shall come to pass in their appointed times; for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: but it is not yet come to pass; therefore
we must look for other times in the last days of all; viz. not the rising of
false prophets, but the destroying and casting of them down; which the Lord
will hasten.

The second thing is, How we may know a false prophet: of which I shall speak
as briefly as I can, because, by what has been said before, they may be known.

1. They will preach and prophecy in the Name of Christ (very much;) but they
say, and do not: see Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23, 24. If Antichrist should not come in
the name of Christ, he could not deceive so many: for the world has been
deceived these many hundred years by praying and preaching in his name, by them
that have not obeyed his commandments, nor contended for the faith as it was
once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. 2. They are of a persecuting spirit: for
they win stir up the Magistrate to persecute others, which both say and do
those things commanded in Scripture, which was first preached by the Lord
himself and his holy Apostles: and yet they cannot tell us how we shall escape,
if we neglect it. See Heb. 2.1, 2.3. 3. They commonly deny Christ to be come in
the flesh, in effect, though not in words, by grounding their Religion upon the
Ceremonies of the Law; as is well noted in that little book of Tho. Collier's,
called Three Parallels, one between, the Priests of our times, and they under
the Law. 4. They love to give expositions of plain places, of Scripture,
thereby to blind the eyes of the ignorant, by darkning the counsel of God with
their words without knowledge; thereby endeavoring to make the people set
their faith in their wisdom, and not in the power of God; contrary to Paul, and
the Apostles of Christ. See 1 Cor. 2.4 5.
Lastly to escape their wiles, let all men try the spirits by the Words of God:
remember, the noble Bereans, Acts 17.11, 12. who searched the Scriptures daily,
to see whether the things were so. Therefore let none venture their souls upon
their expositions, lest they lose them; but let us he sure we have a written
Word of God for what we believe, and for what we obey: for he is a wise man
that believes and obeys the sayings of Christ, and not their Expositions of his
sayings. See Luke 6.46, 47, 48, 49, Consider it well, and learn to be wise.

The next thing we are accused of, is, that we are those that cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine we have learned, Romans 16, 17. From which
place, our enemies take occasion to warn the people to take heed of us, and
avoid our company: for, say they. Who are they which cause these divisions and
offenses amongst us, but these Separatists, and men of a new faith? To which,
at present, I shall briefly answer thus, for the clearing of it.

First, consider [when] the Apostle spoke these words: it was sixteen hundred
years ago.

Secondly, to [whom] he spoke them: it was to the true Church of Christ that
was then at Rome, Romans 1.7.

Thirdly, [what] doctrine it was they had learned: it was the doctrine of
Christ which was preached to them by Paul himself, in those days; and therefore
he exhorts them to mark them that labored to cause divisions and offenses
contrary to it: for (says he) they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple, verse. 18.

Now what is all this to a people that never learned this doctrine, but the
doctrine of their Teacher, or his predecessor; (...) be, if it were tried by
the Word of God, it is so far from that which Paul speaks of, that they ought
to separate and divide from it.

Secondly, the same may be said of Jude's exhortation to the Saints to contend
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints; therefore it is not that
which was delivered since Jude's days, contrary to it; but that which was
delivered before, in his days: or else why should he say, Contend for that
faith which was once delivered, if it were still to deliver? Therefore let us
make that which was first preached by Christ and his Apostles in that
generation, a perfect Rule of faith and obedience in this generation; and let
us contend earnestly for it, and mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to what is written in the holy Scriptures, and avoid them.

Lastly, it is said, that we are the ignorant and unlearned that wrest the
Scriptures to our own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

To which I answer: If Peter meant those which are unlearned in reference to
humane learning, I confess we may be some what guilty: but if Peter meant
humane learning, then he condemns himself, and the other Apostles: for, Acts
4.13. we read that Peter and John were ignorant and unlearned men: therefore he
means them which are ignorant and unlearned in the things of the Spirit of
God, which, as Paul says, the natural man perceives not; nor any of the
Princes of this world knew, for all their learning, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. with
14.

Again, we know that the Pope, his Cardinals and Jesuits, want no humane
learning; and yet most men in England conclude that they wrest the Scriptures
to their own destruction.

Again, we know the ancient, learned, grave Bishops in our days wanted no Greek
nor Hebrew; and yet they are concluded to be Antichristian and erroneous.

Lastly, the Apostle shows us plainly who he calls unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.24.
where he says, If the church be come together into some place, and they all
speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers,
they will conclude they are mad: but if all prophecy, and there come in
unlearned, or unbelievers, they will be convinced, etc. By all which we see
that unbelievers are the unlearned once which wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction: which indeed they must needs do, if they have not heard and
learned Christ, and been caught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.20,
21, 22.

Thus having cast in my mite into the treasury, toward the continuing and
increasing the peace and prosperity of the Church of Christ, and the
Commonwealth of England; I freely commit what is written to the view of all
men; desiring them to read and consider it seriously, and try it by the Word
of God, and judge impartially: and if any find profit, let God have the praise
and glory, and let me have the prayers of all that fear God, and regard not
iniquity in their hearts: To whom I desire while I live, to remain,

A loving brother, and faithful servant, in the service of Christ, HENRY HAGGAR.

FINIS.
Christian Reader,
THe Author hereof has another Treatise extant, entitled,

The Spirit of Promise: OR, Those rich Treasures that so long have lien hid in
Christ, searched out, and discovered to the Saints.

Wherein is undeniably proved, that the holy Spirit of Promise, and the gifts
thereof, are the Saints proper right now, and may and ought to be sought after
with all diligence, so as be attained unto in this generation, full as well as
in the Apostltes.

Which is also to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the sign or the black Spread
Eagle at the west end of Paul's.


