WATERS OF MARAH.

Drawn forth in two Funeral Sermons, October 1653. AND Since (upon desire)
Enlarged.

By Henry Hibbert Minister of the Word, and Pastor of Trinity Church in
Kingston upon Hull.

Genesis 42.36. Joseph is not

Genesis 43.14. If I be bereaved of my Children, I am bereaved.

Aug. Multo facilius est non habita repudiare, quam possessa omittere.

Greg. Majorem dolorem commovere damina majors.

London, Printed by W. Hunt, and are to be sold by Francis Coals in the
Old-Bailey, and by John Awdley at Hull. 1654.

To the Christian Reader, especially to my tender Flock and true Friends, Which
are Inhabitants both of the high and low Church Parishes, within the strong
Town and famous Incorporation of Kingsdom upon Hull.
Henry Hibbert boweth his knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for
for power of grace, and perfection inglory.
Brethren,
SAge Solomon tells us, there is no end of making books, Eccl. 12.12.
and much reading is weariness to the flesh, yet this has been an excess in
all Ages, and cease not in ours. Non omnes ad docendum idonei, utinam omnes
ad discendum ha^iles. Ambr.
Many (though far fitter to learn, and to be wished they would do so)
affecting master ship invade the office of public preaching: And (with the
Poets boy) are almost transported to see themselves in Print.

It is a scribbling Age wherein we live. Scribimus indocti doctique.
The Presses are oppressed, and the world so choked with Papers, that a man
would almost conceit old Origin, Apollinarius, or Chrysippus were risen out of
their graves.

As to my own Apology for Printing. Mr William Lyme, Collector of the Customi,
whose firstborn died October 5. and his second child the tenth. 1653.
One maine ingredient to it was the Gentleman's importunity, who was the sad
Father of these two deceased Children, being deprived of them both very
suddenly, and left childlesse.

I received also the earnest desires of many more competitours, who found me
(though well furnished with quils) a bird of no swift wing. Remaining a season
in suspeace, like a man so long in putting on his clothes, that it were time to
put them off again. However, I would not show my self utterly inexorable.

Another was, Mary my first borne deceased at Settrington in Yorkshire June 25.
And Hester my second at Hull, Jan. 12. 1652. I being absent at London. --
Miseris suecurrere disco.
the impression which both Gods word and rod did at that time take upon mine
own heart, having my self been sometimes under the like dispensation, and
suffering the nipping of such promising hopes, as I have experienced the truth
of that old observation, A sign of no long life, when the faculties of the
mind are ripe so early. But alas! who can call back yesterday?

Add unto these, Gods hand in this kind is very smart, and the Doctrine
suitable, therefore I had also an eye unto public profit. Writing (respect
being had unto matter and measure) is not always vox mortua, a dead voice, but
sometimes vox vivida, a lively voice, and has its Energy. Nay, upon some
accounts, whereas speaking is but like a burning coal, useful near at hand:
Writing is like a shining Lamp, which gives light far off. Let these
suffice.

Reader, I have removed Amasa out of the way, 2 Samuel 20.12.
quitting quaintness, and flying in a familiar Sphere. So that thou need
not to make a stand, having a plain path to tract, and nothing that I know in
the world to stomble upon.

If thou be a Parent, know, that Childrens visitations are also thine. Ater
Philippo.
Philip of Macedon losing one of his eyes by an Arrow, found by what was
written upon the shaft that it was aimed indeed at himself. In smiting of
Children God speaks something to Parents, themselves being wounded through
their Childrens sides, 2 Samuel 12.16.
else David had not mourned so solemnly for his sick Child.

But whoever thou art let this mind thee of mortality, Hic vita aut amittitur,
aut tenetur. Cypr. Genesis 31.30.
knowing that now life eternal is either lost or gained. When Jacob had been a
long season with Laban, at last his heart was homewards: O you, who have
conversed many years in this world, it is high time to have some thoughts
heavenwards. Eccl. 12.1.
It were good to remember our Creator in the days of our youth, Seeing the
grave sucks in Sucklings. Aliorum mors proficiat adnostram salutem.
If these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? If
death begin at the Cradle, it is time for us to think of our Coffins.

Friend Momus, Satis est unus, satis est nullus.
with the rest of your Mimicks, I guess your fancy at first sight, Laudari a
bonis timeo, a malis detestor.
nothing can please you, neither will this. Yet know, if my book merit not a
better man's favor, it fears not your frown. And it has thus much more to
entertain you withal, Nihil facilius est quam reprehendere.
viz. That it is more easy to carpe at many than to compose one.

If these leaves be turned over by the hand of a time-server, Eadem probamus,
eadem reprehendimus, hic exit us est omnis judicii, in quo lis secundum plures
datur.
I question not but he will like it well whilst it holds in fashion: yet will
not be so uncivil, as to make it blush and change color, when contrary blasts
make him face about and change his judgment.

But I tell the more moderate, the days are grown more scientificall, and it
is hard to judge of stars of the least magnitude in the presence of the Sun.
However, let not the praise of the more worthy be the disparagement of the
meaner. Nemo ideo deterior quia alter melior.
The foot is not the head, but yet a member of the body.

And now a word to you, my beloved people, that have called me to this place,
and owned me in the Lord. It is not the least part of my comfort, that both you
and my self (notwithstanding some provecations, yet) have hitherto kept our
selves even finger-free from other men's differences. 1 The. 4.11.
Studying to be quiet, and to do our own business, Ephesians. 4.3.
And endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. I hope
we still shall de, approving our hearts to God, and practices to men, to be of
the number of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel. 2 Samuel 20.19.


You know my Idiome or property of speech, how I am prompted onto
succinctnesse, being no Ciceronian. And that my Talent renders me rather a
Barnabas than Boanerges. Yet Igrant the diversity of the Spirits gifts to tend
all to edification: 1 Cor. 12.
And do like the later from them that are dexterous therein. Only I could wish
(as it was once said of Basil) that they who thunder in their doctrine would be
careful to lighten in their conversation, Gregor. Nazia^z.
We have an Age can readily retort, Do not thou fear God, Luke 23.40.
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And again, Romans 2.21.
Thou that art instructed out of the Law, and teach another, teach thou
not thy self?

Moreover, you are not ignorant of my frequent returns about this season, how
I was forced to afford so many buds and blossoms, as little ripe fruit could
be expected. No more, lest the Porch unbefit the Palace.

I here present you with what you had before, something amplified. Not waters
of Meribah, but Marah: as more suitable to my own solitary temper, and safe for
you. Accept my firstborn. And if God give leave again to turn the Cock,
perhaps the Cisterne may afford you sweeter Waters. In the mean time, and
ever, Phil. 4.9.
The God of peace be with us.

Kingston upon Hull, Jan. ult. 1654. Christians, I am your servant in Christ
Jesus, for the help of your faith, Henry Hibbert.

Waters of Marah.
ZECHARIAH 12. Part of the tenth ver. -- As one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn.


THis Prophecy may not unfitly be compared with the yeaning of Labans flock,
Genesis 30.39.
or those heavenly messengers, mentioned in the beginning of it, Cap. 1. Ver. 8.
being chequered with various colors: for it is mixed and made up of diverse
ingredients, viz. reproof, exhortation, comfort, etc.

In this Chapter our Prophet (an holy Herald) fetteth the silver Trumpet to his
mouth, and in the name of God sounds a gracious retreat to the Jewish Nation.
The firmament is not more full of spangled stars, then Scripture is of precious
Prophesies and promises, concerning their calling and conversion. And although
they are as yet blinded and bowed down; yea, Romans 11.
stark dead and dry: yet God has not cast away his people: but will one day
say of Israel his firstborn, as the Father said of the prodigal Child being
returned; Luke 15.32.
This my son was dead, but now is alive.

If any ask how this people should be made capable of so great mercy? Ver. 10.
The answer is plain, I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications. That is,
the presence, operation, gifts, and graces of the Spirit, who is both the
worker of grace, and former of prayer in the heart. See, Romans 8.26. Note.
the best of men are but dry Cisterns, and empty Casks, until such time as the
Spirit drop upon them. We are nothing, we can do nothing, not a prayer, not a
tear, not a warm desire after Christ, till the Spirit come.

And this effusion shall produce a double effect: for,

First, They shall look upon Christ whom they have pierced. Here is
Conversion. Formerly they turned their backs on Christ, looking upon Moses and
the Law, Ceremonies, and selfe-righteousnesse: But now contrary winds shall
drive them contrary courses. These sweet gales of the Spirit shall make them
face about, they shall only mind a crucified Christ, and seek righteousness
and life from him alone. Truly, Jer. 3.23.
in vain is Salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
Mountains: Truly, in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel.

And secondly, They shall lament over Christ. They shall mourn for him. Here
is compunction. Oh! That ever their fathers, Mittunt legatot pro suis doloribus
Lachrymas. Cypr.
and themselves, by their sins, should have so persecuted, vilipended, and
crucified the Son of God! Now sadness is seated upon their hearts. They are
wholly clad in mourning. All their Songs are Lachrymae. And thus a poor soul,
made senfible of sin, does supple it self in tears of godly sorrow.

Which sorrow of theirs is further amplified and set out two manner of ways:

First, By the particularity of it; They shall mourn every Family apart. Ver.
12.
That is, in this duty husbands and wives shall not stay for each other, but
every one shall so conceive sorrow, and be big-bellied with grief, that they
shall ( Joseph-like) withdraw themselves, seeking where to ease their hearts in
showers of tears. That is the best sorrow which is done in secret. Note.
Commune with your own heart (says David) upon your bed, Psalm. 4.4.
and be still. And our Savior Christ (who is the wisdom of the Father)
advises us very much unto retiredness in duty, and our heavenly Father which
sees in secret shall reward us openly. Mat. 6.
It is not (dear Brethren) it is not cutting of Antick-faces, and contracting
the countenance, it is not grumbling forth vociferous groans, and uttering
loud and hideous howlings, to be seen and heard of men, that will gain
acceptance: No, no, Psalm. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit. But when a poor soul can
sequester it self from carnal Company, and sinful Society, get out of the
noise of the world, creep into a corner, and there fit melting in Gods
presence; surely such sorrow will prove sweet and successful, doubtless
whosoever thus sows in tears shall reap in joy. Psalm. 125.6.


Secondly, By the extremity of it, to express the greatness of which the
Prophet compares it, 1. To that mourning which was made for that religious and
zealous Prince, 2 Chro. 35.25.
good King Josiah, when he was slain in the midst of his so hopeful Reign.
Whose lamentations were written and made an Ordinance in Israel, that is, they
did not only mourn at his Funeral, but also at the death of others made
mention of his loss, lamenting the same in all their doleful Elegies. Even so
shall they look upon Christ and mourn. 2. To the sorrow of an indulgent,
natural, and tenderhearted Parent, which takes up my Text, They shall mourn
for him as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him,
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

In which words there are two things considerable, viz.

1. Comparatio, a Comparison. 2. Applicatio comparationis, the application of
that Comparison.
True it is, the spiritual sense and maine scope of this Scripture lies in the
later of these, and would require a large prosecution, but the first is for our
present purpose.

The Comparison then is to be made out by a supplement, thus, Great is the
sorrow and grief of a natural Parent for an only Son, for a firstborn, that
is, for the death of an only Son, or firstborn.

The application is brought in by this particle of similitude [as] As one that
is in bitterness for his firstborn. The Paraphrase runs thus, Behold, Heb.
12.9.
any of you Fathers of the flesh, that is an affectionate Parent, and has an
only Child, a sweet and tender Sprig, an hopeful Bud; should this Sprig be
plucked up, and tender Bud nipped: This Child be taken away by death: O with
what intensive grief would you pore upon it! With what reluctance part with
it! With what blubbering tears and bleared eyes bewai^e it! Imo ^rabens a
pectore vocem. Luke 7.12.
Yea, with what huge and hollow sobs would you follow it unto its dark and
solitary receptacle! Even so, and far more deeply is that soul affected which
is with smitten the sense of sin.

Much also to this is imported in the expression [ Bitternesse] which
signifies deep sorrow and anguish of heart. Thus is Hannahs sorrow expressed,
1 Samuel 1.10.
She was in bitterness of soul. And thus Solomon (a great natural
Philosopher) gives it out, The heart knows his own bitterness. Pro. 14.10.
And it holds well: for, 1. Bitter things are hated and avoided of nature, so
soon as we taste gall or woormewood we spit it out, and what person takes
pleasure in sorrow? 2. They make the taste bitter that it cannot at present
re^ish sweet things: So does sorrow. My soul refused to be comforted. Psalm.
77.2.
As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, (says Solomon) So is he
that sings songs to an heavy heart. Pro. 25.20.
Performs a very unseasonable and unacceptable office. And Israel in Egypt
hearkeneth not to Moses comfortable message for anguish of spirit. Exodus 6.9.


But I have only to do with the first part. The sum being this, To be the
Parent of a dead Child, (That whereas the Fathers eye was sometime entertained
with beholding his own Image in a quick and sparkling eye, comely countenance,
and well cast proportion; now he sees nothing but a dead Trunck, frigid and
benumbed limbs, a pale face, closed eyes, and grim countenance: Whereas the
Fathers ear was sometimes affected with its lisping Language, and childish
Rhetoric, now he attends nothing but deep silence, Altum silentium.
the mouth being mute, and that little filme of flesh that made all the music
lying still: And whereas the Fathers heart was sometime delighted and overjoyed
with this acceptable enjoyment, now it is overwhelmed with sorrow for the want
of it:) Surely wormwood cannot be more bitter. Our discourse therefore will
center it self in this conclusion, That

The death of a child (a Son, an only Son, must needs be matter of much sorrow
and sadness unto natural and tenderhearted Parents.

Sadness properly is a Passion of the Soul, arising from some coffeehouse
she receives from objects contrary to her inclination, viz. either that is
which she would not have to be, or that is not which she would have, or at
least it is not so as she would have it.

And this sorrow is double, either

Dolere and condolere.
1. That of Passion, for the evil we sustain our selves: or, 2. That of
Compassion, for the evil of another.
Before sin there was no sorrow. Adam, whilst innocent tasted nothing that was
nocent. But sin and sorrow were contemporaries, and have ever since (like
Mistress and Handmaid) continued inseparable Companions. Insomuch that the
second Adam Jesus Christ, undertaking for sins, was pressed with sorrows:
witness the Prophet, Isa. 53.3.
A A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. And his own words, Mysoule is
exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 26.38.
even unto death.

But for proof of the point. Hence that is used as a Patheticall and
Rhetorical illustration of mourning, Jer. 31.15.
A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and bitter weeping: Rachel weeping for
her children, refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.
In this place Rachel Jacobs beloved wife is brought in as raised out of her
Sepulcher lamenting the loss of her children led away into captivity. Mat.
2.18.
The Evangelist reciting the same words applies them to the mothers of those
children, that Herod most barbarously caused to be slaughtered. However, both
the Prophet and Evangelist do imply what Rachel would have done, had she been
surviving at either of those calamities which her issue sustained.

Another place; O daughter of my people, Jer. 6.26.
gird thee with sackcloth; make thee mourning as for an only Son, most bitter
lamentation. Nebuchadnezzar and his Forces being to come against them, the
Prophet uses these expressions as the fittest terms to describe such a
lamentation, as the grievousnesse of their calamities might be deemed to
deserve.

I mention no more but that parallel place in Amos his Prophecy, wherein the
Prophet foretelling what dismal judgments should befall that people because
of oppression, he thus sets off the measure of their miseries, Amos 8.10.
I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof as a bitter
day.

But were there no Scripture-instances, this is a truth written in natural
affections. And we see it in experience, this day here are some that mourn for
an only Son, and are in bitterness for a firstborn.

And this sorrow is not irrational: For first of all, Lo, Psa. 127.3.
Children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his
reward. And the more Children the more bleshngs, Ver. 5.
happy is the man that has his quiver full of them. Children that are begotten
while their Parents are young may live to comfort them when they are old. Some
there are that account their Children burdens, but Scripture (you see) puts
them upon the account of blessings. Many hug themselves in having few or no
Children, but surely this their way is their folly, for Children are the
greatest riches in the world. And here in we come to receive a portion of that
primitive benediction so long since pronounced upon mankind, Be fruitful, and
multiply, Genesis 1.18.
and replenish the earth.

Hence old father Jacob makes such grateful mention of his children, Genesis 33.5.
These (says he) are the children which God has graciously given thy servant.
Children are blessings next unto our graces: greater and better than all
worldly things besides. A wedged chest; a full fraught house and shop, a goodly
Lordship, Cabinets of Jewels, and Copboards of Plate are nothing comparable to
the worth of a Child.

In a word, what more can be said? To have a Child given is to have a soul,
yea, so many Children so many souls, Mat. 16.26.
and our Savior tells us one soul is more precious, and of more worth than a
word.

Filius, (...) ab amore, quod omnium constantissimus amor sit inter parents
and filios. Filius est aliquid patr is. Aquin.
children sit close unto Parents affections, and therefore not parted withal
but with great reluctance. Children are as so many pieces of our own selves;
and in that sense to part with a Child must needs be grievous: as to have a
member plucked from our bodies is very painful. (I speak of natural Parents,
for some are without natural affections, Romans 1.31. Being ( Ostrich-like)
regardlesse of their own products: and leaving them to sink or swim in the sea
of the word. It is very probable the Allegory of the wretched Infant was
grounded upon some known custom. Ezekiel. 16.
Nay, experience has spoken, how many poor Infants have tasted death from the
cruel hands of their Strumpet-mothers: who have twice dipped their souls in
sin, making amends for uncleanness by committing murder. But)

Such is the affection of Parents in the flesh, that Scripture uses it as some
short measure and scantling of the love of him who is the Father of Spirits to
his adopted ones. Psa. 103.13.
Like as a father pittieth his children: so the Lord pittieth them that fear
him. Mal. 3.13.
And I will spare them as a man that spares his own Son that serves him.
Surely, none except Parents know or can be sensible how dear a child is. Nay
further, when God would give a full and affectionate answer to his peoples
lamentable, but groundless complaint, he corrects their distrust by this fit
similitude, Isa. 49.15.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the Son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. O sweet
comfort to Saints! Parents which are otherwise of perverse natures, yet they
will not neglect their Children: and is it possible that the Lord (the
fountain of mercy) should empty himself of his fatherly affection and neglect
his people? Quanto mollior sexus, tenerior affectus. Ambr. Duplex est causa,
physica and moralis. Weemes
Great is the love of a Father, but far more tender is the affection of a
mother. Hence it is rendered by some as one cause why God has placed the woman's
dug in her breast: That she might impart her affection more to her child by
giving it suck with her dug which is so near her heart. The love which she
bears to the little one, that she nourishes and suckleth at her breast, is
almost unutterable. What care does she use? What restless nights does she
endure? Nay, love to her little one makes her clean forget her self.

So near are Children to Parents, that they are called Children of their
loins, and are said to proceed out of their bowels; So said David of his
vip'rous Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.
Behold, my son which came firth of my bowels seeks my life. So that we may
call our spiritual children, Philem. 12.
as Paul does his spiritual Son Onesimus, nostra viscera, our bowels.

I read, that upon a turbulent sedition in Thessalonica, Theodosius commanded
that seven thousand should be put to death. A Merchant there having two Sons
put into the Calender of those that should be executed: their good old Father
put up a supplication for his two Sons: The Soldiers, pitying him, told him
they could not save both, for then the Emperors number would not be fulfilled;
but they would spare one, choose which he would. The poor Father, almost like
a distracted man, looking rufully on both, could not tell which to choose: So
that while he delayed, both were slain.

Thus the natural mother (though an harlot) seeing her Child in danger to be
divided, 1 Kin. 3.26.
her bowels were hot and yearned upon her Son. And David about Absalom, after
all his unnatural villainy, yet Absalom is a Child, 2 Samuel 18.
Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom: and again, Is
the young man Absalom safe? And it is very observable in Job, that he sat
still and did abide the boisterous blasts of all those lossefull tidings, as
being not very much moved, until he heard of the death of his children. But O
then, Children dead! -- So soon as the report of this touched his ear, it
struck him to the heart; Ten children in the morning, and now a child esse man!
Oh, now he startles, now he stirs, now the poor pale father is brought to his
knees, Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down
upon the ground. Other losses may go skin-deep, but these go heart-deepe.
Children are unto Parents like unto Teeth, painful both in breeding and
parting.

Psalm. 49.11.
It is most natural to have an eye to the preservation of Posterity. (Although
that ought not to take up our innermost thoughts.) This care we see not only in
the reasonable creatures, but in the unreasonable also; yea, even in birds of
Prey, and wild beasts, who are yet careful in this behalf, howsoever
otherwise they be of cruel and animosious natures. Psalm. 84.3.
Thus the Sparrow finds her an house, and the Swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young. Likewise the Eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreading abroad her wings, takes them and bears
them on her wings: That is, she carries them with such tenderness, and at
such an height, as none may reach them to do violence unto them. Nay further
(see the force of natures instinct) even the seamonsters draw out the breast,
Lam. 4.3.
they give suck to their young ones. What piteous outcries and cheating
circuits makes the poor Lapwing? And all is to divert the Passenger from her
young. So careful are creatures to preserve the products of their own kind.
And this care must needs be more superlative in the reasonable Creature,
unless horribly degenerated.

Moreover, God threatens this to a wicked man as a very great judgment, to put
out his light, and expunge his name from among the living. Job. 18.16, 17, 19.
As Bildad in Job very elegantly, His roots shall be dried up beneath; and
above shall his branch be cut off. His remembrance shall perish from the earth,
and he shall have no name in the street. He shall neither have Son nor Nephew
among his people, nor any remaining among his dwellings. And the Psalmist,
Psalm. 34.16.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil: to out off the remembrance
of them from the earth. And again, Psa. 109.13.
Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following, let their name
be blotted out. And Solomon threatens him not with a rotten house or body, but
a rotten name, Pro. 10.7.
The name of the wicked shall rot. Mark [ shall rot.] The rot (we say) is an
evil disease where ever it lights, whether amongst herds or flocks: But never
so ill as when it lights on men's names or memories, that either they are
mentioned with disgrace, as a rotten thing, or not remembered at all.

Also, God promises this to his people, as a grand favor, and great
encouragement to obedience, that he will multiply and keep alive their
offspring. Abraham, the friend of God, is blessed with a numerous Posterity,
like to the Sand upon the Sea shore, or Stars of heaven. It was no small piece
of King David's happiness, that he saw his Son Solomon sit upon the Throne of
Israel before his death. And that promise made unto Christ is one of the
glorious things of the Gospel, He shall see his seed. Isa. 53.10.
And contrariwise, 2 Kin. 4.14.
it was a miserable blank in the Shunamites estate, that she had no child. 2
Kin. 20.3.
And this is conceived to be one cause why Hezekiah melted into tears when he
received the fatal message: Even because he had no heire-male, his Son
Manasses being yet unborne. And Abraham himself complains of a great defect
amidst all his fullness, Genesis 15.2.
Lord God, what will thou give me seeing I go childlesse? And therefore there
was a provision made in the judicial Law, Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6.
That if a man dyed without issue, his brother should raise up seed unto him,
that so his name might be revived and kept alive in Israel.

Children are nothing else but Parents multiplied, Bena Banah aedificavit; est
enim totius structura seu aedificatio parentum.
and do in some sense immortalize and perpetuate them; especially Sons, which
have their name originally from a word which signifies to build, because they
bear up the name, and are a support to the Family. Therefore the Church
prays, Psa. 144.12.
That our Sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters may
be as corner stones: polished after the similitude of a Palace. When the Father
dies, the Child rises up in his room: and so Parents have a kind of
resurrection in their Children.

A fourth Reason may be this, Give them, O Lord, Amos 9.14.
what will thou give them? Give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
Comparing it with the context you shall find, so great is Ephraim's sin, that
the Prophet is almost ashamed to pray for such a people, and seems very
doubting what he should pray for: yet, foreseeing the fearful plagues that
were to fall, he supplicates a mitigation: That rather than women with child
should be ripped up by the enemy, or they should bring forth to the slaughter,
and see (as Zed kiah did) their Children murdered before their eyes: 2 King.
25.7.
he prays to God to make them barren. A parallel place is that of David, who
in his great straight chose to fall into the hand of God, 2 Samuel 24.
rather than into the hand of men: That is a lesser judgment rather than a
greater. And yet this was a sore one, three days pestilence, by which there
fell seventy thousand men. Even so the Prophet, as if he should have said, O
Lord, this do I beg in behalf of this people, thou will thus much remit the
stroke. It is the lesser judgment of the two not to have children at all, than
after they are borne, bred, and grown to maturity, to have them slaughtered:
and therefore seeing the decree is gone forth, give, give, in mercy, O Lord,
give this mitigation of barrenness. So that the Petition serves to aggravate
the ensuing judgments. It is a most miserable case, when that which is in it
self a curse, is to be prayed for as a blessing.

Coniah's curse is thus threatened, Write ye this man childlesse. Jer. 22.30.
I do not conceive Coniah dyed without issue, Ver. 28.
(the contrary being apparent) but that he had a curse which was equivalent to
being childlesse, and therefore very great; for so it follows in the next
words, A man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall
prosper, sitting upon the Throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. And
this must not only be spoken, but written, Litera scripta manet.
[ Write ye this man childlesse] as a notable judgment to be left on record to
Posterity. And this was Michals punishment for vilifying her husbands person.
Because she conceived contempt against him in her heart, she never conceived
child in her womb. Therefore (says the Text) Michal the daughter of Saul had
no child unto the day of her death. That is, 2 Samuel 6.23.
she was punished with perpetual barrenness.

Doubtless, among the Jews want of children was a reproach both to man and
woman. This may be gathered from that of the Psalmist, Psa. 127.5.
Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, (viz. his Family well
fraught with hopeful children, which are those polished shafts,) they shall
not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate. 1 Samuel 1.6.
Thus Hannah, her Adversary provoked her sore for to make her fret, because the
Lord had shut up her womb, and she calls her barrenness her affliction; O Lord
of hosts, Ver. 11.
if thou will indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, etc. And
Elizabeth, being with child after a long time of sterility, bespeaks her self
on this wise, Thus has the Lord dealt with me, Luke 1.25.
in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

I would not have any gracious heart stumble at this truth so as to hurt it
self. Good men and women may be destitute both of Children and Nephews: And
yet this is not so great an affliction to them, because God comes in, and makes
up this want with a far more precious supply. A worthy Grectan being mortally
wounded by the Spartans, a friend told him he much lamented that he dyed
without Issue: To whom he replied, my famous victories are as so many children
to renew my memory: But here is more; for if God have denied any of his the
benefit of Children, yet he has given them a name better than of Sons and
Daughters. Isa. 56.6.
They are called the children of God. Mat. 5.9.
They have right and privilege to become the Sons of God. Joh. 1.12.
And John speaks it with admiration, Behold, 1 John 3.1.
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God! He that has the Spirit of Adoption, and is heaven-borne, that
can call God Father, and speak to Christ as his brother, and is allied to all
the Saints, shall find a fullness in this spiritual relation. A name on earth,
how honorable soever, is perishable: But a name written in heaven shall never
wither, but flourish for ever. It is no great matter to him or her that wants
Children, if they themselves be the adopted ones of God.

But to a wicked man it must needs be a curse, because he has nothing to make
up this vacuum, and relieve this want. He that at once is both Childlesse and
Christlesse too, has reason to weep for his Children, and not be comforted,
because they are not.

Dolens profere.
and to fit highest in Parents esteem. And there is reason (with due
limitation) it should be so: Genesis 49.3.
for they are our might, and the beginning of our strength. We know the
firstborn had privileges by Gods appointment above the rest; for 1. They had
the Priesthood, and did approach nigh unto God, till the Tribe of Levi
ministered in their stead. 2. They had a double portion. 3. And then they were
Princes, for they were to succeed their Fathers in the Government of the
Family: and so were to receive honor from the rest of their brethren, as the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Therefore Esau was very
profane that sold it away, and Reuben sustained a great loss. Besides, the
firstborn were Gods peculiar portion, Exo. 13.13.
and were to be redeemed. And they were a figure of Christ, Vnigenitus respectu
naturae, Primogenitus respectu dignitatis.
whose pre-eminence above the rest of Saints is set out by Primogeniture, Romans
8.29. Col. 1.18. Heb. 1.6. Apoc. 1.5. Christ is Gods only-begotten, and his
first-begotten.

Moreover, The Lord being displeased with the Egyptians, a stubborn and
rebellious people, he showers down many plagues upon them. But after all those
heavy judgments, of Lice, Frogs, Grasshoppers, Hail, Darkness, Botches,
B^oud, etc. he takes away their Firstborn: And this was the last Arrow he
shot amongst them, as the most deadly and poisonous. When Parents awake in the
morning, and find in their beds every one a dead child, and upon a view
discover it to be their firstborn, O then they howl it out with a great cry.
Exodus 11.4, 5.6.
About midnight (says the Lord to Moses) I will go out into the midst of
Egypt, and all the firstborn in the Land of Egypt shall dye, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh that sits upon the Throne, even to the firstborn of
the maidservant that is behind the Mill. And there shall be a great cry
thoroughout all the Land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall
be like it any more. Cap. 12.29, 30.
And so it was, for, It came to pass at midnight the Lord smote all the
firstborn in the Land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on
his Thron, unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the Dungeon. And
Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants, and all the Egyptians,
and there was a great cry in Egypt: for there was not an house where there was
not one dead.

Thus we see in ordinary, the firstborn are oft-times dearest. They are like
to the first fruits under the Law, the Prime in Parents hearts. Men glory most
of the first Apple, the first Cherry, or Apricock the tree bears, Lo, this
is the first fruit that my tree did afford. Even so the first fruit of our body
is most joyful and welcome unto us.

I am not for undue partiality in Parents affections, whether to young or old,
first or last. We know what hatred Joseph's coat of diverse colors procured,
Genesis 37.3, 4.
setting him out as an object of envy to his brethren. It had been better if
Jacob had smothered affections, loving him more, and showing it less. And it
is a part of prudence in Parents, so to order the expression of their love, as
they give no cause of grudge, or malignant emulation among their children.

Yet this is a safe rule to walk by, Melior est unus timens, quam mill filii
impii. Cypr.
The best are to be loved most. Grace ought to be owned, and to have the
pre-eminence wheresoever. We should love them most whom God loves most: But
such have the specialty of Gods love, and should have ours. Which Child you
discern to be most gracious and tenderhearted, most humble, and heavenly
minded, a rightly devoted child, a praying child, etc. Son or Daughter, elder
or younger, let that be your Benjamin, the child of your right hand.

The Use in the first place prompts us on to a Sympathy with our friends in
sorrow. Jobs friends, the report of whose miseries no sooner touched their
ears, but it affected their hearts; for (says the Text) They came every man
from his place, Job 2.11.
for they had made an appointment together to mourn with him, and to comfort
him. And Paul is nothing behind in this, witness his own words, Who is weak,
2 Cor. 11.29.
and I am not weak? who is afflicted and I burn not? Surely the same Apostle
lays it upon us, as no less than our duty, to divide both joys and sorrows
with our Brethren, Romans 12.15.
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. We must not
only meet our friends to feast and make merry with them: But also to sorrow and
mourn with them. We ought to take part with them both in the sweet and sour.
The swallow will sing with us all Summer, so long as our Climate is warm, but
when Winter comes she is gone. Vermin will frequent the barn while there is
corn, but the provision being once consumed and gone, they are gone also. Yea,
Caterpillars will c^ing fast like close friends whilst any verdure remains,
but that once devoured and they drop off. Let not us be summer friends, but
winter friends, friends in emptiness as well as fullness, friends in adversity
as well as prosperity. Pro. 17.17.
A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity.

In nature, if the least member be pained, all the rest sympathize. If we
suffer but a nip by the arm, it discomposeth the whole body. If there be but a
thorn in the foot, how officious are all the other members in ministering their
help? The mouth it complains, the head it quickly boweth down, the eye is
intent, and the hand active to pluck it out: Such an harmony there is in the
natural composure. 1 Cor. 12.25.
There is no Schism in the body, but the members have the same care one for
another. Sure I am, we are all one blood in Adam, and real Christians are
joynt-members in Christ, and therefore ought to be mutually affected. Romans 12.5.
The Curtains of the Tabernacle were so tached together, that stir one and
stir all: So ought it to be among Christians, hurt one and grieve all.

Besides, it is a great comfort in calamity to have a friend condole with us.
One calls it, Medicamen^um vilae. Aug.
The Salve of man's life, intimating, that as a Plaster to a wound; so is one
comfortable friend to another in misery.

to prevent sorrow in this kind. In short, ye that are Parents, carry so as ye
may keep your children. In order whereunto three things challenge your careful
respect, viz.

See to your own selves. Genesis 26.24. 1 Kings 11.12, 32.34. 1 King. 15.4. 2
King. 8.19. 2 King. 19.34. Isa. 37.35. Cap. 45.4. etc. Not that I in the least
impute these allaies of judgment, and mixtures of mercy, to the merit or worth
of their Predecessors, but to the promises of God made unto them: who also
endued them with care and good conscience to keep the condition annexed
thereunto. This is plain out of Psalm. 89.20. forward. And the Saints in their
wrestlings with God have pleaded it as a strong Argument. Thus Moses, Exodus
32.18. and 2 Kings 13.23. So that in some cases the Child that is unborne may
bless God that he had a religious Father or Grandfather. And if so, ye may
eftsoone guess what is like to follow upon the contrary.

Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul (says David, 2 Samuel 9.1.
remembering his promise) that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake? And
afterward, thus says he to Mephihosheth, Fear not, Ver. 7.
for I will surely show thee kindness for Jonanathan thy Fathers sake. Even
thus Children may receive much kindness from the King of heaven for their
godly Parents sakes.

Surely, a man may be either blessed, or cursed, not only personally, but also
in his posterity. The blessings of Children are the blessings of Parents, and
Childrens punishments may be Parents punishments. Psalm. 109.
The Psalmist shows sufficiently in those his imprecations, that wicked men are
plagued in their Children. Thus Cham was cursed in his Son Canaan, (mark the
Text, not cursed be Cham, but cursed be Canaan.) Genesis 9.25.
And contrariwise, bounty and kindness to Solomon is called bounty and
kindness to David his Father. 1 Kin. 3.6.
And Joseph was blessed from his Father, in his two Sons Manasseth and Ephraim.
So says the Text, He blessed Joseph, how did he bless him? Genesis 48.15, 16.
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the Lads.

Ezekiel. 18.20. Gal. 6.5.
The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father. But every man shall bear
his own burden?

I answer, Sol.
Here is no contradiction; for 1. The Proposition is most true, if it be taken
away by regeneration. 2. The Son shall not bear it in reference to eternal
punishment, Ver. 4.
The soul that sins it shall dye. God will never send a Child to hell for
the Parents sin. 3. Neither (as I conceive) shall the iniquity of the Father
devolve upon the Child, except he imitate his Fathers iniquity. But ye must
know, 1. Children are Parents goods (as is plain in the case of Job) which may
justly suffer loss for the owners sake. 2. Children are (as it were) a part of
Parents, so that when they are punished Parents are punished, and this is a
more cutting Corrasive and torment to Parents. 3. Parents sin is ost a cause of
Childrens fin: For God in his just judgment may curse a wicked man's Posterity,
by leaving them to themselves, Mat. 23.32.
that so they may fill up the measure of their Fathers. And when the Child has
not only sins which belong to his own individual person, but also revives his
Fathers by approbation and imitation, then the sin is made his own: As a man
catching the plague dies of his own disease, wherever he had the infection. So
that we To visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, to the third
and fourth Generation of them that hate him.

Now Fathers and Mothers be not (as Zipporah once said) bloody Parents. For
your Childrens sake look to your selves: That none of yours, when you are dead
and in your graves, may have cause to curse your dead ashes, and say, Woe and
alas that ever I was born the wretched Child of so unworthy a Parent.

See to your God. do what they can to make their Children miserable. It was
Sampsons Plea unto his Charge for firing the Philistines Corn, Judge. 15.11
As they did unto me, so have I done unto them. Beloved take heed how ye deal
with God: Psalm. 18.26.
With the froward he will show himself froward. Lev. 26.
If ye walk contrary unto him, then will he also walk contrary unto you. If ye
provoke him whom you ought to love most, he will bereave you of that which ye
love most. If ye have one Child dearer to you than another, by one means or
other he will deprive you of it. If ye love your Children love your God: If ye
desire to keep them, keep in with God: he gave, and he can take away at
pleasure. The best way to keep our Children is to serve him who gave us our
Children.

See to your Children: We shall particularize some of the prime, viz.

First then, Ephesians. 6 4.
And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath. And, again, Col. 3.21.
Fathers provoke not your children to anger. Some Copies add, above what is
fitting: So that Parentall power has its limits. Docter Davenant observes,
Davenant an Colos.
that Parents may abuse their authority, and provoke their children several
ways.

1. By denying them necessaries, which by the Law of God and nature they ought
to afford them, according to their power: As food, raiment, etc. A sin so foul
as the Apostle blusheth not one bit to say, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Such a one has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

2. By burdening their Children with wicked and unjust commands. Such was that
of Saul, 1 Samuel 20.31.
when he commanded his Son Jonathan to fetch his innocent friend David that he
might be slain.

3. Parents may irritate and provoke their Children when they do passionately
and undeservedly affect them with contume^ious and disgraceful language. And
thus Jonathan in his Fathers rage is called, Ver. 30.
Son of the perverse rebellious woman. Reproachful Language leaves a sting
behind it, very difficult to be endured.

4. And lastly, by immoderate chastisement. Which is, when the grievousnesse of
the punishment exceeds the greatness of the crime. Thus the same Saul casts a
Javelin at his own Son for defending innocent David, whereupon the Text says,
Ver. 33.
Jonathan arose from thetable in fierce anger. And it is too ordinary for
fathers of the flesh to chasten their children according to their own pleasure.

The reason which the Apostle annexeth to this prohibition is, [ Lest they be
discouraged.] Frequently hereupon Children fall into an Athymy, or despondency
of mind, being (as it were) out of all heart. Whereby, either first their
Spirits (if tenderhearted) are too much sadned: and this sadness enclosed in
the heart is like a moth to a Garment, or a worm to wood; bringing diseases
and immature death. Or secondly, through too much dejectedness they are made
stupid, and so rendered incapable of any considerable seize, or
commendable actions. Or thirdly, they become desperate and contumacious,
whereby they provoke God, and God cuts them off. Certainly, Parents need
abundance of prudence in correcting their Children.

If Parents will not be found wanting toward their Children they must mind
their education. Not only fitting them for an outward and particular calling,
in reference to the world and well being of their bodies: But also having an
eye mainly at their general and spiritual calling in relation to God and
their souls. Thus the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.4.
Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And God himself
seems to be very confident of his servants care in this particular; he says of
Abraham, I know him, Genesis 18.19.
that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.

You are not inhibited the having of respect unto due decency, for education
does consist in Religion, Learning, and Behavior: But have a care that sauce
exceed not meat. Every one ought to say of his natural, as John of his
spiritual children, 3 John 3.
I have no greater joy than to know that my children walk in truth. A mamma
corporali, ad mammam spiritualem. Chrysostom.
O Parents above all, be mostly careful of your childrens souls. Hannah
brought her Son Samuel very speedily from the natural to the spiritual dugge,
so do ye. Be good examples to your Children. Instruct them. Dist^^ good things
into them as they are capable of receiving. Children are like unto
straight-neck'd bottles admitting by drops, Isa. 18.10.
here a little, and there a little.

Yea, Castigationes madicamentorum fimiles sunt, non ciborum. Cattw. in Pro.
31.2.
and correct them likewise when their is occasion. (Provided it be with
moderation, and upon necessity, as Physic: not frequent and fami^iar as daily
food.) Such is the reiterated counrell of wise Solomon. 1 Samuel 4.
We know how fatal Ely's indulgence proved to his Sons, being both slain in
one day, and for the old man himself, difficult it were to tell whether his
neck or heart were first broken. 2 Samuel 18.17.
We leave Absalsm (that was so much cockered up) with an heap of stones upon
him. And it ended far from well with Adonijah, 1 Kin. 2.25.
whom his Father had not displeased at any time.

We shall discover in our children many vices, which we had need to cut off
whilst they are young, lest they grow up with them when they are old. It was
said of Ptolomy, that he was too young to reign, but old enough to love
Har^ots. So there are many, who are in Age children, but can commit sin like
men. Wise to do evil, Jer. 4.22.
but to do good they have no knowledge. But, O let not any nearenesse of
relation make us to connive at wickedness, or be silent at sin. In case of
Gods dishonor we should forget our selves to be Parents, and them Children;
using sin as a Serpent, the nearer it creeps unto us, the more to fly and hate
it.

Youth is a plant very flexible, but old age a tree and inflexible. Youth is
like soft wax, fit to take a good impression, but old age is hard, and more
unfit to take such a counterfeit. (...).
I read of Diogenes, who seeing the rude carriage of a Boy, did reach his
Master a real invective, saying, The fault is not in the Scholar, but in the
Master. I am afraid much of the sin of Children will be laid to the charge of
Parents. If we have a piece of ground, we will be at cost and pains in the
manuring and tilling of it. We take delight in ordering our Gardens, and shall
we neglect our Children? Ought we not much more to weed sin out of them, and to
improve them? Psalm. 127.3.
Children (we heard) are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward, and shall we reward the giver so unkindly as not to give
them education? O let us have a care of them while they are young, lest both
they and we repent afterward when it is too late. 1 Kin. 21.3.
Naboth would not give the inheritance of his Fathers to Ahab. Children are the
inheritances given us of God, take heed that through our negligence we do not
what in us lies to give them to the Devil.

Commonly those Parents are most reverenced of their Children that have wisely
and orderly corrected them. They that have laid the reins on their necks, and
suffered them to go without correction, are most contemned and despised of
their Children afterward. Correct thy Son, Pro. 29.17.
and he shall give thee rest, yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul. 1
King. 1.
Adonijah (whom David would not displease) displeased his Father afterward, and
came at last to an untimely end.

A third thing required of Parents, of holy Job, Quo multorum pignorum pateres,
plures sunt, pro quibus deum de preceres, multorum animae redimendae. Cypr.
He rose up early in the morning, (mark, this man prayed for his Children
next his heart, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them
all, (he begs a particular blessing on every child's head;) thus did Job
continually. And thus Bathsheba bespeaks her beloved Son Solomon, under the
name of Lemuel, What, my Son! and what, the Son of my womb! and what the Son
of my Vows! O it is good for Children that they have praying Parents and good
for Parents that they be at some proportionable expense for their Children in
spirituals, laying up Prayers as well as Portions for them. The Prayers of
faithful Parents are as seed sown in their lifetime, the fruit of which their
Children may reap after they are dead. Christians; I tell you, the time is
coming, and now is, that Parents prayers may be of more profit unto their
Children than their Estates.

Fourthly, 1 Samuel 2.29.
It was heavens complaint against Eli, that he honored his Sons above God,
that is, did choose to please them rather than God. If any fond Parents be
guilty of this, your Children are (as Michal should have been to David) snares
to you, and your selves occasions of evil unto them. I may at least allude to
that place in Ezekiel, Cap. 24.16.
Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a
stroke. That is but a Type, Ver. 21.
mark the Exposition of it. Speak unto the house of Israel, thus says the
Lord God, behold, I will profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of your strength,
the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pittieth, and your Sons and
your Daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword. Truth is, these were
a people grown more tender of the Temple and Arc, than they were of God
himself, witness their loud Acclamations, Jer. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, etc. and more indeed than the Lord of the Temple:
These, together with their Wives and Children, were put into God's room, and
became the desire of their eyes. Well (says God) but I Will plunder them of their
Jewels. Sanctuary shall be profaned, and Sons and Daughters shall fall by the
Sword: I Will learn them by sad experience, that they have a God which ought to
have been dearer unto them than all these. And thus God takes away mercies from
us, lest they should take away too much of our hearts from himself. Cuts away
these suckers, that the topmost branch, which affords all the fruit, may not
want its due.

We may love our Relations in due measure, Genesis 41.40.
but (as Pharaoh said to Joseph) God will be in the Throne above them; that is,
he will sit highest in our hearts. And good reason, he that dwells in the
highest heaven should have the highest place in our affections. It is nothing
but meet, that we usher our best friend into the best place. Otherwise, what we
unjustly advance, he will most justly bring down. If this King find a Wife, a
Child, or whatever in his Throne, down it goes. O then, (as the Psalmist says
of riches, so,) Psa. 62.10.
if Children increase set not your heart upon them. Joy not overmuch in them.
You will invite the man with the Gold Ring, Sit up higher, and bid the vile
person, Jam. 2.2, 3.
Sit down lower; O give check to all your enjoyments, and bid wife, children,
Luke 14 8, 9.
and all give place to this more honorable person. If Dagon stand in
competition with the Ark of God, down falls Dagon. If we dote too much over an
Absalom, or Adonis, we are in danger to be bereaved of them. Rivarity provokes
God to jealousy: and then full soon may we bid adieu to our abused mercy.

Beware of injuring or oppressing the offspring of others. Egyptians: Exodus 1.
They turned most cruel butchers against Joseph's seed, that had been a Father
unto them: And it was all the reason in the world they should have expressed
their love to the dead, by showing kindness to the living: But they will deal
wisely with them, oppressing them with hard labor, and to root them out, or at
least hinder their multiplying, every male-child must be a Sacrifice to their
savage inhumanity. O see how their cruelty recoyles upon themselves, their
firstborn are slain. God usually paies men in their own coin. Lex talionis.
Reraliates unto them according to the method and manner of their wickedness.
So that they are forced to say with Adonibezek, As I have done, Judge. 1.7.
so God God has requited me.

Think of it, you whom deceased Parents have entrusted with their poor
fatherless Children, think of it, and take heed of injurious dealing: lest
God measure it out unto your children as ye have dealt with those poor
Orphans. When ever you are tempted to wrong them, say thus to your selves,
Would I have God to deal thus with my Children? Would I have the recompenses
of the Lord to be unto them after this rate? Seldom shall you see the children
of oppressors stand unto many generations. Men are most bold with them that
want means of defense, but God is the Patron of such. Jam. 5.6, 7.
Weak innocence has a mighty avenger. Omnipotency is the protector of
Impotency. God does soonest unsheath his sword of justice in behalf of weak
and helpless creatures. Psa. 10.14.
The poor commits himself to thee, thou art the helper of the Fatherless.

In the sixth place, Jacob had a numerous offspring, and yet was a strong
wrestler with God. Job had many Children, and yet was an upright and just man,
and one that feared God. And David had Sons and Daughters not a few, Psalm.
119.164.
and yet no bar to his devotion, witness his own words, Seven (that is often-)
times a day do I praise thee. There are some that think it an excuse
sufficient for their neglect of holy duties, because they have a great Charge.
They must rise early, and ^ie down late, and little or no time can they spare
for God, because of providing for their Children. And if so, it will be just
with God to remove away the pretended impediments, and make an experiment upon
you if you will serve him better without than with children.

Again, there is a Generation, (and it is the manner of many) that to cover
their covetousness, and excuse their injustice toward men, plead their care
for their Children, and affection to them. And so they become like the Lion,
Nah. 2.12.
That tears in pieces for his Whelps, and strangles for his Lioness, filling
his holes with Prey, and his dens with Rapine. O take heed of tearing from
others to get Estates for yours. It will be sad with them, whose gain for
their Children proves the loss of their Children, and their own souls to
boot. Quasi vero quicunque patres sunt, nequaquam aut possint aut debeant
omnino esse, nisi divites, and amare liberos suos sine opum multiplicatione non
valiant. Salv. 7.
Salvian pincheth the practice of such Parents, saying, Cannot men be Parents
except they be rich? Nor love their Children without abundance of wealth?
Therefore it is justice from God, either to take away their riches, and leave
them nothing to leave their Children, or else to take away their Children that
should have inherited those riches, for whom their unjust and covetous scraping
was.

And lastly, Give up your Children to be at Gods dispose. Do not dream of such
a rooting, as that your houses shall continue for ever, Psa. 49.11.
your dwelling places unto all generations, and so call your houses after your
own names. Romans 12.
The Gospel calls upon us to present our selves as Sacrifices unto God, and
therefore much more our Children, which are but pieces of ourselves. Hannah
returns her Son Samuel (whose name declares him the answer of her prayer, 1 Samuel 1.
and a free boon from God,) as freely as he was given unto her. And he is
preserved the Lords faithful Prophet, and called to be a mighty Judge over
Israel, when Eli and his Posterity are cut off. In nature, transplanted trees
become most fruitful; and Children are plants which flourish best in Gods
garden. David was a man much acquainted with the mind of God, and he found no
way so safe, in his dangerous flight from his unnatural Son, as
selfe-resignation into the hand of God. If (says he) I shall find favor in
the eyes of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
he will bring me again; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee,
behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. Let the same mind
be in us, and say, Lord, if thou will yet entrust me with what I have, I shall
bless thee: But if otherwise, thou can take no more from me than what thou
have given unto me. Behold therefore, here am I, my wife, my children, my all,
do to me and them as seems good unto thee.

Apoc. 4.10.
The Elders in the Revelation cast down their Crowns before the Throne. Pro.
17.6.
Solomon tells us, Childrens Children are the crown of old men, and we ought
surely to cast down these Crowns at the feet of Christ. Let us confess we had
them from him, and divest our selves of them to do him honor. One uttered a
divine Paradox, Mr Palmer.
A Christian is one that gains by losing, and while he loses he saves. God
will have us willing to lose before he make us to game. To be ready to part
with our children is the way to keep our Children.

The third use bids us moderate affections when such occasions of sorrow fall
out. Paul prohibits not mourning, but mourning without measure. Religion
abolisheth not affections, but moderateth them. Grace destroys not nature but
rectifieth it. In mortification it is the carnality of affections are struck
at, not affections themselves. Stoics are little better than Stocks. Such an
Apathy suits neither with Religion, Reason, nor Nature. God has imprinted
affections in man with his own finger, and will have them exercised. When no
cross laid upon us from God, neither loss of goods, nor friends, nor
children, will affect us to sorrow; this is not Patience, Jer 5.3.
but rather blockish senselessnes. Such stupidity the Lord complains of in his
own people, Thou have smitten them, O Lord, but they have not sorrowed.

I do not therefore interdict weeping upon this occasion, nay, Non igitur velut
penicille quodam sermonis mei, vesiras abstergam lacbrymas, etc. Ambr. in
mortem Valent. Imper.
I say weep. This is a special hand of God, and he has a dry heart that weeps
not. His eyes and heart are far asunder, that affords not some tears. Only set
Grace on work as well as nature. Water this young plant we have this day set
in the ground, but drown it not. Moderate sorrow.

God forbids Israel that heathenish practice of making themselves bald, and
cutting themselves for the dead. And Christ excludes those artificial
mourners, which were about Jairus daughter, Mat. 9.23, 24.
to increase sorrow: Seeing that affections in that case needed rather the
bridle than the Spur. And the Saints of God have set limits to their sorrow
to prevent excess. Hence Joseph mournes seven days for his deceased Father.
Quid perdis tempora luctu?
And his great-grandfather Abram mournes for Sarah: yet, lest he should forget
his measures desires to bury her out of his sight. Genesis 23.4.


Indeed, some Saints have been excessive in this kind, Rachel for her children
would not be comforted. And David for Absalom ingeminates his doleful
outcries, O my Son Absalom, O Absalom my Son, my Son: But it is noted, as
their infirmity; and in the judgment of some of the Ancients, Aug. Bern.
David did not so much bewail the death of his Sons body, as the danger of his
soul. But affections being turbulent and headstrong, I propound a double
means of moderation, viz.

And first, we may moderate our sorrow by diverting it. That is, causing our
sorrow to be conversant about some other object. Thus Artists staunch violent
bleeding, by diverting the blood, and opening a vein in some other part of the
body. And Sailors when they are in a wrong course turn the Ship another way.
This was the Napkin wherewithal our Savior wiped the eyes of his weeping
attendants, Daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.2^.
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your Children. Spare some
tears, wherewith to bewail your ensuing calamities. And so much is plainly
imported in and about my Text, They shall look upon me (that is, Jesus
Christ,) whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. which indeed is
the spiritual and maine meaning of this Scripture, had it been to our present
purpose to have prosecuted it.

O say of present sorrow, (as Joab did in another case) I may not tarry thus
with thee. 2 Samuel 18.14.
There are many other things that claim interest in my sorrow, and call for
their due measure of tears. And doubtless this (...), 2 Cor. 7.10, etc.
godly sorrow is an excellent thing. One observes very well, That it is a good
exchange to put away carnal joy for godly sorrow: for then we exchange Brass
for Gold, a sin for a duty. Out of these brinish tears, God is used to brew
the wine of spiritual consolation, your sorrow and consolation, Joh. 16.20.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. It is good that present sorrow do not
exceed sorrow for sin.

Say thus with thy self, Whither can I look that I see not cause of of
mourning? If I look above me; I have a Crucified Christ, whom my sins have
pierced, to mourn over. If I look into mine own bosom; there I find a
sinful soul, deceitful heart, and corrupted nature: yea, there I view mine
own ignorance, atheism, hypocrisy, pride, covetousness, blaspemous thoughts,
abominable lusts, etc. And if I look into the world; I discover the monstrous
sins of the time, beastly drunkenness, hateful pride, abominable blasphemies,
presumptuous and daring profaneness, Magis deploranda sunt, quam dicenda.
whereby God in all places is dishonored and provoked. In a word, evils so
horrid, as are fitter to be lamented with tears than mentioned with our mouths.

Add hereunto the miseries of the Church, if thou have not utterly renounced
goodness, Ecclesia in attonitu.
thou shall find cause enough to sorrow. Oh! -- Quis fando, abstinet a
lachrymis? In these divisions of Reuben, here are deep impressions of heart.
The seamelesse Coat of Christ is sadly rent. Those polished and living stones
of Zion lie scattered in the dust. It is even the time of Jacobs trouble. This
is Zion whom no man seeks after. Her ways begin to mourn, and her Gates to
wax desolate. Her precious Sons, comparable to fine Gold, how are they
esteemed as earthen Pitchers?

Mine eye affects mine heart. Woe is me my mother that thou have borne me. Oh
that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my
heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace. For these things I weep,
and mine eye, mine eye runs down with water.

Secondly, viz.

First, 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou did not receive? Surely, neither wife, child, nor
any thing else, from a morsel of bread to a drop of water: Nay, from a thread
to a shooe-latcher. God may say of any of us here before him, most justly, as
once Benhadad said most unjustly, Thy Silver and thy Gold is mine, 1 King. 20.
thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest are mine: And every one of
us must needs answer as ^^d the King of Israel, My Lord, according to thy
saying, I am thine, and all that I have. Or in those words of Laban, Genesis 31.43.
These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and all
that thou see is mine. All we have is Gods.

You that this day mourn for your only Son, and are in bitterness for your
firstborn: consider upon what terms God gave this child. Even upon the same
that Pharaoh's daughter delivered Moses to his own mother, saying, Take this
child away, Exodus 2.9.
and nurse it for me. Mark what God says, Nurse it for me. Suppose any of you
should put forth your child to nurse, and at the expiration of the time should
send for the child: If then the Nurse should deny you your Child, or grumble to
part with it, would it not highly displease you? What an unworthy and
irrational woman is this, (would ye say) that has the face to detain from me
my own natural child? Parents in this case, you are only your childrens
nurses, and you do but nurse them for God, they are his children: O grudge not
God his own, grumble not, repine not, when God sends death to your houses, to
fetch home any Son or Daughter of his from nurse.

And does not this sovereignty and supremacy in God render him also the sole
disposer of all we have; Omnia ex nutu, arbitrioque dei aguntur.
Yes surely, either to give or take away, either to kill or keep alive. O man
who art thou that reply against God? Romans 9.21.
has not the Potter power over the clay?

This did silence Job in all his losses, Job. 1.21.
he was dumb before the shearer when he was shorn to his naked skin, stripped
of all, and why? The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away. Thus Aaron, when
his Sons were so sadly slain by fire from the Lord, Aaron hold his peace, Lev.
10.3.
there was silence in his Spirit. Thus Eli when the ruin of his house was
reported, It is the Lord: 1 Samuel 3.18.
Let him do what seems him good. And afflicted David upon this consideration
is as mute as a Fish, I was dumb, (says he) I opened not my mouth, Psa. 39.9.
because thou did it. It was Gods Act, and therefore he had not a word to
say. Thus Hezekiah, What shall I say? for God himself has done it. Isa. 38.15.
And the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord. Mic. 7.9.
O Parents, it is God that takes away your Children, therefore take heed of
heart-tumu^ts, or implicit murmurings. God has all the keys hanging at his
own girdle, both the key of the womb and of the tomb: and he will let in and
out as he pleases, and who may say unto him, what do thou? Job 9.12.
Methinks by this time we should not make such Idols of our selves or ours, as
for their deaths to grow discontented at the Lords appointment: But that
Argument should ever sway with us, Fiat domini voluntas, The will of the Lord
be done. Act. 21.14.


Again, Confider in the second place childrens frailty. Adam begat a Son in
his own likeness, Genesis 5.3.
after his Image. God by creation made man in his Image, but man by procreation
begets one in his own Image: not only like himself in condition as a man, but
in corruption as a degenerate man. Genere non vitio Adae, Chrisius. Tert.
In this the man Christ Jesus is only free and singular. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? not one. Job 14.4.
And who can bring a strong thing out of a weak? not one. That which is borne
of the flesh is flesh. Joh. 3.6.
The effect must needs answer to the cause, and the Product to the Principle.
So that although Infants should neither live to imitate nor approve the actions
of their Parents, yet their death is deserved. For though they be truly called
Innocents in respect of actual sin: yet they are so in respect of Original.
From the very womb they carry a depraved nature, which prepares them to act
evil. We our selves hate creatures that are hurtful, (though they never did
hurt) because of their pernicious natures. The Scorpion has his sting within
him, though he do not always strike; and the Serpent his venomous poison, though
he do not yet hiss it out, and disperse it. For their final estate we meddle
not, but leave secret judgments to God.

If then our Children be weak and frail, dying and withering fin is the
cause. Sin is the sally-port that lets death into the world, Romans 5.12.
Impatientia est quodammodo in Infantibus in cunabula, tunc quanta mox
incrementa? Tert.
Sin entered into the world, and death by sin. Look at your childrens birth, and
ye need not admire their death. Birth-sin merits death-suffering. Children have
in them at first a bad stock, and should they live there would be as bad an
improvement. This worm is bred in the Plant, and this decay at the core of the
most beautiful Apple. Adam and Christ are as two Stocks or Roots, conveying
different fruit unto their branches: As the new Adam Christ Jesus grace and
life to all that are engraffed in him, so the old Adam sin and death. In Adam
all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22.
in Christ shall all be made alive.

Sin is the seed of death. And it is apparent, an Infant is no sooner born but
he has in him these seeds. I was shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin did my mother conceive me. I presently got the infection of sin,
and so a subjection unto death. I was even warmed in sin in my mothers womb.
Ea lege nascimur. Sense.
An Heathen called death Exitus communis: And true it is, death has both young
and old in bonds alike inviolable. As a Genesis, so an Exodus for all. A time
to be borne, and a time to dye. Hence a certain Philosopher, Sciome mortalem
genuisse.
hearing that his only Son was dead, makes answer, I am very sensible, I did
but beget a mortal creature like to my self.

Lastly, Absaloms, incestuous Amnons, riotous and roaring Prodigals, etc. If
this evil were concomitant with our Orbity, it might be written a mourning in
good earnest: Planxit merito David super parricida filio, cui perpetuo sciret
obstructum exitum, etc. Bernard.
As Bernard speaks most fearfully of the case of Absalom, and David lamenting
his death. But Children that are justified from original sin by Christ's blood,
and cleansed by the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, are in Abraham's bosom. They
wish not themselves again with their Parents, as sometimes the murmuring
Israelites, Would to God we were in Egypt again, but rather they say, as the
Disciples did on Mount Tabor, Lord, it is good for us to be here. Vita hominum
caepit esse miserabilis, debuit dari finis malorum, ut mors restituerit quod
vita amiserat. Ambr. Job. 5.7.


Indeed here they find sad entertainment, being courted with calamities so soon
as they enter the world. Their very tears seem to presage their sorrows:
Launching into such troubled seas, where storms will never cease till they
arive in heaven. It is their gain therefore as well as ours to be freed from
the burden of the body.

Neither let it trouble us that they are nipt in their tender years, and taken
away in their minority: for those that dye in the state of grace dye in a full
age, Ephesians. 4.13.
and are perfect men. What they want in time is made out in happy eternity.

David tells us, we shall go to them, 2 Samuel 12.23.
but they shall not return to us. And a very Heathen could say, Praemittimus,
Scnec.
non amittimus, we lose not our friends, but send them before us. Why then
should we immoderately bewail the death of those whom we must shortly follow?
There is great joy in the meeting of friends; when Moses and Aaron met in the
mount, for joy they kissed one another: Yet the joy of these meetings may be
dashed and will have an end. But O what joy will it be when we meet one another
in the glorious Mount of heaven, never to depart any more? Let us then moderate
our mourning, and prepare for that meeting, 1 These. 4.17.
When we shall meet Christ in the air, and ahide with him for ever.

But I add further, lest this grief should overwhelme you, do ye overwhelme
it with the consideration of a greater. Suppose your Children should live ^o be
a grief to you, as Adam (Emperor of the whole world) had his heart sadned
with one Son killing another; and David. In like manner Rebekah, who had a
double desire at once, has it imbittered with fear of a murderous emulation:
That she confesses, I am weary of my life, Genesis 27.46.
and what good shall my life do me? Nay, suppose ye should have brought forth
to the sword: Seen your little ones spitted upon Pikes: Their tender limbs rent
like kids by cruel hands: Or plucked from their mothers breasts, and have their
brains dashed against the wall: Whilst the affrighted mother is half dead
with astonishment. Or to see your selves so straightned by famine as to devour
the fruit of your bodies, your little Infants of a span-long: Being forced
against nature, Parturire and Deglutire.
to turn your tender kisses into cruel bitings, and suck their blood that
sucked your breasts.

(O tender hearted Fathers and Mothers, who knows how far this fire which is
kind^ed among us may burn before it be quenched: Seeing it has such
combustible matter to feed upon, and such bellows to blow it up? All ye have
hitherto seen may be only the beginning of sorrows.) Suppose ye should live to
see women with child ripped up: your daughters ravished: your Sons captivated
slaves: not knowing what destiny may befall them, but most likely to live
abused, and dye without burial. Nay, (which is saddest of all) have the
Gospel taken from your Children. Would you not much rather commit them to
Christ in their Infancy, and lay them up with him?

The Use in the last place counsels us to keep close unto him, 2 Pet. 1.10.
I Will endeavor to make my Calling and Election sure.

This high piece of spiritual wisdom the good Spirit of God did dictate unto
Job. He could not keep his goods, Oxen and Sheep, Camels and Asses were gone:
He could not keep his Servants, they were slain: He could not keep his
Children, Sons and Daughters were dead: But yet, Job will have a care to keep
his God. Say to God, as sometime that great wrestler Jacob, Genesis 32.26
I will not let thee go. He would hold his God though he lost his limbs, his
life. We will be holdfasts of our estates and money, we will not let them go,
Oh that we could be so of our God.

It is said, Sir Walter Rawley.
that when the Persians were defeated and fled, one of the Grecian Commanders
followed them to the Sea, and took hold of one of their Galleys with his right
hand, which being cut off he lays hold with his left hand, and being deprived
of both, with his teeth, so unwilling he was to let them go: Dentibus and
Vnguibus.
O that we could lay hold on our God, as he did on the Galley, even with tooth
and nail, and hold him as our life. This is the doctrine of wisdom. Pro. 4.13.
Take fast hold, let him not go, keep him, for he is thy life. Cant. 3.4.
And thus the Church deals with Christ, So soons as she had found him whom her
fouls loved, she held him, and would not let him go. Having now obtained her
beloved, she would not part with him again upon any terms whatsoever. She
came by him hardly, and will not part with him lightly. She knows nothing in
the wide Universe comparable to such a Jewel. Take all, only leave her this
pearl of price, and she has riches enough to make her fully happy. Psalm.
73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and on earth there is none that I desire in
comparison of thee. Christ is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

Come now and let us reason together. Have thou lost thine estate? Here is a
full Portion, Lam. 3.24.
The Lord is my portion, says my soul. Have thou lost thy Goods? Here is a
God that may satisfy, Genesis 15.1. Nim is avarus, cui Deus non sufficit.
He is an exceeding great reward. Have thou lost, or rather lent a child unto
God? Here Is a Christ in lieu. Have thou parted with a firstborn? Here is the
firstborn among many brethren. Indeed Children are an Heritage, but God is
the goodly heritage. Psa. 16.5, 6.
So says David, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. The lines are
fallen to me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage.

Micha of Mount Ephraim, he thought it was sufficient cause of complaint when
he was deprived of his Gods, Judge. 18.24.
Ye have taken away my Gods, (says he) and what have I more? I allude to it,
we may lose all we have in the world and yet have more: but if we lose our God,
what have we more? Many things may, yea, all we have in the world, will one day
give us a Vale, and depart from us: But we are never spit in the face with a
woe, until God depart from us. Hos. 9.12.
We to them when I depart from them.

O then, get closer Communion with God. Crave familiarity. Beg some smiles.
When the Creature Comforts hoise sail and make away: entreat that the
loving-kindnesse of the Lord may tarry with thee. A smile in Gods face is
better than a world from his hand.

Imitate holy Job, Job 1.20.
when God is taking away be humbling your selves before him, praying,
worshipping. If we do but keep God, our losses cannot be very considerable.
What is the loss of a withered Nosegay, when we may smell to the flowers fresh
in the stem? Or the want of a Puddle, when we may draw water out of the
Fountain? Enjoying God we have all freshly and fully. 1 Samuel 1.8.
God is better unto us than many Sons.

Waters of Marab.
RUTH 1. Part of the twentieth ver. -- Call me not Naomi, call me Marah: for
the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.


THe high and holy one of heaven, and wise disposer of all things is a most
free Agent, owing unto no Creature an account of his actions. Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in heaven and in earth: and in all
places. This God does all in righteousness, and there is always a most wise
reason of his will: though unto us his will must be a sufficient reason.

His actings are like unto himself, Romans 11.33.
deep and mysterious, How unsearchabbl^ are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? As soon may a man wade through the Sea, as pass through his
bottomless depths: Or hold all the water of it in his hand, as comprehend his
proceedings. They are such as can neither be expressed in words, nor fathomed
with man's reason: Higher above us than the spangled heavens, and deeper below
us, than the Center of the earth.

If then it be Gods part to act his will, it is surely ours to submit to that
will, as holy, just, and unerring. Reverently adoring what we are unable to
comprehend. To this end I here present you with a pious pattern, the imitable
example of this holy. Matron Naomi.

The last time I appeared in work of this nature (since when a poor pittance
has passed) we did instead of sweet spices, pound galls, I mean, preach of
bitter grief. And being now called upon the like occasion, I know nothing more
seasonable than the like Subject. Suffer me therefore once more to requite my
bay and sweet water with a sprig of wormwood: That we may a little sit down by
the Rivers, Psalm. 137.
and hang our Harpes upon the Willows: Yea, that our Harp may be turned into
mourning, Job 30.31.
and our Organ into the voice of them that weep. Call me not Naomi, call me
Marah: for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.

The Chapter presents us with a Tragical story, concerning the great affliction
that befell a good woman: in all which she was supported by God, and left as a
pattern of faith and patience to succeeding Ages. The Series of Gods
providence concerning her runs thus: A Famine is sent upon the whole Land of
Israel, Annot. in loc.
occasioned (as our Divines conceive, and is very pregnant) by those plundering
and spoiling Tyrants, the Midianites: who wasted the Country for many years
together. Ver. 1.
Whereupon Elimelech, (a man of Bethlehem-Judah) with this Naomi his Wife, and
Mahlon and Chilion their two Sons, are forced to flee from the mouth of this
meager devourer, Ver. 1, 2.
and seek sustenance in the Land of Moab.

There she had not long so journed, but meets with a tart dispensation: being
in a manner stripped at once of all her outward helps, and bereft of her chiefest
and choicest friends. Her Husband and both her Sons dye, and she (poor widow)
remains in a desolate and disconsolate condition: Ver. 3, 5.
being left to the wide world in a strange and heathenish Country.

Yet so soon as she hears God had visited his people with plenty, she
endeavors some mitigation of her misery, by returning to her native place,
accompanied with the two young widows her daughters in Law. Ver. 6, 7.
By the way she uses some disswasive Rhetoric, as one desirous to dismiss
them: And whether she speak seriously, out of her love toward them, as loath
to bring them into an afflicted condition, by living with her in extreme
poverty: Or because she would try the truth and constancy of their affection
toward her, I leave to others. But this is the effect, Ver. 8, 9, etc.
the one is dissuaded, the other is not. Herein Orpah is the emblem of a
temporary professor, but Ruth bears the resemblance of a resolved Saint. It
is our duty to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Not only to Mount
Tabor, but Mount Calvary. Not only to behold him when he is glorified, but to
stand by him when he is crucified. It is expected we should love Christ with
the Cross, as well as Christ with the Crown. In matters of Religion we must
put on resolution. Ver. 16, 17, 18.
God loves fixed Saints. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou go I will go: and where thou lodgest
I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.

No sooner sets she foot in the City of Bethlehem but the report is carried
abroad upon the swift wing of fame: where all flock about to gaze upon her,
Ver. 19.
with wonderment admiring her great change. What a spectacle is this? Is this
Naomi? As it were doubting whether it were she or not. Note.
How strangely is she altered? Great afflictions may deface our outward
gooddness, that men can scarce take cognizance of us. We may be such altered
Creatures, as to become strange to our fami^iars. Only here is our comfort, if
we have the mark of election upon our souls, which Christ can never forget.
And never are men miserable till he say, Depart from me, I know you not.

From this doubting question of theirs, she takes occasion to frame this
answer, Call me not Naomi, call me Marah: for the Almighty has dealt very
bitterly with me. And thus having brought her home to her City, we are come
home to our Text.

Which we may digest into 1. A Doctrine. 2. And Use.


The Doctrine is not the preaching of the word, but the language of the Rod.
Hear ye the rod, Mic. 6.9.
and who has appointed it. The Rod has a mouth to speak, if we have an ear
to hear.

The Use is not only verbal, but vertuall and Practical, she hears the rod,
she accepts the punishment. the rod is sanctified. It is like Jonathans rod,
there is honey upon the end of it. It is like Aarons rod, it buds and yields
fruit, even the peaceable fruit of righteousness. Heb. 12.11.


The Doctrine speaks bitter and heavy affliction, The Almighty has dealt very
bitterly with me.

The Use speaks humble submission and subjection, she is sensible of it, she
submits to it: Call me not Naomi, call me Marah. The first of these is for our
present purpose, and the later will be coincident in the discourse. Let us
first labor to give a little light into the words by way of Explication.

Call me not Naomi, Naim, civitas, vel nomen oppidi, ab amoenitate, jueunditate
and situ. Guich. and Minsh.
call me Marah.] Naomi signifies sweet, or pleasant and delectable, and
sometimes beautiful. From this word the Hebrews did oft-times denominate
Cities, because of their beautiful buildings, and sweet and pleasant
situation.

And Marah signifies bitterness, so we read of the waters of Marah, Exo. 15.23.
the Israelites could not drink of the waters because they were bitter,
therefore the name of the place was called Marah, or bitterness, Exodus 15.23.
(...) Amarus, tum de sapore, tum de odore dicitur.
The Greeks do use a very Emphaticall word, signifying both such things as do
disgust the taste, and displease the sense of smelling. The sum is, she
submits to Gods hand, and desires to be called by a name suitable to her
condition.

The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.] I conceive these to be the
words, not of one murmuring, (though the best are apt to express impatiency
under such a condition) but of one sensible of Gods heavy hand, and bemoaning
her own estate. As if she should have said, God has given me a very bitter
pill and disgustfull draught in depriving me of my husband and two Sons, and
bringing me into to this low posture of poverty, for so it follows, Ver. 21.
I went forth full, and the Lord has brought me home again empty, and thus,
The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.

Amongst the reft four things are very bitter viz. Jer. 2.19.
and this is an evil thing and bitter. Sin is like John's book, sweet in the
mouth, but bitter in the belly. As Abner faid of the Sword, It will be
bitterness in the later end. It is sweet in the committing, but stingeth
afterward. Let a man offer us wormwood, so soon as we taste it wespit it out
of our mouths. Sin is more bitter than wormwood therefore away with it.
Christians, I say no more, when once you come to taste the pangs of death, you
will say, ah! Sin is bitter.

The wrathful displeasure of God. O pray you may be preserved from tasting
this Cup. Pray it may pass from you. A dram, a drop of divine wrath is
soule-undoing, lethall and mortiferous. O woe to the damned, that must suck the
very dregs of Gods displeasure, and drink whole Vials of wrath in the dark
and deep Cellar of hell for evermore.

Death is a bitter thing. Agag was spared by Saul, and doubted not to receive
good quarter from Samuel, he said, 1 Samuel 15.32.
surely the bitterness of death is past. By tasting sickness, the brim of
this cup, ye may guess what bitterness there is in the bottom.

And lastly, Waters of Marah. In this sense it is that Naomi speaks; And some
among us may this day speak something out of the like experience, The Almighty
has dealt very bitterly with me. Now to the Point.

God Almighty sometimes de ales very bitterly with his beautiful and
belovedones.

Every true Saint of God is his Hephsibah and Beaula, Vel Chephsibab. Isa. 62.4.
God's delight is in them, and he is married to them. They are his Naomi's, his
beautiful, pleasant, and delectable ones. And yet these polished and pleasant
pieces may lie under very bitter dispensations.

God does not always entertain his people with Apples and Flagons: But
sometimes feeds them with bread of affliction, and with water of affliction.
Here is Naomi a precious woman, whose name and disposition both render her
pleasant and amiable, and yet speaks of bitter dealing from the Lord. Neither
is she single, or passes alone in such sufferings, for clouds of witnesses
keep consort and joint-harmony with her in this water-musick. And though it is
most true, Saints never drink the cup of pure wrath, (which is the proper
portion of the wicked) yet many ingredients of sorrow may be mingled in their
cup, they may taste much bitterness from God.

Job (a man whom Scripture seems to Canonize for an eminent Saint, and pattern
of patience, ye have heard of the patience of Job, yet, Jam. 5.11.
) reads a decree against himself, written with gall and wormwood, Thou writest
bitterthings against me. Job 13.26.
Against me? Against whom? Job, who or what are you? Be pleased to take Gods
own testimony, if heavens witness may pass, I pass, A perfect and upright
man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil. Cap. 1.8.
Nay further, One that speaks of God the thing that is right, and is accepted
of God in prayer, Cap. 47.7, 8.
both for himself and others: and yet, He writes bitter things against me.

We find in that Golden Psalm, Psalm. 60.3.
where David personates the Church, she thus bespeaks God. Thou have showed
thy people hard things: thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishment,
Ind^ Pallor, and membrorum vino madentium tremor. Senec.
or trembling. It is an allusion to men addicted to drunkenness, the effect of
which being long practiced, oftentimes ends in a continual and habituated
trembling. Thou have mingled us such a bitter potion of providence as
possesses us with a Palsy, making us to tremble in every joint, to reele to
and fro, and stagger like drunken men: And this thou have done, not to
strangers, but to thine own people.

We must needs yield, that Zion is the Mountain of Gods Holiness, Psalm. 48.
beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, the City of the great
King, and God is known in her Palaces for a refuge. That she is the Orb
wherein God appears glorious to the Sons of men, Out of Zion, Psalm. 50.2.
the perfection of beauty, God has shined. Psalm. 76. Nobile and illustre
nomen, propter inaudita miracula.
That it is the Theater upon which God comes forth to act his terrible and
wonderful works, In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel; In Salem
is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion, There brake he the Arrows of
the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle. And the Lord has chosen
Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my rest for ever: Psalm.
132.
here will I dwell, for I have desired it. And yet the Daughter of Zion sits
down weeping by the Rivers of Babylon, bemoaning her self in this Language,
and blubbering out her complaint thus, I am in bitterness. Lam. 1.4.
And again, Cap. 3.5.
He has builded against me, and compassed me with gall and travel. And Verse
15. He has killed me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with wormwood.
And Verse 19. I remember my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall. Here I stop, I might be endless.

Having thus seen the truth of this Conclusion, let us in the next place make
some inquiry when, and in what cases, God may be said to deal very bitterly
with his beloved ones: which we may mainly demonstrate in these following
particulars, viz.

When God smites in with an affliction. Job felt the least finger of Gods hand
far heavier than all his other massy and multiplied Crosses. Job 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. And it was
not so much Babylonish Captivity, as the apprehension of Gods displeasure, that
so deeply wounded the Churches heart, Lam. 3.3.
Surely against me is he turned, he turns his hand against me all the day. As
the love of God is better to a soul than the best things of this world, Corn,
Psalm. 4.7.
and Wine, and Oil: nay, better than life it self: Psalm. 63 6.
So the displeasure of God is worse than the worst things in this life: nay,
than death it self. One frown from God is more grievous than all the smiles in
the world are joyous. Ephesians. 6.12.
The Apostle says, We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, etc. Whence I infer, if it be so terrible to
have the powers of hell, how dreadful is it then to have the powers of heaven
engaged against us? Here is God and not Man, Spirit and not flesh.

It was once Eli's disswasive Argument to his Sons. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? In our contendings with men we
may have Seconds, but who dare join issue with us against God? Man may deal
it out with man: nay, (in the strength of Christ) man with devils: But who can
stand before Omnipotency? Psalm. 38.2.
Thine Arrows stick f^st in me, and thine hand presses me sore. This is very
bitter.

Hidden afflictions. Psalm. 42.
Why art thou cast down O my soul: and why art thou disquieted in me? It was
no little aggravation of Rebekah's trouble, when she had those struglings in
her womb, that she knew not the reason: And therefore she goes to enquire of
the Lord, Genesis 25.22.
Why am I thus? Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
A disease found out is half cured: but till then very hopeless. Alas (says
the poor soul) if I knew the special and particular cause, why God so and so
testifies against me; I would remove it, that the effects might cease: But
seeing I am ignorant of this, What hope? I may walk in bitterness all my
days.

Inward afflictions. Pro. 18.14.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can
bear? Not huge Atlas himself. Corporis vita and statumen est anima, animae
columen est Deus. Cart. in lo.
No Herbalist could ever yet show me, amongst all those varieties of simples in
nature, the medicine that cures a wounded soul. No, no, in this all are
Physicians of no value. None can do it but the balm in Gilead, and the
Physician there.

Sudden afflictions are much disgusted, and become very bitter. point or
quarter, and afflictions come in at another. Our expectations are from one end,
and evils come in at another. When they throng in at our back-doores, then and
there as we never expected them. Suddenness or unawares contributes very much
to the bitterness of afflictions. Thus the wicked are threatened, Pro. 1.27.
that their destruction shall come as a whirlewind. And Moab to be destroyed in
a night. Isa. 15.1.
And this renders Christ's coming to judgment more terrible, That he will
come as a Thief in the night, suddenly and unexpectedly.

It is reported, that the Basilisk and Man shoot such venenation at each other,
from the eye at a distance, that whether has priority of aspection is
destructive to the other without corporal contaction. Sure I am, surprising
evils are oppressing evils. When death seems to come in an hac nocte, Luke
12.20.
and take away our sweet relations, without any considerable summons given by
sickness, (as has been at this time) it is very bitter. When God sends
Crosses flying upon us as Arrows, swiftly, and silently, they wound sharply and
deeply.

Successive and continued afflictions. David was weary of his groaning. Pro.
27.1.
When each morning seems to be big-bellied, and to bring forth a new grief.
When afflictions succeed and second one other: One horn springing up after
another, and one Hydra's head after another. When afflictions are like unto
Jobs Messengers, one treading upon the heels of another, and preventing one
another. How many changes had that man? Oxen and Asses are gone, Sheep and
Servants are gone, Sons and Daughters are gone. When we have not to do with
single afflictions, but whole armies at once assail us. When we may say, as
Jacobs wife in another case, Genesis 30.11.
A Troop comes. When we are left to bicker with bodies, and to withstand
whole broad-sides. Psalm. 42.7.
When deep calls unto deep. Take a stone, cast it into a Pond, and presently
ye will see one circle succeed another: So when God plyeth a poor soul with
afflictions, like waves at sea, that it seems overwhelmed: Gutta cavat lapidem,
-- saepe cadendo.
When he keeps the back continually bowed down, that there is no time to look
up and get a breathing: This is very sad. Marble decaies at length with
continual droppings.

When we are exercised with stripping afflictions. viz.

When we are deprived of an only enjoyment, gone. Thus it was with Naomi here,
what nearer than Husband and Sons? In being deprived of them she was stripped
indeed. And thus it was with Job, what nearer than Sons and Daughters? He never
looked upon himself as a naked man until they were gone. It is threatened as a
great part of Jezabels punishment, Apoc. 2.23.
I will kill her children with death.

Look as it is in an house, some goods may be removed, and perhaps not be much
missed: But other Utensils again are so much for use and ornament, that the
want of them leaves an house very naked. Even so, our Children are more to us
than all we have in the world besides. Let houses be never so well fraught,
they are very empty if Children be wanting. What will thou give me, Genesis 15.2.
seeing I go childlesse?

When we are deprived of all at once. of the young man) left utterly naked.
Mark. 14.52.
Here is stripping indeed. If a fair and beautiful Apple fall from our Tree,
we are displeased; but if not one left upon it, then are we troubled. Thus God
threatens Idolatrous Israel, Hos. 2.3.
to strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was borne. So is Naomi,
not an Husband, not a Child. And Job, seven Sons and three Daughters in the
morning, but in a trice all dead Corpses. One Chicken serves the Hen to brood
over. It was comfort to old Jacob, that in the want of Joseph he had a
Benjamin: Though Joseph is not, yet Benjamin is. It is a great mercy all our
Arrows are not spent, but there remains yet some shafts in the quiver. But
when all is taken away at once, as with a wet finger, this is to be left naked,
and is very bitter.

And lastly, old, swelling from the ankles to the knees, thence to the navell,
and at last to overwhelming. When they come on by degrees, and the greatest is
reserved for the last. When the dregs lie in the bottom, and the last morsel
proves the bitterest bit. Just thus it is with Naomi, first, she is afflicted
with Famine, next she is forced abroad, afterward deprived of her meet help,
her Husband, and last of all, of her two Sons. Whose heart would not have
tendered to have seen Job give audience to those mournful Messengers? One
comes, Job, your goods are all seized; Very sad, I am beggared. Another, Job,
your Servants are slain; A great deal sadder, here is precious life taken
away. A third, nay Job, but here is not all, I am sent unto you with more heavy
tidings than all this, Job, your Children are every one of them dead, suddenly,
violently, even all at a clap, and in the midst of their mirth and rejoicing.
There might you have seen shattered cups and skuls, the blood of the grape and
of your Children mixed together. What say you to this Job? Oh! -- Then Job
arose etc. And the like shots did the wife of Phinehas withstand so long as
ever she was able. 1 Samuel 4.
Israel is defeated: very sad. Your Fatherin-Law, Brother-in-Law, and Husband
are dead: O grief! But here is not all, The Ark of God is taken away; This
last shot her to the heart, Then she bowed her self, Ver. 19.
and traveled, for her pains came on her.

As it is the godly man's blessing, that his light shines more and more unto
the perfect day: Pro. 4.18.
So it is the wickeds curse, Jud. 13.
that his night comes on more and more, until at last he inherit the
blackness of darkness for ever. The godly, after all the manifestations of
their Fathers love, find the best wine reserved last: But the wicked, after all
his plagues, at last makes up his mouth with the very dregs of divine
indignation. The nearer unto which afflictions we do approach, the more bitter
they must needs be.

Hence it is plain, Gods ways are not as man's ways. We deal bountifully
with them we love, and bitterly with them we hate. Joseph is distinguishingly
free to his brother Benjamin. Genesis 43.34
And Elkanah gives a worthy portion to his beloved Hannah. If any ask the
reason, why God is so heterogeneous in this dispensation? I answer, Den. 29.29.
secret things belong unto the Lord, whose judgments are a great deep, only
revealed things to us. It is no imputation to be ignorant of things not
revealed. Where God does not speak, the ear should not itch with desire to
hear. Let us not soar over high with our waxen wings. Sapere ad sobrietatem.
God severely punished those that pryed into the Arc. The Philosopher while he
gazed of the heavens, fell into a Pit unawares. As soon, and sooner may we
line out the way of a Serpent over a Rock, or of a ship in the waves, or of an
Arrow in the Air, as find out the ways which God walks in. Only herein we may
safely rest, Say ye to the righteous, Isa. 3.10.
that it shall be well with him. Romans 8.
And all things shall work together for Good to them that love God.

Such is the admirable power and goodness of God, that he can bring light out
of darkness, and good out of evil: yea, he can so overruled the nature of
things, that what of themselves would contraoperate he will cause to
cooperate, and make them serve for much good. He can sweeten bitter waters,
and make waters of Marah become waters of life. But lest any soul should be
sick about this question, 1 Timothy ^.4. (...).
and say, Why am I thus? These following reasons may minister some satisfaction
unto sober minds. viz.



He that is borne of God does not commit sin, that is, 1 John 3.9.
as some do unpardonably, or, as the wicked do continually, as one in his
proper element, he sins not wilfully, presumptuously, impenitently, etc. yet
not so, as if he could not, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
or did not sin; Gods purest people have their spots. Pro. 20.9. Possumus quod
jure possumus. Jam. 3.2.
Solomon bids a challenge to all the world, Who can say, I am pure from my sin?
None justly. In many things we offend all. The greatest selfe-justifiers will
prove the greatest selfe-deceivers. Take it in the Apostles own words, If we
(mark we Apostles and Saints) say that we have no sin, 1 John 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 2.
Clem. Hypotypos. l. 7.
James, surnamed for virtue the just, reckons himself amongst offenders. There
is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from
their filthiness: And I guess none to be blacker in Gods eyes than those that
are whitest in their own. Nitre, Soap, and Snowwater, will not wash off their
blemishes.

Nay further, it is plain, Saints do not only sin simply, but transitively,
even in performing duty, and doing good. So says Solomon, There is not a just
man that does good, Eccl. 7.20.
and sins not. It was once the perverse dispute of some Pelagians, Whether
by the absolute power of God, a just man might not live on earth without sin?
But what have we to do with the absolute power of God, Quid in bac vita uisi
Aurora sumus? Greg
when his pleasure is otherwise? we have cause here to be humbled for the
imperfection of our perfection: being at best like the gray morning, not clear
day. Though we do some things that are of the light, yet we do not want the
relics of darkness.

Sin has some life in us still on earth, our sanctification being not yet
absolute, which God suffers mainely for three reasons, viz. 1. For the exercise
of our faith, patience, and constancy. He leaves some enemies against whom we
may fight the good fight of faith, as the Canaanites were left in the Land to
prove the Israelites. 2. For our instruction, to make us know, how deeply we
are obliged to Gods mercy, and how excellent is that deliverance we have by
Christ. Hereby we come to know the benefit we have by grace, to which we must
make our recourse. Did we not feel how powerful sin is to overruled us, we
could never have known the vile servitude of sin, under which we lay by nature:
nor the excellent grace of Christ, whereby deliverance is procured. We find,
that if the relics of sin be so turbulent, how would it trouble us, and
tyrannize, were it in its full vigor? 3. For his own greater glory, and
Satan's greater confusion. Like Conquerours that slay not all enemies, but
reserve some alive Captive for the day of Triumph, to be put to death for their
greater shame, and the Conquerours greater glory. Josh. 10.23, etc.
Thus Joshuah dealt with the five Kings that made war against Gibeon. So Jesus
Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, subdues all enemies, our sins: yet some
remain enclosed within us, (as in a Cave) restrained by his power from their
former liberty, and when the battle is ended he will utterly spoil them of
life.

This being so, men shall smart for sin where ever it is found, Saintship is no
shelter. The best child will deserve it at one time or other, and an offending
Son shall lick of the whip, yea, Gods own Son if he undertake for sinners. So
long as we have in us this bitter root, we may expect some bitter fruit. Psalm.
91.30, 31, 32.
If David's children (in Covenant with God) break his Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments; then will he visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes.

Saints themselves do never receive the full application of freedom from
affliction till death. Joh. 16.33.
Yet these are castigatory, not condemnatory. They have the Cross, but not the
Curse. Correction, Romans 8.1.
but not Condemnation. A good and a bad man may lie under a like calamity, and
yet here is the difference; to the one it is a chastening, to the other a
punishment. Sufferings may be alike in the nature and measure of them, and yet
differ in the acceptance. A Merchant and Malefactor both cross the Sea, in
one and the same Ship: To the one it is the pursuit of his Calling, and for
gain, to the other exile and banishment. Correction stands for a good caution.
Joh. 5.14. Piscu ictus sapit.
Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee. The sins of Saints are more
dishonorable unto God, and cutting to the heart of Christ than others:
therefore a smarter rod may hang at their gird^es. Greatness of mercy
aggravates the greatness of sin, Amos 3.2.
and adds to misery. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth:
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

Again,

1. For the prevention of sin. They are those thorns with which God hedgeth up
our way that we may not find our paths. Hos. 2.6.
Naturally we are like unto beasts, desirous to breakeforth into wrong walks
and pastures: God will by these prevent our extravagancy, and keep us within
compass. If they go on, they shall prick themselves to the bone. Physicians open
a vein, not only to cure, but many times to prevent a disease. God knows our
disposition, how inclinable we are to this or that evil: And that we should
not fall into these, he sends us sickness in body, sadness in soul, losses
in our goods, friends, children, etc. And these, by Gods blessing, become
golden bridles, to curb and restrain us from that, which otherwise we should
rush upon and commit. When the people saw Amasa wallowing in blood, 2 Samuel
20.12.
every one that passed by stood still: When we are in the hot pursuit of sin,
yea, in the very chase, bitter afflictions serve to give us a stand. Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe and sin not.

2. They serve to awaken us out of sin. How apt are we to take a sweet nap upon
the Lap of our Delilah, our beloved lusts? And how unwilling to be disturbed?
Pro. 6.10.
yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.
How long did David sleep under the guilt of adultery and bloodshed before he
was awaken by Nathan? Sin has a strong power to charm us into a deep sleep.
Pro. 23.34.
Solomon's Drunkard continues sleeping upon the top of a Mast; Judge. 16.
Sampson is dorming when enemies are upon his back; Jonah. 1.5.
And Jonah has his senses fast locked up when there is but a poor planke or
inch-boord betwixt him and death. Who fallen into a lethargy can awake
himself? No more can men awake themselves out of this spiritual lethargy.
Secure sinners matter not, though the house be on fire about their ears.

Now sanctified afflictions are means, both to awake us and keep us wakefull.
Psalm. 77.4.
Thou hold mine eyes waking. Both the eye of my body and mind. How comes the
Psalmist to be so wakefull? Even by being plied with afflictions, My sore ran,
I was troubled, my spirit was overwhelmed, I am so troubled that I cannot
speak, etc. David in his heavy affliction of spirit could say, My sin is ever
before me, Psa. 51.3.
and it was unto him as a Monster, very horrid and formidable: Whereas before
in his jollity he was sensible of no such thing. Look up to God, and beseech
him in this glass to discover unto thee the thing that does thee all the
annoyance, that sin may by little and little go out, and grace drop in. Many a
soul had slept the sleep of death if God had not sent some awakening
affliction, to shake them by the shoulder, and shout aloud in their ears.

3. They may be said to cure the soul of sin. 1 Pet. 2.24.
But what then becomes of the blood of Christ, by whose stripes we are healed?
Answer, No great difficulty to unloose this knot, take it in short,
chastisements may be said to cure the soul mediately, but not immediately: for
they are means to bring to repentance, which in its order and place leads us
to the obtaining of pardon, and God ever gives when he forgives: Pardon of sin
and power against sin are constant concomitants, and a double portion from God
given to the soul. So then, the blood of Christ is the only foveraigne
Medicine of souls, and afflictions drive us to seek the cure. Meliores sunt
ques ducit amor, sed plures sunt quos corrigit timor. Aug.
To be won by love shows a spirit very Evangelicall, and the love of Christ
ought to constrain us: yet many we see are brought home to Christ by the
weeping cross. The Prodigal in prosperity had forgotten himself, but having
gone a season to the school of lad experience, (...)
at last he comes to himself. The Dungeon preached to Manasses the doctrine of
true Religion. And fellowship with the beasts taught Nebuchadnezzar humility.
Afflictions and the Cross are Gods file to take off our rust, and make us
bright.

Then let us not look at present asperity but future profit. At first, Job
something grudged the Lords visitations, but in the issue of those great
troubles he was of another mind. No chastening for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous: yet nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable
fruit of righteousness. No child takes pleasure in correction, for the time it
is unpleasant and irksome, he cries out, O good Father! good Master! and
thinks he has no worse enemies in the world: But when he comes to years of
discretion he praises God he was not permitted to live as he listed. Receiving
of Pills, and drinking of potions, the cutting and lancing of a man, and putting
long tents into wounds, Eadem est ratio disciplinae quae medicinae.
these are not joyous for the present: And yet, the health which is procured
afterward brings joy. So afflictions, though irksome to the flesh, yet they
are wholesome to the Spirit. In nature the body is most healthy when the spleen
is smallest: And the soul is at best when the body of sin that spirit in us
that lusts to envy, is brought lowest. Heavens design in this dispensation
is to kill that which would kill us. The time is coming, in which the soul
shall say, Psa. 119.71.
It is good that I was afflicted. Blessed be those afflictions that helped to
keep me out of hell, and to bring me to heaven. I may say of sanctified
afflictions as he said of virtue, Amara radix, dulcis fructus.
The beginning is as bitter as gall or wormwood: But the end shall be sweeter
than honey.

The second reason of the point does respect grace.

To evidence grace. Israel in the wilderness to prove him and to know what was
in his heart. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
Not that God is ignorant of our estate, but to make us appear what we are,
and give us a sight of our selves. A Pilot is best known in a storm, a
Soldier in fight, and a Saint in affliction. This day will make us discern
between a tree and a man: Some weeds being rubbed offend the sense, whereas
Pomander chafed yields a comfortable smell. Afflictions discover the
carrion-like corruptions of some, but are as the breaking of a box of ointment
to others. What is this man, or that woman (says God) Silver or Dross? Corn
or Chaste? Flesh or Spirit? He shall no longer dissemble with the world and his
own soul, I Will make him appear in his colors. Under the Cross the godly
pray, the wicked often blaspheme.

To try grace. 2 Cor. 13. (...).
To deal with our selves as the Goldsmith with his Gold, bring our selves to
the touchstone of trial, the balance of the Sanctuary, to see if we be right
metal and weight: yea, to pierce our selves thorough, and see if we be sound
at heart. All is not Gold that glitters. A varnished Pasteboard or painted Post
may shine till they come to scouring. That may seem to be grace which is not.
Jacob may mistake his Sons. No flower in the garden but a weed may be found to
resemble it in the wild wilderness. It is possible nature may (Parrat-like)
counterfeit heavens language. A man may walk in a Saints habit, and speak
with an Angels tongue, and yet he himself a devil incarnate. Therefore God
will try grace, whether it be of the right stamp or no. The Apostle speaks of
the trial of faith, 1 Pet. 1.7. Cap. 4.12.
and concerning the fiery trial. God has his fire in Zion, and his furnace in
Jerusalem, and he will melt men, for what else should he do to his people? As
God gives grace, so he will try grace.

Saints, look to your fincerity, for one time or other God will in some way try
you. Here is a man (says God) proclaims his own righteousness, and there is
a woman has much to say for her self, put them into the fire, bring
affliction upon them, let us see what metal they are of. O my brethren, I
guess the times approach, you and I may be tried to the bottom whether grace
or no grace, and whether true grace or feigned grace. If ever it be put upon
us, whether we will receive the mark of the beast, or lose all commerce and
incomes in the world: whether we will fall down to the Image, or into the hot
fiery furnace: whether we will side with uncircumcised ones, or suffer
affliction with the people of God: whether we will run with men into the same
excess of riot, or by departing from evil make our selves a prey: By that
time our day grows so hot, the hidden things of the heart will be much
manifested. In the fire the chafe is consumed, but Gold remains, and is
purified. Pinching weather searches unsound bodies.

To preserve grace. Solomon, who had the most prosperity, fell the foulest. But
afflictions serve to mind us of our duty, and to quicken us in the same. Under
the Law the fire upon the Altar must not go out, grace is an heaven-borne-fire,
or holy flame, kindled in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which the devil and
flesh go about to extinguish, therefore we had need (...), 2 Timothy 1.6.
to re-kindle or revive it. Afflictions help to blow it to a brighter flame.

To exercise grace. 1 Pet. 1.7.
and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. There are two exercises for the
godly. 1. The Scriptures; 2. And the Cross. We must expect to be exercised in
chastenings, that is to undergo many. One action makes not an exercise. Habitus
acquiritur erebris actionibus.
It does not render a man a Soldier that he has fought once, or a mariner
because he has been at Sea once: Neither is he exercised in afflictions that
has been once afflicted. We must pass through many tribulations. God will
exercise us daily. It is the use that makes perfect. He that is not used to
running cannot run well, and so of the rest. The body grows corrupt for want of
exercise, and so shall we, if we be not exercised by afflictions.

To increase grace. Zachary, Nemo in bac vita perfect perfectus.
after he had been dumb a season, spoke more devoutly the mystery of
Salvation. A man in danger of drowning stretches out his hand to the utmost
extent to lay hold on some twig: So will the hand of faith, to lay hold on
Christ. God does so turn these stones into bread, that his people come forth
very much improved out of afflictions. Therefore says Paul, We glory in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation works patience, Romans 5.3.
and patience experience, and experience hope. And the trying of your faith
works patience. Jam. 1.2.
Habits are strengthened by frequent acts. The more we act grace, the stronger
it grows. The more these Cedars are shaken with winds of affliction, the more
deeply they become rooted. Crescit sub pondere.
Being like palm trees, flourishing the more because of the weight that hangs
upon them: Or like Anteus in the Poets, gathering strength by their falls.
Affliction is good with grace, but freedom is evil without. That condition
can never be sad in which grace is gained.

Besides, the sick child is most indulged. God is very tender over his sick
children. They receive many a sweet visit from him during their affliction, and
no time like that for the hearing of prayer. Zech. 13 9.
No people so prevalent with God in prayer as those who are refined. When these
Sons of Levi are refined as Silver, and purified as Gold, Mal. 3.
then are their offering's acceptable and pleasant unto the Lord. And frequent
it is, Christians treasure up more experience of God in a little time of
adversity than in all their lifetime before. Afflictions found Job a good man,
but they left him an experienced man, even to selfe-abhorring. So says the
Text, Job 42.5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

The last Reason does respect glory.

Bitter afflictions make us long for glory. Deuteronomy. 3.
The Reubenites and Gadites, seeing a Country pleasant, and fit for their
purpose, had no mind to pass over Jordan. Had we no afflictions we should
look for no other heaven. But afflictions bespeake us thus, Soul, there
remains a rest to the people of God, but here is not thy rest: So long as
thou live here thou shall find thou art upon a Sea of troubles, tossed to and
fro upon waves of misery and never shall be quiet till thou harbor in heaven.
Whereupon the soul changes choice, Desiring to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. Nay, hence she comes to be wholly made up of
desires, emptying her self in these breathings, I see it will never be better
with me till I be in heaven, and bath my self soul and body in those rivers
of joy. Here is a wilderness there is a Canaan: Here the best Roses have
thorns about them, there is nothing that offends: Here all things at best
are but bitter-sweets, there is no bitterness at all. In Christ's presence is
the fullness of joy. Psalm. 42.2.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God?

For this they groan from their very hearts for the redemption of their body,
Romans 8.23.
to lay aside their burdens, and to be clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.4.
that mortality might be swal^owed up of life. And cry, Apoc. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. No woman with child more hearti^y de^^reth
de^i^ery from the burden she walks with, nor any Jew ever looked more
earnestly for the Jubilee, than they for that time. The world is a barbarous
country, and heaven a sweet home, a p^ace of desire. The soul grows impatient
of delay, and can never receive satisfaction till that day arise upon it.

They are means to fit and prepare us for glory. 2. Col. 1.12.
There is a making of men meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light. And the same Apostle tells us, Romans 9.22, 23.
as there are vessels of wrath fitted (or made up) to destruction: So there are
vessels of mercy before prepared unto glory. I know there are two maine things
on Gods part to make up this aptitude in man, viz. 1. The powerful operation
of his grace, whereby he makes us new creatures, 1 Cor. 15.50. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Joh. 3.3. Vae laudabili vitae hominum, si absque misericordia discutias came.
Aug.
2. The merciful acceptance of his good will, whereby he covers our
infirmities, and accepts of our weak endeavors in Christ, as perfect
obedience. And this holy preparation comes between the Elect and glory, which
work afflictions help very much to advance.

Solomon says, To every thing there is a season, a time to weep, and a time
to laugh. There is Tempus determinatum an appointed time, Eccl. 3.4.
it is good for us it be Tempus opportunum, a fit time. When the Sun shines on
one side, it casts a shadow on the other. Bitterness treads upon the
heels of sinful pleasure. Nunc tempus flendi est and ^a fu^^^^^dendi. H^eron.
in L^^. 6.^1.
It is a blessed thing to have the time of sorrow here, that joy may follow
hereafter. So our Savior, Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh.

In the Deluge of old, the same waters which drowned the wicked of those times
bare up the Arc, and preserved Noah with his Family. Punishments to the wicked
are the beginning of hellish torments, but afflictions to the godly are helps
to heaven. They fail upon these bitter waters to that safe harbor.
Afflictions are Gods tools with which he hews and squares his living stones,
and makes them fit to be laid in the heavenly Jerusalem. The way to the joyful
Canaan was through the howling wilderness. God is used to bring his people
through fire and water, before he bring them into his wealthy place. Those are
dark and straight passages that lead into these spacious mansions of light.
I^ur per angusta ad angusta.
The way to heaven is by the gates of hell. We must through much tribulation
enter into the Kingdom of God. Act. 14.22.
What shall I say more? The Son of God was presented with gall and vinegar
before he drank the wine new in his Fathers Kingdom: that is, he dyed a most
cursed death before he came to live that most blessed life.

Methinkes this might be as sugar to sweeten afflictions unto us. A sick man
will drink bitter potions to procure perfect health. A woman endures great
pain and sore travel for the joy of a man-child. The Husbandman will sow in
winter that he may reap in harvest. O let us be willing to sow in tears, that
we may reap in joy. Seed-time for the most part is not very joyous, there is
much cold and rain endured, and the Seed at present seems to be lost: But
when harvest comes then comes the joy. So the seed of righteousness is sown
in affliction in this life, but great joy shall be at the general harvest in
the life to come. Then we shall not know what sorrow means, but shall have
those joys which neither eye has seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, neither entered into the heart of man to conceive.

And now I place this as a conclusion to these reasons, that there is abundance
of wisdom and mercy shining forth in these dispensations. God will not put new
wine into old bottles, nor tender hard meat to weak stomachs, such as are
babes in Christ. Whilst Christians are weak their trials shall not be strong.
Isa. 27.8.
He debates with them in measure proportionated to their strength, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able. If he purpose
heavy afflictions, he will stay till they be strong enough to bear them. Paul
begins his Hieraticks thus, Romans 14.1.
Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.
And certainly it is not for young Novices in Religion to dispute points, (like
children which delight in Knives that will hurt them) much less to meddle with
jug^ing Jesuits, that have distinctions at their fingers ends, versing
themselves in nothing else but controversies: I advise such, study rather to
live well than to dispute. Neither indeed are those to be allowed, the constant
tenor of whose discourse tends to little better than to puzle poor souls.
I read of a Philosopher, which but on^e boasted that he could ho^d Argument,
and dispute of any Position, true or false, a whole day: And the Lacedaemonians
banished him, considering him as one dangerous among the common people, and a
fit fellow to disturb the peace of the State. Psalm. 2.10.
Et nunc reges prudenter agite, eruditionem percipite, o judices terrae. But
haec obiter.

Thus, in dispensing afflictions, God observes this rule. He will not deal
too bitterly with babes, or lay a man's burden upon a child's shoulder. A wise
Merchant commits his strongest bottomes to the most dangerous Seas. And a
General puts his best Soldiers upon the hardest service. They were of David's
worthies that brake through the Philistines host to fetch the waters of
Bethlehem: David had many in his Army, but they are Champions of approved
valor and prowess that are put upon this design. Even so God will not put it
upon weak Christians to bicker with an Army of strong trials and afflictions,
but such as have obtained experience and strength of grace.

The Use is twofold, free it speaks two things. O ye, that as yet have not
tasted bitterness, or at most but tasted some crumbs of gall, and drops of
vinegar and wormwood.

Be charitable toward others.

It is a very ill but common thing, to judge of persons and estates, whether
good or evil by their outward condition, and casualties that befall them.
Usually men charge great guilt upon them that are greatly afflicted. Surely
(say they) he is a man whom God hates. He has the most sorrow, and therefore
the most sin. Thus Christ himself was numbered with the transgressors, when he
was only wounded for our transgressions. For while he bare our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, he was esteemed stricken, smitten of God, Isa. 53.
and forsaken. Likewise, those exemplary judgments which befell the Galileans,
and those upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell did render them very obnoxious to
censure: Therefore our Savior takes it off, Saying, Luke 13.
Suppose ye that these were sinners above others? I tell you nay, but except ye
repent ye shall all likewise perish. And the Barbarians of Melita, presently
shoot their fools bolt against Paul, (a great deal more venomous then the
Vipers tooth,) Acts 28.4.
No doubt this man is a murderer. So apt are men peevishly and preposterously
to descant upon the sufferings of others.

To dissuade from this, know, 1. Censuring is against a Gospell-command of
Christ, Judge not, that is, rashly, or rigidly, misconstrue not doubtful
things, exasperate not small things. Mat. 7. Periculosum est de servo alterius
judicare. Hier 1. Cor. 13.
Who art thou that judge another man's servant? 2. It is against
Gospell-charity, or Christian love, which thinks none evil. 3. And lastly,
It thwarts the right use which every one ought to make of his own frailty, Gal.
6.1.
Considering thy self. But alas! It is natural for men to reflect upon
others, with neglect of themselves. Like Plutarchs Lamiae, or Fairies, which
carried their eyes in their heads when they went abroad, but when they came
home put them up in a box. Whereas Paul, looking into himself, was of another
mind, he thought himself the greatest sinner alive, 1 Cor. 15.8. with 1 Timothy
1.15.
withnesse his own words, The least of Saints, the greatest of sinners. And did
we but shake our own bosoms, I mean, mark the corruptions of our own hearts,
and aberrations of our own lives, I am sure we should have little lust or
leisure to censure others.

Doubtless sin is the ground of misery, and misery the effect of sin. And
therefore whatever God principally intends, it is good for us to acknowledge
sin as the cause; clearing God, and accusing our selves, it is righteously thus
with me. No affliction but is first thus merited, Lam. 3.29.
Man suffers for sin. The Position of one cause is not the removing of
another where many concur: Neither does the affirming of the principal cause
deny the less principal. Yet both are to be considered, and that according to
their occasional energy. And therefore when the Disciples propounded that
question about the blind man, Master, who did sin, this man, or his Parents,
that he was borne blind? Christ answers, Neither has this man sinned, nor his
Parents; but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. This he
does not speak (...)simply, for both he had sinned, and his Parents had
sinned: But the meaning is, the sins of this man and his Parents were not the
cause, why he rather than all sinners was borne blind: But that Gods glory
might appear in his cure. And therefore one well observes, Non art is sed
potestatis. Ambr.
this giving of sight, to a man borne blind, was not a cure of Art, but of
power. So that although sin be the meritorious, yet it is not always the
moving cause of affliction.

Gods secret dispensations are not for us to descant upon. Known unto God are
all his own works, but none of us know either love or hatred by these common
events that happen alike to all. Eccl. 9.
I might bring in a large enumeration. Eli, a Priest of God and a good man; 1 Samuel 4.18.
yet suddenly brake his neck by falling backward from his seat: Jonathan a
faithful friend, and sworn brother to David; 1 Samuel 31.
yet falls by uncircumcised hands: The Prophet that came to Bethel, 1 King.
13.
passes with most for an holy man; yet is killed in his way a by Lion: Josiah,
a religi-Prince, none like him; 2 Chro. 35.23.
yet is cut off and slain in the prime of his time, in the Valley of Megiddo:
Jobs. Children were well educated, and inherited many prayers: Job 1.
yet a violent and sudden period is put to their lives: What say we unto these?

Paradise and Purgatory are not more contrary notions than the estates of
Saints are different as to this. Some are led by a gentle hand, others pass
through many storms before they reach the harbor. How uncessant are the
trials and conflicts of some? A man would think it as impossible for them to
reach heaven as to climb up to the clouds. But let us learn from hence, If
Gods hand be against them, let not our tongue be against them. To him that is
afflicted pity should be showed. The Lord knows (though we do not) why he
suffers such holy and humble souls to be so much disquieted. Let us cease
censures, and rather tremble at, and adore the sovereignty of God: that has it
in his own hands, how, and by what way he will bring souls to heaven.

Be careful of your own selves. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
Every day is a new life, and brings its own cares along with it. O have not
your hearts so stupidly secure as to be insensible of the changes of
Providence. One asking his friend, Will you please to dine with me to morrow?
Ego a mul it is annis crastinum non habui.
His answer was, I have not had a morrow for these many years. Soul, thou
have seen what is, and has been: but thou know not what shall be. To day
thou art rich: Omnia quae eventura sunt, in i^ certo jacent.
To morrow thou may be poor. To day in health: to morrow sick. To day
alive: to morrow dead. To day children: to morrow childles^e. The clearest day
may ere night prove dark and cloudy.

Therefore two things: first, Psa. 62.10. 1 Cor. 7.30.
Set not your heart on them. Use them as if you used them not. Be not so busy
with these Cockle-shells and toys upon the seashore as to forget the tide,
which sweeps away all on a sudden. Say to thy self, I know not how soon God
will bereave me of my only beloveds, and take away from me the pleasure of my
heart, and that which is precious in mine eyes. At present I have plenty and
prosperity, my belly is fully fed, and my back warmly clothed. Now my house is
richlyfurnished, and my Vine and Olive branches, wife and children sit round
about my table. But I know not how soon stripping times may come, that mine
eyes shall behold none of all these. These things may give us the slip, and
salute us with an abrupt Vale when we least expect it. Commonly when we think
our selves most exempted from trials then are they at our heels. It is our
wisdom to suspect our selves when our path is most pleasant. I read of Nero
that Tyrant, who having a beautiful Lady to his Empress, would sometimes
salute her with these words, O goodly face and neck! but when I list it shall
be cut off. Say to thy sweetest outward comforts O fair mercies! but when God
will ye must all be cut off.

Nay secondly, your own selves. Self-denial was our Saviors Doctrine, Mat.
16.24.
and is the very institution of a Christian. One way or other, sooner or later,
God will try what you will do. God will see if he can prevail so far with you,
as to and c^eave cling unto him when all is gone. Believe it God will not
harbor such as he knows not what to make of. (I speak after the manner of
men) None shall want their trialls. Soul, under color of Religion thou may
retain a great deal of self in thee, and God will put thee to it.
Self-denial is of large extent. Think not always to carry thy course even
and fair, and to go on smoothly with peaceable living, and formal praying and
hearing: God will surely take a course further than thus to try what is in
thine heart. The wind may blow long and loud upon the sound side of a tree, and
the tree make a shift to stand: But when it gets into the hollow of the tree,
and affronts it on the rotten side, then it puts it hard to it, ten to one to
lay it under feet. O know that smooth and unblameable walking will not serve
your turn, there is a greater work lies upon us, to stick and stand to our
tacklings when the Lord effectually tries us.

Now soul, see and consider well what thou have to do. If it be so brought
about, thou can not both hold God and thine enjoyments, God and thy Children,
God and thy Life: can thou close with God, be faithful unto him, and content
with him without these? Here thou art put to it indeed. Mat. 16.25.
Whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life
for my sake shall find it. And this may serve for them that are free.

The Use in the next place is to the afflicted.

The first is comfort. Marah, that when they were so bitter, as the people
could not drink, Exodus 15.
upon Moses his crying unto the Lord, the Lord showed him a tree, which when he
had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet. The Doctrine is a bough
of that tree, The Lord may deal very bitterly with his beloved ones. And so it
is, Lord, Joh. 11.3.
behold, he whom thou love is sick, which is also applicable to all other
sufferings, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is bereaved of his Children,
deprived of all, Heb. (...).
etc. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives. That is, into his love and favor in this life, and into his
Kingdom in the life to come. And yet the scope of that Scripture (mark the
place) speaks unto us lovingly, as unto Children. 2 Samuel 23.5.
This was David's comfort. Although my house be not so with God: yet he has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this
is all my salvation, and all my hope, although he make it not to grow. The
meaning is, though my Family have not that flourishing prosperity, but there
are many enemies against my house, and my Children mutiny amongst themselves:
yet, all this shall not frustrate the free promises of God made unto me, and
grounded on the Messiah. And this was his comfort, and his hope, in the want of
outward prosperity.

Besides, they come from a Father, not an Avenger, out of love, not rigor: and
he that has one hand upon us, has another under our heads: and the one is not
more stretched out to smite than the other is to consolate. When by reason of
sin and suffering the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint, Christ
lays down himself as a Pillow for the soul to be refreshed upon: by the
application of his own righteousness, and the consolations of the spirit. And
though all should be taken away, yet there can be no want where there is Gods
love in Christ.

The second thing which this Use speaks is counsel; and that in some
particulars, viz. If the Almighty have dealt very bitterly with any,

Be sensible of it. Ephraim, Hos. 7.9.
whose strength strangers devoured, but he knew it not, and though gray hairs
were sprinkled upon him, yet he knew not. It is the Lord that gives being to
all things, actions, and motions, both in the decree, and in their actual
existence. Amos 3.6. Malum culpae and poenae.
Shall there be evil in a City (that is, not the evil of sin, but of
suffering) and the Lord has not done it? He forms light, Isa. 45.7.
and creates darkness, he makes peace, and creates evil. As we see by the
motion of the Celestial bodies, the air becomes either light or dark; even
so by the change of Providence we meet with prosperity or adversity, peace or
trouble. God is the ruler of the whole Universe, wisely ordering it, partly by
his direction, and partly by his correction, in both which we ought to see a
divine hand. Job 19.21.
Therefore says Job, The hand of God has touched me. And this good woman,
Ver. 13.
The hand of the Lord is gone out against me. Christians, look neither to the
right hand, nor to the left, but upward. Know that afflictions spring not out
of the dust. Blame not chance, blame not instruments, blame not secondary
causes: The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.

The Scripture is Lex loquens, and speaks this Language, My Son, despise not
the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction. Whence we
learn, that when trialls are laid upon us, and we sail in bitter waters, we
must be careful to steer off two extremes, 1. We must not faint under them,
breaking forth into passionate or desperate speeches, Never was any so
afflicted as I, oh! this is greater than I can bear. 2. Neither must we
despise them, or set light by them; for it is God that chasteneth, whatsoever
the rod or instrument be which he uses.

In the second place, Peter, 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves therefore (mark therefore) under the mighty hand of God.
And David, Psa. 32.4, 5.
Thy hand is heavy upon me, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord. O let
the weight of Gods hand upon you or your Families bring you to your knees. Let
the force of it make you fall down before him in the confession of sin. This is
another bough to make sweet these bitter waters. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah
spares a poor prostrate creature. There is no other way to break the
violence of a divine stroke from God, but humbly to run under his hand. They
have humbled themselves, 2 Chr. 12.7.
therefore I will not destroy them.

Nay more, this is the only means to get the breach repaired. God himself
will dwell in the humble heart, he will take up his quarters there. O happy
exchange! O rich supply! O gainefull loss! I have parted (may thou say)
with an Estate, a Child, etc. But I have a God in reserve. Blessed are those
afflictions which fit a soul to be Gods second heaven.

In the next place, sin. When God falls upon us by bitter affliction, we should
fall upon sin by bitter sorrow, repentance, mortification, etc. God eyes most
of all what effects afflictions do produce. We ought in a special manner to
consider the death of those which are near and dear unto us. Son or Daughter;
It may be God has deprived us of them for the punishment of our sin; it may be
they are taken from us because we were unworthy of them; or because we gloried
too much in them, or were not so thankful for them as we ought. Such use as
this the widow of Sarepta made upon the death of her only Child. 1 King. 17.18.
Art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? upon
a due search you will find Sin is the Achan that has caused all this trouble:
do execution upon it. When Jesabel heard that Elijah had slain all Baals
Prophets, she takes a profound (yet profane) oath, So let the Gods do to me,
and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them. O say, Sin
has opened the birter fountain, Sin has brought this bitter grief, and if I
suffer it, will bring me more. Sin has bereaved me of my Children, Sin has
wrought me all this mischief, by the grace of God I will forth with labor the
death of sin. Pluck it out, though it seem a right eye, cut it off, though it
seem a right hand or foot, spit it out, though it be a sweet morsel, out with
it, though it be a beloved Sin. Constantine the Great, hearing that nothing
would cure his Leprosy, but the blood of an Infant ripped out of its mothers
womb, the good Emperor abhorred the very mentioning of it: But sin is so
cruel, as it would have both the blood of our Seed, and of our Souls.

It is reported of the Bezor (the creature which has that cordial stone)
being hunted, and knowing by instinct the cause, leaves the stone to the
Pursuers to save his life. Let the credit of that lie upon the affirmers. But
Brethren, I Will tell you, afflictions are sent out from God, and do pursue us to
this end, to get from us a stone: And it is no precious but a most perni^ious
stone, the stone in the heart. Ezekiel. 11.19.
Surely it is not worth keeping, O cast it away, with your sins and lusts, that
these Beagles may not too sorely seize upon you. Say, O Lord, discover unto me
this sin which engages thee against me, and makes thee contend with me: Tell
me what it is, and take it away, that thou may withdraw thine hand, and be
at peace with thy poor Creature. We must cast the head of this Sheba over the
wall, before ever bitter afflictions will make a retreat.

Again, Justify God. man shows in his Exposition upon Job, Anonymus.
) it is the Devils defigne under such dispensations, to provoke us to have hard
thoughts of God, and to be suspicious of his love and good will toward us. How
apt are men in affliction to say as that wretched Prince did, Behold this evil
is of the Lord; It is a thing very connaturall with the Sons of Adam to lay
their bastard-brats at other men's doors, nay, rather than fail, to lay the
fault upon God himself. Genesis 3.12.
The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. O Adam, a neat evasion, but this Sophistry will not serve your turn:
Know therefore by sad experience the fault was not mine in giving you the
woman, but your own in taking the fruit from her hand, and eating it, against
the express prohibition you received from God: And by this time where are you
Adam? Whose now is the fault Adam? And thus mortal man would seem more just
than God, Job 4.17.
and more pure than his Maker. O have a Care. Get to be grounded in this
Principle, that God is essenally just, justice and purity are his very nature,
he cannot be God and be unjust. Therefore under the bitterest cross give glory
to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, saying, Jer. 12.1.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee. Psalm. 51 4.
Be thou justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge.

And lastly, Submit quietly to God. Do not (as Israel of old) murmur at Marah.
When Sampson had burnt up the Philistines corn, they asked, Judge, 15 6.
Who has done this? Soul, when thou art under affliction, make inquiry, not
into the lower, but higher causes, Tolerare est patientia necessitatis, amare
tolerare patientia virtutis.
and thou will conclude, God has afflicted me. God has bereaved me of my
Children, the Almighty has showed me much bitterness. Let this quiet thine
heart, and silence thy spirit under Gods strokes. The snared bird the more she
struggles the more she intangles her self. God has thee in a snare, struggle
not. It will be but as one taking the Chain from his leg, and tying it to his
neck. It is no striving against the stream of divine appointment.

Art thou or thine under a mournful estate? Submit. Cast up thine eye toward
God, and say, Psa. 39.9.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Thus Aaron, upon
the strange and terrible death of his Sons, Aaron held his peace. Lev. 10.3.
Thus Eli, when he heard of that black cloud that was to empty it self upon
his house, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what seems him good. And Hezekiah, under his visitation, Isa.
38.15.
What shall I say? he has both spoken it unto me, and himself has done it.
Mic. 7.6.
And the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord. O content thy self,
and say with Christ, Sweet or bitter, I must drink the cup my Father has
given me. We should be as Adamants under afflictions, endure all.

But because it is no easy thing to quiet our Spirits, and silence the stirs
and clamours of our hearts under bitter afflictions, I conceive it meet to
propound some considerations helpful hereunto.

They may be such as these:

First, Heb. 12.9.
but also reverence them. The Child cries out, O spare, good Father, but may
not limit him. So we, Mercy Lord, mitigation Lord, but may not limit our
heavenly Father how much. Thus the Church begs moderation, O Lord rebuke me not
in thine anger, Psalm. 6.1.
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Jer. 10.24.
O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing. Hab. 3.2.
In wrath, O Lord, remember mercy. Mercy is a Saints plea in affliction. Let
there be the presence of mercy as well as affliction. Though thy rod laid on me
is smart and does draw blood, yet let not thy wrath burn like fire. Besides,
we for^e him to it; Parents take no pleasure in whipping their Children, it
goes to the heart of a tender Father to beat his Child, water ost-times stands
in the Fathers eyes, he turns his back and weeps. Even so, God does not
afflict willingly, Lam. 3.33.
but sees great need before he corrects. For a season (if need be) ye are in
heavines through manifold temptations. 1 Pet. 1.6.


No affliction befalls us but what is incident to men, 1 Cor. 10.13.
others have tasted the same bottle; And in this very kind. Esau was in his
degree a murderer of his mother Rebeckah, Genesis 27.
whilst by his ungracious carriage he made her life bitter unto her. The
Shunamites only Child dies. The widow of Naims only Son deceaseth. 2 King. 4.
Mary beholds her only Son nailed to the Cross. Luke 7.12.
And Abraham must sacrifice his own Son, Genesis 22.
his only Son, and upon whom depended all the promises. O what a lamentable
sight was this, to see Abraham about the killing of his only Son? That a Father
should be put to this extremity, to be the butcher of his own only Child? Let
us make it our own case, and it will make us all to weep. Consider the
conference that was between them in the way, and it must needs strike Abraham
to the heart, Father, here is fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for the
burnt offering? Alas my child (says Abraham in his heart) thou must be the
burnt offering: And no doubt but the tears went trickling down his cheeks. If
the bowels of the harlot yearned within her when her child was to be divided by
Solomon's sword: What did Abraham's bowels, when with his own sword he must take
away the life of his own Son? O my Son Isaac, my sweet child, beautified with
so many glittering graces, enriched with so many precious promises, A type of
Christ the joy of the world, and the only stay of my old age: must thou be
killed, and by thy Fathers own hand? Yea, and must I burn thee, which is the
sharpest death of all? O! -- No doubt this pierced the Fathers heart, and
touched him to the quick.

It was once the Prophets complaint, 1 King. 19.
I only am left. And indeed it adds much to affliction to be singular in
suffering. But we are compassed with a cloud of witnesses that have broken the
ice before us, and do draw in the same yoke with us.

Nay, the Apostle is very bold, and says, Heb. 12.7, 8.
What Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not Sons. It
is a spurious and ignominious thing to be a Bastard. Bastards are despised in
several respects, and many brands of infamy are set on them: Being
illegitimate, Deuteronomy. 2 3.
and neither to inherit Lands, nor be advanced to office, without a special
dispensation, as in the case of Jephta. Judge. 11.1.
(Although I conceive the result of that rigor was rather to show how God
abhorred uncleanness, and to make men avoid it, then to inflict a punishment
upon the person so begotten, if he did abhor and forsake his fathers sin, and
cleave to God in sincerity.)

Well, see thou a man without the Cross, not a finger aketh? It is a great
sign he is a bastard. God will school his own children. The Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, yea, Christ himself drank of this cup, and if thou be
Gods child thou must pledge him. There is not any one can claim privilege.
This is a rule in divinity admits no exception, 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

No affliction befalls us, Ezra says, Thou, our God, have punished us less
than our iniquities deserve. Exra 9.13.
And yet whoever reads the book of Lamentations may judge of their sufferings.
Is any of us afflicted? It is of mercy we are not consumed. It may be thou have
lost an Estate, a Friend, a Child, a Comfort: Sin did deserve thou should
have lost all, and after all thy self and soul in hell for ever. O brother,
did thou but know in what coin God paies all Sinners, and how he makes even
with them in another world: Thou would heartily bless God for the bitterest
affliction that here falls to thy share. Romans 6.23.
Stipendium peccati mors est: The wages of sin is death.

Consider further, Israel more than once, Lev. 26.
I will punish you seven times more for your sins. Sad were it for a soul to
make experiment of divine plagues. As the joy of the godly clears more and
more unto the perfect day of glory and happiness; so the wickeds sorrow waxes
darker and darker, even unto the black midnight of eternal horror.

The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not
in despair; prosecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.
Brother, it is so with thee and me. We are but under the Cross, we might have
been under the Curse. Here is the loss of children, it might have been the
loss of Gods love. Here is correction, it might have been destruction. Here is
a mixture of mercy, it might have been pure wrath. God might have caused his
indignation to rest upon us. O woe to that man or woman whom divine fury lays
hold upon this is the very dregs of the cup. We think our afflictions very
bitter, but consider, God might have left us in a state of sin and
condemnation, and under wrath, and then had we been (...), Act. 8.13.
In the gall of bitterness.

Lastly,

Two things, Job tells thee, Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job 1.21. Not a rag to cover thee. Not a
morsel where with to sustain thee. Not a friend to minister unto thee. So
that let God take what he will, he cannot leave thee more naked than thou wast.
Jacob, when grown rich, thus bespeaks himself, Genesis 32.10.
With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands, Genesis
32.10. I was like a poor footman, I could have carried all my wealth with me,
and not have been over-laden, though now I am come on, and much increased in
estate. But at thy coming into this world thou had not so much as a staff,
or any thing to stay thy self upon. O, if many of us did but remember what
once we were, we should with more thankfulness be what we are.

And again, And naked shall I return thither. Whither? to the earth, out of
which we were formed. When death, that grim Porter lets thee out of this world,
he will suffer thee to take nothing along with thee, but a Coffin or a
winding sheet. So that likewise whatever God deprives thereof thou have as much
and more than one day thou must have. The Apostle brings in these as a strong
argument unto contentment, We brought nothing into this world, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8.
and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Therefore let us be content, 1 Timothy 6.7 8. Though friends are taken away by death, and comforts seem to
fail, yet be content with thy present lot: Thou have still as much and more
that thou broughtest, or shall carry away. Yet a little while and death will
come to strip thee of all thou have, and leave thee more naked than in the day
that thou wast borne.

O then, cease murmuring and submit, lay your hands upon your mouths, beg of
God a sweet composure of spirit, and say, The Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

FINIS.

