THE Good Old Cause: OR, THE Divine CAPTAIN Uncharacterized. IN A SERMON (Not
Preached, nor needful to be Preached, in any place so properly as in a CAMP.)

Upon II Sam. x. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our
People, and the Cities of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good.

By ED M. HICKERINGILL, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in Colchester.

Licensed according to Order, Feb. 1. 1691/2.

London, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry, 1692.

To the HONORABLE the Lord Colchester, THE Noble Captain of Their Majesty's
Lifeguard, etc.
May it please Your Lordship,
IN this following Text (of all other Verses in the Bible) is found the fairest
Character of a Valiant Captain with a divine Mind, a brave Courage in a
Heavenly Soul, a great and a good Heart, (a most auspicious Conjunction of
Virtue and Valor.)

If Virtue and Valor be not one and the same thing, yet they are so near of
Kin, that the Latins have but one word to express both; at least, they are
reciprocal: No man is truly virtuous that is not truly valorous; no man is
truly valorous that is not truly virtuous: For which cause Fortitude or Valor
is accounted one of the four Cardinal Virtues.

To promote Virtue, and consequently Valor, in our Armies and Navies, (whereof
these Three Kingdoms never had more need) I have, with an humble Heart, lent my
helping Hand from the Press, to whom it could not be very audible from my low
Pulpit.

And the Guard of His Majesty's Sacred Person (the Darling of Heaven as well as
of Mankind) being more peculiarly your Honorable Province, (in this his so
famous and necessary Expedition) invites as well as encourages me to the
dedication of this Sermon to Your Lordship, which (I may without Ostentation
say) is so useful to all Men (against the Fears of Death (the King of Terrors)
but especially, in this juncture, seasonable and suitable for the Soldiery,
(if they will find time to read it) and upon such a Text, as perhaps was never
handled before in this method by any man, except by

(My Lord) Your Lordships most devoted E. Hickeringill.

THE Good Old Cause: OR, THE Divine Captain Uncharacterized.
II SAM. X. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men, for our People,
and the Cities of our GOD; and the Lord do what seems him good.


GEnerals of Armies have usually in all Ages, amongst all Nations, made a
Speech to encourage their Soldiers when drawn up in Battel-aray, and ready to
engage: Such a Speech is this Text, made by Joab, (King David's General) when
his Army stood in battalia, ready to fight the Enemy that had beset them Front
and Rear, the Syrians in the Front, and the Ammonites in the Rear; no way left
to run away, they must either fight or dye; nay, fight, that they may not be
killed. In this desperate state, the General faces his Army to the Front and
Rear, the Front he leads himself against the Syrians, the other half of his
Army his Brother Abishai led against the Ammonites.

In this posture the Army was drawn up in the face of their Enemies, when the
valiant Joab, made a Speech, addressing himself, particularly to his valiant
Brother Abishai, saying, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall
help me; but if the Children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help
thee. Be of good Courage, and let us play the men, for our People and the
Cities of our God; and the Lord do what seems him good.

In my opinion this is the most pithy and succinct, as well as the most divine
Speech of a noble General that ever I met with.

In the former part he speaks like a good Soldier, like a brave man; in the
latter part like a Divine, like a good man: For, Joab did not buy his Place,
nor make Friends at Court to intercede, nor claimed Kindred to the Blood Royal;
and yet he might, for the King was his Cousin-Germain; but he won the place by
his Sword.

For, King David had passed his royal Word, that he that first smote the
Jebusites, 1 Chronicles. 11.6. 1 Chronicles. 11.20, 21.
he should be Chief and Captain: Joab did it, and his Lieutenant General got
his Place by his Valor too; he lift up his Sword against 300, and slew them,
and had the first name amongst the second Ternary of David's Worthies.

Valor is twofold; Active and Passive.

Active Valor consists in doing hardy things, like a stout and great man.

Passive Valor consists in suffering, and enduring hardship courageously, like
a pious and good man.

These two sorts of Valor divide the Text into 2 parts; Active Valor in these
words, Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our People and the
Cities of our God. Passive Valor in these words, Let the Lord do what seems
him good; or as the Chaldee Paraphrase, (none of the worst Versions) Let the
Lord do whatsoever he has predestined or foreordained. As if he should say,
Shall not He that made us and brought us into the World, have Leave to continue
us, or take us out of the World, according to his own (not our) good pleasure?
Let what will come, all shall be welcome, Life or Death, Liberty or Captivity,
Soundness or Loss of Limbs, Victory or Defeat, even as best pleases Almighty
God, not my will, but his be done; let the Lord do what seems him good.

Active Valor is made up of three Ingredients, viz. 1. A good Courage. 2. A
good Conduct. 3. A good Cause. These three Ingredients of Active Valor divide
the first general part of the Text into three particulars.

1. A good Courage, in this Exhortation to it; Be of good Courage.

2. A good Conduct; Let us play the men. Some are fierce and stout as Lions,
and yet may have but a brutish Valor, and be fool hardy; except their Courage
be managed with a rational and discreet Conduct, and thereby play the men.

Though I confess, in this Criticism I follow the English Translation, which
comes nearest to the Septuagint; (...). Sept. but the Chalder Paraphrase, and
Syriack Interpreter, authorizes no such nice distinction; invalesce and
invalescamus.
for the Syriack and Chaldee Paraphrase have but one word to signify both a
good Courage and a good Conduct: The former is the proper act of the Hand and
Heart. The latter is the proper act of the Head and Heart.


Solomon says, A wise man is strong; Prove. 24 5.
(i. e.) though his Hand be weak, yet a good Headpiece makes him strong and
able to play the man.

3. Thirdly; A good Cause is the causa sine qua non, the sole Ingredient
necessary to qualify and sanctify all fighting; without a good Cause all
killing is Murder; nothing but a good Cause can hallow our Swords.

The good Cause in the Text is, The Good Old Cause, namely, in defense of our
People, and the Cities of our God. As if General Joab had said, Let us play the
men for our Countrymen, whether they be good or bad people, they have Lives,
and Estates, and Liberties, in the defense whereof our Swords are drawn; they
have also religious Liberties in the true Service and Worship of God, in the
Cities of our God, in defense of which good Cause too we must play the men.
For, all the Cities of the World, as inhabited by God's Creatures, might as
well be called the Cities of our God, as well as the Cities of Israel, if the
true Religion and Worship of God in those Cities be not meant by this Phrase,
The Cities of our God.

Thus St. Augustine styles his Books concerning the Church of God, (as Joab in
the Text) de civitate Dei.

Obj. But some may say, That this War, when Joab made this Speech, was not a
defensive but offensive War, an invasion of the Country of the Ammonites, and
the Battle was fought at the Gate of one of the Cities of the Children of
Ammon, ver. 8.

Ans. I answer, That notwithstanding this Invasion, this War was purely
defensive: For, the Ammonites had abused King David's Ambassadors, which were
sent in kindness to condole the death of Hyram their late King; which was in
effect the abuse of the King that sent them.

And this abuse of Ambassadors has always by the Law of Nations been reckoned a
just Cause of War: For this cause alone the Romans waged War with the
Corinthians, the Tarentines and Illyrians; and this was once the cause of War
betwixt the Emperor of Germany and the Port.

And the Ammonites here did resolve upon a War, and to that purpose hired
Soldiers of Fortune, the Syrians, for Money, to fight for them against the
Israelites; whereupon K. David, like a wise General, since fight they must, he
would not be behind-hand with his Preparations, nor stay till the Ammonites
should come into his Country, and make Israel the Seat of War, but by wise
Conduct, meets the coming Storm, and in defense of his People and the Cities of
his God, carries the War to the Enemies Cities, where our valiant General
exhorts his valiant Brother to be of good courage, etc.

The first Ingredient of true active Valor is a good courage, which is
threefold supernatural, natural, additional.

1. First, Courage supernatural, which appears when God makes men more than
men, by infusing his Spirit of Courage; nor was there ever a great Conqueror,
but he always had this Spirit of God, which has been given both to good and
bad men, Christians and Heathens: This was so visible, even to the Heathens,
that they all built Temples to Fortune, which we call Providence, Nemo vir
magnus sine afflatu divino; such was Alexander, and Scypio, Caesar, Pompey,
Marius, etc.

And the Heathen Historian observes, that an Athenian General ( Themistocles as
I remember) never won a Battle after he had braggingly told his Countrymen,
after a great Victory, This I did, and in this Fortune had no power,

The Soldiers of the famous Marius thought he spoke in the fight with more
than human voice, when he fought and conquered that Inundation of Men, the
Amnons and the Cymbers that came to swallow up his Country.

When Gideon was to be a Jesus, a Savior to Israel, it is said, The spirit of
the Lord came upon Gideon; Judge. 6.34.
the same Spirit (sometimes called Faith or good Confidence) made Baruch and
Sampson, Jeptha, David, and Samuel, Heb. 11.32, 33.
to play the men above common men, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms.

As for instance in David, Though in prudent and wise conduct he could not have
encountered Goliath with any weapon better that a sling and a stone, to enter
that forehead where alone the Giant was unarmed, and little expected such an
Encounter; yet it was a bold Faith and Trust in the Name of the Lord, that made
his Heart strong and his Hand steady. And it was usual in those days, with a
Sling and a Stone, before the use of Guns, to hit at an Hairs breadth, so
dexterous (I had almost said) were those left handed Benjaminites, Judge. 20.16.
Judge. xx. For, how big soever the Giant was, David was neither longer-liv'd
than we, nor bigger, nor stronger, if so strong, as we are; but the Spirit of
God put into him a supernatural and superlative courage to play the man for his
people and the Citys of his God.

2. Secondly, Good Courage is natural, the Bounty of Nature, for which a man is
indebted (as Goliath was) to the firmness of his Limbs, the goodness of his
Complexion, and his happy Stars, to make him martial strong, and of good
courage; such were these two Sons of Zerviah, in the Text, (...), says the
Septuagint.
whom David confesses to be his overmatch and too hard for him: For, to his
Brother Abishai this Speech is made, though our English Translation only says, He
said; but the Septuagint adds, He said to Abishai.

Such men as are of a faint and timorous Complexion naturally have got a Caveat
entered by Nature in their Bosoms against being listed for Soldiers. Such men
may be useful for the Plow, or to wrap themselves in a Gown, and serve well in
the Pulpit, or to make a noise at the Bar, but the thundering of Guns and Drums
will give them an Ague, and put them into a Fit of trembling: It is tempting of
God, and bidding Defiance to his Handmaid Nature, for such effeminate
Constitutions (of all Employments) to turn Soldiers; let them leave the rugged
and boisterous Wars to rugged and rocky. Complexions and Constitutions. Some
men have styled a Soldier a necessary Evil, but I think, under Heaven, a good
Soldier is one of the most necessary good things.

For, as the World goes, we should lose all other good things, if it were not
for those brave Souls, that play the men in defense of the innocent Infants,
the weaker Sex, and weaker Men; still they are our People, and a brave Soldier
is their Rampart, their Bulwark, their Life guard, the only Safeguard, under
God, of our People, and the Cities of our God: Without these Protectors the
Pulpit would be a Cipher, an empty place, the Bar unfrequented, and our Lives
and Estates at the mercy of a merciless Tyrant.

But there are but few of these Worthies Soldiers of Natures making yet a few
of them are enough to put Courage into Cowards, which is done by,

3. Thirdly, Additional Valor, which has many causes; as, First, a good Cause;
it will make a Coward fight, to think that he fights for God, for his People,
and for the Cities of our God; as we usually and truly say, That one honest man
will beat two Thieves, because the guilty Conscience makes a great Thief a
great Coward, and his Villainy and Roguery makes him a timorous Villain and a
fearful Rogue; whilst he that fights in a good Cause, fights for God, and God
fights for him.

This made little David boast so triumphantly; Psalm. 17.3.
Though an Host of men encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear. Says he, They
compassed me about like Bees, Psalm. 118.
but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.

Yet there are three sorts of Fighters at this day, that play the men in a bad
Cause; which I cannot dismiss without a severe Repremand from this Text; as,

1. First, Soldiers of Fortune, such as was these 33000 Syrians, that ran
away, and fled before Joab, v. 13. they were Hackney-souldiers, hired as
Hackney-horses for such a Journey, such an Expedition, Here Is your Money.

These Soldiers of Fortune, that fight without examining the cause, and march
with the first Chapman, are the basest of Butchers; for other Butchers get a
greasy living by killing Beasts, but Soldiers of Fortune live by killing men,
and are mere Cannibals and Men-eaters, who (like the Bravo's in Spain and
Portugal) have no other Trade or Profession, but Hackney Butchers of Men, any
Men, without any other cause than that of the Switzers; they kill any body for
the l'Argent. What will ye give me, says Judas, and I will betray, and be
guilty of Innocent Blood? What will ye give me a day, and I will kill, ravish,
burn, and murder, says the Soldier of Fortune? And all this without any
remorse, custom of Sin hardens his callous Heart, and makes him pittiless, and
without any Bowels of Humanity, as if he had a Commission from Heaven (as Peter
had in another case) Arise Peter, kill and eat.

Of these St. James speaks; from whence come Wars and sighting among you
(meaning the Factions of Judas Galiloeus, Jam. 4 1, 2.
and also the other Jews then in war against the Samaritans, and fought
bloodily for the Money-business) come they not hence even from your Lusts (of
Avarice and Ambition) ye fight and war, ye kill, and desire to have, that ye
may consume it upon your Lusts: For, a Soldier of Fortune usually consumes in
Debauchery what he gets by this inhuman Butchery. Thus this Devil incarnate
(like his Father the Devil) goes about like a roaring Lion, (from Country to
Country) seeking whom he may devour.

A Prince that has a good Cause may (notwithstanding) make use of these
Man-slayers or Slaughter-men, as Clyents sometimes see their Advocates, not so
much to be for them, as that they be not hired against them: though these
Fellows are seldom either faithful or truly valiant; for he that will sell his
Soul or his Life for Money, will not fear for Money to betray and sell his
Prince.

But since they are kept (like Cocks of the Game) that are good for nothing in
Nature, but to fight, these Forlorns will serve for a Forlorn, and to blunt the
Enemy's Swords; for, if they will not fight, they are good for nothing but,
like the Locusts of Egypt, to eat up every green thing: If these be Cowards,
they must be punished as all Cowards are in a well-disciplin'd Army, with
present Death.

For, plow they cannot, work they will not, fight they dare not, for they are
always unsit to dye, and therefore must be afraid to dye. This Locust, like
other Locusts, is one of the Plagues of Mankind, good for nothing whilst it
lives, but Mischiefs, and therefore, though unfit to dye, yet unfit to live.

These are the men that nourish and foment Wars in Europe; War is their Trade,
their Commodity, and can you blame them, if they make the utmost penny they can
of their Trade and Profession? But, as bad as this Caterpillar is, I have
another in the

2. Second place to expose, that always fights in a bad Cause, and therefore is
worse (if worse can be) than a Soldier of Fortune; for, this Manslayer fights
as seldom as is possible, since he does not love fighting, but as lazy men love
Work, they must starve without it; he fights to eat, and if he could eat
without fighting, it would be the came Brute alive.

But, in the next place I must show you a Hector, that loves fighting and
killing in a bad Cause, as he loves his Life, nay, more than his Life or his
Salvation; I mean the Duelist, that thinks himself a tall fellow if he has
killed his Man, though thereby guilty of a double Murder, 1st, of his
Adversary; 2dly, of himself.

So unhappy is this Man of Blood, if he dies in his Blood, and breathes Revenge
to his last Breath, then it is a fearful thing to think of his fatal Doom; and
if he kills his Adversary, it is Odds but he is hanged; especially if all King's
have such a Conscience as K. Charles I. that never would pardon a Murderer,
saying, The Almighty God has enacted, that He that sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be^shed: And who am I, that should pretend a Prerogative to
dispense with the Laws of the King of Kings?

Obj. But, may some say, would you have a Gentleman whose Honor is dearer to
him than his Life, put up an Affront, especially since the neglect of demanding
Satisfaction (that is the word) is not interpreted Conscience, but Cowardice,
and invites a second Affront, and happy the Coward that can but come near so
tame a thing, that he may safely kick it?

Ans. To which I answer, That I knew not which is better, Death or Life; they
are indifferent things, and only good or bad as they are circumstantiated; a
man of Honor will either live in Honor or dye in Honor.

But, by Honor I mean not that Puff, or Blast, or Vapor which has no affinity
with Reason, Honesty, and a good Conscience; a truly valiant man is a truly
virtuous man, and a truly honorable man a truly honest man; but he can neither
be a good man nor a brave man, that is not a rational man.

Now, I am content to give my man of Honor a Dispensation to answer any
Challenge, so that he retain his Reason and his Honesty.

But, 1st, Is it reasonable and equal, that a Gentleman of a vigorous Health
and a plentiful Estate for his Heirs, and Heirs for his Estate, should venture
his Life against a Beggarly Hector, that perhaps is weary of his Life through
Poverty and Diseases, the loathsome consequences of his Lust, and would be
beholden to that charitable Hand that would cut the rotten Thread of his Life,
rather than suffer it miserably and gradually to rot in pieces? But,

2dly. (What answers all other Challenges) a Duel can never be fought with
Honesty, because it is point blank a Defiance and Breach of the Laws of God and
the King.

And therefore let no man pretend to any point of Honor that is inconsistent
with his Allegiance to God and the King, the only Fountain and Measure of
Honor: And if Hotspur dislike this my Decision, as too sage and cold, yet in
his softer minutes he will thank me, as fiery David did his Cooler Abigail,
when he was upon the Road in all haste to kill Nabal that Churl, saying to her,
1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice; and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed Blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand.

This Duelling is so unsouldier-like, that the brave Romans (who conquered the
World) yet abominated all private Duels, and if they would show their good
Courage, and play the men, they did it against the common Enemy of their People
and the Cities of their God.

Who more valiant than Julius Caesar, or Cato? What could be more cutting and
reviling Language, than that which Cato gave Caesar, and even in the
Senate House, and yet this never produced a Challenge?

What cares a Rich man if a foolish Fellow call him a Bankrupt, and that no
body will trust him? He smiles, and resolves he will not run on Trust.

What cares a valiant man, if a prating Fellow calls him Coward? He smiles, and
resolves that the other will find him no Coward, if he makes trial.

No greater sign of a Bankrupt than to bring his Action for the words. No
greater sign of a Coward, than to send a Challenge for the words; which if a
man answer, he ventures his Body and Soul, his Life and Estate, and if he kill,
he makes work for the Hangman, and if he be killed, he makes work for the Devil.

But, 3dly, There is yet behind a worse Slaughter-man than either of the
former, and all for want of a good Cause, and that is your Religious Rogue,
that fights courageously, and plays the man: Plays the man, said I? No, no, he
plays the Devil for God's sake.

Of these our Blessed Savior prophesies, when they kill you, they think they
do God good service. Such was the Zealots among the Jews, that murdered the
Samaritans, because they differed from them in Religion, the Samaritans owning
only the five Books of Moses, viz. The Law, but not the Prophets; but the Jews
did believe both to be canonical.

There Is no more reason that one man should kill another, because he differs
from him in Religion, than because he differs from him in Stature, Feature, and
Complexion.

Thus Mahomet preached with his Alcoran in one hand and his Sword in the other;
Take your choice, take his Faith, or feel the keenness of his Sword. Thus have
I heard that a most Christian Prince makes Converts with Troops of Dragoons.
Thus the Spaniards in America drove Shoals of poor naked Indians to the Rivers,
utrum horum, take their choice, either therein to be baptized or drowned. A sad
Choice, and a worse Cure, to knock out men's Brains because they are blind and
cannot see so well as we, the abstruse Mysteries of Religion. St. John says, If
a man say he loves God, and hates his Brother, (and Killing is the extremity of
Hatred) he is a Liar and a Murderer.

Of these Religious Villains I Will say as Jacob of his two murdering Sons (
Simeon and Levi) Instruments of Cruelty are in their habitations: Genesis 49.5, 6.
Oh my Soul! come not into their secret, unto their Assemblies; mine Honor, be
not thou united.

Blessed be God (may the Papists in England, Scotland, and Ireland say) that
the Principles of our Holy Protestant Religion, teaches us better things.
Blessed be God (may we say) that the Principles of our holy Religion teaches us
better things. Let the Jesuits fight like mad (as they cant it) ad propagandum
fidem; let their Council of Constance decree, That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics; let them break Truces, Leagues, and Covenants cemented with Oaths
and Sacraments; let their Superstition (like Paracelsus's Demon) be conjured
and confined to the Pommel of their Swords, whilst we know not how to draw our
Swords, except in that good Cause, in defense of our People, and the Cities of
our God. This is such an additional cause of Valor, that where a man's Stars
make but an awkward Soldier, this good Cause will cause a Coward to be of good
courage, and make an effeminate man to play the man.

2. 2dly, A second cause of additional Valor is a good Conscience, or a good
Life and Conversation: Virtue and true Valor are so near a kin, that they have
but one Name in several Languages to express them both.

Therefore many an Army that has a good Cause of War, has been ruined by
Debauchery, and the want of a virtuous and good Discipline.

Can a man be faithful to his Prince that is treacherous to his God, and his
own Soul? Can a man be a Savior to his Nation, that wishes himself damned at
every word? Can he be valiant that fears to dye? And must not all men fear to
dye, that live in open defiance to the God of Heaven, and therefore most unfit
to dye, lest he be damned, according to his daily Prayers? Will not such a one
tremble when he comes near the mouth of a Canon, and a Broadside, and like
Belthazzar, knock his Knees together, in dread of that fatal Doom he trembling
saw, but knew not how to prevent? The profaneness of these Debauchees does
debauch their Courage, though they be naturally of a good Courage; well may they
then think they shall sink and be damned, they have so often wished it in cold
Blood.

Nor can the greatest practice of Atheism prove any Fence against this Fear,
when Death stares him in the face. This Fool (as the Psalmist calls him) may
say in his Heart, (that is) Wish in his Heart, that there is no God, and
perhaps may say so too in his drunken Rant and drunken company, but let him
come to the Gates or Approaches of Death, and he cannot choose but dread that
Judge, against whom (like the Giants of old) he has waged War, and bid Defiance
all his Lifetime.

And it is observable, that the Psalmist says, the Fool has said in his heart,
there is no (...), or as the Chaldee, (...), which signifies, God the Judge.
The Fool could be content there should be a Jehovah, a merciful God, but
wishes, as Thieves in Goal do, that there should never be an Aelohim or Judge
of Assize, and both of them for one and the same reason too.

Obj. A good Conscience! may some say, and a sober Life and Conversation, are
good, very good things; but he that is without Sin, let him cast the first
stone at my Debauchee.

Ans. It Is one thing to sin through human frailty, and a vastly-different thing
to sin voluntarily, presumptuously, and with an high hand; Number 15 20
such Sinners, by the old Law, were punished with Death without Mercy.

A man that is a very good Subject may sometimes break some of the King's Laws,
through Ignorance or Infirmity; but, will this justify a Rebel, that lives in
open defiance of his Prince, and bids him Battle? It is these Rebels to Heaven,
that seem to follow the counsel of that wicked Woman, to curse God and dye;
that never pray, but to be damned, and live in open Hostility to the God of
Heaven; that will ruin the best Cause in the World.

This common and open Profaneness does not only provoke God's Wrath against
themselves, but against their Governors, if they only reprove and make
Proclamations in detestation of them. Old Eli did thus much to his debauched
Sons, but, for want of a severer Discipline, God punished him and his House for
ever.

This Leven must be purged out and cashiered, or else it will leven the whole
Lump. It is no surprise therefore to thinking men, to hear of vast Fleets put
to Sea, with vast Expense, and vaster Hopes, yet without Success, whilst men
(thus impudently and openly) from the First Rate Ship to the Tender, from Stem
to Stern, from the Captain to the Cook, swear and curse like Devils, and
therefore most unfit to play the men for our People, and the Cities of our God.

None therefore can be greater Enemies to Their Sacred Majesty's and so good a
Cause (the best Cause in the World in this Juncture) than these damning,
cursing, cursed, and swearing Libertines, that cannot truly and faithfully
honor their King, if they fear not God. For such I Will pray (though) as we do
over the Doors of them that have the Plague, -- Lord have mercy upon these
Wretches, or in the words of Moses, O that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29, 30.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. How
should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight?

If therefore a Soldier love his God, his own Soul, his King, his own Honor
and Welfare, his People, and the Cities of our God; let him so live, that he
may not be afraid to dye, and then his good Conscience will add to his Valor,
and make a man of good courage, and able to play the man.

3. A third cause of additional Valor, is valiant Leaders, by their courageous
Words and Deeds.

1. First by their Words, adding Courage to their Soldiers by such brave
Speeches as this in the Text.

The first and bravest Emperor Julius Caesar was very happy both in Arts and
Arms, a good Orator, and a good Captain, and was addicted to these Harangues
to cheer up his Soldiers, when ready to come to the Push; as may be seen in
his own Commentaries: No man spoke better; no man fought better; both he and
Joab in the Text, had (as all valiant men have) a great presence of Mind, had
their Wits about them in the midst of Dangers; they did almost what they list,
and could say what they lift, though what they said was but little, yet they
spoke much in little, being happy both for the Pen and the Pike.

2. But the brave Deeds of a Commander is far more efficacious than brave
Words; a courageous Leader (like the Sunbeams) influences all that see him
with Spirit and Heat and Life: For, as Cowardice is infectious (a few Cowards,
if not timely knocked down, are enough to ruin a whole Camp) so Courage also
spreads it self, and there is none so timorous, but will be ready to follow
their Leader, if a brave man at Arms.

4. A fourth cause of additional Valor is good Arms and good Armor: Those
will put Courage into a Coward, and those daunt the bravest Enemy that fights
unarmed. A Soldier may with as much reason flight all his Garrisons, ruin the
Bulwarks of his strongest Forts, and cut down his Palasadoes, as fight without
his Armor. The Prince of Poets (the first, in Time as well as Exoellence)
never sights his Champion Achilles till he has first buckled on him his Armor
of Proof.

Nor does our * Sir Philip Sidney, who was elected to be K. of Poland, but
refused.
English Homer, (so famous for, but less happy in his Pike than his Pen, yet as
terrible to his Enemies abroad, as amiable to his Friends at home, that
accepted the Laurel, but refused the Diadem) in his English Arcadia, ever sight
his Knights to beat the Giants, till he has first brought them the best Horses,
the best Arms and Armor, that he could imagine, (nay, he spares for no Costs)
to furnish them with. And neglected by none but Braggadochios (especially since
the Invention of Gunpowder.) Is Valor any Fence against a Bullet? That
dismounts the Highest's Courage in its full Careir, though shot by the most
feeble Arm. The Wonders done by a late Hero in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
in a had Cause, was truly attributed to his care of good Armor, for that cause
surnamed Ironside.

If good Armor has done so great things in a bad Cause, what Wonders may it
not do in our Cause at this day, the best Cause in the World, In defense of our
People and the Cities of our God, from the Ravage of a merciless and bloody
Foe, the Common Enemy of Mankind, the Turks and Mahomet only excepted.

This hardened Enemy, wonted to spoil, cannot be opposed, in humane
probability, by a Militia, that has no other Armor than Feathers and Scarfs;
as if a muster of Men, when three Kingdoms lie at stake, and raised and
maintained at a vast charge to their Country, were nothing but a Morris-dance,
that their Women out of their Windows might admire in the Street the goodly
menage of the gay Puppit, that belongs to their House: No other reason can be
given why, at this day, the Militia-Captains clude and frustrate the Statute,
that commands Back, Breast, and Pot for the Horse, and Corslet for the Pikes,
now (changed forsooth) into a Leather Jacquet, nick-nam'd a Buff Coat, and into
a Red Coat and Byonet. Or, is it because some Feather-bed Captains sell such
Ware? Oh! but Armor is wearisome and heavy: Yes, so also is the whole Duty of
a Soldier; but it is the Occupation he has undertaken, and by which he gets
his Livelihood; and, Can a Workman work without Tools? Or, is he ashamed (like
other Workmen) to carry them on his Back?

Let a Soldier be ashamed of being beaten, of being a Captive, or running
away, but let him never be ashamed of the Tools of the Trade by which alone he
stands fair for the Victory. But say some, This Armor speaks Fear and
Timerousness. Does it so? Then be it so. Fear, that makes a Sentinel or a Guard
more watchful, is a due Ingredient of true Valor. Was there ever any wise or
successful Generals, but fortified their Camp? When the Spade and the Pickax
are the Soldier's Armor; yet this is really fear of Surprizal, but not
Cowardice, but the greatest Wisdom.

The great Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, and (generally) the Grecians and Romans,
were no Cowards, (for they conquered the greatest part of the known World) yet
they never engaged, but in bright-shining Armor, especially their Horse,
except some light-armed Horsemen, with us called Dragoons, that are not
intended to abide the shock, but in a Battle to be here, and there, and every
where, as occasion serves, being Mars's Hermaphrodites, neither right Horse nor
right Foot, yet both these, and of extreme use and behoof in a Camp.

A Soldier may as well dismantle all his Forts, and scorn to fight within a
Portcullis and Castle-walls, Gabions, Perupets, and Bastions, as to scorn to
sight within his Armor: Victory is not got (but many times lost) by Bravadoes;
and I can scarce pity that Rhodomantade, that died upon the point of that Sword
that he had once gained from his baffled Foes, but returned it in flanting
Bravery, to play the Game over again, and lost it after he had fairly won it.

Let then our wiser Soldiers ride in Armor, that they may ride in Triumph,
adorned with the Spoils and Trophies of the slaughtered Enemy, whilst the
unarmed Captives follow the Wheels of our armed Chariots, and let them laugh in
their Sleeves at the Cowardice of their armed Conquerors, in surprising a
sleepy, negligent, and unarmed Foe on unequal terms: The slaughtered Dead
cannot, and the Living dare not call their Conquerors Cowards. Arm your selves
therefore when near an Enemy, left you pay for your Folly and Credulity, as
Abner did, who came into his Enemy's Quarters without his Aylet Shirt, privy
Armor, or Coat of Mael, (which had certainly saved his Life.) Died Abner as a
Fool dies?

I care not how rich and glittering my Soldiers Armor is, so it be of Proof;
let him be proud on it, and he will joy in it; and though a little irksome at
first, yet Use will facilitate it, (I speak experimentally) and Custom will
make it natural and easy.

The Porcupine never marches but with his Arms ready fixed; the Crocodile never
marches, nor swims, but in his Armor of Musquet-proof; and, Shall Man, who is
made by GOD, the Master of all other his Fellow Creatures, lay by his Armor
when he goes to fight? To what purpose has GOD and Nature furnished Men with
better Brains to invent, and Hands to forge good Armor, if they play the Fool
in the neglect of it, and dye as a Fool dies, when they should play the men,
for our people, and the Cities of our God?

Did ever any wise Soldier accuse Hannibal of Cowardice, though he fought
cunningly most commonly with his Brains, to spare his Men's Lives, by laying
Ambushes, Bribery, and Surprizals? Even the vapouring and flashy French have
now at length learnt this Wit, and so they conquer, they care not what men say
or think. Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit? was an old Proverb in the
Roman Camp.

But, say some, Goliath was armed Cap-a-pee, yet he was killed. Yes, he was so,
but it was digitus Dei, the Finger of God killed him, as it did Ahab that
Cuirazeer, hitting him in the Joints of his Harness, which otherwise it was a
thousand to one but they had both been invulnerable.

Not that I would have a man manacled in his Armor, that he cannot use his
Arms; it is enough probably (for Armor keeps no Assurance Office) to secure the
noble parts, the Head and Heart, from mortal wounds, let the other take their
fate.

The Militia of England are numerous and strong, but the Statutes that well
forms them are at this day generally eluded by the Levity of such fresh water
Officers, that never saw a Sword drawn in Anger, and fit themselves and their
Soldiers rather for a Dance than a Fight, and rather light, to run away
nimbly, than abide the Shock and Brunt of a Battle, by arming their Men as the
Law requires and enjoins, the better to play the men for our people, and the
Cities of our God.

There are many other causes of Additional Valor, as Despair, Custom and Use
of Wars, or any thing that cheers or exhilarates the drooping Spirits, which I
leave to Men of War: And thus much for Good Courage. The method of my Text
invites to speak next of Good Conduct. And perhaps, some that know me may
think, that this is a Province as fit for me to undertake as most other of my
Coat: But to do it now from a Text, would be as impertinent and pragmatical as
that of Phormio the Peripatetick Philosopher, Cicero de oratore.
who took upon him to read a Lecture of the Duty of a Chieftain and good
Conduct, in the presence of Hannibal the bravest General in the World.
Therefore I Will wave it now, and also the treating of a good Cause, because I
have said a great deal to it and of it already, under another Head, and speak a
little, and but a little, in the last place, of the second-general part of the
Text, Passive Valor, the most difficult and most divine part of Valor.

Yet many men have attained to this Good Courage in Passive Valor, that never
were famous for Active Valor. Any Man, nay, Woman, that is a good Christian,
may learn to bear, and be courageous in passive Valor, which is nothing else
but a quiet and serene temper in the greatest Straits, and under the greatest
Pressures and Difficulties, Losses and Crosses, that can possibly befall
Mankind, being very well pleased with whatsoever pleases God to send, according
to his good pleasure, as he has predestined and pre-ordain'd. Not but that it
is not only lawful to pray against all Temptations, and to be delivered from
all Evil; and not only pray against the Plots and Devices of the Enemy, and
counterplot them; use all Stratagems, Ambuscades, and whatever the mischievous
Wit of Man has invented for destruction of our Enemies; but, when we have done
all that active Valor can instruct, and all will not do; when we meet with
Losses, Deseats, Captivity, or Death; then a divine Soldier must quietly
submit to the good pleasure of him that rules the World, and will do what
pleases him in Heaven and in Earth. Will we, will we! it is a Sin, nay, a
Folly, to repine, but serenely say with our Blessed Savior, If this cup may
not pass from me except I drink it, not my Will, but thine be done.

Thus Holy David prayed and fasted, and used all means to save the Life of his
beloved Son, the fruit of his Sin; but when God had declared his Will by the
death of the Child, he cheered up, and called for good Cheer.

On this score it is that St. Paul exhorts the Philippians to be careful for
nothing, meaning, for nothing that is past: That care alone is sinful which is
Janus-like, and which looks both backward and forward; forward it may look,
forward it must look, by way of prevention.

For so our Savior and the Apostle frequently inculcate this Care or Heed that
looks forward; Luke 21.8.
Take heed that no man deceive you: let him that stands take heed lest he
fall: 2 Cor. 7.22.
That we should care for our selves, and for one another; 1 Cor. 7.32.
And yet, says St. Paul, I would have you without carefulness for what is
past; and your care may hurt you, macerate you, deject you, but cannot possibly
help you; therefore use the means, and when you have done what you can, you
have acted all your part; the next is God^s part, I mean the Event, the Issue,
the Success, for that trouble not your silly Heads, it is none of your Province,
but belongs to God alone, therefore cast away Care, 1 Pet. 5.7.
and cast all your Care upon God, for he cares for you.

I cannot but pity those poor Hearts, that make their Lives a Burden to
themselves and all that are hear them, being overcharged with Cares and Fears
of what shall come to pass.

For my part, I care not what comes to pass, I Will prevent with my Might and
Courage what we call Evils, but when all I can do will not do, whatever comes
is welcome.

With what a Courage did St. Paul embrace his Fate! How carelessly he descants
on his death, as if unconcerned! Death, that is the King of Terrors, and makes
them all their lifetime subject to Bondage, Cares, and Fears, was but St.
Paul's Rejoicing and Entertainment; yet the Sentence of Death, the Sentence to
be beheaded, was past upon him by that bloody Nero, and shortly to be executed;
2 Timothy 4.6.
then he writes his Second Epistle to Timothy, and talks so unconcerned, we
cannot but joy in him and with him, as if he was only to undertake a pleasant
Journey; I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand:
The time, the hour he had long wished for, having a desire to depart, and be
with Christ, which is far better.

A desire to depart; the Original signifies, an earnest longing of Soul; as if
nothing could satisfy, but to have his longing, namely, Death, which I say is
called, The King of Terrors, the chiefest of Terrors; but Death is so to none
but to Knaves and Fools, I mean, to impenitent People, and silly ignorant
People.

To dye! What Is that? It is as natural to dye as to be born; it is more
necessary to dye than to be born; it is (for ought we know) less Pain to dye
than to be born; Why do we fear Death then, that is so natural, so necessary,
so beneficial; there the Wicked cease from troubling, and there the Weary be at
rest: There no Tyrant can hurt us, no Grief assault us, no Pain nor Anguish,
for our selves or others, can torment us; there all Tears shall be wiped away
from our Eyes. And, do we sear then to dye?

Obj. No, say some, we do not so much fear to dye, nor cry, Loathe to depart,
for any Sweets of Life, (which at the best are but bitter Sweets) but we fear
the Consequences of Death and Judgment.

Ans. Do you so? But, I Will give you an easy and infallible Receipt and Remedy
against these fearful Consequences after Death; that which makes a Snake or a
Serpent terrible; that alone makes Death terrible, namely, the Sting; take away
the Sting from these, and you safely, and without fear or danger, hug them in
your Bosoms.

Now the Apostle tells us, The Sting of Death is Sin; take away that, and Death
is stingless and harmless. Sin shall never be imputed to any that are not
Volunteers to Sin. A man is not a Rebel to his Prince, nor any Guilt imputed to
him, though he be in the Enemy's Quarters, if he be taken Captive thither, and
strive to his utmost to make his escape. So neither shall any man be accounted
a Rebel to Heaven, that is carried Captive, through Weakness and Infirmity, to any
Sin, and strives to escape, hating all Sin with a perfect Hatred, and resisting
it as his Enemy to his utmost: To such a one the Lord imputes not Sin; Sin is
in him, but he does not live in Sin, lie in Sin, delight in Sin, wallow in Sin.

But, what a vast difference is there betwixt him that is overtaken in a fault,
and he that is a Volunteer to Sin, and follows it with all his might to
overtake it! If to such a one Death be the King of Terrors, I cannot blame his
Fears; but, Who can pity him that takes no pity on himself, that loves a Lust
above his God, above his Soul, and above his Peace here and hereafter, when he
may so easily disarm the King of Terrors, taking away his Venom and Sting?

To conclude this point, By what has been briefly said you may easily know to
get an Antidote against Death, and Losses, and Crosses, whatsoever; and
consequently, be armed against Cowardice, and all unmanly and unchristian
Fears, even in the greatest Streights, though beset (as Joab and Abishai in the
Text) with a numerous Enemy in Front and Rear.

Our part then is, to be of good Courage, with a good Conscience, and in a good
Cause; and let the event be Life or Death, Victory or Defeat, Let the Lord do
what seems him good.

To dye thus in Battle for our People, and the Cities of our God, Where is that
Dastard that is afraid thus to dye, rather than survive a few weary days,
living, or rather dying daily with the Pangs of the Gout, the Dropsy, the
Consumption, Stone, or the like? Not but that God's Will be done, if this
grievous Lot must be our Lot, to endure a Thousand irksome Deaths, painful and
grievous to our selves, and loathsome and troublesome both to our selves and
by-standing Friends; but we cannot help it, if we must be condemned to endure
the Fatigues of Life to the last dringling Sand; we may not break the Glass,
but if a Bullet break it, and in a good Cause, the Glass is well run out, and
the most made of it that it can possibly be worth.

What! Do we fear to go to God and Heaven, (our certain Portion) if we dye with
the said good Conscience, the said good Courage, and in the said good Cause, in
defense of our People, and the Cities of our God? The very Heathen, that had
but the Light of Nature, pro aris and focis, were ambitious to dye for their
Altars and Firesides.

For this Good Cause to be killed in Battle, is, to dye in Peace, like good
King Josiah, who is said to be gathered to his Fathers in Peace, and yet he
died in the Field, in the FIght, with his Sword in his Hand: So that well may
such a Divine Soldier, with good old Simeon, Swan like, sing his Nunc dimitis,
though he dye like the great King Gustavus Adolphus, in the Field: Death may take
such a man, Death cannot hurt such a man by cutting off a few weary minutes;
for, his Account is fairly cast up, like Joab's in the Text; if he lives, he
lives in Victory and Triumph, and lives to God; and if he dies, he dies in
Honor, and dies in Peace, and lives with God. Can Life or Death be put out at
better Interest? Can more be made of it?

Well may such a Divine Soldier and Champion for Heaven say with St. Paul,
after he had fought with Beasts at Ephesus, and more brutish men, I have fought
a good Fight, I have finished my Course, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness.

I have been extremely cheered in the greatest Difficulties (my little
Experience did ever encounter) with that Expression, Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou
Worm, Jacob.

One would think, if Jacob be a Worm, had more cause to fear than any other
Creature under Heaven; a Lion has Strength, a Worm has none; the Dove is
fearful, but she has Wings; the Hare, the Deer are timorous, but they have
swiftness of Foot, to fly from Danger; a Snake has none of these Advantages,
yet she has a Sting. But a Worm, what Creature so despicable, so subject to the
tread of every Foot? She has no Wings to fly, no Sting to make them stand off,
yet Fear not thou Worm, Jacob. And why? (the Reason follows in the next words)
For I am with thee, says God. And if God be for us, who can be against us?

And here I shall baulk my Discourse, and the Text, if Id o not show,

Q. 1. First, How God may be said to be for his People, when the Lord does what
seems him good, in prospering them, as he did Joab, in the Text, with
Victory? Or, how God may be said to fight for his People?

Q. 2. And secondly, How long he will fight for them?

1. First, I answer, that God visibly fights for his People four several ways,
all applicable to this Text and these Times, for which I purposely chose this
Text; and if I should conclude my Discourse on this Text, only with showing
what we should do in case of Death, Defeat, or any other sinister event, (a
Consideration very useful and necessary) yet it would be a Contemplation too
melancholy and ominous, to conclude with Passive Valor, in active and
victorious times, such as this of Joab in the Text, a Victory sultable and
parallel to ours in this Juncture: For, in the Verse next following the Text,
we hear the good News, that the Idolaters are run for it, the Syrians fled
before Joab; And when the Children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled,
then fled they also before Abishai.

Almighty God then gives Victory, and visibly fights for his People, when they
fight in a good Cause, four several ways: He did it for Israel, Great Britain,
and Ireland.

1. First, God is said visibly to fight when he raises up a Hero, a Worthy, by
endowing him with the Spirit of Courage, as he did Gideon, Baruk, Jephtha,
Sampson, David, Samuel, and (that I forget not) Moses and Joshua.

But of this I have spoken fully already under that Head of Supernatural
Courage. But, if I should only remember those famous Worthies, so long ago, and
so remote, my Memory would be as ungrateful as treacherous, if I should forget
what all the World at present admires, and Posterity will much more; His Sacred
Majesty King WILLIAM, whom GOD has raised up to be a Deliverer to us in the day
of our distress, and to rescue us from Popish Tyranny and Superstition, and all
those Miseries and Calamities which were ready to break in upon us.

I am upon a Subject incapable of Flattery or Hyperbole, but surely I cannot
say less upon so great and Fair Occasion, than to say my Prayers; I only repeat
the daily Prayers of the Church of England; In raising up thy Servant King
William, to be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, etc. When God's
Hand is lifted up, they will not see, says Isaiah, but they shall see, Isa.
26.11.
and be ashamed for their Envy, etc.

We have still many Envious Souls amongst us, it spites them to the Heart, to
see what God has done for these Kingdoms, and yet they clap their Hands before
their Eyes, and will not see what all others in the World see: What Is the
Reason? The Prophet says, For their Envy, etc.

Let them go on, and let them go to their Idolater, (their Idol) if they please
or dare; let the Blind lead the Blind, till they both fall into the Ditch; I
mean the French, and the Frenchified English. Frenchified English! There Is a
word unknown to our Forefathers. We used to be such Apes, as to take Laws from
France for Feathers, and Lace, and Top-knots, but the English, for 500 years
and upwards, have been a Terror to France: And, are these Frenchified-English
Natives then? And, do they know to whom they truckle, and why?

I cannot say less on this ungrateful Subject, and I will not say more,
especially at this time, and on this occasion; I am very ready at another time
to speak more home to our silly fellows at home.

2. Secondly, God fights for his People, by sending his Fear and Terror,
Amazement and Astonishment, into the Hearts of the Enemy. This in Scripture is
called God's Hornet, which, like Beasts stung with a Garabee or Hornet, made
Men run they did not know whither, and they did not know why, nor where to be
safe, they were in such a Consternation, Deuteronomy. 7.20, 21.
Amazement, and Fear: And so is the word interpreted.

Thus when the cowardly Spies (Cowards all but Caleb and Joshua) went to spy
out the Land of Canaan, the poor Hearts were out of Heart when they saw the
Giants, the Children of Anak, Number. 13.32, 33.
and that all the People were men of great stature, But we (say they) were in
our sight as Grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.

But, little men may look up to Heaven; little men may cry, I hope, and call to
GOD for help, the less Ability they had in themselves: Therefore, says God,
Josh. 24.12, I sent my Hornet before you, which drove them out from before you,
but not with thy Sword nor with thy Bow.

Yet they had both Sword and Bow in conquering Canaan, but to little purpose;
if God had not sent his Hornet before them, to sting the Enemy to the Heart,
and to leave the Lubbers (like ominous Beasts for Sacrifice) without a Heart.

And, to apply it, What account can be given in human Reason, why Ten of our
men, lately in Ireland, would usually make an Hundred to fly? Was it because we
were bigger, or taller, or stronger-limb'd than the Irish or French? No such
matter: But all the reason that can be given is this; they were stung with
Dread, Horror, and Amazement, run like Beasts stung with a Garabee, they did
not know why, nor whither, nor where to hide; God sent his Hornet before us,
and to him be the Glory, not with thy Sword, nor with thy Bow.

Nor can it be said, that our late Deliverance and Redemption three years ago,
was wrought or brought about with Sword or Spear.

To see such an Army ( treble the number of our Deliverer) none better mounted,
nor better armed; to see a Navy well equipped, Men of War well rigged, and all
these to melt away and scatter, no man pursuing them, What Is the matter? God
sent his Hornet before them.

Not but that it spoke both natural and supernatural Courage, in a superlative
manner, to attempt so bravely, and through Faith, to subdue Kingdoms; but it
was digitus Dei, the Hand of God was visible in it; to him be the Glory, not
with thy Sword, nor with thy Bow.

3. Thirdly, It seems good to the Lord sometimes visibly to fight for his
People without any human means at all, and that by Emissaries sent from Heaven,
(I had almostsaid, from Hell too.) Thus a good Angel, an Emissary from Heaven,
was sent at the Prayer of that good King Hezekiah, who killed in one night, in
the Camp of Sennacherib King of Assyria, Isa. 37 36.
185000 men.

And thus they fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses fought against
Silera, Judge 5.20.
defeated by a Woman, the valiant Deborah and her Captain Baruk.

Thus they fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses, (the Winds and the
Waves fought against the Spanish Armado (styled Invincible) in 88, In memory
whereof I have seen much of Queen Elizabeth's Coin, with her Effigies, and the
Effigies of a Drake.
defeated by a Woman, the Valiant Queen Elizabeth, and her Captain Drake.

Thus they fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses, (the Winds and the
Waves) brought our Deliverer's Navy, in 88, three years ago, to their desired
Port: Nothing but the Finger of Him that commands the Winds and the Waves could
have done this; to him be the Glory, not with thy Sword alone, (though a brave
Sword) nor with thy Bow.

Nay, sometimes Almighty God sends Emissaries from Hell, to vex and plague the
Enemies of his People.

Thus the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 78.49.
that when God delivered his People from that Tyrant Pharaoh, and Egyptian
Bondage, He sent evil Angels amongst them. And thus a lying Spirit, (and
therefore a Devil) made King Ahab fall at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 Kin. 22.22.
when God sent him on an Errand improper for a good Angel and Emissary from
Heaven.

An Angel thus made a few silly Worms pull down the Pride of that Atheistical
King Agrippa, and eat him up alive. And a silly Fly killed our Countryman Pope
Adrian IV, the only Englishman that ever was Pope.

The Hand of God guided the Randome-Arrow to the Heart of that Idolatrous King
Ahab, 1 Kings 22.34.
through the Joints of his Harness, where only it was penetrable.

4. Lastly, God fights for his People sometimes with weak human means.

Thus Israel must be delivered in Gideon's time, not with his whole Army (for
then God's Arm could not have been so visible amongst so many strong men at
Arms) but by the men that lapped as a Dog lappeth, probably the weakest and
sickliest in the Camp.

From this Topic the good and valiant King (and therefore valiant, because the
good King) Hezekiah cheered up his drooping Soldiers; 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8.
Be strong and courageous, be not dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for the
multitude that is with him; with him is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the
Lord our God, to help us, and fight our Battles. But, how long will God fight
our Battles?

The Prophet Azariah answers this Quaere in good King Asa's time; 1 Chr. 15.2.
The Lord is with you whilst you are with him, but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you.

Many a good Cause is spoiled by ill management, and many a good Army by ill
Discipline: England has a potent Enemy, but yet a Cause so good, that we may
say of our King as Abigail said to King David, My Lord fights the Battles of
the LORD. GOD grant that this good King and this good Cause do not miscarry by
a debauched Army and Navy. Can we expect that God should fight for or with
these men, that fight against him, and bid him Defiance, cursing themselves and
their God? We may assure our selves, that those that wage War against the King
of Heaven, will never fight successfully for Their Sacred Majesty's.

He that is not truly virtuous, may do, perhaps, some flashy Feats, in Vapor,
or for Company, or for Shame, or for Fear or for Despair, but he can never be
true to his Post, nor truly valourous. Where there is no Grace, no Goodness, no
Sobriety, nor any Virtue, God is not there, Valor is not there, nor Faith, nor
Faithfulness there: A man's Courage and Loyalty must needs be as frail and
precarious as his Conscience and Religion; and if he does not fell his Loyalty
as he bought his Place, and fell his King and his Faith too, it is because the
Judas wants a Chapman.

But in these days it is possible to find a Chapman too, that will be as free to
part with his Purse as any Wretch can be to part with his Faith and Allegiance.

Purge out therefore our Sins for thy Names sake, Psalm. 79.9.
says holy David, when he prayed to God for Victory.

If our Armies and Navies be not soundly and thoroughly purged from open
Profaneness, and Cursing, Swearing, Damning, and Debauchery, and from fighting
against Heaven, by sinning with an high Hand and an impudent Forehead; they
will never prove Men of good Courage, never play the men, in defense of Their
Sacred Majesty's, nor in defense of our People, and the Cities of our God.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
The Works of the Learned: Or, an Historical Account and Impartial Judgment of
Books newly printed, both Foreign and Domestic: As also the state of Learning
in the World. To be published Monthly; this for January 1691/2. By J. de la
Crose, a late Author of the Universal and Historical Bibliotheque. Printed for
J. Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry.


