Tulse Mayor.
Curia Special. tent. die Mercurii in Hebdomad. Festi Pasch. secund. April.
1684, Annoque Reg. Regis Caroli Secundi, Angliae, etc. xxxvi.
THis Court does desire Dr. Hickes, Dean of Worcester, to Print his Sermon,
Preached in St. Brides Church on Tuesday last before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of this City.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON Preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on Easter-Tuesday, being the
first of April, 1684.

Before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse, Lord MAYOR Of LONDON, And the
Honorable Court of ALDERMEN, Together with the GOVERNORS of the Hospitals,
upon the Subject of Almsgiving.

By George Hickes, D. D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and R. Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter in Fleet Street, 1684.

To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse, Lord Mayor of London, and to the
Honorable Court of Aldermen.
My Lord,
I Here present your Lordship with my Sermon; which you heard with so much
Candor, and must profess my self glad of this opportunity to testify the
Respects, which I have for your self, and the Honorable Court of Aldermen,
among whom there is not one Man, who has not signalized his Loyalty in the
late distinguishing times; when the Commonwealth Party struggling for Empire
with the Monarchy, engaged and Loyal Men to show themselves to be so; and among
those great, and public Spirits, who durst stand up for the Government, when a
powerful and daring Faction durst oppose it, your Lordship was one of the most
Eminent, for which His Majesty, willing to declare His Royal Esteem for you,
has committed unto your Administration the Government of this City, which is
vertually the Government of the whole Kingdom; because, as London is well, or
ill Governed, so will all the Country be.

If the Governors of the City beat down Schism, and Faction, and keep the
Citizens in Peace, and Order, the Magistrates of all other Towns will be able
and willing to do the same; but if at any time they openly countenance Factious
and Schismatical Spirits, or underhand connive at them, Faction, and Schism
will presently grow too strong for the Magistrates in the Country Towns. This,
my Lord, has been found true, by the experience of many years, insomuch that
the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, are in effect the Governors of all
other Cities, and Corporations, who will obey, or disobey their Magistrates in
the same measure and proportion, as you will let the Citizens obey, or disobey
you.

The King therefore, my Lord, has done you a very signal Honor, in committing
so Comprehensive a Trust unto you, the good, or ill management whereof will
make him easy, or uneasy in his Government, and the Nation happy, or unhappy;
and as you, and your Loyal Brethren of the Bench, have in all things acted
suitably to the Greatness of this Trust, which his Majesty reposes in you: So,
it is my hearty Prayer, among other Loyal Subjects, to God, that this City may
never want such a Lord Mayor, and such a Court of Aldermen, all of one
Principle of Loyalty, and all hearty Lovers of their King, and the Church.

We already feel the happy Effects of having such Loyal Governors over us, and
if God in mercy please to continue the Blessing unto us, we shall within a few
years see such happy days, as our Ancestors did, before the deceivable
multitude were led into the Gainsaying of Corah, and taught to set up private
Temples, and private Altars, in opposition to the Church. God grant that we may
so walk, as to deserve the continuance of such a Blessing, which is the daily
Prayer of

Your Lordships, Most Obedient Servant, George Hickes.

Heb. XIII. 16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.


THE Primitive Christians, living in a state of Persecution, had no other way
to relieve their poor Brethren, but by transient Beneficence and Contributions,
not daring as yet to found Hospitals, or erect Banks of standing, and public
Charity for them, lest they should be seized, or escheat to the Higher Powers,
if they came to be discovered; and this is the true reason, why at first they
had all things in common, and why, all along the New Testament, and much
longer, we never read of Building, or Endowing Houses of Charity, but only of
Collections, and Contributions: So that if a man had a mind to trifle, as the
Congregational Writers do in arguing against National Churches, we might ask
you, Where are Hospitals commanded in the Scriptures? Show us an Example of any
one man in the new Testament, that builded an Hospital, a School, or a College?
No! these are but Humane Inventions, mere ostentations of Charity, and devices
of Satan to make men trust in good works. But the Gospel way of supplying the
wants of the Poor, which is of Gods own Institution, is by giving,
distributing, and making Collections, as it is 1 Cor 1e 1,2.
written. Now as concerning the Collection for the Saints, do ye, as I have
given order to the Churches of Galatia, let every one of you, the first day of
the week, at the public Assembly lay by something in store for the Collection,
as God has prospered him, that there be no need of gathering, when I come, and
then I will send your liberality to Jerusalem, by whomsoewer you shall approve.
So says the Apostle to Timothy. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge those who are rich, that they be ready to give, and glad to distribute,
and, in my Text, to do good, and communicate, forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

This indeed was the Primitive, and only way of Charity, while the Church was
in the Wilderness; but when, after many Sufferings and much Passive Obedience,
she was settled, as it were, in the Holy Land, under the protection of Christian
Emperors and Kings, she then let her light shine before men in standing and
visible works of Charity; proceeding to Erect Buildings of public use, and for
the public benefit; insomuch that Julian, the Apostate Emperor, exhorted his
Pagan Subjects, in imitation of the Christians, to build (...) Soz. l. 5. c.
16. Naz. 1 Invect. p. 102. Edit. par. 1630.
Hospitals and Schools, and Houses for reception of indigent Travelers,
together with Monasteries for Contemplative, and Religious Persons of both
Sexes, thinking that the doing of these good Works would bring Paganism into
as much Credit among the Christians, as it had done Christianity among the
Pagans. Ep. 49.
Appoint (says he unto Arcasius Chrief Priest of Galatia) Hospitals for poor
Travelers in every City, for it is a great dishonor to us, that when none of
the Jews go about begging, and the impious Galileans maintain not only their
own, but ours too, our Poor should only be neglected, and left naked, and
helpless by us.

So advantageous, even by the Confession of its most malicious Enemy, were
standing and conspicuous works of Charity to the growth, and advancement of the
Christian Religion; and therefore taking this, and all other Scripture
Exhortations unto Christian beneficence and liberality, to extend to standing
and permanent, as well as transient good works, I shall discourse upon the
words in the following Method.

First, I will show, that doing of Alms-deeds is a Duty incumbent upon all men,
who are able to do them, and that we are most earnestly exhorted unto it by God
in his Holy Word.

Secondly, That the performance of this Duty is highly pleasing, and acceptable
unto God, and very beneficial unto Men.

Thirdly, That the Charitable man, who performs this Duty, shall
notwithstanding have enough, and that his Charity shall never bring Him or his
Children into want.

Lastly, I shall make a brief Exhortation to the performance of this Duty, and
so conclude.

1. First, I will show, that doing of Alms-deeds is a Duty incumbent upon all
Men, who are able to do them, as Heathen Writers univerisally acknowledge, the
Latins in calling Charity Humanity, and the Greeks Philanthropy, or the love of
Men. For every Man, as Julian imp. fragm
Julian observes upon this Subject, (...), whether be will or no, is akin to
all Mankind. For (says he) whether we are all descended of one, Nan, or one
Woman; as some (meaning the Jews and Christians) say; or whether the Gods
Created many Men and Women together, in the beginning of the World; or wheter
they produced them any other way; it is certain, we all partake of the same
Common Nature, and derive our Original from the Gods, and therefore have one
Common Tie of Nature to be kind to one another, and Religious toward the Gods.

And truly, as there is something in Humane Nature, which prompts Men to be
Religious: So, there is something in it likewise, that prompts them to be
Charitable, and I think the difference of Men from Beast, and the Excellency of
our Nature above theirs, appears in nothing so much, as in these two
inclinations of being Religious toward God, and Kindly-affected toward Men.

For every man is of the blood of every other, we have all one common alliance,
not only in the participation of the same common Nature, as the Grecizing
Apostate observes, but in the derivation of it from the same common Parents,
and by his favor, it makes every man more willing to acknowledge another for
his Brother, and perform the Offices of Humanity more indifferently toward all
Men, when he shall consider, that all Mankind were once equal in the loins of
Adam, and that, as St. Paul taught the Athenians, God, who made World, made of
one blood all Nations of Men.

This Consideration, that all men have the same common Nature, and Parentage,
and have derived it in all Countries from the same common Stock, founds the
first Obligation of Charity or Humanity; and upon this account only, the
Moralists assert Man to be Julian. in fragm.
(...), a Creature communicative by Nature, and call want of Charity by the
reproachful Name of Inhumanity, as being a Vice which turns a man, like
Nebuchadnezzar, into a Beast.

The Holy Scripture also lays the first Foundation of Charity in the Community
of humane Nature, every man being bound to relieve the necessities of another,
as he is a Brother of the same Nature, and Parentage with himself. Thus says
the Prophet Isaiah. Is not this the fast, which I have chosen, to deal thy
bread to the hungry, to bring the poor, that are cast out, to thy house, to
cover the naked when thou see him, and that thou hide not thy self from the
OWN FLESH.

According to this general obligation to humanity upon the account of human
Nature, our Blessed Lord, in the Parable of the Man who fell among Thieves,
enlarged the Signification of the word Neighbor to take in all Mankind; and in
general Evangelical Sense of it, the Apostle said unto the Corinthians, Love
works no ill to his Neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law.
And, Owe no man any thing, but the debt of mutual love, which can never be
paid, for love is the fulfilling of the Law. And in another place he says, As
we have oppertunity let us do good unto all men, even unto our Enemies, as is
written in Exodus 23. If thou meet thine Enemies Ox or Ass going astray, thou
shall surely bring back to him again, and if thou see the Ass of him that
hates thee, lying under his burden, thou shall leave thy business, and come
and help him. For the Common Duties of Humanity cannot be cancelled by the
greatest Injuries, and Hostilities, but when my Enemy is in want and misery, I
must remember, that he is my Brother, and, upon the account of common Kindred
and Relation, fulfill the Precept of our Savior, who said, Love your Enemies,
and do good to them that hate you; and of the Apostle, who Paraphrased that
Precept of his Lord in these words, If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; and if he
thirst, give him drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap coals fire upon his
head.

So says F^agm.
Julian, like a true Plagiary, concealing from whence he had his lovely Notions
upon this Subjects, We ought to be beneficent to all men, and though more
especially to the good, yet we must relieve the necessities of all indigent
Persons whatsoever, nay, I will say one thing more, which will seem a Paradox
to you, that it is a very holy thing and pleasing to the Gods, to clothe your
naked and feed your hungry Enemies; nay, Humanity will not let us forget the
wicked Malefactors in Prison, because, in these cases, we give our Charity to
the men, and not to their evil manners, and sins.

So great a Duty is incumbent on us, on the common account of our Nature and
Original, so that what the Apostle said of the Duty of Husbands to their Wives,
may be said with little variation upon the Subject of Charity: So ought men to
love the Poor, as their own bodies, he that loves the poor, loves himself,
and no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it; and
therefore the Rich ought to nourish and cherish the Poor, as their Brethren, as
flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone.

But besides this obligation to the duty of Almsgiving, upon the common score
of our Nature and Original, there is another, resulting from this
Consideration, that the Poor are Members in all places of the same Societies
with the Rich. For the Rich are represented in the Prophetical Writings by
Mountains, and the Poor and Indigent by Valleys; and, as Philosophers observe,
that Mountains can neither be, nor be conceived without Valleys. So the Rich in
this World can neither be, nor be conceived without the Poor. For Rich and Poor
are Relative terms, and no man is properly either, but in comparison to
another, to whom he is unequal in Estate. For if all men were equal in their
Estates, there would be neither Poverty, nor Riches, but one uniform state of
Temporal things in all places; just as if the Valleys were raised as high as
the Hills, or the Hills levelled with the Valley, there would be nothing, but
one uniform plane all over the World.

But this Civil Equality is morally impossible, because no Commonweal, little
or great, can subsist without Poor. They are necessary for the establishment of
Superiority, and Subjection in Humane Societies, where there must be Members of
Dishonor, as well as Honor, and some to serve and obey, as well as others to
command. The Poor are the Hands and Feet of the Body Politic, the Gibeonites
and Nethinims in all Countries, who hew the Wood, and draw the Water of the
Rich. They Plow our Lands, and dig our Quarries, and cleanse our Streets, nay,
those, who fight our battles in the defense of their Country, are the poor
Soldiers, who, as the Legions of Blaesus once complained in a Mutiny, sell
their lives Denis in diem assibus animan and corpus aestimari. Tacit. An. 1. c.
17.
for seven pence a day. As there must be Rich to be, like the Centurion in the
Gospel, in Authority: so there must be Poor, to whom they may say, Go unto one,
and he goes, and to another, come, and he comes; but were all equally Rich,
there could be no subordination, none to command, nor none to serve. But in
such a case, the body Politic must dissolve, as the Natural body was like to
do in the Fable of Agrippa, when the rest to the Members would work no longer
for the Belly, which, they thought, did nothing at all.

Wherefore the Poor being as necessary for the Rich, as the Rich are for the
Poor; the common Law of Equity, received among all Mankind, obligheth us to do
unto them, as, if Fortune or the hand of Providence should turn the Wheel, we
would have them do unto us. There could be nothing more unjust, nothing more
against the Law, and the Prophets; nay nothing more Inhumane and Barbarous,
than not to relieve their necessities; and, as the Apostle speaks, Let our
abundance be a supply to their wants; for they are not only our Brethren, but
our fellow Members of the same body Politic, and such ought to be the mutual
compassion of the Memb^rs, that, if one Member suffer, all the Members suffer
with it. Wherefore, says Deuteronomy. 15.
God unto the Jews, Thou shall not harden thine Heart, nor shut thine Hand from
thy poor Brother; thou shall surely give unto him, and thine heart shall not be
grieved, when thou give unto him; and for this thing the Lord shall bless
thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto, for the
Poor shall never cease out of the Land. Therefore I command thee, saying, thou
shall open thine hand wide unto the poor and needy Brother in thy Land.

This suggest unto me the Third consideration, upon which it becomes the Duty
of the Rich to be liberal to the Poor, out of gratitude to God, who has put
the difference between them, and as Hannah says in Samuel, has made the Rich
and the Poor. For as the Body is not all one member, but many: So it is God,
that has set he Members, (says the Apostle) every one of them in the body, as
it has pleased him. If thou art a Rich and Honorable Member, it is he, that
made thee so, if thou have much Treasure and large Possessions, they came by
his special Blessing, who expects, that all and every Man, whom the has made
Rich, should make becoming returns of their thankfulness to him in their Gifts
and Offerings to the Poor.

He is Lord Paramount of every Rich man's Estate, and every Landed Man holds of
him in Chief, as it is written, The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, and the Cattle that are upon a thousand Hills. He has made abundant
Provision for all Men, but because it is not consistent with the Being, and
Well-being of humane Polities, that he should deal his Blessings to all alike,
therefore his Wisdom obliges him to distribute them in very different
proportions. Like the Noble Man in the Parable, to some he gives ten, and to
others five times as much as gives to another; but then to those, upon whom he
bestows more than is sufficient, he gives it, not for their own sakes, but for
the sake of the Poor, who ought to be maintained by them. As a Prince or Great
Man, going into a far Country, puts his Purse into his Stewards hands, not
altogether for his own sake, but because to do so is necessary for the good
Government of his Family, that he rest, depending for their maintenance upon
him, might be more subject, and subservient to him. But, and if that Steward
shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and will not give his
fellow Servants their meat in due season, the Lord of that Steward shall come
in a day, when he looks not for him, and cut him asunder, because he was a
Traitor to his Trust.

In like manner the Rich are Gods Stewards for the Poor, he lays up their
Maintenance in their Treasuries, because he would have them depend upon them,
and serve them; but then, as St. Paul said of Masters, It is their Duty to give
unto them that which is just, and equal, as knowing that they have a Lord and
Master in Heaven. And as King Henry the Third did Enact, by the 4th. Chap. of
the Statute of Merton, That the Peers and Great Men of this Land should allow
their Inferior Tenants sufficient common Pasture for their use: So, God, the
King of Kings, and Supreme Lord of all the Earth, has Ordained, That the Great
and Rich in all places should provide, and allow what is sufficient for the use
and maintenance of the Inferior, and Poorer sort. Hence it comes to pass, that
we meet with so many Admonitions and earnest Exhortations to this great Duty of
Charity, in the Holy Scriptures, and other Moral Writings, as, not to repeat
those I have already had occasion to mention, our Blessed Lord has made
universal Charity one of the greatest Duties of the Christian Religion; saying,
Give to every man, that asks of thee, and if you do good only to them, who do
good unto you, what thank have you, for Sinners also do the same, and if you
lend only to them, of whom you hope to receive, what thank have you, for
Sinners also lend to Sinners to receive as much again, but love ye your
Enemies, and do good to all, and lend to those from whom you can hope for
nothing again, and be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful, who is
kind unto the unthankful, and makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the
good, and sends his Rain on the just, and unjust.

Nay, he makes the best improvement of Riches to consist in the Charitable use
of them in that Parabolical saying, Make ye Friends of the vain transitory
Mammon, (for that is the meaning of the place) that when you shall fail, they
may receive you into Everlasting Habitations. So Luke. 12.33. Sell that you
have, and give Alms, provide your self Bags, which wax not old, a Treasure in
the Heavens, that fails not, where no theif approaches, nor moth corrupts.
Nay, he has so espoused the cause of the Poor, as to declare, that what we do
unto Them, he will take it as done unto his own Person, as it is written,
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it unto one of these my hungry,
sick, and naked Members, you did it unto me.

Hence it comes to pass, that we read so much of Collections, and Ministering to
the Saints, in the New Testament; when the Rich Christians reserving to
themselves only Food and Raiment, were therewith content. Charity to Men was
then the only Test of Love unto God, according to what St. John says, He that
loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can be love God, whom he has
not seen? and whosoever has the goods of this World, and shuts up the
bowels of his compassion from his Brother, whom he sees in need, how dwells
the love of God in him?

II. Having now showed, that doing of Almsdeeds is a Duty incumbent upon all
men, that have wherewith to do them, I proceed in the Second place to show,
That the performance of this Duty is highly acceptable unto God, and beneficial
unto Men. The first is, the very Motive by which the Apostle exhorts us unto
Beneficence in my Text, To do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased. It is plain from hence, that God accepts
of what we do for the Poor, as done unto Himself, and that our Alms under the
Gospel have the Nature of Offerings and Sacrifices, with which God was pleased,
and rendered propitious under the Law.

The Apostle expresses the acceptable Nature of Almsgiving yet more
Emphatically in Phil. 4.18. where he says unto them, I am full of the good
things, which I received from you by Epaphroditus, as an offering of sweet
smelling odor, a sacrifice acceptable, and pleasing unto God.

This Phrase of a sweet smelling odor, is purely Sacrificial, and taken from
the Old Testament, where God is said to have smelled in the Sacrifices, and to
have smelled a sweet Savor in the Offerings, and Sacrifices, which he
accepted, as in Genesis 18.21. When Noah offered burnt Offerings upon the Altar,
which he builded, after he came out of the Ark, the Text says, that the Lord
smelled a sweet Savor. And in Ephesians. 5.2. the Apostle in allusion to that place,
says, that Christ gave himself a Sacrifice, an offering to God for a sweet
smelling Savor.

I would not be so misunderstood by this remark, as if I thought Almsgiving
were an offering of the same Nature, and Value, as the offering of Christ, far
be that from me, but only to let you see, how highly acceptable it must needs
be to God, when his holy Spirit expresses the acceptable Nature of it, by the
same Sacrificial term, by which he sets forth the acceptance of the Sacrifice
of Christ. Adn as sweet odours perfume other things, and make them delightful
to the smell: so the sweet odor of our Alms perfumes our very Prayers, and
makes them more acceptable unto God. Prayer (says the Angel unto Tobias) is
good with Alms, and it is better to give Alms than to lay up God; and, says
the Angel unto Cornelius, who gave much Alms unto the People; Thy Prayers, and
thine Alms are come up for a memorial before God. And from hence St. Cyprian
concludes, that our Prayers, whether in Deprecations or Petitions, Ostendit
orationes nostras, ac jejunia minus posse, nisi eleemosynis adjuventur,
deprecationes solas parum ad impetrandum valere, nisi factorum, and operum
accessione farciantur: Revelat angelus, and manifestat, and firmat eleemosynis
petitiones nostras efficaces fieri. Cypr. de opere and eleemosy^is.
are of little force, and efficacy, without the joint assistance of Alms.

I observed before, how our Lord looks upon doing of Alms, as done unto
himself, and therefore since the doing of them is so very acceptable to God,
and opens his Ears unto our Prayers, it must needs in the end redound very much
to the benefit and advantage of men.

Thus says the Lord in Deuteronomy. 15. Thou shall surely give unto thy poor Brother,
and let not thy heart be grieved, when thou give unto him, because that for
this thing the Lord shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou
put thine hand unto. So says the Prophet Isaiah, If thou draw out thy soul
unto the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul, then shall thy light rise in
obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day, and the Lord shall be thy
reward, and guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make
fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring whose
waters never fail. So says the Psalmist, Blessed is he that considers the
Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. And in the 37th Psalm, he
confirms this Doctrine by the Observation, and Experience of many years. I have
been young (says he) but now am old, yet I have never seen the Righteous, i.
e. the Charitable, man forsaken, nor his seed begging bread, he is ever
merciful and lends, and his Posterity is blessed. So Prove. 19.17. He that
has pity upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given
will he pay him again. And in the Third Chapter he says, Honor the Lord with
thy substance, and with the first Fruits of thine increase, so shall thy Barns
be filled with plenty, and thy Presses shall burst our with new wine.

To this purpose speaks Tobit to his Son Tobias in the 4th. Chapter Give Alms of
thy substance, and when thou give Alms, let not thine Eye be envious,
neither turn thy Face from the Poor, and the Face of God shall not be turned
away from thee. If thou have abundance, give Alms accordingly, and if thou
have but a little, be not afraid to give of that little, for so shall thou lay
up a good Treasure for thy self against the day of necessity. So says our
Blessed Lord, Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, where moth and
rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal, but rather lay up
for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust do corrupt,
nor can Theives break through and steal. By laying up Treasures in Heaven, our
Lord understands giving of Alms, as is plain from his Words to the young man,
in another place of the same Gospel. If thou will be perfect, go, and sell what
thou have, and give it to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. In
this very Sense it is, that the Son of Sirach speaks, Eccles. 29.11. Lay up
thy Treasure according to the Commandments of the most High, and it shall bring
thee more profit than Gold; shut up thy Alms in thy storehouses, and it shall
deliver thee from all Afflictions, it shall fight for thee against thy Enemies,
better than a mighty Shield or strong Spear. So says the Apostle unto Timothy,
Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they trust not in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy, and
that they do good, and be rich in good works, ready to distribute, and willing
to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on everlasting life.

From these Authorities it is plain, without any further enumeration, how
beneficial the doing of Alms-deeds is to Charitable persons, both upon a
Temporal and Spiritual account; Charity, as the Apostle says of Godliness,
having the Promise of the life, that now is, and of that, which is to come.

But furthermore, this Doctrine will appear, by the rule of Contrary, from the
severe Judgments, which are threatened to want of Charity, as Prove. 28.17. He
that gives unto the Poor, shall not lack, but he that hides his Eyes, shall
have many a Curse. So Chap. 21.13. Whosoever stops his Ears at the cry of the
Poor, he also shall cry himself, and shall not be heard. Which our Savior
inculcated to the Jews in the Parable of the unjust Steward, whom his Lord
delivered in great anger to the Tormentors, because he had not compassion on
his fellow Servants, as he had pity on Him. To this purpose also speaks the
Son of Sirach, Reject not the supplication of the afflicted, neither turn away
thy face from a Poor Man, turn not away thine Eyes from the needy, and give him
no occasion to Curse thee, for if he Curse thee in the bitterness of his Soul,
his Prayers shall be heard of him, that made him. Be as a Father unto the
Fatherless, and instead of an Husband unto their Mother, so shall thou be, as
the Son of the most High, and he shall love thee more, than thy Mother does.

These are great advantages, which are said to come unto Men, as the Fruits of
Charity, but there are greater things said of it still. For the Scriptures, and
other Writings of great Authority, and Reverence, speak of Charity, as if it
were sufficient to cleanse the Soul, and make atonement to God for our Sins.
Thus our Lord told the Pharisees, who were offended at Him, and his Disciples
for not washing before Dinner, that the way to cleanse the Soul, was not to
wash the Body, but to give Alms of such things, as they had, and then all
things should be clean unto them. And Solomon says Prove. 16. That iniquity is
purged by mercy, and truth. Accordingly we read Dan. 4. v. 27. That he spoke
unto the King thus: Wherefore O King, let my Counsel be acceptable unto thee,
and break of thy sins by Righteousness. i. e. by Kindness, and Charity, and
thine iniquity by showing mercy to the Poor, if it may be on healing of thy
Error. To which agrees that of Tobit, Chap. 4. v. 10. Give Alms of thy
substance, because Alms deliver from Death, and suffers not to come into
darkness. This is a mighty Virtue, which is ascribed to Almes-doing, and
mightily sets forth the Dignity and Worth thereof, especially if we attend to
that saying of Siracides, Water will quench a flaming fire, and Alms makes an
atonement for sin. Which is very agreeable to a place in Deuteronomy. where God says,
Thou shall not sleep with the Poor Man's pledge, but thou shall in any case
deliver it to him, when the Sun goes down, that he may sleep in his own
Raiment, and bless thee, and it shall be Righteousness unto thee before the
Lord thy God. According to this Doctrine Saint Et quia semel in baptismo
remissa peccatorum datur assidua, and jugis operatio baptismi instar imitata,
dei rursus indulgentiam largitur -- de Eleemes.
Cyprian says, That Almsgiving is equivalent unto Baptism, for the remission
of sins, and that the way for men to obtain pardon for their daily sins, is to
do daily good works, By sins, he understands sins of ignorance, and error, and
sudden surprise, by which the best men are obnoxious to the Justice of God, if
he should be severe to mark what they do amiss; and by Almsgiving, he does not
mean the opus operatum, or mere external performance of the Duty, but such
Almsgiving, as proceeds from pure Charity, and not from Vainglory, or other
by-ends, as it did in the Pharisees, who sounded Trumpets before them in the
Synagogues, and in the Streets, when they gave Alms, that they might have
glory of Men, and therefore they had no reward of God. This Pharisaical humor,
was, I believe, to be found among the Christians of the Church of Corinth,
which made the Apostle say unto them; Though I give all my goods to feed the
poor, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. No! such Almsgiving
profits nothing, nor has any title to the promises of God, but Almes-giving
proceeding, like good fruit, from the Divine root of Charity, justifies
sinners, and makes atonement for sins.

For Charity is a justifying Grace, as well as Faith, nay Faith owes its
justifying Virtue to Charity, and cannot justify a sinner, by the terms of the
Gospel, unless it be such a Faith, as works by love.

This is the secret of all the forecited Authorities, about the atoning virtue
of Charity. It is so divine a Virtue, and does so conform a man after the image
of God, that for the sake of it, and of the good works, which proceed from it,
God will accept of honest, hearty, and sincere, for sinless, and unerring
Obedience from the Charitable man, who is so like him in the most excellent of
his Moral Perfections; I mean in his Goodness, which moved him to Communicate,
and let out his infinite fullness, among an infinite variety of Creatures; and
which, as the Platonists say, is the fundamental Attribute, or Root of his
blessed Nature, and makes him to be God.

III. Having now showed, that doing of Alms is a great Duty, and that the
doing of the is very acceptable to God, and beneficial unto Men. I proceed in
the Third place to show, that the Charitable man, who performenth this Duty,
shall notwithstanding have enough, and that his Charity shall never bring him,
or his into want.

This partly appears, from what I have observed before out of the Scriptures,
and other Venerable Writings; and if we consult them further, we shall find,
that employing our Money in Charitable uses, is as profitable, as to put it out
to use. So says Solomon, Eccl. 11.1. Cast thy-bread upon the waters, i, e.
among the poor multitude, for thou shall find it after many days. And Prove.
11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be
watered himself. And to this purpose speaks our Lord and Savior, saying, Give,
and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over shall men give into your bosom, for with the same
measure that you mete withal, it shall be measured to you again: So says the
Apostle to the Corinthians, He that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully,
for God loves a cheerful giver, and is able to make all grace, or charity,
abound toward you, that you, having all sufficiency always, in all things may
abound to every good work. And God, that administreth seed to the sower
thereof, will minister bread to your food, and multiply the seed which you have
sown, and increase the fruits of your bounty, which causes through us, who
dispense it among the Saints, thanskgiving unto God. So says the Son of
Sirach, there is a gift, meaning a gift of Bribery, that shall not profit, and
there is a gift, meaning gifts of Charity, whose recompense is double. And in
another place he faith, Give unto the most High, according as he has enriched
thee; and as thou have gotten, give with a cheerful eye, for the Lord
recompenseth, and will give thee seven times as much.

Wherefore Fragm.
Julian, in his Exhortation of the Pagans to Charity, challenges them to tell
him of any one Man, that ever fell into want through his liberality to the
Poor? For my own part (says he) whatever I have given to the poor, I have
still received it of the Gods with manifold interest, although I am one, that
understand not the Art of getting money; for, not to mention my Royal
Munificence, since I was Emperor, I ascribe it to my Charity, while I was a
private man, that my Grandmothers inheritance, which had been, injustly kept
from me, fell to me, because out of the little pittance, I had at first to live
upon, I dispensed part unto the poor.

The Apostate still kept himself Orthodox in this piece of Divinity, having so
much of the Christian yet remaining in him, as to believe, that God is prompted
by his goodness to provide in a particular manner for Charitable men; according
to what he must have often read, and heard in the Church of Nicomedia, where he
was a Reader, God is not unrighteous to forget your good works, and the
charity, which you have showed toward his name in ministering unto the Saints.

Wherefore let me speak unto you, as St. Cyprian did upon the same argument to
the People of his D^oc^ss, Do not fear that your Charity can beggar you, or
that you can lose by the money, which you lend to Christ upon use. I do here
promise, and engage, not of my self, but upon the faith of the holy Scriptures,
and the authority of Gods promises, it cannot; for the Holy Ghost has said by
the mouth of Solomon: He that gives to the poor shall not lack, And, that the
Lord will not suffer the liberal soul to famish.

These Promises we also find verified by many Examples in the Scriptures, as
when God fed Elias in the Wilderness, by the Ministry of a Raven; and prepared
a Dinner for Daniel in the Lions Den, where that speech of King David's was
literally fulfilled, when he said: The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but
they who seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. So the Widow of
Sarepta for a morsel of bread, which she gave the Prophet, when she had not a
whole Loaf for her self, was sustained with all her Family by a Miracle, The
barrel of her meal never wasting, or her cruse of oil failing, until the famine
was removed out of the Land.

These things, as the Apostle says, were written for our Instruction, to show
us, that God will not falsify his promises, but rather work Miracles than let
those perish, who, trusting to them, relieved other men's wants. After so many
promises, and such instances of the fulfilling of them; A doubting heart (says
that Charitable Saint, Cyprian) would become no man, who belongs to the
household of faith. No! says that Holy Father ( V^t. Cyprper Pont^um ejus
Diaconum.
who sold a great Estate, and gave it to the Poor, before he was baptized)
doubting thoughts in this case are sacrilegious, and to want Faith in this
point, is to treat Christ like the Pharisees, who being covetous derided him,
when he exhorted them to make themselves friends of the false unconstant
Mammon, and, by so doing, oblige God to commit unto them the true, and lasting
riches.

In know, it is often objected against this Doctrine, that Charitable Men, and
their Children sometimes fall from Plenty into Poverty, and suffer as much by
want, as those who hardened their hearts against the Poor.

To which I answer, That such Instances are rare, and seldom happen, but when
Charitable Men suffer with others in common judgments, when, as Heathen
Apologists for Gods Providence have observed, God visiting a Nation, or a City,
as such, must punish Good with the Bad.

2ly, Of those few Instances, which otherwise may be brought, it is doubtful,
whether those esteemed Charitable Men, were really so, or no? For as there is
an Art of appearing Rich, or Learned, when Men are not; so there is Art of
appearing Charitable; and of that small number of Men, reputed Charitable, who
come to suffer want, it may very well be presumed, that a great part of them
were such only, as had the Name, and Reputation of being Charitable, without
being so indeed.

3ly, Of those that are really Charitable, really, I mean, as to the eyes of
Men, many do not, or cannot give aright: and so their Charity, though it be
real, as to the material performance of it, yet through other defects it is
false, and vicious, and not that true genuine Charity, which has a right unto
the promises of God. Such is the Charity of those Pharisees, who give to be
seen of Men, and all extorted or disproportionable Charity, which is given too
sparingly, and grudgingly, and does not proceed from a Charitable, Free, and
Compassionate mind. Likewise Charity of those, who give Alms to cover their
Injustice, Extortion, and Oppression, and who foolishly think to satisfy God by
their Almes-giving, before they have made restitution unto Men. This is to
offer unclean Beasts, and unhallowed Bread upon the Altar; to bring the hire of
a Whore, or the price of a Dog into the House of the Lord, which are
Abomination unto him; or, as Malachy speak, To cover the Altar of the Lord with
tears, with weeping, and with crying out; for such offerings, are the Tears of
Widows, and Bread of Orphans; and as St. Basil well observes (...), they shall
be imparted to the giver, as if he had robbed a Man. The Sacrifice of the
wicked (says Solomon) is an abomination to the Lord, especially when he
brings it with a wicked mind; and he that sacrifices of a thing wrongfully
gotten, says Siracides, his offering is ridiculous, and whosoever brings an
offering of the goods of the poor, his offering is not accepted, but he does as
one, who kills the Son before his Fathers eyes. Likewise the Charity of
those, who live in Schism, and Communicate at private Altars, in opposition to
the public, is (...), utterly unacceptable to God; for where Charity is
genuine, the fruits of it will appear in a love of Union, and in an endeavor
to preserve the unity of the spirit, or spiritual union, in the bond of peace.
But the Schism of the Spiritual Corah, as St. Passim in Tract de unit. Eccles.
Cathol.
Cyprian observes, makes his Prayers to be no Prayers, his Sacraments no
Sacraments, and his Alms by consequence to be no Alms. Nay, he says, though
he were a Confessor greater than Solomon, and should suffer death for Christ,
yet he could not dye a Martyr, nor obtain a Crown of Martyrdom, if he dyed in
his Schism, as it is written, Though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor,
and give my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it profits me nothing.
Hither I may also refer the Charity of those, who, living in the practice of
any other known sin, think to atone God by Almsgiving, and procure an easier
Pardon, or perhaps an Indulgence from him by their good works. Thus many do,
especially among the Papists, who, mistaking the Texts, which speak of the
atoning virtue of Charity, run into two mistakes, First, That they trust in the
opus operatum, or bare performance of Alms-doing. and 2ly, That they think to
be justified by them from chosen and presumptuous, as well as from erroneous
and surprising, sins. In all these cases, though Charity, as to the matter is
Real, yet as to the manner of giving, or intention, and incapacity of the
giver, it is not Genuine, but altogether Spurious, and has no Title to any
reward from God.

But Fourthly, there is one case, where Charity being both real and genuine,
the Charitable Man comes to great want, but not by his Charity, but for want of
thrift, frugality, and temperance, being profuse and expensive in his Apparel,
or Diet, or Buildings, or Sports, or Furniture, or Entertainments; and in this
case, Men are often mistaken in the true cause of the Charitable Man's Poverty,
attributing that to his Charity, which indeed ought to be ascribed to his
foolish Prodigality, and want prudence in managing his Estate.

In the Fifth place, a Charitable Man, who is grown Rich by the special
Blessing of God, may sometimes, like the Good Man in the Famous Parable of the
Pilgrim, and Angel, begin to grow Covetous, and set his Heart upon his Riches,
which may oblige God in kindness to him to blast his Estate, and reduce him to
a low Condition, to secure the Salvation of his Soul. Or else, God may foresee,
that if he should let him dye Rich, his Children would abuse those Riches to
Luxury, and Riot, and other sinful Excesses; and so out of his tender Fatherly
care over Him, and His, reduce them both to a poor Condition, wherein though they
have not the greater Blessing of giving, yet they shall have the lesser, to
receive.

These and such like Solutions are a perfect Answer to the former Objection,
and perfectly reconcile the Promises of God to Charity, and the want, and
penury, to which They, or their Children are sometimes reduced, who are, or
seem to be, Charitable Men. Wherefore let God and his Word be true, and every
man a Liar, and let none, who confesses the Name of Jesus, question the Truth
of so many Promises in the Old and New Testament, but rest upon this Principle,
as a certain, and never failing truth, That the Charitable man, notwithstanding
his Charity, shall always have enough, and that God will take care, that He and
His shall never suffer by want.

Exhortation. Having now showed, that doing of Alms is a great Duty, and that
the doing of them is very acceptable to God, and beneficial unto Men; more
especially having shown, that God will take care, that the Charitable Man,
shall, notwithstanding his Charity, always have enough; I now proceed in the
last place, to exhort you to the Practice of this Duty, and if ever
Exhortations to this Divine Duty were proper, and seasonable, they are at this
time in this Nation, where Riches, and Property, by Gods special Blessing, are
met together, but more especially in this City, the Crowning, or Imperial City,
whose Merchants, as the Prophet speaks, are Princes, and whose Traffickers are
the Honorable of the Earth. Here it is, that Riches and Plenty, and therefore
here it is, that Charity ought to Reign. The King has done here, what Solomon
did in Jerusalem; by his Auspicious Reign, and Princely Care for Trade, and
Navigation, he has made Silver as plentiful, as Stones, not that Plate and
Money is here, as common as Stones, any more, than it was in Jerusalem, but
that there is enough of it in the Chests, and Coffers of the Rich, to make it,
with the usual liberty of speaking, as commons, as the Stones in the Streets.

Therefore to you, who have it in so great abundance, and such ample Revenues
issuing from your Lands, or Trade; to you, who have gotten Riches by Gods
Blessing; and to you, who, by Gods Blessing too, have Riches, which you never
got; to you all, who any ways possess Estates by Gift; Inheritance, or
Purchase, by your own sweat, or by the sweat of your Ancestors, in the Change,
or in the Shop, in the Court, or in the Camp, on the Bench, or at the Bar; to
you all, and every one of you, I indifferently address my self in the Words of
the Son of Sirach, Give unto the most High, according as he has enriched thee,
and, as thou have gotten, give with a cheerful mind.

Remember, I beseech you, that Charity is not an Arbitrary thing, which may be
done, or lest undone at discretion, (as too many think) but a necessary duty
incumbent upon all Rich men, who have a manifold obligation to make Provision
for the Poor, resulting, from the Common Nature, and Original of Mankind; from
the Nature of Humane Societies, whereof the Poor are Members with the Rich; and
from the Trust, which God has reposed in the former, as his Stewards to supply
the necessities of the latter. Hence it comes to pass, that the word for
Charity, and Charitable in the Old Testament, and in the Language, which our
Lord spoke, signifies Righteousness, and Righteous, to let us understand, that
Almsdeeds is a debt, which we owe to God, and to the Poor.

As for God, consider what it is he requires of thee for his Poor; a Bullock
out of thine Heard, a Shock or two out of thy Harvest, a small Quit-rent for
the great Estate thou hold of him, a little Tribute, the Tenth, or Twelfth,
or at least the Twentieth part of all thy just Gains, and Revenues, and this,
as thou have heard, will be kindly taken of him, and oblige him to bless thee,
and thine the more.

Wherefore plead not the number of thy Children against the Duty of Charity, as
the Men of this World are wont to do, say not in thy Heart to the Poor, as the
Wise said unto the Foolish Virgins in the Parable, We have not enough for us,
and you; but remember Job, who had ten Children, seven Sons, and three
Daughters, and yet his Charity was so great, that, as we read in the 29th.
Chapter, He was a Father to the Poor, Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame.
And besides his great Expenses upon this account, as Cyprian well observes, in
answer to this unworthy Plea, he daily offered up Burnt-offerings according to
the number of his Children; and therefore, if thou would have God bless thy
numerous Offspring, the Pledges of his Love which he has given thee, oblige
him to take care of them by thy daily Oblations, by setting something aside of
thy daily income for Charitable uses, for such are the Sacrifices under the
Gospel, and with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. I am very confident, that
one great cause of the usual infelicities, which attend those, the World calls
Great Fortunes, is to be ascribed to the worldly-mindedness of their
Progenitors, who, as they increased in Wealth, did not increase in Charity,
never considering, that he that has mercy on the Poor, honors his Maker,
and he that gives Alms, sacrifices praise. There is, says Solomon, that
withholds more than is meet, but it tends to Poverty: Which I desire those
to consider, who neither living, nor dying will spare one out of ten, or twenty
thousand Pounds to Charitable uses from their Children, it may be but from one
Child; who by that means comes to Inherit the unsanctified Riches of his Father
without the blessing of God.

But more especially, I desire those to consider the great Obligation which
lies upon them to do good Works, Who heap up Riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them, I mean those to whom God has given great Estates, and no
Children, and among them, more especially, such as have no reasonable hopes of
Issue, having dead bodies, as the Apostle said of Abraham^ and who perhaps are
yet unresolved, who shall Inherit after them, the Next of Blood, as Heir at
Law, or it may be a Stranger, whom they do not yet know, as Testamentary Heir.

God seems by his special Bounty, and Providence to call and invite these Men
above all others, to give their Estates to Charitable uses, as to Found, or
Endow Hospitals for the Nurture of exposed Infants; or the ingenuous Education
of poor Orphans; or the Reception and Cure of Sick, Maimed, or Wounded Persons;
or for the Maintenance, and Consolation of the Incurable and Aged; or for the
Government of poor Lunaticks, and Distracted persons; or for the Correction of
vagrant, sturdy, and idle Beggars; to whom it is an abuse of Charity to give,
because, as St. Basil observes in his discourse of Almsgiving, We shall
minister by our Alms not to their necessities, but to their idleness, and lusts.

To these I ought to add the Erection of Workhouses, which are yet wanting in
this great City, to complete the Economy of her Hospitals: And because there
are different inclinations among Charitable Men to different sorts of Charity,
give me leave to recommend unto you the endowment of poor Vicariges, and
Erecting of Hospitals for Poor Clergy-mens Widows, which would atone God in a
great measure for the Sacrilege of former Ages, for which, among other causes
of his displeasure, I verily believe these three Nations do yet smart.

I will also put you in mind of establishing a Found for Endowing of poor
Maids, who have lived so many years in Service, and of building Schools, or
Colleges for the Education of young Women, much like unto those in the
Universities, for the Education of young Men, but with some alteration in the
Discipline, and Economy, as the nature of such an Institution would require.

Such Colleges might be so ordered, as to become security to your Daughters
against all the hazards to which they are exposed at private Schools, and
likewise a security to the Government, that the Daughters of the Land should be
bred up according to the Religion now established in it, to the unconceivable
advantage of the Public, in rooting out Enthusiasme, with her Daughters
Schsime, both which are upheld by nothing among us so much, as by the Women,
who are so silly and deceiveable for want of Ingenious, and Orthodox Education,
and not for want of Parts. Methinks the Rich and Honorable Ladies of the
Church of England, the Elect Ladies of her Apostolical Communion should be
Zealous to begin, and carry on such a work, as this; which upon more accounts,
than I have mentioned, would make the Daughters of Israel be glad, and the
Daughters of Judah and Jerusalem rejoice.

Hitherto I have spoken to the Rich of the first, and second Rank, not to
excuse those, who have the good things of this World in a less proportion, but
because they are not of Ability to do Works of standing, and perpetual Charity,
as the others are. However God excepts his Quota of every one of them, For the
administration of this Service, according to what he has, and not according to
what he has not.

If thou can not spare a Talent, thou can spare a Pound to a work of
Charity, or if thou can not spare a Pound, thou can spare a Crown, or a
Shilling, or, as the poor Widow, who ought to be mentioned wherever the Gospel
is preached, a Penny, or a Mite.

If thou can not Found a Church, or an House of Charity, thou can
Contribute to the building, or repairing of it; thou can spare a Gift now and
then to, a poor Housekeeper, or to a poor Debtor to set him out of Prison; or
thou can Present a poor Minister, who is a man of Parts and Piety, and yet
sits privately mourning in his Study for want of necessary Books. To these good
ends, and purposes, thou may Erect a Private Bank for Charity out of thy own
Frugality, and Temperance, and make thy Back, and Belly give Alms, if thou have
not a mind to set aside a part of thy ordinary Gains for good Works. But if
thou art Perfect, thou will do this, that is to say, if thou have tender Bowels
of compassion, as thy Savior had, Who said, it was more blessed to give, than
to receive.

This is thy Duty, and if thou shall do it with a cheerful heart, Blessed shall
thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be in the Field. Blessed shall be
the fruit of thy Body, the fruit of thy Ground, the fruit of thy Cattle, the
increase of thy Kine, and the Flocks of thy Sheep. The Lord shall command a
Blessing upon thy Storehouses, make thee plenteous in Goods, and bless in all
that thou set thine hand unto.

To conclude the whole matter, Charity is the most speedy, and effectual means
to reconcile God to a Church, or Nation, as well as to a single Man. It is a
most Divine Virtue, which will oblige God to dwell among us, and shelter us
under the Wings of his Divine Majesty. It will make him become unto us a Cloudy
by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night, it will make him fight our Battles, and
scatter our Enemies, and be as a Wall of Brass round about us. It will make him
lengthen the Days of our Gracious King, and preserve him against all
Conspiracies. It will keep our Cities from Fire and Plague, our Fields from
Mildews and Blastings, our Ships from Wrack, our Religion from Popery, and
Enthusiasme, the Government from Usurpation, and our Purses, and Estates from
Arbitrary Power.

In a word, it will help us all to an happy, and glorious Resurrection, and to
appear with joy, and comfort at the day of Judgment, when, standing at the
right hand of our Lord, we shall hear him say unto us; Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world.
For I was hungry, and you gave me meat, I was thirsty, and you gave me drink, I
was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked I was, and ye clothed me, I was sick,
and you visited me, I was in prison, and you came unto me, to pay my debts and
set me free. All this you did for my sake, to my Poor Members, whom you always
had with you; And in as much as you did it unto them, ye did it unto me.

Thus much for the general Exhortation unto the great duty of Charity; I shall
conclude it with another more particular, which for your further Encouragement,
I was desired by the Governors of the Hospitals to read.

A true REPORT of the great number of Poor Children, and other Poor People,
Maintained in the several HOSPITALS, under the pious care of the LORD MATOR,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of LONDON, the year last past.
CHildren put forth Apprentices, Christ's Hospital
and discharged out of Christ's Hospital, the year last past 101. Ten whereof
being instructed in the MATHEMATICS and NAVIGATION, were placed forth
Apprentices to Commanders of Ships, out of the Mathematical School, in the said
Hospital, Founded, for the benefit of this Kingdom, by the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty 101 Children buried the year last past 12 Children now remaining under
the Care and Charge of the said Hospital 712.

They being so many in number, and the Charges of keeping them so great, (and
the Hospital having sustained great Losses by the late lamentable and dreadful
Fire,) it is hoped several good Christians will freely contribute toward the
maintenance of the said Children: The certain Revenue of the said Hospital
being little more than the Moiety of the necessary Charges thereof.

THere have been Cured in the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, S. Bartholomew 's
Hospital.
the year last past, of Wounded, Sick, and Maimed Persons, though (as it has
pleased God) the greatest part of the Revenues of the said Hospital was
consumed by the late dreadful Fire 1793 Buried this year after much charges on
them 227 Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital 237

THere have been Cured, S. Thomas Hospital.
and Discharged, this year last past, in the Hospital of St. Thomas in
Southwark, of Wounded, Sick, and Maimed Persons, though (as it has pleased
God) not only a principal part of their Revenue was consumed in the dreadful
Conflagration in this City, 1666; but also the best of their remaining houses
were wholly burnt down in the great dismal Fire in Southwark, which happened in
May, 1676, wherein also the Site of this Hospital it self was very much
damnified, and very likely to have been destroyed 1410 Buried, this year last
past, after much Charge in the time of their Sickness 232 Remaining under Cure
at the Charge of the said Hospital 291

REceived this last year into the Hospital of Bridewel, Bindewel Hospital.
Vagrants, and other Indigent and Miserable People 822 Maintained in the said
Hospital and brought up in diverse Arts and Trades, at the only Charge of the
said Hospital, Apprentices, notwithstanding (it pleased God) the Hospital, and
all the Houses within the Precinct thereof, (which was the greater part of its
Revenue) were wholly consumed by the late dreadful Fire; besides the great Loss
sustained in the remains of its Revenue by two terrible Fires; the one in June
1673; and the other in November last, 168^, which happened in Wapping 223

Bethlem Hospital.
BRought into Bethlem Hospital the last year Distracted Men and Women 75 Cured
of their Lunacy, and discharged thence the said year 41 Distracted Persons
buried the last year 13 Now remaining there under Cure, and provided with
Physic, Diet, and other Relief, at the Charge of the said Hospital 118

The Charge whereof is great, and the Revenue of the said Hospital so small, as
not to amount to one half part of the yearly Expenses thereof; and the Building
of the Old Hospital of Bethlem being Ruinous, and not Capacious to receive and
contain the great number of Distracted Persons, for the admission of whom,
daily applications are made to the Governors thereof; a more commodious House
was Erected; in the Building and Finishing whereof, the Governors of the said
Hospital, have laid out and disbursed above Seventeen Thousand Pounds, whereby
not only the Stock of the said Hospital is Expended, but the Governors thereof
have been necessitated to take up several great Sums of Money for the Finishing
the same, for which they pay Interest. And therefore the said Hospital is a
very fit object of all good men's Charity, to do as God shall enable them,
toward the relief of the said poor Lunaticks, and payment of their Debts;
There having been, and daily are, by the Blessing of God, and the Charge of the
said Hospital, and the Care of those that are entrusted therewith, diverse
reduced to their former Senses.

These are the fruits of their Charity, who have gone before us in the Faith;
God give us grace to follow their good Example, that with them we may be
partakers of Eternal Glory, though Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, Eternal Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Glory, now, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

