The Fourth Part of Naked Truth: OR, THE COMPLAINT OF THE CHURCH To some of Her
SONS For breach of HER ARTICLES.

In a Friendly Dialogue between TITUS and TIMOTHY, both Ministers of the Church
of England.

By a Legal Son, and sincere Conformist to the Church of England, as
established by Law.

Non recipit mendacium veritas; nec patitur religio impietatem.

D. Hillar. Non temere dico, sed ut affectus sum, ac ut sentio, non arbitror
Sacerdotes multos esse, qui salvi fiant: sed multo plures qui pereant.

Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Act. Apost. Neque enim aliorum salutem sedulo unquam
curabit, qui suam negligit.

Calvin. LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1682.

Naked Truth, THE FOURTH PART.
Titus. REverend Tim, well met: I have thought long for a little serious
discourse with thee; and now opportunity favors me: Come, here a convenient
Arbor, let us sit down and enjoy one another one quarter of an hour.


Tim. Enjoy one another! prithee, I cannot enjoy my self.


Tit. Bless me! What do mean?


Tim. I mean I cannot, I will not talk.


Tit. I confess you have some ill symptoms upon you; are you not well, Sir? --


Tim. No, not so well as I would be.


Tit. Why, who, or what would you be?


Tim. I would be a Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, or a fat Pastor at least. --


Tit. I commend thee Tim; as mad as thou art, I see thou will wish no harm to
thy self. And though I never reckoned thy Stars so lucky, as to exalt thee to a
Bishopric or Deanary, yet were it not that thy threadbear Cassock and
superannuated Beaver suit it not, I should have thought a lusty Parsonage, or
plentifully endowed Vicaridge had been thy lot long ere this.


Tim. No in truth, no such plumbs will fall in my dish.


Tit. Where lies thy misfortune?


Tim. In my Conformity, which is too scanty; yet I know not any punctilio
required, wherein I have failed.


Tit. Failed! no, thou art so perfectly innocent in this matter, that if thou will call me before the Bishop, I will witness for thee.


Tim. Witness! what will you witness?


Tit. That which, if any thing, will do you a kindness, and help you to your
desired preferment.


Tim. What Is that?


Tit. In short, I can testify (verbo Sacerdotis), that thou art so far from
being defective, that thou art redundant, out-doest the Act for Conformity it
self in Practice, and many of the 39. Articles in Doctrine.


Tim. Good Mr. Titus, you make my heart leap within me; I should begin to be
proud of my self, if you would but explain your meaning. --


Tit. Nay, not too proud Tim neither; for you are not the only man does this,
there are many, too many such Conformists, besides you.


Tim. Good still; The more the merrier.


Tit. True, but the fewer the better cheer.


Tim. Well, but your meaning: You say, I (and some others) outdo the very Act
of Conformity in Practice, and many of the 39. Articles in Doctrine, -- Your
meaning now?


Tit. That is, in plain English, you use those Ceremonies which the Act for
Uniformity enjoins not; and preach such Doctrines as the Articles of our Church
(the standing Rule next the Scriptures for our preaching) allow not. This do
you, and many more of our brethren in the Church.


Tim. It Is easily said, but how do you prove it?


Tit. The thing proves it self, only by having recourse to the Act, and to the
Articles, and comparing what you do and say with these touchstones. But before
we meddle with proof, let me ask thee a question or two Tim, and prithee answer
me seriously; come, here is no body hears but thee and I. -- First, did thou
ever peruse the Act of Uniformity?


Tim. Never in all my life: what need I? I know my duty without reading the Act.


Tit. Huge well no doubt; -- Next, did you ever for you never yet were
possessed of a Benefice, though you often possess the Pulpit for half an hour,
or so); did you, I say, ever seriously read and consider the Articles of our
Church?


Tim. No, neither.


Tit. But you have subscribed them, have you not?


Tim. Yes.


Tit. And not read them?


Tim. No.


Tit. A hopeful youth; I wish you were single: subscribe you know not what! and
this makes you preach you know not what; rise a note beyond Ela, and to out do
all your sober brethren, preach down the Doctrines of the Church you ought to
maintain, and destroy with your tongue what you have subscribed to preserve
with your hand. This makes our enemies on both sides laugh in their sleeves, to
see so many profound Drs. sin for ignorance sake, and some for interest sake
rend in pieces our very foundations, preach and write contrary to each other,
as if the only contest were, not who shall be the honestest and most
conscientious, but the greatest Churchman: For go to this Congregation, and
there Dr. Socinus preaches; to that, and there the Reverend Arminius holds
forth; to a third, and there the much admired Calvin is reading a Geneva
Lecture; yet all of the Church of England, and all subscribers to her Articles.
-- This is fine indeed, don't you think so?


Tim. I shall think nothing till you come to prove something.


Tit. Well remembered: First then I am to prove, that you (and many more of your
Cue) use some Ceremonies which the Act of Uniformity does not enjoin, and
consequently do more than you need, or shall have thanks for from our Lawmakers.


Tim. Ay that, prove that.


Tit. Thus then Tim; That Act requires the use of no more Ceremonies than are
contained and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; The Act for Uniform.
Caroli 2d. 14.
if therefore you use any Ceremonies not contained and prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer, you use more than the Act requires --


Tim. What are those Ceremonies contained and prescribed in the Liturgy or
Common Prayer Book?


Tit. The Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. --


Tim. Goodman Ninny, and do I use any more than these?


Tit. Yes, Goodman Confidence, and more besides you too.


Tim. Which be they?


Tit. What think you of bowing at the name of Jesus, and bowing to or toward
the Altar? Are not these as much, and as great Ceremonies as either of the
former?


Tim. Granted, and as innocent too.


Tit. That Is not the case, but are they enjoined? For if saying this or that is
an innocent Ceremony, will justify the making and use of it, we may quickly
have as many as the Church of Rome her self; and then what is become of our
Reformation; for all her Ceremonies are innocent, her self being Judge? -- But
where, I say again, are these required?


Tim. In the Liturgy, are they not?


Tit. Not in that which my Churchwardens bought for me; and they tell me, they
are sure they bought the newest Edition.


Tim. I Will protest you have stunded me; Ple consider of it.


Tit. Consider it! be ashamed of it; for you transgress the Law as much in
adding to, as in taking from what is contained and prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer: for the Act establishes that, and no other; the Ceremonies
therein contained, and no more. For your fuller satisfaction read the words of
the Act in this point; they are these, -- And be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that no form or order of Common Prayers, administration of
Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies (mark that) shall be openly used in any Church,
Chapel, or other public place of, or in any College or Hall in either of the
Universities, etc. other than what is prescribed and appointed to be used in
and by the said Book (note that also). And lest once mentioning of this should
not be sufficient, you have afterward (when the said Book, with the Prayers,
Rites and Ceremonies prescribed and appointed by it, is named) these words (and
no other) again repeated. -- What think you now Tim?


Tim. I think bowing toward the Altar, and bowing at the name of Jesus are
works of supererogation, and not at all meritorious; For the Act seems not only
not to enjoin them, but to forbid them, in as much as they are no where
contained in the said Book.


Tit. Thus you give offense, and become a scandal to weak brethren where you
need not, nay in things you ought not.


Tim. I see it, and hope I shall avoid it for the future, and shall endeavor,
my brethren of the Clergy about me may do the same.


Tit. I wish they may. But there is that which is far worse than all this.


Tim. What should that be, brother Titus?


Tit. Thank you Sir, for that friendly title; I wish we of the Clergy were all
true brethren in heart and deed; that we might all speak and do the same
things, as our Rule requires: I am pleased, I say, with this expression of
amity, and 'twill make me the more free in my talk with you, as well as serious.


Tim. The more free the more grateful; for you have gained upon me by your
plain dealing and strong arguments. Go on brother, with what you were about to
say was worse than the addition of those Ceremonies.


Tit. It Is this, brother, That many of our public Preachers, some ignorantly,
some (I fear) designedly, oppose and preach down the very Articles of our
Church, which they have subscribed, and which we all are bound to maintain and
keep close to, which has been matter of great grief to me to consider.


Tim. But surely there are none do this.


Tit. As sure as you are there, too many; and, if I mistake not, you for one,
and that too often. --


Tim. I am not conscious to my self I do, or ever did.


Tit. I confess I have so much charity as to think so, and that your sin is a
sin of ignorance, because you said but now, you never read the Articles. Though
I must tell you, Tim, it is vincible ignorance; for that you have not read them,
is your own fault. --


Tim. No I profess, they are so scarce to be got, that I know not where to have
them; and I withal so short of money, that I know not how to purchase them.


Tit. To remove this obstacle, and cure your ignorance in some measure, here
they are: I hope you can read as well as preach. --


Tim. Yes, yes, I am not so ignorant neither; pray let me see them.


Tit. Hold, not without Conditions.


Tim. What are they?


Tit. Nay, reasonable enough: First, that you will stay so long here as to read
them over deliberately; and Secondly, admit of a short debate, as we pass
along, upon some of them; and then tell me, whether I do any wrong to you and
many others, in saying, that your Doctrines and theirs do not admirably well
agree with them: For I meddle only with those that have subscribed, yet do not
keep to them.


Tim. All this is highly reasonable, and I readily yield to it.


Tit. Begin then, and read carefully, not hastily. --


Article 1.
Tim. There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts,
or passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the maker and preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be
three persons, of one substance, power and eternity, the Father, the Son and
the holy Ghost.


Tit. Hold now, what think you of this Article?


Tim. Mighty well, sound and good, and no body surely but believe and approve
it, both in part and in whole.


Tit. I am afraid not; how else come you (and many others) to discourse
sometimes against, and deride what is contained in it? I don't mean the being
of a God; for though some in their works (and with David's fool in their hearts)
say there is no God; yet I know you dare not do it in words. But that which is
next door by, they dare and do say.


Tim. What Is that?


Tit. That there is no Providence.


Tim. Admit it, wherein does that cross this Article, that has not a word of
Providence in it? I don't see but a man may think so, and yet safely subscribe
this Article.


Tit. Right, it is what I expected, and doubtless there are many of your
judgment; but what if I prove a Divine Providence governing the world, and all
that there is; and after that, prove too, that this first Article of our Church
plainly asserts it?


Tim. Then I shall say, I never understood it.


Tit. A worthy satisfaction for your gross, wilful ignorance, and the great
mischief you have thereby done to the Christian Religion, and the Church of God
established amongst us. Tell me, what think you of those words of our Savior,
Mat. 18.29, 30.
Not a Sparrow falls to the ground without your father; and the hairs of your
head are all numbered? I think this bids fair to prove a protecting,
preserving, disposing providence, and that not only as to the great changes and
revolutions in Kingdoms and Nations, but even as to smaller matters, such as
relate to you, and me, and every man; nay, to the very beasts and birds. And he
that shall seriously consider the workings of God now in the world, and even in
that spot of it which we inhabit; and think how the wise and profound
Politicians of Rome are baffled in their enterprises, and detected in their
hellish Plots and Counsels, even beyond their expectation or belief, must
either put out the eye of his Reason, or else he must needs see and adore a
special hand of Providence acting for us to admiration -- What prevented the
further designed mischief from taking place, when London was put in flames, if
providence did not? How came the late (as well as former) Popish Plot against
King, the Kingdom, our Religion and Lives, to light, but by providence? In a
word Tim, think, and then say, what was the safeguard of our present gracious
Sovereign in many battles, when diverse fell on his right hand and left, in
sundry pursuits, and in foreign Countries, and what restored him to his Rights,
Crowns and people without the least opposition, and with an universal consent,
and unheard of acclamations of joy, but wonderful providence? Certainly there
was as great a Concatenation of providence in his preservation and return, as
in the fall and rise of Joseph (God give his Majesty an heart to remember and
improve it!) or in Job's, David's case, or any recorded in holy Writ I cannot
therefore disapprove the ingenuous return of a Scholar coming for Orders, and
being asked by his Poser, how he proved a providence, answered (it being
quickly after the Kings Restoration), redeunte Carolo. And certainly wanted we
other instances, that is sufficient and high enough alone.


Tim. This is something, but not enough.


Tit. Enough surely to any but an Epicurean.


Tim. An Epicurean, what is that? Call me no hard names, if you do, you will move
my Choler.


Tit. I shall be sorry for that; but if I should, I Will endeavor to make you
amends, by laying it again.


Tim. Tell me then, why do you call me Epicurean?


Tit. Because I take you to be one of Epicurus his Scholars.


Tim. Epicurus! who is he? 'Slid! this is insufferable, Epicurus, and Epicurean!
-- Farewell Sir, I Will have no more of this.


Tit. Patience man a little, and hear who this Epicurus was; He was a certain
ancient Gentleman, Tutor to Mr. Hobbs, whom I suppose you well knew. --


Tim. You have abated my heat a little, by naming that person, worthy Mr.
Hobbs, profound, non-such Mr. Hobbs.


Tit. I knew how to nick you; I know you are well acquainted with his works.


Tim. Huge well; I have read them all, and delight to read them.


Tit. More than to read the old doting Fathers, the crabbed Schoolmen, or any
modern Divine, not to say the Scriptures themselves? --


Tim. I think he that reads Hobbs, reads all that is to be read, can be read,
or is worth the reading. But what is all this to Epicuran?


Tit. You mistake Tim, it is Epicurean; and the short is this, Mr. Hobbs denies
a providence, he learned it of Epicurus; you deny a providence, being taught so
of Mr. Hobbs; and so you are either an Epicurean or an Hobbist, which you
please Tim; Though I styled you after the first, as being the more ancient, and
so I thought the more honorable. --


Tim. Well, if this be all you mean by Epicurean, I shall own it for Mr. Hobbs
and sake, and am of his opinion, and shall be, notwithstanding what you have
urged --


Tit. I am sorry for it; but if what I have inferred from the words of Christ
prevail not, what think you of the opinion of a grave Divine and good Christian?


Tim. I don't know, who is it?


Tit. One that no doubt understood the Articles of our Church very well; Herb,
on Provid.
hear what he says, and you will judge who I mean --


O sacred Providence, who from end to end,
Strongly and sweetly movest! shall I write,
And not of thee, through whom my fingers bend
To hold my Quill? shall they not do thee right?
Of all the Creatures --

Tim. Hold, here is enough, it is Herbert, but little to my conviction.


Tit. I was afraid so; but will you be determined by a whole Church?


Tim. Now you come close, could you but find a whole Church owning this.


Tit. I think it is no hard matter.


Tim. What Church, and where I pray?


Tit. The Church of England, and in this very Article you have now read, and
that in these words, -- There is but one living and true God, -- Maker and
Preserver of all things. Now how will you grant God to be the Preserver of all
things to this very moment, and not allow of Providence? -- And to assure you
this is her meaning, the prayers of our Church are answerable to her faith, v.
Coll. for the 8th Sunday after Trin, Whose never failing Providence, etc.


Tim. Preserver! I profess it is so, Preserver and never failing Providence! I
never minded it before. This has somewhat in it to your purpose more than I
have noted.


Tit. Something in it! for shame Tim, knock under: what, subscribe such an
Article as this, and to the use of such a prayer as this, and yet deny
Providence? Must God preserve the world, and yet not be at the least concerned
in any thing done in the world? O nonsense! stupidity! the very Heathens spoke
more like Divines and Christians than you, and the rest of your Atheistical
gang. Hear what one of them says (and he none of the best neither), Seneca I
mean, who calls God, the Keeper and Governor of the whole world; a mind, a
spirit, the Lord and Artificer (or Creator of all the world), he to whom every
name agrees. Will you call him fate? You will not be out; for he it is on whom
all things depend. Will you call him Providence? You will say right; for by his
counsel the world is provided, and taken care for, that it remains steady,
Custodem, Rectoremque universi, animum and spiritum, mundani hu jus operis Do
minum and Artificem, cui nomen omne convenit. Vis illum fatum vocare? Non
errabis. Hic est, ex quo suspensa sunomnia, causa causarum. Vis illum
Providentiam dicere? Recte dices. Est enim cujus consilio huic mundo
providetur, ut in inconcussus eat, and actus suos explicet, Sen. Not. Qu. l. 2.
cap. 45.
and performs its operations -- Thus he. And Du-plessis, Lord of Morney, in
his Book of the trueness of Christian Religion, chapter 13. shows, that
Providence is abundantly owned by Plato, Plotinus, Hierocles, Aristotle, Cicero
and others. And in short, none but some of the most sensual and brutish
Epicureans, ever so much as called this in question. --


Tim. And suppose they do, What ill consequence can follow upon it?


Tit. Many and sad ones, though perhaps otherwise in your opinion; for first, you
hereby deny God's Mercy, Wisdom and Goodness, in that you suppose him to take
no care at all of, or regard to the numberless number of creatures that he has
made. Next, you abridge him of his Sovereignty, and take his Prerogative from
him, which is this, To dispense good and evil as he pleases; Is there evil in
the City and I have not done it, says the Lord? Amos,
Nay, you do in effect deny his being, and ungod him, to suppose him to sit
like an old man, idle in Heaven, and unconcerned at what is done here below.
Another sad consequence is, that all the signs in Heaven, Comets,
Blazing-stars, all heavy and sore Judgments upon Kingdoms in general, as War,
Plague, Fire, Famine, signify nothing; with all personal calamity and
afflictions: Pompin.
And that all good as well as evil comes by chance and fortune; that God has
no hand or providence in the dispensation of either, Consequently all ground
and reason of Thankfulness or Humiliation toward God vanishes, since her is
not to be owned either in the good we receive, or the the evil that we suffer
-- What think you of these things?


Tim. These are sad indeed.


Tit. Yet true and natural Inferences from your Doctrine; and if you would
speak out, you must own it: As a Divine of our Church once did, when being
exhorted by a Person of Quality to give God thanks for his good Providence in
raising him to such a Preserment, replied to this purpose, Providence! (says
he) thank my Money and my Friends, for without these I had gone without it, for
all Providence. Are not these trusty Lads to their Subscriptions of the
Articles!


Tim. Enough of this, Sir, I have done: Let us go on to the next. --


Artic. 2.
The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and Eternal God, of one substance with the Father, took man's
nature in the Womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance; so that two whole
and perfect Natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood, were joined
together in one person never to be divided; whereof is one Christ, very God and
very man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his
Father to us, and to be a sacrifice not only for Original guilt, but also for
actual sins of men.

Tit. This is another Article you and I have subscribed to, and profess to own,
and have promised to maintain.


Tim. And good reason; for I see nothing in it but what is sound and Orthodox;
and he deserves not the name of a Christian that says otherwise.


Tit. I am of your mind; yet I fear you have cracked some part of it in your
elaborate discourses ex tempore. To try you, I will only crave your Opinion of
one little branch of it; What think you of Original Sin?


Tim. I take it to be only a privation of Original Righteousness.


Tit. Now I know whereabouts you are; You are one of those subtle Gentlemen,
who subscribe the Articles of the Church of England, and when you have done,
preach the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, and Canons of the Council of Trent.
This is very pretty! a Popish Priest may do as much. Council of Trent, Sess, 3.
Can. 6.
But we will debate farther on this in its proper place, under Artic. 9. which
speaks as plain English in this point, as ever Article did. -- Go on therefore
to the next.


Artic. 3.
Tim. As Christ died for us, and was buried: so also it is to be believed, that
he went down into Hell.


Tit. Here is something in this Article will take up a little more of our time
than ordinary, because it is a matter of weight, and what I know you and I much
differ in?


Tim. What can that be? it is all mighty plain to me.


Tit. No doubt, since you never read it before; but when you have considered it
as often and thoroughly as I have done, perhaps you may hesitate as well as I, in
what sense we are to take the latter part of it, viz. So also it is to be
believed, that he went down into Hell. Pray what is your sense of it? and how
do you teach people to understand it?


Tim. That Christ did personally and locally go down into Hell, that is, into
the place or state of the damned, to suffer there; to conquer and overcome the
Devils in their place of residency, and to free those Souls that were detained
in Hell till Christ's descension thither.


Tit. I know some of the Ancients, and all the Papists are of this opinion; yet
I confess it is not clear to me, nor do I find any reason to think our Church
intends this sense in her Article. And if you will have patience with me, I
shall give you my Reasons for it.


Tim. I will exercise what patience I can; but pray be brief.


Tit. As brief as the weight of the matter will give me leave. To explain the
Terms of the Article a little [ He went down, or descended]: To descend, is
properly to to go down by bodily motion from an higher place to a lower: But in
a borrowed sense, or speech, it signifies a change of state, from better to
worse, from greater to meaner, as Isa. 47.1. Come down (or descend), and sit in
the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon [into Hell]: The word here Englished
Hell, in the Hebrew is Sheol, in Greek (...): And this I find is taken four
ways in Scripture; For the grave, or place of the dead, 1 King 2.6. For the
power of death, or state of the dead, appointed to all men, good and bad, as
Psalm. 89.48. For extreme humiliation or abasement, or such sorrow and pains as
may be compared to hellish sufferings, 1 Samuel 2.6. Psalm. 18.5. and for the
place and state of the damned, Luke 16.23. (...) and when he was in Hell Now in
which of these senses do you take it?


Tim. In the last, as without doubt our Church intends it.


Tit. That is, not in any, or all the three first, viz. the grave, the power of
death, or extreme abasement and hellish sufferings, but in the last, namely,
that Christ descended into the place of the damned, suffered in the same flames
wherein the rich man cries out he was tormented, and wherein the Devils
themselves and damned Spirits have suffered, do and shall suffer for ever.


Tim. Yes, I believe so, and shall never believe otherwise.


Tit. Perhaps you may, when you have heard what I have to ofter to the
contrary, which now follows: 1. It is not clearly recorded (as all other parts
of our Belief are) in Holy Scripture, that Christ did locally and personally
descend into the place and state of the damned: For the word (...) taken in
this sense, occurs but once in all the New Testament, viz. Luke 16.23. which is
not spoken of Jesus, but of Dives. Nor does the word there signify the place
of the damned, from the force or propriety of it, but from the circumstances
which are there noted: For Dives is not simply said to be (...), in inferno,
seu Gebenna, but in torments and flames. Moreover the Evangelists, who have
professedly delivered to us the whole History of our Savior, from his
Incarnation to his Ascension, have not made the least mention of his descention
into Hell in this sense.


Tim. Surely you are mistaken.


Tit. Discover where; And I cannot conceive they would have omitted it, had
Christ done it or had it been necessary to salvation to believe it:
Particularly, St. Luke writes nothing of it in his Gospel; in his Preface to
which, he tells Theophilus, That he would write to him in order of all those
things where of he had perfect understanding, Luke 1.3. And St. Paul,
rehearsing certain chief Heads which he had preached to his Corinthians,
mentions the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, but not his local
descension to the state and place of the damned (which had been a fit place and
opportunity to have inserted it); yet affirms, he had preached what would
suffice to salvation, if they were not wanting to themselves, 1 Cor. 15.1, to 5.


Tim. You begin to shake me, when I thought I had been invincibly settled, and
unconquerable: you give me soft words, but hard Arguments; have you any more
behind? for I think long till this combat is ended?


Tit. Yes, 2. I say further, that if Christ descended to the place or seat of
the damned, it was either in his soul, which the Scripture testifies went the
day (or moment of his Death) into Paradise, Luke 23.43. a place of Joy, not
torment; and in the same Chapter he says himself. He commended his soul into
the hand of his father, in the same sense no doubt, that St. Stephen did after
his example. Or else in his Body, which we are assured by the same Infallible
Spirit, was in the grave till the third day, the day of his Resurrection, Mat.
12.40. Or else in his Godhead; but to attribute descension to the Godhead is
improper, which is in all places at one and the same time; nor is the Godhead
subject to passion. How then did he descend?


Tim. Nay, I cannot particularize them, but surely it was necessary he should
do so.


Tit. Doubtless then it was done, for Christ omitted nothing necessary to be
done or suffered, in order to the great redemption he was sent to accomplish.
But as the Scripture does not clearly affirm it, so to me it seems not of
absolute necessity, in order to our redemption, that our surety should descend
to the place of the damned, and suffer there.


Tim. What are your reasons for this opinion?


Tit. Because the place of suffering is but a circumstance. Hell, the place of
the damned, is no part of the debt Christ was to pay; nor suffering there
locally, any part of payment, that we read of in the Gospel. As the surety may
satisfy the creditor in any place appointed for payment, or in open Court;
which being done, the debtor and surety are both acquitted, and need not go to
Prison: If they be cast into Prison, it is because they do not pay the debt; for
all that Justice requires, is the payment of the debt, to which the Prison is
merely extrinsecal. So the Justice of God cannot be satisfied for the
transgression of his law, but by the death of the sinner. Now it does not
require, that this be done, or this satisfaction be made in Prison, or in the
place of the damned; for the wicked go thither because they cannot pay the
debt, or make satisfaction. But our surety, Jesus Christ, who undertook the
debt for us, has made such full satisfaction on the Cross, that himself said,
just before he gave up the Ghost, Consummatum est, the work was finished. And
the Apostles so understood Christ, which made them ascribe all to his
suffering, or to the merit of his sufferings on the Cross, as spoiling of
principalities and powers; by which is meant the power of darkness, the Devils,
Col. 2.15. and the blotting out the handwriting that was against us, Col.
2.14. our reconciliation to God, Col. 1.20 and tell us, that he is able now to
render us unblameable and unreproveable in the sight of God, Col 22. Having by
that offering of himself, for ever perfected them that are sanctified, Heb.
10.14. And if God is satisfied, Man's Redemption perfected, and Believers
perfected by his Death, I can see no necessity of the following descension into
Hell.


Tim. This is all very rational and convincing. But what makes you think that
our Church does not understand it of a local descension, and require the belief
of it as necessary to Salvation?


Tit. Two things have raised in me such an opinion, viz. 1. Because she does
not here (nor any where else that I can find) give any such sense, or
interpretation of the words; which were a very dangerous omission, if the
belief of it were necessary to salvation. -- And 2. Because in her 8th Article,
where she mentions the 3. Creeds, which she affirms agreeable to Scripture,
viz. the Apostles, the Athanasian and Nicene Creed (which she not only allows,
but enjoins the use of in her Liturgy or public Service), has in the last of
these left the descention of Christ into Hell wholly out, which she certainly
would not have omitted, but have inserted it here as well as in the Athanasian,
had she thought the belief of it necessary to salvation, or designed to bind us
to the belief of it; for this were to render that Creed imperfect, which she
allows as perfect, and according to Scripture.


Tim. Really my Stomach begins to turn at a local descention; yet ere you can
work a full Conversion, you must Answer an Objection or two, which I have
swimming in my Noddle, against what you have said.


Tit. Out with them, Tim. and I Will do the best I can to cleanse thy Stomach and
Head too; the latter being (I fear) as much oppressed with ill Notions, as the
former is with ill Humors.


Tim. My first Objection is this, The Terrors and Torments which Christ
Suffered in his Soul upon the Cross, went before his Burial, but his descention
into Hell follows it in our Creed and Article: therefore his descention in Hell
concerns not these Torments.


Tit. Cunningly offered; this discovers thee either Knave or Fool in Logic,
which you like best: for the Minor of this Syllogism is faulty; alleging, Non
Causa pro Causa: or that for a Cause which is none. For know,

1. In the Creed, our Saviors Descention into Hell is put after his Burial, as
an Illustration of what went before touching his Sufferings or Passion, least
any thing should be detracted from it; and not that it was performed after it.
As if it had been said, He not only suffered in Body and Dyed, and was laid in
the Grave, but also suffered extreme Tortures, Hellish Torments in his Soul
too, such as made him cry-out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

2. And if you observe it, (Tim.) you will find all along in the Creed, a
Procession in the Passion of our Lord, from a lesser to a greater Suffering:
from the grief and pains of his Body, to those of his Soul. That he did suffer
in his Soul greatly, himself Affirms, and we all believe. Now where in all the
Creed can you find any thing that may express his Soul-sufferings, if not these
Words, He descended into Hell? He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified,
dead and buried, is all: which all might be, and he suffer in his body only;
and this the Thieves suffered, which were Crucified with him. But his
Descending into Hell, implys somewhat more, viz. Suffering in his Soul: which
is all the Judicious and Learned Hamon says on that Text, Ham. Act. 2.27.
Thou will. not leave my Soul in Hell. And it is therefore put last, or
mentioned after his Death and Burial, to show, that it was the greatest and
sharpest part of Christ's Sufferings.

3. Moreover, for the order of expressing it, I meet with the very same, Luke
16.23. The rich man dyed and was buried, and when he was in Hell, etc. No doubt
his Soul was in Hell before his Body was in the Grave; and yet his Burial is
put first by our Savior, and his Soul-sufferings afterward, as being only a
higher and farther degree of Misery. -- So in the Creed it is said, (or in the
Article) Christ was Dead, Buried, and descended into Hell; or suffered in his
Soul Hellish Torments, as the sense of Gods Wrath, the loss of Gods sight and
presence for a time, due for our Sins: -- Not that his Death was before his
Sufferings in his Soul, but these are mentioned last, as being the greatest,
far greater than the Death of the Body: and the highest degree of Christ's
Passion and Humiliation. And to Conclude otherwise, as that Christ could not,
or did not suffer in his Soul these Hellish Torments before his Death or
Burial, because mentioned after both; is all one as if you should infer, that
never any went to Hell before they were Buried; because it is said in that
forementioned Text, That the Rich man Died, was Buried, and when he was in
Hell, etc. which were a gross Error, and contrary to Scripture. Nay, then it
will follow, that the Soul cannot go to Hell, so long as the Body remains
unburied: an inference so absurd, that a man of any Reason or Religion, will
neither make nor own it. -- What say you Tim. are we over this style?


Tim. Pretty well, Thanks to you for the good lift you gave me; but there is
another yet behind, as hard to clamber as the former, at which I doubt we shall
both stick.


Tit. Never fear it, man, I Will heave with both hands, but I Will have you over,
now we are come thus far: What is it?


Tim. Seeing these words [He Descended into Hell] are so dubious, and have
caused such a Controversy, why are they not wholly left out of our Articles
and Creed?


Tit. I see you were more afraid than hurt; for your frightful Objection is
dwindled into a little Question: this Bar is so low, you may almost go over
without help, were you not so very weak. However, that I may not leave you
behind, know first, that every thing that is a Controversy, is not an Heresy,
either in matter of Doctrine or Faith, and therefore not presently to be
Expunged out of our Creed. And since it has been received by the Church in all
Ages (since the Fourth Century, as Bellarm. tells us) and being rightly
understood, contains in it a truth according to godliness, yea necessary to be
believed unto Salvation, as the Sufferings of Christ in his Soul, and
continuing in the state of the Dead for a time. I say, it being so ancient, and
(rightly) understood so necessary, we may not leave it out; but retain it to
the Edification of our Faith, and Consolation of our Souls.

Secondly, If because there has been some difference or dispute about the
meaning of this Phrase in our Creed or Articles, we should presently abandon
it, by the same Rule we must expunge many Texts of Scripture out of our Bible:
as, those that concern the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, Free Will,
Falling away from Grace, etc. Controverted by Learned men on both sides, and of
different Persuasions. This is no Rule for putting out of the Articles of our
Faith therefore, barely because Controversies have risen about the meaning and
sense of it. But I have been too prolix already, therefore let us dismiss this
Point.


Tim. No, I am so well satisfied, that I must entreat you to give me the Sum of
what you said, as brief as you can; for my Memory is very short: and I would
fain retain somewhat, if Possible.


Tit. The short then is this, There are I say these two different senses of
these words, He Descended into Hell. Which is the Opinion of some of the
Ancients, and all the Papists.
Some thereby understand literally a Local Descension into the Place or State
of the Damned, to conquer the Devils, and so set free those Souls, that were
kept in Hell, till Christ's Descension. Others understand no more than a further
degree of Humiliation, then his Death and Burial. Namely, the continuing under
the Power of Death for a time: or of the Sufferings in his Soul on the Cross;
whereon our Blessed Savior was humbled usque ad Inferni tremenda tormenta, or
endured for a time those Torments, Quae reprobi in aeternum sensuri sunt, Which
the wicked shall Eternally suffer in Hell. As the loss of the sense of Gods
favor, This is the Opinion of some Fathers, and most of our Modern Reformed
fines
the Malediction or Wrath of God in his Soul, which is Hell, or that Fire which
shall never be quenched; In which, Christ himself for a time was scorched for
our Sins. And therefore may truly enough be said, To Descend into Hell. These,
Brother Tim. are the two senses; which of these now do you apprehend the most
agreeable to Scripture and the Analogy of Faith?


Tim. The latter clearly.


Tit. Then we have done with this, your satisfaction being all I aim at in this
Discourse.


Tim. No, there is one little Question more comes into my mind, though I
question whether you can Answer it.


Tit. It may be not: for you know the Proverb,


Tim. But let us hear it.


Tim. Why did not our Bishops, when by His Majesty's Command at his first
Return, they inspected the Common Prayer, and Corrected some things in it, put
some gloss upon these words in the Creed, that we might not have been in the
Dark, as to their sense of them, which now we are?


Tit. It had been very easy for them to have done it, and why 'twas omitted, I
can give no reason, unless it was either because we should not know their
Opinion, or because (it may be) they were divided in their Opinions about it.
Or else, that they would not assume the Honor of doing all that was needful to
be done of this Nature, but leave some things to their Successors; among which,
this may be one. And in the next Edition, or next Generation (God grant the
Liturgy and Bishops to stand till then) you may expect it.


Tim. It Is well Replied, I will inquire no further. Let us proceed.


Article IV.
Christ did truly rise again from Death, and took again his body, with Flesh,
Bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's Nature, wherewith
he Ascended into Heaven, and there sits, until he return to Judge all men at
the Last Day.

Tit. The principal intents of this Article are the Resurrection, Ascension of
our Savior, with his Coming to Judgment; in either of which, I confess I
cannot charge you, nor I hope any one else.


Tim. No, I am sure they cannot, the People to whom I have Preached now Two
Sundays together, can bear me Witness I am found here, for I have handled these
main Doctrines amongst them; though I never knew they were part of the Articles
of the Church before.


Tit. That Is not material to you, whether you Preach according to the Articles
you have subscribed or not. But by the way, I observe


Tim. you have a Whisking Faculty at handling, to handle Three such Points in
two half hours or thereabouts.


Tim. Nay, I was not longer, yet performed so well, that I had as many thankful
scrapes, as Dr. O. himself for his long interwoven Discourse of late, at --


Tit. It Is like you might have as many Tongues, but I doubt not so many
Guineys, as he.


Tim. Guineys, what are they?


Tit. Now I see thou art ignorant of something besides the Articles: Guineys
they are the great Procurers of Advousons, Presentations, and Ecclesiastical
Preferments; their Principal Residence is about the Court, and they sometimes
help a Churchman at a dead lift, when Merits and Friends both fail.


Tim. I wish I could meet with one of these Courteous Gentlemen, I am sure none
ever stood in more need of his Assistance.


Tit. One? no less than some hundreds, (according as the Place may be
Thousands) will do you any kindness at all.


Tim. Nay, then I despair, for having lived Forty years and never met with one,
it is more than probable I shall be dead before I procure a Thousand to stand my
Friends.


Tit. It will do you more good to understand the Articles of the Church, and
practice them; for that will make you happier in Forty years more, than all the
Guineys in England can. Therefore push on to the next.


Article V.
The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty and Glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

Tit. Here I hope you are found too.


Tim. Yes truly, for the Athanasian Creed teaches me thus much touching the
Holy Ghost; which Creed I have often Repeated, and do most steadfastly believe.


Tit. I wish all that have subscribed this Article could say as much. -- But
let us have the Sixth.


Article VI.
Tim. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. In the name of the Holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament,
of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.


Tit. As to this, I hope, you are perfectly Orthodox.


Tim. So perfectly, that I wish all but the Canonical Books of Scripture, had
been left out of our Calendar; for since our Church here Affirms that these
Contain all things necessary to Salvation, and consequently are sufficient, for
Example of Life, and instruction of Manners, I think we might have made a
pretty good shift with these (especially on Sundays) without Tobias, Bell and
the Dragon, with the use of the Apocraphites.


Tit. And I Assure you, if our Calendar were to suffer a new impression, and I
were the Corrector, I should not boggle much to gratify you in this Opinion.


Tim. I thank you for your good will: but since it is not in my power, nor
yours to amend it, we must be content, and make as much use of the former, and
as little of the latter, as possibly we may.


Tit. Very good, I wish we agree in the next as well as we do in this.


Article VII.
The Old Testament is not Contrary to the New, for both in the Old and New
Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man. Wherefore they are not to
be heard, which feign that the old Fathers did look only for transitory
promises. Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and
Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the civil Precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Commonwealth: Yet notwithstanding, no
Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Commandments which
are called Moral.

Tit. This Article has a great Deal in it.


Tim. Where lies it, I don't perceive it?


Tit. No? Why it Requires of every Christian Man Obedience to all the Commands
called Moral; now how do you Comport with it in your Practice?


Tim. I own it, Obedience is Due to all the Commands that are Moral?


Tit. Why is there any that is not Moral?


Tim. Yes, I think so.


Tit. Which is that?


Tim. The Fourth.


Tit. Why so? Don't the Article term it so?


Tim. I cannot tell, I don't believe it.


Tit. Nor a great many besides you, who have subscribed this Article, yet deny
the sense of it.


Tim. I must be plain, In troth I hold it no more moral than All Saints, or the
Fifth of November.


Tit. I thought somewhat was the matter, you make so slight of it; Why does the
Church require all her Members, when this Command is read to say Lord have
mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this Law, etc.
that you can share one half of it Weekly to your own use and Service.


Tim. And I hope no Offense.


Tit. And as you give your People leave in the Afternoon, so many of them take
leave for the Forenoon; and thus you share the whole betwixt you, leaving the
rest to God Almighty, -- Yet no Offense I hope.


Tim. If it be Moral, why is it not perpetual without Alteration?


Tit. It Is the shameful Profanation of this Day, by you and such as have
Sucked in your Principles, that has Ushered in so much Irreligion amongst us,
and helped to pull down such severe Judgments upon us. But hoping, being better
informed, you will become reformed, hear me a little, as to this point.


Tim. When you have said all you can, you can never prove it Moral and
perpetual.


Tit. You have owned it is so, by your Subscription of this Article, and will
you now question it?


Tim. Yes, I do, for I knew not there was any such Article amongst them, if I
had known it I --


Tit. Nay never Repent you have done it, for you have no cause, if you
understood as you ought.


Tim. Understand what?


Tit. That the Morality of this Fourth Command lies not in observing, the
Seventh day from the Creation: for the Fourth Commandment does not require to
use and sanctify the Seventh Day from the Creation, not from any other period
or Date of time, but only the Seventh Day after Six of Labor, or coming
between Six of Labor in a settled Course of Numbering from any Period that God
should appoint, and so in the Meaning of that Commandment, we do now and ever
must use the Seventh Day. For the Seventh is that part in order of Numbering,
which still comes between Six, having Six before it and Six after it
continually, and so our Sunday, our Day of rest has, and therefore we also
rest the Seventh Day.


Tim. I deny it, ours is the first, not the Seventh.


Tit. And the Seventh as much as the first; the first of our Week, and Seventh
after Six of Labor. Indeed the Period from which we take the beginning of our
Account is not the same, but another from the Jews; for they did Reckon from
the beginning of the Creation and so forward, we from the Resurrection and so
forward; but ours is as truly and surely the Seventh, as theirs, though
Reckoned from another Period: and as for the Period whence the account must be
made, we have no word at all in the Precept. For the Precept says, not Six
Days from the Creation thou shall labor, and the Seventh from the Creation is
the Sabbath of the Lord; but, Six Days shall thou labor; nor does it say, The
Lord blessed and Sanctified the Seventh Day from the Creation, but the Sabbath
Day, that is, the Seventh after Six of labor.


Tim. And what do you understand by all this?


Tit. I understand, what I suppose the Article Enjoynes, by Requiring every
Christian to yield obedience to the Commandments, and so to this Fourth among
the rest viz. That you and I, and every Christian, is obliged by virtue of
this Command for ever, to rest every Seventh day after Six from all labor,
Recreation, etc. and to Dedicate it in Solemn manner, wholly to the worship and
Service of God, by preaching, Reading, Praying, and other Holy Religious Duties
and Exercises both in Public and Private. Consider this a little, and give me
your thoughts.


Tim. I need not much time to Study, I have (in the Company I have been
Conversant with, some Clergy men as well as others) heard the Sabbath so
Decryed, and the strickt Observation of it so slighted and vilified, that I
thought there was little in it, more than another day. But for the future, I
hope I shall be more diligent in preparing for it, and more strickt and serious
in the Observation of it, than ever I have been.


Tit. You will do very well, and to endeavor to bring it into greater esteem
and veneration with the people, wherever you come, for the life of all Religion
amongst us, consists in a due keeping this day; and believe it our own practice
in this regard, will prevail more than our Preaching, Inasmuch as Examples are
of more force with men than Precepts. And it is our Obedience to Gods Commands,
which must evidence the sincerity of our Faith, contained in the Creeds
mentioned in the next Article.


Article VIII.
The three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received, and believed: for
they may be proved by most certain warrants of Holy Scripture.

Tit. Touching this, I think I need not question you: for though you never see
them in the Articles before, yet you have often Read them in the Common Prayer;
and I suppose with hearty assent to the Articles of Christian Faith contained
in them.


Tim. I do so.


Tim. Let us therefore hear the next, viz.


Article IX.
Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam ( as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man,
that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far
gone from Original Righteousness, and is of his own Nature inclined to evil; so
that the flesh lusts always contrary to the Spirit: and therefore in every
person born into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And this
infection of Nature does remain, yea, in them that are regenerated, whereby the
lust of the Flesh, called in Greek, (...), which some do expound the wisdom,
some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not
subject to the Law od. And although there is no condemnation for them that
Believe and are Baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that concupisence and
lust has of it self the nature of sin.

Tit. If I remember right, at Reading the second Article, you discovered your
self a little infirm and faulty, about Original sin, calling it only a
privation of Original Righteousness, what think you now?


Tim. I think if I had Read this Article, I should never have Subscribed it,
nor do I believe it now I have Subscribed it?


Tit. What nothing, no part of it?


Tim. Truly very little, a very small part of it.


Tit. Do you believe the Scriptures? if you do, I see no reason why we should
not believe this found Article of our Church, even every shred and Syllable of
it. For,

1. It asserts that there is Original sin; which is called sin, Romans 7.8. The
sining sin. Romans 7.13. The sin that dwells in us. Romans 7, 20. The sin that so
easily besets us, Heb. 11.1. The body of sin. The body of Death. The Law in the
Members. It is also called Fesh. Romans 7.23.24. Joh. 3.6. Romans 7.5. To. 7.25.
King. 1.8.38. Heb. 12. Jam. 1.14.
The old man. The Law of sin. The plague in ones own heart. And the root of
bitterness. Besides the woeful effects we find of it in our selves, proves it.
As blindness in the mind, darkness in understanding, rebellion in the will,
etc. with unholy and unclean affections, proneness to sinful, and aversness to
Holy and Godly Actions.

2. Next this Article teaches us, that this Original corruption remains in
every man, even in the Regenerate: and this St. Paul acknowledges at large in
Romans 7. and Gal. 5.17. He says the Flesh lusts against, the Spirit, so that
we cannot do the things we would. And St. James, Every man is tempted when he
is drawn away of his own Lust. And the best of Gods Children bewail the
remainder and indwelling of this Lust and Corruption: doubtless therefore our
Church is right thus far.

3. And also in saying, [ in every person born into the world deserves Hell and
Damnation] for if it be sin, as has been proved already, it can deserve no
less, Romans 1.18. Colos. 3.5.6. Jam. 1.15. To. 6.23.
So that I can find nothing in this Article but may go down very well, if
Arminius or Socinus has not turned your Stomach against it.


Tim. It can never enter into my Head, that Adams sin, he being but one, should
defile the Universal Nature.


Tit. I thought Socinus was in your Belly before, now he looks out at your
mouth. 1 Cor. 15.47. To. 5.12.17.
Adam had in him the whole Nature of mankind, and by his one offense the whole
Nature was defiled.


Tim. Adams sin was not voluntary in us, we never gave gave consent to it.


Tit. There is a twofold will, Voluntas Nature, the whole Nature of man was
represented in Adam, therefore the will of Nature was sufficient to convey the
sin Nature, Volent as Personae, and by every actual sin, we justify Adams
breach of Covenant, and that Text Romans 5.12, 19. seems clear for the imputation
of Adams sin. All were in Adam, Peccatum Adami ita posterii imputatur, ac si
omnes idem peccatum patranissent. Bellarm. Again. Peccatum Originale, tametsi
ab Adamo est non tamen Adami, sed nostrum est. Tom. 4. l. 4. c. 3. and 8.
and sinned (in him) (...), and so our last Translation in the Margin. Though
it be rendered [for that all have sinned] yet must it be understood [in him, or
sinned in Adam] else it is not true, that all upon whom death has passed have
sinned, as namely Infants newly born. Therefore it is not said all are sinners,
but all have sinned, which imports an imputation of Adams, act unto his
Posterity. So that without question you and I are as guilty of this sin, as if
we had been present and joined with Adam in it. And the offering of another
Adam to thee and me in the Church, shows that the dispensation of God is not
rigorous, for we may share in his obedience, as well as in the others
disobedience. It is as agreeable to the Wisdom and Justice of God by the sin of
the First Adam to entail death upon all his Children, as to the Wisdom and
Grace of God by the Obedience and Righteousness of the Second Adam, to confer
Life upon his Children. Have I said any thing toward your Conviction?


Tim. Yes, a great deal, but to little purpose, for I don't understand this
putative sin, and putative Righteousness of the First and Second Adam.


Tit. Take heed [ Tim.] of making a mock of these serious matters: I could tell
where you learned that word [putative] for a need. But as merry as you and your
Companions make your selves with it, know that if imputative Righteousness
don't justify you, you are in a worse condition than the Scribes and
Pharisees, whose Righteousness Legal, I am afraid exceeded yours, and yet
insufficient to carry them to Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. And St. Paul, who was as to
the Law blameless, does yet desire not to be found in his own Righteousness,
but that which is by Faith through Christ Jesus, the Righteousness (putative as
you in derision term it) which is in God by Faith, Phil. 3.9. But of this in a
more proper place. I only demand this of you [ Tim.] that though you played the
fool in subscribing this Article before you Read it; yet that you would not
play the Knave in disowning it, now you have Subscribed it, making a mock of
it: for you must needs understand it, if you understand English, for never any
thing said more plainly that there is Original sin in all, remaining in the
best of men, and that Adams sin is so far ours, as we deserve Hell and
Damnation for it. And assure your self, unless (after this warning) I hear you
are Reformed as to this matter, I shall acquaint the Bishop what a Subscriber
and maintainer you are of the Articles of our Church, who I doubt not will call
you to an account. For I steadfastly believe his Lordship holds it a less sin to
be defective in the Ceremonies, than in the Articles: and will sooner Suspend
for the latter, than the former. But I hope you will give me no cause --
especially when you have Read the next.


Article X.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, That he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

Tit. The following Article Concords so well with this, that it is pity to part
them; if you will, therefore, Read that too, before we proceed farther.


Tim. I shall.


Article XI.
We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own works, or deservings.
Wherefore that we are Justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and
very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

Tit. As to these two Articles, I need not ask your Opinion, for I know you to
be as rotten in these, as an Egg nine days sat on. Free Will and the necessity
and efficacy of Works to Justify without putative Righteousness, is so much
your tone in the Pulpit, that the very Bells in the Steeple have learned the
Tune. And when you are approaching the Church, the least jar out of it puts you
into such an Arminian chafe, that the Bells are presently forsooth
Calvinistical Bells, the Ringers Calvinistical Rogues, wishing the Ropes in
their hands fast about their Necks. An admirable Devotion at your first
entrance into Gods House!


Tim. And there are more of this Opinion besides my self.


Tit. What Opinion? That the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Chapters to the Romans,
were foisted into that Epistle by Calvin, or at least he had an hand in
Composing our Articles?


Tim. No neither, but for Free Will, and Justification without putative
Righteousness; that Christ came chiefly to be an Example to us, and not to
Justify us by the imputation of his Righteousness, this is the Opinion I know
many are of besides me.


Tit. Aye, too many: but for you and I, and those men you mean, who have
consented and Subscribed to these Articles, to talk at this rate, I must tell
you, is a fault not to be born with; whatever others say, that are free, we
that are obliged by Promises and Subscriptions, should be honest and true to
them.


Tim. Honest and True? Yes so I ought, but I have learned better since my
Subscription; and I hope you will give a man leave to improve his Reason and
Understanding?


Tit. Yes by all means, but suppose you were called to Subscribe these very
Articles word for word again, now your Reason is so mightily improved, what
would you do?


Tim. A needless question, for that is not likely.


Tit. Why not? Put case the Patron of a Good (that is a great) Living, or about
two hundred or three hundred pounds per annum, should out of his Generosity
freely offer you the Presentation to it: would you refuse his kindness, rather
than Subscratch for it?


Tim. I am afraid I should scarce withstand the force of so taking a temptation.


Tit. And you would Read them openly in the Parish Church, the people being
present, and openly declare your approbation of them, and full consent to them
(as the Law requires) rather than lose such a Benefice?


Tim. I believe I should, I wish some body would try me.


Tit. And Preach and Prate against them, or contrary to them, when you had
done, ha!


Tim. Not directly.


Tit. Directly or indirectly, directly you would be a Knave for your pains; not
to say worse.


Tim. You would not have me talk contrary to what I believe, would you?


Tit. What is that?


Tim. I believe every man has a power and freedom of Will to good Works as
well as Evil.


Tit. What Naturally, and in an unregenerate Estate?


Tim. Yes.


Tit. This is contrary to the Tenth Article, as Aye and No, directly Opposite
to Scripture, Which says, the Carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God; nor indeed can be: so then, they that are in the
Flesh cannot please God. The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are Spiritualy discerned. No man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of
our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. And without me ye can do nothing,
says our Savior. Repugnant is your belief also to many Prayers of our Church.
As the Collect for the Second Sunday in Lent. The Fifth Sunday after Easter.
The Ninth Sunday after Trinity. The Seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. The
Nineteenth, The Collect on All Saints Day, and many more. Now what a rare
Believer are you, to believe contrary to the Word of God, the Articles you have
Subscribed, Romans 8.7.8. 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 12.3. 2 Cor. 3.5. John 15.5.
and the Prayers you constantly make use of, and are obliged to put up to God
on those several days, in the prescribed Words and no other. But what is the
next part of your Belief in this matter?


Tim. That as I have a Power and freedom of will to Good Works, so I must do
them, in order to my being Justified before God.


Tit. This is as Corrupt and Erroneous as the former, and as opposite to the
next Article, read it.


Article XII.
Albeit, that Good Works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after
justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the severity of Gods
Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, insomuch that by them a lively
Faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the Fruit.

Tit. Here you are Taught, That Good Works are pleasing and acceptable to God;
but so far are they from justifying without Faith, that they are the fruits of
Faith, and follow after Justification. Plainly implying, That we must have true
Faith, and be justified, before we can do any Works, good, pleasing or
acceptable to God. So that I believe (according to our Church) that Faith in
Christ justifies the Person, and Good Works the Faith: Or thus, I take it, that
God justifies Judicially, Christ Jesus Meritoriously, Faith Instrumentally, and
Good Works Declaratively.


Tim. So then, you will make Good Works of little worth; and it matters not
whether a man has them or not.


Tit. No such matter, I believe they are absolutely necessary to Salvation;
that no man can go to Heaven without them; for they are (as this Twelfth
Article tells you) the genuine and necessary fruits of a true and lively Faith;
and that there can be no such Faith without them. And St. James says as much
in the Second Chapter of his Epistle at large. I believe that Text of Holy
Writ, which tells me, Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, with an equal
Faith, Heb. 12.14 Heb. 11.6.
that I do that which says, Without Faith it is impossible to please God. That
is, that both are necessary to make a good Christian, and there is no other, I
am sure, shall ever enter into Heaven. And to close this Discourse, I believe,
he that Teaches such Doctrine as this, stands further off from Rome, comes
nearer to the Analogy of Faith, the Tenor of the Holy Gospel, and the sound
Articles of our Church, then those Men who Teach or Preach otherwise: and I
hope by this time you think so too.


Tim. I am inclinable to such thoughts.


Tit. And the more you think on it, the more inclinable you will still be, if
you do not wilfully shut your Eyes against the Light of Gods Word, and of the
following Articles, grounded upon it.


Article XIII.
Works done before the grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesu Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say)
deserve Grace of congruity: yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
Sin.

Tit. What think you of this added to all the rest?


Tim. It still helps to Confirm what you have said, and to convince me of my
Error, without any farther Comment.


Tit. Proceed then to the next, viz.


Article XIV.
Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
Works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without Arrogance and Impiety. For by
them Men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are
Commanded to you, say, We are unprofitable Servants.

Tit. I have such Charity for thee (Tim.) as not to think thee so far Popefied,
as to oppose this Article.


Tim. You may, for surely we who neither do, nor can do all that God Commands,
have little ground to boast of doing more.


Tit. Honestly said, Tim. I hope to find thee right as to the next too.


Article XV.
Tim. Christ in the truth of our Nature, was made like unto us in all things
(Sin only except) from which he was clearly void, both in his flesh, and in
Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the Sins of the World: and sin (as St. John says) was
not in him. But all we the rest (although Baptized, and born again in Christ)
yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves,
and the Truth is not in us.


Tit. I know nothing contained in this Article, that you do Oppose or Cavil at:
and therefore think the best, never loving to make quarrels, when there is not
just and apparent Cause for it. Therefore let us view the following one.


Article XVI.
Not every deadly Sin willingly committed after Baptism, is Sin against the
Holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of Repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into Sin after Baptism. After we have received the Holy
Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into Sin, and by the grace of
God (we may) arise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be
Condemned, which say, they can no more Sin as long as they live here, to deny
the place of forgiveness to such as truly Repent.

Tit. What think you of this?


Tim. Sound and good.


Tit. It Is so, if understood aright: but by a Sermon you lately Preached at St.
B's. Church; I presume, you mistake one Clause of it vilely, either wilfully
or ignorantly.


Tim. Which is that?


Tit. It Is in these Words, after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart
from Grace given, and fall into Sin.


Tim. Mistake the sense of the Article in this, it is not easy, nay, it is
almost impossible to miss it.


Tit. Why, what is the sense, say you?


Tim. That Believers, or such as have received the Spirit of God, and his
saving Graces, may fall away.


Tit. What totally and finally, and perish Everlastingly?


Tim. Yes, totally and finally, and be Damned.


Tit. I judged I should find you as sound in this Point, as that Sheep, that
shaking her self in a frosty Morning, falls in pieces. That this Article (or
our Church in it) does not intend a total and final Apostasy, is apparent to
me, by these Two things.


1. Because she says not, That such as have received the Holy Ghost, etc. may
fall away; but that they may fall into Sin, as David, Peter and others, who
Sinned or fell into great and gross Sins after Grace given, yet no final
Apostates.

2. Because she says in this Article, That the grant of Repentance is not to
be denied to such; as it is to be granted, They which thus Sin, after the
Reception of the Holy Ghost, and Grace given, may Repent; And by the Grace of
God may rise again, and amend their Lives, as the forementioned Saints and
Servants of God, David, and St. Peter did: which no final, total Apostate ever
did, or can do. Therefore, it cannot be meant of a final Apostasy, or falling
away from Grace.

And therefore if you have taught any such Doctrine, you have Preached down
this Article, and many plain Texts of Scripture to boot, as They should deceive
(if it were possible) the very Elect. Whom he loves, he loves to the end. The
gifts and calling of God are without Repentance. Kept by the power of God
through Faith, unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 2.6. Romans 8.30.
He that believes in him shall not be confounded. Whom he did predestinate,
them he also called, whom he called, them he also justified, whom he justified,
them he also glorified. And many more gracious and infallible promises,
assuring us of the stability, and perseverance of true Believers, of such as
have received the Holy Ghost, and Graces thereof.

Tim. Nay, now we are in indeed, if we are come to Election and Predestination.


Tit. Yea, and good and proper mediums too, to prove no final apostasy, or
falling away from grace; for grant the one, and the other follows. Election and
Predestination are inconsistent with a total and final defection. But I hope [
Tim] these are not frightfull terms to you, you have heard of them before?


Tim. Yes, but don't well understand them, Election and Predestination! it is
nonsense.


Tit. Such sense as you have subscribed to, and consequently should believe,
and maintain against all Arminians and other Opposers.


Tim. I cannot imagine any Article of our Church asserts any such thing, so
contrary to all reason, as nothing can be more.


Tit. Yes, this is such an unreasonable Article, and by good luck the very next
in course, and so full mouthed for Election and Predestination, that you would
think some body spoke it through Calvin's Mouth, or at least that: that
wretched, stiff Predestinarian guided the hand of him that writ it. -- Look
there, it is [ Tim.] nay, never start at it: but out with it, like a man of
metal.


Article 17.
Tim. Predestination to life is the Everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before
the Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his
Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has
chosen in Christ out of Mankind; and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting
Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor: wherefore they which be endued with so
excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit,
working in due season; they through Grace obey the calling, they be justified
freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like the Image of
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk Religiously in good works: and at
length by Gods mercy, they attain to Everlasting Felicity.

As the Godly consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort to Godly Persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ. mortifying the works of
the Flesh, and their Earthly Members, and drawing up their mind to high and
Heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of Eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So, for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesness of most
unclean living, no less perilous than desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wife as they be generally
set forth to us in Holy Scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the word of God.


Tit. Bless me, what is the reason of this sudden paleness in your countenance?
you look as though you were fainting away.


Tim. Not so Sir, but I am stricken with a strange horror and astonishment, to
think how our Pulpits ring of Doctrines directly contrary to this Article; for
though I was so careless as never to read the Articles till now, yet I
concluded these great Dons had, and never questioning their honesty, I was
confirmed in it, by their constant preaching, no such Article could possibly
be: but now I see they are out as much as I, I pity them with all my heart.


Tit. Pity thy self man.


Tim. I do so, but them more, because I declare it, mine was a sin of
Ignorance, I am afraid theirs is otherwise: and because, being leading men,
they have drawn me and many more into this error, by their authority.


Tit. I am more than half of your opinion. For our Church (as foreseeing how
prone men would be to dance after Arminius his Pipe) has taken more pains in
framing this Article than ordinary, on purpose to prevent them; and it is so
full, so plain and punctual, that (one would think) no mistake can arise, but
what is wilful.


Tim. Full and punctual? there is all that ever can be thought on against
Universal Redemption, Free Will, Falling away from Grace, and the use of those
points, which are most what their subjects, especially on popular occasions.


Tit. Take the contents of the Article, and you will be confirmed in your
opinion -- which are these,

1. There is a predestination of Men unto Everlasting Life.

2. Predestination has been from Everlasting.

3. Not all men, but certain, are Predestined to be saved.

4. They which are Predestinate unto Salvation, cannot perish.

5. In Christ Jesus, of the mere will and purpose of God some are Elected, and
not others to Salvation.

6. They who are Elected unto Salvation, if they come unto years of discretion,
are called both, outwardly by the word, and inwardly by the Spirit of God.

7. The Predestinate are both justified by Faith, sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
and shall be glorified in the life to come.

8. The consideration of Predestination is to the Godly most comfortable, but
to curious and carnal persons very dangerous.

9. The general promises of God, set forth in Holy Scripture, are to be
embraced of us.

10. In our actions the word of God, which is his revealed will, must be our
direction. These are the several Doctrines laid down and asserted in this
Article. -- Would you have any more?


Tim. No, here is enough, and as much as all, that ever wrote for
Predestination and Election, can say: and had our Church enlarged this Article
to the bulk of the Common Prayer, she could not have spoke more to the purpose,
than she has in this one Page. I wonder the Reverend Fathers of the Church
will suffer her Sons to wrong her, as they do daily, openly making her speak
through their Mouths, and often through the louder mouth of the press, those
Tenets, which she never held, nay, which in the very body of her Articles, she
so plainly disowns and contradicts. --


Tit. I rejoice at your Conviction: Now these being fundamental points, it may
not be amiss, (I think) nor time ill spent, to see a little (for your fuller
satisfaction and confirmation) what ground and footing each point in this
Article has in holy writ; the perfect Rule and Touchstone of all matters of
Faith, and manners.


Tim. No sure, no loss of time, but time well improved; and if you will take so
much pains, I shall thankfully partake of it.


Tit. For the vindication of our Church, reprehension of those men who have
subscribed to her, and yet oppose her, and for thy establishment (Tim.) I will
do it. To begin with the first then.

1. There is a Predestination of men unto life Everlasting. To fit on my Right
hand, and on my left, Math. 20.23. Math. 22.14. Math. 24.23. Joh. 6.37.
is not mine to give, but shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of my
Father. For many are called but few chosen. But for the Elects sake those days
shall be shortened. All that the Father has given me shall come unto me. To
this truth also do the Evangelists St. Luke and St. Paul give witness: the
former faith that of the Gentiles at Antioch, so many as were Ordained unto
Eternal life believed: and the other says, whom he foreknew he also did
Predestinate. Act. 13.48. Romans 8.29.
And Paul blesses God for this, saying, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who, etc. has chosen us in him, before the fourdation of the
world; Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5.
having Predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto
himself. Are not these Texts to the purpose?


Tim. As clear as can be.


Tit. Besides the Example of the Elected Creatures, Men and Angels; of the two
brethren Abel and Cain; Isaac and Ishmael; Jacob and Esau; of the two servants
of King Pharaoh; of the two Kingdoms of Juda and Israel; the two peoples Jews
and Gentiles: the two Apostles Peter and Judas; the two thieves upon the Cross;
the two men in the fields; the women at the Mill, are a great illustration to
this truth. -- The next is,

2. Predestination has been from Everlasting, or before all times; Then shall
the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my father: inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: Math. 25 34.
which the Apostle understands to be from Everlasting, saying God has chosen
us in him before the foundation of the world. Again, God has saved us and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, Ephesians. 1.4.
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus, before the world began. -- And as good footing on the same word has the
following point, viz.

3. Not all men, but certain, are predestined to be saved. Luke 10.20. Joh.
16.14 2 Timothy 2.10
Rejoice that your names are written in heaven, says our Savior, and I know
mine, and am known of mine. I suffer all things for the Elects sake. And our
Church (in her order for burial of the dead) prays for the accomplishment of
the number of Gods Elect. And again in the same Office, come yea blessed,
receive the Kingdom prepared for you. And in the form of Baptism, we pray that
the infant (to be baptized) may remain in the number of thine Elect Children,
etc. not all men, but a certain number are Elected or Predestined to life.

4. They which are Predestined unto Salvation cannot perish. Joh. 6.37.
All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me, and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand; and no man is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, Joh. 10.28, 29. Math. 16.18. Romans 8
30. Romans 11.29.
who is greater than all. And the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.
Moreover, whom he Predestined, them he also glorified. The gifts and calling
of God are without repentance. They went out from us, because they were not of
us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. -- So the
next point (which these men so much stick at) is as clearly taught in Gods
word, as any of the former, -- namely

5. That of the mere will and purpose of God, some men in Christ Jesus are
Elected, and not others, unto salvation. a Romans 9.11. b Ephesians 1.5. c 2 Timothy 1.9.
d Exodus 33.19. e Romans 9.15. f Ephesians. 1.4, 5. g 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. h Ephesians. 1.5,
6. Prove. 16.4. Romans 9.21.
a That the purpose of God according to Election might stand. b Having
Predstinated us according to the good pleasure of his will. c Not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. d I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, etc. f He has chosen us in Christ, and Predestined
us through Christ. g Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, etc. but by
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb, etc. who verily was foreordained,
before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for
you. Who has Predestined us to the praise of the glory of his grace. The
Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of
wrath. Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor, another unto dishonor? -- was ever any thing more fully
and plainly said in holy writ, than this part of our Article?


Tim. I think not, or can be.


Tit. These portions of Scripture (to which more might be added were it
needful) do not barely assert a Predestination of some, and not of others,
but assign also all the causes of such Predestination, -- as

1. The Cause efficient, to be the everlasting purpose of God.

2. The Cause formal, Gods infinite goodness, mercy and free grace.

3. The Cause material, the blood of Christ.

4. The Cause final or end, (why both God the Father has loved, and Christ for
his Elect has suffered) is the glory of God and the salvation of men: so that
I cannot see how any man, who is at enmity with this Article, can hold any good
friendship with these Texts of Scripture: or with those that arise to prove the
next point, which is this,

6. They, who are Elected unto salvation, if they come unto years of
discretion, are called both outwardly by the word, and inwardly by the spirit
of God. These things are most evident and clear in the Scriptures, where is set
down, both the calling of the Predestinate, their obedience to the word being
called, Romans 8.30. Gal. 1.15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 1.13.
their adoption by the Spirit to be the chidren of God, and their holiness of
life and conversation, -- whom he did Predestinate, them he also called. God
separated me from my mothers womb, Called me by his grace. Walk worthy of God,
who has Called you to his Kingdom and glory. He has saved us and called us
with an holy calling, according to his own purpose and grace, etc. In whom also
ye trusted, after ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. Ye
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father, Romans 8.15,
16.
the same spirit bearing witness with your spirits, that we are the children of
God. Ephesians. 2.10.
And for their being chosen and called to holiness of life and good works, the
Apostle plainly enough asserts, saying we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in
them. And the Grace of God has appeared, Tit. 2.11.12.
etc. teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and Godly in this present world. -- yea says the next
Proposition.

7. The Predestinate are both justified by faith, sanctified by the Spirit, and
shall be glorified in the life to come. All these blessed effects of
Predestination, does the Scripture fully assert, for know (says the Apostle) a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ.
Gal. 2.16.
Moreover whom he predestined, etc. them he also glorified. If children then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ. And as we have born the image
of the earthly, Romans 8.30. v. 17. 1 Cor. 15.49.
so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. Now are not all these consequents
of Predestination, viz. Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification fully
enough expressed in these Texts?


Tim. Very fully, in my opinion.


Tit. Therefore very well does our Church say, in the next part of this
Article, That

8. The consideration of Predestination, is to the godly most comfortable; but
to curious and carnal persons very dangerous. To the former, the Meditation of
it must needs be exceeding sweet, pleasant and comfortable, because it greatly
confirms their faith in Christ, and increases their love toward God. Romans
8.18. v. 31, 32, 33, 34.
I account the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory, that shall be revealed in us. If God be for us, who can be
against us? He that spared not his own Son, how shall he not, with him, freely
give us all things. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is
God that justifies, who is he that condemns? ye are sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his
glory. And again, grieve not the holy Spirit whereby ye are sealed unto the day
of Redemption. Ephesians. 4.30.
Here is a deep and large Well of Consolation to the godly; yet not affording
the lest drop to carnal and wicked men.


Tim. But does not this Doctrine lead toward Desperation?


Tit. by no means; for no man, either from the word of God, or this Article of
our Church, can gather, that he is a vessel of wrath fitted for destruction;
but contrariwise, by many and great arguments may persuade himself, that God
wills not his destruction, as by the next proposition plainly appears, viz.

9. That the general promises of God, set forth in holy Scripture, are to be
embraced of us, Math. 11.38.39. Joh. 3.16.17. 1 Timothy 2.4.
such are, Come unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. God gave his only beloved Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, etc. Who will have all men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth. These and many more such general Promises of grace and
favor to mankind are heartily to be embraced of us, as encouragements to
faith, repentance and an holy life. So that whoever embraces these promises,
(and as our Church in the close of this Article says.)

10. Will in his actions be directed by the revealed will of God, has no
ground to despair, or to exclude himself out of the number of Gods
Predestinate or chosen ones. Thus you see the drift of this Article,
comprehending most fully and clearly, that great doctrine of Predestination,
with all its coherent doctrines, which is so much cried down in our day; and
(which is the wonder and shame of all) by some sons of our Church, who have
subscribed it.


Tim. I must confess I have been one of those, led by the example of the
greater ones, rather than by the depth of my own knowledge. But surely these
men have something to say for themselves; is not our Church single in this
point.


Tit. Admit she were, yet there are two weighty reasons, why they should not
desert or oppose her in this: First, Because she has the Scripture on her
side; And Secondly, Because they have listed themselves her faithful votaries,
by subscription.


Tim. That is true, these are plaguey strong ties.


Tit. But withal I say, she is not single in this point, for the Churches in,
Helvetia, Basil and France believe and hold the same, as their public
confessions bear witness, yea, all the reformed Church.


Tim. Who then are the enemies to it?


Tit. The Arminians, Socinians, Antinomians and Papists; amongst these last,
the Jesuits are the acutest and most malicious opposers of it.


Tim. This is more than I understood before.


Tit. It must needs, since you never inquired into it before, no, not so much
as to consult the Article, which of it self had been sufficient to have
regulated you, both in your private opinion and public Doctrine, whereby you
have often brought your self under the lash of that severe reprehension of St.
Jude, Jude 10 13.
to those, who foam out their own shame, speaking evil of those things, they
know not.


Tim. I am convinced it had been as well, to have let these high points alone.


Tit. As well? and much better: had you spent your time, and exercised your
Talent [ Tim] upon the 10 Commandments; Preached down Atheism, Idolatry,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, and such immoralities; and in Preaching up
Faith, Repentance, Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness, you would have done
God better service, and had more thanks from your Reverend Diocesan, than for
your yelping against Predestination, Election, stability in grace, etc. without
measure or reason, and (as you acknowledge your self) without understanding. --
It Is a miserable reproach to our Church, to see Buzards soaring at that, which
is above the Eagles flight.


Tim. I shall be more careful for the time to come; and lay out more hours
daily in Reading than ever I have done. --


Tit. It Is well resolved, and to that forget not to add daily and serious
praying; and it may not be amiss to insert into your private devotions, those
requests of our Church. -- Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee O Lord, and
forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances -- But it is time we dismiss
this, and look to the next Article. --


Article 18. Of obtaining eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.
Tim. They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man
shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, o that he be diligent to
frame his life according to that Law, and the light of nature. For Holy
Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must
be saved.


Tit. What is your judgment, touching this Article?


Tim. My judgment is, that our Church is too scanty in her charity to damn the
greatest part of the world; even many Heathens, who have lived admirable good,
strict and moral lives, according to the Religion, and light they had: and for
ought I can see, the Patriarchs to boot, and all that lived before Christ. --


Tit. Not a word on it Tim: For all that our Church says in this Article is,
That the Profession of every Religion cannot save a man, live he never so
virtuously: and that no man ever was or shall be saved, but only by the name,
or Faith of Jesus Christ; This does not condemn the Patriarchs or those before
Christ, who believed in him to come, and whose Faith was every way as
beneficial to them, as ours believing in him now he is come, and the Apostle
recounting many of these, Heb. 11. says these all dyed in the Faith.


Tim. But then what shall become of the poor Heathens?


Tit. Our Church determines not, but wisely says, whosoever among them (or any
other fort of Mankind) are saved, are saved by the name or Faith of Jesus
Christ; and no other. And gives you her reason, because the holy Scripture does
set it out so to us; saying, through his (Jesus Christ's) name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins: Act. 10.43. Act. 4.12.
neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. So that the charity of our
Church in this point, is every whit as large as the Scriptures will allow. And
this is the Faith and Confession of the Reformed Churches; (d.) Confess. Helv.
2. ar. 10.11. and 2. Chapter 11.13. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem. c. 4.10. Gall. ar. 13.16,
17. Belg. ar. 17.20, 21.
and therefore whether your charity [ Tim] or your ignorance be the greater, I
will not say; but this I say, to subscribe to such a number of unintelligible
Articles, unsight and unseen, was no Mathematical demonstration of a wonderful
wisdom in you.


Tim. But it was a sign of the greater Faith.


Tit. Yes, a Popish or implicit Faith, by virtue of which (if the Imposers
honesty had not been of a better stamp than your Faith) you might have
underwritten to the Alcoran or Mass Book, as well as the Articles. --


Tim. No, hold there.


Tit. Why what should have hindered; nay, how do you know you did not; since
you never looked what it was?


Tim. But who could divine, but I would?


Tit. That Is somewhat indeed, for I believe they don't often meet with such
blind Believers: which may make them (as you say) somewhat the more wary. But
if the worst had come to the worst, you could have come off tuta conscientia.


Tim. How so?


Tit. As you do with the Articles, which you (believe) have subscribed.


Tim. How is that?


Tit. Deny them all, or many (at least) of the most considerable of them.


Tim. What will not go down, must come up, and there is an end on it.


Tit. Then I hope the next will down glibb, for I know nothing in it, that is
the least choaky -- Try,


Article 19. Of the Church.
Tim. The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of Ceremonies,
but also in matters of Faith.


Tit. Well, are not my words true, there is nothing sticking here?


Tim. Yes, something that sticks with me a little; and does not go so smoothly
off, as I expected.


Tit. What should that be; you believe such a thing as a visible Church of
Christ, don't you?


Tim. Yes, but not this description of it?


Tit. Wherein is it faulty?


Tim. The fault is this, that our Churches charity (in my mind) is as much too
great in this, as it is too little in the former Article.


Tit. How so, prithee?


Tim. Because by this description of a true visible Church, she allows some of
the Fanatic Congregations to be true Churches, or at least true members of the
visible Church of Christ: for in some of these Congregations, the Word (they
say) is purely preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to
Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are requisite to the
same


Tit. And if it be so, why should they not be reckoned among those parts, that
help to make up the whole.


Tim. What without the Common Prayer and Ceremonies? these true Churches, or
true Members of the visible Church of Christ? God deliver me from such Churches.


Tit. Why the Article does not tell you, these are necessary to the
constitution of a Church, but only the Preaching of the pure Word, and right
Administration of the Sacraments.


Tim. Well, they are none of our Church, I am sure.


Tit. True, no more are the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, yet parts and
members of the visible Church of Christ, and our Church is no more. -- But I
find (Tim.) you have a greater kindness for Socrates, Plato, and other Heathen,
than for these Dissenters, for you could be content, even now, the former might
be saved, but for the Salvation of these latter --


Tim. What have I to do with their Salvation?


Tit. Not much I confess; only it is an old maxim with Divines, that Extra
Ecclesiam nulla salus: So that if you totally exclude them out of the true
Church of Christ, you do (as much as in you lies) to bar them out of Heaven:
for which they have reason to give you little thanks. --


Tim. I value not their thanks.


Tit. However let them have your Prayers, that since they are no Christians as
yet, they may be such in time: especially on Good Friday, when you pray for all
Turks, Jews, Infidels and Heretics, think on them, will you?


Tim. Then or not at all, for I know no other part of our Liturgy will
comprehend them. --


Tit. Yes, If I mistake not, there is one place more, wherein they may be
remembered, without much danger of defiling our Prayers with the thoughts of
them.


Tim. Where is that? I cannot call it to mind.


Tit. That Is much, when you read it some 3 times a week; it is that in the
Litany -- That it may please thee to have Mercy upon all men. So that if you do
but allow them to be men (not beasts) you may venture to let them have a ship
in that sentence, --


Tim. You have named all, I am sure now, wherein they can have any share.


Tit. Suppose when you read the Confession -- We have left undone those things,
which we ought to have done: and we have done those things, which we ought not
to have done; We should understand it of the Phanaticks as well as of our
selves, would there be any harm in it?


Tim. None in the world, for doubtless it is true of them to a Tittle. And if
there were any more such instances, I should begin to think, our Prayers were
composed chiefly for them: -- But surely there is no more?


Tit. Many more.


Tim. Where?


Tit. In the Litany, as that -- From all Pride, vain Glory and Hypocrisy; from
envy, batred, malice and all uncharitableness.


Tim. Nothing ever more pertinent.


Tit. Except that, -- From all Sedition, privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, from
all false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism.


Tim. Better and better,


Tit. And that it may please thee to bring into the way of Truth, all such as
have erred, and are decieved; That it may please thee to forgive our enemies,
persecutors and slanderers, and to turn their hearts.


Tim. Incomparable I profess; I shall never read these Prayers hence forward,
but I shall think of the men: they are so apt, so exceeding apt, that it will
add to my devotion ever after, -- Where were my Brains that I never noticed
this before. As I hope to live, I believe, scarce a Bishop that knew for whose
sake, those Prayers were inserted, till now.


Tit. Now then I hope, you will let these poor Gibeonites share both in your
Confessions and Petitions, as often as you may, without turning your Zeal to God,
into passion against them, in Prayer: and I have so much Charity, as to think
they will do much for you: and with that sincerity and love, as becomes fellow
members of the visible Church of Christ, for such I take them to be; nor does
our Church in this Article exclude them; which made it stick long so long by
the way, but by this time I hope it is pretty well down; if not, I am sure the
next will drive it down.


Tim. I Will try.


Article 20. Of the Authority of the Church.
The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy writ, yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

Tit. I need not ask whether you ever read this before, because I know you did
not; but how do you like it, now you have read it?


Tim. Not at all in troth, unless by Church they mean that at Westminster: nor
can it be true (as to us) in any other sense, for it is that Great Assembly or
General Counoel that decrees, and appoints all our Rites and Ceremonies, and we
have no other than what they approve and establish, witness the Act before the
Common Prayer.


Tit. But you believe the Church has a power to decree Rites, which is all the
Article asserts in that point. --


Tim. Decree, Ay she may decree and decree till her heart aches, but if she have
not the Votes of the House, she shall never have the thanks of the House for
her pains; and without their Votes and Thanks, I know what her decrees will
come to.


Tit. To what?


Tim. To scorn and disdain; with them that make those decrees, 'slid man, if
all the Reverend Bishops of the Land should sit together in Council, and decree
a Ceremony no bigger than the dash over an Adverb, which is scarce half a
cross, it would signify no more, than if you and I should do it.


Tit. How, you and I, we have no power at all.


Tim. En'e as much as their Lordships in this case, was not the P -- but the
other day, decreeing out of the Church those Rites and Ceremonies (or a good
part of them) that we have; and had it had the Royal stamp; the Bishops might
have thrown their Caps after them.


Tit. And is it not fit that they which make other Laws, should by Law
establish the Government in the Church?


Tim. Therefore I would have this Article amended, and named thus, the P. (that
is King, Lords and Commons Assembled, etc.) have power, etc. Leaving out the
Word Church, else I will never subscribe it;


Tit. That Is done already.


Tim. I care not, but I will not own it.


Tit. But can you withdraw your hand singly from this, and yet subscribe and
own the rest?


Tim. Yes, very well.


Tit. That Is a cunning trick indeed; it is next to a mental reservation. -- By
virtue of which, a man may subscribe any thing, all things, and yet in truth
subscribe nothing. So that I have all this while been under a mistake, for I
thought you had subscribed all the Articles, and it seems you have not, but a
little here and there only, as it should please you, when you come to read them.


Tim. And as much too, I think, as reason can expect.


Tit. Mighty pretty truly; read the next, and (having had your subscription
before hand) let us now have your intention, when you have perused it.


Article 21. Of the Authority of General Councels.
Tim. General Councels may not be gathered together without the Commandment and
Will of Princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of men whereof all be not governed by the Spirit and Word of God) they
may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.


Tit. Now, what did you think of this, at the time of subscription?


Tim. How could I think any thing of what I never saw, read nor heard? but now
I think it is sound and good, and I own and assent to it: though it is like (in
our time) there may be no occasion to make use of it.


Tit. Then we'll dismiss it to our Successors, and come to the next.


Article 22. Of Purgatory.
Tim. The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and
Adoration, as well of Images, as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is
a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but
rather repugnant to the Word of God.


Tit. Here I hope your heart shall follow your hand.


Tim. Ay Sir, and more hearts if I had them, for all this I steadfastly believe:
though I am afraid, this Faith is going out of fashion.


Tit. I hope not; as long as the Defendor of it lives, there is no fear; and if
Prayers will add to his days, he is like to live as long as any that ever sat
on his Throne, and therefore I hope our Fears will dye, before he dies.


Tim. Pray God they may, and be buried too, never to rise more in our
Generation, or in the Generations after us.


Tit. Amen, Amen. -- And I am joyful to find you so hearty a Protestant, I wish
they be all such, that wear our Livery. -- But what is the next Article?


Article 23. Of ministering in the Congregation.
Tim. It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of Public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men who
have public authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords Vineyard.


Tit. I suppose we need not stay long here neither.


Tim. No, for I know none but Quakers, Lay Elders, and such holders forth, as
the Apostle describes, -- That creep into Houses, and lead captive silly women,
etc. but can digest this Article well enough, I am sure there is never an
Orthodox Divine (nay, scarce a right Presbyterian) but will subscribe to it.


Tit. Presbyterian, yes, for Ordination by laying on of hands is a Doctrine
they stiffly maintain, both in their Sermons and Writings: yea, and many of
them have admitted of Episcopal Ordination, rather than run before they were
sent.


Tim. I know they have, but for all the rest of the Dissenters, they had as
lieve Old Ketch should goll them as a Bishop.


Tit. Why then are the Presbyterians decryed as the great bane and pest in
Church and State, when (at least in respect to others) they are men of some
orders. --


Tim. O Sir, because they are the leading faction.


Tit. Leading do you call them, I am sure they lead the smallest number, of any
Dissenters this day in the Nation, -- yet unhappy men that they are; all that
do any ways oppose or undermine the Government either in Church or State, are
cried down, under that (new frightfull and abominable) title, Presbyterians,
for my part (though I know they are not in infallible yet) I cannot but pity
them. --


Tim. But I cannot, what pity a crew of Knaves and Villains?


Tit. Take heed [ Tim.], for they come nearest the Church of England of any
other Dissenters, and upon a small abatement, could join with her, which the
rest of the Dissenters would not; and are they the worse Knaves and Villains
for this?


Tim. Yes, much the worse -- but pray say no more of them, for I abhor the very
name, and cannot hear it repeated with Patience. --


Tit. I would not provoke you too much; but I would gladly hear your reasons.


Tim. That I cannot do without thinking of them, (at least) and the very
thoughts of them put me into such an heat, as utterly confounds my reason.


Tit. We use to say, break my head and show me a reason: but it seems they must
be content to be called Knaves, Villains, and what not, without reason.


Tim. Yes, for this once they must and shall; and that for this reason, because
I cannot stay now to give my reasons.


Tit. Are they so very long then?


Tim. Yes, much longer I see, than the next Article, which I am just going to
read.


Tit. Well [ Tim.] I perceive it is an hard matter to force reason from you. --
proceed as you will.


Article 24. Of speaking in the Congregation, in such a Tongue as the people
understands.
Tim. It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom of
the Primitive Church, to have public Prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the People.


Tit. There is nothing you can dislike in this?


Tim. No, it is very Orthodox, and according to the Apostles direction. 1 Cor.
14.6. to 19.


Tit. So, I percieve you have some Scripture at command.


Tim. Yes, but this Text I cannot but remember: For at one of the conferences
appointed by the right Reverend Father in God, the B. of L. where the subject
was against Praying, etc. in an unknown tongue; the Dr. that Preached in our
division, cited this place so often, that I shall never forget it. --


Tit. You give a good account how you came to have it so ready at hand --
proceed to the next.


Article 25. Of the Sacraments.
Tim. Sacraments ordained of Christ, be not only badges or tokens of Christian
men's profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs
of grace, and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work invisibly in
us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in
him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are not to be accounted for Sacraments
of the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures; but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have
not any visible Sign or Ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation; but they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as St. Paul says.


Tit. You may read on, for I know not but you are sound in this, and I shall not
charge you, but where I know you are guilty.


Artic. 26. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effects
of the Sacraments.
Tim. Although in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good,
and sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith, and
rightly do receive the Saeraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that enquiry be
made of evil Ministers, and they be accused by those that have knowledge of
their offenses; and finally being found guilty, by just judgment be deposed.


Tit. your opinion of this [ Tim?]


Tim. I have a very good opinion of it, as of any I have yet read.


Tit. But if I mistake not, there is that in the close of it, touches your
copyhold.


Tim. What is that.


Tit. It Is this -- nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the
Church, that enquiry be made of evil Ministers. and that they be accused by
those that have knowledge of their offneces; and finally, being found guilty,
by just judgment be deposed. Can you heartily consent to this?


Tim. Yes, why not?


Tit. Here is no body present but our selves, therefore I will be plain with
you and tell you the ground of my Question: Were you not long since presented
and accused to your Diocesan by the Church wardens of the Parish where you
officiate?


Tim. Yes, there was a Puritanical, Fanatical Churchwarden did present me,
like a splenetick Knave as he was.


Tit. But pray what was your Crime?


Tim. A small matter, only sitting up too late, and playing the Good Fellow a
little too much one Saturday night, being to administer the Sacrament the next
morning; and the Rascal told his Lordship 'twas a thing frequent with me so to
do.


Tit. And what did the Bishop say to you?


Tim. He gave me a grave Admonition, and told me, if that wrought not upon me,
Suspension should follow.


Tit. He spoke like himself; yet if he had done it, as well as said it, it
might have been better; for I don't hear that his Fatherly Admonition has
wrought in you the least reformation. What you did before, I am credibly
informed you do still: nay, that you mend as sour Ale in Summer, insomuch that
the far greater part of the Parish are so scandalized at you, that they resolve
never to receive the Sacrament at your hands more.


Tim. It Is a sign they are a company of nice, squeemish Idiots, and know
nothing; else they would understand that neither my Vices nor my Virtues
signify any thing to them in my Preaching the Word, or Administering the
Sacrament.


Tit. Then whether you are holy or wicked, sober or disorderly in your Life, it
must be the same thing to the People?


Tim. Yes, must, and is in this Case; for does not this Article say, That he
that ministers does the same not in his own name, but in Christ's, and by his
Commission and Authority -- And that the effect of Christ's Ordinance is not
taken away by his (viz. the Ministers) wickedness, nor the Grace of Gods Gifts
diminished from such as by says do rightly receive the Sacraments ministered
unto them.


Tit. True, these are the Words of the Article, and they contain a great Truth:
Should a faithless wicked man receive the Sacrament at the hands of the holiest
man living, the Holiness of him that administers would nothing avail such an
unworthy Receiver: so the contrary. But our Church never intended this as an
encouragement to Profaneness in her Ministers, as she plainly declares by the
close of the Article; and you make a very ill use of it, who shall take such
liberty from it. -- Besides (Tim.) give me leave to tell you, that though the
ill living of some Ministers, and their slight and irreverent Administration of
the Holy Sacrament, cannot obstruct the Grace of God toward a worthy Receiver;
yet this is a shrewd bar to keep off sober and serious Persons from that
Ordinance, especially in those Places where they must receive from the hands of
such Ministers, or not receive it at all. For what Person that has any sense
of God and Religion, and the weight of that sacred Ordinance upon his mind,
(though he strives what he can to conquer all prejudices of this kind) can
receive the Elements at the hands of a profligate and irreverent Minister, with
that satisfaction that he can at the hands of one who by his heavenly Life, and
exemplary Devotion in the Sacrament, shall excite and quicken the Zeal and
Devotion of all that are to partake with him? No, let me discharge my
Conscience this once. I heartily wish and pray, that those Reverend Fathers who
have the Discipline of the Church, would narrowly inspect the Lives and Manners
of such Persons in the Church as you are, who by your disorderly Conversations,
and slight, irreverent; and slovenly Administration of Holy Ordinances, (I must
tell you without flattery) are a dishonor to God, a scandal to the Gospel, a
reproach to the Ministry, the causers of Division and Faction, the Promoters of
Atheism and Profaneness, and the bane of all true Godliness and Religion. It Is
you, and such as you, that open the mouths of our Enemies, that turn the glory
of our Church into shame, and trample her honor in the dust. It Is you, and
such as you, that make many sick and dying sinners go out of the world without
Ghostly Counsel and Absolution; the notoriousness of your Crimes raising in
them a disgust against you, both living and dying; and who (if any of them
miscarry) must answer for those Souls?


Tim. I shall not, if they send not for me.


Tit. But who shall answer for the cause of your not being called at such a
time?


Tim. What, you would have Ministers live like Angels?


Tit. Ministers are called Angels in Scripture; and what if I should say they
ought to live like Angels, for Purity and Holiness? I am sure our Savior
propounds to us an higher Pattern, when he says to his Disciples, Matthew. 5.
last. Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.


Tim. But that is impossible.


Tit. True, as to Equality, but not as to Imitation. St. Paul was not equal
with our blessed Lord for Purity and Holiness; but he was an imitator of him,
as himself testifies, saying, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. Nor is
it impossible for you to consider seriously the weight and dignity of your
Calling, and to take heed thereto, Vid. The Form of Ordering of Priests.
as you are exhorted by the Bishop, at your Ordination; which if you do (as you
ought, and there promised to do) you shall be an able and faithful Minister of
the Church of Christ. The exhortation runs in these Words.


YOU have heard, Brethren, as well in your private Examination, as in the
Exhortation which was now made to you, and in the holy Lessons taken out of the
Gospel, and the Writings of the Apostles, of what Dignity, and of how great
Importance this Office is, whereunto ye are called. And now again we exhort you
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you have in remembrance into how
high a Dignity, and to how weighty an Office and Charge ye are called: That is
to say, to be Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the Lord; to teach and to
premonish, to feed and provide for the Lords Family; to seek for Christ's Sheep
that are dispersed abroad, and for his Children who are in the midst of this
naughty World, that they may be saved through Jesus Christ for ever.

Have always therefore printed in your remembrance, how great a Treasure is
committed to your charge, For they are the Sheep of Christ, which he bought
with his Death, and for whom he shed his Blood. The Church and Congregation
whom you must serve, is his Spouse, and his Body. And if it shall happen the
same Church, or any Member thereof, to take any hurt or hindrance by reason of
your negligence, ye know the greatness of the fault, and also the horrible
punishment that will ensue. Wherefore consider with your selves the end of your
Ministry toward the Children of God, toward the Spouse and Body of Christ;
and see that you never cease your Labor, your Care, and Diligence, until you
have done all that lies in you, according to your bounden duty, to bring all
such as are or shall be committed to your Charge, unto that agreement in the
Faith and Knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of age in
Christ, that there be no place left among you, either for Error in Religion,
or for Viciousness in Life.

Forasmuch then as your Office is both of so great excellency, and of so great
difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your selves,
as well that ye may show your selves dutiful and thankful unto that Lord who
has placed you in so high a Dignity; as also to beware that neither you your
selves offend, nor be occasion that others offend. Howbeit ye cannot have a
mind and will thereto of your selves; for that will and ability is given of God
alone: Therefore ye ought, and have need to pray carnestly for his holy Spirit.
And seeing that you cannot by any other means compass the doing of so weighty a
Work, pertaining to the Salvation of Man, but with Doctrine and Exhortation
taken out of the holy Scriptures, and with a Life agreeable to the same;
consider how studious ye ought to be in reading and learning the Scriptures,
and in framing the Manners both of your selves, and of them that specially
pertain unto you, according to the Rule of the same Scriptures: And for this
self same cause, how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as much as you may) all
Worldly Cares and Studies.

We have good hope that you have well weighed and pondred these things with
your selves long before this time; and that you have clearly determined, by
Gods Grace, to give your selves wholly to this Office, whereunto it has
pleased God to call you: So that as much as lies in you, you will apply your
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your Cares and Studies this way;
and that you will continually pray to God the Father, by the mediation of our
only Savior Jesus Christ, for the heavenly Assistance of the Holy Ghost; that
by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures, ye may wax riper and stronger
in your Ministry, and that ye may so endeavor your selves from time to time,
to sanctify the Lives of you and yours, and to fashion them after the Rule and
Doctrine of Christ, that ye may be wholesome and godly Examples and Patterns for
the People to follow.

Tim. I confess this is very serious and weighty, and do acknowledge I never
perused or pondered it before.


Tit. Add to this that daily Prayer at the end of the Confession, And grant, O
most merciful Father, for his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly,
righteous and sober life, to the glory of thy name. Is not the Minister
concerned in this, as well as the People, when he says, and grant that we may,
etc?


Tim. Yes, without doubt: and by Gods help hereafter my Practice shall be more
conformable to my Prayers.


Tit. Pray God it may, for evil Ministers ('it is the phrase used in this
Article) are most odious to God and injurious to his Church, of all others. One
such impious Wretch, by his ungodly life, gives such a wound to Religion and
the Cause of God, as many of his Brethren (though exemplary both in life and
Doctrine) are not able to heal. Besides, I tremble to think of the Reward of
such a Minister in another world; and what he will be able to plead for himself
to the great Bishop of Souls, the Lord Jesus, at his general and final
Visitation, Rev. 22.12. I beseech you therefore (Tim.) remember the weight and
excellency of your Calling, and the solemn Promises (in the face of the
Congregation) made to God then, when you were admitted to it. Not forgetting
your Obligation by Baptism, which is the subject of the following Article you
are next to read.


Tim. I give you my hearty thanks, and hope these things will make an
impression upon me for good.


Tit. I shall rejoice to see it -- Go on.


ART. 27.
Tim. Baptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also
a sign of Regeneration or New Birth, whereby, as by an Instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the Promises of the
Forgiveness of Sin, and of our Adoption to be the Sons of God, by the Holy
Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed: Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased
by virtue of Prayer unto God. The Baptism of young Children is in any wise to
be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the Institution of Christ.


Tit. You see here what high and noble privileges are signified and sealed to
us by our Baptism, Regeneration, Adoption, and Remission. To which our Church
(explaining this Article in her Catechism) adds Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven. What Obligations to an holy Life can there be greater or stronger than
these?


Tim. None, surely.


Tit. Add hereto the Covenant on our part, to renounce the Devil and all his
Works: to believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, and obediently to keep
Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of our
Lives. Which Covenant, unless we perform and keep, we have no right to, or
benefit by the aforesaid Privileges. Nay, our Baptism will prove but an
aggravation of our Condemnation in the day of Judgment; and an unbaptized
Heathen would not change estates at that day with such a baptized Christian.
Moreover, we who are made Ministers, do most solemnly devote and dedicate our
selves to God, to holy services and gaining of souls, as the Deputies of
Christ, in the day that we enter into holy Orders. And if none of all these
bonds will hold us, certainly we are the worst of men, and deserve the highest
Censures the Church can inflict upon us. And our Church will never be glorious,
till all such Apostates be either thoroughly reformed, or totally ejected out of
her.


Tim. I hope I do forsake all the Works of the Devil.


Tit. Except Drunkenness and Swearing.


Tim. Truly it is very seldom: In a passion perhaps an Oath may slip; and when I
meet with good Company I am loath to part, and apt to be merry; but it is rare:
And bating these, I think I have no fellowship with the Works of darkness.


Tit. But there is another Vice (I know not whether you will allow it a Work of
the Devil or not) you are almost incurably infected with, for it is Chronical.


Tim. What Is that?


Tit. That which I think in a Minister as bad as either of the former.


Tim. I cannot imagine what you mean.


Tit. I mean Sloth, horrible Sloth and Idleness: spending little or no time in
fitting and improving your self for the difficult and weighty Duties of your
Office. And this Vice exposes you to the rest, and all other whatever.
Besides, this makes you so profoundly ignorant, that you are not able in any
tolerable manner to defend our Religion against Papists and Sectaries; and your
weak defense of the Truth confirms them in their Error, and makes them cast
off all thoughts of reconciliation to our Church. Doubtless therefore Idleness
(in a Minister) is a great sin, a woeful shame, and the Mother of many sins. And
till I see you reform this, I shall have small hopes of you, as to the rest --
But this is all I shall hint to you from this Article, which puts you in mind
of your Privileges and Obligations by your Baptism. Now proceed.


ART. 28.
Tim. The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the Love that Christians
ought to have among themselves one to another; but rather it is a Sacrament of
our Redemption by Christ's Death: Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily,
and with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break, is a partaking of
the Body of Christ: and likewise the Cup of blessing, is a partaking of the
Blood of Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the Substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions.

The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.


Tit. You may read the two following, for they both relate to this.


ART. 29.
Tim. The wicked, and such as be void of a lively Faith, although they do
carnally and visibly press with their Teeth (as S. Augustine says) the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they Partakers of
Christ, but rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament
of so great a thing.


ART. 30.
The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People: For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

Tit. What is your sentiment of these three Coherent Articles, and what do you
observe from them?


Tim. I think they contain very sound Doctrine; and I observe our Church throws
out Transubstantiation and Half Communion.


Tit. Nothing else?


Tim. No: What Observations do you make from them?


Tit. Such as, I think, reprehend both your Practice and Doctrine.


Tim. Pray what are they?


Tit. First; this Twenty ninth Article (which with the rest you have subscribed
ex animo to be agreeable to the Word of God) declares, That wicked persons,
Vid. Canon 36.
void of lively Faith, receiving the Sacrament, in no wise partake of Christ,
but rather to their own condemnation. And does not your Conscience tell you,
you have been often such a Receiver?


Tim. I bless God, not in the least.


Tit. I am sorry for it: For whoever continues in any known sinful Courses,
(open or secret) is a wicked Person. Now to omit secret Impieties, not
observable by Man (yet are not by any Coverts to be hid from the notice of God)
your Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Ideleness are public sinful Courses; and
continuing in these (as you do hitherto) I cannot learn by this Article how you
can be a worthy Communicant at this Sacred Ordinance: nay, I wonder you do not
tremble to think of that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks (...) judgment to himself.


Tim. But before I come to the Sacrament I repent of these miscarriages.


Tit. What, Repentance without Reformation? This is new Divinity. Repent of
Sin, and not forsake Sin? The Scriptures teach us other manner of Repentance
than this: Repent and turn, Ezekiel. 18. and, Let the wicked forsake his way, Esa.
55. And our Liturgy will tell you, in her Confession, That true Repentance
consists in sorrowing for Sin, sorsaking Sin, and living soberly, righteonsly
and godly for the time to come. Besides, had you this lively Faith in Christ,
which our Church says is necessary to make us worthy Receivers, I must tell
you, it would purify your heart, and reform your life, 1 John 3.3. He that
has this hope, etc. Believe it therefore, that Faith and Repentance that
consists with the allowed and daily practice of such soul irregularities in the
Life, will never render you a worthy Receiver at Christ's Table on Earth, or
procure you admittance into his Kingdom in Heaven. Often read this Article, and
take this Reprehension and Warning by it in good part; which you must needs do,
if God give you (...) heart to reflect seriously upon your Life and Practice.
-- Then,

(...) Another thing the reading of these Articles brings to mind, and I would
(...) is this: -- Did not you once instigate your Church warden to present a
great part of the Youth of your Parish, for not coming to the Sacrament at
Easter?


Tim. I did so; V. Canon 112.
and it is agreeable to the Canon, which requires all Men and Women of the Age
of Sixteen years to receive, and to be presented if they neglect it.


Tit. These are the Words of the Canon, I know; and I know not well how to
reconcile the practice of it to the Doctrine of the Church in this 28 Article.
For, must you and I, and all the Ministers in England, take it for an
unquestionable truth, That all in our several Parishes at Sixteen years of age
have a lively Faith in Christ, the means whereby the Body of Christ is received
and eaten in the Supper? I am afraid, in this corrupt and profane Age, scarce
One in Sixteen (not to say a greater number) at those years have this true and
lively Faith.


Tim. Well, suppose the worst, that they have not, what then?


Tit. Then our Church faith, they cannot be worthy Receivers; nay, without this
Faith, they rather eat to their condemnation: And is it not exceeding dangerous
then for us, by presenting them, to fright them to do that, for the doing of
which (without the breach of Charity) we may doubt and fear, not one in many of
them are prepared or qualified?


Tim. Not at all: if they have not Faith, the Sacrament may work Faith;
therefore they may be compelled.


Tit. This is what I looked for, it being agreeable to your Doctrine, that the
Sacrament is a Converting Ordinance.


Tim. Right, I am of that opinion; and are not you?


Tit. I don't know, unless you tell me in what sense you mean; whether per
institutionem, or per accidens? If you say it may be so by accident, as a Clap
of Thunder, a Fit of Sickness, a great Cross or Loss, have by Gods sanctifying
Grace been made means of men's Conversion and Reformation, none will deny it:
For, as God can work without Means, so by any means, as pleases him. But if
you say it is so by Institution, or that the Sacrament was instituted by Christ
for this end; I must tell you it is a very disputable Point.


Tim. My Judgment is for the latter.


Tit. You and I (Tim.) are not Men of such Authority, that our particular
Persuasion should be much valued; yet I have a few things come suddenly to
mind, that seem to carry somewhat of weight in them, to turn the Scale against
you.

1. I do not remember where it is said in the Gospel, that this Ordinance is a
Converting Ordinance; or that it was instituted by Christ for this end; as is
frequently said of the Word or Gospel preached.

2. Nor do I remember when or where the Apostles admitted any to this
Sacrament, before they were by the Preaching of the Word brought to believe in
Christ. It Is said of S. Peter's Hearers, Acts 2. That they continued instant
(with the Apostles) in Prayer, and Breaking of Bread etc. but it was after
their Conversion, not before. Now if the Apostles had received it from Christ,
(for St. Paul says, What they received they delivered, 1 Cor.) That the
Sacrament was appointed by Christ as a Converting Ordinance, it had been as
proper for them to have received the unbelieving Jews and Greeks to the
Sacrament with them, as to the hearing of the Gospel preached by them: but, I
say, I am not advised that they did so, therefore doubtless they had not
received any such Doctrine from Christ: nay, if they had, they were greatly
unfaithful, that they did not obey it themselves, and also leave it upon record
in their Writings plainly, as a Rule, and for the satisfaction of the Church of
Christ for ever.

3. The Instances of Persons converted by this Ordinance (compared with those
converted by the Preaching of the Word) are so exceeding rare and few, as seem
to bespeak it not instituted for that end. Scarce one in an Age to be found
that can say, he was converted first at the Sacrament, that this was the first
means of enlightening his Eyes, of convincing him of Sin, of Righteousness, and
of Judgment; of bringing him off from his former vain Conversation, to newness
of Heart and Life. Can you give one Instance in all your time? Did any one ever
acknowledge or declare thus much to you?


Tim. No, in truth; but doubtless others can.


Tit. But, I say, I believe very few; for which I know no Reason can be given,
if it were by Institution an Ordinance of Conversion. -- But,

4. In the last place, Our Church seems in her Articles (which you have
subscribed) to countenance what I urge, rather than your Opinion: for, she
says, a lively Faith in Christ is a necessary means of a worthy Reception, and
without it we rather eat our own Condemnation. Now to be brought to a lively or
true Faith in Christ, I take this to be Conversion; and this, she says, is
necessary to those who come to this Ordinance: which plainly implies, they must
come Converts thither, or else they cannot be worthy Guests at that Feast. --
Moreover, he that shall read the Direction of our Church to her Ministers, in
the Rubric before the Administration of the Sacrament, touching malicious,
disorderly, and uncharitable Persons, and seriously contemplates her most
strict, severe, holy, pathetical, and Christian-like Exhortations to such as
purpose to be Communicants, will discern, and must acknowledge, she seems to
favor but very little this Doctrine. And, to speak the truth, I see no reason
but that those who are of that Opinion may open the door to the Altar as wide
as they do those to the Church; there being no Warrant in the Gospel to hinder
any (how wicked soever) from the ordinary (nay instituted) means of their
Conversion.


Tim. Well, admit the sense of the Church be as you would have it, that the
Sacrament was not instituted for a Converting Ordinance; what would you be at
now?


Tit. At what I was before, viz. That you do not do mavelous well to
subscribe the Articles ex animo to be according to the Word of God, and then
preach contrary to them. And, secondly, That this being granted, that the
Sacrament was not instituted as a Converting Ordinance (to work Faith, but
rather to confirm it) I cannot commend you for compelling all promiscuously to
receive it, only because they are Sixteen years old, before you have any
assurance or hope of their being converted, or brought to a lively Faith in
Christ Jesus; which the Article tells you is a very necessary Qualification in
all Communicants, and that without it they hazard the eating to their own
Condemnation.


Tim. I shall not proceed so strictly according to that Canon for the future;
for I see few of my Brethren do.


Tit. No, if all the Ministers in the Church of England were inspired with your
zealous Spirit in this respect, the Presentiments at the Ecclesiastical Courts
might for numbers vie with the late Petitioners to His Majesty, and we will
give you all the Addressers too into the bargain.


Tim. I believe you may; for doubtless they are a vast number.


Tit. Consider but some Parishes in and about the City of London, in which
there are so many thousand at that age and upwards, that to take a personal and
particular account of them, and draw up his Presentment, would be work enough
for the Minister from one Easter to another.


Tim. I think he would not have much time for his Study or Ministerial Offices.


Tit. And I think he would have but little thanks for his pains, either from
his Parishioners or Diocesan; for such Proceedings would gender Confusion. And
I think Visiting the Sick, Catechizing the Youth, and Informing the Ignorant,
would be a better improving of Time, and a greater Service to our Church, than
drawing up and making such Presentiments. And when we must be doing, let us
present the Debauched and Profane, the Scandalous and notorious Offenders
against the Moral Law of God, rather than the ignorant Offenders against that
Law of Man.


Tim. Well, now you talk of improving Time, pray let us improve ours, and
proceed; we have been long enough here already.


Tit. I would not weary, nor overlong detain you; for I know you sit upon
Thorns: therefore go on.


ART. 31.
Tim. The Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both
Original and Actual, and there is none other Satisfaction for Sin, but that
alone. Wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said,
that the Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have Remission
of Pain or Guilt, were blasphemous Fables and dangerous Deceits.


Tit. This Article destroys the very bulk and life of all the Romish Religion,
namely, the Sacrifice of the Mass. It Is this that promotes the Adoring of the
Creature, Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead, and all those Papal Stratagems
whereby his Holinesses Coffers are crammed, and the Pomp and Grandeur of his
whole Body Ecclesiastic is supported and maintained. Take away this, and their
Religion dwindles into nothing; Vid. Saul and Samuel, p. 22.
the Priests and Jesuits might cobble Shoes in reality to get Bread, as they
sometimes have done here and elsewhere to cover their intended Villainies: yea,
the Pope himself would become as poor as his (pretended) Predecessor St. Peter.
Well, this gainful and admired Device does our Church rightly explode, as a
blasphemous Fable, and dangerous Deceit.


Tim. And doubtless such it is, and no better.


Tit. Then whatever Priest shall subscribe to this Article, and afterward lift
up his hands to this Romish Babel, (without great Repentance) is a damned
Hypocrite.


Tim. And cursed beyond the Power of the Popes Absolution or Benediction.


Tit. I am glad to find you so firm in this, and hope you will prove so as to
the next, which thwarts another Doctrine of the Romanists.


Tim. What is that?


Tit. Read it, and you will be satisfied.


ART. 32.
Tim. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to
vow the Estate of Single life, or to abstain from Marriage: Therefore it is
lawful for them, as for all other Christian Men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to Godliness.


Tit. Now you perceive whereto the Article tends?


Tim. Yes, to reprehend the Doctrine of the Papists, which forbids Priests to
marry.


Tit. And I am sure our Church is in the right here, having the Scripture on
her side.


Tim. She has so; but she does not say that Priests by the Word of God are
bound to marry, or bound not to marry; but they may or may not, as in prudence
or discretion they shall think fit.


Tit. And as the same shall serve better to Godliness; pray put that in too.


Tim. Admit I do, yet I think it is as great prudence in Priests (and as
conducive to Godliness, not to say more) to live unmarried, as married.


Tit. In good time: Then here you prefer the Prudence of the Church of Rome to
this of our Church. You would have done well to have read this Article before
you had subscribed it.


Tim. You will give me leave to speak my thoughts.


Tit. Most freely, good Tim. I know you are a single Person yet; but have you
vow ^petual Chastity (as the Papists call it)?


Tim. (...) truth, I have resolved it.


Tit. And if you do but believe as the Church of Rome believes in this Point
too, no doubt but your Resolution or Vow will marvellously promote Godliness.


Tim. How is that?


Tit. That nothing can break or violate that Vow but Marriage.


Tim. I don't understand your meaning.


Tit. The meaning is, a Priest having vowed Chastity, may if he will, and as
often as he will, frequent the public Stews, or keep Concubines or Whores, yet
be a very chaste and honest Man. If a Priest keep an Whore at Board and at Bed,
and use her constantly as if she were his Wife, he is not therefore Irregular:
but if he marry her, or an honester Woman, all the World cannot excuse him; for
though such Whoredom never disables a Priest, yet chaste Marriage utterly
spoils him. Now does not this tend mightily to Godliness? Yea, they make
Whoredom so small a matter in a Religious Man, that they tell us; For a Monk or
a Friar to lay aside his Habit, is a Crime by which he incurs Excommunication;
but if he lay aside his Habit that he may commit Fornication the more
expeditely, without the Encumbrances which his Monkish Weeds would give him in
the Act, they declare him upon that account freed from Censure. And so common
is this Vice among them, that Cassander (a moderate Papist) says, There is
scarce an hundred amongst all their Priests that abstain from Women. Popish
Coelebacy therefore is a great promoter of Piety, is it not?


Tim. It Is but some few that are so wicked.


Tit. It Is a Leprosy that runs from Head to Foot in the Ecclesiastical Romish
Body. The very Popes themselves (as Holy and Infallible as they are) have
generally had a Finger in the Pie; as it were easy to show, if time would
permit: but for brevity sake, read but a few ancient Sentences written of some
of them, and then give me your thoughts. -- As that of Pope Paul the Second.
Anxia testiculos Pauli ne Roma requirasa
Filia huic nata est, haec docet esse marem.


Of Pope Innocent the Eighth. Bis quatuor nocens genuit puellulos,
Totidem sed and nocens genuit puellulas.
O Roma, possis hunc merito dicere Patrem.


Of Pope Alexander the Sixth. Non spado Alexander fuer at, Lucretia nempe
Illius Conjux, nata, nurusque fuit.


And of the Priests in general, one wittily writes. Multi vos sanctos, multi
vos dicere Patres
Gaudent, and vobis nomina tanta placent:
Ast ego vos sanctos non possum dicere; Patres
Possum, cum natos vos genuisse sciam.
What think you now of the Prudence of the Church of Rome, in forbidding
Marriage, and allowing and practicing Whoredom? Is it preferable to the Wisdom
and Piety of our Church, which allows and encourages Marriage in her
Priests, to prevent Fornication and Uncleanness? And is the former a better
means to Godliness and Chastity than the latter? Surely you will change your
Opinion, though not your Condition; and believe a Priest confined by Lawful
Matrimony, may be as good a Member of the Church as a Town-Bull.


Tim. Yet we do not read that many of the Apostles were married.


Tit. Not that they made use of the Romish Remedy allowed to Priests unmarried.


Tim. God forbid any should think so; they were holy Men.


Tit. And Men in perpetual Travels, to publish the Gospel to all Nations, and
under sore and continual Persecutions. But if not many, yet if any of them took
upon them the holy and honorable Estate of Matrimony, that is sufficient to
justify this Article of our Church, encouraging her Clergy to the same. In the
Exhortation after Marriage.
But St. Peter himself was (says our Church) a married Man: And how the Popes
come to lay claim to more Prudence, Continency, and Holiness, than was in their
(pretended) Predecessor, I am to learn; steadfastly believing none of them ever
had such Measures of the Spirit of Purity and Infa^ibility as he was endowed
with. -- And I do farther believe, that the licentious Practices of the Romish
Priests and Jesuits of this kind (suitable to their Principles) has been a
great means of promoting Debauchery to so high a degree amongst us. For if a
Priest may keep a Whore, why may not a Nobleman or a Gentleman do the like?
Nay, some of our Lay-Hectors do not stick to aver, that it is more pleasurable,
more prudent, (and as lawful), to keep a Courtisan than a Wife: And others that
are married, have by these Doctrines of Demons been so perverted and drawn away
to Licentiousness, as to rob their Families, to maintain their Misses. And from
whom do they learn such Gospel, but from Rome and her Agents with us? Yet we
must believe these Men under an inviolable Vow of Chastity.


Tim. In troth I am of your mind; therefore I resolve Coelebacy no farther than
I find it consistent with true Chastity and Honesty.


Tit. And while you can keep that Resolution, I have nothing to say against it:
For you may marry, or not marry, as your Prudence shall direct, and as it shall
most promote an holy and godly Life, says our Church, to whose Wisdom in this
I subscribe.


Tim. So shall I; for I think she is in the right.


Tit. It Is but newly come on you then; for but just now you thought she was in
the wrong, and the Church of Rome was in the right.


Tim. But I see my Error.


Tit. It Is well; amend it too, and I am satisfied: but had you persisted in it,
I would have read the next Article to you my self, to let you see what
Punishment you deserved: But now you may proceed to it, as you have to them
before.


ART. 33.
Tim. That Person which by open denunciation of the Church is rightly cut off
from the Unity of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the
whole multitude of the Faithful as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
Authority thereunto.


Tit. Methinks I tremble at the very hearing of this word Excommunication. It
carrying in it the most severe and utmost punishment, the visible Church can
inflict upon any Offender.


Tim. What think you of suspension ab offieio and beneficio, or of deposition?


Tit. I look upon them as great Punishments, and such as the Church may and
ought upon just occasion, to inflict. -- But this, -- Take him Jailer, nay take
him Devil; all other are Fleabites to this. --


Tim. As severe and sharp as it is, I wish it were more in use than it is. --


Tit. Not too brisk with your Bulls, it is dangerous to play with edg tools. It
has been too common, to the great reproach and injury of our Church, when at
the command of a passionate Commissary, the timorous Priest has delivered over
several to Satan, for not answering immediately to their names, though in Court
at the same time. And the fault lying rather in the voice of the Apparitor than
any obstinacy in them.


Tim. A light Offense truly.


Tit. But an heavy Sentence, and not to be taken off neither, without paying
their Fees, as if that were the matter chiefly designed --


Tim. Had I been the Priest, I should have paused a little, ere I had
pronounced Sentence.


Tit. And any one else, who considers, to whom it belongs to Excommunicate, who
are to be Excommunicated, for what causes, and the nature and end of
Excommunication. --


Tit. Pray for my satisfaction, will you speak a little to these particulars,
for I am taken with them much?


Tim. I shall, and as briefly and fully as I can, Ex subno, -- I say it is to be
considered,

1. To whom it belongs to Excommunicate, and here I find the Commission given
to the Disciples of Christ, Matthew. 18.17. whom no lay Chancellor or Comminary
can represent, nor any but such as are in holy Orders, as Bishops, Priests,
etc. And as the Constitution of our Church is, I think Bishops only (who are in
chief Authority) can Excommunicate, and are the fittest Judges when and where
that a Commissary's Sentence is to be pa^ed. Though our Chancellours in our
ordinary Courts take upon them to be Judges, and to direct and command the
Priesthood in this case. Which to allow, is neither better nor worse, then to
give the Government of our Church into Lay-hands -- a thing which we decry'd in
the Presbyterians.

2. For those that are liable to this Censure; they must be more than ordinary
Criminals, this Censure is not to pass upon common and trivial occasions, that
makes it contemptible. And I find there are three sorts of men Excommunicable
by Scripture rule. First, Such as pervert the sound Doctrine of Truth, as did
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy ^.20. Secondly, Such as are defiled with
notorious wickedness, as the incestuous Person at Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.1, 5.
Thirdly, Such as obstinately persist in their Crimes and Offenses, after a
double admonition (or treble rather) privately by himself, after that before
two or three, and if that fails, then openly before the Church, and if he will
not hear the Church, then let him be to thee us an Heathen man, or a Publican,
Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. Where our Savior plainly teaches us, that as this must
be the last remedy, so he would have his Disciples (and those that succeed
them) proceed to it with all caution and care, endeavoring first by all other
means to gain the Offender to Repentance. Would to God all our Excommunications
were always for such Causes, and proceeded with such Cautions and Endeavors.
It would render both the Sentence more formidable, and our Church more
honorable.


Tim. I am fully of your mind, for I perceive it is a thing of weight.


Tit. 3. That is the next particular, the Sentence it self. Excommunication
carries no less in it than the Apostles, (...) 1 Cor. 5.5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. a
delivering to Satan. Hammonds Annot. on 1 Cor. 5.5.
Or it is a depriving the Offender of those daily means, which Christianity
affords and ordinarily uses, to eject Satan and the power of his Kingdom out
of the heart. Such are, 1. The Prayers of the Church. 2. The public use of the
Word and Doctrine of Christianity (for he that is under Cerem nec decet, nec
dccetur, says the Jews) and in the ancient Christian Church, they that upon
Repentance were received in again, were first amongst the (...), hearers in the
Porch. 3. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now certainly such a Sentence as
this, which deprives a man of all the Ordinances of God, and delivers him over
to the Devil, is not to be passed against a professing Christian out of pet and
humor, upon light and trivial occasions, but for just Causes, and with greatest
deliberation and consideration, and for right Ends; not for revenge or filthy
lucre, or barely to show a Dominion and Power. But to keep the Church pure by
cutting off corrupt Members, and to reclaim the obstinate and impenitent by
this means, when all other proves ineffectual. Thus you see Excommunication
(though an heavy Censure) is a Gospel Institution, and is appointed for high
and excellent ends, and is a proper medium to those ends, where it is not
abused. And I must needs say, it is better used in our Church at this time, then
it was some Years past. Which I hope will make it more valuable than it has
been. Many men heretofore being so far from dreading it as a punishment, that
they sought it as a privilege, as it excluded them from our Church. --


Tim. You have given a full answer to my request, and great satisfaction to my
mind in this matter, which I never before so well considered.


Tit. I am glad I can gratify you in any thing. Proceed, for it grows late.


Tim. I will.


ARTICLE 34.
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly alike; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of Countries, Times, and men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do
the like) as he that offends against the Common Order of the Church, and
hurts the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the
weak Brethren.

Every Particular or National Church, has Authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's Authority, so
that all things be done to edifying.

Tit. I need not ask your thoughts of this, having had your opinion of the
20th. Article, not much different from this. So that you may read the next.


ARTICLE. 35.
Tim. The second Book of Homilies the several Titles whereof we have joined
under this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary
for these times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in
the time of Edward the 6th and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
People.


The Names of the Homilies.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of repairing
and keeping clean of Churches. 4 Of good works, first of Fasting. 5 Against
Gluttony and Drunkenness. 6 Against excess of Apparel. 7 Of Prayer. 8 Of the
place and time of Prayer. 9 That Common Prayer and Sacraments ought to be
ministered in a known Tongue, 10 Of the reverent estimation of Gods Word. 11 Of
Alms-doing. 12 Of the Nativity of Christ. 13 Of the Passion of Christ. 14 Of
the Resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. 16 Of the Gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the
Rogation days. 18 Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against
Idleness. 21 Against Rebellion.
Tit. These Homilies I suppose you are well acquainted with.


Tim. Truly no, I don't know that ever I saw them; I remember that some of our
Rubricks sometimes appoint (if there be no Sermon) an Homily shall be read, but
understand not what is meant by Homily.


Tit. It had not been amiss you had informed your understanding better, before
you subscribed, because of the high Commendation the Article gives of them,
which you consent to examine, by your subscription.


Tim. True, the Article faith they contain godly and wholesome Doctrine, and do
they not?


Tit. That question comes a little too late from you, yet I answer, they do.
The Books of Homilies are (I may call them Sermons) or Methodical Writings,
composed on sundry necessary Subjects (as you see here) by godly and sober men,
and were of good use (in those times) says the Article, being read distinctly
to the People.


Tim. But why were they Composed?


Tit. For the benefit of the Clergy, few of whom were able to Preach (in those
times) or do any more than Read.


Tim. How long ago was it, or in what times were they Composed?


Tit. The Article tells you, one Book was in Edward the 6ths time, the other
about 1604.


Tim. But why are they in use still, what are they better Sermons, than are
usually Preached in these times?


Tit. I think not, but far short of what many of our Reverend and Learned
Clergy Preach weekly. Therefore they are rarely enjoined now, but with this
Proviso, if there be no Sermon. Whereby our Church says no more than this,
better an Homily than nothing. And I think our Governors in the Church show
their wisdom in not requiring the constant use of them. For though (as it is
said here) they contain wholesome Doctrine, yet they are not so suitable in
these times, as in those wherein they were framed. Honest B. Lattimer's Sermons
contain in them wholesome Doctrines; yet if one of them should be read in our
Churches, it would rather be matter of Ridicle than Edification to most of the
Hearers.


Tim. It is very true, for most Persons stand affected to their Sermons, as
they do to their Garments, nothing will please them but the newest Fashion --


Tit. And I can assure you that is no good humor, for Truth is the same in any
dress; though I confess old Truths in a new dress, look somewhat better than
new Truths in an old one. -- But I admire you never saw the Homilies, since the
Canon requires every Parish should have them.


Tim. There you have them?


Tit. Yes, I caused my Churchwardens to buy them, and have diligently perused
them, and my advice is, you do the same: they are worth your reading, if it be
but for this reason, because you have approved them by subscription to this
Article --


Tim. As you say, upon that consideration, I may do it, when I can light on
them, but I shall not be at the cost to purchase them my self. --


Tit. As you please for that, but I hope you will read the next Article, which
will be no charge to you? --


Tim. I will.


ARTICLE. 36.
The Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and Ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the 6th, and confirmed in
the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and Ordering: neither has it any thing that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly. And therefore whosoever are Consecrated or Ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second Year of the aforenamed
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or Ordered
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and
lawfully Consecrated and Ordered.

Tit. This Article you and I, and every Minister of the Church must heartily
own, else he must dissallow of his own Orders. Therefore we need spend no time
here; nor much about what follows.


ARTICLE. 37.
The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles
we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended: we give not to
our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which
thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do most
plainly testify: but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given
always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that
they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Givil Sword
the stubborn and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death for heinous and
grievous Offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the Wars.

Tit. No man can refuse to subscribe this Article, that has taken the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, as I know you have.


Tim. Yet (if I mistake not) this is one of the three Articles, the Dissenters
would expunge from the thirty nine, and I wonder for what cause?


Tit. Because it makes the King Supreme in and over all persons and things
Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil, which most of Dissenters thought was no
better than to make him a Pope. Yet some of them I think have better considered
it since, for they have lately taken the Oath of Supremacy; and I know not (if
understood aright) how any man can refuse it, that is not a Papist.


Tim. Then this Article may stand now as it is?


Tit. Yes, and with approbation too, no doubt: for swearing is every whit as
bad as subscribing, and he that will do the one, cannot reasonably refuse the
other. --


Tim. But do they swear, as we subscribe, ex animo?


Tit. Who can say that? I hope they do; being great pretenders to Conscience
and sincerity. But their Practice will be the best indication of this, which (I
would gladly believe) will prove answerable to their Oath and Obligation by it.
--


Tim. I wish interest and designs be not at the bottom; I suspect them really.
--


Tit. It Is time and Patience must give you satisfaction, whether it is so or
not, and that is all the answer can be given at present. --


Tim. You say well, and for this reason I shall watch their water. And if they
don't act, and walk according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, to which they have
now obliged and subjected themselves, they shall hear of it on both ears.


Tit. And I think it is not amiss to remind you, that you walk and act
according to your Oaths and Obligations, least your reprehensions of them be
returned with -- the Devil rebukes Sin.


Tim. I hope I shall give them no cause for such Repartees, having now a better
understanding of things than I had. And my knowledge being bettered, I trust my
practice shall be answerable.


Tit. Well resolved, it is the best way (says the Apostle) by well doing, to
put to silence ignorant and foolish men.


Tim. In troth, more Knaves than Fools, I doubt.


Tit. Judge Charitably (Tim.) and as becomes a Christian, think the best, till
you see just ground to alter your opinion. And let the consideration of your
own infirmities, make you bear the more with your Brethrens.


Tim. Nay, for Love and Charity, I believe there is not much lost between them;
for mine would serve me to see them subdued, and theirs to see the Church
destroyed.


Tit. I perceive by your eyes, your Choler begins to rise in your Stomach, and
therefore we must leave this and proceed to the next Article, and so to a close
in a few words.


Tim. Why, have we so near done?


Tit. Yes, there is but two more, and they not long neither.


Tim. I am glad of it, for I am almost weary.


Tit. But I hope you don't repent of your pains?


Tim. No, no, I Will proceed.


ARTICLE. 38.
The Riches and Goods of Christians are not common, as touching the Right,
Title, and Possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give Alms to the poor, according to his ability.

Tit. You are no Leveller, are you Tim?


Tim. No.


Tit. Nor do you believe and hold that Dominion and Right, as to Worldly Riches
and Possessions is founded in Grace?


Tim. No more than I do a World in the Moon, or that Dr. O. has a right to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury.


Tit. But you believe and teach, That all Christians ought to be Charitable and
Rich in good Works, and I hope you are so your self?


Tim. Yes, I so teach, and so do according to my ability: for I am not ignorant
of the Divine Commands to this Duty, the many gracious promises made to those
that do it, and severe threatenings breathed forth against those that neglect
it. --


Tit. Then I perceive you are sound as to this Article. Read the last.


ARTICLE. 39.
Tim. As we confess vain and rash Swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ and James his Apostle: So we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may Swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
Cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophets Teaching,
in Justice, Judgment, and Truth.


Tit. The sum of this last Article is this: That vain and rash Oaths are
unchristian, and forbidden by the Gospel. And that a lawful Oath (by the same
word) may be given and taken in Justice, Judgment and Truth. Or when we are
lawfully called to it by a lawful Magistrate. Now touching the former, some are
too forward, and as to the latter, some too backward. And all that I shall say
here (having spoken somewhat to you of this nature already) is this, I heartily
wish, that as some Dissenters from our Church may justly be charged for
Swearing too little; so that they could not as justly charge many of our Church
with Swearing too much. --


Tim. I wish so too, the Lord grant it.


Tit. Sure I am that because of Oaths, such as this Article forbids, etc. our
Land mourns, I pray God therefore, that all Christians (Ministers especially)
may learn of the Prophet David, to set a watch upon the door of their Lips,
that they may not (in this kind above all) at any time offend with their
Tongues.


Tim. Amen.


Tit. Now you have heard this short account of the Articles of our Church,
which you have subscribed, give me your serious thoughts of them. --


Tim. In brief, and sincerely (as I subscribed them) I am convinced they are
sound and good. That those Ministers who deviate from them, in Doctrine or
Practice (as I and many more have done. God forgive both me and them) are
greatly to blame, and justly deserve to be censured for it, by the Governors
of our Church. And that such as hold them firm and inviolable, Preaching and
Living according to them, are not only (in regard of their subscription) the
most Conscientious Person, but must needs be also the Truest Friends to our
Church, and strongest Foes to Rome, and all other our Churches Enemies.


Tit. God be thanked for this Conviction, and while you are in this good mind
(with my Prayers to God that you may continue so) I bid you Farewell. --


A Friendly and Cordial Exercitation to my Brethren in the Ministry. Whose
Lives are unbecoming their Function.
Reverend Brethren,
I Call God and his Holy Angels to Witness, I have had many sad and serious
thoughts, for the Misery and Destractions of our Church. And can truly say, the
former discourse is the effect and result of such thinking; and how would my
heart rejoice, and my sadness be turned into singing, might I conduce any
thing, by what I Preach or Write to her Settlement and Union? But who can hope
this, till all her Sons shall speak, and do the same things; Preaching
according to her Articles, and acting and living answerable to her
Prescriptions, which are Sober, Righteous, and Godly? Nothing gives a greater
blow, and bane to Religion, than the discords, and loose lives of her
Professors, and much more of her Ministers. If Pride and Covetousness, if Envy
and Malice, if Slander and Censoriousness, if Division and Uncharitableness, if
Debauchery and Looseness, look ill (and are of ill Consequence) in other men,
much more in Ministers. We are not called the Salt of the Earth, to corrupt
others, Lights, to walk in Darkness; Stewards, to be Unfaithful, and Angels, to
like like Devils. We cannot Sin at so easy a rate as other men, for as our evil
examples do more hurt than others, solour doom will be more dreadful, when we
come to give up our account to our Lord Jesus, the Bishop of our Souls, and of
the Souls committed to our frust, whom he has redeemed by his Precious Blood.
It is noted among King Alphonsus sayings, that a great man cannot commit a
small Sin. I may say much more that a learned man and a Teacher of others
cannot commit a small Sin, or at least, that Sin is great in him, which is
smaller in another. For we Sin against more knowledge, and against more light
and means of knowledge; there must needs therefore be more wilfulness in our
Sins: If we Sin, it is because we will Sin. Yea our Sins must needs have more
Hypoorisy in them, than other men's, by how much the more we have spoke against
them. O what an heinous thing is it in us, to study how to disgrace Sin to the
utmost, by setting forth the Author, Nature, and danger of Sin, thereby to make
it as frightful and odious to our People as we can; and when we have done to
live in it, and secretly cherish that, which we openly disgrace? To cry it down
in others and keep it (up in our selves, in our own Hearts and Lives? To call
it publicly all to naught (beastly Drunkenness, hellish Swearing, damned
Covetousness, Body and Soul destroying Whoredom, etc.) and yet make it our
Bedfellow and Companion; what vile Hypocrisy is this? is not this to bind heavy
Burdens for others, and not to touch them our selves with a finger? what can
you say to this in the day of Judgment? Did you think still of Sin, as you
spoke, or did you not? If you did not, why did you dissemble? if you did, why
would you keep and commit it? if Sin be evil, why do you live in it? if it be
not, why do you dissuade men from it? if it be really dangerous, how dare you
venture on it? if it be not, why do you tell men so? if Gods threatenings be
true, why do ye not fear them? if they be false, why do you trouble Men
needlessly with them, and put them into such frights without cause? Do you know
the Judgment of God, that they that commit such things are wanthy of Death, and
will you do them? O my Brethren yet lot not any of us, who bear the Name of
Christ's Ambassadors, bear the Badge of a miserable dissembling Pharisee, They
say, but do not.

Our Sins have more persidiousness in them than other Men's. We have more
engaged our selves against Sin. Besides all our common Engagements, as
Christians, we have many more as Ministers. How often, and how earnestly (for
God's sake, Religions sake, and their own Souls sake) have we called others
from it, how often have we declared the Terrors of the Lord against it? All these
did imply that we renounced it our selves. Every Sermon, that we preach against
it, every private Exhortation and Admonition, every Confession of it in the
Congregation, is a renewed engagement upon us to forsake it. Every Child that
we Baptize and receive into Covenant with Christ, every Administration of the
Holy Supper of our Lord, wherein we call upon Men to repent and forsake Sin, to
renew their Covenant with God, and lead a new Life, according to his Word, does
import our own renouncing of Sin, the World, and the Devil, and our Engagement
to Christ, and Obligation to live according to his Gospel. And shall we
entertain and encourage Sin in our Lives against all these Professions and
Testimonies of our own. O what Treachery and Perfidiousness is this! to make
such a stir against Sin in the Pulpit, and yet to give it Countenance by our
Practice? O it is this promotes Atheism and Debauchery, it is this that casts
Contempt upon our Church, reflects great Dishonor upon God, and obstructs the
Power and Prevalency of the Gospel. Methinks if we are sincere Christians (to
whom the Glory of God is dearer than their Lives) it must needs wound us to the
Heart, to hear the Name and Truth of God reproached for our sakes. To see Men
point to any of us and say, There goes a covetous Priest, a scandalous
Preacher, an open Tipler, a frequent Swearer, and secret Whoremonger. There are
they that preach for Strictness and Ho^ess, that condemn us by their Sermons,
and themselves by their Conversations. Brethren bear with me for my Plainness
and Zeal. It Is good (says the Apostle) to be zealous in a good thing. My Zeal
for the Cause of God and Religion (which lies bleeding amongst us) constrains
me.

Whose Heart can endure to hear Men cast the Dung of our Iniquities in the Face
of the Holy Ghost, in the Face of the Gospel which we Preach, and in the Face
of all that desire to fear the Lord. For if one of us, a Leader of a Flock; be
but once (tho he continue not in it) enmared in a scandalous Crime, all the
pious Ministers, and other Godly Christians round about him, suffer by it. For
the Wicked and Ungodly (and all our Enemies) cry out, they are all alike: Their
being nothing more common with evil Men, than for the Faults and Crimes of one
Professor (especially if a Minister) to reproach the whole Party. -- O take
heed therefore Brethren, in the Name of God, of every Word you speak, of every
Step you tread, of every Action you do: For you bear the Ark of the Lord, you
are entrusted with his Honor, and dare you let it fall and trample it in the
Dirt? If you do. God can find out ways enough to wipe off all that can be cast
upon him: but you will not so easily remove the Shame and Sorrow, you hereby
bring upon your selves. Remember therefore that standing Decree of Heaven, Them
that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed, says the Lord. And know thus much, that all our Preaching and
Persuasion of others, will prove but dreaming and trifling Hipocresy, till we
be thoroughly wrought upon to live according to the Word our selves. For he that
has not so strong a Belief of the Word of God, and the Life to come, as will
take on his own Heart from the Vanity of this World, and set it upon a resolved
Diligence for Salvation, it cannot be expected that he would be faithful in
seeking the Salvation of other Men. Surely he that dares damn himself, dares
let others alone in the way to Damnation. He that will let go his hopes of
Heaven, rather than leave his worldly and sensual Delights, I think will hardly
leave these for the good and saving of others. In reason we may conceive, he
will have little pity on others, that is wilfully cruelly to himself; and that
he is not to be trusted with other Men's Souls, that is unfaithful to his own,
and will sell it to the Devil for the short Pleasures of Sin. I beseech you
therefore Brethren, as you tender the welfare of your own Souls, and the Souls
of others, as you would have the Church of God flourish, the Kingdom of Satan
lessened, and the Gospel of our ever blested Lord run and be gloryfied in the
Conversion of Sinners, and in the Lives and Conversations of his Saints; take
heed to your ways, and become exemplary in your Lives, that others, seeing your
good Works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Nor would I put you only to an outward, sober and civil Conversation, but also
(as the means to it) to look after an inward Renovation. We, as well as other
Men, have vicious and corrupt Natures, which must be sanctified and renewed, or
we can never be saved: Prove your selves therefore whether you be in the Faith,
in Christ by a through Sanctification and serious Repentance, or not. Take heed
you be not void of those Graces of God's Spirits, which you offer to others and
excite others to pray for and endeavor after. That you preach not the Word of
Conversion to others, and your selves being yet unconverted, should prove
Castaways. And know that a Gospel Conversion, or work of true Grace, implys not
only sober and righteous Actions, but sanctified and renewed Affections: not
only blameless Lives, but clean and pure Hearts; and you shall be able to judge
of the one by the other. For if the inner Man be renewed, the outward Man will
be reformed; where the Heart is truly sanctified by God's Spirit, there the
Life will be conformable to God's Law. -- And being satisfied about our own
Spiritual State, that it is safe and good, let us in our respective places
vigorously endeavor the Renovation and Conversion of others, studying and by
all means striving to fit our selves for so great a work, as these that are
semble of the difficulty of it. O what Qualifications are necessary for us, who
have such a Charge upon us, as we have. He must not be a Babe in Knowledge,
that will teach Men all those mysterious things, that are necessary to be known
in order to Salvation How many Difficulties in Divinity to be opened? How many
obscure Texts of Scripture to be expounded? How many Duties to be done, wherein
our selves or others may miscarry, if in the Manner, End, Circumstances and
Matter they be not well informed? How many Sins to be avoided, which without
understanding and foresight cannot be done? What a number of Satan's Wiles, of
his fly and subtle Temptations, must we open to our Peoples Eyes, that they
may escape them? How many weighty and yet intricate Cases of Conscience must we
daily resolve? And can such work and so much work be done without Knowledge and
other due Qualifications? O what strong holds have we to batter, and how many
of them, what subtle, diligent, and obstinare resistance, must we expect at
every Heart we deal with? Prejudice has blocked up our way, we can scarce
procure a patient hearing, but many think ill of what we say, while we are
speaking. We cannot make a Breach in their groundless Hopes and carnal Peace,
but Men have twenty Shifts and seeming Reasons to make it up again; and as many
Enemies, that are seeming Friends, ready to help them. We Dispute not with them
upon equal Terms; but have Children to deal with that cannot understand, as we
have distracted Men (in Spirituals) to reason with, that will bawl us down with
rogueing Nonsense: we have Atheistical Persons to encounter, that deny
Principles; wilful and unreasonable People, that when they are silenced are
never the more convinced, and when they can give no Reason, will give you their
Resolutions. I will not believe you, nor all the Freachers in the World in
this, nor change my Mind, nor alter my Course, say what you will. Like the Man
Salvian had to deal with, (...) 4 de Gubernat. p. 133.
that being resolved to devour a poor Man's Estate, and being entreated by
Salvian to forbear, told him, he could not grant his Request, for he had made a
Vow to take it; so that the Preacher, and ita religiosissimi sceler is ratione,
was fain to depart. Now when I consider all this (and much more incumbent upon
us Ministers, which is no Burden for a Child's Back) I cannot but break out with
the Holy Apostle and say, What manner of Persons ought we to be, in all Holy
Conversation and Godliness? Lord! What manner of Persons ought we to be in all
holy Resolutions and Endeavors for our great indispensable and weighty work?
Let us therefore with Seriousness and holy Resolutions, separate our selves
from the World, and devote our selves with our Might to God and the good of
Souls, laboring both by our foundness of Doctrine and holiness of Living, to
add unto the Flock of Christ, the Church of God, such as shall be saved. And to
approve our selves in the sight of all Men, to be the Lights of the World, the
Ambassadors of Christ, a Chosen Generation and a Royal Priesthood, showing
forth the Practices and Virtues of him, who has called us out of Darkness into
his marvelous Light. Which that we may all do, I conclude with that excellent
Prayer of our Church, pertinent to this Exhortation.

That it may please thee, O Lord, to illuminato all Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, with true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by
their Preaching and Living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly. --
And let every one that wishes well to Zion, say. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 16. for sin, read some. P. 5. l. 46. f. there is, r. therein is.
P. 7. in the Margent dele Pompin. P. 10. l. 33. f. are, r. is. P. 10. l. 44. f.
tongues, r. thanks. P. 13. l. 30. r. the sin of Nature. P. 17. l. 19. f. this,
r. their. P. 22. l. 58. f. the men, r. these men. P. 24. l. 4. f. new, r. now.
P. 35. l. 26. dele a Commissaries. P. 35. l. 42. f. proceeded, r. preceeded. P.
36. l. last, f. examine, r. ex animo. P. 37. l. 27. f. there, r. then. P. 38.
l. 39. f. lost between them, r. between us.

FINIS.

