GULLELMUS HICKS GENESIS ATAT^S (...) 1658.
Though Thou no Prophet art, nor Prophets Son
Without their Spirit, this could never be done
Though Brightman, Napeir, Mede, are gone to rest,
Their Sp'rite yet lives redoubled in thy Breast.
Ye, that have cast the Apocalypse to ground.
Because so dark, mysterious, and profound;
Why, take it up again, and use this Glass;
Twill then no longer for a Mystrie pass.
D: Loggan. del: et sculp


POKLYPSIS POKLYPSEOS, OR, The Revelation Revealed Being a Practical EXPOSITION
On the Revelation of St JOHN.

Whereunto is annexed a small Essay, Entitled Quinto-Monarchiae, Cum QUARTO
OLOGA, OR, A Friendly Compliance BETWEEN Christ's Monarchy, AND THE MAGISTRATES

By William Hicks, Gent. Sometime of Wadham College in Oxon, Now living near
the Mount in Cornwall.

Dan. 2.28. There is a God in heaven that reveals Secrets, and makes known
u^ the King what shall be in the latter days.

Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophet and keep those things which are written herein; for the time is at hand.

A Deo principium -- Dabit Deus his quoque finem.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Daniel White, and sold at his Shop at the
Seven Stars in St Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To the Right Worshipful Sr Richard Chyverton, Late Lord Mayor of the
Honorable City of LONDON.
SIR,
I Take the boldness to present unto You this Essay on the Revelation of S.
John; and I hope, for this my Address, and for prefixing your most worthy Name
to this Discourse, I shall not be judged either unseasonable or presumptuous;
Considering not only the great Honor and Devotion I bear to your most Worthy
Name and Person, but being also bound in Gratitude to Revive the Memory of that
most Generous and Noble Family of the Chyvertons of Kerris, your Worthy
Kinsmen: To whom I being obliged by so many real Benefits and near Relations,
that I knew not how to manifest a better Retaliation, then by a Revival of
their most Worthy Memories, in the Dedication of this Discourse to your
Worships Protection, who is the only Surviving Branch of that Ancient and Truly
Generous Family of the Chyvertons of our County of Cornwall. But by the way I
shall take leave to assure you (being not altogether ignorant of the ends and
ayms that most men lay before themselves in such Dedications) that it was least
in my intention to affix hereunto your Honorable Name, thereby to add a
countenance to any private opinions of mine; much less was it in my eye to
raise an esteem upon my weak endeavors, by insinuating the least compliance in
your Worships judgment, in many things I have written herein; let them stand
or fall according to the Truth and Reason therein manifested* I quite disclaim
any such pretenses, in having any Interest in my Plea for this my Application
unto your Worthy Self: But if the least measure of the Truth of God be herein
found, I trust it will be no dishonor to your Self, nor to the greatest
amongst men, that such walk under the countenance of your Authority and great
Names: But what herein shall justly appear heterodox and dissentaneons from the
Word of God, let it not have the least approbation or countenance from man, but
let it rather be as an abortive birth, and dye for ever, never to have a
resurrection more.

Thus having wiped off the sinister Interpretations for this Application, In
the next place be pleased to take a view of what is here tendered, when the
urgency of your great and important affairs will permit, it being an
Interpretation on part of the Book of John's Divine Prophesies, wherein God's
various dealings with his Church and people, as also with the Empires of the
world under whose power they come under, are under most lively Prophetical
Representations, and Hyerogliphique Figures, discovered and made known, even
from the time of the giving of that Prophecy, unto the end of the world.

And you know, it is a common Custom amongst most men, to get a Prognostication
in the ending of the old year, to inform themselves of the Accidents and Events
that are likely to be in the ensuing year. Lo, now, about the end of this year,
I present You with this first part of this Divine Ephemerides, composed by the
skilfullest Astronomer that ever was: There is now no need of upholding that
wretched practice of running to the Wizards or Star-gazers, to know the Events
and Successes of Churches, States, and Kingdoms: We have here a full Discovery
from himself, who created the Stars, and knows their course, and calls them all
by their Names; who loses the bands of Orion, and binds up the influence of
the Pleiades. Men may conjecture, and their conjecture fail; they talk of the
heavens, but never were there for a full discovery: but here then the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and he that created the Seas, telling and foretelling Signs
and Wonders, not for a day, or a month, or a year, but for many years, even
until the end of the World, not only the events of our present old year, but
the accidents also of the New year: that is, of the other life. The
Mathematicians of this world never dreamed of that great day, wherein a
thousand years should make up but one great and glorious day: Only this Book,
the Saints great Almanac reports this, and therefore I believe it. Aristotle
could not conceive that the World should end, because he never understood how
it did begin: but behold a greater then Aristotle is here. Christ has taught
of the end, and given Notes and Signs to discern this end.

I doubt not but you will perceive and find how singular useful the knowledge
of these Prophesies will be to all persons, but especially to such as have
their hands much employed in the great Affairs of the World, so that when their
Lord and Master comes with ten thousands of his Angels to call them to an
account of their Stewardship, how comfortable then will the contemplation be,
that they in their several Generations have employed their Interests, Power,
and Authority in the World, for Christ and his people, against Antichris^ and
its Adherents? Those Christian Wor^thies that have already long since fallen
asleep with those that are alive at Christ's second coming, that have engaged on
this account, wi^ be sure then to have an Euge bone Serve, to be their portion;
and they that have ruled here for Christ, shall then rule and reign with him
for ever. But I desire not to be mistaken in this, that I judge all is
Antichrist that many in these days call Antichrist: I know there is a true real
Antichrist, an opposite state to Christ and Truth, under the Visor of Christ
and Truth: It is not every difference in Judgment or Religion that makes up
Antichrist; indeed o^ late I find it a State-knack of several parties and
factions to brand their adversaries with those odious styles of Antichrist,
Heretics, etc. that they may go undiscovered, that deserve such Titles better
themselves, or at least wise, so to raise a Scar-crow, to drive away the
fearful and dis-ingenious from a full enquiring into the Truths of God, that
would discover the vanity and folly of their opposers. But no more of this.

And here by the way, I shall not be ashamed to acquaint you with one mistake
of mine, who once thought (as most men do) that God in his Providential
disposing the Kingdoms o^ this world, and in exalting men of low degre^ into
the Throne of Princes, and throwing down great Princes, and their Progenies,
into the state of slaves, it was only to manifest his Sovereignty over the
Kingdoms of this world, to give them to whom he pleases: but more maturely
considering the All-wise ordering hand of God in such great Transactions, I
have found the issue in all Ages to be very advantageous to the Church of God,
and the result of all such State-shakings and Revolutions to be in mercy
toward his Church and People. When God broke the great Caldeo-Assyrian
Monarchy, and transferred it to the Medio-Persian, how wonderfully, and by
what strange providence did God raise Cyrus his servant or instrument for that
work? Who was exposed to be destroyed by the command of his Grandsire Astyages,
whiles an Infant, upon pretense of some fatal Prophecy, yet preserved and
brought up amongst Shepherds, as his Story goes, that afterward he became most
providentially the great deliverer of God's people (the Jews) from their
Assyrian bondage. Moses the great Captain of Israel, we are sure trod almost
the same path under a strange providence of Preservation, that at last he
became the deliverer of Israel from their Egyptian thraldom. When Saul was
set by, who was of a Kingly Presence, and by the Head and Shoulders above his
brethren, David was called from the Sheep-cot to the Throne, the issue whereof
was, the exaltation of Israel, and the downfall of their enemies. If we shall
but reflect since Christ's coming in the flesh, on the example of Constantine
the Great, Son unto Helena a British Lady, who through many glorious and
eminent Victories and Services, was at last advanced to the Imperial Seat, and
how he at last became as a Temporal Savior to the Church of Christ, and
Destroyer to the Kingdom of the Dragon, is most mavelous to consider. It is
worth further the taking notice of, how wonderfully God in late ages, raised
the Spirits of some obscure persons, as Martin Luther, and his Associates of
the first Reformation, with some other Reformed Ministers since, that they have
made the great Hierarchy of Rome to shake with their Power; so that many
Christian Princes then, and since, began to hate the Whore, with the Wine of
whose Fornications they were made drunken; and now begin not only to hate her,
but to make her desolate and naked, and to eat her flesh. But yet that age was
but the first fruits, or Prodromus, not the consummation of the work; for she
having since lifted up her head, and endeavored to cover her nakedness, and to
cure her self of her great Wound received, but all in vain, for her period
drawing nigh, God exasperates her sore more and more, and makes those Horns,
those Princes that were once her strong Supporters, to fall off from her, and
to hate her. Indeed the first Reformers took off her outward garments, and
showed her nakedness in her false Doctrine, and partly in her false Worship,
and then began to eat her Flesh, in taking off some of her pompous Revenues,
but yet the main Work was left undone to its appointed time: For as this great
City rose not in one day, but gradually, so will also her ruin be by several
Measures, or Vials of God's wrath poured out upon her, until the consummation
of her ruin come with fire, both Material and Analogical, the one the fire of
God's Word, first destroying quite her false Worship, which daily goes on in
perfecting: the other, God's fire of War and Judgments, destroying quite up
her outward State and Policy, that her place be no more found. And to the
bringing about this great end, God works very variously, sometimes in moving on
the hearts of Princes, and so makes them willing unto this work: sometimes in
laying aside Princes of ancient and potent Families, and raising up meaner and
lower Persons on their Thrones (as he most wonderfully has done of late among
our selves) to whom he gives Hearts, Spirits, and Gifts meet for this great
work: and lastly, in overruling the designs of others, that though they go
about to seek themselves, and to advance their own Dominion and Power of
Ruling, yet the All-wise providence of God knows how so to order them, as to
bring about his predesigned end: For I cannot believe that they will be all
pious good Princes, and right in their ends, that shall be employed about this
work; for they are the ten Horns, or ten Kings that receive power one hour with
the Beast, and were Members of him that shall destroy the Whore, and burn her
with Fire, Rev. 17.12.16. I am of the mind, that few conclude that Hen. 8. and
some other Princes were so justifiable in their ends in expelling the Authority
of Antichrist, as they should have been, and yet God employed them as his
Instruments in this Work: and when they have done his business, God knows how
to lay them by, and all such self-ended persons, as useless, or at least, make
them but as Gibeonites, or Hewers of Wood in the House of the Lord.

Lastly, Your Worship may be pleased to take notice, that some conceive those
and the like Interpretations of dark Prophesies, to be but the issues of
distempered brains, and of little certainty. To whom I answer, Seeing that this
is a Book that has the public impress of the Spirit in it, and left (as it
were) as its last Legacy of this sort in the Church of Christ; I profess
soberly, I know not what tolerable sense to set on this Book of the Revelation,
if it be not for an historical discovery, under Types and Figures, of all the
Changes and Revolutions, with their Periods and Issues, that should befall the
Church of God, and their Oppressors and Enemies, until the end of all. I
confess there may be some difference in Interpreting, and in not rightly
Applying some of the several Characters, Periods, and Visions of this Book, and
in other circumstantial parts thereof; and wherein I fail, I entreat not only
your Worship, but all others, to remember my weakness, and our common
attribute, Humanum est errare: and especially being amongst such Prophetical
deeps and difficulties, which may well plead for his failings, who is conscious
of his insufficiencies for so high and difficult an undertaking: Yet this I
dare be bold to say, that the substantial part of this Prophecy is here
cleared and discovered: And if any receive light hereby, to the better
understanding the dark Mysteries thereof, give me leave to say with Daniel,
cap. 2.28. There is a God in Heaven which reveals Mysteries, to him be all
the Glory.

But to You (worthy Sir) I have nothing more to add, nor for you a greater good
to pray, then that God who having exalted you in Authority and Power, into that
likeness of himself, so he would Engrave upon you another image or likeness of
his own, true wisdom, and give you an enlightened, wise ( Solomon-like)
discerning heart, whereby you may daily see more and more into the great and
glorious discoveries of the Truths of God in this Book of Prophesies, and
elsewhere, in the holy Word of God; that you may have your ayms right, and
your heart fixed to prosecute those ends, and that in integrity, which God in
your present Employments has called you unto. The work of this present
generation for all Christian Worthies to set their hands and hearts to, being
(as I conceive) if not to the downfall of the Throne of the Beast, yet at least
to the Eclipsing of the Austrian Sun, the great Pillar of the Antichristian
State. And that your heart and hand may not be wanting amongst the chiefest of
the Christian Worthies in those great transactions, is the great desire of him
that is

Your Worships Most Humble, and Faithful Servant William Hicks.

To the Judicious Christian READER:
READER,
IT is very well known, that amongst most that are conversant in the
profoundest Speculations, and in searching out hidden Verities, they are
various in their Projects and their Cogitations, are usually fixed upon diverse
ends. Some know, that they may be known: and this is vanity. Some know, that
they may know, and this is curiosity. Others know that they may edify, and
this is charity. How distasteful the two former are to all judicious persons,
and how desirable the latter is to all knowing Christians, I need not
inculcate. The latter being my choice, I hope thy candor, and the uprightness
of my ends, will Apologize for me, in that I appear in Public, now among the
crowd in Print, and at such a time, wherein (as one wittily observed, viz.
Heylins Geogr. in folio 865.) The Treasury of Learning was never so full, and
yet never more empty; by reason of the many vain, frothy, and unnecessary
discourses it abounds with, from the Scriblers and idle Paper-blurrers of these
days; and if I have gone beside my self, to become one of that number, by
playing the fool in Print, I must say as Paul did to his Corinthians, 2 Cor.
5.13. Sive insanimus, Deo insanimus; sive s^na mente sumus, vobis sana mente
sumus. So if I have played the fool herein, it is unto God, and for your sakes
(Christians) that I have done it.

But if thou ask me to what end I fall upon this task of interpreting this
Book of Prophesies, seeing many have already attempted it, whereof some are
come off with loss, yet others with more credit and proficiency?

I answer, Indeed in all our actions and undertakings of this kind, we are to
enquire in the first place Cui bono? To what good? for what end we do effect
them? For the end crowns all our actions, and adds perfection to them: (...),
or, Exitus actu probat: The excellency of our works appears and are
distinguished by their ends: Therefore though my labor herein may by some be
accounted superfluous, and my self to be justly numbered among the former sort,
that have Oleum and Operam perdiderunt, that is, come off with loss in their
undertakings; yet I believe, the indifferent and ingenious Reader will be of
another mind concerning it, when God has given him and my self opportunity to
go through with it; though I must confess, it will partake of much weakness and
imperfections from the Instrument, yet I trust, the Reader will find my ends
high and honorable enough, and of sufficient excellency to bear up my Spirits
in the undertaking, and his in perusing and considering. And although to some I
may seem herein Actum agere, to fall upon a Theme fully already discussed by
others; yet I am of opinion with that saying of Augustines, Utile est plures
Libros a pluribus fieri diverso stilo, etiam de Questionibus iisdem, ut ad
plurimos res perveniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic. That it is profitable
to have Books composed of the same Works or Questions, in a various and diverse
style, that knowledge may be conveyed to very many, to some in one manner, to
others after another.

Though I shall not much boast of my impartiality in Interpreting and Applying
those Prophetical Visions, yet I assure the Reader, as far as I know mine own
heart, it was single and unbyassed in this undertaking, having first desired
God to guide my Understanding and Pen aright, to write no more then what did
genuinely rise from the substance and coherence of the Text, or what might be
extracted therefrom by good consequence, or what did naturally flow from the
proper tendency of the Figures and Hierogliphique characters of each Vision in
this Book, interpreted, not according to private Judgment, nor unto the
Interest of any Party or Faction (being free from any such pre-engagements) all
which are to be laid aside in all such undertakings, as Abraham did his
followers (as great encumbrances) when he went into the Mount to confer with
the Lord in Prayer. I trust the candid Reader shall find the Divine Mysteries
of this Book of Revelations Opened and Applied, according to the mind of the
Spirit, therein (for the main) made evident by the proper characters of each
Vision, and according to that full complete Spirit of Harmony that runs through
this whole Book of Divine Prophesies. I confess I may come short of some
Learned Men who have gone herein before me, to whose Labors I must justly
acknowledge a due Tribute, being assisted thereby unto this Work: And though I
cannot justly apply that saying of Cicero's to my cause (for it would savor of
too much vanity and self-exalting) Recentissima quaeque sunt emandata magis:
yet this I may boldly adventure to say, That thou shall find such variety of
Collections, Observations, Questions, and Truths herein Discussed, not ordinary
in any former Writers hereupon, that will yield thee (if an ingenious person)
no small delight and profit in Reading, Pondering, and Treasuring up the same.
The variety of Flowers makes the sweetest Posie: and various Discording, yet
harmonizing Sounds, makes the sweetest Music; So variety of Truths and
Questions Discussed, will yield the greater pleasure and profit to the Reader.
And though I must needs say that many that went before me on this Theme, did
excel in true Piety, Learning, and Parts, yet saving due respects both to the
Persons and their Parts, it is not at all strange, if that we in this Age,
being advanced by their help upon their own shoulders, and coming nearer unto
the accomplishment of the events and the end of all, should see a little
further in the Truth of these mysterious Prophesies, then they that went before
us, and no discredit to them, be they ever so Godly and Learned. I have
observed that some (and no mean Ones) that are gone before on this Theme, are
not without their Maculae and Defects, and more especially, in that they have
appeared of too private and narrow a Spirit in their Interpreting and applying
the Prophesies of this Book unto their own times, Interests, and Designs; as if
the Actions and Revolutions of every petty City, and Commonweal, yea, the ends,
Designs, and Periods of every Person that Divine Providence exalts in Power and
Authority somewhat beyond the common boundaries of the ordinary Lords and Rulers
of the Nations, were Comprised, Predicted, Foretold, and Prophesied of in this
Book of Revelations; and so by this means makes strange and wild Applications
of the Visions and Mysteries of this Book: And where this conceit works
strongly, it will work madly too; when once it is elevated to that height and
gets a power, then there must be no opposing of those Ends and Designs that
such Opinionists pretends as just Collections from the Prophesies of this Book;
which they interpret according to their own Fancies, and have only a Being (as
wild Chymeras, in their own deceived Imaginations.

This is that Rock whereon some have formerly made Shipwreck, and perished
thereon, and others now adays are Sailing with a full gale toward the same
Charybdis; and if God in Mercy prevent not, will thereon split and perish also.
But to return.

Here I shall give an answer Cui bono; or to what ends I undertook this
Exercitation on this Book of the Revelation. This last, the Discovery of this
dangerous Rock, was not the least End that I set before me in this undertaking:
Which Ends, for better satisfaction, I shall here more particularly set down in
Order.

1. My first was (next Gods Glory, and the advancement of his Truth) for the
keeping the Saints feet straight, in not stumbling by a false Interpreting and
Applying of this Book of Prophesies: and in vainly endeavoring the setting up
of the Kingdom of Christ before the time; and in the pulling down all Authority
that oppose such Pretenders, to their own utter ruin and undoing without
Repentance.

2. That Christ's true Saints may be comforted and supported under all their
Afflictions and Persecutions in this World, by the consideration of Christ's own
True and Real Kingdom which is to come: Not this of Weakness, which is partly
Spiritual, partly Carnal; but that of Power, and great Glory, when all his
^nemies shall be made his Footstool, and broken and ruled by his Rod of Iron;
which will be at the great Day of his Appearance and coming in the Clouds, and
not before.

3. In Profiting my self and others: My self in Writing; others in Reading. As
it was once said by Augustine, Prodest scribendo; and scribendo prodest: We
having all (as Aquinas testifies) longing desires, conjungi cum suo principio;
to be conjoined with our principle.

4. To redeem the time, having spent many precious hours and days in folly, and
been examples unto others in evil doing: So there is all reason we should
redeem the time: and God calls in this day of light, both from my self, and all
others, that we should be patterns unto others in well doing, if that possibly
we may redeem the lost time of our youth and folly.

Lastly, That God may have his ends and glory in the work of our Creation, we
being born not alone for our selves, but for the work of our generation, to
serve God therein faithfully, in all the relations that he calls us to. God
has not sent us into this world to spend away all our precious days in sports,
pastimes, and follies, or about the more profitable affairs of this present
world, as the custom of too too many is; but to sacrifice some competent part
thereof unto the service of our God and Christ, that our friends, neighbors,
relations, and posterity, may take encouragements and examples by us, to live
more unto the praise of God and their Creator.

Having thus laid down my ends in this undertaking, I have this more to
acquaint thee with. This Exercitation being sent forth as my Firstborn in this
kind, in public unto the world, the second being intended also, on this
whole Book of Divine Prophesies, if God does continue but his wonted mercies
and encouragements thereunto: This first is more Practical and Doctrinal, and
therefore I have herein followed a method with Observations and Notes, which
the second will not so commodiously admit; the great work of that being to
demonstrate the truth of each Prophecy, and how the Mysteries, Figures, and
Characters thereof are to be interpreted, understood, and applied to their
proper times, periods, States, Interests, and revolutions represented by them:
But this first being more practical, and treating of diverse Questions that are
under dispute now in these days, I thought it fit to let this see the light in
the first place, to try how it will taste upon the pallates of the godly
ingenious; for if it savours well with them, it will suffice, and be a farther
encouragement unto the second. I know I shall not please all in this Writing,
neither was there ever a Writer with whom all have been satisfied; for
according to the Poet, Ad captum Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.
Books do either hit or miss,
As the Readers Judgment is.
Neither indeed was it in my thoughts to endeavor the satisfacton of all, well
knowing that there are some so prepossessed with prejudice, or at least, so
wedded to their own conceits, that it were the greatest unreasonableness and
servility in the World, to captivate ones reason to the satisfaction of their
overweening folly. It was also far beneath my Design to accommodate my
Writings to the popular applause, and as the Tragedian says, Populo ut
placerent; who commonly weigh not the matter by the truth and Scriptural
reason, but by their own irregular fancies and affections: and therefore am far
from their humor, who Nil rectum reputant, nisi quod placuit sibi ducunt.

Next I shall acquaint the ingenious Reader, That if any of my conclusions
recede from the truth of Scriptures, I could willingly wish all such an
abortion in the very birth: But if any thereof seem only to discede from the
common received Opinions: let the Ingenious consider, So long as they are
Warranted by the Authority of Scripture and Reason, I hope I shall not want a
Protector, or a sufficient Defense and Apology.

I have no more to add in this way of Apologizing unto the Reader, but if he be
a friend unto the Truths herein discussed, I wish him a farther increase of
Divine light: If he be malevolent thereunto, all the harm I wish him, is a
better Spirit, and a more enlightened Judgment: If he be supine and negligent,
I wish him to add diligence and prayers to God for a right enquiry: If he be
ignorant, I wish him a greater measure of true light and sound knowledge: If he
be spiritually judicious and learned, I wish him to search and enquire
diligently (true Berean-like) whether things are so or not, and declare it
forth unto others: So shall he deliver his own soul, and his Brothers also from
the snares of death. To all which (as the Close of all) I say Amen: Who am

Kerris in Cornwall, Nov. 1. 1658. Thine In all Christian services, William
Hicks.

The Preface.
GOD spoke at sundry times in old time to our Fathers, after a diverse manner
by his Servants the Prophets: but now in these later days he speaks unto us
by his Son, and his Ambassadors, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ: And he
that would desire to know the mind of God toward his people and Church, may
by the blessing of God, and the Spirit of Grace moving on his endeavors, in
searching, meditating, and inquiring into the Word of God, (both Old and New)
not only find out that Treasure (where out flows both New and Old things)
that will make his soul wise unto salvation; but also he shall find a
treasure of wisdom that will replenish his soul, (whiles here beneath in all
the changes of this World,) with a great deal of Peace and Comfort. For what
will add greater hopes, or be a surer prop to a soul in the time of its
Affliction and mourning, then to fore see, know, and be assured, (next to its
interest in Christ) of the day of it is deliverance? This has been the Ordinary
portion and Lot of every soul that is truly Interessed in Christ Jesus through
their several Generations, for the Servant must not look to be greater then
his Master; Christ entered into his glory by Sufferings, Temptations, sorrows,
and the way of the Cross; his members must drink the same cup with him, whiles
here militant, though not, to the same measure, nor to the same ends; for
herein they are not made mighty to bear: his sufferings were to give
satisfaction to Divine Justice, that he that knew no sin might be made sin for
us, that we thereby might become the Sons and Children of God. Our sufferings
are for the Exercise of our graces, and to fulfill the remainder of the
sufferings of the Mystical Body of Christ in our selves, in our Journying
toward our Celestial Canaan. And this has not only been the portion of
particular members but of the whole Body, the true Church of God in all ages,
as appears by the History thereof. Yet notwithstanding, our gracious God to
manifest his Fatherly oversight, and faithful providence and goodness, which
he without Intermission dispenses toward his Church and people, has often,
for a Comfort to the Godly, and warning to the wicked, not only delivered them
from their oppressors, and set them above them; but so prefixed the time of
their distresses and deliverances, that both they and their enemies themselves,
in observing the events, must needs acknowledge the All-wise hand of Gods
providence, to the one for good, to the other in wrath and Judgment. God has
promised he will not be angry with his for ever, God has his accesses and his
recesses, his comings in, and his withdrawings toward his Church: Some are
conditional, as if we keep with God he will be found of us; but if we forsake
him, he will forsake us. Some again are absolute, and out of Sovereignty, as
that, I will be found of them that sought me not, etc. Yet however, Gods
purpose of doing good to his Church is so steadfast and unalterable, that though
many of them run upon the performance of some precedent conditions or
qualifications in his people, yet he will in faithfulness perform his promises
toward them in their deliverance, either by making them a fit people for so
great a mercy by working the condition in them, and so will make them a willing
people in the day of his power: or otherwise rather then any of the promises
shall fall to ground unaccomplished will do it absolutely of his good will and
pleasure.

1. Before the Flood God gave 120. years respit to the old World before he
would execute his Judgment upon them, Genesis 6.3. When this time was expired his
Spirit would contend with them no longer, but God came with the Flood and
destroyed all living, except Noah, and what was with him in the Ark.

2. God declared to Abraham that his seed should be a stanger in a Land that
was not theirs, in Egypt, and should serve them and they should afflict them
for 400. years, but withal that Nation whom they should serve he would judge,
and afterward they should come out with great substance, Genesis 15.13, 14. etc.
Which promise God did fulfill most faithfully unto them in its due time, and
after the expiration of the said Term he brought out his people with a mighty
and strong Arm, in drowning the Host of Pharaoh in the red Sea.

3. To that Captivity in Babylon God sets a period of 70. years, Jerem. 29.10.
when that time was accomplished; God stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of
Persia to let the people go.

4. To Daniel God showed, that 70. weeks, viz. weeks of years being 490. years
were to be determined, in which time the Messiah should come and be cut off,
and at length the City of Jerusalem destroyed, Dan. 9.24, 25, 26. verses. And
how all these things were fully accomplished is most evident to every one that
knows any thing of Gods dealings toward his Church and people.

5. In like manner there is a certain time set and determined upon the Church
of God in the new Testament, how long she shall be exposed to persecution and
when she shall be delivered from it, which is expressed in the Prophet, Daniel
7.25. and the 12.7. They (the Saints) shall be given unto the fourth Beasts
hand until a time, times, and the dividing of time. Which Prophecy of Daniel
does answer that of Rev. 12.14. The Woman which is the Church of God shall be
in the Wilderness and trodden under foot by the power of the Beast for a time,
times and half a time, which is to say, as it is explained in the sixth verse
of the same Chapter 1260. days or years, which term for the comfort of the
Saints the power of the Beast cannot exceed. For he that has set a bound and
period to all Kingdoms and Empires in this World has said it, hither thou
shall go and no farther. And that Angel in the Prophet Daniel 12.7. held up his
right hand and left hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever that
it should be but for a time, times, and half.

It being then clearly evinced that God will in his appointed time visit his
Church with sure mercy, and having prefixed in all ages the time and
continuance of their Distresses and persecutions, and that in the day of his
visitation, he will come with a certain deliverance to his people, and ruin to
his enemies: it is matter of great Joy and comfort to his people to be
forewarned of this time, and fore see it though long before it come to bear up
their Spirits in there greatest afflictions and distresses: Abraham saw Christ's
day and blessed God, though seeing it afar of by faith. This God has more
especially done in this Book of the Revelation, it being a discovery unto the
Apostle John in Prophetical representations and Hierogliphique figures of all
the Empires, States and Kingdoms, both Ethnic and Antichristian, with their
several usurpations and oppressions over the Church of God, which should
happen from John's time unto the end of the World, together with the issue
thereof, the final destruction of the one and the exaltation of the other
before the ultimate end of all.

But here by the way it will be objected and said that this Book is full of
hidden mysteries and sealed, and very difficult to be understood, and therefore
most of those that have espoused their studies to the opening of this Book,
have come of with loss in their over bold undertaking.

1. I Answer, this Book of the Revelation of S. John is indeed full of
mysteries which will so remain until the accomplishment thereof do discover
them unto us, and make them manifest: But when we by the observation of the
events do see before our eyes the effect of each Prophecy, and what by this
and that thing has been meant, it is now no longer a mystery unto us. It is
now obvious to every eye what is meant by mystery, Babylon the great, the
Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17.6. This the Spirit of God does clear up in the same
Chapter to be, the City with seven heads reigning over the Kings of the earth:
And few or none do hesitate, but do acknowledge, yea even the learnest of the
Jesuits themselves as Bellar. Lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans Chap. 2. Blasius Viegas
in Chap. 17.18. Apoc. 5. Sect. 3. Ribera. in Apoc. Ch^p. 14. Page 144. etc.
That by this great City here is meant Rome, likewise, all interpreters of the
Reformation do harmoniously accord that by the Beast of seven heads and ten
horns, Rev. 13 1. must be meant the Romish Empire divided into ten Kingdoms.
And the Beast with two horns like a Lamb, Rev. 13.11. yet speaking like a
Dragon, to be the Popish Antichristian Hierarchy, and if events has plainly
evidenced these without contradiction so to be understood and interpreted, as
in the progress of this discourse will more fully appear, why then should if
seem strange that the residue of the mysteries of this Book should be unlocked
and made obvious as well as the former? Since the Spirit of God it self in the
17. Chapter has laid the first ground work, from whence as from a sure
foundation we may have a view of the whole Revelation, by collating Hystories,
times and passages one with another, and lay them to their several characters
and periods which the Spirit has affixed to every remarkable revolution,
passage and Prophecy in this Book as a sure token and touchstone to find
them out, and make them manifest. So that now the Revelation is no longer a
mystery, but a Book of History of memorable Acts and passages. Wherein is fore
told the several changes that shall befall to the secular State or Roman
Empire, and to the Church of Christ under the Dominion of that Empire, until
it shall, as that stone prophesied of in Dan. 2. Smite the Image on his feet
and become it self a great Mountain and set up upon the top of all Mountains.
And if we compare the Historyes and changes that has happened in the Roman
Empire with the Revelation, we shall discover clearly how far the
accomplishments reaches, and what we may expect ere long: So that the things
represented in this Book are no more mysteries and hidden things, but as clear
and accomplished Acts unto us.

2. The very Title and first entrance into the first Chapter, first verse of
this Book denies it to be a hidden mystery, no farther then before the events
do discover themselves; for it is called the Apocalypse or the Revelation of
Jesus Christ which God gave unto him to show unto his Servants which shortly
must be done, which he sent and showed by his Angel unto his Servant John.
Besides it is contrary to the clear letter of the Text that it should be a Book
shut and sealed; for in the 6. Chapter verse. 8. The Lambs is found worthy to
open the sealed Book, and so discoveries are made unto John: and by him to all
the Church of God.

3. That little Book mentioned in Chap. 10. which more especially contains the
fate or destiny of the Church to the end of the World was an open book, and the
Son of God in the end of the Revelation, Chap. 22.10. plainly prohibiteth to
seal the sayings of the Prophecy of this book for the time is at hand.

Therefore this hence clearly follows, to set a check upon our supine and
overly looking on this book: We would rather have it sealed and hidden, (though
the Son of God testifies the contrary) then to bestow our industry with the
help of the Spirit of God to seeks out the mind of the Spirit in it. Truths
are like treasures got by the forest labors, are most sweet and precious, but
with all such slowbellies that think there is a Lion in the way, I leave with
them these considerations. Is it the Book or Word of God or not? If it is (as I
hereafter shall clearly evince) then study it; Some good will come to the soul
by it: No Word of God is of private interpretation, or written in vain, it will
stand in great stead. Yea in the Alpha of this book and the Omega thereof, in
the first and last Chapters, there is a blessing stored up for them that read,
and they that learn the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein, for the time is at hand, Chap. 1. ver. 3. and Chap. 22.
ver. 7. And shall there a blessing be promised to all these that read, hear and
keep the words of this Prophecy, and he that has promised being most faithful
to perform? Yea these things says the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto
a flaming fire Revel. 2.18. These things says he that is holy and true, Chap
3.7. These things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, Chap. 3.14.
And so closes in the last Chapter ver. 6. that these sayings are faithful and
true, Heaven and earth shall first pass away before one jota or tittle of the
Word of God, shall fall to the ground unaccomplished, I say shall there a
blessing be promised upon so faithful grounds, and will thou not look after it?
I should judge blessedness worth the looking after seeing that he that has
promised is most ready, willing and able to perform.

But if it demanded, what is the advantage? what is this blessing that may
accrue in reading, hearing and keeping the words of this Prophesy? I answer
much every way, both to every particular soul and to the whole Church of
Christ.

First if there were no more in it, but the detecting and making manifest of
the Antichristian whore or state and the pollutions thereof, and so give a
warning to all Gods people to come out of her, and not to partake of her
iniquities least they be partakers of her plagues. Is it not a blessing to keep
their souls undefiled from Antichrists pollutious, and to be delivered from
judgments due thereunto? Was it not a great blessing for Lot to be fore told
and delivered out of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah? So is it not a
singular blessing and mercy unto us and the Church of Christ to be delivered,
and freed from the divine wrath that is gone out against spiritual or
mystical Babylon?

2. Is it not a great privilege and blessing to the people of God, to know the
catastrophe and result of all their troubles, and to have a sure word of
Prophecy, for their deliverance from the oppressions and cruelties of their
enemies, and that they shall one day triumph over them to their utter ruin and
destruction? Is not this able to beat up their Spirits in all their fiery
Trials, to see that their deliverance draws nigh? Is it not a blessing in the
day of affliction, in the day of mourning to be kept faithful witnesses unto
our God? And though Satan and his deputized Antichrist have power over us to
overcome and afflict us, yet we are these that are sealed in the foreheads with
the mark of the Lamb?

3. Is it not a blessing to know that Antichrists reign is but 42. months a
certain definite time, which is now drawing to its period? Is it not a blessing
to know that the time of the woman in the Wilderness, and the witnesses
mourning in sackcloth, the treading down the true Church of Christ and the
Professors thereof is but for 1260. days, which term is also near expiring?
Is it not a great blessing after all the troubles and afflictions of the Church
and Saints here on earth to be assured, that Christ their head with Myriads of
his Angels and Saints departed, will appear to the final destroying of all
their enemies and giving them peace and rest, causing them to reign on earth.

Lastly, is it not a great blessing to have a promise of the enjoyment and
Communion of Christ and his glorified Saints, here on earth for a thousand
years? When mortality shall put on immortality, when we shall see and know all
the mysteries of God in Christ as we are seen and known, when that which is
perfect is come, that which is imperfect shall be done away, when we shall see
no longer in a glass, through weak and dark ordinances, but then we shall see
face to face, when all our ordinances will be in a higher and more spiritual
key, when sorrow, sin, and death shall be swallowed up of victory, when we
shall walk in the light of the new Jerusalem the Lambs Wife that comes down
from Heaven, wherein dwells true righteousness. And shall all those things be
discovered in this Book of the Revelation, with a promise thereof, and of
blessedness to all those that keep the words of this Prophesy, and yet will any
be so stupid to conclude, that this is a dry useless book? That treats of
Christianity from its very rise to the consummation thereof, full fraught with
abundance of useful Observations to steer our feet aright in our militant
course here, until we shall all come to the full stature of Christ.

And whereas some say it is a most difficult Book to interpret, and that many
able Expositors have come off with loss in their studies about it.

I answer first, that all things to the sluggard indeed are difficult; The
pith, marrow and substance of the Revelations is not to be found out by a
coursary reading thereof, it is not obvious to every ey: And this is intimated
in that 3. verse. of Chap. 1. wherein is observable, that blessedness is
entailed to reading, hearing and keeping the words of the Prophesy: it is not a
bare reading or hearing that will entitle to this blessedness, but it must be
keeping, treasuring up, pondering and digesting before it will produce the
happy fruits of blessedness. Indeed there are, (...), the depths for Elephants
to swim in, as well as shallows for Lambs to wade thorough in the Word of God,
as God has dispensed various gifts and abilities in his Saints, so God has
sown in his Word several measures of truth suitable thereunto, none may
complain for want to exercise their Spirits in. The weakest may see so much as
shall make him wise unto salvation, and the highest capacity can attain no
more, and when it has done all yet it must needs confess that it is not
omniscient, but that there are some mysteries in the Word of God, that will be
still mysteries unto it until the day of the Revelation of Christ shall come,
wherein he will teach us all things.

It was a saying of Prospers, Parvuli, magni, fortes, infirmi,
Habent in Scripturis unde alantur and satientur.
No age so young which Scripture does not fit,
There Is milk for Babes, and meat for stronger wit.
2. It is difficult to all such that are not versed in the old and modern
Roman Histories, not knowing how to apply the figures and representations of
this Prophesy to their several times and periods: Neither knows how to
distinguish the times of the revolutions and changes, but confound several
things spoken of diverse States one with another: Not observing where mention
is made of the secular or civil state, and whereof the ecclesiastic,
conceiving that the Revelation is as a continued History, or Relation of events
succeeding one another in the same order and cause as the visions are reveiled
in: And for want of due observation herein many interpreters have stumbled, and
so confounding, perverting and disturbing the whole method and harmony of the
Revelation, in making several epacts and periods of time, so placing things
which must come to pass after the destruction of Babylon and the Beast before
it: Whereas the passages of the Revelation are so related one to the other,
though written in order one after another, that many thereof do concur in one
and the same time; so that he that goes about to describe them in order of
time as they lie in the book; in order of place, without the observation of the
methd, oharmony and connection which is to be observed in all the passages of
this book, falling under the same syncronisme or concurrencies of times, indeed
to such this Book of the Revelation must needs remain full of difficulty,
mystery and obscurity: And so the whole order of the Revelation together with
themselves are rendered in-extricable and confounded. Whereas indeed the Spirit
of God in this Book as a wise and well versed Historian is wont to do in the
description of humane actions, does rightly distinguish of all the Revolutions
and changes both of the civil and ecclesiastic states, and though many of them
are done and acted together and at the same time by diverse and sundry Persons,
yet cannot be declared together, but severally one after another. So these
Prophesies though revealed and set down in order of place one preceding the
other, yet in vain do they go about to interpret them that observe not the
peculiar characters and hidden mysteries of numbers syncronising, and meeting
in one and the same time: which is indeed the great key of the Revelation,
which makes all the passages and Revolutions therein, though at the first sight
they seem abstruse and disturbed, yet by collating one to the other they become
plain and revealed to us, which in the subsequent discourse will manifest it
self. And these have been some of the reasons that some former interpreters
have come off with loss in their studies and expositions of this Book: when as
they have applied diverse passages in this book, to their own times, when they
had no relation to them: and sometimes interpreted as they are in order set
down in the Book following one another, whereas they should be interpreted as
they are Relata and ^orrelata, and belonging to one and the same time and
period though dispersed here and there thorough the whole book, and so the
harmony of the whole is kept some and entire. For we see that the order it
self is not to be conformed to every aptness of interpretation according to the
will and pleasure, of the interpreter, but according to the mind of the Spirit
of God made clear by the Idea of their several and particuliar Characters for
explanation thereof affixed thereunto. Now because some expositours have herein
gone astray, must there no farther inquiry be made into this Book? This would
be a way to cast of all the Books of God: for in which of them have not some
expositors done amiss. There is no promise of infallibility, but there is a
promise unto the latter days, that many should run to and fro, and knowledge
should be increased? Dan. 12.4. do not arts grow in time to their (...) and
perfection? And is it any disparagement to those that went before us, that we
see farther then they did? Apigmy upon a ^yants shoulder may see farther then
the himself: So we being helped by the instructions and experiences of our
predecessors upon their shoulders, it is no great advancing of our abilities
if we soar a little higher. I would not be understood as if this my essay were
perfect and so exact as nothing can be added thereunto: for herein I should
balk our proper attribute, Humanum est errare, since others that come after us
will see farther then we of this present age coming nearer to the
accomplishment of the events of all. Only I leave this consideration and
proposal with the judicious and pious Christian, that if he can find out a
more commodious method of interpretation upon better reasons and grounds then I
have, for this Book of the Revelation, suiting with the mind of the Spirit,
and preserving the harmony of the whole Prophesies entire, and discovering the
several passages and revolutions therein, how they do relate one to the other
in their several proper characters, and syncronismes with more prospicuity and
fitter application of History answering the truth of this Prophesy, I should
most willingly become a learner at his feet: in the mean time, I shall add that
of the Poet. Horat.

Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum.
Object. Again others will object and say, That this way of interpretation
savours too much of curiosity and impertinency: And the application of the
Prophetical representations, and of the Apocaliptique days and periods to the
several times, and changes of the Church and State here on earth, is too
precise and peremptory.

1. To which I answer, first I assert no more in this interpretation, the text
being not at all forced, but as it is either literal or figuratively referred
to the times and states then in being, and that interpretation made clear and
undeniable, by such necessary and sure arguments characters and notable tokens,
as will make the true sense and meaning of every notable mystery obvious to
every discerning ey: And herein I walk not alone, having M. Brightman, Napeir,
Piscator, Alsteed, and learned M. Mede, with some others in their several
tractates, upon the Revelation, to be my leaders herein.

2. Those figures and representations which makes this interpretation dubious,
difficult o^ misterious, being cleared out of the other places of the
Revelation, and the Prophets of the old Testament, which being rightly applied
to the civil and ecclesiastic States as the text and time does require, should
wipe of the brand of impertinency and curiosity: what God has sanctified no
man should call unholy, what God has revealed, no man should judge himself too
curious and impertinent to search into; Unrevealed things pertain unto God, but
revealed things are for the use and good of man.

3. I answer to the perciseness of the time of the Apocaliptique periods,
though I will not herein be too peremptory, well knowing that in matters of
History and Chronology, there is great variety of opinions and imperfection
therein, as it is manifest in Scaligerde Emendatione temporum, and other
accounts also treating upon the same subject: yet all this does not hinder, but
the times and periods are fixed in the predeterminate Counsels of God, which
are higher then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, unalterable and
unchangeable. And though notwithstanding there is difference and imperfection
in most accounts of times, yet by a regular judgment drawn from the visible
tokens, characters, image and representation of each time, which are either
concomitants, contemporaries or immediate antecedents or consequents of each
great revolution and change: we may judge their periods either to be past,
drawing nigh at hand, or yet to come. And this is no more then Christ himself
has done in setting down remarkable forerunning as Signs, of the destruction
of Jerusalem, and his least coming in the 24. of Matthew. and the 13. of Mark.

But I would desire always to be understood, when I set down the exact epacts
and periods of time, it may vary as unto us in preciseness of account in
respect of the imperfection of our Chronology, but long time it cannot miss,
every notable revolution and season having their own proper characters and
tokens, to point them out as it were with a finger: which will notably help us
peremptorily to conclude (in the foresaid limited sense.) This time is the time
of Antichrists birth and rising: this of his reign, this of his ruin and
desolation. Consider to this end that of the Angel in the Prophet Daniel, Chap.
12.7. Who held up his right hand, and left hand unto Heaven, and swear by him
that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, times and half. And the Son
of God in the Revelation 13.14. has showed that the Beast and false Prophet
shall have power over the Saints for 42. months, and that the time of the
woman in the Wilderness, and the time of the witnesses Prophesying in sackcloth
to be 1260. days. These things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness:
who would not then believe him? Seeing that Antichrists reign, and the time of
the Saints mourning is in the Eternal decree of God limited and prefixed, and
that which the Angel and the Son of God do testify with a great oath, we have
no reason to doubt of, but that they will come to pass in their several periods
and appointed seasons.

Again, against the definite demonstration of the last times, and seasons and
the great changes and revolutions, held forth in this Book of the Revelation,
two Scriptures offers themselves, that of our Saviors to his Disciples in Mark
13.32. speaking of the last day and of his second coming. But of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son
but the Father, the other is that of the Act. 1.7. Wherein Christ answers his
Disciples question, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom unto
Israel? And he said unto them it is not for you to know the time and the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power, so the objection lies thus.
If no man, no not Christ the Son of Man, nor the Angels of Heaven knows the
last day, but that times and seasons are left alone in the power of the Father,
how then comes it to pass that there is a discovery of times and seasons, and
of the last day it self and end of all made out unto John, in this Revelation
by Christ himself?

I answer first, we must know that in Christ, there was two natures distinct
and unconfounded to make up one Person of a mediator, and the property of each
nature did remain entire unto each: he was true God and true Man: and as he
was Man or the Son of Man, it is no derogation at all unto him to affirm that
he knew not all things, and that according to the understanding of Man to be
ignorant of some things, and so of the last day. But to affirm it as he is God
being one in Counsel, nature, and essence with the Father from all eternity, it
would be no less then blasphemy to affirm it, for shall the Creator of all
things be ignorant of his handiwork?

2. It was not the injunction or command of his Father on him whiles he
conversed here on earth, to discover unto the World what should happen in the
latter days. Of the same comfort is that Scripture, Mark. 10.40. being an
answer to the Sons of Zebedee, to sit on his right hand or his left was not his
to give, yet in Revel. 3.21. he promises to him that overcommeth that he shall
sit down with him in his Throne. This Scripture gives a fair light to an
interpretation of the former: for whiles he was here beneath perfecting the
work of our redemption here on earth; the Revelation was not given unto him,
from the Father to discover times and seasons: nor to give Thrones, Powers and
Kingdoms into the hands of his Saints, until after his resurrection when all
power was given unto him by the Father, and all things were then given into his
hand by right of purchase. And this is that that is clearly intimated in the
Revel. 5.9. etc. When none was found worthy to open the Book, then the 24.
elders before the Throne sang a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the
book and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and has redeemed us
to God by thy blood of every kindred, tongue, people and Nation. The opening of
this book being as it were referred to the merit of his death and passion, so
that it should not seem strange that he knew not the day of his second coming,
neither having not as yet suffered nor entered into his glory. The Revelation
of all things being reserved by the Father for Christ unto that day.

3. That place of the Acts 1.7. is nothing to the purpose. It was not for his
Disciples to know then the fittest and most meet time, which God thought good
at that time not to make known, to restore the Kingdom unto Israel, he does not
answer them that he will not restore the Kingdom unto Israel. But it was not
now fit for them to know the time and season thereof; Christ here speaks of de
tempore Tempestivo, of the opportune and fit time and seasons, which the Father
does reserve in his own power, and will not reveal unto his people.

4. I answer that in this essay, I do consider the time of the rise, progress
and period of Antichrist and other the great events, Syncronizing with the same
in an Indefinite and more general way, not in an exact, definite precise day
and hour, here I only consider the years in a more general way, which now the
Father has not reserved as a secret in his own power, but revealed them to us
by his Son in this of the Revelation and other books of God.

Lastly accounting it as labor lost to answer the vain interpretations and
glosses of the allegorizing and Chemical Scripturists, to wit the Familistical
Notionists, who can extract quidlibet ex quolibet, and so make the Revelation
indeed a mystery and book sealed to the wisest Christian, therefore I shall not
at all meddle with them, when as they interpret according to the mistical
fan^ies of their own confused brains, and not according to the least measure of
sound knowledge. For indeed if this book be not opened according to the
Prophetical visions, with their peculiar characters rightly applied to their
several times and seasons, we shall not know what tolerable sense or
exposition to set upon it.

It is well that the Spirit of God it self does clearly discover, and
demonstrate in the 17. Chap. the beast with seven heads and ten horns to be a
government or Empire, that should arise under ten Kings: And that mystery of
Babylon the great, and the woman sitting upon many waters, to be that great
City situated upon seven hills, and which does reign over the Kings of the
earth. Now if the Spirit of God it self has helped us with this key to unshut
in part the mysteries of the Revelation, it should not be accounted presumption
in us to fall on the same method, in opening the rest of the Prophetical
representations and figures of this book, when as the Spirit of God has given
us some first fruits thereof it self, as sure footsteps to tread in: From which
discovery of the Spirit, we may as from a watchtower, take a full veiw of the
rest of the Revelation, and so a scanding of the whole book otherwise in it
self inaccessible.

And that thy Servant, O Christ who in himself is too weak for such a work may
be fitted in some measure, from thy self who art the Wisdom of God, and to whom
the Revelation of all things is given of the Father, because thou art found
worthy, O do thou enlighten his mind with true Light from above: And remove
all impediments, his iniquities out of thy sight, by the washing of thine own
blood, then thou may discover thy mind unto thy poor Servant, being hallowed
by thy self to a fruitful reception thereof: Grant O Christ that by thy favor
and the guidance of thy good Spirit, he may diligently consider the mysteries
of this Book, and that unto sobriety, and declare it forth unto others, that
the Church of God, may receive some advantage by him. And if thy Servant, O
Lord, has herein through weakness, built any hay and stubble upon thy precious
structure, O let it be consumed, but so as that thy Servant may be saved in the
great day of the Lord God Almighty, but if any of thine receive good hereby, to
thee for it, as most due, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty, be praise, glory and Dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Catalogue of diverse Questions, in this Treatise discussed.
WHether this Book of Revelation, be of divine authority? page 1 Whether John
the divine, the subordinate Author thereof be the same with John the Apostle,
and Evangelist or some other Person? 5 Whether the Title of this Book, viz. The
Revelation of John the Divine, be John's own or some other Persons? 7 What is
meant by the Christian wish or salutation, grace and peace unto you? 19 How
comes John to wish grace and peace to the Churches, whilst being Churches of
Christ they had this grace and peace aforehand? 19 Whether Christ shall have
two last commings to Judgment? 25 Whether Christians when they are called unto
it, are bound in duty to suffer for the profession of all the truths of God?
31, and 112 Whether the Lords day mentioned, Rev. 1.10. wherein John received
his Visions, be the first day of the week or not? 33 How shall we know Divine
raptures, ecstasies, or Visions from diabolical, the Devil being Gods ape
herein? 34 Does not the Devil often foretell the truth of events? 37 Did not
Satan tell Saul in that apparition of Samuel in the 1 Samuel 28, 19. That he
should be delivered with all his host into the hands of the Philistines, and
that he and his Sons on the morrow should be all with Samuel, that is dead? and
was not that prediction truly fullfilled? 38 Whether that Samuel which the
Witch of Endor raised unto Saul, was the true Prophet Samuel, or the Devil in
his shape and likeness, or otherwise some cousening consort and confederate of
the cousening Pythonists, 38, 39 Whether Christ according to his manhood
appeared unto John, Rev. 1, 13. when he appeared to him as one like unto the
Son of man? 43 Whether there can be any separation between the deity and
manhood of Christ? 44 Whether the two edged sword that proceeded out of Christ's
mouth, is to be only spiritually understood and not matterially also? 50, 51
Whether the blessed heavenly Spirits and Angels, or glorified Persons after the
Resurrection do or shall see the essential glory of God? 53 Do not Angels see
Gods face in Heaven? and did not Moses and Jacob see God, and talked with him
face to face? 54. and do not divines hold that in Heaven we enjoy the
beatifical Vision: 55 Whether Christ according to his divine nature was
impassible? 58 Why John is commanded particularly to write to each Church of
the seven apart? 68 Whether a sound Church may censure a corrupted Church? 69,
70 Whether by Angel of the Church of Ephesus, be meant the Metropolitan over
the rest of the Bishops of Ephesus? and whether the Angel of Ephesus was the
Metropolitan over the other six sister Churches? 71 Whether the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, is to be interpreted the Presbytery? 72 What gives unto our
works the denomination of good works? And whether any of our works are simply
and strictly to be called good and perfect? 79, and 80 In whom lies the power
to try, judge and examine false Apostles, false teachers and their Doctrines?
83, and 196 Whether the jurisdiction of the Church be above the word? 84
Whether wicked Persons or unsound in the faith are to be admitted, or being
admitted to be tolerated in the fellowship of the Church? 85, 86, etc. Whether
any else besides true and real Saints or believers in the judgment of charity
are to be admitted into Church fellowship? 86, 87 Whether the judicials or
ceremonials of Moses, are any foundation for a Gospel ordinance? 88, 89 Whether
Baptism is administered with best satisfaction of conscience upon infants? 88
Whether it must be true justifying, faith or dogmatical only that entitles to
Baptism? 90, 91 Whether the Apostolical Office be ceased to the Church or not?
and whether it was only tied unto the first twelve? 92, 93, 94, 95 Whether the
first 12 Apostles were but of equal authority with other ordinary Officers as
Pastors, Elders, etc. 95 Whether the gift of miracles does continue unto the
Church? 97 How shall we know or try false Apostles from the true? 101, 102,
etc. To what Church shall one repair to receive a sound and orthodox call for
the min^stery of the Gospel? 105, 106, etc. How should the first reformers
have a right call to the ministry, if they ^ had it not from Rome? 108 Whether
the Presbytery of England have a right call from the late Bishops as true
Presbyters? 110 Whether Believers complaints for want of wills to repent, be
just or not? 118 Whether it be a Legal Teaching to denounce wrath and Judgments
on non-amendment, or for want of Repentance? 119 Whether Repentance is to be
joined to Christ in some causality unto salvation, or jointly with him, somewhat
subordinate to that great end? 120, And whether Faith and Repentance be the
condiiion (properly so taken) of the Covenant of Grace? 121 What is meant by
the Spirit that speaks unto the seven Asian Churches? 126 What is meant by the
Tree of Life, and what is meant by Paradise? 130 Whether Paradise and Heaven
above be all one? 131 Whether God tempts man? And whether he tempts unto
evil or sin? 143 Does not many Scriptures say, That God tempts man? 144
Whether God has a hand or efficiency in and about sin? 146 Why does God often
afflict his own children with so sharp tribulations? And whether the justice of
God can be vindicated in that particular? 149 Whether great corruptions
nullifies a Church? 173 What is the reason that full Reformation cannot be
attained? 171, 172 How is Gods justice vindicated, if he smites godly and
ungodly together, for the sins of the wicked among them? 179 Whether Christ
received now by faith to justification and absolution, be the hidden Manna, and
white Stone, promised Rev. 2.17. to the conquering Saints? 181, 182 In whose
power is it to remove false Teachers? 196 Whether the power of the Keys be
singly in the Officers and Presbytery, or jointly in the Officers and Brethren
together? 198 How will it stand with the Justice of God to cut off innocent
Infants, with their Parents, in his wrath and judgments, that have never done
good or evil 204 How comes Infants, dying Infants, to be saved, that have not
faith? And whether the Parents faith is the condition of their salvation? 205,
etc. Whether we may merit by our works? 208, and 237. How are the Saints
Copartners with Christ in his Imperial Reign and Kingdom? 212 Is it not in the
power of Saints to recover themselves out of sin, without going to Christ by
faith? 223 Whether true Saints may finally fall away from grace, 223, 241.
Whether perfection may be had in this life? 225 Whether Christ creates war, and
sends the sword into the world? 233 Whether the Saints of God for their
iniquities may be blotted out of the Book of Life? 241 Whether it be lawful to
pray that God would blot out any name or person out of his Book of Life? 242
Whether the Civil Magistrate has authority over the Church? 250, 251 Whether
Magistrates may not suppress errors, being well advised by a Learned Assembly
of Divines? 851 Whether the Magistrate be not subordinate unto Christ, as
Mediator, to make Laws for him to rule next and immediately under him in his
Church? 252 When shall the Jews and Gentiles be gloriously united into one
Church? 261 Whether Saints may be said to be saved in the hour of Temptation,
and yet suffer in it? 262 Whether the tryumphant State of the Church shall be
here on earth, or in the supernal Heavens? 276, 313 Whether the Imperial
Reign of the Saints shall be after the general Resurrection, or before? 277
Whether Christians may not be over-hot and Zealous in matters of Religion? And
whether a moderate temper would not be more advantageous therein then an
over-furious one? 285 Whether we are to buy of Christ his Graces by way of
contract, or not? 295 How is Christ said to love those whom he bitterly
chastises? 302 Whether does Christ always use a spiritual force for the
reclaiming of his back slidden people? 304 Whether Christ's Kingdom and the
Fathers be all one? 310 Whether the Saints, as Saints, may justly expect, by
virtue of promise in the Word, the Rule and Dominion under Christ on Earth at
this present time? 335 Whether the Saints, in order to the obtaining of the
Rule and Dominion, may oppose the Supreme Magistracy they live under? 335, 337
Whether Heathenish or Antichristian Magistrates may be opposed? 338, 339
Whether the Saints Imperial Reign be far off, or near at h^nd? 341 342
Whether it be not lawful for Saints to put to a helping hand in pulling down
the Powers of the world that uphold Babylon, and the Whore thereof? 346, 347
(...), Or, PRAECOGNITA. THE REVELATION OF John the Divine.
CHAP. I.
VER. I. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto
his servants things which must shortly come to pass, and he sent and signified
it by his Angel unto his servant John.
THis Book has for Title, (...), The Revelation of John the Divine. And here
in the Entrance, I shall take leave to insert some (...), or preliminary
discourses and questions, which are necessary to be discussed, before I enter
upon the Exposition of the Body of this Book.

Quest. 1. Whether this Book of the Revelation of John, be of Divine Authority?

2. Whether John, who in the Title of this Book is named John the Divine, the
Author thereof, be the same with John the Apostle, and Evangelist, the beloved
Disciple of Christ, or some other person?

3. In the last place, I shall give a compendious view and taste of the scope
and design of the whole Book.

1. Concerning the Divine Authority of this Book, I should say very little or
nothing unto it, well knowing how dangerous it is to move Foundation stones, or
to question the Authority of any of the Books of God, received reverently in
the Churches of Christ from age to age, as the Canon and Rule of their Faith
and Manners. If it were not that the Adversary of old took advantage by this
artifice to hinder the growth, and cast prejudice on many of the Truths of God,
and to weaken the comforts of his Saints, mainly cherished and supported by the
Prophesies in this Book. The occasion of the first doubting of the Divine
Authority of this Book: Hence rose, in that it favored the pretended Heresy
of the Chyliasts or Millenaries, and their adversaries endeavored to father it
rather on Cerinthus the Heretic, then the Apostle John, thereby, if possibly
they might, not only enervate its Testimony, but quite shut it out for ever out
of the number of the Canonical Books of God, that it might never do the
Chyliasts any service more. Upon this ground Hyrome was the first that did most
publicly call its authority into question, about the year of Christ 400. and
that in pure opposition unto the Millenaries, the followers of Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Ireneus, Lactantius, and others of good credit and authority in the
Church of Christ in that judgment. Secondly it became suspected, as Erasmus
witnesses, (who in this particular, and concerning other Divine Books also,
was very unstable in his own Judgment) in that some of the ancient Greek
primitive Christians did not receive the Revelations as of Divine Authority;
and this Hierome himself also testifies: But on what slender grounds this came
to pass, I shall presently consider: And though it is granted that some ancient
Greek Christians did not receive it, yet it was by others of the same age, and
of the far abler parts, judgment, and integrity, numbered amongst the Books of
God, and acknowledged to have the public stamp of his Spirit on it. There was
one Caius or Gaius, as Eusebius witnesses in the fourth book of his History,
who says, That this Book was written of one Cerinthus an Heretic, who held
among many other errors, That after the resurrection of Christ, his Kingdom
should become earthly and sensual, wherein the flesh should be satisfied again
in all manner of concupiscences, for the term of a complete millenary of years.
Dionisius of Alexandria takes up this report from this Caius an obscure person,
and (as is thought) was one of the heretical Alogi, who denied (as Epiphanius
testifies) the Word of God; and on the false report of this Caius, Dionisius
doubts of the Divine Authority of this Book: But Hierome takes up the same
slender ground from Dionisius, and does object it strongly. But I answer, it
seems Hierome would admit of any slender testimony to the invalidating of the
Authority of this Book, because this book was the great Fortress of his
adversaries the Chiliasts: yet however, though Hierome, and some others of
suspected credit, and of obscure note, as Dorotheus, Dionisius, Eusebius,
Caius, do oppugn it, yet Epiphanius was so passionate friend to it, that he
reckons them among Heretics that did reject it; and Justin Martyr, and
Ireneus of sounder judgment, and of singular piety, did not only approve this
book as canonical, but wrote commentaries on it.

2. Whatsoever that Caius was that fathers the Apocalypse on Cerinthus, on whose
report all his followers were misled, yet the relation it self holds not any
resemblance of truth; for Ireneus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius, who write very
largely of the heresies of Cerinthus, and his successors, yet never mentions
that he held this opinion of Chiliasme, or the Kingdom of Christ on earth,
which they could not be ignorant of; therefore this story of Caius, concerning
him and his Apocalypse, is Apocryphal, and a mere figment, on purpose devised by
the adversary, to lessen the authority of this book; see more at large hereof
in D. Homes, lib. 3. chap. 3. sect. 3.

Further, if Cerinthus was the Author of this book, doubtless he would have
besprinkled it with some other of his errors that were peculiar to him; as that
of the creation of the world by Angels, denying of the Divinity of Christ, and
affirming his generation to be only of the seed of Joseph and Mary, as is
testified by M. Baxter's book of Infidelity, treating of the heresies of
Cerinthus, Carpocrates, and their followers, page 129. etc. But in this book of
the Revelation, there is not one word to this purpose, but rather the contrary
strongly confirmed in many places thereof, as the subsequent discourse thereon
will manifest. And lastly, If it were granted that Cerinthus held and expected
a riotous and luxuriant Millenary, (which is now disproved) yet this of the
Apocalypse has not the least intimation thereof, but of a Millenary of rest and
joy, in a higher, and more spiritual key then ever the Church enjoyed on earth
heretofore: there is great difference between an earthly sensual reign, and to
reign on earth: Saints may be on earth, and yet be most spiritual; so they may
have a Kingdom here on earth, and yet a most spiritualized and heavenly one,
which is fully confirmed in the 21, and 22 chapters of this book. And so I have
answered the first ground of suspecting the divine authority of this Apocalypse.

Secondly, Hierome the great Antagonist of this book writes, that many learned
men spoke very sharply against this book, and the whole matter thereof, as not
becoming the gravity of an Apostle, being only a common history of things
shaddowed under dark figures, and hard kind of speeches.

I answer, Rather it becomes and savours the excellency and authority of an
Apostle, being directed to the then seven famous Churches of lesser Asia,
carrying in it all along the spirit of Prophecy, and the very steps,
sentences, and figures of the old Prophets, being full of pregnant testimonies
of the Divinity of Christ, and of this perfecting of the work of our Redemption
and Salvation by his continual Intercession, and providential acts of
gubernation of his Church to the end of the world. I confess the book in the
figures and expressions thereof is dark and mysterious, but that is not strange
in prophetical writings, as in Daniel, Ezekiel, etc. It seemed good to God to
set us on diligence to enquire into the dealings of God with his Church and
people, and not to over-slip the judgments of Gods providence, which are
reserved in God's infinite wisdom unto their appointed times of discovery; that
from generation to generation, his people and Church may be comforted and
supported unto the end of all.

Thirdly, Dionisius aforesaid, Bishop of Alexandria, reasons very slightly
against the divine authority of this book, when he says, That it does not suit
with the gravity of an Apostle, to cast up so often his own name; since in his
Gospel he never names himself, but only points it out by some modest marks
as these; The Disciple whom Jesus loved: But here in this Book, in his Visions
and Conferences with the Angel, he has never done with these kind of words, I
John. This reason moved Dionisius to think that this book was rather set out by
some other in his name, then by himself.

I answer, This opposition is but weak; for he that writes a History, or
matters of Doctrine, as the Gospel is mixed of both, he need not often insert
his own name; for the truth of that depends on its present verity, and other
apparent circumstances, witnessed unto by the spirit of God in miracles, and
its operations on the hearts of Believers: But it is far otherwise with the
Writers of Prophecy; for that receives authority by the Author, who is known
to be a Prophet; for in every Prophecy that foretells things to come, we
must enquire, first who revealed it; and then, to whom it was revealed; that
the person being known to be a Prophet, and to have divine Revelations, we may
give credit to it: for otherwise, who would give credence or faith to any of
the Prophetical predictions, or books of the Prophets, before they saw them
accomplished and fulfilled? As to instance in the Prophet Jeremiah, who makes
mention of his name at least a hundred times; and the Prophet Isaiah, how often
does he repeat these words, Isaiah the son of Amos? And in Daniel's Prophecy,
we shall find his name more then threescore times repeated; yea, ye shall find
I Daniel, about nine times from the seventh to the tenth chapter; and Paul when
his Apostleship was called in question by some false Brethren, and to show the
excellency of his Ministry, how often shall you read I Paul an Apostle (not of
men, nor by men, but) of Jesus Christ? And why should it be accounted strange,
when John mentions not his name above five times in this whole book, and with
that modesty, that none might doubt of the truth of this Prophecy.

Having wiped off the objections that have cast jealousies and suspicions on
these divine Revelations, I shall in the next place endeavor to clear the
divine authority thereof, and add some testimonies for that end; and I doubt
not, but that being cleared, there is no true christians but will receive this
Book of Prophesies, but as the Oracles of God. The testimonies are of two
sorts, either from without, or secondly, within the said book. Those from
without, are the general consent of the churches of Christ in all ages,
(excepting in the heat of contest, amongst some violent persons) to the
receiving of them, into the Canon: The Councels of Laodicea, the third Council
of Carthage, and the Council of Toletan 5. cap. 16. decreed it to be received
as holy and divine Scriptures. Secondly, it was so received by most of the
ancient Orthodox Fathers, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyril, Epiphanius,
Lactantius, Ireneus, Augustine, and many others; and so this book is often
quoted by them, as of divine authority in their writings: I shall add the
testimony of our late Assembly of Divines, in their confession of Faith, set
forth in the year of Christ, 1651. who do number this of the Revelation in the
catalogue of the sacred books of God.

Secondly, There are other testimonies very radiant and pregnant within the
said Book, to prove it of divine inspiration: First, In that it proceeded from
so highly illuminated a person as John the Apostle, the beloved Disciple of
Christ was, (which hereafter I shall evince) and being directed to the seven
famous Asian Churches, and being by them left unto all churches unto the end of
the world, as the last public Legacy of the spirit of God in this kind, must
needs be from the special impulse of the spirit of God: seeing God would never
suffer such a palpable deceit to be put upon the churches, and to continue so
long without control, and under his own name, so often reiterated in those
Prophesies, if it were not from God himself, and by his Spirits direction,
approbation, and providential preservation.

2. It is clear and evident that this book is from the spirit of God, in that
it does fully harmonize and agree with the other indubitable received books of
God, that treat about the divinity of Christ, and the work of our redemption.

Thirdly and lastly, Seeing those things are evidently come to pass that this
book of Prophesies has predicted and foretold, as the destruction of the seven
Churches of Asia, the dethroning of the Dragon, the rise, continuance, and the
fall of the Kingdom of the Beast, and of the Whore riding upon the Beast, etc.
with diverse other events and contemporaries with the former; some whereof are
long since evidently accomplished, and the rest to be expected in their
determined times and periods; and to be sure that this is an infallible mark of
a Prophecy coming from God, when we see it come to pass, consult Deuteronomy. 18.21,
22, verses.

2. I proceed to the second Question, about the Title of this book, (having
cleared and confirmed the divine authority thereof) to wit, who is the Author
thereof? Whether this John the Divine, be John the Apostle and Evangelist, or
some other person? First, They that oppose the first, do offer as their
reasons, the unlikelyness of the style and speech that there is between this
book and the Gospel of John, and his Epistles; which two latter agree in style,
and many points of doctrine, but this of the Revelation is very dissonant from
them both. To which I answer, It is no marvel in the first two, of the Gospel
and his Epistles, though he writ by the instinct of the spirit of God, as unto
the substantial Truths contained therein, yet he was not so strict tied up in
the history of the Gospel, or in the doctrines thereof, and the Epistles, but
was left at large by the Spirit, to follow his own expressions, which he wrote
according to his own genius and temper, being high and sublimate; but here in
this book he must write those things which he had heard and seen, and were
delivered unto him: besides, the Spirit in this Prophecy keeps somewhat the
like and the same manner of expressions, characters, and method, as it did of
old in the Prophets Ezekiel, Daniel, Isaiah, and others; that it might appear
that the same spirit of Prophecy did jointly run through them all, and were
endited by one and the same Spirit: so that this objection does not at all
hinder, but that it may be John's, the Evangelist and Apostle, notwithstanding
the difference of the style in this of the Apocalypse, and others of John's
writings,

Secondly, They that oppose, give as another reason (but unadvisedly) that in
all the Greek copies, the Revelation was entitled not unto John Evangelist, or
John the Apostle, but unto John the Divine. This rather proves the contrary;
for indeed I should desire no better argument to prove it to be John the
Evangelist's: for all the Learned know, that John was by excellency, and as it
were by a peculiar prerogative, called by this name of the Divine, because it
was as it were his peculiar office and work in his Gospel, to write and
maintain the Divinity of Christ against those Heretics that opposed it in his
time, as the Ebonites, Simon Magus, Carpocrates, Cerinthus, and their
followers: Yet withal, I must needs say, that this word, The Divine, in our
language, is too narrow a word or expression for this Title (...), which in the
Greek is of more copious and extensive signification, which makes much that it
was the Evangelist that wrote this book for the foresaid reason; because he was
the great asserter and maintainer of (...) to be (...), the Word to be God; and
therefore had this denomination either from his work, and so was entitled
(...) the Divine; Or lastly, He acquired that peculiar Title to himself, from
the high Divine Inspirations, and most eminent Discoveries he had from God,
beyond any others of Christ's Disciples in those his Visions; and so being very
frequently and eminently conversant with God, he might justly acquire unto
himself the Title of (...) of John the Divine; but I rather think the former
was the more genuine reason and ground of that Title.

In the next place in the affirmative, I shall endeavor to confirm, that this
John, who is the subordinate Author of the Apocalypse, is John the Evangelist
and Apostle: To this purpose, consider what is written cap. 1. 9. when John was
in the Isle of Patmos, under banishment and affliction, for the testimony of
Jesus, and the Word of God; that then he received his Revelations: which does
agree with all antiquity and ancient Fathers, who all testify with one
consent, that John the Evangelist and Apostle was there banished. And secondly,
as a testimony from the best Antiquity (as Aretas witnesses) Basil, Gregory,
Cyril, Epiphanius, Ireneus, Hippolite, and most of the ancient orthodox
Councels, plainly avouched this of the Revelation to be John the Apostle's.
This John then, the Author of this book, was the son of Zebedee, the brother of
James Major, or the great, and the Kinsman of our Lord's, and his beloved
Disciple, who was always one of the three great witnesses with Christ in his
most retired and eminentest actions and miracles of his whole life; who after
Christ had accomplished the work of our Redemption on the cross, and was
ascended, he followed the work of his Apostleship; and as Antiquity and Church
history testifies, having with the rest of the Disciples after Christ's
ascension, received power from on high, and the gift of the holy Ghost, his
Province fell in the lesser Asia, for the work of his Ministry; where it is
very probable, that he not only preached, converted, and founded those several
Churches, mentioned in the beginning of the Revelation, in the Cities of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Sardis, and Laodicea; but
also it seems evident that he appointed Pastors, and Elders, and other
Officers over those churches, by his Apostolical authority; as Paul and other
Apostles had done in their respective Provinces: and this is somewhat clear, in
that he received from God those several preadmonishments which he is commanded
to write, and to deliver to the Angels of those churches, as unto his peculiar
charge and children, begotten of him in the Lord, who in the time of the
Emperor Domitian, about the year of Christ 84. wherein fell the second great
persecution against the Christians, John was forced and banished from his
church at Ephesus, to Pathmos, a Mediterranean Island, and one of those called
Cyclades, wherein he himself testifies, cap. 1. 9. that he received his
Revelation during the time of his banishment.

Lastly, I conceive the Title of this book, The Revelation of John the Divine,
to be a superadded Title, and not John's own* and yet of great antiquity, given
it by some primitive well-meaning christians. My reasons for this opinion is,
that the Title (...), or Divine, was not peculiar to John, more then the rest
of the Apostles, at the time of his writing the Revelation, it being written
some years before his Gospel* but his Gospel was written after his return from
banishment, as Eusebius, Prideaux history, page 27. and other Ecclesiastique
writers testify: and for writing so divinely of the Word (which was God) in
his Gospel, as is declared, he justly acquired the Title of John the Divine,
and not for the Revelations, which was written before it. Another reason that
justifies this opinion, is, that the first verse in the first chapter looks as
John's own Title, written by himself, to wit, The Revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God gave unto him, etc. and which was signified by his Angel unto his
servant John: Wherein he only modestly nominates himself by the Title of
Christ's servant, John; and without any other eminent superadded Title, as John
the Divine: which has swayed my reason, that that first Title was given unto
him for honors sake, and not took up by him himself.

Having done with the authority, and also with the Author of this book, I come
to the third thing proposed to be considered, to wit, the scope, matter, and
design of the whole book, which I shall handle but compendiously, and more
general, that I may not preoccupy my subsequent discourse.

This book of the Revelation is a book of Prophesies, wherein is a discovery of
all such notable events and alterations, as should happen to the church of
Christ, and her enemies, from her first rise, unto the end of all, set out and
described in Hyerogliphique and Prophetical visions, which Christ has
signified unto his servant John: and it contains in it two general parts.

1. An admonitory Epistle, which is directed to the seven Churches of Asia
minor, which is the subject of the three first chapters.

2. A general discourse of all the alterations which generally do concern or
relate to the church of Christ, from John's time to the latter day, which is
comprised from the fourth chapter to the end of the book.

1. In the Epistle there is to be taken notice, as in the preface thereof,
first the immediate Author from whom this admonition comes, and the whole of
the Revelation, and that is Jesus Christ, cap* 1. 1. and 11.

Secondly, To whom it was given and delivered, and that was John, verse. 9.

Thirdly, To whom it was sent and directed, and that was particularly to the
seven Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, to Sardis, Philadelphia,
and Laodicea, cap. 1. v. 11. and cap. 2. and 3. throughout.

Fourthly, In this monitory Epistle is to be considered, what faults and errors
they are admonished and reproved of.

Fifthly, The threats laid out against them for non-amendment.

Sixthly and lastly, The approbation of their well-doings, and of their faith,
with an exhortation unto perseverance therein.

^. In the second general part or discourse concerning the great alterations
that happens to the church of Christ, and its adversaries: these most
remarkable things, offer themselves to the observant eye,

1. An historical relation under the visions of seven sealed books. or sealed
prophesies, in the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 chapters, which principally concern the
various successes, combustions, confusions, and ruin of the heathenish Roman
Empire; and in the midst of their highest confusions, yet take notice of the
providential preservation of the church of Christ under it hottest
persecutions; and though mightily conspiring its ruin, yet preserved, fenced,
and sealed by God.

2. In part of the eighth, and in the whole ninth chapter, under the visions of
the seven Trumpets, there is an alarm sounded forth to the ruin of the then
degenerated Roman Christian Empire, by a sevenfold order of plagues; the four
first being not so terrible as the three last, being entitled the three
Wo-Trumpets.

3. You may observe, as it were, a digression in the prophecy, after the
plague of the sixth (being the second wo-Trumpet) was poured out in the ninth
chapter, and the description of the seventh and last Wo-Trumpet set off to
another place, where the wisdom of the Spirit found it more conveniently to
refer it; and in the tenth chapter, to fall upon the prophecy of the little
book, which is as a preface and entrance unto the prophecy and discovery of
the events and destinies that should befall to Christ's church until the end.

4. In the eleventh chapter, you may observe how therein there is a peculiar
visible and full discovery of the state and progress of the church of God, even
from the time of this prophecy, unto the later day, and you may farther
observe, that this vision of the open book, which principally relate to the
church of Christ in this eleventh chapter, do most necessarily concur and
connex with all other the visions and prophesies of the Revelation, concerning
the secular powers under the Seals and Trumpets; for both do concur together,
though under several characters and visions.

5. In the twelfth chapter, there is as it were a retrogranation to a more
particular, ample, and fuller discovery of the persecuted and afflicted state
of the church of Christ, under the Kingdom of the grear red Dragon, concurring
with the prophecy of the six Seals under the idolatrous heathenish Roman
Empire, until she had brought forth her man-child, and the Dragon cast down
and destroyed; yet she was not so freed from her afflicted state, but she was
glad to fly into the wilderness, where the Dragon sends his floods after her of
persecutions, besides errors and heresies, to overwhelm her if he could.

6. You may observe in the visions of the thirteenth chapter, the Dragon being
dethroned, how he substitutes in his room the ten horned Beast, the secular
Roman Empire divided into ten Kingdoms, which persecutes the woman being entered
into the wilderness, and does the work of the Dragon, and of the former
heathenish Empire against her. Yet that is not all, there is another two horned
Beast jointly raging and reigning with the former, at one and the same time,
which does as much mischief to her as that secular Beast it self does, being
the Ecclesiastique and Pseudo-prophetical Beast, or Antichrist it self, who is
the former Beasts great chaplain, Prophet, and Vicar general; who under
pretense of Christ, and Christian Religion, having two horns like a Lamb, yet
exercises the cruelty of the Dragon, and sets up again other under specious
titles, the late abolished heathenish Idolatry, and tyrannous persecuting
Government, like that of the Dragons, and so heals the wound given to the
first Beast. This Beast's tokens, qualities, and characters are herein
described, that they that have wisdom, may know and shun them.

7. In the fourteenth chapter is observable, how during the reign of this
antichristian beast, the faithful followers of the Lamb, by their continual
publishing of the sincere Gospel of Christ, they bring ruin and desolation
upon spiritual or mystical Babylon, the antichristian state and seat, set forth
under the cry of the three Angels, but more particularly in the 15 and 16
chapters, in the visions of the Vials, and the effusions thereof, are the
particular, gradual, and final ruins of the antichristian Beast, with all the
churches enemies, more fully set forth and manifested; at the pouring out
whereof, the church of Christ being freed and delivered from all antichrists
oppressions, and idolatrous pollutions, she sings her tryumphant song, the song
of Moses.

8. In the seventeenth chapter, that those precedent prophetical Visions and
Discoveries may not seem improbable, the Spirit it self gives the
interpretation of the mystery of the great whore of Babylon, sitting upon a
scarlet colored beast of seven heads, and ten horns. The Beast is the Roman
Empire, divided under ten Kings, or Kingdoms. The woman harlot is the great
City, to wit, Rome it self (which the Jesuits themselves cannot deny, as in
the preface hereof is more fully manifested) which reigns over the Kings of
the earth, the mother City of all spiritual fornications: By this taste of the
Spirit's interpretation, it plainly appears, that the whole Book of Visions are
to be applied and explained historically, and that every mystery opens others
to the discovery, even of the whole.

9. In the 18 and 19 chapters is but a more solemn reiterating of the execution
of Gods wrath against the antichristian state, with the horror, anguish, and
utter desolations that should befall it, and all the Churches combined enemies;
whereupon the Church being now freed from all dangers, gives praise, power, and
glory unto God: And in chap. 20. enjoys that happy sabbath of rest, that
glorious reign on earth for a thousand years; that great day of judgment
beginning with the first resurrection, and determined with the last and
universal resurrection of all the dead, when all Christ's enemies shall be taken
and cast into hell, to be tormented for evermore; and the Saints translated
into the glorified estate, that heavenly City, the new Jerusalem, the spouse of
Christ, which came down from heaven to reign with him for ever and ever.

10. In 21 and 22 chapters, you may observe the glorious description of this
new glorified Church State, which came down from heaven, set forth by most
excellent metaphors and figures, wherein all spiritual delicacies, in a far
higher pitch then the church ever yet enjoyed on earth, set forth unto us by
such resemblances and figures, as is now most glorious to our capacities, and
fittest to express such heavenly and spiritual matters; whereupon follows a
conclusion of the properties of that glory, but never of the glory it self, and
so of the whole prophecy, with a confirmation of the verity and truth thereof,
until the accomplishment of all.

These things being cleared and premised, and having laid down a brief view of
the scope and design of the whole, I come, by Gods assistance, and with a
spirit of sobriety, and with awe and reverence, to open in the next place the
mysteries of the book it self.

Remove not the stone well laid. THE REVELATION Revealed.
Chap. I. Verse 1, 2, 3.
Ver. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto
his servants things which must shortly come to pass, and he sent and signified
it by his Angel unto his servant John.

Ver. 2. Who bare Record of the word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.

Ver. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time is at
hand.


HAving formerly by way of Introduction premised some things, and amongst the
rest, who is the Author of this Revelation, and that is Jesus Christ; and
therefore here it is called, The Revelation of Jesus Christ; because he, as the
Mediator of his Church, received it from the bosom of the Father, in an
unspeakable manner, and made it known by his servant John, for the good and
comfort of his servants, the Church and Saints of God, from this word or Title,
(...), or Revelation, you may observe,

Observe. 1. That this is a book of Truths and Prophesies not hidden and sealed,
but made known and revealed for the comfort and edification of the church of
Christ. It is a Revelation of things and passages which must shortly come to
pass, verse 3. And how with reason could a blessing be promised to the keeping
of the words of this Prophecy, if it were not known what was to be read,
heard, and kept? We have further the testimony of the Spirit for it, cap. 10. v
8. That the little book was an open book, wherein is contained the great
revolutions of the Church, until the end of all; and in chap. 22. v. 10. there
is a positive command not to seal the prophesies of this book, for the time is
at hand.

Observe. 2. From the Author of the Revelation, Jesus Christ, observe; That all
good things that God has in his counsel determined to bestow and give unto his
Church, he does give and bestow them in, by, and through Jesus Christ. He is the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever: He was the Angel of the Covenant, and the keeper of Israel of old,
and is the same to us for ever: It was he that bruised the Serpents head in the
beginning, upon our parents first transgression, and it is he that is more then
conqueror over all the powers of darkness, now, and for ever. He was the same
spiritual rock and way of salvation to the Patriarchs of old, as he is now unto
us, and none ever did or shall come to the father, or receive good from him,
but in, by, and through the Son, who is the true light, that lightneth every one
that comes into the world; so that if Christ be yours, then all is yours,
whether things present, or things to come, for Christ is God's. 1 Cor. 3.22,
23. Lastly, he is the high Steward, and great Dispenser in God's Kingdom; All
power is given unto him in heaven and in earth.

Observe. 3. That that Prophecy which comes from so sure an Author as Jesus
Christ, must infallibly be true, and come to pass: for he is, and always was
the great Prophet of his Church; it was he that gave visions and Prophesies to
the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel; sometimes by his ministering
spirits, the Angels; sometime by himself, in the appearance of the likeness of
the son of man, Ezekiel. 1. v. 26. And all know, that their prophesies stood sure,
and were accomplished in their respective seasons: But as unto the stedfastness
and faithfulness of this book of Prophesies, see what Christ himself testifies
in Rev. 3.7. and 14. and in chapter ult. v. 6. These things says the Son of God,
who is the faithful and true witness; therefore of most sure performance in
God's appointed seasons.

From the words, which God gave unto him, to show unto his servants things
which must shortly come to pass, Observe.

1. That Christ's servants are very privy to Gods counsels, and knows much of
his designs. This Christ has verified, First, From that ground of union which
is between Christ and his members; for being once become his members or
servants, then they in Christ, and Christ in them; and according to that, 1
John 2.20. They have an unction from him that is holy, and they know all
things; so that they that have the Son, have the Father also; for they both are
one in will, counsel, power, and essence, John 17.21, 22. And the secrets of
the Lord are with those that fear him.

2. They know much of the mind of God in all the combustions, changes, and
revolutions of this world. Many think that they come by chance, ill fortune, or
for want of foresight in management of State affairs; but the servants of God
know, that the hand of God is in all those revolutions and State-shakings, and
that there can no evil befall unto the City, but that there is the providence of
God in it, directing and overruling it unto its end; so that they do foresee,
that this change, and that alteration in the world will come too, and can
rightly conclude, that all tend (as in a chain of providence) to bring about
God's great end, in the exaltation of Christ's Throne, and the pulling down his
enemies.

Observe. 2. God reserved the more full revelation of all things concerning the
changes and revolutions of the Church and State, and the end of all, unto the
day of Christ's exaltation in glory. Christ on earth, was not so glorious as
Christ in heaven; he had not so full commission to send out so much of his
Spirit while he was on earth, as when he was in heaven, John 7.39. So in like
manner, it is no sin to say, that God had not communicated unto Christ's
manhood, whiles here on earth, the complete knowledge of times and seasons, and
the end of all; for he is said to grow in knowledge; and therefore according to
his manhood, whiles here on earth, might be ignorant in some things: But yet it
is clear, the Father revealed it to him when he ascended into heaven, that he
might reveal it to his Church, as the due reward of all his sufferings, chap.
5. 9. Thou art worthy to take the Book, and open the Seals thereof, for thou
wast slain, etc.

Which must shortly come to pass. See verse. 3. on these words, The time is at
hand.

And he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his servant John.

From these words you may observe, That God reveals these Prophesies, not
immediately from himself, but mediately, and by instruments.

First, God gives this Revelation to Christ, Christ gives discovery, partly
himself, and partly gives commission to his Angels for the same. Thirdly, The
Angels instruct John. Fourthly, John directs the same to the seven Churches.
And fifthly, From the seven Churches, they are left to all the Churches of
Christ, for information, unto the end of the world. The infinity of God, and
the finiteness of creatures are not compatible, therefore God uses instruments
suitable to our capacities, for discovery of his mind.

Observe. 2. From the Messenger or Angel, by whom partly this prophecy was
sent, Observe, That Christ employs Angels in great services for his Church.
Angels were the first publishers and preachers of Christ's birth, an Angel tells
the Apostles that Christ should return in that manner they had seen him go up
to heaven, Acts 1.11. Angels tells Abraham and Lot what God would do to Sodom;
Christ tells John, Rev. 22.16. That he sent his Angels to testify those things
in the Churches. The Angels are made ministering spirits for the service of the
church, and their service is more manifest in these particulars.

1. They inform us of God's will, and God of our ways; they ascend and descend,
Zac. 1.11. Genesis 18.19.

2. They oppose the enemies of Christ and his Church, Rev. 12.7. Dan. 10.20.
Numb. 21.22.

3. They execute the judgments of God upon his enemies, Exo. 12.23. Genesis
19.11.13. etc. Isa. 37, 36. Rev. 16. throughout.

4. They defend the godly, both against wicked men, wicked spirits, and wicked
practices, Rev, 7.1, 2, 3, etc. Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. Genesis 32.1, 2. 2 King.
6.14, 15, etc.

5. Next after the spirit of Christ, they comfort the afflicted in their
distresses, Luke 1.30. Acts 10.4. and 27.24. Dan. 6.10, 11, 12. Luke 22.43.

6. They are God's reapers, and gatherers of God's elect at the end of the
world, Mat. 24.31.

From the person to whom this prophecy was sent, and revealed by the Angel,
under this relation of his servant John; what this John was, is made fully to
appear in the preliminary discourse unto the Title, it was John the brother of
James, our Lord's kinsman, the beloved disciple, a great Pillar and Apostle in
the Church of Christ, and yet he is here described under the title and relation
of servant, not only so by right of creation, but of redemption, special right,
covenant, and service.

From which observe, That to be related to Christ by way of service, is a
higher privilege then any outward relation to him. Better be Christ's bondsman,
then his kinsman; inward privileges are more honorable then carnal; Mary was
happier in carrying Christ in her heart, then in her womb. John glories more to
be Christ's servant then his cousin, Mat. 12.47, 48, etc. Christ professes,
that they are his kindred, who shall do the will of his father: and he that is
related to Christ in grace and faith, is as sure of his love and acceptance,
as any of his nearest friends or kinsmen.

Observe. 2. It is man's greatest honor to be Christ's servant. It was a curse
upon Cain, Genesis 9. to be a servant of servants; but to be Christ's servant, is
not only free, but noble: John, though he was a great pillar, a prophetical
Apostle, the darling Disciple, yet Christ calls him but his servant: Paul,
though he were the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and so calls himself, and
glories in the privilege, and that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Phil. 3.5.
that is, born of the ancient Hebrew race and lineage, and one mighty in the Law,
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, yet how often does Paul inculcate in his
Epistles, Paul the servant of Jesus Christ? Romans 1.1. Phil. 1.1. etc. Tit. 1.1.
etc. David, a King, should rather glory to be a servant unto God, and a
doorkeeper in his house, then to live in the courts of Princes.

Observe. 3. If the highest in repute and office in Christ's church be but
servants, then not lords; the grave Apostles, Paul, James, John, are but
servants, and would be accounted but as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1.
and not as lords and masters over the churches faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.3.
Christ alone is the great Dictator and Imposer of Ties and Rules upon the
conscience of his people, Matthew. 23.13. The greatest Apostle, Bishop, Pastor,
or Elder, deserves but the honor of a Servant, Minister, or Steward in the
church, not of a Lord and Master; their work is a work of service, to persuade,
entreat, convince by reasons, not to impose, dictate, and compel: In short,
they can impose nothing as necessary to be believed, done, and practiced, which
is not according to the mind of God; and that, neither in their own name, or
for their own ends; for they are servants, not at their own dispose, but at the
call, beck, and direction of another, even of their Lord and Master, Christ.

There is also somewhat to be considered in that, when Christ precisely sets
down, and takes notice by name to whom he gives this Prophecy, His servant
John.

Whence note, 1. That the truth of a Prophecy depends much for credit, on the
credit and reputation of the Relator. John was Christ's beloved Disciple, most
highly illuminated in the mysteries of the Eternal Word of God, John was a
Prophet, and the last that had prophetical Visions, to a full discovery of the
state of things to the end of the world, and therefore there is an Anathema
gone forth against all persons that shall add or diminish from the words of
this prophecy, in the 18 and 19 verses of chap. 22. for there is no other
discovery of the state of affairs, then what is in this present book, to be
expected until the end of all; and therefore the Spirit of God, in the second
verse, the better to gain belief and credit unto the Truth of this prophecy,
and unto the subordinate Instrument and Author thereof, describes his
Excellencies, Offices, Gifts, and Qualities, in these words.

Verse 2. Who bare Record of the Word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.
You have in the words (...), Who witnessed a Record, or bare a sure Testimony;
and that of three things. First, Of the Word of God. Secondly, Of Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, Of All things that he saw. Wherein two senses or Interpretations offer
themselves to the view: Whether this Record be to be taken singly, as John was
an Evangelist, and bare testimony of the Divinity of the Word, as one with God,
and that Word was God, John 1.1. and this Word was made flesh in the person of
Jesus Christ, and so bare record of all the acts and miracles which he saw this
divine person do, and perform, through the whole course of his life here
beneath. Or secondly, Whether this Record of the Word of God, and the Testimony
of Jesus Christ, and of the things which he saw, be to be understood of the
Truth of the Word of God in this book of Prophesies, which Jesus Christ did
testify unto, and was made apparent by Visions unto John. Indeed I shall
willingly admit of both senses; and I am of opinion, the Spirit of God in this
verse aims at both, for adding the better authority and credit to the truth of
this book of Prophesies; and though the Gospel of John was not written when
this Revelation was given, yet by his constant preaching, he might well be seen
to bear Record of the Word of God, and of Jesus Christ, and of all things that
he saw.

1. From the first sense, Note, That they that are the faithful Publishers or
Preachers of the Word of God, and of Jesus Christ, gets best credit and
reputation to all other their relations.

2. Another Note is, That they are fittest to receive Visions, or Prophesies
from God, that bears the faithfullest Record of the Word of God, and of Jesus
Christ. John was now a prisoner, and under banishment, for the Testimony of
Jesus, when he received those Revelations. Paul as a reward of his faithfulness
in his Ministry, and Apostleship, had even here an irradiation, and taste of
the heavenly glory, when he was wrapped up in the third heavens. The Prophets of
old, Ezekiel, Daniel, Jeremiah, etc. received those visions of God, high and
excellent ones, because they were faithful witnesses of the Word of God, and
publishers of it unto others; and the reason hereof is, because they whose
minds are most conversant with God, and exercised in his Word, are fittest
Instruments to receive and know the mind of God; for omne simile, gaudet
simili: Every like desires communication with its like.

Verse 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time is at
hand.
You have again the promise of blessedness made to those that keep the sayings
of this Prophecy in the last chapter, verse 7^ From which promise here in the
entrance of the Book, and in the end thereof reiterated and made good to such
as keep the sayings of this Prophecy, you may observe,

Observe. 1. That this prophecy is not altogether inaccessible, but to be
understood of such as diligently enquire thereinto, by the help of God's
Spirit. If the discovery of this Prophecy were not feasible, how vain would it
be to promise blessedness to the diligent observers thereof? I conceive it
would be very derogatory to the Divine Truth of God, to make such a
supposition. Besides the sayings of this Prophecy are to be read, heard, and
kept, and therefore most absurd to conclude that it is so hidden, as not to be
understood in the scope, and substantial part thereof.

From the promise of blessedness, Note.

Observe. 2. That this book of Prophesies contains most excellent and useful
things to be understood, kept, and observed. How singular useful it is to
foresee the coming either of the day of joy and triumph, or the day of evil and
affliction? That our Spirits may be born up, and our hearts comforted under all
conditions, in the certain hopes and expectancy of the one, and that we may not
murmr in the other, but acquiesce under the hand of God in patience, until
the day of the wrath of the Lord be past and over. This book of Prophesies is
full of such discoveries, to wit, The afflicted state of the Church, its
security in that condition, together with the rise of Antichrist, its reign,
pollutions, and a discovery thereof; and at last, its utter ruin and
abolition; and the consequent thereof; the Restoration of the Church to glory.
Judicious christians should account this knowledge excellent, it will much help
to keep their spirits in a frame and temper suitable to their conditions: This
will teach them to know, that this is a time of patience and tribulation, not
of tryumphing and reigning. While the Bridegroom is absent, the Spouse is under
sorrow and mourning, not of mirth and rejoicing* The Scarlet Whore, or harlot
church sits yet as a queen, and therefore the true Spouse sits mourning, yet
still expecting the day star to arise for her comfort and consolation. See more
concerning the usefulness of this Prophecy in the Preface to this work.

Observe. 3. The contents and intendment of this Prophecy, is not obvious to
every eye. Reading and hearing will not serve turn, there must be a keeping;
that is, he that will read to advantage the things in this Prophecy, must read
observantly, hear attentively, and at last treasure up in his heart what he
has read and heard, and so having carefully observed the contents of each
Prophecy, with a right application thereof, he becomes most blessed and happy.

From the difficulty of the understanding of this Prophecy, observe 4. That
the profoundest speculations, and the choicest truths, are hardest come by. It
is a true saying, Quod difficilimum, pulcherrimum: Truths (as Treasures) that
lie deepest, are sweetest. It is not unknown what knots there are in the choice
doctrines of the Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, Justification, etc. and yet
most necessary to be known.

This informs us several lessons.

1. To set a reverence upon the truths of God, for they are choice ones, not
easily come by.

2. It sets a check upon our swelling conceits, as if we knew all mysteries,
and the deep things of God; but we are creatures not omniscient: and it
teaches us, that many difficulties in the word of God, are the truths of God,
though we know them not.

3. It quickens us to duty, and whets our endeavors to the attainment thereof.
Strive to enter into the strait gate. Choice Truths, as heaven, must be taken
by violence, and the violent takes them by force.

4. God has hid some excellent Truths under the rocks, and laid them deep,
that the greatest abilities and graces he gives, may be exercised therein; in
the Word, there is meat for babes, and also meat for strong men: both have
enough, that neither may complain for want.

5. Lastly, It drives us to God, and to pray with David, Open thou our eyes,
that we may see the wonders of thy Law.

For the time is at hand.] The same expression is in the last chapter, v. 10.
which intimates, that all ought to take heed to the contents of this
Prophecy, because the time was then at hand, and drawing nigh, wherein all the
predictions thereof must be accomplished, and wherein an entrance should be
made forthwith unto the accomplishment of some, and so unto all the rest in
their order, until all should be fulfilled. And in the first verse it is said,
The things revealed in these Prophesies by Christ unto his servant John, must
shortly come to pass.

Hence observe, That those prophesies began to be in force, and run out
presently upon John's time, and so continues in all the ages since, until the
consummation of all, This will be made good in the ensuing discourse, treating
on the particulars.

Verse 4. John to the seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and Peace from
him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits
which are before his Throne.

Verse 5. And from Jesus Christ, etc.


John having discovered the Author of this Revelation in the first two verses,
by whom it was given, and the Instruments by whom it was sent and received, and
having confirmed it by a sure testimony, that it was he himself that did
receive it, he goes on with a saluting preface to the seven famous Churches
which were then in the lesser Asia, by way of an admonitory Epistle; wherein
partly he commends and encourages them, partly he checks them; which will be
manifested in the progress of the discourse, before he enters upon the relation
of the Prophetical visions themselves.

From whence observe, That Christ's Ministers or Prophets, though they have a
Burden, or Doctrine of Judgments and Wrath, to denounce against a people or
church, yet they are in the first place to come with the doctrines of Grace and
Peace in their mouths, with bowels of pity and compassion toward them. The
work of judgments is as it were a work of abhorrency unto God; Why will ye
die, O house of Israel! How often would I have gathered and healed you, but ye
would not? It is God's method, a long time to exercise his patience and
forbearance, before his wrath be executed: he will try all means in the first
place by mercies, by providence, by deliverances, to win a people to himself:
he will (as a good husbandman) many years enclose, dig, dress, and prune his
Vineyard, in expectancy of fruitfulness, before he will hew them down, and cast
them in the fire: He will abide long with his backsliding children; forty years
long was he grieved by his gainsaying people Israel: yea, he will come down and
see (as if formerly he did not take notice of their sins, hoping of their
amendment by such forbearance) whether their transgressions be so or not, Ezekiel.
33.11. God takes a solemn Oath, As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked; Turn, turn, etc. When God is as it were, by
unrepentant sinners, enforced to withdraw his presence, and execute his
judgments, O! how troubled is he at it? He does it, as it were, step by step;
Ezekiel, 10.4. When God withdrew his glory from the Temple, first it moved to the
threshold, then toward heaven, v. 19. then to the midst of the city, and from
thence to the mountain on the East side of the city, cap. 11. 23. and so at
last went wholly from them. This sets a reproof upon such that come like
Boanarges, sons of thunder, with doctrines of judgments and wrath, before they
have made experiment of the doctrines of peace and grace: That of our Savior
may be well applied unto them, They know not of what Spirit they are of.

Observe. 2. That all Christ's faithful Ministers, that desire the good of souls
by their doctrines, are to pray for the increase of grace and peace in God, and
in our Lord Jesus Christ, and upon all their hearers: It is John's wish here to
the seven Churches, Paul always in every Epistle to those to whom he directs
them, Romans 1.7. it manifests our charity and our duty, in praying for all, but
especially for the household of faith.

Quest. What is meant here by wishing Grace and Peace?

Answ. Not only the gifts and graces of the Spirit, but Grace it self, the
fountain and original of all good, even the good will, and free favor of God,
which he bears to his Elect, even whilst sinners, in and through Jesus Christ:
and Peace, which is not only happy success from God in all things which
concerns the felicity of our souls and bodies; but more especially,
reconciliation unto, and with God, from whence flows all true peace and
tranquillity unto the mind and conscience.

Quest. How comes John to wish Grace and Peace to the seven Churches, whilst
being churches of Christ, they had this Grace and Peace aforehand?

Answ. He wishes unto them a fuller sense, and more plenteous fruits of this
Grace and Peace, and perseverance in it; it seems by their backslidings, they
had lost some of the comforts and fruits of their grace, and therefore need a
supply from God.

Secondly. I answer, All Grace is not given at once to God's best children, but
by degrees, and as they are capable of; and therefore rightly might John wish
these Churches an increase, and so may all Christ's Ministers unto all, that
will ever want increase of grace whiles here beneath; for none here in this
world will ever see perfection in an absolute and abstract sense, and therefore
will still have need of an additament of grace and peace

You have here the Author or Fountain (to wit the Trinity) from which all
happiness, all true grace and peace do proceed, even from him which is, and
which was, and which is to come; that is, from that almighty glorious God, who
only has an absolute and infinite Being, in, and of himself, who was from all
eternity, and is the same for ever.

And from the seven Spirits which are before his Throne,] Here is some
difficulty in Interpretation, What is meant by the seven Spirits? Some
interpret that here is meant seven principal ministering Spirits, or Angels,
that always stand before the Throne of God, to receive his commands: But this I
cannot approve of; First, because grace and peace is here desired from them,
jointly, as from God and Jesus Christ, to be bestowed upon the Churches; and
this is not the Angels, or creatures work, but only the Creator's.

Secondly, For that in all the Epistles where there is mention made of this or
the like salutation, you shall never find it in any created Spirits or Angels
name, but only in this sort; The love of the Father, the grace of Jesus Christ,
the consolation or peace of the Spirit be with you.

Thirdly, for that in chap. 5. v. 6. these seven Spirits are there called the
seven eyes of the Lamb that was slain, which the Spirit sent forth into the
whole earth. Which reasons do clearly convince me, that we must here in this
place, and there also, understand this spoken of the Spirit of God, which here
goes under the denomination of seven Spirits, to signify its sevenfold power,
virtue, efficacy, and gifts, Romans 12. For this mystical number of seven, do
always in this book, and all other prophesies, signify compleatness and
perfection; seven Churches, seven Candlesticks, seven Seals, seven Trumpets,
seven Vials, seven Angels, all signifying a perfection in their kinds.

Hence take this Note:

Observe. That the Father, Son, and Spirit, the whole Trinity, are engaged for
the support and increase of our grace and peace, and of all our joy, comfort,
and happiness, here, hereafter, and for ever. From the Father more peculiarly
flows the grace of Election; from the Son, the grace of Redemption and
Satisfaction; from the Spirit, the grace of Sanctification, Peace, and
Consolation: And from the Three in one, our God blessed for ever, Salvation,
and Eternal Glory.

Verse. 5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful Witness, and the
first-begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Verse. 6. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him
be glory, etc.


Christ here is said to be the faithful Witness in sundry respects. First, In
that he has faithfully declared the Will of the Father. Secondly, In that he
has been faithful in all his works, about our Redemption, committed to him by
the Father. Thirdly, In that he has here faithfully declared the mind of God
toward his church in these prophesies. From whence observe as before on verse.
1.

Observe. That this Prophecy having so faithful an Author and Relater as
Christ, it must surely be true, and come to pass. If the word spoken by Angels
was steadfast, much more what was spoken by the Son, Heb. 2.1, 2. see more
hereon, cap. 3. 14.

Christ is here called the first-gotten of the dead; first, because he was the
first that rose by his own proper power from the dead. Secondly, because all
that have risen, or shall so rise, does it by a derivative virtue and power
from him. Thirdly, he may be called the firstborn, or first fruits of the
dead, because he is the true and substantial first fruits that was offered up
unto God, for the living and the dead; which was typified in the Levitical
primicies, or first fruits, or firstborn, that was offered unto God, 1 Cor.
15.20.

Observe. This proves the Resurrection. If Christ be the firstborn of the dead,
then others of his members must necessarily be partakers of the resurrection
also, 2 Cor. 4.14.

Christ is here called the Prince of the Kings of the earth; first, as Head of
his Church, or of Saints, who are called Kings of the Earth, Rev. 5.10.
Secondly, as King of Kings; so by him kings reign. This manifests his power
and ability to bless us here with his grace, and at last to raise us, and to
save us: and unto this mighty and powerful Savior, who loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, that is,
Kings and Conquerors, not only over our own lusts, but over the world, and over
the powers of darkness, and Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto the
Father; To this gracious Savior, who has done all these great things for us,
be given all glory and dominion for evermore, Amen. Hence Note,

Observe. That the whole work of our salvation is ascribed unto Jesus Christ,
under these particulars. First, He loves us, that is, accepts our persons in
himself from all eternity, and in time, justifies us from our sins in his
blood. Secondly, He sanctifies us, by making us conquerors over our lusts, and
to become actively zealous toward God in spiritual sacrifices of prayer and
praise. And lastly, he makes us Kings and Priests after the Resurrection,
Rulers with Christ, and sharers with him in his Kingdom of glory. See more,
cap. 5. 1.

Verse. 7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
him; Even so, Amen.
He comes with Clouds,] This is a Graecism; that is, In the Clouds. This verse
has an Index, or an Asterisme before it: Behold, to show, that it is very
remarkable what is here expressed, being as the general proposition unto the
whole Revelation. Christ's coming in the clouds in power and glory to set up his
Kingdom here on earth before the ultimate judgment. This has relation to
Zachary 12.10. and promised in Matthew. 26.64. and 24.30. and Acts 1.9. etc.
Several Interpretations offer here to the consideration: Some would have it
here meant, that at the time of Christ's passion, this Scripture was fulfilled
in these first fruits of the Jews conversion in Acts 2. that were the
crucifyers of Christ, being pricked to the hearts because of him, and of the
evil by them done unto him, and so mourned over him. Though indeed it is
granted that that prophecy in Zach. 12. is partly fulfilled in that of the
first fruits of the Jews conversion, who truly mourned for him whom they had
pierced; John 19.37. yet John here in this prophecy, and in this verse, long
after Christ's ascension, re-inforces, and takes up the same relation, to be
fulfilled at Christ's second coming in the clouds; therefore that of Zach. 12.
was never completely accomplished to this day. Secondly, These small numbers of
the first effusion of the Spirit after Christ's passion, cannot with any sound
reason answer that general and universal mourning, promised of in Zach. 12.
where the several families of David, of Nathan, of Levi, of Simeon, etc. and
all the families that remain, shall all mourn apart, or jointly, as they did at
Hadimmon, in the valley of Megiddon.

Thirdly, That prophecy of Zachary 12. could not wholly relate to the time of
Christ's passion, or little after, because in the day of the fulfilling of that
prophecy, he would make the Governor of Judy like an hearth of fire in the
wood, and like a torch of fire in the sheaf, and they shall devour all the
people round about, and the Lord shall save the Tents of Judah, etc. ver. 6, 7.
and that in ver. 8, and 9. God would in that day make the feeble of the house
of Judah as David for strength, and of the house of David, as the Angel of God:
and that God would in that day seek to destroy all that came against Jerusalem.
But in how contrary, low, and weak condition Jerusalem and Judah was in at the
time about Christ's passion (being then under the Roman yoke) and ever since
have been under a miserable afflicted estate, as all histories testify: And
how unsuitable such a condition is with the fulfilling of the aforesaid
prophecy, let the wise consider. Therefore sure this coming of Christ, must be
intended of his second coming, future to his Ascension; for he was ascended
long before this Revelation was given. This same Jesus which is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven. Acts 1.11.

Others again apply the time of this mourning and looking upon Christ whom they
had pierced, wholly to be the time of the last and ultimate judgment of the
wicked; when as they say, all they that crucified him, and all his enemies,
shall mourn and wayl for anguish, and tremble before him. But this cannot be
the whole or main sense of the Spirit herein, nor altogether according to the
time thereof, for these reasons.

First, Because this time or day of mourning, is not of mourning to
desperation, as that ultimate mourning of the wicked is, but it is a godly
sorrow or mourning that leads unto repentance, compare it to Zach. 12.10, 11.
It is as one mourning for his only son, or as that mourning was for good Josiah
slain at Megiddo; out of bowels of love and compassion, not of horror and
desperation, as the former is.

2. Another reason is, because in this day of mourning, there is promised, that
God would pour out the Spirit of Grace and Supplications upon the Inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem, Zach. 12.10. unto which this verse does relate; but in
that day of God's executing his last wrath on the wicked, is no time of pouring
out of grace, nor the spirit of supplications; therefore to me it clearly
follows, that seeing the Prophet Zach. 12.10. and John in this seventh verse,
both prophecy of one and the same personal appearance and coming of Christ in
the clouds, especially intends the conversion of the Jews, of them that pierced
him, and that before the ultimate judgment of all, for then there is no time
of repentance or conversion.

3. The third reason is from the words; And all the kindreds of the earth shall
wail because of him: Even so, Amen. If it were to be understood here only, that
all the kindreds of the earth should see Christ's coming, and wail for dread or
horror, as the wicked at the ultimate judgment day, then John would never set
such a heavy Amen to it, So it shall be; seeing himself, and all the Saints
departed likewise, do expect and rest in hope for the sight of this his second
coming unto their joy and comfort.

Therefore the conclusion or observation that arises hence, and as a right
Interpretation of this verse, is,

Observe. That Christ will appear again in the clouds, to be seen of all, to the
conversion of his ancient people the Jews, the destruction of all his enemies,
and the restoration of all things, before the end of all.

And this conclusion and interpretation flows from these grounds or reasons.
First, from the very genuine sense of the words themselves in this verse, Every
eye shall see him gloriously coming in the clouds: As ye have seen him going,
so shall ye see him come. Acts 1.9. We see him now by the eye of Faith in
heaven, but then by the eye of the body. Faith and sight are two distinct
things; 2 Cor. 5.7. all do not now see him by faith, but then all and every eye
shall see him coming in the clouds, to perform a double work; the one in a
wonderful manner, to cause the Jews that pierced him, to look on him and mourn,
even to a holy repentance; whose conversion will be so wonderful, that it will
be as a Nation born in one day, Isa. 66.8. And this is no more then was done
formerly toward Paul, Christ miraculously appearing to his conversion, and
which he intimates must likewise follow afterward to Israel, in that that God
showed him this grace first.

Secondly, That all his obstinate enemies may look upon him, and mourn and
wail, even to desperation; for that their ruin, and the day of God's great
wrath is coming on them: for it is the work of Cnrist's appearance, not only to
destroy all his antichristian adversaries, 2 These. 2.8, 9. but also to the
joy, comfort, and exaltation of his Church, 2 Pet. 5.4. Now this cannot be the
work of the end of all, and ultimate judgment, because this of Christ coming
in the clouds here, is set as the general result, and the main proposition of
the whole of the Revelation; wherein the great design is, to set forth Christ
to come, and the glorious estate of his Church here on earth, before the
ultimate end, as will appear hereafter: To demonstrate this a little plainer, I
set these Queries out of Zach. 12. collated with this place, and that of Matthew.
24.30.

1. Was ever Judah or Jerusalem since that Prophecy, made to her enemies a cup
of trembling? Was she ever a burdensome stone to the whole earth, to cut them
in pieces? Have ever the Governors of Judah been like an hearth of fire
amongst the wood, and and like a torch of fire in a sheaf, devouring all the
people round about? Or, Were they ever since that Prophecy of Zachary, in that
strength, that the feeble amongst them were as David, and the house of David as
Elohim, etc. Peruse the History of the Jews, and consider whether you can find
the least accomplishment thereof?

I next quere, when was ever that eminent effusion of the Spirit of grace and
supplication poured out on the house of David, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that they should look on him whom they had pierced, and mourn for
him with great bitterness, each family mourning apart? Was this done at
Christ's passion by the obstinate Jews his crucifiers? They derided him: Or was
this fulfilled by the small number of the Jews, his Disciples, the eleven, who
fled at his suffering? They did not pierce him: Or was this fulfilled upon
those mourners in Acts 2? They saw him not when they mourned, nor with their
families apart, nor saw him in the clouds, and thereupon mourn for him; and
therefore as yet the main of this Prophecy is to be fulfilled.

Lastly, Is this to be referred to the last resurrection or ultimate judgment?
I ask, Is that a day of repentance, of mourning, and of grace? That is a day of
judgment unto the wicked, and then Christ's dispensatory Kingdom of Grace is
at an end, 1 Cor. 15.24. Therefore to be brief, and not to exceed due bounds, I
assert, That here by seeing Christ coming in the clouds by every eye, and by
them that pierced him, and that all kindreds of the earth should wail because
of him, is meant by John, as Zachary meant, namely, that all the Tribes, both
Jews and Gentiles, should see Christ coming in the clouds with glory, as man,
before the end of all: to the Jews, and all his Elect, with grace and godly
repentance; to the all other his enemies, with horror and confusion: consult
Jer 25.5, 6. Zach. 2.10, 11, 12. Isa. 2. throughout.

Object. But here it may be objected, That you make diverse comings of Christ to
judgment, the one to the conversion of the Jews, and the restoration of his
Church to a glorious State and Reign, in the destruction of their enemies; and
another, or second coming again, before the final end of all things, to execute
the ultimate judgment. But this is contrary to Scripture, which mentions only
of two comings of Christ; the first in the flesh, in the time of the Gospel;
and the last at the day of judgment, to execute the wrath of his Father on all
his impenitent enemies, and the refusers of his Gospel.

I answer, Christ's coming in Scripture is variously taken; sometimes for his
first coming in the flesh; sometimes in Spirit of grace, power, and miracles;
but lastly, and most eminently, to judgment. And in this his last coming,
there are several remarkable periods and events; In the beginning and morning
of this great day, he comes to convert the Jews, restore the kingdom unto
Israel, and to the church of Christ, and to destroy antichrist, and all the
Saints enemies; not utterly, finally; but of all power and dominion over the
Church, which is quite taken off by Christ; and a sure chain or tie laid on
their spirits of malice, and on their Ringleader, Satan himself, that there is
none can hurt during this glorious reign in Gods holy mountain: This
Restoration is the work of the morning of the day. But the wotk of the evening
of this day, is, the universal resurrection of the dead, and to give final
sentence on all the enemies of Christ, that opposed him, and his Kingdom, and
to give them their portions with the devil and his angels, in that lake of fire
that burns for evermore: see more at large hereof in chap. 20. So that there
is not two last comings of Christ, but two remarkable acts or events in this
his last coming; to wit, in the morning and evening of this great day of his
appearance.

Verse 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty.
Here the Divinity of Christ is plainly asserted, who counts it no robbery to
be equal with God, and to take his attributes unto himself: And that the person
here intended by the Spirit, is Christ, is clear from the precedent verse; the
same person that came with clouds, and was pierced, is the same here described,
who is the Alpha and Omega. and this is most evident, by collating it to verse
11. and 17. where he that is the first and the last; who was dead, but now
alive; commands John to write what he saw, and that was Christ; verse 1. Christ
is here called the Alpha and Omega (which are the first and last letters of the
Greek alphabet) and which is, and which was, and which is to come, even the
Almighty.

Out of which description of his person, Note.

Observe. That Christ is one and the same, infinite, almighty, and eternal God
of himself, with the Father, from everlasting. By him all things were made in
the beginning, and without him nothing was made, and by him all things shall
end: This eternal Word, or Christ, was with God from everlasting, and this Word
was God, and therefore takes unto himself the essential and absolute
incommunicable properties of God unto himself; and therefore this is a most
express Scripture, if there were not any more of this consort in the word of
God (wherein it abounds) to ^ay low the reasons of the greatest pretenders to
reason in the world, the reasonless Arrianized Socinians of these times, who
deny the Divinity or Godhead of Christ. Collate with this, to this purpose,
verses 4, and 5. of this chapter.

Verse 9. I John, even your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle called Patmos, for the
word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.
John in this verse describes his condition, and the place wherein he was, when
he received this Revelation, using the loving and common Christian
compellations, of brother and companion in tribulation: the word in the
original is (...), a fellow commoner, or fellow-sharer in affliction. From
whence by the way observe from the compellation.

Observe. That all Christ's servants are brethren, and fellow-feelers in all
conditions, whether good or evil. And this flows from that root of union, being
all baptized into one Spirit, and made members of one mystical body: so that
what good soever falls to any one of Christ's members, the whole body is
partaker of the joy of it. When the lost sheep, or the lost groat in the
parable was found, there was a general rejoicing for it; Come (says the good
man) rejoice with me, for I have found my lost sheep. If any evil befall to any
member, there is mutual mourning for it; for there is, as I may so say, the
same stream of blood running in all their veins, being members of the same
Body: Nay, and not only a sympathy between the members, but also between their
head, Christ and them; for he takes notice of all that is done unto them, as
done unto himself, whether good or evil: In as much as ye have not done it unto
one of these, ye have not done it unto me; but having done it unto one of
these, you have done it unto me, Matthew. 25.45. This informs all in power, how
dangerous it is to cast contempt on the Saints of Christ; and much more to lay
affliction on them. But here John was not only under tribulation himself for
the word of God, and testimony of Jesus Christ, but also his Brethren, the
seven Churches of Christ, to whom he wrote, were fellow sufferers with him; for
it was under that Tyrant Domitian, who raised the second great persecution
against the Christians, between the years of Christ 97. and 99. as Eusebius
witnesses; and doubtless it reached not only unto John, the chief Apostle or
Minister of those Churches, but that they were sharers in his affliction also,
or else he would not have called himself (...), companion, or fellow commoner
in sufferings with them: From which observe,

Observe. 2. Whenever tribulation or persecution do seize on any of the
eminentest lights or ministers of God's churches, then be sure the interior
christians or members shall not go free themselves, but be sufferers also. The
churches now in this time of patience and tribulation, must not think to be
greater or freer then their master's own flock was in the time of his abode on
earth; for then according to that prophecy of Isaiah, The Shepherd was
smitten, and the flock were dispersed, and fled: Therefore let all his members
not think to have a greater privilege of exemption, when they are in the same
condition that those sheep of his own calling was, in his time on earth.

From John's condition here, of Affliction and Tribulation, being a great
Apostle, and one of the chiefest of the twelve, observe.

Observe. 3. That when persecution arises, it takes hold first on the eminentest
lights, and choicest members of Christ's church. Satan in his designs strikes
high; first at Christ, next at his Apostles, after that, at the chief Pastors
and Teachers of the Gospel, if so possible he might hinder the progress of it.

Observe. 4. As a corrolary from this note, That it is a rash and dangerous
thing, to judge of the condition of christians according to their outward
afflictions. John was here a man of tribulation, and under banishment, yet the
beloved Disciple of Christ. The world presently judges those are none of God's
people, for they are afflicted, discountenanced, imprisoned, banished, etc. and
I could wish that none but the world did judge so: This is the way to condemn
the righteous, and let the guilty go free: Of persons of such judgment, I
demand; Was John that was in banishment, and under tribulation, or Domitian's
Courtiers in prosperity and outward pomp, nearest or dearest unto God? Was
Ezekiel, Daniel, Mordecai, and the three children in the Babylonish captivity,
less righteous, or more ungodly then King Zedekiah, who at that time lived in
state and sin in the land of Judah? Or was Jeconiah more beloved of God
dwelling at Jerusalem, who was a despised broken Idol, Ier. 22.28. then those
dear children of God in Babylon, who waited under a long and hard captivity?
Was not Paul with his fetters about his heels, dearer unto God then Agrippa
with his crown on his head, sitting in the Throne, to condemn him? Shall we
number the Apostles, the Martyrs in the primitive times, and since, when they
were imprisoned, stoned, sawed asunder, burnt, tormented, and slain, amongst
and in the catalogue of transgressors? Is not this to condemn Christ himself,
who is made a man of sorrows for our sakes? In short, those that are under
great tribulation, may be dear and beloved children of God, when those that are
in great prosperity, may be both hated, and obstinate enemies unto him.

Observe. 5. Another observation hence is, That in the lowest, and most
afflicted condition of God's church and people, God makes out unto them the
greatest discoveries of himself, in light, and truth, and comfort. God here
discovers unto John under tribulation and banishment, this excellent book of
Prophesies, for the comfort of his people unto the end of all. Unto the
children of Israel when they were in a strange land, and under captivity, and
deprived of all their ordinances peculiar to their Temple, then God sends them
an Ezekil and Daniel, even in Babylon, with visions of God, to comfort them,
and support their spirits in all their afflictions; to preserve them from
Idolatry, amongst Idolaters, and to discover all false Prophets that came with
false hopes unto them, to deceive them. It is not banishment, nor fetters, nor
prisons, can keep off the special presence and discoveries of God from his
afflicted ones, when they are lowest, he is highest in grace and mercy toward
them; when we are deepest in afflictions, God comes in with his greatest
consolations: Thou remembredst us in our low estate, says the Psalmist. Let
the godly comfort themselves in this, that in their prisons, fetters, or
Banishments, God will provide for them, his discoveries of mercy, grace, and
consolation, to bear up their spirits under all extremities.

In these words, In the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. Here is some
difficulty of interpretation. Indeed Kingdom in Scripture is of diverse
acceptance: sometimes it is taken for the coming of Christ in spirit, sometimes
for the doctrine of the Gospel, but chiefly for his tryumphant reign at the
day of his last appearance; and I conceive it is here to be taken in this
latter sense: for the state of affliction and tribulation in the Scripture, is
never called a Kingdom, and how unsuitable it is unto it, all know; though they
are said to overcome, and to be more then conquerors herein: for the Kingdom is
bestowed as a reward and crown to the faithful, holding out in this condition;
consult Reu. 2.7. and the tenth: and that which is bestowed as the result and
reward of their faithfulness under tribulation, which is the kingdom; can in no
good sense be interpreted to be faithfulness under tribulation, the condition
it self; one thing cannot be the cause and the effect too: as a faithful
holding out under persecution is the cause (causa dispositiva) the kingdom or
reigning is as the fruits and effects, therefore not one and the same: so that
the interpretation or sense of this verse runs thus; I John, your brother, and
sharer, or companion in tribulation with you, for the hopes in that kingdom
which is to be revealed by Jesus Christ at his second coming; and for which I,
and you, and all Christ's faithful ones, wait for in patience, and longing
desirings, through Jesus Christ our Lord. From whence this Note arises.

Observe. That all Christ's faithful ones ought to wait with patience under all
afflictions and tribulations, for the day of their release, by the coming of
the Lord Jesus, and his Kingdom. This is the Kingdom of patience and suffering,
not of reigning and tryumphing. Some of Christ's disciples would needs have the
kingdom presently, in that their question, Is this the time that thou will
restore the Kingdom unto Israel? But Christ answered, It is not for you to know
the time and seasons; you are to occupy, employ your talents till I come. Of
the souls beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, How long Lord? is their
continual cry: Their work is with prayers and tears to wait upon God for
deliverance; they set not the world on fire by wars and bloodshed, the proper
works of Satan and his members; they are (to wit the Saints, or at least should
be) of meek, placid and peaceable spirits, easily to be entreated; when they
are reviled, not to revile; when they are stricken, not to strike again; yea,
to pray even for their very enemies: and to such persons, in God's appointed
time, he will fulfill that promise, The meek shall inherit the earth. This sets
a check upon the turbulent ones of this age, the soundness of whose spirit I
question, being opposite to the former characters of Christ's spirit; who
conceive they go about to pull down Antichrist, when they raise commotions,
rebellions, and bloodsheds in states and Commonwealths, and endeavor the ruin
of the Sovereign Magistrates thereof; when as indeed, the prosecution of the
work against Antichrist, is rather hindered then furthered hereby; for hereby
they weaken and divert the hands of Sovereigns from that work, in as much as in
them lies: for antichrist is to fall by the hands of those Princes and Powers
of the world from whom it had its first rise, Rev. 17.16. and therefore all
should rather add to their helping hands in assisting those Christian
Magistrates they live under, rather then disturb or oppose them in this work:
and for those that are otherwise minded, let them be here companions with John,
Wait for his coming in faith and patience, and stand still, and they shall see
the salvation of our God.

Observe. 2. Another note hence rises, That the contempletion of the coming of
the Kingdom of Christ, is the great prop and stay of the spirits of all
Christ's faithful ones, under all their afflictions and tribulations.

John here comforts himself, and the Churches, with those thoughts; in the next
place he often inculcates this contemplation on them that should be tried, and
come under tribulation; Christ would give them as the guerdon of all their
sufferings, this Kingdom, described under several names, of the crown of life,
v. 10. Manna which is hid, and white stone, v. 17. the Tree of Life, v. 7.
Power over Nations, v. 26. and to rule with a rod of iron, v. 27. and lastly,
Christ himself, by the name of Morning Star, v. 28. And indeed, what can more
support the spirits of afflicted Saints, then to know there is a crown laid up
for them, and dominion, that shall last for ever, after the progress of a short
afflicted life here: and therefore the Apostle Paul accounted the afflictions
of this present life, not worthy of the glory which should be revealed unto us,
Romans 8.18.

Was in the Isle called Patmos,] Whether John fled there voluntarily, to avoid
persecution, or banished there, as most ancient Writers affirm, I shall not
contend: but sure he was in this Island called Patmos, by reason of the great
persecutions in Domitian's days, about Anno Christi 97. This Island was one of
the Cyclades in the Aegean Sea, now called Archipelago, situated between the
lesser Asia and Greece, now under the command of the Grand Seignior, and in the
way going up from the Mediterranean unto the Hellespont and Constantinople.
This Island was famous for nothing so much as for this entertainment of our
Apostle John in his exile, being one of those barbarous Islands into which the
Romans did use to send their malefactors and exiles: and here in this Island,
amongst the Barbarians, John received these Visions and Revelations, wherein
observe.

Observe. That God does not tie himself in the discoveries of himself, unto the
holiness of places. The Rabbis have a rule amongst them, and they hold it for
truth, That God never spoke unto the Prophets out of the holy Land; but this is
contradicted in the Prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, who received their visions at
Babylon, by the River Chebar in Chaldea, Ezekiel. 1.1, 2. God did here pass by the
holy Land, the holy Temple, the holy City, and gave those Visions of God in
Chaldea, and pours out his spirit in Babylon. Whiles John conversed about
Jerusalem, and those holy places John had not any Visions; but when in Patmos,
amongst Barbarians, he had these high and glorious Revelations. God is not tied
to places, in a dungeon, in prison, as unto Paul and others; In a Babylon, as
unto Ezekiel, Daniel, and the three children: God pours down his Spirit into
the hearts of his servants, and raises them up unto a height of Prophecy.

Observe. 2. That God often in the most obscurest and barbarous corners of the
earth, does raise up glorious Instruments for his service: It was once a
question, Can any good come out of Nazareth? Much more may it be said, Can any
good come out of Egypt, of Rome, of Babylon, of Patmos? The answer was, Come
and see: so I say, come and see a glorious prophet in Patmos, a Moses in Egypt,
a church of saints in the house of Nero, in Babylon an Ezekiel, a Daniel in
Caldea. God can raise up instruments most serviceable unto his name and glory,
in the most profane and idolatrous places: and this is from that unlimitted
spirit of God, that blows where it lists: see more hereon in chap. 2. v. 13.

For the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ,] This shows the cause
of John's exile, because he professed faithfully the Word* and the Testimony of
Jesus Christ.

Hence observe, That the Saints faithful profession of God and Christ, moves
the rage of Christ's, and their enemies against them. John here became a
fugitive and exile in Patmos for this faithful testimony, and this is no more
then what Christ foretold of before his passion; that his Disciples should be
offended because of him, and that they should be cast out, imprisoned, reviled,
and suffer many persecutions for his names sake: And the ground or reason of
all this, is, from that promise in Genesis 3. That God would set enmity between
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent; and this enmity has abided
ever since, and will ever abide between those two mystical seeds, until the
seed of the woman, Christ and his members, shall become absolute conquerors in
the binding up the old serpent, who is the father of all enmities and
mischiefs. This informs God's people, that it should not seem strange unto
them, when the world and their enemies do rage against them.

Here a question may come in, Whether christians (when they are called unto it)
are bound in duty to suffer for the profession of all the Truths of God?

To clear this question, I shall premise briefly, That Truths are either about
fundamentals, or circumstantials. Fundamentals are such, as without the
knowledge thereof, we cannot ordinarily be saved; and they are conversant
either about the very being of a Saint and Christian: or secondly, about the
well-being, in preserving and building up this Christian in his holy faith; and
these are called principles, or rudiments of Religion, Heb. 6.1. You know no
one can proceed to be an Artist in any Art or Science, or come to any
perfection therein, without some certain rules and principles to proceed by: so
none can become a true Christian or Artist in that heavenly Science of
Christianity, without some first laid principles: And amongst those
Fundamentalls which are necessary to the Being of a christian, I believe, as
some have been too large in the description of their Fundamentals, so some have
been too narrow; and therefore seeing they are not precisely determined by any
universal assembly of christians, but are left to be gathered up here and there
in the Word of God by parcels, I shall not be so presumptuous, to define their
certain number; only I say thus much, That that Creed which is called the
Apostolical, setting a qualified sense on that article of Christ's descent into
hell, to be the exactest square and rule of principles that relates unto the
very Being of a Christian, that is this day extant; and he that is not ready to
suffer for the profession thereof, is not worthy the name of a Christian.

Now secondly, other Fundamentals are about the well-being of a christian; and
such are all the Ordinances of the Gospel: As, Baptism, Lord's Supper, Prayer,
Thanks-givings, all Church Orders and Fellowships, Preaching, Exhorting,
Reproving, Overseeing, and the like: And if it be in our power, we are rather
to forbear the use of one of them, then to defile our souls or consciences
under corrupt administrations of them; but if at any time we were called to
suffer for the essential truth of them, we are bound to suffer, and to bear
them a testimony, as a part of the Truth and Word of God. But for every opinion
that arises about the right administrations of the latter, or manner of
understanding of the former principles, which are but the circumstantials of
Religion, to set bonds upon the conscience therein, it savours rather of a
spirit of contention, heat, and passion, then of found judgment, and christian
wisdom. This is to make hard knots where there is none, and Christ calls his
yoke easy, this were to make it burdensome and intolerable: The substantial
part of Christian Religion is plain and easy, and the blind may walk therein,
and a lamb may wade through: This is life eternal, that they may know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. It is true,
there are mysteries, high questions, and deep things of God in the word, these
are for the exercise of our spirits and gifts, not of our faith, no further
then as part of the revealed mind of God; and therefore we believe them to be
truth, though we understand them not, which are reserved until the day of the
revelation of all things, when we shall know as we are known, and when all our
ignorances and imperfections shall be done away. This sets a check upon some
hot spirits of these times, that rather then lose or part with their wild
opinions, or let them lie unvented, would break all the bonds of peace,
charity, and communion amongst Christians, and so utterly deprive the churches
of Christ of all the benefit which otherwise their gifts and parts might stand
in stead for. I doubt all sorts of christians of our times are too far baptized
into this error, and Satan has too great a stroke in it to divide the hearts
of Christians about circumstantials, when as they hold one and the same
fundamentals jointly together: The Lord in mercy to his churches remedy this
great evil and sin of our times.

Verse. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as of a Trumpet.
In the Greek copy it is no more but (...), I was in the Spirit; which in
Beza's translation is rendered correptus in Spiritu, I was rapt in Spirit. It
was indeed a rapture of spirit, an ecstasy wherein John received this Vision;
and so it has been with all the Prophets of old, they were acted by the Spirit
in all their visions and prophesies, they were lift up above themselves, and
out of themselves, when they were to have cognizance of Divine things, and this
was by the Eternal Spirit of God, working mightily in their spirits.

Observe. That the Spirit of God does as it were set a violence on those persons
he employs about the high mysteries and discoveries of his choicest Truths.
Paul, that great light of the Gentiles, he had his raptures into the third
heaven; whether in the body, or out of the body, he could not tell. Exekiel
when he was to receive those high Visions, he often reports of the Spirit entering
into him, and taking him up, cap. 3.12. and 2.2. John for his better
accomplishment to receive those divine Visions, he is here said to be rapt in
Spirit: And the reasons of this is, First, That he might be the better enabled
to take a clear and full view of those divine discoveries which were about to
be shown unto him: When we would show one things distinctly, we use to place
him up on high for the better sight. Secondly, That he might have satisfaction
in his own spirit that those his visions were from God, seeing he had so
extraordinary taste of the Spirit in the first place, he might well conclude he
was now, as it were, to become the mouth of the Spirit unto the churches.
Lastly, That his thoughts and heart might have been sequestered from things
below, and his contemplation raised higher on things divine, as a true Prophet
of God ought to have.

Another Note from hence is, as a corrollary to the former, That when Christ
sets up any eminent Officer, or Light in his church, for the service thereof,
God first fills them with his Spirit. When John was but upon entering upon his
prophetical office, God ravishes him with his Spirit, and fills him therewith,
to fit him for this office: When men in the Apostles days were to be chosen but
for the lowest services in the Church, as for the oversight of the poor, and
the like, yet they must be men full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, Acts 6.3.
Much more then for the highest places, as Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and
Elders, etc. It is said, Paul and Barnabas were filled with the holy Ghost, and
therefore to be separated unto the work, Acts 11.24. and 13.2. The Offices of
the churches of Christ, are for those that have the Spirit of Christ in them,
in some fullness of it: those places are not for such as are filled with the
spirit of envy, covetousness, pride, the world, contention, ignorance, and
antichristian lording; such have not the spirit of Christ in them; it may be
well said of such, that they run for profit here, and the like, but the Lord
sent them not, Jer. 14.14. and 23.21. They flatter themselves, and think they
are called and sent of God, because God has given them some common acquired
gifts and parts, yet want all the especial graces of the Spirit as meekness,
self-denial, contempt of this world, humility, bowels of compassion, ready to
forgive, sound knowledge in the truth, and holiness and righteousness in their
lives and conversations: they that want those graces in the truth of them, are
neither fit for those high functions in the church, nor can satisfyingly
persuade themselves, or others, that they are called unto it: Let this be as a
memento to all such that climb over the walls into those holy Functions, and
are well satisfied with a call from men, when they were never called of God; I
say, let all such fear and tremble, lest God spew them all our, together with
their flocks that would have it so, in his wrath, for ever.

John was rapt in Spirit on the Lord's day: (...), in the Greek: Whether this
day be here called the Lord's day, for the great discoveries of those visions
made unto John upon this day, or because it was the Lord's day for the
assembling of the Saints, to perform their services unto God; it being the same
day with that, which the Apostles call the first day of the week, and our
christian Sabbath, I shall not much contend, but rather am inclined unto the
latter, for these two reasons. First, Because the great work of Christ's
resurrection, on that day wherein he was manifested Lord, and Conqueror over
hell, and Satan, purchased it that Title of the Lords day. Secondly, Because
the observation of the Sabbath, with all christian public services, were
transferred to that day, and so is called the Lord's day, (...), or according
to the Scottish dialect, the Kirks day, the Churches day, because they held
their assemblies, and performed their public services upon that day. Hence
note.

Observe. That the Lord's day, or the day of the great and public assemblings
of the Saints, is the fittest time for God's highest discoveries of Grace and
Truth.

John received here on this day, his high irradiations of spirit and
Prophesies: This is God's great Market day, wherein there is a constant and
mutual Exchange, or Bartering of heavenly and divine commodities: the Saints
come with the returns of their improvements of mercies, in praises, prayers,
and thanksgivings; God gives out in return, farther supplies of grace, and
greater measure of knowledge in his ways and truths: Therefore sure, most
happy, most knowing, and most gracious are those Saints that are most found in
this way. O! this should make all of us that are not in this way, to wail for
it, as David in his absence and exile from the church of God, that being the
special habitation of God's glory, Psalm. 96.6. and to breath after it, even as
the Heart brayeth after the fountain streams: for this is the day of the Saints
assemblings, wherein the Angel comes down, the Angel of the New Covenant,
Christ in spirit, to stir upon the waters of Bethesda, upon the hearts and
affections of all his people.

When John was in this rapture of spirit on the Lord's day, then he heard
behind him a mighty voice, as it were of a Trumpet, loud and terrible: The
Trumpet being a warlike Instrument, whose sound is to prepare unto Battle, and
to the terror of the adversary. God's public admonitions are so unto his
church; it not only prepares his own unto repentance, but is also of terrible
signification unto all his impenitent enemies.

But here comes in a question fit to be discussed; John had here his raptures
of spirit, ecstasies, and heard a great voice as of a Trumpet: The Quere will
be, How shall we know Divine raptures, ecstasies, or visions, from diabolical?
For Satan is God's Ape, and has his raptures, possessions, strange
apparitions, sounds and voices also.

For answer, first know, that God's visions are given either in the sleep, as
unto Jacob, when he saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, and Angels
ascending and descending, in Genesis 28. but such are more properly called Divine
Dreams. Or secondly, When the person is awake, as here, when John was at Patmos
on the Lord's day, doubtless either in God's services, or holy contemplations,
he received those visions and raptures of spirit, and those ecstasies, or
raptures of spirit, do cause a great alteration upon the person that receives
them; he is as it were, taken out of himself that is in this posture and frame;
and therefore it is called a rapture or ecstasy, quasi extra se raptus, being
in that posture not master of the faculties of his own soul, which are wholly
in the power and motions of the Spirit that acts them; and this is common to
both sorts of raptures, whether from the good or evil spirit: Now to discern
what spirit moves in such raptures or visions, observe first, Whether the
person passive, or that is under such raptures of spirit, were always, or for
the most part of their lives, faithful witnesses unto the word of God, and of
Jesus Christ; such have not only the promise of the holy Spirit to teach them
all things, 1 John 2.27. but to be preserved against the evil one, in their
bodies, souls, and spirits.

Secondly, Observe the matter of their visions in such raptures, whether it be
to denounce God's judgments against sinful practices, or not; for surely Satan
will never be divided against himself, if we will believe our Savior, for so
his kingdom could not stand; though I have read a story in some old Popish
Mass-monger, that the devil once in the shape of a Priest, preached a very
catholic sermon, but being discovered by some Saint in presence (it seems one
of an excellent endowment in discerning spirits) asked him, how durst Satan to
appear in that presence, with so sound, holy, and catholic instructions in
his mouth? The devil, or the divelish preacher answered him, that whilst he
preached good and sound doctrine unto his auditors, and they were not followers
of it, he had his end, even the aggravation of their condemnation for their
neglect, inproficiency, and contempt of such good doctrine: surely how this odd
design should come into the divel's head, I know not, being a liar from the
beginning, and the truth abides not in him, nor will confess it no further
then he is compelled to do it by an over-mastering divine power, this were
indeed to destroy his own Kingdom: and God never sends the evil spirits to be
the messengers to provoke to break off from sins, to live to God, holiness, and
works of reformation, his very nature is contrary to such works, and therefore
is the great hinderer, not the promoter of them. This is another mark to
discern of what spirits visions are of.

Thirdly, Another distinguishing mark is, That in respect those visions and
raptures of spirit carries with them a terribleness in the strange apparitions
therein, they leave a high and strange impression of spirit upon the parties
under them; and those that are from God, leaves always behind them, when they
are passed away, a holy awe and reverence of the divine Majesty and glory, and
a contempt of themselves and their own worthlesness. Isaiah the Prophet when he
saw the Lord, and had discoveries of his glory, he could call out Woe is me! for
I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, for my eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.5. Job also confesses, cap. 42. 5, 6. Now mine eyes
sees thee, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. The sight of divine
glory and majesty does always humble, in that it brings to sight our own
worthlesness, even in our best seize in respect of it, which causes a
godly sorrow. Now the contrary spirit brings contrary fruits and effects, as
pride, vainglory; etc. and therefore not difficult to be differenced in their
operations.

Fourthly, Visions, ecstasies, or raptures of the Divine Spirit, though often
they may much grieve and trouble their spirits that are under them, as in Dan.
7.15. and 8.27. and take away their senses for the present, and their strength
and comeliness, and make them as it were, faint, dead, dumb, and breathless, as
in Daniel, cap. 10. 8. 15. 17. verses, and as John in verse 17. at the vision
of Christ, he fell at his feet as dead, and in the examples of Zachariah, Paul,
etc. yet after they are passed, they have no impairing in the parts either of
their bodies or souls, but rather a greater glory put upon them, as Moses,
whose face did shine, coming from the presence and visions of God. Paul grew a
most eminent light, and the highest of all the Apostles, after he was stricken
as dead with his converting vision, Acts 9. John here receives great and high
revelations from Christ, after he was stricken as dead at his feet, by the
glory of the vision. God is no hard master, none were ever losers to be his
instruments in this sort; for unto such he commonly adds greater additions of
parts, grace, and glory.

But on the other side, by the evil spirit's raptures or possessions, many have
not only lost the due temperature of their reason and understanding, and so
become altogether besotted, and wittols, but have also their bodies impaired by
the hard service of their master. Hence it is, that as it is reported, and
commonly by experience seen, of witches, and such wretched creatures that are
truly bewitched by the spirit of delusion, and have given up themselves as
servants to his will, have the faculties of their souls so impaired and hurt by
his possessions, and daily disturbing of them, he being an Apollyon, or
destroyer from the beginning, that being broken in their reasons, they conceive
in their raptures, that they are transformed into strange shapes, of cats,
dogs, hares, etc. and in an instant to be transported and carried into far
places distant, and in and out to houses, though the doors were shut; things in
themselves above the efficiency of any creature, and contradictory to nature,
and all its works: and unless persons of such belief makes two Omnipotents, it
can never stand. Indeed the true ground hereof, and of all their confessions in
this kind, proceeds from hence, that the devil from whom they have their
frequent ecstasies and raptures, has so befooled them in their understandings,
that they do verily believe those things to be really done and acted, which the
devil does represent unto them in their ecstasies and trances, and so when they
are out of them, having lost their reasons, believes, and often confesses them
to be of truth, though many of them be impossibilities in nature, without a
miracle, and had never a being, further then in the fancies of their confused
and disturbed brains: This is the reward of the divel's instruments in this
kind.

Fifthly and lastly, If all these former distinguishing marks fail, for a
hypocrite may go very far in complying with the signs of God's word, yet herein
he cannot deceive; to wit, in the truth of his vision or revelation, in the
event thereof; this will be sure to try him, whether his vision be from God or
not. Events discovers visions, and distinguishes prophets, Jer. 28.9. The
prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to
pass, then shall the prophet be known that the Lord has truly sent him; and
this is according to that of Deuteronomy. 18.21, 22. The question is, How we shall
know whether a vision be from God or not? Look to the event, if it comes to
pass, it is of God; if not, it is a lie.

Jeremiah prophesied against Jerusalem, Hananiah, and other false prophets, the
contrary; Jer. 28.2, 3, 4. Ahab feared not to go against Ramoth Gilead, whiles
Zedekiah the false prophet told him, Go and prosper, 1 Kings 22. but when the
words of Micaiah proved true to Ahab in his destruction, then the false
prophets were confounded, and Zedekiah ran into an inner chamber to hide
himself, 2 Kings 22.25.

Object. But has not the devil often foretold the truth of events? Yes, but
not with that clearness, as the divine Spirit does; he leaves no hesitation or
doubting on which side the overthrow will be: The Beast, together with the
false Prophet, and their adherents, must be taken and destroyed; the Saints
must remain the conquerors: Satan in his predictions, is but as a good guesser,
or conjecturer at best, to keep his credit good with his accomplices; he gives
out his predictions in riddles, or aenigma's, as of old, in the Oracles at
Delphos.

Aio te Aeacides Romanos vincere posse. Or that of Croesus: Croesus Halyn
penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim. Both which may be taken in a diverse
sense, which the constructors took in advantage, as to themselves, and so
proved to both fatal, in not applying them the right way. Again, if Satan
foretells any thing, it is only gathered from the observation of the affairs of
the world, and his long experienced conversing in them, and this at best can be
but conjectural, and therefore keeps himself to those dark ways of delivery.
Lastly, To ascribe to Satan truth in foretelling of events, it would rob God of
his glory, and one of his great prerogatives, which he alone by his Spirit has
often manifested to his servants the Prophets, for the good and comfort of his
church and people.

Object. But did not Satan tell Saul, in that apparition of Samuel, in 1 Samuel
28.19. That he should be delivered, with all his host, into the hands of the
Philistines, and that he and his sons on the morrow should be all with Samuel,
that is dead? And was not that prediction truly fulfilled?

I answer, first, Amongst Expositors there is a great difference of opinions
about the meaning of this place: They that hold it was Samuel himself, who was
at rest, have but small store of reason for it, for these reasons.

First, Because God will not send one from the dead to exhort the living: They
have Moses, and the Prophets.

Secondly, It is improbable that God would send Samuel, who would not let him
to answer Saul in his life time, because God had forsaken him, would now send
him from the dead to advise him, and then too, when he was advising with
Wizards and Witches, which was utterly forbidden by God in his Law. But the
current of most Expositors hold, That it was the devil in the appearance or
likeness of Samuel. But herein submitting to the judicious and more discerning
judgments, I here lay down some considerations to the contrary: If this were
Satan in the shape of Samuel, it is strange he would leave such an excellent
lesson to all posterity, to the destruction and prejudice of his own kingdom,
as this is: Saul had departed from God, and disobeyed his voice, therefore God
was departed from him, and given his kingdom unto another, even unto David,
ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. and at last, for this his disobedience, would destroy him
and his family by the hands of their enemies: Now this is against that former
saying of our Savior's, A Kingdom divided, cannot stand; is Satan divided
against himself: Collate unto this the reasons a little before mentioned, and
judge whether ever that spirit of lies, and enmity to mankind, would leave such
a good and fruitful lesson for the children of men upon record, to his
prejudice for ever. For this reason I am hardly induced to believe, that this
was Satan in Samuel's apparition, but rather a cozening confederate of the
Pythonist of Endor, set up by her in a secret corner, described by her, or set
up in the shape and garments of the old and famous Prophet Samuel, who was but
lately dead, and therefore his postures, garments, and also his prophesies of
rending the Kingdom from Saul, and giving it unto David, was very well known
unto all Israel; and therefore this witch of Endor could not be ignorant of it,
being but a little way distant from the Court of Saul, where Samuel was often
conversant in his life time, as appears from verse. 7, and 8. campared with 25:
And also it appears unto me, that Saul here in the whole transaction, did not
see the counterfeit Samuel, by that his question in verse. 14. What form is he
of And she said, an old man comes up, and he is covered with a mantle: And
Saul perceiving by this description of hers that it was Samuel, he bows
himself, and so proceeds to his business with this Samuel or counterfeit, which
might lie hid behind some shrine, hanging, or grate, where the whole cozenage
is transacted; and how easily Saul was to be caught and deceived in this kind,
appears from his distraction, consternation, and fear he was in, being
serrounded of his enemies, forsaken of God, and seeking unto witches in this
time of trouble: This wise woman, or witch of Endor, with her confederate, knew
well enough that this was Saul, being higher by the head then all Israel,
though disguised, and by his attendants and servants with him, from the
beginning of this whole art of cozenage, though she counterfeited the contrary,
verse 12. This appears from her neighborhood with the Court, he coming to her,
and after all these cozening transactions, returning the same night again,
verse 25. whereas this counterfeit is here often called Samuel, and Saul took
him indeed to be Samuel; yet this makes it no more to be true and real Samuel,
then if it had been granted that it was the devil in Samuel's shape: so that
under correction of better judgments, I am of opinion, this was not Satan in
Samuel's likeness, that left this useful lesson and prediction, for the reasons
abovesaid, but rather proceeded from the cozening Pythonist of Endor, and her
well-informed confederate, who well knew of the prediction of the Prophet
Samuel, that God would take off the kingdom from Saul, and give it unto his
servant David, because Saul had disobeyed God's voice in the business of Agag;
and this she could foresee was the time, in that the Philistines, the enemies
of Israel, were come up against him, and he knew not which way to turn, for God
had forsaken him, and had denied to answer him either by Prophet, Urim, or
Thummim. I have been somewhat the longer herein, to stave the devil off, that he
may not have any hand in God's prerogative in foretelling the truth of events.
If it were granted that this were the Devil in Samuel's likeness, yet I answer,
the Devil might well gather the truth of this prediction concerning the
destruction of Saul, and his sons, from that of Samuel's prophecy against him,
when in his life time at Gilgal, he came and told him, that God would rend his
kingdom from him, for not obeying his word, and give it unto his servant David,
1 Samuel 13.14. And therefore the Devil here might well predict the same unto
Saul, coming to him to know the event and success of his undertaking against
the Philistines: But in the time, and some other circumstances of this
prediction, whether it proceeded from Satan, or the cozening Pythonist, yet
there is a palpable failure therein; to show, that God's Spirit alone is the
spirit of prophecy, and the sure foretelling of all events in the full truths
thereof: for this pretended Samuel, tells Saul, that to morrow he and his sons
should be with him, that is, in the state of death. But observe, if this were
the Devil, how this father of lies keeps on his old trade of lying; for indeed,
Saul and his sons were not overthrown nor slain by the Philistines on the
morrow, but some days after; as appears by considering the several
transactions done by David, in the 29, and 30 chapters, against the Amalekites,
after he was dismissed from the Army of the Philistines, before they fell upon
Saul and his Army to their utter overthrow, chap. 31. v. 3. etc. It is also
somewhat against reason that Saul should be all the precedent night at Endor,
and on his way coming and going, and that under great dejection, trouble, and
consternation, by reason of his hard fate foretold him; and yet
notwithstanding, he should the immediate morrow join Battle with the
Philistines, is in my apprehension a very unlikely conceit. I shall only add,
and conclude with that of the Psalmist: O teach us O Lord, to number our days,
that we may apply, our hearts unto wisdom; that both God and the creature may
have their dues.

Verse. 11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and what thou see,
write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which are in Asia; unto
Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis,
and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.
After John was set by a spiritual rapture in a fit frame and posture to
receive those divine and excellent Revelations, he in this verse makes an
entrance into his first vision, which was the effect of that great and mighty
voice that he heard, as of a Trumpet, saying, I am Alpha, and Omega, etc. This
was Christ, as is manifested in verse 8. compared to the 9. who is the
beginning and last of all things, and who is the giver out, and author of this
Revelation unto John, and gives him this vision concerning the seven Churches,
by way of an admonitory Epistle unto them; and what he sees, and shall be
represented unto him in those visions: he is commanded to write them down, and
send them to the seven famous Churches, which then were in Asia minor, at
Ephesus, Smyrna, ande. Hence Note.

Observe. That the true Ministers of the Gospel must deal very faithfully with
their churches in their doctrines and prophesies; they must come with real
visions of God, not feigned ones. Paul did profess unto those he wrote, that he
kept nothing back for their good, but discovered the whole mind of God unto
them: They are to observe God's motions and directions; when he moves, they
must move; when he stands still, so must they. If God commands them to come
with the doctrines of peace and consolation, they are not to come with the
doctrines of judgments, and if God proceeds in anger, wrath, and judgments
against a people for their sins; the Ministers ought not, like the false
Prophets in Jeremiah, preach peace, peace, and sew pillows under their elbows,
to build them up in security, and so make them ripe for destruction; neither
are they only in a perfunctory way to preach the mind of God unto their
churches, but they must follow John's example here, whatsoever vision or burden
is made known unto them from the Lord, they must for the more certainty, and
better observation thereof, write it down, and send it, and commit it to their
churches keeping: this rule the Apostles kept, in committing their doctrines
unto writing, a sure way of preserving it for the churches of Christ, to the
end of all.

Verse. 12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me, and being turned,
I saw seven golden Candlesticks.

Verse 13. And in the midst of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of
man, clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle.


John having heard this great and terrible voice, he turned to see the voice
that spoke unto him: Either this is to be taken metonimocally, where seeing is
put for understanding; that is, he turned rightly and distinctly to understand
the voice he heard: or else to be taken per Synecdochen, part for the whole;
that is, he turned to see the voice, that is, the person that uttered the
voice. From hence note.

Observe. That God's faithful ones are very intent to know the mind of God in
all the discoveries of his Will. They are not those that desire to know their
master's will darkly, and in part, they are willing to know it fully, that they
may fully obey it: It is but a fruitless hearing, to hear the voice only in the
ministry of the Word of God, and not be intent upon the intendment and
substance of it. The word of God (though it be the power of life unto all that
believe) yet without this, is but as a mere voice, and a dead letter. Those
with Paul, Acts 9. when he was stricken down when he was going to Damasco,
heard the voice, but saw not him that spoke unto him; so many in our days, do
hear the same voice of God, that strikes through other souls unto conversion,
whiles they neither see nor understand the meaning of God in the voice, either
to their comfort or conversion.

No sooner was John turned, to comprehend more distinctly this voice that spoke
unto him, but presently he had a vision presented him, of the seven golden
Candlesticks, and one like unto the Son of man in the mids of them; what is
meant by the seven golden Candlesticks, I refer to the last verse of this
chapter, where the Spirit it self is Interpreter: But by the way this Note
arises.

Observe. That God reserveth his choicest discoveries for the most diligent and
enquiring souls. John when he turned to see the voice, and being turned, he saw
seven golden Candlesticks, etc. When souls turn to God, and enquire carefully
after his will, God will be found of them, they are the Treasurers of his mind;
The secrets of the Lord are with those that fear him: They shall know the
intendment of God in all the revolutions and providential percussions of the
Nations of the world. If the Statists of the world would know what would be the
event of things, their best counselors would be such as are the wise and
diligent observers (not of Stars, flying of Birds, the bowels of Beasts, and
such Ethnic fopperies) but of the voice of God in his holy Word.

Observe. 2. The things contained in this book of Prophesies are most certain.
John says not he heard only a voice, but he saw seven golden Candlesticks,
etc. The sense of sight is the most certain, most evidential of all the senses,
1 John 1.3. And indeed this whole book is a book of visions, presented unto
John, and which he saw in Patmos: Now in all visions there are some
representations made either to the eye of the body externally, or to the eye of
the mind internally.

Secondly, In every vision there is something that is Future, and therefore it
is sometimes called prophecy, or prediction, Isa. 1.1.

Thirdly, The party to whom it is made, has a strong irradiation of Spirit,
and mighty light over-powering him, to make him obedient unto that heavenly
vision, and so is put out of all doubt of the truth of it.

Fourthly, It is in great evidence when the party is awake. Dreams are but
obscurer visions when men are asleep; and therefore visions are the more
evident and excellent discoveries of the truth.

In this first vision, John saw seven golden Candlesticks, and in the mids of
them, one like the Son of man, etc. Some may conceive that this person here
represented in the likeness of the Son of man, to be some Angel, and not
Christ; because he is said to be like the Son of man, and not the Son of man,
but an Angel which Christ deputized, as v. 1. to give these visions unto John.
But to refel this opinion, I offer these reasons. First, He is called the A and
O in verse 8. and in chap. 2. verse. 18. where the same person is described, he
is called the Son of God; Now sure God would never give these Titles, and his
peculiar Attributes, unto creature-Angels, but unto his Son, who is not only
(...), but (...), not only consimiliar, but consubstantial with the Father; and
who counts it no robbery to be equal with God: For, unto which of the Angels
has he said, ye are the A and O, the first, and the last? Or, ye are the Sons
of God? Or, unto which of the Angels has he said, as in verse 18. ye are
alive, but ye were dead; or, ye have the keys of hell, and of death? Surely no
creature in heaven or in earth will take these high Titles and Prerogatives
unto themselves, but Christ himself; and therefore this likeness of the Son of
man in this vision, must needs be Christ: And by the way, I would have the
observant reason take notice, that it is not very difficult to discern what
visions in this book are given forth by Christ, and what by Angels, by
observing the descriptions of the parties that gives them; for the principal
and most remarkable visions, Christ gives out himself, but the less principal,
he discovers by his ministers, the Angels. But to leave nothing in the dark:
Some may say, Why may not this be the Father who appeared unto Daniel? chap. 7.
9. who is there called the Ancient of days, whose garment was white as snow,
and the hair of his head as pure wool, his throne was like the fiery flame, and
his wheels were as burning fire? The description of this person here in Daniel,
is almost the same with this in the Revelation, comparing the 11. 14, and 15
verses together. I answer, first, The Learned do observe, That neither the
Father, nor the holy Spirit, have ever appeared in the likeness or the shape of
man.

Secondly, The Anthropomorphites have abused this place, to maintain their
gross opinion, of the corporiety and circumscription of the infinite Deity; and
therefore the all-wise Spirit of God, to prevent the mistakes of man about the
invisible and incomprehensible nature of God, describes this vision of Daniel
in the likeness and appearance of things; not that they were materially so: It
is the likeness of a Throne, and like a fiery flame, etc. And in the 13 verse,
like the Son of man; no true substantial body, nor material visions.

Thirdly, I answer, This must be the person of the Son in the likeness of man,
for the reasons immediately foregoing, who was dead, but is alive; and he that
should attribute this to the Father, or the Spirit, should want some Hellebore.

Lastly, This must be Christ, because we find in Scripture, that Christ has
often appeared in visions like unto man, Dan. 7.13. I saw in the night Visions,
and behold one like the Son of man; Ezekiel. 1.26. and Rev. 14.14. I looked, and
behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud, one sat like unto the Son of man:
and that this was the person of the Son, and not the Father, or the holy
Spirit, is most evident from verse 18. of chap. 2. where one and the same
person that is in the 13, 14, and 15, verses, here described in the mids of the
seven Churches, or the seven golden Candlesticks, who had his eyes like a flame
of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass; in the 18. verse of chap. 2. he
commands John to write to Thyatira, one of the seven Churches. These things
says the Son of God, which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his
feet like unto fine brass. Therefore to be brief, that person that is here
called the Son of God, is neither the Father, nor the Spirit, but Christ, the
eternal Son of God.

Quere. But was not this appearance then in the likeness of the Son of man,
truly man, or Christ the Son of man? Seeing you hold it was the person of
Christ, was it Christ according to his manhood?

I answer, It was Christ, but not Christ as the Son of man; for it is a maxim,
that nullum simile est idem; and here he is called, like the Son of man,
therefore not the true and proper Son of man. The heavens was to contain his
manhood until the restoration of all things; though his Divinity is
ubiquitary, omnipresent, and omnipotent, yet his manhood is circumscribed, and
terminated unto one place at once; if it be in heaven, it cannot be on earth;
it ascended there, Acts 1.10, 11. and Stephen saw him there, even the Son of
man, at the right hand of his Father, in glory, Act 7.56. not by a visional
representation, but truly and really: As God gave Stephen this glorified sight
of the Son of man in heaven, so God doubtless fitted and qualified his
organical instruments of sight above their common pitch, to reach an object at
so high a distance; when God will work wonderfully, he can turn Nature out of
its proper frame, either in elevating it beyond its own power of production, or
to hinder it in its own peculiar operations: He can make the Sun to stand
still, as in the days of Joshua: He can make the eye to see a thousand miles
distance, as unto Stephen; he can bind up the fiery flames, that they shall not
hurt or burn, as unto the three children in the fiery Furnace, walking therein
without scortching a hair. But to return, If Christ, as the Son of man, be in
heaven, then he is not on the earth; he is not transubstantiated, or
consubstantiated into, or with the Bread in the Sacrament, as the Papists and
some Lutherans dream of.

But secondly I answer, Christ here appears to John, as he did to the Prophets
of old before his Incarnation; that is to say, by his Deity and Godhead, being
transfigured into the likeness of man, and taking up the form of man, as being
most suitable to the capacity and nature of man, and so manifests himself in the
shape or form of man, otherwise the Divine Nature in it self is invisible, as
in Dan. 7.13. and 10.5. Ezekiel. 1.26. Rev. 14.14. Before Christ's Incarnation, he
appears in the likeness of man; to show, that in time he would become the true
and real Son of man, by assuming flesh into union with his Godhead: and since
his Ascension, he appears in the likeness of man; to teach us, that one day he
will in the true humane nature, come again to judge the sons of men: He was
from his first undertaking for fallen man, even from the beginning, the great
Administrator and Agent for his Father, and so will be, until the end of all,
under several appearances, to wit, either in Spirit and Power, as now in the
days of the Gospel; or secondly, in visional representations, as here in the
likeness of man, and to the Prophets of old: Or thirdly and lastly, in his real
humane nature, as the Son of man, as in his first and second coming.

Object. But some may here unadvisedly say, If this be the Deity of Christ that
appeared here to John in the likeness of man, and his manhood in heaven, why
then there may be a separation between the Deity and the Manhood of Christ.

But this objection savours of much ignorance of the nature of the Deity:
Though the Deity, I grant, is most eminently conjunct with the manhood in
heaven, for that is the most special and magnificent habitation of his glory,
yet this does not at all hinder, but that that infinite Deity, which is one
with the humanity in heaven, does from thence flow, and extend it self most
infinitely over the whole Universe; and therefore is not only most glorious in
heaven, but all other sublunary places also are filled with his glorious
presence, according to that of the Psalmist, 119.8. If I ascend up unto heaven,
why, thou art there, that is the habitation of thy glory: If I go down unto the
deeps, thou art there also, thy power, and wonderful providential workings, are
seen there also. This is made good by that old verse, Enter, praesenter, Deus
hic, and ubique potenter.
God's Being, Power, and Presence, is most clear
On high, and here beneath, and every where.
Therefore it is not strange that Christ should here appear unto John in his
Deity, as the Son of God, and not as the Son of man, but in the form or
likeness of the Son of man: For if Christ had appeared to John in his humanity,
as he did unto Stephen, he had then called him the Son of man; but taking only
the likeness of the Son of man, he is called cap. 2. 18. the Son of God, and
not the Son of man, being under a figure like to his humanity: his humane body
being in heaven since his Ascension, and is there to abide, until the latter
day. Acts 2.34, 35.

From this figure of Christ's appearance in the likeness of man, observe: That
the Divine nature of Christ, is too glorious for the eyes of man to behold;
therefore is here represented to John under the form of man: the more excellent
glory is here shaddowed under that is less glorious. If Christ had opened his
divine nature and glory unto John, in the fullness of it, as it is in it self,
other then in some darker representations of it, it would have overwhelmed
John, and slain him: No man can see me, and live, says God to Moses, Exodus
33.18. when he desired God to show him his glory: This representation unto John
was so glorious, though in the likeness of man, that John professes in verse
17. when he saw it, he fell at his feet as dead. If we cannot behold (without
prejudice) the Sun in its glory, how can we behold the exceeding glory of the
Creator, whose glory exceeds infinitely the glory of all the creatures, as far
as infinity exceeds all finite Beings: the sight of the glory of that Majesty,
would turn us into nothing: If the Lord should not condescend to our weakness,
and shrine up his Majesty under the form of man, there could be no communion
between him and us: Oh the goodness of God, that condescends to our capacities!

From Christ's appearing in the mids of the seven golden Candlesticks; Note,
That Christ sits as King and supreme Moderator and Governor in his Churches.
And this is couched in these words, In the mids of them: for a King, supreme
Captain, or Governor, sits in his throne, in the mids of his Nobles and
servants, being environed about with attendants, for his greater Majesty.

This person here in the likeness of the Son of man, in the mids of the seven
Candlesticks, which denotes Christ's Kingly Office, being farther described by
his garments, being clothed with a garment down to the feet, betokening gravity
and wisdom; this sort of garment was worn of the Priests of old, and also of
the Roman Senators, the Scribes and Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law, in
Christ's time, Matthew. 12.38. used also this kind of garment, and Christ here
appears in this garb, which does typically represent both his Priestly office,
and his Prophetical office also; for the Priests and Prophets under the Law,
were to be arrayed in such long garments, Exodus 28.42, 43. Lev. 6.10. and
Samuel the Prophet ministered in such a garment, 1 Samuel 2.18. Hence observe.

That when Christ makes discovery of himself to his Churches, he desires to
manifest himself in all his Offices. When he appears here among these Asian
Churches in a Kingly way and Power, to chastise them for their backslidings,
yet he appears too in a Sacerdotal garment, under his Priestly office,
interceding for his poor backsliding people; and withal, exercises his
Prophetical Office, in admonishing them to return to their first love, whom
they had forsaken. Christ will not be wanting in any of his offices, for the
good and benefit of his Churches; and therefore he is said here, to be girt
about the Paps with a golden Girdle, which denotes Christ's readiness in all
his offices for their good: consult Luke 12.35. and 17.8. When the Romans of
old did undertake any matter of action, they did use to truss up their long
garments, for the better expedition in their actions; so Christ here is said to
be girt with a precious and golden girdle, to manifest his readiness for his
Churches service, either as King, to rule and chastise them, as a Priest, to
intercede for them, and as a Prophet, to inform them.

Verse 14. His head and hairs were white, as white wool, and as snow, and his
eyes were as a flame of fire.

Verse 15. And his feet like unto fine brass, burning as in a Furnace, and his
voice as the sound of many waters.


This appearance, or likeness of the Son of man, is farther described, to have
his head and hairs white as wool, and as snow; and the Ancient of days in Dan.
7.9. is ever under the same figures described; white hairs, and white head,
shows gravity, age, and antiquity, worthy of all due reverence: according to
that of the Poet, Magna fuit quadam capitis reverentia Cani.

From this description, Note, That Christ as the Son of God, is of the same
antiquity with the Father, even one and the same coeternal God, blessed for
ever: For God who is called the Ancient of days in that vision of Daniel 7.9.
manifested himself in the like appearance, as he does here unto John, in the
likeness of the Son of man; therefore is one and the same God, having the same
incommunicable properties with the Ancient of days.

He is here farther described to have eyes as a flame of fire, and feet like
unto fine brass, burning as in a furnace. (...), Eyes like a flame of fire,
signifies either their piercing nature, in searching into the secrets of the
heart; or of wrath and indignation, to terrify his impenitent enemies: and
indeed, Christ is here from head to feet, presented in a fiery color; his eyes
were as a flame of fire, his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a
furnace. Hence Note.

Observe. 2. That when Christ is about executing acts of power and judgment
against Kingdoms or Churches, he is most terrible in his appearance.

When he goes about to call to an account the seven Asian Churches, he is very
intense about it, and all of a fiery color: sparkling in the eyes like fire,
does signify much anger and indignation; feet of burning brass, speed and
execution: Christ is here presented in that fine posture; he is brought in,
Rev. 10.1. with his face shining as the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire,
whereupon presently followed terrible thunders, and dreadful judgments. So in
chap. 2. v. 18. he is presented with eyes like fire, and feet like brass, and
forthwith goes on with a charge against the Church of Thyatira. So in Rev.
19.10, 11, 12. he is said to have his eyes like a flame of fire, and his
vesture dipped in blood, and presently goes on in executing great wrath against
his adversaries. The dreadfulness of this fiery Judge, when he comes in wrath,
will better appear, if we consider that of the Prophet Malachi 3.2, 3. Who
shall abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he
is like a Refiners fire. A Refiners fire is the hottest, most terrible, and
most consuming. How terrible he is toward Babylon, both literal and mystical,
consider Jer. 51.25. and Rev. 18.8, 9, etc. I am against thee, oh destroying
mountain (speaking of Babylon) which destroyest all the earth; I will stretch
out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the Rock, and will make thee a
burnt mountain. This was fully executed on old Babylon in the letter. And how
severe is Christ against Babylon in the mystery! in Rev. 18.8. Her plagues
shall come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt
with fire; for strong is the Lord God which will condemn her. Peruse the
chapter throughout. When Christ goes forth on his red horse, to execute
judgment, and to take peace from the earth, neither Kings, nor Captains, nor
the mighty ones of the earth, shall be able to stand against this mighty one:
They shall call for the mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the face
of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. And Paul
tells us 2 These. 1.8. of the dreadfulness of this Judge, who should come in
flames of fire; to what end, to destroy Antichrist, the son of perdition, with
the brightness of his coming: only consider once more Rev. 19.12, 13, etc. When
Christ goes forth to make war in righteousness, his eyes were like a flame of
fire, and was clothed in a garment dipped in blood, and out of his mouth
proceeded a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the heathen; for he shall
rule them with a rod of iron, for he it is that treads the wine press of the
fierceness and wrath of almighty God. All this does clearly inform, that Christ
has another name, a strange name, that none knows but himself, Rev. 19.12.
that is, another nature and disposition to appear in, then of a Lamb: No man
ever thought, that have only considered Christ in the state of his humiliation,
that he had that Lion-like disposition in him: All Christ's adversaries shall
one day know, that he is as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whose voice shall
be terrible unto them, as well as a Rock of defense and safeguard to all his
chosen ones; and as sure as he has already acted the Lamb-like part in his
sufferings here on earth, and now does the same in his Mediators office in
heaven, so he shall one day come with power and glory, to rule the Nations of
the earth, that would not have him for their Lord and King, even with a Scepter
of power and judgment, and with a rod of iron. And to set forth the
dreadfulness of this Judge the more, he comes with a Lion-like voice, roaring,
as the sound of many waters. Hence Note,

Observe. 2. That when Christ comes to judge his enemies, he is not only
dreadful in his looks, and outward appearance, but he is dreadful all over,
even in his words also. In verse 10. his voice was as of a Trumpet, loud, and
terrible; here, like the sound of many waters, very terrible to his enemies,
but rouzing, converting, and saving to his faithful ones.

Verse 16. And he had in his right hand seven Stars; and out of his mouth went
a sharp two edged sword, and his face shone as the Sun shines in its strength.
Notwithstanding Christ's dreadful appearance, and his intenseness unto
judgment, yet he had in his right hand seven stars. In the right hand is
seated the chiefest strength and power of man, and so it connotes to us safety
and protection; and he takes the seven stars into his right hand, to preserve
and keep them safe under his protection, whilst he is executing his judgments
upon his impenitent backsliding churches, or obstinate enemies.

The seven stars the Spirit interprets to be the Angels of the seven churches,
verse 20. of this chapter; only what is meant by Angels in that place, being
mystically represented by the stars in Christ's right hand, I think fit to make
enquiry here: Surely it cannot be meant Angels in a proper sense, such as are
ministering Spirits, the Angels in heaven; for John is commanded in the next
chapter to write unto those Angels of the church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. to
write unto the Spirits Angelical; all know such a command would not proceed
from him that is the wisdom of the Father; therefore this must needs be
interpreted to be the chief Ministers or Pastors of those Asian churches, who
should rather be called here the Messengers, then the Angels of the churches;
for the word in the Greek (...), is Messenger, which we translate Angel, when
attributed to God's ministering Spirits; but when attributed unto man, more
properly it should be rendered Messenger, and not Angel; as that of Peter, Acts
12. When he came and knocked at the door where the Disciples were, they thought
it was his Angel, and not himself; that is his Messenger, one coming from him
to acquaint them of his deliverance; for they could not be so ignorant to
conceive that it was an Angel that knocked, which could enter without opening
the doors; wherefore under correction of better Judgments, I shall account
this amongst some of the mistakes of our Translators. Consult to this purpose,
Luke 7.24. Mal. 3.1. and therefore it should be better rendered here,
Messengers, write unto the Messengers of the seven churches: And the Ministers
of the Gospel are so termed, because they are persons sent and commissionated
by Christ, to preach, and teach his Gospel amongst his churches, Matthew. 28.18.
Having cleared what is meant by the Angels, or seven Stars of the Asian
churches, I shall draw these notes.

Observe. 1. Christ has an especial eye of providence, and hand of protection
over all his faithful Ministers of his Word, in the most terrible times of
wrath and judgment. He takes them in his right hand, claps them under his
wings for safety. Noah who was a preacher of righteousness, was preserved in
the Ark, when all the world was drowned: Righteous Lot was preserved, when
Sodom flamed in fire: Ezekiel, Daniel, Mordecai, etc. were preserved in
Babylon, when the Inhabitants of Judah suffered all the miseries that an
insolent Conqueror could lay upon them. How Luther was preserved when all the
antichristian world sought his ruin, is most admirable to consider: I have
heard it related, that that most famous Minister of Christ, Peter du Molyne,
was preserved in Paris, being a sucking child, by his Nurse under a tub, when
the bloody massacers did not spare man, woman, or child of the Reformed Faith;
that he might afterward become a star in the firmament of Christ's church. And
the reason of all this is, they that are most engaged for Christ in his work
and ministry, he does most engage for their safety and protection; Satan is
their greatest enemy, therefore Christ is their greatest friend and bulwark. Oh
that all the Ministers of our churches were shining stars, faithful Angels, or
rather, faithful Messengers of God's word and truth! Then Christ would carry
them in his right hand of protection, and they should be as the apple of his
eye unto him. The Angels, Messengers, or chief Ministers of these seven Asian
churches are here represented by stars: Stars always in prophetical Scriptures,
signify eminency, splendor, light, and excellency. How art thou fallen from
heaven, O Lucifer, thou son of the morning! meaning Nebuchadnezzar, Isa. 14.12.
and Rev. 18.10. I saw a star fall from heaven; which connotes the fall of a
most eminent, high, and excellent person. From hence note.

2. Those that are the dispensers of Christ's mysteries, ought to be more
eminent and excellent in knowledge and holiness, then other inferior
christians. They are figured by stars, by the shining heavenly lamps, they are
the salt of the earth, their lips should especially preserve wisdom, they
should be as stars of the greater magnitude, shining in the firmament of their
churches; they are the Overseers of the flock, to go in and out before them in
soundness of life and doctrine: yet too, though their light be great, shining,
and eminent, yet let them consider they are but stars, their light is borrowed
from the Sun, they should not advance it to that pitch, as to make it an
infallible light, but they should eye the Son, as the fountain of all true
light, to keep them in their proper Sphere, and not to lord it over the Lord's
inheritage: Let them remember too, that they are stars, whereof some may be
erratique, as well as fixed ones; Christ alone is the true light, the true
morning star, that whosoever shall receive light from this true Son of
righteousness, he cannot be deceived, but at last shall be brought to the
Father of all lights.

3. Another Note is, That the Ministers of Christ are in an high and honorable
calling: They are figured under the types of stars, celestial lights, they have
the same Titles of God's ministering spirits: The Angels, they are his
Messengers, that goes on his errants, his Ambassadors, to treat with man about
the great mysteries of heaven. Hence arises another corrolary; That all
Christ's ministers, as they are stars, though differing from one another in
glory, in parts, gifts, and graces, yet not differing in power, nor Lords over
one another: They are Angels, that is, Messengers, Ambassadors, not Prince
Cardinals, not Lord Bishops: Every church here had its Angel, its Bishop, its
Pastor, its Elder; not many Bishops, not many Elders in a classical form over
diverse churches; but every church had its Angel, its Ministers, or Officers:
Ephesus had its An^gel, Smyrna its Angel, etc. not that Ephesus Angel, either
singly, o. joint with two, three, or more, were superintendent over all the rest

Here is a farther description of the terribleness of the appearance of Christ
in this vision, when he comes in power and judgment: Out of his mouth went a
sharp two-edged sword, and his face shone as the Sun in his strength. The sword
of the mouth is taken in Scripture for the words or doctrine proceeding from
the mouth, Psalm 56.5. Prove. 5.4. Job 5.15. The word of Christ is here called a
sharp two-edged sword, it cuts both sides, but in a diverse mode; it wounds the
penitent, but for their recovery, and to bring them unto Christ, and so it is
mighty in operation, Heb. 4.12. And secondly, It is a destroying sword to his
adversaries, Rev. 19.15. Out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it he
should smite the heathen.

Hence observe, Christ's word is very powerful, and piercing, it divides
between the bone and the marrow, between the soul and the spirit; it is Telum
Achilleum, Achilles Spear, that can both hurt and cure, kill and make alive.

But it may be here questioned, whether this figure of a two edged sword, that
went out of the mouth of Christ, may not signify and represent a material
sword also.

I answer affirmatively, That Christ also is to use that sword which is to
smite the heathen with, and that is a material one, for he is to rule them with
a rod of iron, Rev. 19.15. Now how it can be understood that Christ is to smite
the heathen with the sword of his mouth, that is, his word, or rule them with
his word and doctrine, I see but small reason for such an interpretation; and
seeing too, when he does this, it is in fierceness, treading the wine press of
the wrath of almighty God.

But then some may say, Does Christ judge and smite his enemies only by the
material sword?

I answer, No; first he goes out with the sword or spirit of his mouth, to wit,
his divine truth and word, to make manifest, destroy, and overthrow all
antichristian Idolatry and Worship, 2 These. 2. Then secondly, he goes out on
the red Horse of war, with a material sword, to destroy the Beast* and the
false Prophet, and their adherents; and they are so smitten and destroyed, that
the Fowls of the Air are called to the prey, to eat the flesh of kings, and the
flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of
them that sit upon them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both
small and great, Rev. 19.18. and this is to be executed by the sword that
proceeded out of his mouth, v. 21. and how this can be effected by the word of
his mouth, I know not, otherwise then by moving and working powerfully on the
hearts of such instruments as God shall command and employ to take the material
sword in hand, for the ruin of antichrist, and to effect this work of wrath
and judgment. Collate to this, the Notes on the two precedent verses, 14, and
15.

And his face shone as the Sun shines in his strength.] This shows farther the
resplendency of this vision, His face is likened to the Sun in his glory: There
was much and great glory in this vision, and yet all this is but like the Sun
in his glory. If it were the glory of ten thousand Suns united in one, yet
would be short of the essential glory of the Son of God; it is neither
expressible nor comprehensible by any of all the creatures, but here is
presented by things beneath its excellency, that according to man's weakness,
we may perceive a little of his glory; for no man yet ever could see the glory
of God, and live.

Hence Note, That the execution of Justice and Judgment, is a glorious
administration. Christ's face shone as the Sun in his strength, when he was
about to call his delinquent and offending churches to an account for their
backslidings, in chap. 10. v. 1. and 3. his face was as it were the Sun in that
appearance also; but then presently followed thunders, and voices, as when a
Lion roareth; to denote unto us, when Christ was going forth with terrible
judgments upon the world, his carriage and appearance therein was most
glorious: and it is said in Exodus 15.6. upon the destruction of Pharaoh and his
host in the red Sea, Thy right hand, O God, is become glorious in power, thy
right hand has dashed in pieces the enemy, and in the greatness of thine
excellency thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee. The acts of
God's power and justice do shine so clearly in the world, that they dazzle men's
eyes and hearts, and makes them tremble before God: So likewise it is amongst
the children of men, not any Magistrates, Commonweals, or Nations, are more
honorable, shining, and dreadful to their enemies, then such as keep close to
the rules of Justice and judgment against offenders. Never was Solomon more
glorious in all his reign, then when he executed justice between the two
Harlots, and called for the Sword to decide the controversy. How honorable
was Phineas and what a high reward he got, for executing justice and judgment?
It was an old saying, Fiat Justitia, and ruat Coelum. If our chief Magistrates
keep close to Justice in our Land and Commonweal, our Nation will shine as the
Sun in its strength, none of the Nations round about will be able to look us in
the face, for the power and glory of the Lord will be upon us.

Verse 17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead; then he laid his
right hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not, I am the first and the last.

Verse 18. And I am alive, but I was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore,
Amen: And I have the Keys of hell and death.


When John had taken a view of this appearance of the Son of man, and of that
great and dreadful Majesty and Glory that he appeared in, it struck him, as
dead, at his feet.

Hence Note, That the sight of Divine glory, is the most effectually and
humbling sight* When the Prophet Isaiah had a sight of this glory, he could cry
out, I am a man undone, and of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King,
the Lord of hosts. Isa. 6.5. When a soul comes to see this glory, it brings him
to a true sight of his own worthlesness, and to an abhorrency in his own eyes:
There is no greater, or more efficacious way to take off our hearts from the
creature, then to behold the vast disproportion between the glory of God, and
our poor selves. All flesh is as grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as
the flower of the field, Isa* 40.5, 6. and why? Because the glory of the Lord
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. And when Job had a
sight of this glory, he cried out, Job 42.5. Now mine eyes see thee, I abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Observe. 2, That Revelations of Divine glory, are dreadfully glorious. They
struck John as dead: There did but Angels appear in an inferior glory unto
Gideon, and Manoah, and made those Worthies quake, Judge. 16. and 13.
Apparitions of glory works strongly upon the spirits, and quickly overwhelms
them: And if the glory of the creatures is so resplendent, how is the glory of
God to be born, who dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto? 1 Timothy
6.16. Paul could not behold that glorious light that shined about him, Acts 9.
but was stricken to the ground, and blinded with it. In the Earth, Heavens, and
World, we may behold the glory of God in part, and as in a glass; but his
essential glory, as it is himself, wherein he makes his habitation, is, that
light which no man can approach to, or comprehend, and live; and therefore when
it is but left out to appear but in some likeness, or similitude of man; Fire,
or the like, it works such terrible effects upon the beholders of it. Abraham
fell to the ground when he had this glory appeared to him, Genesis 17.3. The three
Disciples, when they had but a taste of this glory, at the Transfiguration in
the Mount, they fell upon their faces to the earth.

Now the reasons that the appearance of Divine glory is so dreadful, are,
First, Because the Majesty of God is partly in those visions, and the luster
that accompanies it, is too high and burdensome for mortal eye. Secondly, That
it may breed an awe and reverence in us, of, and unto the Divine Majesty. When
Israel saw the lightning, and heard the Thunder in the Mount, all the people in
the Camp trembled. Exodus 19.16. Thirdly, It is to prepare a soul for
entertainment of what God has to speak unto it: Our souls are quite out of
temper by reason of lusts, cares, fears, and the world, to have converse with
God: This prepares them for this Divine communion.

Quest. Here a question may be made, whether the blessed heavenly Spirits,
Angels, or blessed Souls, or glorified persons after the resurrection, shall or
do see the essential glory of God: Though it were granted, mortal eye cannot
see this glory, yet those blessed glorified creatures may?

I answer, That I am swayed for the negative. My reasons are, Because God's
essential glory is himself, and God is invisible, and that glory inaccessible,
and no farther, and in no other way to be seen and comprehended by any created
being then himself thinks good to propound it in; and this has hitherto from
the beginning been God's method in the representations of himself under shapes,
figures, and similitudes, fitted to the capacity of the creature: it is true, I
confess Saints in heaven, and Angels, have a greater manifestation of the Glory
of God, then Saints on earth, by reason of their glorified Organs, fitted to
receive that high measure of glory, to complete their vessels with all true and
perfect blessedness. but still remember they are creatures, and will be still
so, though glorified and immortal ones; Now how a finite creature can see or
comprehend an infinite Glory or Majesty, I know not, otherwise then by
condescensions to their capacities, and finite natures, If a finite creature
(as Angel, or glorified Saint) could see and comprehend an infinite, then what
is seen or comprehended, it were not infinite: and if an infinite could be
comprehended of the finite, the finite would it self become infinite: Neither
can infinite be seen in parts; for it is not possible therefore not to be seen
at all. Therefore I am of opinion, that God, and his essential glory, is seen
of Angels, and glorified Saints, not as in himself, infinitely glorious, but by
way of condescension, in some resemblance, likeness, figure, or representation,
above our reach to consider; But I conceive the glory of God will be most
eminently seen to glorified Saints, in the face of Jesus Christ; God did always
appear in the likeness of the Son of man, when he did appear to his Prophets
before the Incarnation of Christ; the Saints saw God in the face of Jesus
Christ, when he was on earth; for he was the express Image of his Father: And
they that hope to see God and his glory at the resurrection, shall see him most
gloriously, and most eminently, in the face of the Son of man, Rev. 22.3, 4.
The Throne of God and the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve
him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

Object. But some may say, Do not the Angels behold always the face of the
Father in heaven? Matthew. 18.10.

I answer, It is true, they are in the special presence of God, and have a most
high and eminent fruition and communion with God, but the manner unutterable,
and inexpressible; for in this sense you must understand it, and not literally;
for God has not a face in heaven: and consider as before, they are creatures,
and the Father is infinite and invisible.

Object. 2. But did not Moses and Jacob see God, and talked with him face to
face, and mouth to mouth? Exodus 33.11. Genesis 32. Numb. 12* 8.

I answer, Those Prophets and Patriarchs did see God, but how? Not essentially,
but under diverse resemblances; for in his own nature he is invisible: as that
of 1 Timothy 6.16. Whom no man has seen, or can see: and that of John 1.18. is
downright, No man has seen God at any time; either by corporeal vision, or by
intellectual natural vision, for they are weak and imperfect, and cannot
comprehend that which is most infinitely perfect in it self: And for this
reason also, the blessed celestial Spirits cannot comprehensively see God, by
reason of their imperfection, comparatively, to that most perfect Divine Being,
who only is able to comprehend himself unto perfection.

Secondly I answer, Moses nor Jacob never saw the Divine Essence, nor any
other; Because that is pure, unmixt, and always alike, but that of God they
saw, was under some resemblance; sometimes of a cloud, sometimes of the likeness
of fire, sometimes of man, etc. that under the exhibition of those visible and
sensible figures, they might perceive God, who was invisibly represented to the
understanding by these visible glories.

Thirdly and lastly, To see God face to face in Scripture, imports only two
things; First, a familiar converse, as that of Exodus 33.1. Deuteronomy. 5.4. the Lord
speaks to Moses face to face, and mouth to mouth, as a friend speaks with his
friend. Secondly, it signifies a more clear sight of God, with greater
perspicuity and clearness. Some saw God in Dreams and Visions, which were in
dark resemblances; but Moses had more clear and illustrious visions of God: To
this purpose is that of 1 Cor. 13.12. Then shall we see face to face, that is,
in heaven we shall enjoy and see God more perfectly, and more fully, then here
on earth; and then we shall see God in like manner, or in some such way as the
life of man is now seen by the bodily eyes, by the intervention of something
else, and so do become sensible and perceivable to the understanding. Jesus
Christ will be the great and special mirror, wherein glorified Saints will see
the Deity, and the Father.

Object. 3. But do not all Divines hold, that in heaven we shall enjoy the
beatifical vision? And does not that of 1 John 3.2. import so much; We shall
see him as he is?

I answer first, The highest Saint in glory will not be able to see all of God
in eternal life, though to see and know this little of God that we see here, is
life eternal.

Secondly, I answer, It is true, in heaven we shall see God in that manner, and
through those mediums he is pleased to manifest himself in: And that we shall
see him as he is, that is, as he is to be seen, in a new and unexpressible way
of glory: We see now the Sun beams, and we sensibly perceive the light,
efficacy, and virtue of the Sun, yet we cannot possibly behold the nature of
it. In like manner, in heaven the blessed souls shall see the beams and rays of
the glory of God, and shall live in the light and power thereof, but shall
never comprehend the nature of it. O Lord, grant that we may so live here to
thy glory, that in the world to come we may be partakers of thy self and glory,
who will then resolve us of all our doubts, and will also unvail so much of thy
self unto us, as will make us most perfectly blessed.

When John was in this humbled state and consternation, as dead at the feet of
the glorious apparition of Christ, in the likeness of the Son of man, then he
laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not, I am the first and the
last. The hand of the Lord has diverse senses in Scripture: First, for
judgment, or punishment: The hand of the Lord shall be upon thee, and thou
shall be blind, says Paul to Elymas, Acts 13.11. Secondly, It is taken for
prophecy: When God stirred up the sons of men to prophecy, then it is said,
That the hand of the Lord was upon them: as Ezekiel. 1.3. And the hand of the Lord
was upon me: that is, God stirred up mightily on my Spirit to Prophecy.
Thirdly, It is taken for the Spirit of God, as the hand, and especially the
right hand, is the symbol of the strength of man, so the Spirit is the
strength and power of the most High: In these two latter senses, Christ lays
his right hand on John. First, upon his consternation, he gives him the spirit
of Prophecy, elevates and excites John's spirit to see Divine mysteries: And
secondly, gives him his Spirit of strength, power, and consolation, which might
subdue all his carnal conceits and fears, and so remove all impediments
whatsoever, that hindered him in that work which God would have him to
undertake; and therefore comes in with consolation, and bids John fear not, for
I am the first and the last.

From this, Note.

That those that are stricken low, and humbled by God, are fittest to be risen
by God for the reception of his choicest divine truths and mysteries. John was
stricken as dead with his glory, and then heard a voice, Fear not, but write
the things that thou shall see, to the seven Churches. When the Prophets
Ezekiel and Daniel were fallen down on their faces, then they were lifted by
the Spirit, and received glorious visions: We must let all our own go, our
false confidences, and carnal props, as of our own parts, our graces, our
eminency in gifts, and the like, if we will be fit auditors for Christ; we must
fall down at the feet of his Throne, if we expect an answer from his Throne.
Moses a meek man, yea the meekest of all men, he received the choicest favors
from God's hand; for he spoke to him mouth to mouth, and face to face. Deuteronomy.
34.10.

He laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not. Hence secondly Note,

That the hand of Christ, or his Spirit, is not only a most powerful, but also
a comforting and consolating Spirit. This is the Comforter, that takes off all
fears from John: It is the Spirit of God that does convince, it is the Spirit
of God that converts; it is the Spirit that does inspire godly men, it is the
Spirit that sanctifies, it is the Spirit that comforts, the Spirit is the great
Agent, and hand of God, by which God does all his works. Christ here in the
likeness of the Son of man, was but as a terrible apparition unto John, it
served only to strike him dead, before he laid his right hand upon him, to
comfort and support him: so the sight or knowledge of Christ in the Gospel,
without the cooperation of his holy Spirit, is but as a terrible sight and
knowledge, that makes for the greater condemnation: Christ unto some may be a
rock of offense, and a stumbling stone, whiles unto others that have his
Spirit, he is the rock of salvation, and the corner stone, which is sure and
precious. O lay thy right hand, O Lord, upon thy servant, give him thy Spirit,
that he may know thy Will and mind in thy Word, and serve thee without fear.

Observe. 3. That Christ is full of bowels of grace and compassion, toward all
such as he smites and humbles. The sight of Divine glory being the most
effectual thing unto poor, frail, worthless creatures, God follows it with the
greatest comfort, and sweetest consolations. No sooner does Christ appear unto
John in his glory, that makes him fall at his feet as dead, but presently
Christ lays his right hand upon him, and he hears his comforting word, saying,
Fear not: Christ would not leave John in that spiritless and liveless
condition, that the glory of the Vision had affected him with, but quickly
raises him, and comforts him again, with the most effectual and sweetest
consolations. Christ is our merciful high Priest, and that good compassionate
Samaritane, who is so affected and touched with our wounds and infirmities,
Luke 10.33. Heb 4.15. and that more especially, with such hurts and wounds that
proceeds from his own hand, that he is most ready at hand with the oil and
wine, the Grace of his Gospel, and Blood of his Covenant, to pour into our
wounded souls, for peace, healing, and consolation. Job after he was stricken
and humbled by the hand of God, and came to a true sight of the hand that did
it, His captivity is turned into joy, and comforts are multiplied, Job 42.5, 6,
etc. Daniel after he was afflicted, and humbled for his own sins, and the sins
of his forefathers, cap. 4. Then the Lord sent Gabriel to comfort him, and to
tell him, that he was a man greatly beloved, ver. 22. God does not throw down,
afflict, wound, or humble any of his servants, to leave them so; but forthwith,
or within a short time, reaches out his right hand, and lays it upon them, to
raise them up, and to comfort them.

Observe. 4. Another Note from this comforting word of Christ, saying, Fear not,
is; That the Word of Christ being conjunct with the Hand of Christ, his Spirit
is the most effectual comfort to a wounded spirit. The Word without the Spirit
is inefficacious in its operations; John had lain still as a senseless and dead
person, notwithstanding the word and voice of Christ, if he had not lain his
hand upon him also: The word is of little power, if the efficacy of the Spirit
be not in it; without this it is but a dead letter: That word of Christ which
is powerful and efficacious, carries the Spirit with it; the same word goes
forth unto all, and works from common gifts in some; so many are called: But
that that makes it a distinguishing powerful word, is the concomitancy of the
Spirit of grace; and so, few are chosen. When therefore we find in Scriptures
such expressions, as that the Word is the incorruptible seed, the power of God
to salvation, the word of life, sharper then a two-edged sword, and the like:
These, and the like phrases, we must understand, not as if the Word were such
in it self without the Spirit, but conjunctively, when the Word is made the
chariot of the Spirit, and the Spirit is made the life and power of the Word.
The Word without the Spirit, is only a voice void of virtue and operation; and
the Spirit without the medium of the Word, works not ordinarily, but both
conjunct together, makes up that true dispensation of the Gospel, which is
called the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. and the Grace of God that
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. God is light it self, and the Father of lights;
yet the Sun is not useless, but by it he enlightens us: so the Spirit of God is
the Comforter, and the Sanctifier, but does both comfort, sanctify, and
perform all other his offices and works, in, by, and through the Word. O Lord,
sanctify and comfort us by thy Word and Spirit; for thy Word is Truth, and the
power of our God unto salvation.

Observe. 5. The last Note that I shall raise from these words, And he laid his
right hand upon me, etc. shall be, That Christ does fully furnish in some good
measure, with the gifts and graces of his Spirit, all such as he calls and
employs in the great offices of his church. First, he lays his right hand upon
John, intimating his designation, enstalment, and confirmation in his
Prophetical office: for, as Imposition of hands was the solemn, and the
ultimate complete act in Ordination, unto all Offices in the Church, so Christ
here follows his own method used in his churches; he lays his right hand upon
him: but here lies the difference; men may lay their hands on, that is, bestow
offices on men, but cannot add power to execute those offices; but Christ not
only lays his hand on, makes John a Prophet, but fills him with his Spirit also.
Whom Christ calls unto offices in his church, he lays his right hand upon them,
he fills them with his Spirit. John before he received his confirmation in his
Prophetical office, and the command to write his visions, and what he saw, unto
the churches; had in the first place, divine visions of Christ in the likeness
of the Son of man, and was struck as dead with the glory thereof; whereupon
Christ laid his hand of comfort upon him, and he heard that rousing voice,
saying, Fear not: The case and condition of such persons that are called to the
Ministerial offices in the church, should in some measure run parallel with
John's. First, They ought to have clear visions of Christ, sound knowledge in
the mysteries of the Gospel. Secondly, under the apprehension of divine glory
and their own corruption, they ought to be humble, and lie low at the feet of
Christ, to be patterns unto others in humility, self-denial, and other graces.
Thirdly, They ought to be sensible of Christ's hand upon them; that is, his
spirit, which will manifest it self in their sanctified desires, willingness
and readiness unto the work of the Lord. Fourthly and lastly, They ought to
hear that rousing word of comfort within; Fear not: that is, the comfortable
experience of the Spirit in their own souls, Fear not, which will raise them to
a holy confidence, to declare the mind of God in all things, and not to fear
the faces of men; for the righteous are as bold as a Lion. This endowment with
the Spirit, was that that was principally looked at in the choosing of Officers,
in the Acts of the Apostles, yea even Officers of the lowest form. Consult Acts
6.3. and 9.17.11.24. and 13.2. unless men have the Spirit of Christ in them in
some fullness of it, they are neither fit for those holy functions, nor can
satisfyingly persuade themselves or others, that they are called of God unto
them.

Verse. 18. I am the first and the last; and I am alive, but I was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore.
That this person that is here spoken of, was Christ, is clear; to avoid
repetitions, peruse the precedent 8 and 13 verses: but here lies the difficulty.

Object. It was formerly asserted on verse. 13. that this was the divine person
of Christ that appeared unto John in the form of a man; now according to his
divine nature, he is impassible, he did not suffer death, nor was again made
alive, for he is life it self; therefore this is only proper to his humanity,
and that was it, to wit, his humane nature, that appeared unto John; that which
was now alive, and was dead.

To clear this, I answer, you must understand that is frequent in Scripture, to
attribute that unto one nature, which is the proper attribute of the other; and
so as the Learned calls it, communicatione Idiomatum, by the communication of
properties, what is due unto the divine nature, is communicated, or attributed
unto the humane, and so on the contrary: as to instance, When we are said to be
bought, justified, or saved by the blood of God; wherein we must not be so
gross, to conceive that God has blood, but it is meant of that person who
cleansed us by his blood, was both Man and God in one person; and that which is
proper to the humane nature, is here attributed unto the divine: And so when it
is said that God suffered, and the Son of man created all things, and 'twas he
that was with the Father from everlasting: This is predicated of one nature,
which is proper to the other. Consult Acts 20.28.

And so in this verse, though it is said, that Christ in his divine person
appeared unto John, under the similitude of the Son of man, who is alive, but
was dead, imports only thus much; That that similitude or form that appeared
unto John, was the very same Christ, and Divine Person, that was conjunct with
his humanity in heaven, and by a mutual and interchangeable communication, and
attribution of properties, this divine Idea, or Representation, that John saw,
is called by the proper attribution of Christ's humanity, which was pierced,
dead, and lived again; though indeed it was only the divine person of Christ,
clothed with the figure and likeness of the Son of man, which was dead, but was
now alive. This is very usual in Scripture, and amongst Divines, wherein the
properties of one nature are really attributed to the person denominated of the
other nature interchangeably, by reason of the unity of person consisting in
both natures.

Secondly I answer, That often in Scripture that has the real denomination of a
thing, which is only so in appearance and resemblance. That apparition, or
counterfeit of Samuel that appeared unto Saul at the Witch of Endors, is called
Samuel several times in 1 Samuel 28. without any note of distinction from the
true and real Prophet Samuel, further then is collected from scriptural reason
and the coherence of the discourse in that place: Angels that appeared in the
form and likeness of men to Jacob, Lot, etc. are called men, because they
appeared in humane form: so this divine appearance of Christ here, is called
the same person that was dead, but is now alive; because he appeared in that
shape and figure of the Son of man, which was dead, but is now alive.

And behold I am alive for evermore, Amen. As he is the first and the last, the
first before all beginnings, and the last to all eternity, so Christ assures
all his in this place, he is the same for ever to them, a King to rule and
protect them, a Mediator to intercede for them, a Prophet, to teach and direct
them unto everlasting, Amen, so be it, so it shall be, and so it must be. And
he adds,

And I have the Keys of hell and death.] Christ to take off all fear from John,
and to assure John, and all his Saints, that he is most powerful, and able to
effect and bring to pass those visions and ptedictions that he was about to
reveal unto John, and by him unto his churches, he now publishes unto John,
that all power now is put into his hand from the Father, even over hell it
self, for he has despoiled it of its power: Here is a transporting of the word
hell before death: Hell is the sting of death, and therefore according to order
of things, the last: Rev. 20.14. so death and hell were cast into the Lake of
fire. Take hell here for the grave, or the state of the dead: so Christ has
the key to open it in the resurrection; so has power to deliver them from the
state of death and hell. Or secondly, Take death and hell for the state of the
damned, and he has power over that too; he holds the key of the bottomless
pit, Rev. 20.1. as he has obtained power since his exaltation, to give Crowns
and Thrones to all his faithful ones, that shall persevere and overcome; so
also to chastise his impenitent and obstinate adversaries with hell and death.
The Keys in Scripture do signify Power, Dominion, and Rule: He that keeps and
commands the keys of a City, has the Power and Rule over it: The Keys were
anciently carried before the chief Magistrate, and are in some places at this
present time, as symbols and badges of authority. On Peter's honorable
confession in Mat. 16.19. the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven is given unto him
by Christ, which intimates the power of shutting and loosing, which was by
Christ deposited in the Church. It is said in the third chapter, that Christ
has the key of David, that shuts, and no man opens; and opens, and no
man shuts: and in chap. 20. v. 1. Christ is there represented by an Angel
that had the key of the bottomless pit. All this connotes,

Observe. That Christ has the full power over all powers, and principalities of
darkness, over the devil, and death, and hell it self, which before he has
attained and purchased by his death, 1 Cor. 15.55, etc. they cannot move nor
stir to the destruction of souls, but as he permits them; it is a most vain
conceit, yea, and savours of little faith, in those that think that the godly,
or faithful ones of Christ, are in the hands of Devils or Witches, to be hurt
by them, or tormented at their pleasures: Christ has the Keys of hell and
death, the wicked Angels are so surely locked in their prisons, and reserved in
chains up by his providence, that they cannot possibly touch any one of those
that are dear to God, no not to hurt a hair of their head, or the least lamb in
their fold, without Christ's special commission for it; and then too, they are
like a dog in a chain, under his hand and direction, to go thus far, and no
farther: The Devil could not touch Job, who was hedged about by God, before he
bid him go: And therefore, O! How reasonless and weak it is to affirm or hold,
that they are in the Divel's power, to touch or hurt at his pleasure* for whom
Christ has said down his most precious blood, and are as dear unto him, as the
apple of his eye; but if at any time God shall give any of his into the hand of
Satan, to be touched by him, either in person or goods, let us consider, it is
either to withdraw and wean us from sin, and to bring us to repentance for it,
or else to winnow and try us, whether we will bless the name of God or not* In
such cases, which seldom God exercises his children under, for few are able to
bear such temptations, and God will lay no more on his, then they are able to
bear; the most high and eminent in grace, are only fit to meet with such strong
trials, and not sink under them, as Job, and Paul, whom Satan buffetted; but if
God shall use the hand of Satan, to smite any of his children, let them look
upon God as the principal Mover, and Author of it; and though Satan be the
Instrument, yet to say with wise and godly Job, The Lord has done it; The Lord
takes, and the Lord gives, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Observe. 2. Another observation hence is, That Christ's obstinate enemies,
according to the Prophesies in this Book, may expect and look for a most sure
and certain ruin and destruction. For here Christ says unto John, Fear thou
not John, that is, of the truth and execution of those dreadful predictions,
and judiciary visions, which I shall now make known unto thee, concerning those
high, implacable, and obstinate enemies of mine; they may think I have not
power to execute those judgments upon them, but they shall know, that I have
the keys of hell and death, that Satan is at my command and beck, to be the
executioner of my wrath upon them, and that I have power to open the door of
hell, death, and destruction, and to shut them up, together with Satan, in that
Lake of fire, that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, Rev. 19.20.
and 20.10.

Hence two Uses arise very naturally. First, That the godly need not fear hell
nor death, either that of the grave, or that of the second death; for Christ
their head is the Key-keeper of both, and has power thereof.

Next, Let the impenitent, wicked, and such as will not have Christ to reign
over them, fear and tremble; for he has the keys of hell and death: Therefore
repent in time, and kiss the Son, lest he be angry, before the day come,
wherein he shall shut, and no man opens.

Verse 19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and
the things which shall come after:

Verse 20. The mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right hand,
and the seven golden Candlesticks, is this, The seven Stars, are the Angels of
the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven
Churches.


After Christ had fitted and confirmed John in his Prophetical Office, by
laying his hand upon him, and by giving his Spirit to him, and assuring him,
that it was he that is the first and the last, that is alive, but was dead, and
had the power over hell and death, most able and mighty therefore to bring to
pass, and execute all the dreadful predictions and visions which Christ should
make known unto him, and being thus qualified and confirmed, he receives his
commission to write the things that he had seen, and the things which are; that
is, to Record these things which he had seen, and were represented to him, by,
and in the precedent visions, which relate unto things that are present, and in
being; to wit, God's discovery of his will and judgments, toward the famous
seven Asian churches, some whereof had much back-slidden from their native
purity, which the first, second, and third chapters do treat of, as things that
were then present, and in being. Next, John is commanded to write the things
which shall come after; that is, he is to record visions and things which he
shall see, which are related unto the future.

Observe. Hence Note, That this book of Prophesies is not only a Historical
relation and discovery, under hyerogliphick figures of things present, but also
of things to come: John is commanded to write to the then seven Asian churches,
and that as an Introduction to all the future Prophesies; and this is that that
is intimated in cap. 5. v. 1. where a book is represented, written within and
without; within, that is, secret, sealed under seven Seals, and their end yet
in part to come: written without, that is, plain for discovery, open to the
view: All which imports, that John was to write of the then present state of
Affairs, and of the churches, which was plain and open, and as of things that
are: and also of the future state of things, which are as a book written
within, sealed and secret, in respect of their futurity.

2. Another Note hence is, That God's true Prophets, and faithful Ministers,
will commend no more to the observation of their churches, as visions from God,
then what they have really seen, and has been discovered from God unto them:
They are not to come with the word of the Lord in their mouth, and pretend
visions from God, like the false prophets in Ier. 14, whiles their mouths and
hearts are full of lying vanities. John writes no more then what he saw to the
seven churches, nor discovers no more then what he saw was then present, or
should come to pass in after time. What we have seen and heard, says the
Apostle, we speak, and are bold to preach, and to commend unto you. Christ's
Ministers should press no more then what they are assured are experienced
truths: I doubt me, every opinion concerning outward forms of Government,
Discipline, and the like, will not at last appear to be visions of God, which
some do now a days so hotly contend for, it may be one day said unto such
hot-spurs. Boanerges, sons of Thunder: who required such things at your hands?
whiles you let the greatest works, as of love, righteousness, and judgment,
lie prostrate at your feet, as if they did not concern you.

Verse. 20. The mystery of the seven Stars, etc.] Christ in the last verse, to
make things plain unto John, and to give him a taste of the discovery of those
mysteries in his book, interprets the mystery of the vision of seven Stars, and
of the seven Candlesticks, presented unto his sight in the precedent 12 and 16
verses, and he calls it, the mystery of seven Stars and candlesticks; because
indeed unto John it was a secret and hidden thing, what those figures of stars
and candlesticks did mystically mean or represent; and unto John it would be
still a mystery, if Christ himself had not here interpreted. Hence Note,

That this book of Revelations is made clear, obvious, and manifest, by a
diligent observation, and a right applicationof the mystical characters and
figures of each vision: Christ himself in this verse, has made the first
entrance and essay on this account: He tells us, that the seven Stars in his
right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks, do mystically represent the
seven Angels, or Messengers of his churches, and the seven candlesticks, the
churches themselves. In the seventeenth chapter Christ is more large in
interpreting the mystery of Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, etc. All
which connotes unto us,

Observe. That the wise observant christian, may attain unto the revelation and
discovery of the mysteries of this book of Prophesies by the help of the Spirit
of God, upon a diligent enquiry thereinto: The Spirit says often in the second
and third chapters, Let him that has an ear; hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches: and in chap. 13. verse. 18. Here is wisdom, let him that has wit
count the number: Here is the mind that has wisdom, cap. 17. v. 9. so that it
is for him that has an ear, an intelligent understanding ear, and wisdom, a
wise heart to consider, that is fit and capable to open and apply aright the
mysteries of this book: It is a mystery therefore difficult to all, but unto
the spiritualized eye, and unto the mind, that has wisdom; but it should not
therefore be accounted presumption in such, to undertake this essay, seeing it
has pleased Christ to give us the first fruits himself, in opening the
mysteries of the vision of the seven stars, and the seven golden candlesticks,
which is as an entrance into the whole; and since he has interpreted unto us,
that by the seven stars are meant the seven Angels of the churches; by the
seven golden candlesticks, the seven famous Asian churches; by the woman
arrayed in scarlet, the mother of harlots in the seventeenth of the
Revelations, to be the great City that reigns over the Kings of the earth;
and the Beast with seven heads and ten horns, to signify a Government, Empire,
or Kingdom on seven Mountains, where the great harlot reigns under ten Kings;
why should it be thought strange, rash, or presumptuous, to interpret the rest
of the mystical figures, and hyeroglyphick characters of this book, according
to their natural and genuine tendency, and as they are opened and applied in
other prophetical writings, by one and the same Spirit of Prophecy; whose
wisdom it was ever from the beginning, to represent the risings, progress, and
downials of the great Empires and Kingdoms of the word, by such dark and
mysterious figures and representations, unto God's servants, his Prophets* And
conceive one great reason of this dark and mysterious carriage of the Spirit,
is, That the Intendments of God toward the Powers and Kingdoms of the world,
may be revealed and made known but unto few, such as have spirits suitable, and
wills to conform to the will of God in all things; for if those great events,
and revolutions of State were made vulgar, and known unto all, it would raise
innumerable combustions in the world, and great sufferings and afflictions to
the children of God, from those Powers that they live under, for whose sakes
these great concussions and subversions of States and Kingdoms do come to pass,
that Christ's and their Interest may be exalted at the last.

2. Note. That it is the Spirit of Christ in his Word, that makes known, and
opens the secrets of all Divine mysteries unto his servants. Christ discovers
unto John those mysteries of stars, etc. It is this Spirit that searches into
the deep things of God: He shall take of mine (as Christ says, John 16.15. and
shall show it unto you: and hence he is called the Comforter; because he makes
the love of the Father, and the grace of Christ, which was beforehand hid in
the bosom and counsel of God, manifest unto poor souls, and so sheds abroad
the love of God in their hearts by faith. The discovery of Divine mysteries,
are too high a work for the ablest and wisest person in his natural capacity,
without the help of Christ's Spirit; for they are spiritually, not carnally to
be discerned.

But to proceed, The mystery of the seven stars, Christ interprets to be the
Angels of the seven churches. Stars in all prophetical writings, do signify
persons of eminency and honor; and in Heraldry, it is accounted the most noble
sort of blazoning, peculiar alone to the Armory of Princes. The Angels of the
seven churches, or rather Messengers, for so the Greek word signifies, because
they come with the best message and news that ever came to man; to wit, the
glad tidings of peace through Jesus Christ, and therefore beautiful are their
feet, and so may rightly be represented mystically or figuratively by those
lightsome and noble creatures, the stars: but to prevent tediousness in
repetition, I refer to the Notes on the precedent sixteenth verse, where I have
fully discussed the same subject.

And the mystery of the seven golden Candlesticks, Christ interprets to be the
seven Churches; to wit, in Ephesians, Smyrna, Pergamus, etc. In Exodus 25. amongst
the Adorements and Instruments of the Tabernacle, God commanded M^ses to make a
Candlestick of Beaten Gold; Christ in this verse takes up the Figures and Types
of seven golden Candlesticks, to represent mystically his Tabernacles with men,
his seven famous Asian Churches, wherein his glorious presence did most
resplendently appear: for it is said verse 13. That he appeared in the midst of
them, in great luster, glory, and splendor. Golden Candlesticks are fit Types
and Emblemes to represent Christ's churches: First, In respect of their
choicest metal; they are golden Candlesticks.

Observe. Christ's churches are of that precious allay and temper, that they
excel all other assemblies in the world. Others of the world, though never so
great and eminent, are but as Lead or Tin, but those like precious gold.
Secondly, Gold is the most tried and refined metal that is; so are Christ's
churches, they go under seven fold refinements: They have trials from God and
man: Refinements by afflictions, refinements by the Spirit of Grace, whereby
their dross is done away, and so become most precious and shining gold.
Thirdly, Gold is the most noble, dearest, and highest esteemed metal amongst
men, so Christ's churches are the most highly respected by God of all creatures,
the world was made for their sakes, yea they are the right heirs, that is, that
have the more especial right, by blessing, promise, and compact, unto the
world, and the good things thereof, whether things present, or things to come;
why, all is yours, if Christ be yours, 1 Cor. 3.23. Fourthly, It is the most
extensive and ductible of all metals; so Christ's churches they have the
largest bowels of true charity of any sort of people in the world, for they
will endeavor the conversion, and pray for it, even of their very enemies.
Fifthly, Gold is the most weighty of all metals: Christ's churches are of the
greatest weight with God, all others are but as the dust of the balance in
comparison of them; they are of such weight with God, that they are to stand in
the gap, to stay the hand of God when he goes out to execute his judgments: If
two or three righteous persons be in a City, God will not destroy it for their
sakes. Sixthly, and lastly, Gold is most fair and shining of all metals: so
Christ's churches, they are most shining in their graces, they are not gilded
Candlesticks, but golden ones; yea beaten ones, as that of the Tabernacle was.
Thou art all fair, says Christ to his Spouse in Cant. 1. my Love, behold thou
art fair, behold thou art fair, like a Lilly among the Thorns, so is my Love
among the daughters. Cant. 2.2.

In the next place, consider the Types and Figures; the seven Candlesticks that
are the emblemes of those seven Churches, and how they suit fitly for this
purpose, all know; The proper work of Candlesticks is to contain and hold their
shining lamps or candles, as in Exodus 25.37. And thou shall make the seven
Lamps thereof, and the Lamps thereof shall thou put thereon, to give light
toward that that is before it. As the golden Candlestick of the Tabernacle was
to have seven lamps or lights, to give light to all that was before it, so
these seven golden Candlesticks, those seven Asian churches, have their seven
Lamps or lights therein, which number denotes perfection, to enlighten all that
was before it: they have also their seven Angels, seven faithful Messengers,
Ministers, or Ambassadors of Christ's Word and Truth, to enlighten every soul
that comes with a teachable heart before them. Hence Note,

Observe. That every church of Christ, as the candlestick of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 25.37. ought to have their shining Lamps in them; that is, Ministers and
Teachers that are both godly and faithful ones: Each one of the seven Asian
churches had its Angel, its light, its Lamp within its candlestick: and a
church without these lights, these Angels, is as a candlestick without its
lamp, or light, standing for ornament and fashion sake, but wanting much of its
honor, life, light, and service, which those Lamps and lights would yield unto
it; for Christ has placed in his church some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Prophets, some Teachers, some Pastors, some Elders, and all for the edifying
and completing of his Body, the church. Churches thus organized with their
Angels and Ministers, are most comely: yea that high expression in Cant. 6.4.
may be well applied to such, Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirza, comely as
Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with Banners. Amidst those seven golden
candlesticks that had their Angels or Lamps shining within them, Christ made
his glorious appearance in the likeness of the Son of man, verse 13. The
discoveries of Christ's ways and presence, both in the way of grace and
judgment, are most clearly to be learned and discerned amongst his churches,
that have their Angels, Ministers, and Teachers shining most bright in their
life and doctrine, in the midst amongst them; and like to this, was the advice
which Christ himself had given to the Spouse in the Canticles, chap. 1.7, 8.
when she had lost, or could not find her Beloved: Tell me, O thou whom my soul
loves! where thou feedest? Where thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon? His
answer is, If thou know not, thou fairest among women! Go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.
Therefore, O thou the beloved of my soul, cause my soul, that by its wanderings
have long missed thee, to seek for thee among thy golden candlesticks, in thy
Ordinances and holy Assemblies, in the midst whereof thou do appear, that my
soul which languisheth, may be comforted with Apples, and stayed with Flaggons
(with spiritual comforts and refreshments) from thy self, who dwell in the
gardens, and feedest thy flocks beside the Shepherds Tents.

Observe. 2. That Christ's churches are his chiefest Treasuries here on earth of
light and truth. If souls desire to come into the true light and truth of God,
where should they rather repair, then unto those golden candlesticks, whose
proper service is to hold forth light unto all comers? Christ is found walking
in the midst of them, verse 1^. and therefore where the Sun runs its course,
there must needs be light in that Firmament, and much glory: and for this
reason in this place, these seven famous Asian churches are represented by the
figures of seven golden candlesticks, and also in Zach. 4.3, etc. the ancient
church of the Jews is represented by a golden candlestick, with seven Lamps
thereon; and in Rev. 4. the two Gospel Witnesses are said to be the two
candlesticks, to wit, the two churches of Jews and Gentiles, with their two
Olive branches by their side, to wit, the two administrations of Law and
Gospel, which are always pouring out their oil for light into the ministerial
Lamps of these golden candlesticks: Here must needs be then much light and
truth; for these are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole
earth, Zach. 4.2.12 and 14 verses.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write these things, says he
that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks.
THe general preface to the seven churches, and of the whole Book, being
finished in the first chapter, wherein was considered, who was the Author of
these divine Revelations, and that was Christ, under diverse denominations and
similitudes, some appropriable only to the divine nature, some to the humane,
clearly notifying, That that person that appeared unto John, was (...), or
Christ, God-Man, who gave these Divine Revelations unto John, some immediately
by himself, some by his ministering Spirits, the Angels; for though the greatest
part of these Prophesies are given and signified by the instrumentality of
Angels, yet it may be truly said, that Christ does it; for it is a known rule,
What is done by another at ones Order and command, is done by himself: Christ
he is the Author of those Visions, he gives them out to John, and John he is
the recipient instrument, and the subordinate Author, and is commanded to write
them, and make them known unto the churches; and in the first place in this
second and third chapters, John is commanded by Christ, to write those
premonitions to the seven churches, which in their order shall be handled: But
in the way, before I fall upon the particulars, it will be worth the enquiry,

Quest. Why John is commanded particularly to write to each church of the seven
apart: To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, of the Church of Smyrna, of the
Church of Pergamus, etc.

I answer, for diverse reasons: First, They were not guilty of one and the same
faults; and as their defections were diverse and various, so ought they to have
various and diverse reprehensions: So likewise their graces and endowments were
various, so ought they to have diverse and various encouragements therein: The
more obdurate and high-handed sinners, ought to have the sharpest and highest
reproofs and censures, but the more flexible and tenderhearted, ought to be
dealt with the more tender hand of love and compassion.

Secondly, The several charges are drawn against each particular church, and so
sent unto them by the hand of their own peculiar Angel, Minister, or Pastor, to
show unto us, that they were not to seek for any extrinsecal power or authority
over themselves: Christ is the common and general admonitor and reprehender of
them all; each of them are solely and singly under his reprehensive power and
jurisdiction. The Angel of the church of Ephesus has only received commands
and reproofs, that relates to the church of Ephesus; so the Angel of Smyrna,
for the church of Smyrna, and the Angel of Pergamus, for the church of
Pergamus, etc. The Angel of the church of Ephesus did not receive commands or
reproofs, to impose them juridically on the church of Smyrna, nor Smyrna on the
church of Pergamus, or on any one of the seven, either singly by it self, or
jointly with any of the others, one, two, or more: They were not to be
superintendents, or to have a prelatical authority over the rest; there was no
cathedral then at Ephesus, nor in any of the other six: the name of
Archiepiscopacy and Hierarchycal Supremacy, was then unknown in the little
well-ordered Christian world, or rather Commonweal; Bishops then did look no
farther with an eye of authority, then over their own flocks; neither then was
it known that a combination of some few churches, or rather officers of
churches, under the name of classical Elders, provincial Elders, or National
Elders, should have the sole power and jurisdiction over the rest of the
churches of Christ in their vicinity: Ephesus then as unto outward authority,
was Independent, Smyrna then was Independent, and so were all the rest: The
churches could then, and also now can act consultatively, by way of advice, by
their Elders and Brethren, either joint or singly, but not juridically, by way
of authority, over one and another: The churches of Christ are all Peers,
respecting their authority, yet in their graces and perfections amongst
themselves differing from one and another in glory: Christ keeps the sole
Legislative power in his own hand, and what he communicates thereof unto his
churches, it is not that they should be lords over their Sister-churches faith,
but that they may within their due bounds, exercise their wholesome admonitions
and censures, according to the Word of God: Christ will not suffer one church
juridically to censure another sister-church, though corrupt, for there is no
such authority given them; Christ keeps that prerogative in his own hand, he
reproves and censures the whole seven Asian churches himself, but suffers not
one or more to do it over the rest: And one great reason of this is, That if
Christ had granted such authority unto one church over others, that that church
which becomes most potent, and most countenanced by the secular powers, though
most corrupted in doctrine and worship, will undertake to censure the soundest
and most orthodox churches of all; as the Arrians did of old in the times of
the sons of Constantine the great, and their Successors, censure, chastise, and
vex even the soundest and most faithful churches of Christ: And the idolatrous
apostatized church of Rome, under this pretense of having authority over other
churches, do even fulminate out her direst Anathemas on all other churches,
though the faithful and undefiled spouses of Christ: Be wise therefore ye true
spouses of Christ, hold fast the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free,
lest ye subjugate your necks, and precious faith, unto the idolatries of the
spiritual harlot: For this very reason Christ gives his particular censures and
reproofs to each particular church, according to their peculiar failings and
errors, that one more corrupt church might not undertake to censure that which
was less corrupt: But if it be demanded how a sound and faithful church of
Christ should carry it self toward an erroneous and backslidden corrupted
church, I answer, They are to use all means for their recovery, and that in
love and charity: First, They are to advise them, and admonish them of the
danger of their ways, charitably, not juridically, as a church exercises
toward her own members. Secondly, They are to pray for their healing and
recovery out of their spiritual Maladies. If all this will not do, to their
amendment, they are to withdraw communion from them, and to leave them to their
Master, who after he has proceeded on his white horse, with offers of peace
and reconciliation, and they continue obstinate, and not turn by repentance, he
can go forth on his red Horse of wrath and fury, and remove his candlestick,
his church, and the glory thereof, from amongst them, and leave them desolate.
The first that I read of that extended the wings of his authority beyond his
own just limits and boundaries, was Victor, Bishop of Rome, about the end of
the second century, who hotly contended with Ireneus, and others of the
Affrican churches, to have a Supremacy over them, and to impose his Dictates on
them, and that very pertinaciously, about a frivolous controversy, the
observation of Easter. Herein that mystery of Iniquity did begin to work,
which in few after succeeding ages, came to its full stature. To this I shall
only add, that all ancient and modern history, both civil and ecclesiastique,
do testify, that this Prelacy, and affecting of Supremacy over other churches,
whether it be in one single church, person, or many combined ones, has not
only been very dangerous and prejudicial to the faithful churches of Christ,
but is, and has been always the very first born of pride and luxury.

Thirdly, Another reason is, that Christ writes particularly to each of the
seven churches, is, to show, That Christ has an equal care and respect to all
his churches, whiles they continue his, though under foul prevarications and
backslidings: Christ has bowels of compassion toward them, as long as they
keep faithful to his name, though otherwise in themselves very faulty; and he
is found to be walking in the midst of them providentially, caring for them,
holding the seven Stars in his right hand, and teaching them by his Word, if so
be he may bring them to repentance.

Lastly, These messages are directed to each particular church, out of Christ's
especial tenderness toward them, that they might endeavor to reform their
enormities within and amongst themselves, That the churches errors and
infirmities may not be told in Gath, nor published abroad to their reproach
amongst their enemies; whilst there is any hope of the recovery of backsliders,
Christ comes with a rod and strokes of a loving and tender hearted father, to
cure them, not to shame and reproach them; and therefore Christ directs John to
write his messages to the Angels of each particular church.

To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Write,] What is meant by Angel, I refer
to the sixteenth and last verses of the first chapter: But the question is,
Whether by Angel of the church, of Ephesus, be intended the chief Pastor or
Bishop, being as Superintendent, or Archbishop over the rest of the Bishops and
Pastors of the church of Ephesus? Or, Whether the Angel of Ephesus were the
Metropolitan over the other six Sister churches?

I answer first to the latter, There is no color at all for that opinion, for
the reasons but in the former page specified; and to add a word, Because Christ
commands each Angel to reform their abuses within themselves: He sends not the
Angel of one church to reform another, that has no authority over it; the Angel
of the church of Ephesus is not sent to Smyrna, nor Smyrna unto Ephesus, nor
unto the rest, but an extraordinary Officer, a Prophet, John, a man of God is
sent unto them all, to tell them of their faults, and to exercise that
authority which Christ has given and deposited in all his Gospel churches, and
to each of them in particular, for their dealings and recoveries out of their
backslidings. Indeed any one that has an extraordinary Spirit and call, as
John had, may exercise that unlimited authority over the churches of Christ,
but I know not any in these days, or since the Apostles times, that do pretend
unto it, but that great and rampant Roman man of sin, who is the great and only
pretender to that Spirit of Infallibility, and yet who more fallible then
himself in his judicial sentences, doctrines, and ways of worship? Indeed if he
had what he pretends, that Spirit of infallibility justly might he assume
authority in censuring, directing, and governing all other churches; but before
that does appear, let himself, and others that assumes the like authority with
himself, hide their faces in shame and confusion for ever.

Secondly, To the first question I answer, That those I confess of the
Episcopal Interests, do hold that the Superscription of the particular church,
directed to the Angel of the churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. do intend and
signify, that they are directed to the chief Pastor or Bishop, that is supreme
Overseer, Director, and Mediator, over all the rest of the Bishops and Pastors
of the particular churches within Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. As if this had been
written to the Angel of the church of England, that is, says the Episcopals to
the Archbishop, who is the chief Prelate and Bishop over all other the Prelates
and Bishops in England: Or if it had been directed to the Angel of the church
of London, Salisbury, Exeter, etc. that is, say they, to the Bishop of London,
Salisbury, or Exeter, etc. who is the chief Bishop, Pastor, and Overseer over
all the rest of the Bishops and Pastors within his own Jurisdiction and Diocese.

I answer first, that the words (...), and (...), which we translate according
to the Latin Dialect Bishops and Pastors, or according to our own proper
Idiome, Overseers, and Feeders of the Flock are Synonimas, and are but as
several denominations of one and the same Office, which do arise from diverse
acts therein. For the faculty of over-seeing, guidance, and direction, he is
called a Bishop; for that of teaching, instructing, and spiritually feeding his
flock in all kinds, he is called a Pastor, and very often too in Scripture for
his rootedness and soundness in faith, life, and doctrine, he is called an
Elder; so that these are but several names of one and the same office, and
often applied in Scripture reciprocally to one and the same person; sometimes he
is called the Elder of the church, sometimes the Bishop, sometimes the Pastor; to
denote unto us, that such as guide well their flocks, and feed them with the
green pastures of wholesome doctrines, are most worthy of double honor amongst
the Saints; but lest herewith they should be elevated above their proper
station, they ought to eye another Title too, which is given them in Scripture,
they are Ministers, that is, Servants that attend on Christ and his churches;
they receive Christ's messages, and commend them unto his churches, and come
again with returns of the churches improvements in obedience and thankfulness
unto Christ; and for this reason they are here entitled by the name of Angels,
Messengers, Ambassadors, or Ministers of Christ; and how these humble Titles of
Servitors and Messengers will suit and agree to the Lording stomachs of
Metropolitans, and Lord Bishops, or chief Pastors over many churches, it passes
my skill to conjecture. There was a time when the good Bishop of Rome did take
on him that self-denying Title only of Servus servorum Christi, A servant to
the servants of Christ; but O now, Quantum mutatus ab illo!

Secondly, As some of the Presbyterian interest will have this Inscription, To
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to be meant the Presbytery, or the combined
Elders of the church of Ephesus, which is asserted with far less reason then
the former; for it is inscribed, Unto the Angel, not Angels of the church of
Ephesus: neither is it clear that there were more political churches then one
in Ephesus, to make up a combination of diverse, as the Presbytery will have it;
but rather the contrary is evident, for if there were more churches then one in
Ephesus, the Inscription would run more rationally thus, Unto the Angels of the
churches of Ephesus, etc.

But here they will object (as I have found that one of their learned
champions, I mean M. Rutherford formerly has done) That Angel here is to be
taken collectively, as that, The Angel of the Lord shall pitch his Tents about
the righteous.

I grant, Angel in that Scripture ought to be taken collectively, for many
Angels; but that it should so in this place, is a mere non sequitur, yea
rather, a foul absurdity will be according to this sense of theirs, fathered on
the Spirit of God in this place: for understand that the Presbytery, which is
a collective and combined body of many Elders of diverse churches, which they
would have here to be meant by the Angel: All of the Presbyterian judgment do
intend thereby the church representative; as Go tell the Church, that is, say
they, the Presbytery. Hear the Church, that is, say they, the Presbytery. Now
that this word Angel will stand with such interpretation, sounds very harshly;
for observe what a strange and uncouth sound and sense do these words give* To
the Angel of the church of Ephesus, that is, to the church of the church of
Ephesus, according to their acceptance; for so they call the Presbytery, the
church: I suppose few will find but very little reason in such a sense; yet I
grant that in one church there may be many Ministers, so there might be in
Ephesus many Teachers, many Elders, many Deacons, for they are all Ministers
unto the church of Christ; so also they might have one that had the
pre-eminence over the rest, as the Overseer, Bishop, or Pastor of the flock,
whose care and office is not only to rule and guide the flock, but to feed them
also, and such a one is worthy of double honor, in respect of the eminency of
his ministerial service above the rest, and so might rightly be called the
Angel catexochen, or chief Messenger or Minister of the church of Ephesus, to
whom these admonitions were directed; and so I take the word Angel in this
place to signify the chief Minister, to wit, the Bishop or Pastor which God
had set over the church of Ephesus, to whom the charge is inscribed, and this
was Onesimus, as Eusebius justifies, lib. 3. cap. 35. out of Ignatius his
Epistle unto the church of Ephesus.

Observe. From this former discourse note, That the Pastors and chief Ministers
of churches, are the fittest instruments to receive and deliver Christ's
messages and intendments unto his churches. They can do it authoritatively, ex
Officio, by virtue of their call unto that end: Others of private capacity can
do it only charitatively, virtute doni, by virtue of a gift, by way of advice
and counsel: The charge here is inscribed to the Angel or Pastor of the church
of Ephesus, and it is the rather inscribed and directed to the chief Minister,
for sundry reasons: First, That it might have the greater reverence and
authority with them to whom it was directed. Secondly, That it might be set
home on their hearts with the greater wisdom and vigor; for admonitions or
reproofs coming from Pastors, or the chief Ministers of the church, are as
nails driven by the masters of Assemblies. Thirdly, That it might be done with
the more faithfulness, for they are the Overseers of Christ's flock. Fourthly,
That it might be done with the more tenderness and compassion, for they are the
Shepherds or Pastors of Christ's flock, to feed and heal them, notto wound or
destroy them. Fifthly and lastly, That it might be done with the greatest
experience, for they are the Elders of the church, who are acquainted with all
our spiritual maladies, and know their several cures, and are the best
Physicians (next and subordinate to Christ) for our souls in the world. O let
us therefore give them due honor and reverence, which is most commendable and
worthy of a sound christian, to all Christ's true and faithful Ministers and
Ambassadors of his Word and Gospel, whom Christ has honored with the names of
Angels, Bishops, Pastors, Elders, and the like; let us not dishonor, vilify,
or upbraid, with any branding or unworthy Titles whatsoever.

Observe. 2. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Write,] Hence Note, That
every rightly constituted and well ordered church, ought to have their Angel,
Minister, or Pastor over them. Every golden candlestick ought to have their
burning Lamps within them, to give light to all that come before them; see more
hereon on the last verse of the first chapter. Yet in this I desire to be
understood, not as if the Being and form of a church did remain wholly in the
Officers thereof, but in the whole Fraternity of Believers, the essential
matter thereof primarily and chiefly; so that I here intend the well-being of a
church, not the being thereof: and so I affirm, that two, or three, or more
gathered together in the name of Christ, to close with him in his Ordinances,
though without Ministerial Officers, yet may be for the essential matter termed
a faithful church of Christ, but not a political organical one, which has the
highest and greatest glory on it: for I am of opinion, that the first has the
privilege of the exercise only of some Ordinances within themselves, as
Prayer, etc. but the latter has the more full and ample Gospel pattent and
commission, even to the administration of the Sacrament, and unto
excommunication and highest censures, which cannot rightly be executed out of
political churches, which are merely acts of power, office, and authority.

From the words, the church of Ephesus, of Smyrna, of Pergamus, etc. Some hence
absurdly reason for a National church: It Is true, there was a church at
Ephesus, at Smyrna, at Corinth, at Rome; but to argue from hence that all in
Rome, all in Corinth, all in Ephesus must be the church, is a very fond
reasoning: This were to argue, that Nero that bloody heathenish Tyrant, with
his whole household, not much unlike unto himself in barbarous cruelty, were
the church of Christ, because Paul writ to the church in Nero's house; and
though there was the church of Christ in Ephesus, yet I presume, on good
grounds, that most or the greatest part of Ephesus cried up, Great was Diana of
the Ephesians, and though there were churches of Christ in Rome, Corinth,
Smyrna, Pergamus, and other places mentioned in Scripture, yet we know by good
history, that the National Worship and Religion was Ethnic, unto Jupiter,
Mars, Sol, Venus, etc. yet indeed I confess, a Church may be called the
National church, as that of Ephesus, of England, of France, of Scotland, etc.
in respect of the church constituted and made up of members or persons of that
Nation; but herein we have no difference, the controversy is not about words,
but things really differing among themselves; as when they affirm every
individual and singular parochial church of England, to be particular churches
of Christ, as parts of the whole, and the whole to be the National church of
England, constituted of its singular parts. If all England, Scotland, France,
be the church, what room is left for the world, and the profane therein? The
church may be denominated of England, Scotland, France, etc. but not all
England, Scotland, France to be the church, there is great difference in those
expressions, but of this I shall say no farther at present.

Having done with the Inscription or direction, To the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, the next thing is, write, for the better observation of the things
that follow. These things, says he, that holds the seven Stars in his right
hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks.

That the church of Ephesus, and the rest, may know from whom this subsequent
message comes, tell them, that it is from him that holds and keeps in his
fatherly hand of protection, his faithful Ministers and Pastors, which are as
stars in the Firmament of his churches, for glory. Peruse the sixteenth verse
of the first chapter more fully to this purpose. And who walks, that is, is
in active posture, ready to observe all the doings, whether good or evil, of
all his churches; and therefore he is said to walk in the midst of his seven
golden candlesticks: consult more at large with v. 13. and 20. of c. 1. From
Christ's posture of walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, or
the seven Asian churches, note.

That Christ is very intent, with an eye of providential observation, and that
for their good, over all his faithful churches.

This is not the time of his sitting on the Throne, of judging the world, but
of walking in the midst of his golden candlesticks; viewing the order of his
churches, and to see whether they are proficients under the means of grace,
according to that of the Canticles, cap 6. 11. I went down into the garden of
Nuts, to see the fruits of the Valley, and to see whether the Vine flourished,
and the Pomgran^tes budded. Christ is now viewing his churches graces, taking
delight therein, and to encourage them to perseverance, that the crown may be
unto them that overcome; and also takes a special notice of their backslidings,
and lays them before their eyes, in the deceitfulness thereof, that they may
loath them, and return unto their God by a holy repentance. And this is but a
confirmation of his promise at his departure, left as his last comforting
Legacy with his afflicted church. Matthew. 28.20. That though he was ascended
into the highest heavens, yet in his providential eye over them, and by his
Spirit, teaching, directing, counselling, supporting, and comforting them, he
would be ever with them, unto the end of the world.

Verse 2. I know thy works, and labor, and thy patience, and how thou can
not forbear them which are evil, and have examined them which say they are
Apostles, and are not, and have found them Liars.

Verse 3. And have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have
labored, and have not fainted.


In the Greek (...), I have seen thy works, for the better and more perfect
taking knowledge of them: Our knowledge is mixed, and joined with much
imperfections, and at best, is but a mixed act of our understanding and
affections; and so to know a thing by a human capacity, is to understand it,
and the nature thereof, in the highest notion that its capable of
comprehension, and often by reason of the darkness in the understanding, the
affections or will are misplaced, and so become erroneous and sinful: for a
mind not well informed, or an ignorant soul, can very hardly be a good or a
godly one, for without this light, the judgment and affections will be often
led astray, to that which is only good in appearance, and to contemn that which
in it self is really good and perfect: but here is no fear of imperfection of
knowledge in this person; Christ who is one with the Father, God from
everlasting, and therefore all our works are patent and open before him, his
judgment or affections cannot be misled, to approve of things and works that
should not, or disapprove of works that are worthy to be approved: He is God,
and cannot be deceived, on any false pretenses, he sees our works as they are
in themselves, and in the very nature of them, with all their circumstances: We
see and know things by mediums, mixtly, weakly, and imperfectly; He sees and
knows things simply, absolutely, and most perfectly: the eye it self cannot
want sight, nor the Sun want light, neither can the Creator of all things in
this present temporal world, or his church, this spiritual world, be ignorant
of any of his or their handy works. Christ sees and knows the works of the
church of Ephesus fully, what are approvable, and what are disapprovable in
them. Hence Note.

That Christ is a most just and equal censurer of his churches works. He
forbids to call darkness light, or light darkness; he tells the church of
Ephesus, that he knows their works of travel, patience and sufferance for his
Name sake, and so places his favorable aspect and complacency thereon; and yet
what is evil in them, he cannot bear without a reproof, as it is defection or
failure in its first love, and ardent affections, which the church of Ephesus
bore to Christ, and his Truths, at their first conversion or entertainment of
the Gospel amongst them, verse. 4. Christ also tells the church of Sardis and
Laodicea, that he knows their works, but in another tone, not of approbation,
but of reproof and censure; he said to Sardis, cap. 3. 1. I know thy works, for
thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead; and in verse 15. he falls
upon Laodicea, and tells them, I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor
hot, I would thou were cold or hot: Christ will not palliate, or lay cushions
under great ones elbows, and prophecy smooth things unto them, nor to the
churches that bears them, whilst they are most rotten in the root and heart.
Had not God a controversy of old with his Israel for this very sin, abundantly
witnessed against by God in most of the old Prophets; When as some would stand
up and prophecy peace, when there was no peace? as Ezekiel. 13.10.16. And what
have they to do with peace, while their hands are full of blood and iniquity??
I could wish it were not the sin of some of the pretended Angels of the
churches in those days, where is that faithful one to be found? It may be one
of a thousand, that as a true Angel or Ambassador from Christ, will deal
roundly with their sins, and tell Israel of her sins, and Judah of her
transgressions. Good Physicians will search the wounds thoroughly, the rather for
to cure them: It is also Christ's method, to lay open the wounds and sins of
his churches, that so he may (like the good Samaritane) pour oil into them, and
heal them, and bring to repentance: Christ's Ministers should follow their
master's pattern, deal faithfully, simply, and roundly with the sins of their
people, according to Gospel rule in that case provided, and not as many do,
speak peace, and words of comfort, (the true portion of spiritual members of
Christ) unto professed enemies to Godliness, and the Saints, scorners and
deriders of Christ's ways and ordinances, drunkards, swearers, etc. what have
such to do with the childrens bread, so continuing unrepentant and obstinate?
It is much to be feared, for this lukewarmness of many Ministers and churches,
it will come to pass, that Christ will spew them out of his mouth, cap. 3. 16.
as he did the church of Laodicea, and the church of Israel of old, Mat. 21.43.
I shall only add that of Ezekiel. 13.22, 23. to be seriously considered in the
close of this point: The Prophet speaking to those that sowed pillows under the
Arms-holes, because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom
I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should
not turn from his wicked way, by promising him life: Therefore ye shall see no
more vanity, nor divine divinations, for I will deliver my people out of your
hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Observe. 2. Another correllary hence rises, That all churches and persons
ought to have and receive a due acknowledgement of all graces and virtues that
they are eminent in, though chargeable with many defections and failings
otherwise. Christ spares not to acknowledge, but makes honorable mention of
the graces of the churches, in this and the next chapter, though otherwise many
aberrations and failings were laid unto their charge. Though the church of
Ephesus was to be reproved for the coldness in her first love, yet she had
these commendable virtues and graces in her, constancy and patience under
sufferings for Christ's sake, and hatred to all evil workers, and false lights,
and Apostles, that come with doctrines destructive to the great fundamental, or
corner stone, the true doctrine of faith in Christ: and so Christ proceeds with
the other churches in the like method, and lays a commendable character on them
all for those graces in them worthily calling for it. Paul could give a just
acknowledgement to his brethren the Jews, though otherwise perverse enough,
bearing them witness, that they had a zeal to God, though not according to
knowledge, Romans 10.2. And Christ told the Jews, and spoke it with approbation,
and to their commendation, Ye believe in God, believe ye also in me. It is the
great fault of most of professors of these days, of all sort of persuasions,
that they will not almost acknowledge him a brother in Christ, or give him the
right hand of fellowship, that is not baptized into the same opinions and
interest with himself; but this rather savours of a spirit schismatical and
factious, then of a meek christianlike peacemaking temper, which will bear all
things that are indifferent, rather then break the communion and unity of
brethren, who have put on one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. O! what a
lamentable practice it is, for such as are Presbyterians, to rake up all the
faults, and dirt they can, and cast it in the faces of Independents? And again,
for Independents to cast it back on the Presbyterians; and both of them to cast
it in the faces of those called Anabaptists, and they again as ready as the
former, to repay it back again: Why? Have you so learned Christ? O! for shame,
let all that fear God of each sort, be ashamed of this unchristianlike
practice, let it not be told in Gath, nor published in Askelon; but follow the
steps of your common Savior, what you see of God in your brethren, commend it,
encourage it, cherish it: Though there may be failings in each sort, and that
great ones, yet for that grace and appearance of God in them, love them, honor
them, and think better of them then of thy self, though thou may be righter
in some externals of Worship then they, yet they may be righter then thee in
doctrinals; and though thou art sounder then they in doctrinals, yet they may
be the more holy, and better men: I speak not this to comply with any corrupt
doctrine or worship, but to give every one his due titles of honor, love, and
commendation, for their gifts and graces; and for their faults and failings,
deal with them in a spirit of love and charity, Gal. 6.1. for their recovery
and repentance* according to Gospel order; for so thou may win thy brother:
but by the other way, thou art sure to drive him farther from thee. It is
observable, that the Familistical Notionists, the Quakers in these days, are
highly baptized in this sin, and out run all others in this uncharitable and
unchristianlike practice; they are sharp censurers of all others, churches, and
persons, that will not run in the same fanatique wild courses with themselves;
and which is strange, and most observable, is, that they never will
acknowledge, nor give a due commendation to any, though never so self-denying,
and godly, and filled abundantly with all the graces of the Spirit, unless they
take up the same mad opinions with themselves; and therefore not strange, when
they have lost the spirit of love and charity, and in stead thereof, are filled
with a spirit of self-fulness and pride, that they tread under foot the blood
of the covenant, as an unholy thing, and so carried on to damnable and
blasphemous opinions and heresies. Amongst the many reasons that we ought to
give a due acknowledgement to the graces in the godly, these are some.

1. That God may have the due honor, as the author of them.

2. Because all graces are of the same Spirits working, and therefore worthy of
honor wheresoever they are found.

3. For the encouragement and cherishing all persons under all hardships and
afflictions, in acquiring and maintaining those graces alive, fructifying and
effective.

4. And lastly, That their sins may not so discourage the godly, as to think
nothing praise worthy in them, whiles they have many things in them worthy to
be praised, cherished, and followed, as having the impress of the Spirit on
them.

Christ having given his approbation of the sufferings, constancy, and patience
of the church of Ephesus for his names sake, and taking notice thereof as their
works catexochen, I know thy works, that is, I take notice of these your
graces, and works of suffering, patience, and zeal against such workers, false
Teachers, and false Apostles, and these are your good works, worthy of
commendation, and imitation in you: Now in all our actions observe, there must
be many circumstantial ingredients to denominate them by the name of good
works: according to that old rule, A Quo, cui, quomodo, quando.

First, They must proceed from a true Fountain: God's Spirit must be the first
Mover and Author of them; corrupt Nature can produce nothing higher then it
self, Romans 3.9, 10. God can look upon none of our duties or works with an eye
of complacency, unless they have in the first place his stamp upon them.

Secondly, Cui. You must examine to what ends, and to whom, to whose name and
glory they are directed; if we sacrifice to our selves, for our own ends and
advantages, our sacrifice is in vain, an abomination, and as the cutting off a
dogs head, in as much as we do it unto our selves, and not unto the Lord:
consider Isa. 1. A good action or work may lose its crown for want of a right
end. If we pray, repent, mourn for sin, etc. which are necessary duties, yet if
we only respect our selves, and our own ends, to wit, to be freed and delivered
only from wrath to come, not having an eye to the sanctifying of God's name
thereby, we may lose much of the comfort of those duties, if not the duties
themselves become sin unto us; for all must be done unto the glory of his Name.

Thirdly, You must consider the Quomodo: In what manner works are to be done,
to denominate them good; they must not be done Pharisaically, to be seen of
men; so they lose their reward. The sufferings and patience of the church of
Ephesus for the name of Christ, were highly commendable graces in them, yet if
they should affect them as the popelings do, to attain to themselves the glory
and name of Martyrs, they had their rewards: The Familistical Quakers of these
days, do most perversely walk in the same steps, highly affecting sufferings,
and rushing thereinto, not considering the Cui, nor the Quomodo, neither to
what end they do it, nor the manner how they do it: Indeed persons may suffer
justly for their pertinacy and obstinacy against Magistrates, but not for the
name of Christ, unless in his providence he calls them to it. Therefore

Fourthly, The Quando is also to be considered, the time when they are to be
performed. To bestow a beneficence on a rich person, or one that wants it not,
it cannot be called an act of charity, for they are able to make retribution
for it; but to do it toward Christ's poor afflicted members, when their wants
and necessities call for it, then it is truly a good work* Secondly, To draw
sufferings on ones self for ones pertinaciousness in opinions not relating as
necessaries, or fundamentals unto salvation, and so disturbing the peace of
Commonwealths in the promotion thereof, this cannot be termed a suffering for
Christ's name: But it must be clear and real Truths that justifies a soul in
his sufferings for it, that the soul and conscience be kept undefiled thereby,
and so become a faithful witness unto Christ, and the Truth, when God calls him
to it in clear dispensations of providence. See more hereon in v. 9. of the
former chapter.

Fifthly, in the last place understand, That the best and choicest of our
works, though they are all rightly circumstantiated, as aforesaid, yet strictly
and simply in themselves, according to the rules of Justice, they are not to be
called good works; for so, and in that sense, God is only good, Mark 10.18. and
our best works being mingled with much weakness and imperfection in the
production of them, though the agency of God's Spirit is manifestly in them,
yet passing through corrupt conduits, and the hands of sinful instruments, they
receive a tincture of the vessels and defilement from the sinful Agents that do
produce and effect them, and so singly in themselves are sinful and imperfect:
But as our persons are accepted in Christ, our works, though otherwise weak,
sinful, and imperfect in themselves, being performed in the sincerity of our
souls, God accepts, as good, holy, and perfect, as being done and presented
in the name of Christ, and upon that altar, that both sanctifies the gift and
the giver: In vain to seek for an acceptance of our works before our persons
be in Christ, then he accepts the will for the deed, and our works, though weak
and imperfect in themselves, yet in Christ, and as flowing from his divine
efficiency, they are accepted of God, as most holy, good, and perfect.

I shall in the next place consider more especially, what was commendable in
the church of Ephesus, which was the labor and patience they under-went for
Christ's sake; which did manifestly appear in their zeal against evil doers,
and false Apostles, which they could not bear. From hence Note,

Observe. That it is equally burdensome, troublesome, and grievous to Christ's
faithful churches, to have evil doers, and false teachers amongst them. The one
does corrupt their manners, the other their judgments; the one is pernicious
in their examples, the other in their doctrines; the one destroys the life of
godliness, the other the truth of God; and where the one is tolerated, the
other follows also: for if evil workers are forborne in the churches, their
judgments will be soon corrupted, to endeavor to uphold their more corrupt
practices: for such as keep not to the commands of God, he gives them over
judicially to embrace and follow false Teachers, and to believe lies and
vanities. And secondly, When false Teachers are tolerated, quickly follows evil
practices: When in the time of the late Bishops, in opposition to the godly, it
was asserted, that the Law that required the observation of the Sabbath, was
not moral, but only humane and Ecclesiastique; what followed that false
teaching, but most profane and wicked practice of carding, bowling, sporting,
revelling, drunkenness, and all sort of profaness upon that day? Uprightness in
life and doctrine, are the two pillars of a church, and where one fails the
other will soon fall to ground after: they are as inseparable twins, the
corruption of the one will be the death of the other. It is to be observed, as
soon as these primitive churches entertained false Apostles amongst them, we
presently hear of the obscene Sect of the Nicholaitans following; the devil
will not be contented to corrupt the head only, but the heart also, and if in
the first place he corrupts the heart, the evil affections will soon fume into
the judgment, and darken the understanding; wherefore a use of caution hence
arises to Christ's churches; That if they be zealous of God's glory, and their
own well-being, that they suffer not peaceably amongst them, either evil doers,
or false Teachers, both equally tending, if tolerated, to their destruction and
ruin.

Observe. 2. It is often a matter of great trouble and travel for the churches
of Christ, to deal with evil doers, and false teachers in the church. When the
corrupted part is become a great Interest in the church, how difficult is it
for the sound part to meddle with it: Witness the present state of our churches
in England, and elsewhere amongst the Nations, desiring Reformation from
Antichristian errors and idolatry; what a matter of trouble it is, and sometimes
of much affliction and sufferings to diverse precious and sound christians, when
they go about to reprove the false teachers, and evil workers, the great
hinderers at present of a through Reformation in the Ordinances and Doctrines of
Christ? How they fall upon such as the troublers of Israel? Not considering
that their lusts are the principal causes thereof; and if Christ's witnesses
speak against them in faithfulness, they are presently branded as troublers of
their peace and factions, and often suffer for it: The church of Ephesus had
their portion herein, of travel and patience, for their integrity unto Christ
and his Truth, against these teachers and wicked persons in that primitive age,
so near Christ's time, and the pouring forth of the Spirit; and therefore no
marvel if under the falling away, and Antichrist's dominion, Christ's faithful
witnesses have a share therein also.

But to proceed, And thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are
not, and have found them liars.] It seems Ephesus had pseudo-Apostles, or false
Apostles, as well as Corinth, and other churches, 2 Cor. 11.13. who pretended
themselves to be true Apostles of Christ; who under that pretense, came with
deceitful, and soul-destroying doctrines; as, That the Resurrection was past
already, That the Mosaical Law was to be joined to faith in Christ for
justification; That the community of all things and women were lawful, which
they called spiritual marriages, which the sect of Nicolaitans held: These were
the errors of the false Apostles of the primitive days. Now the Apostles of
Christ were extraordinary Officers sent by him; so the word (...) signifies,
one sent to his service for the publishing the Messiah and his doctrine over
the whole world, and so were universal Officers, and could act in and over all
churches by their Apostolical authority; but for others to argue from their
practice, that are ordinary officers, and of an ordinary spirit, that they may
act as they did, is a mere non sequitur: Now the false Apostles would it seems
needs arrogate the same authority to themselves, in imposing their dictates
upon the churches; but the church of Ephesus had so much spiritual wisdom as to
try and examine them, and so found them false ones, and liars.

Hence note, That it is a most commendable practice and duty in Christ's
churches, to make a diligent and narrow inquisition into the truth of all
doctrines and teachers that come among them. The church of Ephesus was very
famous for this very thing, and an Euge given them by Christ for this action:
And indeed, how could they, or any other churches, find out the deceitfulness
and falsity of those that were false Apostles, and false Teachers, unless they
had tried and examined their doctrines? Paul accounted the Bereans more noble
then others, for this very thing, for the enquiry into the truth of his
doctrine, whether things were so or no as he delivered unto them: for indeed it
argues a most stupid kind of disposition, to receive all things that comes from
men without enquiry, either into the truth thereof, or at least, the integrity,
faithfulness, and the authority of the Relator thereof: for as some truths lie
deep, and every common person or member cannot fathom it, yet every one, though
never so weak, that cannot satisfy their consciences by their own sight in the
entertainment of a truth, yet can in part acquiesce in the ability and fidelity
of their Teacher, and so may get much satisfaction unto themselves from the
authority of their guides and teachers; therefore it is a duty incumbent on all
First, for the more spiritual and quick-sighted christian, to try all things,
and to hold fast what is good. Next, for the weaker christian, to try the
faithfulness and integrity of his Teachers, and to hold fast what he commends
unto him in things disputable, and not of easy discernment.

Query. But a Question may be moved, who shall try, judge, and examine false
Apostles, false Teachers, and their corrupt doctrines?

I answer, First, every private or particular christian may do it, Judicio
discretionis, by a judgment of discretion, and of private discerning.

But secondly, to try them Judicio Authoritativo, by a judgment of authority,
and juridically, it must be done by that whole church wherein they are risen up
and maintained; for in them lies the plenary judicial power and authority of
judging all doctrines and teachers, which is usually called the power of the
Keys. Neither is this power in the Officers or Eldership of the church, when
distinct from the Body, as some would have it, but collectively, in the whole
church Officers and Members, though unto the Presbytery, or Officers, I should
grant the precedence in many things, yet the Body collective is above the
Officers; for the Officers are ordained more principally for the Body, but not
the Body for the Officers: but the head cannot say unto the body, I have no
need of thee; nor the body unto the head, but all joint together makes up a
complete harmony, and an organical Body; Officers and Members in a church, make
up a complete christian, or microcosm, or commonwealth, wherein all the Laws of
Christ are juridically administered, and who have the full power of trying,
censuring, and judging all false Teachers and doctrines that shall rise amongst
them: For if the juridical power were solely in the Presbytery, or Officers of
the church, then the church of Ephesus would not collectively deserve that
Eulogie and approbation for their zeal against false Apostles, but it would
rather be attributed to the Angel of the church, or chief Officers or Overseers
of the church only; but here the whole church of Ephesus is praised and
approved for their non-toleration of evil persons, and for their trying of, and
sifting out the false Apostles; therefore it argues very strongly, that the
power of censures and trying, is not singly in the Officers, but in Officers
and members jointly, as making up one organical Body politic, which is
Christ's highest Judicature on earth, to decide and judge of all Doctrines
rising in his churches, that will not hold weight according to the shekel of
the Sanctuary. A farther instance ye have pregnant to this purpose in the
church of Thyatira, in verse 20. following; where the reproof is laid home
close on the whole church of Thyatira, for suffering the woman Jezabel, and her
prophetique delusions: Now if it were alone in the Angels power of Thyatira to
deal with these Balaamitish prophets, the Spirit of Christ would especially lay
the burden and reproof upon them, to wit, the Superintendents of the church;
but it is clearly notified unto us, that the charge is wholly laid home upon
the churches, v. 17. Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches: Though I grant, the Eldership or Officers may be the mouth of
Christ unto the churches, and again the churches mouth unto Christ, and so they
are his Ambassadors agitating in his name, and are to precede in many duties in
relation to the church, yet the charge for admission and entertainment of
heterodoxies, and corruptions in the churches, is not solely laid upon them,
but upon the whole churches: so hence this is clearly evinced, that those that
are justly charged for the admission and permission of evil, had an indubitable
power and authority in themselves, either not to admit it, or being admitted,
to try it, and cut it off by such means as are appointed for such ends: but the
whole church of Thyatira is justly charged for the admission and permission of
corruptions among them, therefore the conclusion is evident. But this shall
suffice herein. See more hereon, v. 20. following.

Object. But is not this (with the Papists) to raise the jurisdiction of the
church so high, as to set it above the sovereignty of the Word?

I answer negatively: for a Sovereign Prince receives no diminution of honor
for his subordinate Ministers of State to receive that honor due unto their
place; neither so does the Word lose at all of its glory, for that the church
has its due honor put upon it also: indeed the Word is suprema Lex, the
Standard, the Rule and light by which all doctrines are tried and discerned,
and being of Divine Revelation, and in its self infallible, must needs be above
the authority, and of a surer testimony then that which is mixed with much
fallibility and imperfection, as the choicest and purest churches ever were, as
those of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. And as a Law of mere humane
institution is reputed of so high authority, that it binds the Legislators
themselves, and in that respect is above those that made it; but much more the
Word of God, which is his Law, and his revealed mind, coming from so infinite
and unerrable a Legislator as God is, so far transcends the authority of any
Judicature on earth, as the wisdom of an infinite does a finite creature,
therefore must needs be binding to all to whom it is made known, having such a
perfection in it, that whosoever is conversant therein, it is able, by the
blessing of the Spirit, to make him wise unto salvation, and perfect in every
good thing and work. The Word unto the Church, is as the Sun unto the Dial; if
the Dial be set right to the Sun, it will give a right judgment of the time of
the day; so if the church gives a judgment according to the square and
scantling of the Word, it will be a righteous judgment; but otherwise, to make
the Word subservient, and to conclude unto the churches dictates is an
undertaking to rectify the course of the Sun unto the obliquity of the Dial,
which will prove Aethiopiam lvvare, and most irrational. So that church that
keeps her self within her own sphere, and tries and examines spirits and
doctrines that are heterodox and unsound, by the sound of the Word, which is a
most sure light, and infallible cynosure, doubtless that church will be led and
preserved in all truth: But if any one so far exalts its self, as to conclude
for truth its own dictates, dissentaneous unto the Word, but suiting with
self-interest and design; the first may be a golden candlestick, both precious
and famous for its faith, integrity, and justice toward God and man; but the
latter will soon degenerate into an harlot-church, if not soon become apostate
to the faith. The first is Christ's highest Judicature on earth, wherein he
takes delight to walk in, as his Garden enclosed, to view their pleasant
fruits, but the other Christ will look upon as a rotten Tree, that cumbers the
ground, and serves only to be hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Observe. 4. Another Observation is, That in the purest times and churches,
there are found great corruptions, both in manners and doctrines. In this
famous church of Ephesus, Corinth, etc. in the Apostles days, were found both
(...) and (...), evil ones, and false ones; such as pretended they were
Apostles, but were found liars and deceivers. Amongst the twelve there was a
Judas. In that church in the Ark, when the world and church had one and the
same extent and boundaries, in eight persons only, yet one was a Cham; and
there was also a Cain when it was of a lesser number, and but four in the world.

But here obiter, and by the way, we must be careful to distinguish between
God's Decretive will, and his Preceptive Will. His Voluntas been placiti, and
Voluntas signi, as the Schools call it. or his will of purpose, and his will of
good pleasure: Not that there are two Wills in God, but several and diverse acts
of one and the same Will; as by the same will we love, by the same will we
hate; by the same will we purpose one thing, by the same will we command
another thing; yet they are not two contradictory wills, but diverse acts of one
and the same will. Diversa non sunt contraria. Now though God may in his
providential wisdom ordain false teachers, and wicked persons to be found in
his church for diverse ends known unto God, and more especially for the trial of
the faithful, and the exaltation of his grace, yet they are much mistaken that
hence argue either for admission of wicked persons, or unsound in the faith,
into the fellowship of the church, or for their toleration therein after a
discovery; for it is the command of God to the contrary, That we admit not
such, being known, into the consortship of the church; or being admitted, upon
discovery we tolerate them not: for if they were to be admitted and tolerated
quietly within the church, then doubtless the church of Ephesus had not
received that encomium, and well done for their zeal against them: nor the
church of Thyatira that worthy reproof, for the suffering that woman Jezabel
amongst them: therefore the one church did her duty, and obeyed Christ's
preceptive will, and had the praise and glory for it; the other neglected it,
and therefore had a just check laid upon her: So that this question is to be
stated de Jure, non de Facto: I confess, de facto, there may be evil persons,
false teachers in the best churches, and purest times, but de jure, it ought
not to be so; for that which seems and tends to the destruction of a church,
should in no wise be admitted; but the admission and toleration of such wicked
persons, tends to that end. The illation is very clear from the nature of
wickedness, which is of a destroying nature to all entertainers of it; witness
those seven famous Asian churches, and many other Eastern churches, who for
their iniquities and transgressions from the rule and faith of Christ, are in
stead of pleasant Gardens, wherein the Lord delighted in, spewed out, and
become the habitation of Dragons, and receptacles of all unclean spirits.
Therefore it is unsound to argue from acts of God's providence, to his will:
The act of Judas in betraying Christ, was never the less abominated in the
sight of God, because he had pre-ordained it in his eternal decrees: We must be
sure to do no evil (against all which God has declared his displeasure from
heaven) on pretense that the Divine wisdom can order it to good, and draw
praise unto it self out of the wrath of man. It is a sure maxim and rule unto
us, to act by the rule of God's commands which are patent, not of his
providential actings and decrees, whose meaning unto us are unrevealed, and
secret.

Object. But some here comes with a replication, and object, and say, That they
grant, that manifest, scandalous, and wicked persons, and erroneous, are not to
be admitted and tolerated in the church; but withal add, and answer by another
question, that it cannot be defended or made good, that none ought to be
admitted or tolerated in the church, but such as are true and real Saints; for
so they say, we make the church of God of no larger extent then the Elect
themselves. I have met somewhat to the same purpose, in the writings of a
Learned Gentleman, Mr W. Morice of Devon, in his New Enclosures broken down,
page 110. who says, That he undertakes not to be an Advocate for persons
notoriously wicked and scandalous, not asserting that those which are notorious
for sins, may not be rejected, but that without tried and approved notes of
sanctity, they may be admitted: nor that men, whose flagitiousness is
publicly known, may be repelled, but none upon any private notion of their
faults may be excluded: and thus much will be inevitably concluded from the
example of Judas his admission, which was the Diana contended for, or rather,
to use his own words, Hos quaesitum munus in usus. And in page 61. he asserts,
We do only here argue, that Sacraments, formally as such, are not proper
privileges of real Saints, or absolutely incommunicable to any but such as
have given satisfaction of their holiness, which is their hypothesis, against
which we are disputing. Thus far he.

For answer, I could refer M. Morice to another learned man of these times, if
he would account it as good payment to be referred to another, and an able
paymaster without exception, even learned M. Baxter, the great anti-Separatist,
and anti-Anabaptist of these days, who has sufficiently, and with Achillean
arguments made good that Thesis against M. Blakes dogmatical faith, That it is
a true justifying faith that entitles to Baptism, and so consequentially, to
other Ordinances of the church: And also against M. Bedford, his Baptismal
Regeneration, who has strongly convinced in that dispute against him, That
Baptism does not convey the first grace, but that the first grace was
necessarily pre-required before Baptism: And though hereby M. Baxter has
unavoidably armed his adversaries the anti-Paidobaptists, who takes up, as the
Lancastrians did of old to the Yorkists in the Battle of Towton, the same
arrows which came from their enemies quivers, and send them back again, to
their greater prejudice; and so may the anti-Paidobaptists form very sharp
weapons out of M. Baxter's own Forge, though justly and rightly by him
fabricated and aimed to another end: Neither can I see how it will serve M.
Baxter's turn, nor how he secures himself against the reverberation and
brandishments of their retorted weapons, when he flies to his common Asylum and
subterfuge, which is indeed his Clypi Septemplix, or his surest backer, when
they charge upon him arguments drawn from his own pen.

Sic propriis pennis, laeditur ipse suis.
Or, -- Proprius configitur alis.
A mounting Eagles plume fixed on a Dart
Rapt from her Wing, it causes her own smart.
And though to them he answers, (when they collect and object from his own
positions, that there must be justifying faith, and the first Grace, as
pre-requisites in persons coming to Baptism) that that must be found either in
the party himself; or, in the case of Infants, in their parents for them; but
where that supererrogating grant is made to the parents faith, I am yet to seek
to make good the rights of Infants unto Baptism, and I believe it will be
produced ad Calendas Graecas: But how far purity of reason, and analogy
between the old legal administrations, and the new Gospel institutions bind and
oblige us, I shall briefly enquire into; and shall here take leave to digress
so far. as to leave one word on record for hesitating and scrupulating
consciences in this particular. Whether it is safer to practice ordinances in
that way, which by all hands and parties is accounted clear and obvious in
their several positive institutions, or in that way which is confessed to yield
most dark and difficult controversy to find it out, as that about Infant
Baptism, is, as M. Baxter himself most ingeniously confesses, page 301. of his
Plain Scripture proof, etc. and in the beginning of that book more at large, to
page 9. And as it is to be observed that if it had been lawful in Institutions
that relate to Worship (as the Sacraments are, which in themselves are not
naturally moral Ordinances, but depend wholly for virtue on the authority of
the Institution) to set them on the Rack, in all the circumstantials of their
administrations, as for manner, subjects, and form thereof, to answer all
Allusions, Types, and Analogies that may be drawn from the old Testament, we
know not, wherein they will make a stop; unless, as in the old Law there was
one visible National church of the Jews, which had a high Priest over them, so
by way of Analogy and resemblance, the divisible parts of the Catholic
church become united in one, under one Pontifex maximus, or, in plain English,
his Holiness of Rome: So dangerous it is to adhere to Analogies and
proportions, of reasoning from the obsolete Legal administrations, which are no
ways cogent or constringent to be exemplary, either in matter, form, or
subjects of Gospel Ordinances, which wholly depends upon the Will of the
Instituter, who is faithful in his house, as was Moses. And that is but a
slender argument or Scar-crow of some, to raise an odium against their
adversaries, when they cry out with a full mouth, this is to cast off the whole
Law, and old Testament, at one stroke, whereas we generally grant, that the Law
which is moral, natural, is both divine, spiritual, our duty, and perpetual,
there is no relaxation to the least Iota of it.

Secondly, We grant the Judicial Law of Moses to be very useful in many
particulars for the use and imitation of the church under the Gospel; but for
the ceremonial part of that Law, it is quite dead unto us, and is part of that
handwriting of Ordinances, which is nailed unto Christ's cross, and to give a
restoration and resurrection unto it, either in its self, or in allusions
drawn from it, pressed home upon the conscience, is to add Circumcision unto
the Gospel, and in effect, to lay a yoke upon the necks of the disciples, which
we nor our fathers were ever able to bear, and so by consequence, to make
Christ of none effect: For if the Ceremonial Law, and the Judaical Judicial
Law, as particularly relating to that Nation, be void, and non-obliging unto
christians under the Gospel, as all sound Protestants confess, and is this day
made good and avowed by their general practice; for what sort of christians do
strictly bind themselves up to the Judicials of Moses, but do pick and choose as
they please? For as I said but now, many good things are in them, both useful
and imitable for Christian Commonweals to adhere to, but to make them of
absolute necessity, as cogent upon the conscience, I know no sound church or
teachers does so undertake to become its Advocate; and if any should be so
heterodox, I am resolved, and should give it as advice to others, to hold fast
that liberty wherein Christ has made us free. And if the Judicial Law,
together with all its Ceremonials, as all sound Divines grant, and confess, and
practice accordingly, be null, and void, and non-constringent unto christians,
then how unequal and unjust it is to make it a foundation or corner stone to
build any Gospel ordinance thereon? For the Basis being unsound and sandy, the
structure cannot hold, but must needs fall to the ground together: and all such
conclusions as are extracted from such unsound premises, are rather exotique
then concentrique with the Word of truth: For what have we to do with Legal
Types and Shaddows, which are long since putrified in their graves? And we may
say of them, as Mary said to Christ concerning her brother Lazarus, Lord, by
this it stinketh. We have the Antitype, Christ himself, the true substance of
all Judaical Types and Shaddows, who is the sole Lord of his house, and Head of
his church, who of common elements of Water, Bread, and Wine, by virtue of his
Institution, has made them unto us Spiritual water of Regeneration, and
Spiritual symbols of his Flesh and Blood, which are mystically and
Sacramentally communicated to every worthy receiver; and this Lord, as a
faithful Legislator, has declared his will about those Ordinances, about the
manner of the administrations, together with the subjects thereof; and though
some assert that the truth hereabout lies deep, and of difficult discerning,
and I believe it true, as unto them and those, by reason of the great dust they
themselves raise about it, as the Fox in the Fable, that went to sweep the
house with his tail, who in stead of cleansing the house, made it more filthy,
by the dust he raised about it; but for my part, I conceive these two great
Gospel ordinances to be plain and clear, to plain and simple hearted
christians, in all the necessary circumstantials thereof; as, about the manner
of their administrations, the qualification of the subjects, etc. for these
Ordinances were not instituted alone for philosophical christians, but were
also subjected to the cognizance, and for the edification of all sorts of
christians that were not Academicks; and therefore their significancy obvious
unto all, in all such particulars that makes but a reasonable enquiry
thereunto: and therefore I should judge such as Sophisters and vain Janglers,
as go about to darken the truth of those two great Gospel lights, or
Sacraments, by analogical arguments, levied from the Judicials or Ceremonials
of Moses, to support them withal, or to evidence their truth either in
themselves, or in any circumstantials thereof; whereas they are sufficiently
supported and virtuated by a clear light in themselves, to wit, their own
genuine Institutions: And here rightly may be appplyed that of the Poet, -- Ne
te quesiveris extra --

And for him that is otherwise minded, -- Cre dat Judeus Apella,
Non ego, --


But to return to M. Morice, from whose answer I have somewhat digressed, I
shall take leave to present him with few arguments out of that learned M.
Baxter, being my self very conscious to be -- Impar congressus Achilli.

In his book for Infant Baptism, against M. Bedford, p. 299. this argument of
his offers it self. If both in the Institution, and every example of Baptism
through all the Bible, the first grace be prerequisite as a condition, then the
Ordinance was not instituted for the confirming of that first grace, but in the
Institution, and every example of Baptism through all the Bible, the first
grace is prerequisite as a condition: Therefore the Ordinance was not
instituted to confer it.

By the first Grace (it is his own words) I still mean that Grace which
consists in a real change of the soul, whether habitual or actual, or if you
will call it seminal or radical, you may: By prerequisite as a condition, I
mean either in the party, or another for him.

The force of the consequence is evident in that, otherwise Baptism should be
instituted to give men that which is pre-required in them, and so which they
have already, as to all them that are capable of it.

The Antecedent is undeniable, as might be manifested by a recital of the
particular Texts, could we stay so long upon it. John required a profession of
repentance in those he baptized: Jesus first made them Disciples, and then by
his Apostles baptized them, John 4.1. The solemn Institution of it, as a
standing Ordinance to the Church, which tells us fully the end is in Matthew.
28.19, 20. Go and Disciple me all Nations, Baptizing them etc Now for the aged,
a Disciple and a Believer are all one, Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. Acts 2.38. Repent, and be baptized every one etc. 41.
They that gladly received the Word, were baptized. Acts 8.12, 13. The
Samaritans believed, and were baptized, both men and women. Simon himself
believed, and was baptized, Acts 8.36, 37. If thou believe with all thy
heart, thou may be baptized. And he answered, I believe etc. Acts 9. Paul
believed upon Ananias instruction, and then was baptized. Acts 10.47, 48. and
16.15.33. and 18.8. and 19.4, 5, etc. Thus far M. Baxter in this place. And to
see his clearness herein, is admirable, and what advantage a learned man has,
when he has Truth on his side: Which argument is able (though by him managed
there to another end) to overturn all its opposites, that asserts, That true
real Grace, or as he calls it, a real change of the soul, is not pre-requisite
as the condition unto Baptism.

Amongst many other arguments of his against M. Blake's dogmatical faith, I
shall only make use of his fourth, and fifth, and eleventh arguments page 96.
of his Apology, and refer the Reader to that place for farther satisfaction,
where there are many more arguments, both from Authority and Scriptures, levied
to this purpose, and comporting with this Truth. His fourth Argument is,

They that are to renounce the World, Flesh, and Devil, are to be true
Believers to Justification; but they that are to be baptized, are then to
renounce the World, Flesh, and Devil; therefore this abrenunciation has been
practiced always in Baptism since the Apostles times, as Antiquity testifies.

His fifth argument is, They that are required to believe sincerely, in the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are required to believe to Justification; But such
are all as come to Baptism, Therefore. For the major, it requires no more
proof, but to explain what it is to believe in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
and our Divines against the Papists have enough proved, that the phrase of
believing in, comprehends the act of the will, as well as the understanding.
To believe in God, is to take him for our God; which is to take him for our
sovereign Ruler, and chief good, This none but a sound believer can truly do.

His eleventh argument. If Baptism be solemnizing of the mystical marriage
between Christ and the Baptized; then true justifying faith is of God required
thereto: But the Antecedent is true: Therefore. Therefore it is said, that we
are baptized into Christ, and into one body: and the church has ever held the
Antecedent to be true: The consequence is evident, in that no man but the sound
believer can truly take Christ as a husband and head; for so to do is
justifying faith

These three have I only chosen of M. Baxter's 26. arguments, to set, as an
Antithesis unto M. Morice's positions, and as an answer thereunto; and if I may
speak it pace tanti viri, an ill case is much disadvantagious to the most
learned man; and in this that I have set M. Baxter to answer M. Morice, is, but
to set Socrates to answer Plato: And I may add one word, that whereas it is
objected, That Judas and Simon Magus faith, which was only dogmatical and
formal, though rotten in the root, gives right of admission. I answer, First,
It may be granted, in foro Ecclesiae; for that may be said to give admission to
Baptism, etc. which so qualifieth the person, as the church is bound to admit
him, as being one that seems sound in believing; for Judas was always
reckoned amongst the twelve, before his traiterous betraying act of his Lord
and Master: and Simon is said to have believed also, Acts 8.13. Now the church
can but give a judgment of charity, and not knowing any thing to the contrary,
cannot deny admission either to Simon, or any other that desires it; for
charity thinks no evil, and hops the best of all: and it is an old rule, de
occultis non judicat Ecclesia. But secondly, This is not an entituling, and
having right, coram Deo, and a foedere, for that alone is saving faith, which
God in his covenant makes the condition pre-requisite to such a right of
admission, which is before asserted and proved, and that that gives right coram
Deo, gives a true title also foro Ecclesiae; for according to a charitative
judgment, they are bound to judge, that the profession of faith, and wills of
such as desire admission, are both true, real, and sanctified, or else they
would not desire it, though oftentimes the sequel manifests that they are
deceived therein: and hereby it is clearly evinced, that the church door is
wider then the door of heaven; and that the number of the church militant, does
exceed the tryumphant, and is far enlarged beyond the limits of the Elect. And
herein this shall suffice.

Observe. 5. That false Teachers are most arrogant, and pretend highest to gifts
and mission.

The church of Ephesus found it so in their false Teachers, and Corinth also, 2
Cor. 13.11. who transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and who by
their own mouths said they were Apostles; they would needs get the honor of
men of extraordinary spirits and callings, as the Apostles were, yet on trial,
they were found liars: they are of Diotrephes-like spirit, that would needs
have the precedence, and be above John himself, and the true Apostles: Gaudent
preesse non ut prosunt, sed quia grande aliquid putant preesse, and
insolentius, and arrogantius principes in Ecclesia locum appertivisse. They are
like those in Jer. 8.8. who say, We are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with
us, while their hearts are full of lies and vanity: and as those in Ezekiel. 13.6.
who saying, The Lord says, yet have seen nothing but a vain vision, and a
lying divination. But I should here demand, why should those false teachers
denominate themselves to be Apostles, seeing the number is only limited to
twelve?

I answer, Some of the ancient Fathers did denominate the first second, and
third century after Christ, the Apostolical times, though the Twelve were dead,
for the purity of their doctrine, and being so near the fountain, as Church
history manifests: And our Bishop Jewel offers to join Issue with the Papists,
so far as the fifth century, upon the authority of the Fathers, as holding the
Apostolical doctrine.

Secondly, I answer, This Apostolical office was not so much the peculiar
faculty of the Twelve, as to debar all others from that denomination; and
though I grant they were Christ's Apostles catexochen, yet that does not
hinder, but others that are sent, for so much the word signifies in the Greek,
in Christ's Embassies unto the world, may appropriate that Title unto
themselves, as Paul very often in his Epistles has justly vindicated his right
unto it; and I know not why might not Barnabas, with others that were sent upon
the same message with Paul, and the rest, appropriate the same Title, and that
justly, to themselves also; for I am of opinion, that those are standing
perpetual officers in the church, which are described in Ephesians. 4.11. and are to
continue it from one age to another, until the whole body of Christ mystical,
the elect are gathered and complete, for so the words strongly enforce: and he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come into the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Now whereas they object that
are contrary minded, That some Offices in the church were only temporary, and
for that age and season wherein the Gospel was first promulgated and planted,
and for this purpose do urge that other text of Paul in 1 Cor. 12.28. And God
has ordained some in his Church, as first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, then them that do miracles, after that, the gifts of healing, helps,
governments, diversity of tongues: and therefore hence do argue, That because
some officers that are here numbered up, are but temporary, and for that first
age, as the gifts of miracles, healing, etc. Therefore the Apostolical gift and
function is ceased also with them; which was, as they say, for the first
planting of the church, not for its growth and continuance.

To which I answer, first, By distinguishing between times and persons: and
grant that Officers since Christ's time, have not that measure of Unction, and
Spirit of infallibility, as the first Apostles had, yet withal assert, that for
all what the contrary minded say, is but petitio principii, for they only
affirm, that the Apostolical office was but temporary for the first age, but
prove it not; and though they rank it up amongst some of the primitive Gifts
and Offices that are interred, yet to persuade the ingenious, they should
inform where in the Temple (I mean God's Word) is their grave to be found? They
may from this last Scripture as justly argue, that the gifts and functions of
Teachers, Prophets, Helps, and Governments, are also ceased in the church,
because the gifts of healing, miracles, etc. are ceased, in and amongst which
catalogue they are also ranked.

Secondly, This Tenent of the Opponents is the ready way, and I presume, had a
great influence of late in hatching and cherishing the sect of the Seekers, and
anti-Scripturists: for when it is asserted and maintained by the reputed
Orthodox, that most of the primitive offices, as Apostles, gifts of Miracles,
Healings, etc. are ceased to the church, under the defection and falling away
by the rise of antichrist: They forthwith rejoyn and object; Why? If some gifts
are evacuated in the church, and no virtue in them, as you confess, why not the
rest of the same foundation and catalogue, as well as they? and so upon the
same grounds that some are ceased, they pertinaciously affirm, that all other
offices and ordinances are null and defunct also, being only for that age and
ministration; and to that end, do interpret that promise of Christ's spiritual
support and presence with his Church, in the last of Matthe^, That he would be
with them (...), which we render, to the end of the world, or all generations:
yet they for their own interest, render, to the end of that age; and so
consequentially, deny the Word, and Ordinances, and the Being of a church: for
how should there be a church, without Word and Ordinances? and how should the
Word and Ordinances be administered without Officers? according to that of Romans
10. How shall they believe unless they hear? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? And how shall they preach, unless they be sent? This has been the
sad consequence of asserting that relaxation of some Offices and gifts in the
church, and not evidencing where their graves lie, or their repeals.

Thirdly, I answer, That Ephesians. 4.11, 12, etc. is strongly convincing for the
contrary; for all those offices that are there recounted, which Christ gave
unto the church, there is not the least intimation that some were for the
church then in being, of that present age, and the rest for futurity to
continue; but rather the contrary is evinced: And he gave some Apostles, etc.
Cuibono? To what end? For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the faith, etc. Now I would anti-query, Are the Saints all perfected?
Is the work of the Ministry at an end? Is the church, the body of Christ, so
sufficiently edified and confirmed, that they are all come to the unity of
faith, and to perfect knowledge, and to a full measure and stature of Christ? I
hope none will affirm it, unless the Perfectists, and Quakers.

But here again they will say, We grant ordinary Officers, as Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, etc. are still continued in the church for this work, until
we all come to be a perfect man in Christ, but extraordinary officers, as
Apostles, etc. are ceased.

I answer again, This is asserted, and not proved, therefore it is a begging of
the question.

Secondly, I affirm, That those which are called the standing ordinary
officers, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. were in their first institution of
an extraordinary Spirit, and of the same Unction, though differing in measure
with the Apostles themselves, and sometimes Apostles, Pastors, and Elders, were
taken as Synonima's, though really differing amongst themselves in gifts and
offices; as to instance, James the first Pastor or Bishop of Jerusalem, was
also a pillar and an Apostle. John, the great and beloved Apostle, is in his
Epistle called the Elder. And in that great Synodical assembly, Acts 15. the
Elders are in joint commission with the Apostles; and being men of an
extraorindary spirit also, as appears by all those of the first unction, as
Stephen, Ananias, Barnabas, etc. and the rest of the brethren who went abroad
upon the persecution of the church, and preached, and wrought miracles every
where, Acts 8.

Object. But here some may say, this is to level all officers, and to make the
Apostles themselves but of equal authority with the ordinary offices of
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc.

I answer, Not at all; for though I grant some purity in their gifts, being
both extraordinary in their first unction, yet the first twelve, in some acts
of their offices, were to excel all others, as is evident by Acts 1.22. when
the eleven chose Matthias into Judas Bishopric; Peter urged that one must be
ordained to be a witness with them of the Resurrection, that was conversant
with them from the baptism of John, to the time of Christ's resurrection: as
this was a great part of their office, to bear witness of the life, death, and
resurrection of Christ unto the world; and this they could attest as truth, as
eye witnesses, being with Jesus all the time he went in and out amongst them;
and herein they surpassed all others that came after. Secondly, They excel all
other officers, in that they had their commission immediately from Christ, to
convert, disciple, and baptize all Nations into the faith; but all other
officers had it derivatively from them. Thirdly, They had the pre-eminence in
gifts, of miracles, which was most frequently adjoined to their Ministry for
the confirmation of their Doctrine. But it is very inconsequent that the whole
Apostolic office is quite ceased to the church, because some of the most
eminent gifts and endowments of that office, as it was in the Apostles of the
first institution, are ceased, which only indeed was temporary, and necessary
alone for the first plantation of the Christian faith; it will as well follow,
that Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, are defunct, because some of their first
primitive and extraordinary gifts are ceased also.

But secondly, I am of opinion, that what is necessarily essential to
denominate an Apostle, did not consist solely in being eyewitnesses of
Christ's, life, death, and resurrection, or of power of miracles; for others of
the Disciples might be partakers in those gifts, and were so equally with
themselves, and yet no Apostles; and Paul that wanted much of the accommodation
of witnessing unto the life, death, and resurrection of Christ, though supplied
by a miraculous sight from heaven, none can deny but was the great Apostle, and
light unto the Gentiles.

Lastly, In the affirmative, I assert the true essentials of an Apostle, does
consist in his Call and Commission to that work and function: Christ calls the
first twelve, Matthew. 10.1.5. which were only denominated Disciples, and from
their mission unto the lost sheep of Israel, they were then first baptized into
the name of Apostles, and so having taken their names from their office, as men
sent, it soon became their proper appellations. Now (I say) it is a right
mission and commission, that gives a being and essentially unto an Apostle:
Christ, he was the first author that commissionated unto this office; in that
of Matthew. 10. his commission was more strict, and of narrower jurisdiction; but
in Matthew. 28.19. it was much enlarged; for in the first, they were only to go
to the lost sheep of Israel, and not in the way of the Gentiles: but in the
second, they were commanded to go and Disciple all Nations, and to preach the
Gospel to every creature. Now as they were sent on this great Embassy for
Christ, and by Christ; so they send others to go on with the same work:
Matthias was the first we read of, Acts 1. that they chose into the place of
Judas: After that, Paul, and Barnabas Act 13.2, 3. were chosen, and separated
unto this work, and sent unto the Gentiles; and so might be truly called the
Apostles of the Gentiles: They again, with the rest of the Apostles in their
several Provinces, went about, gathering and constituting churches, and
ordaining Elders, and officers in every church; and those political churches
made up of Officers and Elders, and Members, were the true Delegates of the
Apostles, and the center of all just power and authority; and they again from
this delegated power, commissionates others, and sends them forth as the
Apostles of Christ, by virtue of that power committed unto them, to disciple
the Gentiles, and unconverted Nations abroad in the world; for this was the
then practice, unless we affirm, that all churches were planted, and all
Nations converted by the Apostles themselves in their days, that we read of in
history, were afterward converted to the faith, and became famous churches. The
Apostles were men but of one generation, and to ascribe to them that work, were
to make them eviternal. Though their Doctrine continue, yet their persons are
translated, and gone to their Fathers; and this propagation of the faith, and
work of conversion must be carried on from generation to generation, till all
the Elect be called in, and we all come to a perfect man, and unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ, and this must necessarily be done by
Apostolical men and officers: For I would have the ingenious to consider, that
the offices of Elders, Pastors, Teachers, Helps, and Governments, are but
relative Functions, and have their being only dependant and limited to their
relations and churches: they are neither Elders, Pastors, nor Governents
without their own churches, therefore it is very necessary that there must be
other officers, universally commissionated to preach the Gospel to the
unconverted Gentiles: and these are properly called Apostles of Christ,
authorized by the church of Christ unto this service. Joseph of Arimethea, as
antiquity testifies, was our English Apostle, which was sent by the church unto
our Nations conversion. Dionisius Areopagita was the Apostle unto France. James
unto Spain. Anthony unto Italy. Thomas unto Italy, and so others unto other
Nations: And when christianity was almost lost and obliterated here in England,
by the incursions of barbarous Nations, Gregory, the Bishop of Rome, not yet
Antichistianized, some centuries of years after, sent here Austin as an
Apostle, and a Restorer of their almost lost faith, and christian profession.
So likewise when our churches send men to convert the Gentile Nations of
America, and elsewhere, as private Disciples they cannot go; for how can they
preach, unless they be sent? as Officers, to wit, as Pastors, Elders, Teachers,
or Governents they cannot; for they are relations only to their own churches:
therefore they must go as Apostles, which is only suitable to so general and
universal work.

And if it be objected, That if the Apostolical offices must continue, as
necessary to do the full work of Christ and his church, why not the gifts of
healings, miracles, tongues? etc.

I answer, There is no necssity for it; for they were only added because of
unbelief, and to confirm the truth of that doctrine which was first delivered
unto the Saints.

Secondly, I am not sensible what great inconveniences will follow upon it, if
it were admitted, that such gifts of miracles, healings, etc. are still
continued by Christ unto his church, though not so clear and ordinary as in the
first churches. I have read of Tertullian, and after him Cyprian, about the
second century, who provokes their adversaries to the trial of the truth of
their profession by miracles, by bringing persons possessed with devils into
their assemblies; which if they should not be effected, and made to confess
themselves to be devils, and Christ to be the Son of God, then they were
content to suffer.

M. Baxter gives us a farther account out of Athanasi^, Austin, and many of the
Fathers, that there was a continuation of miracles in their days, and attested
to by so many, and honest witnesses, that they were credible to reason, page
63. upon that question, in his book of Infidelity: and in that part of the book
of the sin against the holy Ghost, page 15. speaking of casting out devils. Of
which sort (says he)some think that really they did so by the power of God, as
we may do now by fasting and prayer sometimes: To this purpose, consider what
the prayers and appeals of God's people have strangely and miraculously
perfected and produced at the hands of God, of late, and within our memories,
in diverse examples, which is now too long to rehearse: Some have been restored
to health, and miraculously recovered, when there was no hope: others
dispossessed of evil spirits, that had palpably vexed and possessed them, and
that only by the prayers of faith of somg odly persons. I shall only give one
instance; I heard it related by a faithful messenger of Christ, in a public
Sermon in the City of Exeter, to wit, M. Lewis Steukley, a workman that need
not be ashamed, who occasionally in that discourse, spoke of a great man's
Steward in Scotland really possessed with the Devil, who was tormented so sore
many days, that his tongue was swollen without his mouth, to that magnitude and
extensiveness, that it was impossible for him to bring it in, or contain it
within his mouth, and so thereby was utterly deprived of all use of speech; yet
however in that horrid posture, and speechless, there was a clear distinct
voice heard within him, saying unto that Minister that Minister that came to
visit the possessed party, being his neighbor, That he might save his pain,
for that the person possessed was his own: To whom the Minister answered, I
cannot believe thee Satan, for thou have been a liar from the beginning. Then
the spirit or voice within would answer again, Be gone, for he is mine. To whom
the Minister replied, If Christ died for him, thou have no interest in him; and
I will try with my God by prayer, to prove thee a liar, Satan: Whereupon he
departed, and left the party miserably extorted and tormented: and as he was in
his way returning to his house, it was in his thoughts to pitch upon some
certain faithful christians to join with him, and assist him in this duty to
God, on the behalf of the possessed party, and to send for them as soon as he
returned: But observe the providence, when as he came unto his house, he found
all these persons there, coming on other accounts to speak with him, which he
in his thoughts had in the way pitched on; when he saw that, he admired and
blessed God for the providence, and presently told them, that he intended
forthwith to send for them all in particular, to assist him in duty and prayer
to God for the recovery and releasement of such a person possessed by Satan,
and would try their interest with God for him, and on his behalf: they gladly
heard it, and entertained the motion, and so continued that evening some hours
together, very fervent in prayer; and after the duty performed, they all
departed to their several rests. The next morning very early, the party
possessed came to the Minister, well composed, and sensible, and his tongue
restored to his wonted bigness and station, speaking to the Minister plainly
and distinctly, that he wrestled with God for him; for he affirmed, by his
prayers he was healed and delivered from the evil one that vexed him: The
Minister demandsed him, By what time he had releasement? He answered, by such a
time in the precedent evening: by which the Minister found, it swas about the
same time he was in prayer to God for him; and so both Minister and party gave
glory to God for it. This was the sum of the story, and he avouched he had it
from a godly Minister of his acquaintance, who received it from the Minister's
own mouth that was the actor of it: and coming from so serious and godly man,
and especially in the public exercise, it deserves as much of an historical
faith, as any story of like kind whatsoever. And why the church should now want
miracles, I know not, seeing the primitive christians had that abundance of
them; if it is not, because that the church of Rome have of late so cheated the
world with so many legends of them, that we will now give credit to none,
because there are so many false ones coined, and so by reason of our little
faith, we are deprived of them.

But to return, that I may not seem singular in this opinion of the
continuation of Apostles in the church of Christ, which I press not as a matter
of necessary faith, but dogmatically only, I shall recite some of good
authority, to defend me from the censure of singularity herein; but for such
opinions as are only conversant about the accidentals of Religion, I would have
that of the Poet recognized, Hisce Veniam petimusque damusque vicissm.

And first D. Hammond Resolv. 6. page 351. asserted, That in the primitive
times, Bishops were usually called Apostles, and manifested, that the notion
Apostles is not always taken properly or strictly to be understood. And M.
Parker Of the Cross, part 2. 126. affirms, That the ancient church extended the
Apostolical times beyond the age of the Apostles, even to the Nicene Council:
and therefore some Authors, and persons of antiquity, are said to live
Temporibus Apostolorum, in the time of the Apostles, that lived about 300.
years after Christ; and our Bishop Jewel admits of these first five centuries
of years after Christ, to be Apostolical, pure, and uncorrupted, for the main:
and therefore I cannot see what disadvantage or inconvenience can happen to the
church of Christ, by the entertainment of this dogmatical point and tenet, but
rather much many ways by want thereof; for as I said before, what general or
universal officer does the church now enjoy, that can rightly preach abroad to
the conversion of the Gentile Nations in the world, unless under the notion and
office of an Apostle? for all other ordinary officers are merely relatives, and
cannot move or act authoritatively, beyond their own proper spheres and
relations, to wit, their flocks and churches; unless they will hereby
inevitably grant a liberty of prophecy to all gifted persons, and so rank
themselves amongst those that do it only virtute doni non authoritatis, unto
the unconverted world; and to acknowledge that it is only done virtute doni, is
to slight the authority of the church, and tacitly to conclude, that the
church has no power in it to confer such an office, whereby Christ may be
publicly taught unto the Gentile or Heathenish world; for it is clear, that
the preaching of the Word unto the world, is an act of authority, Romans 10. and
Matthew. 28.19. for how shall they preach, unless they be sent? and to prophecy,
interpret, or preach the Word, virtute doni, was only a relative duty, and
permitted and exercised within the church assemblies only, that I can collect
either from the practice of the first churches in the Acts of the Apostles, or
their Epistles; and therefore all that were sent to the conversion of the
Ethnic world, were sent ordinarily from the church (some extraordinary cases
only excepted, which never amounts unto a rule) in the notion of Apostles, as
was Paul and Barnabas, etc. and for want of the continuation of these ordinary
officers in the church, we are enforced to maintain heterodoxical opinions
concerning the authority, the power of preaching, missions, etc. and in effect,
conclude with the Papists, that there must be an universal Bishop, or at least
as absurdly, universal Elders, Pastors, Teachers, Ministers, being merely
relatives, that must have power over the whole world. From the discoursed
premises, I shall only add this argument, If the word cannot lawfully
ordinarily be preached to the conversion of the world, either by private
christians or officers now at present authorized in the churches, merely as
such officers, then surely there are some officers wanting unto the churches,
by which it may be rightly dispensed. But the major being formerly cleared, the
consequence I believe none will deny, that looks upon the preaching of the word
as an act of authority and office: therefore the conclusion is evident.

And therefore to shut up this discourse, I am very much of opinion, that all
primitive offices and officers which were of positive institutions in the
Apostles times, are moral positive laws, and still constringent and perpetual,
unless you can show their repeals. See Cawdry on the Sabbath, part 1. cap. 2.
hereon, and therefore binding unto the church in all ages. Confer hereunto that
of Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. All which indeed the church does virtually and
implicitly maintain, though they have laid by the names thereof, so necessary
do they find the acts of the said offices, though the offices themselves
nominally are thrust out of doors: When we send Preachers to our American
plantations for the discipling the poor Indians, are they not tantamount as
Apostles? When Eusebius, the centurists, and later Church Historiographers, do
historifie the acts and occurrences of the church, are they not in a qualified
sense Evangelists, when persons do interpret and enucleate dark or prophetical
Scriptures, do they not look like Prophets? When by the faith and prayers of
the faithful, corruptions are vanquished, the will's reformed, health restored,
and Satanical dispossessions accomplished, do they not carry the face of
miracles? And why then should we not entertain the offices and gifts
themselves, nominally as well as operatively and virtually, though with some
mark of distinction, as by a crescent, as unto younger brothers; acknowledging
always, and that justly, a pre-eminence of gifts and spirit in those of the
first age, and nearest unto the fountain of life and verity; but far thereby
from concluding that their offices were buried with the first founders,
together with their most excellent gifts in one arm, but still kept alive and
preserved for the good of the Church, and the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come
to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the station of the fullness of Christ. And that
none may judge me rash or presumptory in this opinion, I submit it to the trial
of Christ's churches, and add, Adhuc sub Judice lis est,

Try all things, hold fast that which is good. Let every one be persuaded fully
in his own mind, and in the mean to walk in that measure of light that he has
attained unto.

In the next place, the question may be seasonably set, how shall we know or
try false Apostles from true? Christ's ministers from antichrist's? or the
pseudo-prophets from the Orthodox? Seeing the false ones can transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and say they are Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, as well as true ones, 2 Cor. 11.13. Rev. 2.2.

This question indeed is worthy the discussion, useful both for the rectifying
of the private judgment of discretion, as well as of the public
authoritative judgment of the church in this particular; for indeed it is no
new thing, nor strange to the purest churches of God, to have false Prophets,
and false Apostles in them. In the days of Ahab, 1 Kings 18.19. the prophets of
Baal were four hundred and fifty, and of the Groves, four hundred; but the true
ones hid by Obadiah were but one hundred, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, met them too in
Babylon, Jer. 28, 29 chap. and Ezekiel. 12.2, 3. The Apostolic primitive
churches were much troubled and vexed with false Apostles, false prophets, and
false teachers also, witness 2 Cor. 11.13. 2 Pet. 2.1. Gal. 5.12. Matthew. 24.11.
and those churches of Ephesus, Pergamus, Sardis, etc. had their share also in
this trouble, by the doctrine of Balaam, Nicolaitans, Jezabel, etc. and this
God often suffers, with the sad consequences thereof, in and upon his churches,
to make the Truth more clear and precious, to try the godly, and discover
hypocrites, and to show his power and wisdom, that can produce good out of
evil, and preserve his undefiled in the midst of contagions; but the wisdom of
the Saints is to try them, and discover them, that so they may be avoided, with
all their malignant influences, and pernicious doctrines.

Now a false Apostle or Prophet may be discovered two ways: First, Either from
his false doctrine or prophecy: Or secondly, From his false call or mission.
The ancient Prophets of God, were called Seers, from the clear divine
revelations and irradiations they had of the mind of God, 2 Kings 17.13. and
this was called the Gift of Prophecy. Next, They had a clear call to exercise
that Gift. But the false Prophets, they prophesied out of their own hearts, and
follow their own spirits, and have seen nothing, as in Ezekiel. 12.2, 3. that is,
They are Prophets, because they will be Prophets; it is their own motion that
makes them prophecy, they thrust themselves upon it, and make their own wills
the highest original of their call; and therefore in the next place, the things
they prophecy are their own; what their fancies, lusts, private interests,
affections, and carnal reason suggest unto them, so their prophesies come by
the will of man, not of God, as that of 2 Pet. 1.21. and therefore however
esteemed and magnified by men, is worthless in God's account; because it only
proceeds from their own spirits, and not from God's Spirit, the true Spirit of
prophecy. Now I would not here be mistaken, as if I pressed for enthusiastique
prophesies, but to keep close to that Spirit of prophecy in the Word of God,
which will not close with man's base interests and motions, but is according to
the will of God in all things; and this is the true spirit of prophecy: and
therefore what comes from the will of man, and private Spirits, are in the
Scriptures variously branded, under the Titles of lies, dreams, vain
divinations, perverse things, the commandments of men, Mark 7.7. wisdom of this
world, 1 Cor. 2.6. another Jesus, another Spirit, another Gospel, 2 Cor. 11, 4.
Therefore Paul durst not preach any other thing but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
what he had from him by his Spirit, that he preached unto them, 2 Cor. 4.5.
Therefore we may plainly judge a false Prophet or Apostle, when he comes with
doctrines, and prophesies of his own motions, and own Spirit, and own designs,
being opposite and destructive to the Spirits doctrine of faith and godliness
within the Gospel.

Object. But will not some say, that all heretics, false apostles, and false
Teachers, will come with verbum Domini in their mouth, and pretend highly, that
their doctrines are concordant and agreeable to the word of God, or else in
vain to broach and attest them? And who more high then they in this particular;
witness the Jesuitish Sect, with their many pretended miracles, voluminous
interpretations of Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, Traditions, super-numerary
Sacraments, etc.

I confess it is the common trade with all new and false doctrine-mongers, to
amuse the vulgar with their intricate Scriptural glosses, that so thereby they
may the better swallow down the hook or poison undiscovered, within the
artificially composed bait and pill: and as the fish Sepia darkens the water
with its inky humor, to avoid the hand of the Fisher, so do these serpentine
Fry so cloud the truth with their polemical discourses, that unawares they have
brought many heretical Syncretismes upon the church of God under the pretense
of Scriptural truths and reasons: but notwithstanding their high pretense to
Scripture and Reason, both are undermined by them, and have endeavored the
overthrow thereof, by their strange conclusions, which are both false and
opposite to the truth as it is in Jesus.

Now understand that I hold not that every difference of opinion about the
externals or accidentals of Religion, is sufficient to denominate the holder
thereof a heretic, or false Teacher, for then which of the Fathers would go
clear, nor but few (if any) of their Successors? But that truly and really
denominates a heretic or false teacher, is the holding and maintaining such
errors, as directly strike at, and will subvert the foundation. Now this is the
foundation article, That ye believe in God, and in Jesus Christ whom he has
sent; for this is life eternal, John 17 3. And that doctrine that strikes at
this, either directly or consequentially, is heresy, and false doctrine: and
therefore justly were they called false Apostles, that went about to add
Circumcision unto the Gospel, and said they could not be saved without it, Acts
15. This was to nullify Christ's sacrifice and satisfaction, and to make
Christ of none effect, as the Apostle Paul tells the Galathians, That hereby
they hearken to a new Gospel: Therefore it is of plain and easy discernment,
for a competent spiritualized Christian, to make discovery of a false Apostle,
Prophet, false Teacher, or Heretic, by the doctrine he brings. For first, If
it strike at the root, or tends to the subversion of the true fear of God and
godliness, it is of Satan, and from hell. Next, If it strikes directly or
consequentially at the subversion of Christ in any of his offices, be sure that
doctrine is not of God; for there is no name, way, or practice under heaven,
whereby we may be saved, but in the name and faith of Christ, who is the alone
way unto the Father, and none comes unto him, but in and by the Son; all other
ways are not only broken reeds, but dangerous; this only in the Son is eternal
life.

2. In the next place, false Apostles and Teachers may be discerned from their
false calls or missions; and this will the better be evinced, by first
considering its contrary; the right Call of true and faithful Teachers and
Apostles of Christ; and their Call was either first from God; or secondly, from
the church: God's call is by giving abilities, gifts, and affections, suitable
to the work and office that he ordains him for: He gave some Apostles; some
Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. and so when God sent Moses, he furnished him
for the great work he appointed him to. Moses pleads his unaptness and slowness
of speech; but God said, Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee, etc.
Exodus 4.12. and so unto all the Prophets of old, God came with his Spirit upon
them, and filled them with a sufficiency thereof, before they were sent upon
their errands: God calls Apostles of Fishers, and makes them Fishers of men,
and so spirits them; and enables them, that they fear not the faces of men; nor
the learned of the world; for he tells them, Go preach, and lo I am with you to
the end of the world; that is, by a peculiar assistance, by his grace,
strength; comfort, direction, Spirit: Those that Christ calls and sends, he
gives them a full supply of all gifts and graces necessary to discharge their
respective services; Secondly, God's call gives affections and heart unto the
work; he moves strongly, by a secret impulse of Spirit on the soul that he
sends on his employments: it will not consult with flesh and blood, but will
on, as Paul did in the work of the Lord, without hesitating or securing his
carnal interests. Yet secondly, This call must proceed orderly unto the
exercise thereof, since extraordinary Gifts and Calls are ceased; the mediate
call must concur, to set the seal and authority upon the first. God's giving to
a man the call of abilities, parts, and affections to an office, do not really,
and ipso facto invest him in that office; it maybe said that he has jus ad
rem, but not jus in re; he has a potential right thereunto, but not a right of
possession: for Christ has delegated that power unto his church, of setting
their public Signature upon all Officers for his service: for whom God
qualifies with a call of abilities, he is only judged and deemed fit for the
Ministry of Christ, but not really a Minister or Officer of Christ, before he
is ordained thereunto by the church: by the first call only he may perform many
good duties and services unto the church, as an able and faithful Disciple, or
member; but by the conjunction of the other, he can do it ex officio, and
authoritatively. Therefore such as pretend their call to public offices, as
Apostles, Teachers, Pastors, etc. only as from God, and contemn the other from
the church; surely I am of judgment, as unto their mission, they are false
Apostles, and are neither called of God nor man; for if their call of abilities
was from God, as they boast of, then it would manifest it self to be of God, by
a submitting to the wisdom of God, in the order of the dispensation of his
Ordinances in his word: Therefore both conjunct together, makes up a complete
officer, and shining star within the church.

In the next place, Those that boast of their callings from the church, and
want the first call of God of abilities, they are good for nothing, but as
unsavory salt, to be cast unto the dung, useless to any service; they will not
serve so much as to make a pin in the house of God; such are false Apostles to
the purpose, fit to be spewed out of all Christian churches in the world.
Wherefore all faithful christian assemblies, should have a special care not to
admit of such who can only manifest their call from man, and not from God, in
competent gifts and parts fit for so high a calling: They cannot work at all to
edification in the Lord's house, for they want supplies to that end: We know an
Artificer can do little work without his tools or instruments; but unto those
who should be employed about spiritual buildings, if God has denied the
instrumentality of his Spirit, be sure that in stead of a Zion, such will erect
a Babel; and being ignorant where the green pastures of the Gospel lies, they
will (like idle Shepherds) either starve the sheep of their flocks, or at least
poison them with unwholesome herbage. And these I account as sufficient rules to
try and examine false Apostles and Teachers by, and to find them liars.

Object. But an Objection may here arise from him that has the first call of
abilities from God; That if I count it so necessary for him to denominate him
Orthodox in his call, to have the additional call of the church also: But then
(says he) to what church shall I repair to receive this call, seeing there are
so many that are pretenders to be the true and right churches of Christ, and
that the alone ordaining authority is in them, and not in others.

This is indeed locus lubricus, a slippery question, and I should be loath to
deal with it, lest I should offend the contrary minded, by ventilating my
judgment herein; but I profess ingeniously, it was neither men, nor parties,
self interests, nor by-affections, that did lead me first to this undertaking,
but only the general good of christians, unto which the Lord moved my heart,
with much singleness of Spirit, being clearly unbyassed, and not so overmuch
engaged to any of the new parties of these times, but that I can reserve my
judgment free to close with truth, wheresoever I can find it. And therefore I
think it not amiss, but to prosecute my first intendment, in the singleness of
heart, to endeavor to clear up truth, according to the scantle of my
judgment, not as walking in the clouds, but in plainness, and perspicuity,
though for my reward, I may have his hire that traced truth so near at the
heels, that had his teeth dashed out for his pains; but if I be a fool herein,
yet being reputed a fool, for the promotion of truth, it will be some comfort;
and if I suffer loss herein, yet this consideration will consolate: Magnis
tamen excidit Ausis.

First then to the business, Understand that the word Church in Scripture is
ordinarily taken (to avoid all criticizing upon the word) to be the company of
the faithful gathered out of all Nations, by the ministry of the Word and
Spirit; and this I conceive to be the genuine definition of the church; which
may abundantly be made good both by good authority and Scripture. Now this
church is either more improperly, first, called the invisible church: or
secondly, more properly, the visible church. The invisible church comprehends
only the elect; and seeing their number to us are unknown, therefore they are
denominated invisible. But secondly, The visible church is either to be taken
for the visible universal catholic church, or secondly, for a visible
particular political church. Now the question is concerning the church in this
last notion; for it is apparent, the invisible church as invisible, has not to
do in visible and outward ordinances: Neither secondly, the visible universal
church can by themselves or others, their representatives, convene for the
institution of Officers; for how can it stand with convenience, or with the
least show of reasonableness, that all the churches of Christ dispersed and
planted in the various and far distant corners and Islands of the world, should
either by themselves, or their representing Officers, meet together in one
catholic assembly, for the disposing and conferring of all mediate calls and
Offices? And therefore Christ has ordained that All wise order and gubernation
in and over his mystical body the church, that every part of this universal
body, I mean every particular christian assembly of the church catholic (for
every particular is part of the whole) should have within their own limits and
jurisdiction, a full power to exercise all the offices and ordinances which
Christ has given and instituted for the good and edification of his church
unto the end of the world. Neither is the church to be called catholic, in
respect of any her Officers (for we know no such office since the first
Apostles, that were so extraordinary gifted) as to have the denomination of
Catholic authority over the universal church, though they may be accounted to
have Jus ad rem, fit to be officers of any parts of the catholic church, and
so to have a potential right thereunto, yet actual they have not, before their
particular calls does invest them into Jus in re, as well as their gifts and
abilities does to Jus ad rem. But the profession of that catholic universal
faith, which is one and the same in all churches over the whole world, that
gives denomination to the universal or catholic church; therefore the results
and conclusions of combined Churches, Provincial or National, may be only
admitted as prudentially binding and obliging, as Ecclesiastical Laws and
Canons, but not as having a divine authority stamped upon them, though
agreeable to the divine truth it self; so that such constitutions are to be
received and embraced, not solely, virtute authoritatis convocation is, sed
virtute veritatis propositae; which if the same conclusions were enjoined by a
particular christian political church, were to be received by all of that
church, not only for the truths sake therein, but in submission to the divine
authority of the church that commands and institutes them; Such is the
difference between prudential Ecclesiastique Edicts, and Ecclesiastique divine
Institutions; the one is humane, and binding only prudentially, the other is
divine, and obliges conscienciously.

These considerations being cleared, I come to answer the question, to what
particular visible church must a candidate apply himself for a mediate
authoritative call and mission, to receive it rightly, and according to the
mind of God, and satisfaction of a good Conscience?

I answer, and take leave here first to distinguish and take notice between the
been esse, and the esse of a call. There may be particular churches which I
cannot deny but to be truly churches of Christ, but not true ones; that is,
they may have being in Christ by faith, as branches in the Vine, yet mixed with
much rottenness and unsoundness; and as a leprous person is a man, yet a sorry
one, so a church holding the faith, which is as the soul and life thereof, yet
entertaining much corruption and error, may be truly called a christian
church, but a sad one: So the Ministerial call does answer the constitution of
the churches from whence they proceed. Its observable, that the offsprings
constitution do follow the parents temperature; strong issues are not to be
expected of sickly parents: Fortes creantur fortibus, and. as Seneca, so in
politic bodies of particular churches; if they are found and healthy in the
faith, their off springs are strong and healthy also; then their officers and
ordinances will be lively, efficacious, and virtual; If ootherwise be with
them, they will lose much of their vigor, life, and virtue, and (as in sickly
bodies) have much to do to keep life and soul together: Hence I assert, a
person may receive a call from diverse particular churches, but the more sound
and Orthodox the church is from whence it is derived, the more orthodox and
sound is the call; though in a corrupted church there may be the true
essentials of all offices and calls, yet not so virtual, and with that
satisfaction of conscience, as in a more sound and undefiled one: But for the
particular church of Rome, as now constituted, cannot be a perfect church to
this end; nay, I much question, whether she has not by her abounding
abominations, false doctrines, and idolatries, lost the very essence of a
church of Christ, and so by consequence, the essence of all church offices, and
ordinances also: A wife and spouse, when she turns a harlot, she loses the
privileges of a wife, and ipso facto, virtually becomes a cast-out, and
divorced. So the church of Rome (though by some too favorably acknowledged to
be truly a church, though not a true one) having not only forsaken her first
love, but having committed adultery, and spiritual fornication with the Kings
of the earth, and the inhabitants of the earth being made drunk with the wine
of her fornication, Rev. 17.2. now she that has played the part of so
notorious a harlot, as that she is entitled in Scripture, v. 5. The mother of
harlots, and abominations of the earth, the great Whore, Babylon the great,
etc. how such a church, or rather, antichristian Synagogue, should give an
essence to christian officers and ordinances, it cannot enter into my judgment
or conscience to conclude, though otherwise extensive enough in charity to
erroneous and backsliding churches, and ready to acknowledge and approve
whatsoever of truth and God is in them. But that which is most admirable to
consider in this adulterate Romish church, is, that God has so far infatuated
her spiritual reason and understanding, that of all those offices and officers
we read in the Gospel, that Christ has instituted for the work of his
Ministry, and perfecting of the Saints, we can hear but of one, to wit,
Bishops; and that too, with most abundant Prelatical corruptions in the whole
Apocryphal catalogue of the officers of the Synagogue of Rome; where is it
asserted in Scripture of a secondary monstrous head of the church to be a Pope?
Where shall you read of those Princely Cardinals in the whole Treasury of God's
Word? In what page of his word shall you find the Lordlike Titles of
Archbishops, Lord Abbots, Archdeacons, etc? Where shall we find it recorded in
holy Writ, of all the rest of the rabble, and supernumerary officers of this
harlot church, as Deans, Canons, Prebends, Surrogates, Priests, Abbots,
Abbesses, Friars, Nuns, Doctors, Proctors, Sumners, cum multis aliis etc? And
again, has not this adulteress, instead of those spurious Issues* spewed out
of her bosom the sound and orthodox offices and officers of Christ? As where
shall you hear in all her Egyptian or Babylonish Territory, the sound of those
Gospel officers, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Bishops rightly qualified, etc?
Therefore sure shame unto all such that will own a derivation of office and
call from such a church, that has not only banished such officers out of her
jurisdiction, as are truly Christ's, but is become her self an adulteress, and
the mother of harlots, and also the Throne of Antichrist; and yet if any for
all this will endeavor to avouch their calls and missions good, as unto the
essentials thereof from the church of Rome; they must in the first place
maintain, that she is truly a church of Christ, as unto the essence at least,
and to separate and depart from such a church, I know not how they can defend
it without sin; therefore either be so ingenious as to acknowledge to be a true
essential christian church, and justify your calls therefrom, and hold
communion with her, or else acknowledge her to be the Synagogue of Satan, and
of Antichrist, together with all her dependencies of missions, calls, and
ordinances, which at best are but antichristian, and therefore worthily to be
rejected, removed, and loathed of all true christian hearts: Besides, we have a
command for it; Come out of her my people: and I pray, how shall we depart or
come out of her, if we communicate with her in her holy things? Indeed,
ingenious M. Baxter affirms, if the Pope be Antichrist, the case is clear, as
the good Bishops, Downam, Jewel, etc. has evinced. See his Worcestershire
agreement, p. 69, and 70.

Object. But it may be objected, How then should the first Reformers that fell
off from Rome, have a right call to the Ministerial offices of the church, if
they had it not from that church from which they departed?

I answer, Surely they never owned their call from Rome, from whence they had
departed, and had manifested to be the seat of Antichrist, but withal assert,
that their call was some what extraordinary, and some what ordinary: God in that
time of spiritual darkness, moved most powerfully and vigorously on the hearts
of the first Restorers; as Wickliffe, Husse, Luther, etc. and gave them such a
call of abilities and courage, that was not ordinary in that great first
undertaking, and breaking forth of light.

Secondly, He gave them the ordinary call of their respective churches, to be
their Pastors, Teachers, etc. So being both abilitated, and called of God and
man, they had a true and justifiable call to the Ministry of Christ. If any
one say, the Ministerial office must precede in order before the Being of the
church; I grant, that the church cannot be called or gathered without a
precedent officer, for, How shall they hear without a Preacher? Or, how shall
they preach, unless they be sent: But withal, rejoyn and super-add, that in the
first constitution of churches, extraordinary calls did supply all wants
otherwise; so I am of opinion, it may be granted that in so miserable collapsed
church estate, as the Antichristian darkness in the times of the first
Reformation was, God did supply (not with ordinary gifts only) those that he
employed in that work of the first Reformation, and in absence of the ordinary
call, God gave them an additament of parts and gifts, not ordinary, which was
to be observed in all their constant course and Ministry, carried on with a
Spirit of extraordinary courage and abilities: Witness that saying of Luther,
when he was advised by some of his friends, in respect of danger, that he
should abstain from a Diet, wherein he promised to give his adversaries a
conference; he answered, if there were as many devils at the Diet, as there
were tyles in the City, he would not fear them, but would among them. But in
rightly constituted churches, the ordinary call is not to be neglected, but to
be attended to, as a positive Law of God indispensable, and not in the least to
be slighted; but where God has dispensed, by interposing an intervening
necessity, and clear obstacle thereunto, and therein God loves obedience better
then sacrifice.

Secondly, I answer, That the first Ministerial Reformers never maintained a
personal succession of Ministry and Officers, from the Apostles lineally,
through the loins of Antichrist, but only a succession of doctrine, which in
all ages was by the invisible church maintained and asserted, sometimes with
more perspicuity and visibility then other; for if we should grant a personal
succession of officers and Ministry from the Apostles days, we must needs also
grant a perpetual and necessary visibility of a church, and consequentially, a
truth of Ministry, and Ordinances of Christ, in the Antichristian state; and
how a true christian Ministry and Ordinances can be found in that
Antichristian state, in that man of sin, that mystery of iniquity, that whore
of Babylon, as I formerly said, I know not; or how the same state can be both
merely antichristian and christian; a Whore of Babylon, and a Spouse of Jesus
Christ; a Ministry of God, and a mystery of iniquity; a Temple of God, and o^
Idols; I leave it to the Judicious to consider.

In the next place in the affirmative, I hold, That a true and Justifiable
call, respecting the essence thereof, may be received in any the churches of
Christ, holding the foundation aright, of godliness toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, though otherwise differing among themselves in
many circumstantial points, yet, de been esse, it may more comfortably be
received from one church then another, as formerly was evinced; the more pure,
spiritual, and sound the churches are, the more sound, spiritual, and edifying
their Ministerial functions are, the more loose, unsound, and corrupted the
churches are, the more corrupt and loose their Ministerial call will be:
Therefore the godliest churches, and soundest in the faith, are in the first
place, for missions, Ministerial calls and offices, to be sought and repaired
unto.

But if any one should ask me, what I thought then of the present Ministry of
England, as now constituted, who, as Presbyters, ordain one another to their
Ministerial offices, who were first ordained themselves by the late Bishops,
and so holding their ordination from them, as from true Presbyters.

I answer, and I think it not meet, but contrary to the simplicity of the
Gospel, to cloud my judgment in any thing; If the English Presbytery (as the
Helvetian and Genevan has done to their perpetual glory) had declared to the
world, that the Romish church was the antichristian whore, and so publicly
renounced all ministerial calls, as derived from her, then I grant such
ministry and Presbyters to be true Ministers and Presbyters, as unto the
essence and being thereof (though collating of offices, merely as officers or
Presbyters, without the just assent, and assistance of their churches, is not
so justifiable, as hereafter I may have occasion to evince) but if they
maintained their calls from the Bishops to be good, as by succession of
Presbyters, they have utterly nullified and undone their case, and their call
too, in my judgment; and my reason is, for what was not good and justifiable in
the fountain and first origin, cannot be made justifiable by succession in the
streams and branches: a polluted fountain cannot send forth sweet wholesome
streams; causa causae, causa causati. If that Episcopacy was antichristian, as
most of them grant, (though both name and office are warrantable in a Gospel
regulated sense) from whom they had their first mission and calls, how then
comes their calls more warrantable then that of their first Authors and
Founders? If Bishops in their ministry were orthodox and sound, how came they
to supplant them, and pull them down? Christ's ministry is not for the work of
desolating and dethroning Brethren in the same holy function, but rather for
consolidating and confirming; therefore surely there was somewhat amiss, all was
not right, or else they might have stood to this day. Witness the National
Covenant against Antichristian Prelacy, etc. But the truth is, Episcopacy, as
it was then constituted in England, was of the off spring and brood of Babylon;
they always held their call good, as ministerial Bishops, having their personal
calls from such successively, as first received it from the church of Rome, and
so could never be made good or justifiable in the succession; neither will it
suffice, as some say, to salve it, that Christ had always a church of invisible
Saints under antichrist, because they must prove themselves then to succeed
that very church, or those very invisible Saints; and not only that, but that
those very Saints were ministerial officers or Presbyters, or else all will be
in vain, according to their own concessions; for men may be Saints, but not
ministerially Saints sent, or Presbyters, who according to them, has the alone
power of ordination, and therefore in want of such true ministerial Presbyters
in the succession of the Ministry, must either unavoidably acknowledge,
according to their own principles, their ministerial offices void and null, or
otherwise plainly concede, that they have it derivatively from the church of
Rome: and what a sorry call that is, (if at least so to be called) I have
formerly evinced. And it is a maxim in Law, that quod initio vitiosum est, non
porest tractu temporis convalescere. See more hereon, Du Plessis Treat. Of the
Church, p. 3624. and Bishop Jewel Defen. Apolog. part 2. page 131. who are
witnesses without exception, manifesting the vanity of such a claim. But I
proceed to the next verse.

Verse 3. And have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have
labored, and have not fainted.
Observe from this,

Observe. That false Teachers, and false Apostles, are great persecuters of the
faithful ones of Christ. The church of Ephesus had suffered much from such
false Teachers, for Christ's sake, and his truth. The false Prophets of old
were always against the true ones, and caused them often to be smitten and
afflicted; as Micaiah was jeared by Zedekiah, Which way went the Spirit from me
to thee? 1 Kings 22. 2, 4. and that not all, but was smitten disgracefully on
the check also: Shemaiah stirred up the authority against Jeremiah the Lord's
Prophet, and would have cast him in the prison, Ier. 29.24. Yea says Ezekiel
22.25. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof; not only
like Foxes, but even like Lions, ravening the prey. These false Teachers have
been always very pernicious to Gods true church: What great persecuters Arrius
and his followers were to Athanasius and the Orthodox? They were the Priests
and false Prophets of old, that shed the blood of Christ and his Apostles,
though not by their own hands, yet by incensing the authority to do it: How
willingly would Pilate release Christ, if it were not for the outcry of the
Priests and their followers: false prophets still exclaim and fastigate the
Magistrate, and tells them, that they shall do God good service in sacrificing
the Saints, which they term heretics, or schismatiques, and troublers of
their peace and union; but when you meet such a fiery persecuting spirit in any
that pretend to Christ, judge of it whence it is by these Scriptures, Gal.
5.20. Col. 3.12, 13. So great has been the malice of false Prophets, and false
Teachers, ever against the true Saints, that they have never rested till they
have got their blood shed. It was the Pope and his false Prelates and Priests,
that first filled all Europe with blood; it was the same cursed progeny that
brought so many precious souls to the stake and faggot in Queen Mary's days,
otherwise of her self, as History testifies, of nature good enough.

Quere But it may here be queried; for what things ought we to suffer with
patience and constancy, and not to faint under the burden thereof?

I have partly formerly answered this question in the ninth verse of the first
chapter: I shall here add one word more, for the rectifying the judgment, and
keeping the conscience undefiled herein First, Know that every soul is strictly
obliged to observe all the Laws of God, whether Moral, Natural, or Positive,
and to undergo all sufferings whatsoever, rather then to dishonor God by the
breach of the former, or neglect his worship by the contempt of the latter: We
are not only bound, under persecutors to keep the conscience undefiled, in not
committing gross sins, as Idolatry, etc. but also we are obliged to perform all
our positive christian duties, though we suffer for it: as we find that Daniel
gave a testimony in this case, though to the hazard of persecution to
extremity, and would not forbear his three times a day solemn prayers, and that
upon his knees in his chamber, and his windows open toward Jerusalem; though
he knew his enemies might by that means surprise and accuse him, and cause him
to be cast into the Den of Lions; yet did he hold himself bound daily to the
Law of outward Worship, though the looking to Jerusalem was but a ceremony
ordained by God upon Solomon's prayer, 1 Kings 8.9. Also the Macchabean
Worthies did not think that persecution did, or could discharge them from the
strict observing even of the Ceremonial Law, of not eating Swines flesh, but
for it endured all extremity of torments, as the Story relates; and for it are
justly ranked among the Worthies of the old Testament, who lived and died in
faith, Heb. 11. So jealous is God not only for the preservation of his Moral
Laws, but even of those Ceremonial and Ritual Laws; that after he has
discovered his Will about them, and commands them, they forthwith become
morally positive Laws, and obligent, until their repeals from the same
authority are manifested and cleared. Therefore by this Judge, what a lax and
loose Religion does Hobbs his Leviathan prescribe unto us, to submit to any
Religion that the chief or sovereign Magistrate shall dictate to us; and that
it is not christians duty to suffer for any Article, but for that, that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah; so subjecting almost the whole will of God in morals and
positives, unto the will of man. But as to this, let us like true christians
pray, Libera (Domine) nos a malo.

Verse 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love.
We have heard the virtues and graces of the Church of Ephesus, and how she had
a just and honorable approbation for them, yet notwithstanding there is a tang
in the end, which shows some defection in her; and after all her commendations,
there is a Nevertheless follows close in the heels thereof, with somewhat to be
said against her: just as it is often said of the good Kings of Israel, in the
book of Kings, That they walked and did uprightly in the sight of God, as David
the King; but withal, there is added a but; But they departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin. Hence by the way Note.

Observe. That the purest churches, and the best christians, are not altogether
exempted from stains, but have their spots and blemishes, as well as
resplendent graces. It was the Spouse condition in Cant. 1.5. where she
describes her self, and says, I am black, but comely (O ye daughters of
Jerusalem) as the Tents of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon. Let us out survey
the first churches and christians, to elucidate and confirm this truth; and
seeing they stood nearest the light, even the Sun of Truth, and his Twelve
illustrious radiating Signs, (his Apostles) in my judgment, they are to be
reputed the soundest, and the purest; yet see whether we read not of their
Maculae, or spots, as well as of their shining graces. The church of Corinth
was a famous church, yet she had her failings, contaminating the holy feasts,
and their Agapees with surfeiting and drunkenness, and besides, the foul errors
of false Apostles, as denying the Resurrection, etc. The church of Galatia was
not much inferior in her wantonnizing after liveless ceremonial fancies, and
pressed them, as necessary (with Christ) unto salvation; and when Paul opposed
them herein, for whose sake they once were ready to pull out their eyes to do
him good, yet now for crossing their capricious whimsies, is become their
greatest adversary. The churches of Ephesus, Pergamus, etc. had their several
encomiums for their graces, yet there were some things chargeable on them, for
waxing cold in their first love, for admitting the Doctrine of Balaam,
Nicolaitans, Jezabel, etc. If we descend from bodies collective to individual
persons, we shall find the same lot befall unto all; consider Noah, Job, David,
Peter, etc. but I desire not to rake up the faults of the Saints, which are not
left upon record to encourage to sin, but to be presidents of the grace of God,
and as examples for encouragement unto repentant sinners.

Because thou have left thy first love.] Some difficulty seems in these words;
whether by first love be intended Christ whom the church of Ephesus had left?
Or, that first ardent affection and zeal which she bore to Christ at her first
conversion? The latter Interpretation to me is clear, Because the church of
Ephesus had not withdrawn her self from the faith of Christ, as is evident by
the two precedent verses; for it was for Christ's sake, and his truth, that she
had suffered much, both from wicked persons, and wicked teachers; therefore, as
long as her faith was sound, she could not be said to have left Christ, as her
first Love, and taken a new love, or new object of her faith: But that for
which she is charged as faulty, is, that she has left her first love, that is,
her first zeal, and fervent affections, which she bore to Christ and his
Ordinances at her first conversion; and this is plain from the next verse,
where she is commanded to repent, and to do her first works. From hence observe,

Observe. That it is frequently seen, that many true and faithful christians and
churches, do much abate and fail in their first zeal and love to Christ and his
ways, in a short progress of time after their conversion, or from their first
entertainment of the Truth. Paul did much complain of the church of Galatia in
this particular, at their first entertainment of the truth, they were so full
of affections and zeal, that they were even ready to pull out their eyes to do
Paul service, who was their great Apostle; yet shortly after he complains of
them, as if they had entertained another Gospel, and exclaims; O foolish
Galathians! who has bewitched you? It seems Ephesus was much faulty herein;
and so were diverse others of the primitive churches; and therefore the Apostles
were very urgent and pressing in their preachings, to maintain love alive, and
of the three eminent Gospel graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, charity has the
precedence, First, in regard it has a more extensive object then the other
two; faith and hope respects only God, and eternal glory as their object,
charity has not only God for its object, but the Saints also. Secondly, it
has the precedence, in that love abides in glory, when faith and hope
cease: Thirdly, it is as the soul and life unto other graces: faith it self
is but as a dead carcass, unless it be enlivened by love. To know and entertain
the Gospel and its truth, is an excellent gift and quality, yet if we do not
(...), Receive the truth in the love thereof; we may know so much as may justly
condemn us for our unproficiency, but not save us, for want of love. Indeed I
could wish that this were still a paradox, That the love of christians is waxed
cold; for it was once a hard saying, to be a christian, and to want love; I
have read that some christians of the first ages after Christ were so famous
amongst their heathen adversaries for this grace of love, that they were ready
even to die one for another; whereof their very enemies taking notice, with
approbation, when they would commend the love of any, they would say
proverbially, that it was like the love of christians: but now, O christians!
Quantum mut ast is ab illo! It was far otherwise with you at your first coming
to the truth, then it is now; then every one loved one the other for the truths
sake At the first breaking out of light in England from under Antichristian
clouds and darkness, every one had his breast on fire for the promotion of
truth and godliness; Presbyterian, Independent, and Anabaptist, were then all
under the notion of Puritans, and Non-conformists, zealous for the common cause
of advancement of Christ and his Gospel: what is the cause that ye have now
left your first love, both toward God, and toward one another? Is God and
Truth grown less lovely then at first? Or were you mistaken then in the right
objects of your love? I rather fear, of the both, that the God of the world
has blinded you, when ye seek to advance every one his particular interest by
rearing one the other most uncharitably, as bears, not as christians; who are
meek, full of bowels of compassion, easily to be entreated, etc. Have ye not
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Spirit, one Scripture, one common hope of
Salvation? and yet look upon one the other, as the Jews did on the Samaritans,
and that for some small differences in circumstantials of Religion: It would
better besuit christians to be like the good Samaritan, that will be ready to
pour oil and wine into the wounds of their afflicted brethren, not vinegar and
gall, which was the work of those that piercd Christ, not of his followers and
disciples.

Tantane Ira Fratrum? --
Sed praestat motes componere fluctus.
In the next place, all sorts of christians have sadly experienced the truth of
this position, that they have forsaken their first love. Where is the love of
the Presbyterian to his Geneva model, as if it had been the very Elixar of all
church Discipline? Was he not even fire and sword against Episcopacy, that
stood in his way as a bar to the advancement of his Form; and now Episcopacy
being down, and the aspect of authority benign toward them, yet how remiss
and cold are they in setting up their Elders? I believe they fear the Iure
Divine of it, and therefore will not move a foot farther, without a Sovereign
hand for to support it: but all this shows they have much abated in their first
love. Next, What is become of the ardent affections, and frequent private and
public exercises and assemblings of the Independents? Were they not the only
men in the world, in their first appearance, that carried the face and
judgment of Saints, yet now how remiss and cold they are grown, all see? How
formal, or rather carnal, are some of them become, that were once as fire in
the hearth, and in the sheaf, ready to warm and inflame all that came by, by
their ardent affections and duties? Yea, are not many of them, that would not
be satisfied otherwise, but with hewn stones for the building of the Temple,
evidentially visible Saints for the House of the Lord, now content, and sit
down satisfied in a parochial congregation of a mixed multitude, the tenth
whereof, if so much be good wheat amongst the pile of chaff that answers that
part which they have for their maintenance, they may account themselves most
happy ^ And lastly, How is the great zeal of the Anabaptists (so called)
slaked? There was a time when they would compass Sea and Land to make a
proselyte, at their first appearance, how strict they were to Discipline and
Order, that they might justly be called above all others, the Disciplinarians?
Yet now how remiss they are unto it, all know, by a too large toleration of
errors amongst them? And how flat their zeal is for the promotion of the
truth, all see: yea strange how they are changed from their first principles,
who at first loved one the other as christians, and for the Truths sake; yet
now who more worldly or haughty then they? Therefore seeing ye have all come
short of your duty, and made a defection from your first love, take the
exhortation of the Spirit in the next verse.

Verse 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
thy first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.
The Spirit sets a (...), or Memento, home on the affection and zeal-fallen
church of Ephesus, and to re-mind her of her first state and condition, when
she had a greater measure of zeal and love both toward God and his Saints,
then now she had; that that consideration might so work upon her, as to make a
renovation in her affections, and to be-think her self of a recovery of that
measure of zeal and love which once she had, and bring forth such fruits and
good works as formerly she did, as the true effects and issues of that love, or
else etc. Hence Note.

Observe. That the contemplation of grace, is the only Gospel motive unto true
repentance. The commemoration of God's former gracious dealing unto a
backslidden soul, will operate very strongly (if not judicially hardened) to
recall him unto his God.

The straying prodigal experienced this truth in himself, Luke 15.17. when he
came to himself, and considered, how that many hired servants in his fathers
house had bread enough, and yet he starving for hunger, it made him to reflect
upon that full and gracious condition when he was as an obedient son with his
father, which moved him to set on the resolution to be a Trewant no longer, but
to arise, and go unto his Father, and say, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee. If any thing will break the course of sin, and recall
the heart unto its first love, the consideration of the former gracious
dealings of God with it, will effect it: It will reason thus with it self, was
it not better with me when I kept close to God, then now it is since I have
broken with him? Was not my soul more at peace within it self, when I was more
zealous of God's glory, and of keeping his commands, then now when I am more
remiss, and colder in my affections, both toward God and christian duties? Was
not then my food more spiritual, and my delights more heavenly, then now when I
am clogged with the vanities of this world, and the bewitching lusts thereof:
Had I not then a freer access to God, and of a freer spirit in my approches,
crying Abba, Father, then now, having strayed from him, instead thereof having
a spirit of bondage, and of fear? In short, when I kept close with God, did not
a face of heaven (as it were) appear in all my performances and relations; but
now having departed from him, all is turned into hell and bitterness against
me? Surely those considerations of grace formerly received, will work more upon
an ingenious spirit, then any thundering Legal threats whatsoever: yet I add, if
these will not do, Christ has another course and method, and can come
judicially, and remove his candlestick from amongst such obstinate and
unrepentant sinners.

Observe. 2. Another Note is, That true Gospel repentance consists not only in
changing the mind, but of practice and conversation also. (...), Rescipicite,
to wax wiser, or repent, do not only consist to grow wiser in the judgment,
but in the choice of the practical affections also. If the will be not right,
as to its objects, as well as the judgment, it will not denominate a true
repentant. The church of Ephesus was right, as to her faith, for which she
suffered in patience, yet her practice and affections were not straight, for
which she had the check, and commanded to do the first works, works of love,
works of charity, works of piety, which formerly she had been zealous in: In
true repentance there is a Terminus a quo, and Terminus ad quem. Turn ye, turn
ye every one from the abomination of his ways: there is the terminus a quo: but
this is not all, a negative righteousness will not serve turn, but there must
be Terminus ad quem, a positive righteousness also: There must be a doing of
the first works of holiness and godliness toward God, and of love and
righteousness toward all; but more especially toward the household of faith:
These are the adequate ingredients of true and Gospel repentance. It is a gross
deceit in many, that think that they have believed sufficiently, and they have
repented sufficiently, when they have altered their judgment, or at least,
their weathercock opinion, from one external form unto another; as when an
Episcopal man is become for a Presbytery. O most kind and benign Sunshine,
quoth he; but when a Presbyterian turns Independent in judgment, he presently
cries out, that heaven is opened unto him; never considering that the kingdom
of heaven does consist in godliness and righteousness, but in outward forms of
worship, which if rightly regulated, something of each might be rightly admitted
to make a just composure. In the next place, some think their repentance very
sound, when they have changed one error for another; when of an Arminian or
Pelagian, are become Antinomists, rightly so termed, denying and opposing the
morality of the Law, as a rule of duty obliging unto christians: when of an
Arrian, or Antitrinitarian, are become Tridheites, or worshippers of three Gods
etc. So corrupt is the heart of man, that will make his own opinion an Idol,
and all that looks not that way, nor brings any flowers to that sacrifice (and
yet otherwise apparently gracious) shall neither have the title of a true
believer, or a repentant soul, amongst them: Therefore with all such I would
leave this Scripture, as a Signet upon their finger, Remember from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works.

Observe. 3. Another Note from the authority of the person, (Christ) that gives
this memento, is, That Christ's commands in his Word, should be very powerful
and efficacious, to bring us unto repentance. Shall Christ be our Anamnestes,
or Remembrancer, and set our faults before us, by his Spirit in the Word, and
shall not our hearts be molten for it? Shall he call from heaven to us in his
ever-living word of Prophecy, and shall we not intend, or hearken to that
heavenly vision? He gave but one glance on Peter, reflecting on his unkindness
and denial, which caused Peter to turn aside, and weep bitterly: And shall he
not only look upon us with his daily providential acts of goodness and mercy,
which leads unto repentance, but give us line upon line, and precept upon
precept, and yet not return by repentance: It is the sign of most obdurate
hearts, and of stiff-necked sinners.

But some will say, We want wills to it, and if Christ gave wills as well as
commands, we should readily follow him.

I answer, first, Where Christ lays his commands on his chosen ones, he also
gives there the first grace of his Spirit to enable to obey that command; and
we know the Spirit may be opposed, and the Spirit may be quenched, and is so
often by our own defects, and by reason of the abundancy of corruptions; so
that the want of wills to good things, proceed from our own base and corrupt
wills, not for want of power from Christ, who commands us to them; but take
notice, though the operations of the Spirit may by the Elect themselves be
opposed, darkened, and quenched partially, but not totally and finally, but at
last will get the victory, in bringing forth the work of God unto perfection.

Secondly, It is in vain for persons in an ^nregenerate state to complain for
want of wills, for before Christ moves thereon by his Spirit of grace, they
cannot rightly will any good thing or work; but the first grace being given to
any, and after follows a complaint of want of will to holy performances, it is
a good sign, that there is a good will unto it, or else there would not be a
complaint, which is only for a greater measure, not for a total want of will
unto it.

Thirly, and lastly, Understand that Christ often exhibits his commands of
faith and repentance, even to the reprobate themselves, to manifest unto them
their duty, the due performance whereof, they have in their original first
parent lost and forfeited, and God is not obliged to restore it, seeing the
vindication of Gods justice is as dear unto him as his mercy; and therefore
when Christ in his Ministry bids such persons to believe and repent, they
never complain of want of wills unto the work, but rather add sin unto sin, in
a more obdurate unbelief. But to proceed.

Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent.] As if Christ had said unto the church of
Ephesus, if thou will not return unto me, and unto thy first love, by this
gracious warning I have given thee, be sure I will come in judgment against
thee, and that shortly; and though my appearance as yet unto thee (whiles there
is hopes of thy recovery) be in the likeness of the Son of man, one of thy own
nature, and compassionate toward thee, yet know, if thou will not repent, and
do thy first works of love, zeal, and charity, I shall forthwith come in
another like resemblance, having mine eyes as a flame of fire, and a two-edged
sword proceeding from my mouth, and destroy thee and thy church state, and that
quickly, unless thou speedily amend thy faults.

Observe. Hence Note, That a speedy repentance is the only means to avert the
judgments of God from falling upon a church or people. Ahab's repentance,
though it was but hypocritical and unsound, yet stayed God in executing his
judgments on him. The repentance of David and Solomon for their Adultery and
Idolatry, stayed God's hand against them; and many others of the Kings of
Israel experienced the goodness of God in this particular, and by reason of
their sincere endeavors of returning unto God, by demolishing their
abominations and idolatries, God promised them he would not bring the evil in
their days, which he had denounced against his Idolatrous people the Jews, but
should be gathered in peace unto their fathers. The Ninivites upon their
repentance in sackcloth and ashes, on Jonas preaching, had a longer date set to
their political state and City: and this repentance too ought to be speedy; for
who knows how long God will suffer (though long often he does) before he sends
forth the unevitable decree of execution: As God is merciful, slow to anger,
slow to wrath, yet know, that God is also just, and that one attribute is as
dear unto him as another; the duty we see is presently required, and we know
not, though God defers the execution, whether he will give us hearts again unto
the work, after we have once slighted his gracious calls and invitations
thereunto: It was an old Proverb, Sero sapiunt Phryges, which may be our lot,
if we defer too long: and we know that to be true, that sera penitentia raro
vera: and consider how it was too late for Jerusalem to howl and cry after she
had slighted the many gracious invitations of our Savior unto repentance, who
would have gathered her, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wing: When
Titus the Roman General had cast a Trench against her walls, and bolted up her
gates by the siege of a potent Army, Christ tells the church of Ephesus, and
the rest of those Sister Asian churches, if they do not repent, he will come
quickly in judgments against them, as indeed he did in few ages after, by the
incursions of barbarous Nations, and quite removed their churches from amongst
them.

Quere. But is not this a Legal teaching, to denounce wrath and judgments on
non-amendment, or for want of repentance?

I answer, Such as object thus, are much mistaken; for repentance is not
strictly a Legal duty, but a duty Evangelical, and of grace: for the Law admits
of no repentance: for it says, The soul that sins, shall die: It is the
Gospel of grace alone, that says Repent, and live; that is, Return from thy
wicked ways, and accept of Christ as thy Lord, Savior, and Teacher, and thou
shall be saved: The Law is inexorable, and exacts the whole satisfaction as the
penalty of the breach thereof, which was fully laid on Christ, and satisfied by
him; It is grace alone that accepts the will for the deed, and admits of
repentance in the sinner, whiles the Surety has completely satisfied the
justice and rigor of the offended Law.

Secondly, What God has sanctified, no man should call unholy; for has not
Christ commanded this duty of repentance very abundantly in the Gospel, and
very often to be interpreted for faith it self, and shall we count it Legal?
Repent, and be baptized, for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. Repent, or ye
shall all likewise perish, etc. But I confess there is no little difference
between Repentance under the Gospel administration, and the old Testament
administration; under the one, the doctrine thereof is more clearly taught,
upon more evident terms of grace: In the other, more darker, and on more
sensitive and carnal grounds. As Christ under the Law was veiled under clouds,
and typical ordinances, but under the Gospel, more clearly preached unto all;
so his doctrines of grace, faith, and repentance, were not by far so radiant
before the days of his manifestation in the flesh, as after; so the difference
lies in the degrees of clearness, not of the verity and truth of the doctrine.

Quere 2. But again some may query, Is not this to join Repentance unto Christ
in some causality unto salvation, and to set them both, as it were, in a joint
commission, though somewhat subordinately unto that great end?

Indeed this is a question worthy the clearing, which many unskilful ignorantly
handle, not knowing how to divide the Word of God aright, do miserably stumble
in it. Understand, for clearing of this in the order of causes, God's free love
is the first moving and predeterminating cause unto life and salvation, Christ
next is the alone procuring and meritorious cause; and as Christ has purchased
the Elect unto himself by his death and merit; so as a King, or a Sovereign
Legislator, he sets up a Royal Law for his Redeemed people to walk by; to wit,
that of Repentance toward God, and Faith unto Jesus Christ. Now he sets not
Faith nor Repentance in any causality with himself in this great work of life
and salvation, this is only but a principal part of his revealed Will and Law,
that he will have his redeemed ones to walk in; he does not require those
graces in them, as cooperating, or efficient causes unto life or
justification, nor as conditions, properly so called, for on the performance of
every condition, by virtue of compact, it has a legal influence, merit, and
causality unto the production of its end: Neither indeed is there any such
compact in the Word since the fall of Adam, that on the performance of any
conditions, be they never so Evangelical, as Faith, Repentance, etc.
Justification, or life, was promised thereupon, only the condition of the old
covenant between God and man, was death upon disobedience, and life upon
obedience: Man having forfeited the one by his disobedience, Christ steps in as
the Mediator of a better and surer covenant, and makes his soul an offering
unto death, which was the full performance of the penal condition due unto the
sinner, and so absolutely purchased a blessed seed unto himself, and on such
stable conditions performed altogether by himself, that they cannot possibly
forfeit their inheritance, being in so sure a hand, and are still heirs, though
whiles under years they differ not from servants; that is, whiles under sin,
and unregeneracy, are still in bondage, until faith come to discover their
heirship, and interest unto the purchased possession; and in the mean time, by
evil works, they are as enemies, strangers, and aliens to God, and the
commonweal of Israel, according to the old Legal distinction, they have
notwithstanding Jus ad Rem, though not Jus in Re.

And though I deny faith or repentance to be conditions (properly so called) in
the covenant to life or justification, yet I say, they are required in the same
new Law, Covenant, or Testament, as conditions, improperly so called, or as
conditions in order preceding one the other, and as benefits of the same
covenant: But seeing the word condition is of late glown so rampant, and
overmuch perfumed with the Spiceries of Rome, I shall willingly let it lie, as
that other term of merit, which in their first births were more innocent, and
inoffensive, and shall rather call them as duties and qualities required in the
new covenant by Christ, as necessary in all his redeemed ones to life and
salvation: And when I say they are duties necessary, I would be understood, not
absolutely necessary, but virtate precepti, and virtute medii, unto all such as
are capable of their duties, but not unto Infants or Idiots, that want the use
of reason; for to believe and repent, are acts of the will and understanding,
which Infants or Idiots are not capable of; and therefore we exempt them from
salvation, dying so, if the condition of faith was absolute and peremptory, as
Augustine once dreamed, and therefore was called durus pater Infantum: and all
others must conclude the like harsh judgment on them also, that hold actual
faith and repentance as absolute necessary conditions unto justification and
life.

But again, If it were true what the Arminian says, That none are saved but on
the condition of the To credere, or act of faith, and none damned but for
unbelief; then I reassume, that some persons according to this, are neither
damned nor saved; for Infants dying such, as aforesaid, cannot have (by reason
of their incapacity) the act of faith nor unbelief, which is a privation by
refusal or resistance of the truth made manifest: Indeed such absurdities do
they incur, that assert such absolute conditions in the covenant of grace to be
done on man's part; yet I say, they are absolute and peremptory on Christ's
part to be performed, and he having fully finished all the conditions for his
elect ones by his death (though some of them dying Infants) yet are saved by
virtue of that everlasting covenant made with Christ, in, for, and on the
behalf of all his chosen ones, of whom he will not lose one which the Father
has given him.

From this precedent discourse you may plainly conclude, that though I grant
repentance a necessary Gospel duty, and for diverse good ends it is ordained so,
yet do not in the least place it in any subordinate causality, jointly with
Christ, in the work of our salvation, but only as our duty, thorowfare, or way
thereunto, commanded and instituted by Christ, as part of his new Law, that he
himself might have the pre-eminence in all things, and the name and glory alone
of our salvation. And this hereon shall suffice. See more hereon v. 23.

Observe. 2. Another Note hence is, That the doctrine of judgments and threats,
is a very useful Gospel doctrine.

When Christ has passed with his doctrine of grace, and offers a reconcilement
freely, if the sinner will but turn from his iniquities, and repent, and yet
the sinner will refuse his gracious terms, he has another burden to tell him,
that after he has refused so great salvation, he can cast both soul and body
into hell fire: the most obdurate and incorrigible child must have the sharpest
rod; a smile, or a love-token will work upon the ingenious, but says Solomon,
a rod is for the back of a fool. Neither is judgment a strange work unto
Christ; for as he is related unto his church, as a Savior, and a Father,
respecting his grace and loving kindness, so he is as well a Judge, and a
Legislator, and so may justly chastise his church, as contemners and
transgressors of his Royal Law. If he calls us to repent, which is part of his
new covenant Law, as he did the church of Ephesus, and yet go on obstinately in
sin, justly may he remove his candlestick from amongst us: If his Lamb-like
quality of mercy and grace will not invite us to return, he can roat as the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which will cause us to call upon the mountains to
fall upon us, and to hide us from the presence of the Lamb: wherefore they are
much mistaken, that would shut out as useless, the doctrine of threats and
judgments from the Gospel, which are to be preached soberly, and conditional,
not peremptory and absolute; for if there were not a curb, and fear of loss and
punishment, the wanton straying soul would hardly be reclaimed, though the more
tender hearted the apprehension of grace and love might reclaim and mollify.

Observe 3. Another Observation is, To take off God's candlestick, or to
unchurch a Nation or people, is the most grievous of all God's judgments.

Christ could not afflict the church of Ephesus with a greater loss, then to
remove his church from among them: for hereby,

First, Privatively, His glory and special presence of grace and favor is
withdrawn.

Secondly, The guidance, light, and comfort of his holy Spirit is departed.

Thirdly, His Ordinances are all defiled and vanished.

Fourthly, His special protection is withdrawn also.

Fifthly and lastly, Instead of his gracious presence, they have his presence
in wrath, judgments, and fiery indignations; Instead of his Spirit of light
and comfort, they have the dismal spirit of darkness, error, and despair;
instead of Christ's holy Ordinances, they have the Divel's sacrifices; and
instead of God's special protection over them, they are carried captives by
Satan to all foul and unclean lusts whatsoever. This is the most sad condition,
when God does unchurch a people for their sins: witness the habitation of these
seven Asian churches, wherein the Synagogue of Satan in Mahumatism and
Heathenism is set up in the room of Christ's holy Doctrine and Ordinances, and
all for their impenitency and obstinacy in their loud crying abominations: and
therefore I cannot too often recognize this verse to backslidden souls,
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works; or
else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent.

Verse 6. But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans,
which I also hate.
Christ goes on, and tells the church of Ephesus, that though she was justly
faulty for her defection in her first love, yet she had this commendable point
in her to be added unto her other commendable graces, That she abhorred the
abominations of the Nicolaitans both in judgment and practice, which also was
most hateful and abominable unto Christ himself. Now the Sect of the
Nicolaitans, as all Ecclesiastique history testifies, took the denomination
from Nicholas, a Deacon of Antioch; but whether he was their leader himself, or
whether they falsely pretended him the first founder of their heresy, is
disputable: Indeed Ireneus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius, are of opinion, that he
himself was their leader; yet Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius. lib. 3. do
say, That the Nicolaitans had falsely pretended the name of Nicholas to their
heresy, as M. Baxter asserts in his book of Infidelity, p. 132. However, we
see their heresies were abominable; for Christ hated them: and their heretical
practices and opinions consisted (as Antiquity testifies) under the name of
christians, to hold and practice all manner of corporal obscenities and
adulteries lawful, and all manner of spiritual fornication and idolatries also;
and which they grounded on this wicked principle, That there was no difference
in good or evil, but only in opinion; and therefore took liberty to all sorts
of wickednesses. And that these were chief heads of their heresies, is somewhat
evident from verse 14, and 15. of this chapter, where the doctrine of Balaam
and Nicolaitans are joined and compared. Now we know, that Balaam's wicked
doctrine was, To lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to entice
them to offend God both in corporal and spiritual whoredom, in the business of
Baal Peor, that so by offending him, they might perish. Numb. 25. compared to
31.16. The Nicolaitans were this false Prophet's true disciples, and were true
branches of the Gnostics of old, who pretended strange and unknown high
mysteries, and discoveries of light, which plain and orthodox christians never
heard of; as many of the same spirit now a days pretend unto, on purpose to
amuse the simple, and to draw them into the snare of Satan: and how well these
filthy dreamers amongst us, do correspond with their elder Brethren, the
Nicholaitans, compare the heresies and blasphemies of some of these times, with
that description of the Nicholaitans, made by M. Baxter out of historical
Antiquity, page 129. of his said book of Infidelity: speaking of the
Nicholaitans, whose inhumane filthiness (says he) was such, and their divelish
conceits so many and vile, that I will forbear to mention them; only this, They
made themselves like Christ, and some of them to be equal to him, and some the
same with him: That good and evil differed not in deed, but in men's opinions;
they worshipped Images, they lived in such horrid ways in lust and filthiness,
as is not to be named: Epiphanius himself unhappily fell in amongst them, and
knew their ways from their own mouths and actions, but happily escaped when
they would have drawn him to their lusts; They have multitudes of amazing words
and notions, like our Behmenists, that would bring a man into a suspicion of
witchcraft to read them: They used witchcrafts, and several sorts of
enchantments, and kept devils in familiarity with them, that by their means
they might increase their knowledge and power, Thus far M. Baxter. And he
professes afterward, that it is not one, nor two, but all church histories of
those times, that makes mention of them, do say the same things; and if they
will read Epiphanius himself, who once fell in amongst them, they will see much
more. Having thus far described the Nicholaitans, and their heresies, in the
next place take this Note.

Observe. That the more pure, sound, and undefiled the church is, the devil is
most solicitous to raise heresies and schisms in it.

How busy the devil was in those Asian churches in the Apostles times, to
bring in the foul heresies of the Nicolaitans, the doctrines of Balaam and
Jezabel, if possibly he could, so to entice them to sin against their God, that
he might have his purpose on them; but when the church became more corrupted,
tyrannical, and antichristianized, under the headship of the Bishop of Rome,
their heresies were less, and their schisms fewer, then in the primitive purer
times; for Satan would rather hereticate and poison the whole, then a part; and
indeed the devil has his design accomplished, when he sees a church rushing
onward to their own destruction, by the multitude of their corruptions; and
amongst such, he has no need to lay any of his stratagems of heresies and
schisms, but only to let them in peace and security, and they will hasten on
fast enough unto their own destruction: Therefore hence, unto me it is a good
argument, that we have true and faithful churches of Christ amongst us, and
that the true doctrine of the Gospel is sincerely preached and taught amongst
our churches, or else Satan (the envious one) would not be so ready to sow also
his tares of heresies and error, as he does at present amongst us, to
overthrow (if he may) our hopes and harvest. It seems to me but a sad saying,
when some Ministers affirm, they give thanks to God that their churches are not
troubled with the heresies of the times: though I confess heresies are great
evils, and to be fervently deprecated from all Christ's flocks; yet when they
say they are all at peace, it is much to be feared, that there is another
strong man keeping the house besides Christ; for, be sure when Christ comes to
bruise Satan's head, he will bite Christ's heel; and no sooner is the man-child
Christ born in the souls of his faithful ones, but the Dragon will presently
send forth floods of water of heresies, errors, and persecutions, if possibly,
to destroy both it and them, Rev. 12.15. and this proceeds from that
everlasting enmity set between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the
Serpent, even from the beginning, Genesis 3.15. and will continue, until he be
bound up in everlasting chains of darkness: and therefore the purer the church
is, the busier will Satan be to undermine them if he may.

Observe. 2. Another Note is, That all heresy is defiling and abominable.
Christ hates it, and his church hates it; and therefore surely it has some
poisonous and pestilential quality in it; sometimes it amounts so far, as to
defile both judgment and practice jointly, as it did in the Sect of the
Nicholaitans: And this it most frequently does, unless in such a time, when the
appearance of an Angel of light will seem better with Satan's designs: for if
the Theoretique part of the understanding be not sound, the practique can
hardly be straight; where the light of the eye is darkened, our feet will soon
stumble: and the will and judgment are so linked together, that some make the
will to be the last act of the understanding, or the practique part of the
judgment: so nearly they are related into oneness, that the contagion of the
one, will be the defilement of the other.

Yet secondly, Satan is so serpentine and crafty, that often he can restrain
the will, and put on the forms of an Angel of light, and set on a stricter garb
of holiness and mortification then ordinary, even unto an Erenetique monastical
conversation, denying the lawful comforts of humane life and society, that he
may make the greater impression to deceive thereby, as he does in some of the
crafty deceiving heretics of these days: Therefore it is not only the duty of
all Christ's faithful ones, but their honor, and glory, and their crown, to
abominate and hate all such deeds and mysteries of Satan, even as they are
abominated and hated by Christ himself.

Verse 7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches: To him that overcomes, will I give to taste of the Tree of life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.
The ear is the chief instrument or organ by which we hear, and the Spirit sets
it here metonimically for hearing it self; such a hearing or right
understanding as is mentioned in Romans 10.17. as comes by the Word of God, by a
sagacious and diligent prepending of the mind of God in the word, stirred up
and warmed by the influence of the same Spirit; and such a hearing, or such an
ear, is here called, as competently fit for the comprehension of the mind of
the Spirit in these prophesies. Hence Note,

Observe. That there is chiefly required a spiritualized and enlightened reason,
and a well ordered judgment, for the discovery of the mysteries of this book
of Prophesies.

Holy and good affections, without sound knowledge, will not reach it. It is
for him that has understanding, that must count the number of the Beast, Rev.
13.18. God has given diversity of gifts to his Church, for the profit of the
whole: some one is excellent for an interpretation of Tongues, another for
Prophecy, another for exhortation, another for a Psalm, another for
gubernation and discipline, another is excellent about justification, another
about the doctrines of holiness and sanctification, others again are for
unlocking prophetical deeps and mysteries etc. So every one has their variety
of gifts and excellencies, that the body may be completed, and made perfect,
by the co-assistance and harmony of the whole. Let it not seem strange, that
this book is dark and difficult to the supine and lazy christian, it is only
for him that has an ear, to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

What is meant by the Spirit that speaks unto the churches, is to be enquired
into.

It cannot be understood, neither Angel, nor the holy Spirit, personally
considered; for in the next immediate verse, the same Spirit is called the
first and the last, which was dead, and is alive. Now this must be Christ, who
appeared unto John, not in his humanity, but spiritually, in his Deity, under
the figure and likeness of the Son of man. Review v. 13. of the first chapter,
more fully to this purpose. And here he is called the Spirit, to denote

Observe. That Christ is one and the same, not only in properties and qualities
with the holy Spirit, but in essence also.

He has the incommunicable properties of the Father in the words in the next
verse, and precedent chapter, v. 4, 8, and 17. who is the first and the last:
In verse. 18. of this chapter, he is called, The Son of God; and in this verse,
he is called, The Spirit: all making up this harmonious conclusion and truth,
that Christ is one and the same, everlasting Father, Son, and Spirit, our God
blessed for ever.

Observe. Another Note from these words are, That every wise and judicious
christian, ought to be very intent and enquiring into the mind of God, in and
about all his providential dealings and discoveries toward his churches abroad
in the world.

What God speaks unto his churches, is not of a private interpretation, but of
a public concernment unto all others. If God have dealt in judgment and
righteousness with those Asiatique churches, and for their abounding iniquities
unrepented of, has anathematized, and utterly unchurched them all; think not
that we shall go free, if we be found in the same transgressions with them.
There were other churches too, as well as these, once famous for their faith
and piety, now become the Dens of Dragons, and habitation of all unclean
spirits: Therefore to avoid the stroke of divine judgment by a timely
repentance, how behoveful and necessary it is for him that has an ear, to hear
what the Spirit says unto the churches: For be sure, if we run the same course
of sin with them, we shall drink the same cup of indignation with them also; if
we continue obstinate, and repent not: for God is the same immutable Being,
just, and righteous, and a hater of all iniquity, today, and for ever.

But to him that overcomes, that is, holds out against the spiritual assaults
of Satan, and so overcome his temptations, will I give (says Christ) to eat of
the Tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Here we have the tryumphant Christian Conqueror described, together with his
Crown, and Reward: To him that overcomes, that is, the Conqueror: The reward
is, To eat of the Tree of life in the Paradise of God.

But if it should be asked, wherein should a christian combatant overcome, to
denominate him a true conqueror, and to overcome indeed?

I answer, As God has furnished us with variety of spiritual weapons and
armory from himself, which are mighty through God to pull down the strong Holds
of Satan; so we have diverse and various stratagems, and wyles of his, to meet
with in our christian warfare here beneath: we have not only to fight with our
corruptions within, but we must meet with diverse assaults of Satan also from
without; enticements and allurements to false Doctrines and Worships: and if we
comply not, we may be sure to meet his buffettings from without, in revilings,
reproaches, afflictions, etc. and often, as Paul did, fight with unreasonable
and bestial men, as he did after the manner of Beasts at Ephesus. So that he
that overcomes, to have right to the Tree of life, must go farther then
overcome the assaults and temptations of Satan, as unto the breach of moral
duties; but to denominate him a complete Conqueror, he ought to have a special
eye and regard unto Satan's more spiritual and refined designs and assaults,
which lies as it were, against the very life of a christian, which he ushers in
by false doctrines, and abominable heresies; which he lays as a stumbling block
in the ways of God's children; as wicked Balaam did set a snare of Idolatry and
Adultery, to make the children of Israel fall, that God might be wroth against
them, and so judge them in his displeasure: So Satan sets up his standard under
the heresies of the Nicolaitans, anti-Trinitarians, anti-Scripturists,
idolatrizing Antichristians, etc. that if possibly he can draw the faithful
ones of Christ to comply with them, and to receive their marks in their hands
and foreheads, then he has the accomplishment of his design; for, be sure
destruction follows speedily, as the consequence of such doctrines: So that
he that overcomes the assaults of Satan, not only respecting life, but in
doctrine also, is a complete christian, and conqueror, and shall eat of the
Tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God. Hence arises a Note.

Observe. To overcome, is the Christians crown. Or otherwise, Perseverance is a
christians great duty. It is not him that has begun well, that will obtain the
Palm, but holds out his course in faithfulness: Vincenti dabitur. Many have
begun in the Spirit, and ended in the flesh, and so lost their reward. In a
Race, he that leaves off at the first stage, have no hopes to obtain the
Laurel: But that Traveller, or way faring man, that endures patiently the
hardships of a long journey, with all the dangers, difficulties, and
extremities, that ways, weather, and other accidents may offer, will at last
doubtless attain to his much complacent place and period, whiles the lazy one
is deterred with the difficulty; and if not in the first days journey, yet in
the midway, is resty and tired. It is not sufficient for us to endure and
repulse a flash or two of Satan's assaults, who is as a roaring Lion, night and
day going about, seeking whom he may devour. As he is restless in his
temptations, so we must be restless in our defensive Guards and Repulses; our
life is a constant warfare, and one error committed in warfare, is remediless,
and irrecoverable: And though I am far from asserting with the Novatians, That
the errors or slips of the faithful are irreparable; and though the errors of
humane wars admits of no repentance, yet the errors of our christian warfare
may be reinforced, and redeemed, by a returning unto a more strict and diligent
watch upon our hearts and judgments; yet notwithstanding this, we may lose
much of our comfort in the way, and be accounted but as dastard soldiers by
our Captain General, in that we have not kept close unto our Colors, and
diligent and constant in all extremities, in opposing the assaults and inrodes
of the adversaries; for to that very end, Christ, our Captain, has set weapons
into our hands, which are spiritual, and mighty, to oppose and overcome all the
assaults, stratagems, and underminings of Satan: Besides, he has laid it on us
as our duty: Strive to enter into the strait gate. And, The Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence; and it is the violent (not the lazy dormant one) takes it by
force: So in this place, To him that overcomes, to him is given to eat of the
Tree of life, (as his crown and reward) which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God.

In Rev. 22.2. There is described, as an additament of the glory of the New
Jerusalem, that new heavenly City or church estate, that came down from God,
That in the midst of the street thereof, and of either side of the River, there
was the Tree of life, which had twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit
every month, and the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.
Those that overcome the spiritual assaults of Satan, are promised to eat of
this Tree, which is placed in this Paradise of God. As Paradise was the blessed
habitation of Adam in his innocent and sinless condition; so it is put
typically and figuratively both, for that blessed estate that the Saints enjoy
now in heaven. This day (says Christ unto the penitent Thief) thou shall be
with me in Paradise. Luke 23.43. that is, thou shall be in a blessed state and
glory. Paul when he was rapt up in spirit into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4.
he says how that he was caught up into Paradise, that is, into an incomparable
glory. So that Paradise may very fitly signify and represent figuratively unto
us any state of glory, either in the supernal heavens, or that that is reserved
for all God's faithful ones, after the reunion and resurrection of their souls
and bodies at the last day: for God does make things known unto us by such
things as we partly already know and understand. Now we know Paradise was
presented unto Adam full of all delicacy and ornaments that the heart of man or
his curiosity could wish for, and how it was replenished with all goodly
fruits, not only pleasant to the eye, but very savoury unto the taste also; by
sensible things God makes known his hidden mysteries, and spiritual delicacy,
as unto the children of men: But here lies the difference between the first and
second Paradise; The first Paradise had not only the Tree of life in it, as a
reward, and a confirming Sacrament of Adam's eternal felicity, if he had
continued obedient to the command of God, but it had also the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil; a Tree, that when he should taste thereof, and make a breach
of his obedience toward his God and his Creator, he should sadly experience,
for himself and whole posterity, the bitterness of the fruits thereof; and so
should come to know, by the sad event, what was good, and what was evil; how he
had wronged by disobedience, the chiefest good; and as his due reward and
merit, is become liable and obnoxious to mortality, death, and all miseries
that an infinite divine Justice can inflict upon him for his disobedience. Now
in this second or last Paradise, there is no fear of eating the bitter fruits
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; for there is no such Tree therein;
this last is guarded with a surer Angel then that that guarded with a flaming
sword at the entrance of the Garden of Eden: The Lamb (in this last) is the
light and the glory thereof: The first Adam, the possessor of the first
Paradise, was of the earth, earthly; but the second Adam is the possessor of
this, whose Throne is in the midst thereof, and is of heaven, heavenly; Here
are no conditions of life and death put upon eating, or not eating; here is
only the Tree of life, which is prepared for the faithful conqueror in
Christ's name, for the confirmation of their eternal happiness.

But it may be queried, what is meant by this Tree of life?

I answer, Some of the Ancients, as Augustine, and others, makes it to be
Christ, whose leaves, that is (say they) his merits, is for the healing of the
Nations. But saving due reverence to antiquity, I rather adhere to those that
understand it a true and real Tree of life, as that in the garden of Eden was,
for these reasons. For Christ being personally in this heavenly city, or new
Jerusalem; for where should he be but with his Spouse, the Bride, the Lamb's
wife, at that great and solemn day of triumph? And it is said, That the Lamb is
the Temple, and the light of this City, cap. 21, 22, 23. and therefore
evidently convincing, that he is not personally absent from her; and being with
her, and present, I cannot see how congruous to reason it is to say or assert,
that the glorified Saints shall eat of that Tree of Christ Sacramentally: For
when we have the enjoyment of vision, faith cease; nor is then any need of
signs, figures, or Sacraments (the only way that we can eat Christ spiritually
and mystically) in this heavenly Paradise; for being himself then and there
present with his Saints, that Scripture will be fulfilled, whose authority is
yet of force, and not at all as yet elapsed (as some would have it) to wit,
Matthew. 28. And lo, I am with you unto the end of the world, or, of this
generation: that is, Christ promises his presence of grace, efficacy, comfort,
and support, unto the faithful dispensing of his Ordinances of the Word and
Sacraments unto the end of this world, which consists in several series or
courses of generations that shall succeed one the other, until the day Star
shall arise, and radiate with a more incomparable glory, and set a period to
all those present Ordinances we now enjoy, which are fitted to our present
weakness and capacities, and restore us into the liberty of the Sons of God,
and give us Ordinances of a more spiritual and higher key, fit for that new and
glorious City, the Bride, the Lamb's wife, that comes down from heaven. And why
may I not think that in this heavenly Paradise, this Eden of God and Christ,
this New Jerusalem, or New Heavens, and New Earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, according to 2 Pet. 3.13. shall have the Tree of life placed by
God in the midst thereof, whose fruits shall shine as Sacraments of
confirmation unto the blessed Saints, of the continuation of their glorious
state and blessedness for ever; so that whether Christ be taken to be this Tree
of life, or whether God shall set up in his celestial Paradise a real Tree of
life, as formerly he did to Adam in Eden, yet both and either do evince this.

Observe. That God has secured the everlasting blessed estate of the faithful,
by most evident Sacraments, and clear signs of his presence.

Sin cannot then hurt them, the devil is chained up in the bottomless pit,
their adversaries have their portion also with him; so that there is none found
to hurt in all the holy mountain. What greater security, when all fear of
miscarriage is quite done away? No enemies appear from within, nor any from
without; all are vanquished and brought under the footstool of the Lamb, that
sits upon the Throne: Then it may be said, O death! Where is thy stirg? O
grave! Where is thy victory? And as if the treading under all enemies were not
enough to secure this blessed estate, and make it completely happy, there is
added the Tree of life, to eat thereof; not as if there were fear of death, but
symbolically, sacramentally, hieroglyphically, or emblematically, to manifest
and confirm the perpetuity and continuation of that most glorious and blessed
state for ever.

But it may be objected, Is not Paradise taken in Scripture for the supernal
heaven? and is it here to be taken thus? That he that overcomes shall eat of
the Tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God; that is, shall be
translated to the heavenly mansions above, where the Angels, and souls of the
blessed remain in glory, and t^ere shall eat of the Tree of life; that is,
shall participate of Christ in his glory and eternal life, in the supernal
heavens.

I answer, first Negatively, This Paradise that is given to the christian
conquerors, cannot be in this place, nor that of cap. 22. v. 28. whereunto this
has relation, and correspond both in sense and reason, be understood of the
supernal heavens, for many reasons. First, Because in this Paradise it is said,
There is the Tree of life, whose leaves are for the healing of the Nations: Now
in the heavens above, there is no healing or conversion, that must be done here
beneath, or not at all

Secondly, In the supernal heavens, there are neither Streets, nor Rivers,
Gates, nor Foundations; as this Paradise is circumstantially described in chap.
21, and 22.

Thirdly, This Paradise is measured to a certain proportion, cap. 21. 15, 16,
17, etc. And how short that measure, being according to the cubits of a man, is
to spanior fathom the supernal heavens, let him that has the least grain of
reason judge.

Fourthly, It cannot be intended of the highest heavens, because this Paradise
or New Jerusalem is said to descend, or come down out of heaven from God, and
that the Tabernacle of God is with men, and that he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people: Now how improper and dissonant from right reason is
it to say, that the supernal heavens do descend and come down unto the children
of men? And how needless is it for God to promise that he will be the God of
his people in the highest heavens, and that he will dwell with them there? All
know it is the place of his habitation, where his glorious presence is most
eminent and resplendent.

Lastly, I answer positively, That this Paradise which is here promised to the
faithful conquerors in Christ, is a Terrestrial Paradise: It is a heaven on
earth, though not an earthly one: It is a holy City, a New Jerusalem, a New
Heaven, and a New Earth, that comes down from God, cap. 21. 1, 2, etc. And if
it be not on earth, what need is there of the mention of a New Earth? In the
supernal heavens there is no place for the performance of such a promise, 2
Pet. 3. which place has relation to that of Isa. 65.17. where God promises
the Jews New Heavens, and a New Earth; and withal there mentions, the enjoyment
of Houses and Vineyards: and how these things can be attributed or consist in
the supernal heaven, or how things there may be said to be meliorated, made
new, or better then they are, passes my reason to comprehend? Though withal I
grant, That the supernal heaven may be represented by Paradise, as in that of
Luke 23.43. But more properly, The first Paradise may serve to typifie or
represent the second Paradise, or new Church State, or heaven, which Christ
will restore unto his faithful ones, before the ultimate day, and end of all.
See more on the 21, and 22 chapters.

Verse 8. And unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, Write these things, says
the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive.

Verse 9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty; but thou art rich:
and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are
the Synagogue of Satan.


Christ having finished his charge to the church of Ephesus, goes on on the
same account with the church of Smyrna, and commands the Angel, or chief
Pastor, or Minister of the said church, who (as Ireneus testifies) was
Policarpus, scholar unto S. John, to write those things for them to take notice
of, which he was about to discover to them: The person that gave out these
discoveries and charges to the churches, is here plainly manifested to be
Christ, who was dead, and is alive, as in v. 18. of the precedent chapter more
fully. The matter of the discovery is wholly of encouragement and approbation;
I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty; but thou art rich: that is, I
know thy works, thou church of Smyrna, and the trouble, affliction, and
tribulation that thou endurest by reason of the opprobrious, scandalous, and
reviling speeches which those cast out against thee, which call themselves
Jews, and are not: And I know thy poverty, and scantiness in worldly riches;
but I add withal, thou art rich in spiritual graces; and though thou art
accounted poor in this world, yet thou have treasures abiding for thee in
heaven: And withal, I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and
are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: As if he had said, I also know and
take notice of the reviling speeches that those which call themselves Jews (and
so perhaps were so by blood) and yet are not true Jews, true spiritual
Israelites, but rather by reason of their unbelief, and malicious practices,
and persecution of the truth, and the professors thereof, are the very divel's
disciples, and of the Synagogue of Satan: Here is a twofold knowledge, or
several acts of one and the same knowledge, and far different the one from the
other: The one is a knowledge of approbation, love, and complacency, the other
of hatred and abhorrency. Christ knows the works of the church of Smyrna, of
her tribulation, persecution, and poverty, and loves her, and honors her for
it. Christ also knows the works of her adversaries, of blasphemies, reproaches,
and enticements to evil, against the true Professors of godliness; and not only
hates them for it, but sets a character of ignominy upon their head for ever:
for what may be more reproachful or stigmatizing, then for those that think
themselves somewhat in the church of God, that call themselves Jews, the keepers
of the Oracles and mysteries of God, yet indeed, to be justly numbered among the
disciples of the Synagogue of Satan; that is, of the divel's church: for the
word Synagogue, in the Greek signifies so much as Convention, Meeting, or
Church, which is commonly used now in the worser sense, which was appropriated
first, chiefly to the Jewish Pharisaical and Priestly meetings, and called the
Jewish Synagogue; but Christians having renounced the name and thing, have
appropriated to their meetings or conventions, a more significant name, to wit,
the Church, Ecclesia; and leaves the Synagogue to unbelieving Jews, Antichrist,
and the Devil, to nourish their Disciples in. From Christ taking knowledge,
with approbation, of the works and tribulations of the church of Smyrna, see
the Notes on v. 2. of this chapter, to which I refer. But from this verse
explained, one Note shall be,

Observe. That a poor afflicted and persecuted church of Christ, is more dear,
precious, and rich in his eye, then all other the potent, rich, and mighty
Societies in the world.

Christ looks upon the latter, but with an eye of common providence, as the Sun
shines, and shower falls on the field of the righteous and unrighteous
alike; herein there is no distinction of love or mercy: God equally dispenses
those common gifts equally alike unto all; neither is any one to be accounted
godly or ungodly, elect or reprobate, from the abounding or want thereof; for
some godly have abounded, and others have wanted herein: But the church of
Christ, they have distinguishing mercies, their afflictions and tears are
treasured up in a bottle of remembrance, for a reward and crown unto them: they
are as the apple of his eye, his jewels, members of his mystical body, and
therefore must needs be dear unto him; for no man ever hated his own flesh, for
them the world was made, and is preserved and continued to this day for their
sakes; and I dare be bold to affirm, if there were none of his elect members on
earth, the world would soon see its night and period, and forthwith relapse to
its primitive and everlasting chaos, or at least, pass away, and perish, that
its place be no more found. Christ is still walking amongst those golden
Candlesticks, viewing their order, and takes his delight in those Gardens, and
Beds of Spices, and so gets up early into these Vinyards, to see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender Grape appear, and the Pomgranates bud forth, Cant.
7.12. his delight was ever to be with the children of men, and takes much
pleasure, not only in seeing and smelling the savoury exercises, and spiritual
sacrifices of the more grown christians, but also takes much complacency in
viewing the growth, production, and fruitfulness of younger christians, and
leads them gently by the hand, by his doctrine and discipline, until at last
they are brought unto the Winecellars of his love, where he bids them to take
their fill of love; but by the way, comforts them with apples, and stays them
with flaggons, till at last he bring them home unto himself, purified and
cleansed by the purgatory of afflictions and tribulations, as gold, seven times
tried by the fire of the Chymister. The genuine use of this is, to demonstrate
the danger of persecution of Christ's members or churches, to all persons in
the world. They are his members, and in as much as it is done to one of them,
it is done unto himself; and better a millstone were hanged about the neck of
such offenders, and cast into the Sea, then to offend one of his little ones.

The reasons that Christ's churches, though afflicted, scorned, or persecuted,
are so dear and precious to him, are,

First, Because they are his Members, and it is most natural to love ones self;
for he that loves not himself, cannot love another, and we are bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh.

Secondly, Because of their graces and unction; we having received all of his
fullness, grace for grace, and of the same anointing with himself, though in an
inferior measure: The same oil that was poured on Aarons head, ran down to the
skirts of his garments; so the same unction of the Spirit, that was poured on
Christ, is, in some measure, poured on all his inferior members, and therefore
most dear and beloved to him. Omne simile, gaudet simili.

Thirdly, By reason of Union, Christ and his Members bei^ one, by a mystical
and spiritual union, they must needs be most dear and precious to him.

Fourthly, and lastly; the great reason that Christ's Saints and churches are
most dear unto him, is, In that he has laid down his own most precious life
for them: for greater love then this was never shown, in that he died for us,
even whiles we were fighters against God, and enemies by evil works.

Observe. 2. Another Note is, That though the world looks upon the faithful
distressed churches of Christ, as a broken, poor, and forsaken people, both in
outward estates, and intellectuals also, yet God sets another rate upon them,
and accounts them rich, wise, mighty, comely, beautiful, and as the most
accomplished people in the world.

Is not this a strange Paradox to the infatuated worldling? But it is not so
strange, as true: Christ here calls his poor afflicted Smyrna rich; for she was
rich indeed with spiritual graces, that their persecuting adversaries were
ignorant of; she was rich in immortible Treasures, laid up for her service in
heaven above, where moth could not corrupt, or thi^^ ^reak through and steal,
which her blaspheming enemies never dreamed of; what wise worldling does think
a poor afflicted christian wise? He looks upon him so far beneath himself, that
from his Machiavilian plots and counsels, he tells the wise and prudent
christian soul. -- Procul hinc, proculate prophani: Yet God tells them plainly,
That the wise of the world are taken in their own snare, whilst true wisdom is
justified of her children: And, God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things that are mighty, etc. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. The wise of
the world think themselves a wise, politic, and highly contriving Statists,
when they have brought the Saints of God, and the whole world under their feet
and subjection; but the Saints of God know no such wisdom, but that wisdom
which is of God, the eternal Word, and Christ, who of God is made to us,
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that no flesh
should glory in his presence. The great Potentates of the world think with
their Alexandrian Armies (as a Torrent) to carry all before them; Alas, they
are deceived, there are others more mighty then they; the poor afflicted
churches of Christ can do more with their prayers, and using their interest
with God, then all the Armies in the world: they can pray for legions of
Angels, and they are ready at their commands: Witness the host of Sennacherib,
destroyed by an Angel at the prayers of Hezekiah, and Isaiah the Son of Amos: 2 Chronicles. 32.20. How many heathen Armies do we read of in Histories, were defeated
by the faithful prayers of the godly, or at least, their force diverted another
way: A poor despised chri^ David with a sling and pebble, can do more by the
prayers of faith, then Goliath with his spear: Oh! how happy and fortunate were
the Captains and Armies of this our Nation, whiles the prayers of the faithful
in the land continued fervent for them? The Bow and Sword of the mighty had
then no power to destroy, for the presence of our God was in the midst of them,
for a defense unto them in all their warlike undertakings. Oh therefore, ye
sovereign Governors, take heed how ye offend these little ones of Christ, that
they may not avert their prayers from you; make good your interest with Christ
and his Saints, and be one with them in faith and prayers; then never fear the
boisterous storms or waves that are emitted from the Pillars of Hercules to our
Albion shores, which will prove but as the daily surges that washes our rocks
and clifts, and so dash themselves into froth, and vanish. Next, the gaudy
Gallant of the times, thinks himself the most fair and comely of all God's
creatures, and looks upon a sober and prudent christian, as a despicable
creature in respect of his gay Worship, whiles God himself sets another
character upon both: The one is clothed with the white garments of Christ's
righteousness, and is all fair with the beauties of holiness, whiles the other
is only covered and ^^^hed with the excremental extravagancies and
menstruosities of small, earthy, brutish, and despicable creatures, and at
best, do serve but in the room of Fig leaves, to be somewhat more honorable
badges of their sin and misery: it is a shame to glory in that which are the
ever-living Ensigns of their sin and shame; and seeing the Lillies of the
field do exceed even Solomon in his bravery, little reason to glory in those
rags of ours. Next, the Glutton, that makes his belly his god, and fares
deliciously every day, conceives he has a heaven on earth, and that the poor
afflicted christian comes far short of his happiness, in that he has not that
fullness every day in the varieties of Viands, and Festivals, that he enjoys:
But alas, this wretched Dives never considered, that a poor christian has
other food to eat then he ever knew of; he has spiritual Manna, bread from
heaven, and the wine of Paradise, that he is quite ignorant of, that he that
eats thereof, shall never hunger or thirst more. Lastly, the wisdom of the
world looks upon the distressed disciples of Christ, as fools, wittols, and man
men, and thinks them to be so indeed: But on the contrary, the judicious
christian knows the wisdom of the world to be foolishness and madness to
purpose: for who but fools and madmen, would perversely run on in the ways of
destruction, as the wisdom of the world does prompt unto? Whilst Christ's
faithful ones, though suppressed and broken by afflictions and tribulations,
yet do walk in the way of life, and shine as Stars in the Firmament of their
Churches and Graces.

Observe. 3. That the sharpest persecution comes from such as are the highest
pretenders to truth and godliness.

The Jews were such, that boasted much of their div^ ^^cles, and privileges
from Abraham, Luke 3.8. yet ^ere the most inveterate and bitter adversaries to
the Gospel of Christ, and to the primitive Apostolical churches, of any persons
in the world: Witness their reproachful blasphemies, which consisted not only
against Christ himself, but against his members also: They reproached him that
he had a devil, and that by Beelzobub he did his miracles, and cast out devils;
yea, their malice was not only to him living, but reached him after his
crucifiction and resurrection, that if possibly they could destroy or weaken
the faith of his disciples, and withal, hinder the promulgation of the truth:
and to that end blasphemed, and raised a most false report touching his
resurrection, and affirmed, That his Disciples came and stole him away out of
his Sepulcher, and that he was not indeed risen, as they affirmed, but conveyed
away closely by them, that he might be deified: And this the unbelieving
perverse Jews say unto this day. Their malice stops not here against the Head,
but also falls foul upon his members and churches in succeeding ages: We see
how maliciously they fall upon Stephen in Act. 7. and how zealous Saul himself
was, whiles an unconverted Jew, against the Disciples at Damascus, Acts 9. What
uproars did the Jews raise, and what provocations did they use, to incense the
Magistrates and chief Governors against the Apostles and Disciples of Christ
in every place and City? These Asiatique churches were not free of their
clamours, or their invectives against the christian profession. Paul met them
at Antioch, Acts 13.45. and at Iconi^m, Acts 14.2.19. who stoned Paul, and at
Thessolonica, Acts 17.5. an uproar was risen by the Jews by reason of him, at
Corinth he was drawn before Gallio at the Judgment seat, by the envy of the
Jews, Acts 18.12. and at Ephesus he found the same malicious dealings from the
Jews, Acts 19.9. he found some of the same Blasphemers there, that were in the
church of Smyrna and Philadelphia, Rev. 3.9. that spoke evil of that way of the
christian faith before the multitude: Yea, the very heathens themselves were
more friendly to the christians, then the Jews, the professed people of God;
witness the entertainment of Paul amongst the Athenians, Acts 17. the carriage
of Gallio, Festus, Felix, and Agrippa toward him; Pilate a Roman Prefect,
would wash his hands from the death of Christ, whiles the Jews, the visible
people of God, cried out, Crucify him. At Malta, amongst the Barbarians, Paul
was almost deified, Acts 28.6. But when at Jerusalem, and amongst the Jews,
they would have torn him to pieces, Acts 21. and 23.12. O strange! That zeal
perverted should so rage in fury against the truth of God, and his Christ.
These Jews did not only occasionally oppose the faith of Christ, and the
publishers thereof, but of set purpose, did go to every City and place where it
was taught, for to oppose and suppress it if they could; else possibly they
could not be found in so various places and Cities, and at so far distance one
from the other, doing their parts, and venting their malice against it

Object. But some may say, That those that raised blasphemies in the churches
of Smyrna and Philadelphia, were not properly Jews by blood, but such as say
they were Jews, and are not, but do lie, cap. 3. 9.

I answer, Indeed they were not worthy to be called Jews, who had many eminent
privileges peculiar to their Nation; our Apostle Paul could boast that he was
an Ebrew of the Hebrews, and Romans 3.1, 2. they had much advantage every way;
chiefly, Because unto them were committed the Oracles of God, and the word of
peace and reconciliation by Christ, was first to be preached unto them, then
next unto the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5. And indeed, they were not worthy of the name
of Jews, that had such great and glorious privileges, and yet so averse unto
the Truth.

Yet secondly, I say, they must needs be the same Jews, of the same blood and
progeny that opposed, persecuted, and blasphemed Paul, and other true churches
of Christ also, with those found, blaspheming, reviling, and persecuting in
Smyrna and Philadelphia, being so like one the other in their cursed practices.

But lastly I answer, Though they say they are Jews, yet indeed are not; for he
is not a Jew that is one outward, but he is a true Jew, a true Israelite of
God, that is one inward: It is not he that tals and boasts of his carnal
privileges and birthright, as from Abraham, and does not the works of
Abraham, is a Jew, but such an one is a true spiritual Jew, that walks in the
steps of faithful Abraham; but for those reviling persecuting Jews, they were
rather to be termed Rabshekahs, and Barbarians, then Jews; for their
circumcision was become unto them, by reason of their impieties and blasphemies
against the truth, uncircumcision, and therefore not worthy to be called Jews:
Just as a nominal christian, when turned antichristian, and a blasphemer and
persecutor of the true profession of Christ, who will think him worthy of the
name of christian? And though he arrogates to himself that name and Title, and
says (as the Jews here did) he is a christian, who will not say unto him, he is
not, but a liar, and a Barbarian, or at best, an antichristian.

But if it were demanded, What were the blasphemies of those Jews, against the
church of Smyrna and Philadelphia, etc.

I answer, as before, Doubtless their blasphemy was Bicernis, or twofold. The
one horn thereof struck directly at Christ. The other, at the churches, and his
members. This appears by Acts 19.9. when Paul preached in the Jews Synagogues
Christ and his Doctrine, diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil
of that way before the multitude. First, They would blaspheme the Master, and
say, that he was a deceiver, and cast out Devils by Beelzebub, and a destroyer
of their Laws and Customs which they had from Noses: And next. That his
Disciples and Followers were seditious, and perverters of all Magistracy and
Governments; and also amongst themselves unclean, using promiscuous lusts, as
the Nicolaitans were, denying the holy Laws of God, so by these Diabolical
artifices, to bring them into contempt with the whole world, and so under the
rod of persecution and tribulation. See the charge of Tertullian, the Orator of
the Jews, against Paul, Acts 24.5, 6, etc. tending partly to this effect: and
the Jews perceiving the heresies of the Nicolaitans, Gnostics, and others, of
like unclean practices, to creep in among the churches, were bold to reproach
them, as all such, and of the same unclean judgments and practices with the
former. Consider the words of Epiphanius to this purpose, out of M. Baxter's
book of Infidelity, page 131. Which sort of men (says he) Satan seems to have
fitted, and sent for a reproach, and stumbling block to the church of God; and
having put on themselves the names of christians, that for their sakes the
Nations being offended, should abhor the profit of the church of God, and
should refuse the truth declared to them, because of their savage wickedness,
and incredible vileness; that I say, their frequent vilanies being taken notice
of, they might persuade themselves, that those are such, that are of the holy
church of God, and so may turn away their ears (as I said) from the true
doctrine of God; or at least, beholding the dishonesty of a few, might cast the
same reproaches upon all, etc. These doubtless were the advantages that the
Jews took, to blaspheme the churches of Christ with, and so to make Christ's
doctrine and followers seem abominable, whiles some that were called
christians, were truly and worthily abominable. This artifice and method Satan
keeps still afoot to this day, to vilify Christ's Truth's, and his followers,
by terming their doctrines Novel, and new Lights, though of above 1600 years
standing, and of Apostolical Institution; and if they prove faithful Assertors
of it, are presently termed factious, or Schismatical for it, being (as they
say) Disturbers of the National Peace, perverters of Customs, Laws, and
Governments, and forthwith branded with Anti-magistratical, and
Anti-Ministerial Titles; as if they were against Magistracy; when they say in
the first place, Fear God; in the next, Honor the King: Or if they were
against all Ministers, because they are against the formal, lazy, and
belly-god Priests, whose very forms, as carnal ordinances, are perished with
using, and in the room thereof, desires a Ministry, sound, able, godly,
efficacious, spiritual, and more edifying in the assemblies and churches of
Christ.

In the next place, if any defection happens in the churches of Christ, as if
some among them turn loose Nicolaitans, or the like, there will not be wanting
the Nominal Jews, formal christians, to blaspheme them, as if they were all of
that feather. The Papists, as soon as they heard of some heresies broken forth
among the Protestants, presently cry out, and blaspheme the whole name of
Protestants, as if they were all of that heresy. Among the old Episcopal men
of our Nation, it was a common saying, That a Geneva Presbytery made a fair
gap, and was a downright way to Brownism and Anabaptism, as M. Hooker's Preface
to his Ecclesiastical Policy manifests. And if any Nonconformist turned
Anabaptist or Brownist, presently they would say the Presbyters were all such:
And again, if any Independent, or Baptist now a days, became a Familistical
Quaker, or Antiscripturist, presently the Presbyters lay the same harsh
judgment and contumely upon the whole churches of the same profession, to
render them abominable in the eyes of all; as if the eleven Apostles were all
Judasses, because one in twelve was a Judas. This Satanical method should be
quite laid by, by such as have truly learned Christ. This was the old Jewish
trick and stratagem, against the primitive precious Asiatique churches of
Christ, who were not all Nicholaitans, because some Nicolaitans were crept in
among them, but precious in the eye of God, both for their graces, and
sufferings for the testimony of Jesus. But for such as will blaspheme the true
doctrines of Christ, and the Professors thereof, by means of the evil among
them, and to cast a reproach, tribulation, and affliction thereby upon them
all, let them too withal not be discontented to read their judgment in this
verse, Whiles they say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of
Satan.

Observe. 4. The last Note from these words shall be, That a misled zeal, is
both dangerous and pernicious.

Little did the Jews think that they were fighting against the God of heaven,
when they were persecuting and blaspheming the Professors of Christ: Nay, they
do it, and think as Paul in his ignorance, that they do God good service in it:
If our zeal be not commixt with sound knowledge, instead of promoting the glory
of God, we may do the downright work of Satan. These poor Jews had an
indubitable aim and zeal to glorify God, for so Paul bears testimony of them,
Romans 10.2. but it was exercised amiss, in that it was not according unto
knowledge; if their judgment had been rightly informed, or bore the least
proportion with their zeal, they would not persecute the disciples of Christ
from city to city, and from Town to Town, much less put the Lord of life to
death amongst them. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled.

Use. Christians now adays should look to it, lest they go about to do the work
of Satan, when they blaspheme and persecute all others that are differently
minded from them in some particulars: They may call themselves christians, but
are not; for it savours not of a christian spirit, which is ready to cover and
heal the infirmity of his christian brother, not to revile, or cast a rancour
on it, to Gangrene it, which is the work of Satan: Though I am not for the
least toleration of evil or heresy in the church of Christ, yet I would have
all to take heed, how they blaspheme, persecute, or speak evil of that way or
practice, which has the visible stamp of Christ upon it, though at present, by
reason of some clouds of ignorance over them, they cannot plainly discern the
truth of it: In this case, the counsel of Gamaliel, Acts 5. is very seasonable;
Refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone; for if their work be of
men, it will surely come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it,
lest ye be found even fighters against God.

Verse 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; Behold, the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life.
I know (says Christ) the tribulation and affliction that will overtake thee, O
church of Smyrna, yet fear none of those things which shall come upon thee:
Neither art thou to suffer only the reproach and blasphemy of the tongue, but
also the devil shall so far prevail against you, as by his instigation, that
the Tyrants of the world, and your malicious enemies, shall so far persecute
you, and cast some of you into prison; but comfort ye, it is not for your
destruction, but only for the trial of your faith and constancy to your
christian profession: and your tribulation is not for a little space, but to
continue ten days, that is, ten years, that answers ten prophetical days; or
rather I understand it, ten days of tribulation shall pass over you, to wit,
the ten great primitive persecutions, the first whereof began against the
christians under Nero, and the tenth under Dioclesian; yet however, this long
and tedious persecution reach thee, yet leave not thy constancy, but be thou
faithful unto thy Lord and Savior, though their persecution be so high and
fiery, as to make thee to taste the tortures of death for thy faith, yet be
thou a faithful witness to me in that death, and thou shall be crowned, as a
reward of thy faithfulness, with the glory of eternal life.

Observe. 1. From the words is, God never lets the devil loose to raise
tribulation or persecution against his churches, but he gives them first a
cordial, a preparative, and strength from himself, that they may not sink under
ut, though they may suffer by it.

Before the ten great days of persecution fell on the primitive Asian churches,
Christ tells them, Fear not those things which ye shall suffer, though
imprisonments, and death it self attend you; for it is only for your trial, and
that your faith may be more apparent, by your constant Martyrdom, in the face
of all your adversaries; yea, it is the way and method that Christ builds his
Church by, by the way of the cross and sufferings. Sanguis Martyrum, semen
Ecclesiae; The Martyrs blood was God's seed-plot of his Church and Truth. There
is no promise that God's Saints shall be freed from Trials, but there is a
faithful promise that they shall not sink under it; for, he will lay no more on
them, then they are able to bear: If God calls any to witness his truth by
tribulation and persecution, he gives them hearts of courage, and constancy to
bear it; he administers suitable strength unto the temptations; the strong in
faith have stronger trials then the weak, yet both are preserved by a divine
supply and influence, that neither perish under them. Peter is desired by
Satan, to be winnowed as wheat, yet Peter shall be still Peter, a Rock; for
Christ has prayed for him. Job is given into the hand of Satan to be touched
in all that he has, and is dear unto him, yet Job by this means is preserved and
made an everlasting example of faith and patience to all generations to come.
The devil receives loss by afflicting Christ's churches, for they grow the
better for it; as Gold by the Refiners fire, loses its dross; so the Saints are
more resplendent in their graces in the times of sufferings, and less corrupt
and earthy, then in prosperity, as these and former days witness. The worst
that the devil can cast on them, is death; and that is gain unto them, and an
entrance unto a crown of life.

Observe. 2. Another Note is, That wicked tyrannical men, in the imprisonments
and persecutions of the Saints of Christ, are said to do the work of the devil.

We well know, that the devil himself did not cast those poor persecuted Saints
of Smyrna into prison, but they were divellish and wicked men, who were as the
Instruments of Satan, to do his work, and set his designs in execution. O sad
to consider! When men open their mouths against the Saints in blasphemies and
reproaches, their mouths are only Satan's Organs, that he belches out his malice
by: when they lift up their hands against them, in loading them with
persecutions and tribulations, they are but Satan's wheels, whereby he moves and
acts all his vilanies, yea, and are called Satan himself. Consider seriously
this, all ye that lift up your tongues and hands against the Saints of God, and
tremble.

Observe. 3. Another Note is, God's ends, and the divel's, are far different in
laying afflictions and tribulations on the Saints.

God's end is, That they may be tried, not destroyed; as gold is cast into the
Refiners fire, that it may come forth more purified, so God's Saints are cast
into the fire of tribulations, that they may be purged from their dross, kept
closer, and more undefiled unto him, then before: The divel's end is, that they
may not only be broken under affliction and tribulation, (and therefore he is
termed Apollyon, a Destroyer; because he delights in the destruction and ruin
of the godly) but also he aims and intends thereby, to vilify the truth of
God, and if possibly he can, to bring the Professors of the truth, by heaping
afflictions on them, to impatience, and become wayward toward God and his
truth; and as Job's wifes advice was unto her husband, to bring him unto a
desperate condition, to curse God and die. This is Satan's design in afflicting
the godly, either that they thereby may become Dastards, and Apostates unto the
Truth, that both the truth and godly may be vilified and scandalized, or else,
that they may provoke God by their foolish, wayward, and impatient carriage
under it, and so provoke God to become their adversary, and to chastise them
for it. Satan does indeed desire to winnow us as wheat, but sure not for our
good, not to cleanse away our Tares and ^arnel from us, but to destroy us, and
undo us if he may; but our comfort is, Christ has prayed for us, that we shall
not fail, but has given us also spiritual weapons, to oppose his fiery darts,
and to silence the Tempter in all his soul destroying temptations for ever. Gone
desires by afflicting us, to try our faith, and keep us closer to him, that so
we may become his approved children, as it is in Heb. 12. Deuteronomy. 8.16. Satan is
on another pin, he desires thereby to draw us further from God, and God also
from us, if he may, by provoking him against us by our untoward carriages under
the rod. O Lord, lay no more on us, nor give power to Satan to touch us,
farther then thou have given us strength and ability from thy self to resist,
or bear with patience, and so we pray, Lead us not into temptatation.

Object. But some may say, God tempts no man, according to Isa. 1.13. How
then say you, that God tempts, and the devil tempts?

I answer, First, Indeed God that is the Author of all good cannot be the
Author of evil, as evil is a sin, and an obliquity to his holy and righteous
Laws, for he is God, and unchangeable holiness it self, and therefore he never
presents seducements, or motions to sin. This is the proper work of Satan, and
their own lusts, and far from the nature of the unchangeable holiness of God.

But secondly, God tempts, as temptation is taken for trial, and so tries the
obedience and faith of his children, by diverse temptations and afflictions, as
he did Abraham, Moses, etc.

Object. 2. But again you will say, Does not God in his inevitable Decrees and
Providence, cast us necessarily upon the objects and temptations unto sin,
therefore may be said to be author of them, and to tempt thereunto.

I answer, It was God's providence that the wedge of gold lay in Achans way*
and it was the purpose and decree of God from everlasting, that Judas should
betray his innocent master; and it was by God's providence that Bathsheba was
presented naked to David's eye, yet this does not at all make God the author of
sin, nor render Achan, Judas, or David, the less culpable for their sins; for
God's secret Decrees, and providential dealings with, and toward his
creatures, are no rules of duty unto us, nor render us more excusable for our
failings; for God does neither enforce our wills, either physically or morally,
by urging or enclining them to act in sinful ways, or by counselling or
persuading thereunto; for that (as I said before) is against his holy Nature,
and so tempts no man; but when we are drawn aside, it is by our own lusts and
concupiscences, God is free from the charge thereof, otherwise then as the Sun
that casts his efficacious beams on a stinking dunghill, makes it send forth
unsavory vapors; the nearest cause is the intrinsique corruption of the
dunghill, the Sun is only a more remote cause, he only sends forth (as it were)
its providential heat, whereby the dunghill is enflam^d, and so sends forth from
its corrupted womb, most unwholesome stenches and savours: So God emits his
comfortable beams of providence toward us, spreads our tables with good
things, and our own base lusts make them a snare unto us; presents us with
objects of Beauty, as a remedy against sin, and our base hearts and lusts makes
them occasions to sin: God gives us the fruit of the Vine to cherish us, and we
turn them to drunkenness. The providence of God disposes riches and honors on
us for good ends, and we employ them on our lusts, usurpations, and grinding
the poor. All the creatures of God are in themselves good, phisically
considered, and we tacitly reflect on God as the author of our sin, when we
lay the blame of our sins on the occasions thereof. Women, wine, riches,
honors, are excellent creatures of God, and for singular uses and comforts
unto men, but the occasions that are taken thereby to sin, rise not from any
innate quality in those objects, for they all are good; but from the lusts of
the heart of man; consider that of 2 Pet. 1.4. The corruption that is in the
world through lust: the world is the object, lust is the cause. The reason that
men are covetous, effeminate, voluptuous, drunkards, sensual, etc. is not in
riches, gold, wine, women, etc. but in men's most corrupt and naughty affections
and dispositions of heart, which does, as the Spider or Toad by their own
corrupt natures, turn the extraction of the sweetest flowers into poison.

Object. But again, does not many Scriptures say, that God tempts man? As
Genesis 22.1. God tempted Abraham, God tempted, or moved David to number the
people, 2 Samuel 24.1. God stirred up Pull King of Assiria, to carry away the Jews
captive 1 Chronicles. 5.26. and also Psalm. 105.25. he turned their heart to hate his
people, and to deal subtly with his servants. Thus also 1 Kin. 22.22. Thou
shall be a lying spirit, go forth, and do so, and thou shall prevail. It is
also said Romans 1.26, 28. that God delivers over to a reprobate sense, and to
send strong delusions, 2 These. 2.11. It is said of Joseph, Gen 45.5, 8.
speaking to his Brethren, Be not grieved nor offended, it was not you that sent
me hither, it was not you, but God: Or that, Is there any evil in the City, but
God is in it? Amos 3. And many other places say, That God delivered Christ to
be bruised and afflicted by his unbelieving enemies, which was an evil act.
Therefore from those, and the like places it may fully be objected, that God
tempts to evil, and has a hand in sin and iniquity.

I answer, First, We must be careful to distinguish between temptations that
are in themselves simply sinful, and those that are not so: God may justly try
the faith of Abraham, by calling him to sacrifice his only son Isaac, for he is
the God and Maker of the whole Creation, and therefore without any injustice or
sin, can call for the life of any of his creatures. God can lay afflictions on
Job, and who can question his righteousness for it? God can chastise the church
of Smyrna with ten days of tribulation, and who shall lay any thing to his
charge? Trials and temptations on this account, are not simply evil, neither
are they absolutely to be deprecated, but with a submission unto the Will of
God; for though no affliction at present seems joyous, but grievous, yet the
fruits thereof are eternal life: If our judgment were rightly enlightened, we
would not look upon the afflicting hand of God, or his trials by the cross, a
bitter thing, considering the happy effects and consequents thereof, even
mortification of sin, and a crown of eternal life. If God comes with sharp
corrections and Trials on us, be sure we have strong corruptions to be
mortified, and if we are called to great trials, our hopes are the greater, and
more sublime; and indeed, a faithful christian is of that heroic spirit, that
he can look upon all the sufferings of this present world with an eye of
contempt, and not worthy to be compared with the joys that shall be revealed,
and so with Moses, can esteem the reproach of Christ, better then the treasures
of Egypt; and so often on this score, God tries his children, and this is for
their bettering, not for their worse.

But secondly, I answer, When ye read that God moves or tempts to that act that
is sinful, it is either permissively, or judicially most commonly understood;
as when God moves David to number the people, it was on God's part both
permissively, and judicially: for, the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, and he moved David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. God suffered it,
and that judicially, but Satan did it maliciously, and destructively: God
suffered, Satan tempted; God judicially permitted it, Satan executed it: for it
is said 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up, and provoked David to number the people:
So it was a judicial act of God, to stir up Pull of Assyria to carry away a
rebellious people (the Jews) into captivity, 1 Chronicles. 5.26. God only permits
the lying Spirit to go forth to deceive Zedekiah, 1 Kings 22. and so permits
the Egyptians to deal deceitfully with his people the Jews, Psalm. 105.25. that
thereby, he might rise in judgment against them: And where it is said, that
God delivers over to a reprobate sense, to harden the heart, to blinden, or
send strong delusions, God does it most justly and judicially to punish evil
with evil, administers occasions of sin, that the sins of the obstinate may be
heightened and aggravated, that their judgments may be the greater; and in the
case of Joseph, that was wickedly handled by his brethren, yet it is said, that
God sent him into Egypt, and there is no evil done in the City, but God is said
to do it; yea, if it be rebellion it self, as 1 Kings 12.15. First, God
pre-ordains it, intends, and appointed it should be. Next, He permits it, and
that not by an idle permission, but by an efficacious permission: then he
disposes the events thereof to his own glory, according to his pre-ordained
purposes and decrees. And lastly, God is said to deliver Christ, to bruise and
afflict him; that is, God pre-ordains him to that end, and hinders it not, but
permits it, by a providential assistance and cooperation, by which every
physical action of the creatures comes to pass; for, in him we live, move, and
have our being.

Object. But then it seems you make God to have a great hand or efficiency in
and about sin.

I answer, There would be no sin, if God had not given the commandment; If
there were no Law, there were no transgression* neither is it beside the Will
of God, nor against his Will; for if it were, then he were not God omniscient,
or omnipotent: neither can we, without a continued concurrence and supportation
of providence, produce any action or work of ours, wherein there is sin; and
therefore God has an agency, and concurrence in the action wherein sin is, but
not in the sinfulness of the action: as the Sun that emits his efficacious
beams upon a dunghill, yet it self is undefiled from the corruption of the
dunghill; so God that has his hand and efficiency about sin, is far from mixing
with the obliquities of the creature; neither can he be said to be the direct
author of it, nor the next proper cause thereof; sin is only a moral being or
entity, and it has subsistence alone in our corrupt natures; but all our
physical actions are good, wherein God has a concurrence, and they become ill,
or sinful, by our own depravities; and so the devil, and our own lusts, are the
mixed proper authors and fountains of all sin: So, let God be justified, and all
men liars.

Secondly, Yet I say, God has his hand and efficiency about sin, several
manner of ways; and for distinct method sake, I shall briefly set them down.

1. God foresees, and pre-ordains it, else, as I said, it could not come to
pass, seeing God is omniscient, and omnipotent, to hinder it if he would, Acts
2.23. Christ was delivered by the fore knowledge, and determinate counsel of
God: What was a greater sin, then the betraying the innocent, and that too, the
Savior of the world? Yet this was pre-ordained of God, and he meant to draw
excellent good out of it: and Genesis 15.19, 20. Joseph tells his brethren, As for
you, ye thought evil, but God meant it for good, to bring it to pass, as it is
this day, to save much people alive.

2. God permits it. God's Decrees imply a necessity, that sin shall be, but do
not impel or enforce thereunto: We being left to our free choice, God is not
bound to hinder us; he suffered them to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. and
we being left unto our own choice, without God's special grace, we are sure to
choose the worser part.

3. God has his concurrence in every action wherein sin is, but not in the
obliquity of it; all our actions and motions are from God, but the sinfulness
thereof is from the lusts of the heart of man.

4. God withdraws his preventing Grace, or suspends it from a sinner; for God
is not bound up to Laws and conditions unto us, and he may do it out of
Sovereignty, and he will do it, sometimes in wisdom, to try us, and see whether
we will seek after him, and keep close unto him, as he did to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 33.31. God left Hezekiah, that he might know what was in his heart: So
sometimes he withdraws his grace in Justice and Judgment, Psalm. 81.12. I gave
them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels.

5. God gives a concession and permission to wicked Instruments to stir up and
move to evil, as 1 Kings 22.22. I will go forth, and be a lying Spirit in the
mouth of Abab's Prophets: And God said, Go forth.

6. God wisely disposes his Providence, that they become a snare unto the
sinner, and yet no dishonor to God; for his acts of Providence are in
themselves good, and are rather motives to holiness and duty, if our hearts
were sound, then temptations to sin; yea, his very mercies will become unto
them a snare, Psalm. 69.22. Let their Table become a snare, and their Welfare a
Trap. A sinner (like the Sea) will make all it receives brackish, though ever
so sweet that runs into it.

7. God's hand is conversant about sin, as some of his judiciary punishments
that he afflicts the sinner with, as Romans 1.26. 2 These. 2.11. God gave them up
to vile affections, and gave them strong delusions: When we leave God and his
ways, justly may he give us up to our own lusts and perverse ways, in a
Judiciary way, and to a reprobate sense.

8. God limits sin: Thus far thou shall go, and no farther, Psalm. 76.10. The
wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder thereof shall thou restrain:
So far as God gets glory by the permission of sin, God will let the sinner take
his swing, but it shall not exceed its bounds, but can presently destroy it, or
stop the current of it in an instant: And so the remainders of wrath thou will
restrain.

9. God disposes the events and ends of all sin to his glory. God would never
permit sin, if he could not bring good out of it, Romans 3.7. Adam's sin (as one
wittily said) was a happy sin; because it made way for the grace of God to be
more clearly manifested unto the creature: Many of God's attributes would never
be so clearly advanced, if it were not for sin; to wit, his mercy in pardoning,
justice in punishing, wisdom in ordering, power in overruling it: Let us never
therefore murmr against God for pre-ordaining and permitting sin; for though
the wages thereof be death, yet thanked be God, we have Victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Observe. 4. Another Note from the words, The Devil shall cast some of you in
prison, is, That it is the Saints great comfort, to know that their
imprisonments and afflictions comes from Satan and his wicked instruments.

Saint Peter's rule was, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let none of you suffer as an evil doer.
The comfort of sufferings will be quite abated by the guilt of sin: neither
must the Saints sufferings be voluntary, and out of choice; for unto such it
may one day be said, Who required these things at your hands? There must be a
just call unto afflications that must make them comfortable to us: It is but a
fond presumption, to cast our selves upon imprisonments and tribulations, Satan
and his wicked instruments will be apt enough to do it, and in that we may
truly rejoice, that Christ has thought us worthy to be Martyrs to his Truth,
Acts 5.41. Matthew. 5.12. and has given us so sure and strong a token of our
Interest in him, together with a sight of that glory of our interest, which we
then under that condition must virtually and strongly enjoy in him by faith;
but such are very fond, that will desire to fall into imprisonments and
tribulations out of an affectation to Martyrdom, as many of the Quakers of
these days do: and Christ has taught us to pray, Lead us not into temptation;
and this had not been taught us, had it not been grievous and evil to fall into
it, whether it were either the temptation unto sin, or temptation of affliction
or the cross; for Christ himself prayed when his soul was troubled within him,
Father, save me from this hour, and, Let this Cup pass from me, John 12.27.
though Christ submitted to the will of his Father, and freely chose death and
sufferings, as our Mediator, yet as a private person, he would manifest the
same affections that are in us, and deprecate the evil of sufferings, if
possibly he could: Therefore for us to desire or rush into them, would be a mad
zeal, and irregular, and not according to sound knowledge: but if we desire to
wait on God sincerely, and live godly, we need not fear of want of persecution
or tribulations; for that is the common lot of all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus; for Satan is the great contriver and promoter of it.

Observe. 5. From the words, And ye shall have tribulation ten days. Note, That
the afflictions of Gods people, are but for a definite time and season.

The tribulation that passed over the Church of Smyrna, was but for ten days;
that is, ten prophetical days, or years, as some will have it: But I rather
should understand ten days, to be ten times of persecution; for it is to be
observed, that days in Prophetical writings, do signify times, as well as
years: as in that of Dan. 4.29. Seven times shall pass over thee; and in verse
31. it is rendered, And at the end of those days, I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine
eyes to heaven, Rev. 12.6. compared to verse. 14. So that the highest pitch of
Tribulation that should happen to the Church at Smyrna, should be the ten great
days or time of persecution that should befall the Churches of Christ under the
Kingdom of the red Dragon, the Heathenish Emperors. Seventy years were
appointed to the Jews captivity of Babylon: And the longest day of tribulation
that is to pass over Gods church, that I read of in Scriptures, is but a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, or two and forty months; or a time,
times, and half a time: therefore the time is certain, fixed, and determinated
in the counsel of God, that the godly may have hopes to support their spirits,
and not faint under tribulations or afflictions, for their Deliverer will come,
and will not tarry.

Quest. But here you may demand, why this innocent church of Smyrna, wherein
the Spirit could find no guil, nor had any thing to lay unto her charge, but on
the contrary, was very eminent in graces and sufferings for Christ's name,
should be so afflicted with so sharp tribulations, and how the Justice of God
can be vindicated in this particular.

Answ. First, I say, This does not at all derogate from the Justice of God; for
he does not afflict his children as a Judge, de merito, for the guilt of sin;
for that is already done upon the Surety: but he does it in wisdom, as a loving
father would do unto his child, keep him under the rod of correction, to
prevent him from running into future evils: and so God deals here with the
Smyrnians, that they may be tried, that is, refined from their dross, and
become more purer metal.

Secondly, God sees or judges, not as man judges. We see nothing publicly
laid to the charge of the church of Smyrna, but is set forth as one of the most
eminent and fairest of the seven Sister churches, both for faith, piety, and
sufferings; and worthily too she did deserve it in the eye of all: yet God
could foresee that she would turn wanton and prodigal as well as the rest, and
that she had the same heart of corruptions within, as the others had, and
therefore had need of the rod of correction, to keep her close to Christ: And
this in few Ages did appear by their iniquities, whereby their candlesticks
were removed from amongst them.

Thirdly, When God chastises and afflicts his children, it is not to be looked
upon as an act of Justice, but of Grace. To you it is given to suffer, says
Paul to the Philippians, 1.29. It is an act of honor and service, when we are
singled out to be Martyrs for the Truth of Christ before men and Angels. And
hence the Primitive Saints, Acts 5.41. They went away rejoicing, that they were
accounted worthy to suffer for Christ.: Yea, they think themselves Bastards,
and not beloved children, if God chastens them not. It is God's rod, as well as
staff does comfort them.

Fourthly, Another reason that God afflicts his most innocent children, and the
godly, is, The Truths of Christ are more propagated thereby. What though the
godly should suffer death, that is but gain unto them, and the church also
gains by it: for the enemies of Christ seeing their patience and fortitude,
have been often converted to the Christian faith, as Antiquity testifies,
Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae. Just as an Oak that lives by its own
wounds: The more blood of Christians was spilt in the primitive days, the more
they were multiplied. The church was first founded in the blood of Christ, and
it thrives best when they fulfill the remainder of the sufferings of Christ in
their own bodies: Therefore think it not strange, nor against the Justice of
God, when he casts his children into diverse tribulations.

Lastly, God does afflict his best children to try them. The ordinary strokes
of God's providence, as losses, crosses, sicknesses, and the like, are more
properly corrections then trials. Corrections great end is, either to mortify
sin, or to keep from sin; and to that end, God often takes the rod of
affliction and correction into his hand: But Trials that God sends us by Satan,
or his Instruments, aim chiefly at the discovery and maintenance of our graces;
and therefore when such befall us, they bring more inward comforts and
experiences with them then ordinary crosses of Providence, according to that of
2 Cor. 1.5 For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so also consolation
abounds by Christ: These are the two ways that God carries his Saints unto a
crown of eternal life: They must be first hewn, before they will make fit
stones for the building of the New Jerusalem: Gold must pass through the
Refiners fire, before it come unto its perfection. Trials, and the Cross,
though not meritorious for heaven, yet are Antecedents thereunto: It is through
much tribulation that we must enter into the Kingdom of God; for we have much
dross and sin within us, to be cleansed from us, before we shall be made meet
for the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. And this work is much
promoted by afflictions, which makes us more heavenly, and meet for the
communion of Saints: For, before we were afflicted (as David) we went astray,
but since, we have cleaved close to his commandments: Wherefore when we enter
into diverse tribulations, let us not judge, that God has done it in wrath and
judgment, but rather as a gracious father, either to wean us from sin,
preserve us against sin, or to approve and improve our gifts and graces: Under
Tribulations, sincere graces are distinguished from gilded or hypocritical,
true faith from a feigned faith, and the strong from the weak. Here is the
patience and faith of the Saints in their highest glory, and in their greatest
fragrancy; therefore I conclude in S. James words, cap. 1. 2. My Brethren,
count it all joy, when you fall into diverse temptations.

Observe. From the words, Be thou faithful unto the death, and thou shall have a
Crown of life. Note, The Crown and reward is for him that faithfully persevers
under sufferings for Christ's sake unto the end.

He that leaves off half way, is never like to win the prize: Heaven is set
forth as a crown and reward of our faithfulness, though not for the merit of
the work, but according to the work it is freely given; as wicked works shall
not pass unpunished, neither shall good works, or our faithfulness toward
Christ, pass unrewarded. Every one shall receive according as he has done in
the flesh, whether good or evil: And he that has fought the good fight of
faith, and perseveres therein under all afflictions, and that even to death, he
is the true christian conqueror, and for him is laid up the crown of eternal
life: The true militant christian must not look for the crown, if he turn's
back to the enemy: and that which is most admirable herein, is, that the method
of obtaining this crown, is far different from that of obtaining worldly
crowns: they are got by over-mastering and surviving the enemy, but the
christians crown is gotten by suffering and dying; the christians cross and the
crown kiss each other. And to set you right that seek after, and contend for
this crown,

First, Understand what this crown of life is. It is not only the translation
of the soul after death into the supernal heavens, that is not so properly
called life; but that blessed state which soul and body shall enjoy after the
resurrection of the just, and therefore it is called a crown of life; that is,
life given most eminently, which is the most desirable blessing of all things,
as being one of the chiefest gifts of the blessed Saints in the resurrection,
and so part is put for the whole; and therefore it is here called a Crown of
life: To denote unto us, first, That that blessed state of life which the
Saints shall then enjoy, will be a most honorable state, and so it is often
set forth by a kingdom in Scriptures, Luke 22.29.12.32. Rev. 3.21. Secondly,
That it is an endless estate. Thirdly, That it is a state gotten by conquest,
and as a prize set unto a race, 1 Cor. 9.24. Fourthly, That it is a most
glorious estate, and a living crown, and that that will continue to all
eternity.

Secondly, In the next place, understand how this crown of eternal life is
rightly to be obtained; every suffering will not do it: The cause must be good
that makes a Martyr, it must be for Christ, and that in faithfulness. Secondly,
The heart must be upright for Christ therein: It is not vainglory, or worldly
applause, or obstinacy in private opinions, that will weigh the least to make a
Martyr; it must be in the uprightness of your hearts, and that you can appeal
unto God with the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.21. and say, The Lord knows the secrets
of the heart, Yea, for thy sake are we slain all the day long. Lastly, This
suffering must be out of love unto God and his glory, or else all in vain, as
Paul said, 1 Cor. 13.3. If I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it
profits me nothing. There may many die for Christ, and yet not out of love to
Christ; obstinacy of mind, and formal profession may do much in that
particular; but a true zeal to God and his glory, makes the Holocost, a sweet
smelling Sacrifice, and the crown of life its reward.

Observe. The last Observation from these words, is, Sufferings and afflictions
are but the opening the door to a Christians happiness.

The most happy estate of the worldling, is but vanity; and the most suffering
state of a christian, is a crowning: when the christian suffers the loss of
all things for righteousness sake, he abounds then in greater measure of
graces; yea, when he suffers death it self, it is gain unto him; for he has
only left thereby a world of troubles, sin, and vanities, for a crown or life
and glory: For, if our hopes were only in this life, we were of all men most
miserable: Therefore be thou faithful unto the death, and thou shall have a
crown of life.

Verse. 11. Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.
The Spirit does often inculcate in this and the next chapter, this charge and
duty on the judicious and enlightened christian, to take notice what the Spirit
of Christ in this spiritual appearance, says unto the churches: To avoid
repetition, see more on this on verse 7. of this chapter. But, he that
overcomes, that is, that abides constant and faithful unto Christ and his
truths under all temptations and tribulations, and so a faithful christian
overcomes, it is he that shall not be hurt of the second death; that is, the
second death mentioned in 21 chap. Rev. ver. 8. and 20.14. In that Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, shall not touch him. Negatives in
Scripture strongly evince the enjoyment of the contrary; as, Thou shall not be
hurt of the second death; that is, thou shall surely live, thou shall taste of
the Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, and a crown of life shall
be thy portion. It is here called the second death, in respect the first death
is but a partial punishment of the wicked; but the second death is, that when
the first death and hell shall deliver up the dead were in them, and they shall
be cast into the Lake of fire, cap. 20. 13, 14. there is a first life, and a
second life that we shall enjoy; the first life is that that we now at present
enjoy; the life of grace, the second life, we shall be made partakers of at the
resurrection of the just. The life that the soul in heaven enjoys, is but a
partial life, and incomplete, in respect of that at the resurrection; as the
punishment of the wicked under the first death, either spiritual or corporal,
is but partial, so the glory of the elect is but partial and incomplete now in
heaven, in respect of that that will be revealed at the resurrection. Abraham
now does not know us, and Jacob is ignorant of us, neither do the faints
departed know our wants, nor are touched with our infirmities: Their condition
is happy, but what it is we know not; but this we are sure of, at the
resurrection we shall know, as we are known; and see as we are seen; and this
is eternal life, and the crown of life, that is so often promised to the Saints
in Scripture. So then, there is a first death, and a second death; the first
death is but a partial punishment for the wicked, but the second death is the
complete execution of divine wrath upon them, in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for evermore.

Observe. The Observation from the words are, That the constant, faithful, and
persevering Christian, is secured from all dangers of death whatsoever.

Tribulations in this life, and death it self, does him no hurt; that tries
him, refines him, and renders him glorious into the hands of his Creator; Hell,
Satan, Law, nor the second death cannot take hold upon him, for it is Christ
that died for him; for Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It
is Christ that is risen for their justification, therefore they are beyond all
danger of miscarrying, and so may justly triumph and say, O Death! where is thy
sting? Hell! where is thy victory? But thanks be to God who has given us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15.

Verse. 12. And to the Angel of the Church which is at Pergamus, write, this
says he which has the sharp sword with two edges.
Christ here follows the charge against the church at Pergamus: It is
inscribed to the Angel or Pastor of the church which is at Pergamus, and in the
18. verse. following, To the Angel of the Church which is at Thyatira: the
Spirit herein clearly denoting unto us, that the inscription in the first verse
of this chapter, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, or, of the Ephesian
Church; and here, To the Angel of the Church at Pergamus; or, in Pergamus.
(...), are of one and the same significants and latitude; and therefore such
places are very incongruously taken up, to prove a Church of the same extent
and latitude with the Nation: And though we may lawfully use the terms of the
church of England, of Scotland, France, etc. it must always be understood in a
limited sense; not that all England, Scotland, France, Ephesus, Smyrna, or
Pergamus, were the Church, but that it is the church of England, or in England,
of Ephesus, or in, or at Ephesus, of Pergamus, or rather as it is here, in
Pergamus, (...), in, or at Thyatira. And therefore it is most safe, to keep
close to the sound of wholesome words, in such expressions.

Write, this says he that has the sharp sword with two edges. Christ sets
himself forth unto each church in a diverse mode; John saw him in the first
chapter, in a general and full appearance and discovery of himself in his full
luster. And now he discovers himself by parts unto the churches, according to
their several wants and imperfections. Where, by the way, take this Note.

Observe. That Christ's discoveries of himself unto his Churches, are always
most suitable to their present conditions.

To afflicted and persecuted faithful churches, as Ephesus and Smyrna were, he
appears as a God of protection and salvation unto them, as in the first verse,
under the description of having the seven Stars in his right hand, and walking
in the midst of the seven Golden candlesticks; and in the eighth verse he says
to the church of Smyrna, for a comfortable discovery unto them, write, these
things, says he, that is first and last, which was dead and is alive. But now
unto the more unsound and corrupted churches of Pergamus and Thyatira, his
discovery is in another posture, as one having a two edged sword proceeding
from his mouth, and eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass, v.
18. an appearance of indignation, Wrath and Judgment. Faithful afflicted
Christians need discoveries of grace, peace, and consolation, but unfound and
corrupt ones, ought to have the doctrine of Judgments and wrath preached unto
them; he that knows not rightly to divide the words of truth, is no complete
workman in Christ's Vineyard, he is a workman that need not be ashamed, that
knows how to preach Gospel, and glad tidings of reconciliation and peace, to
poor humbled and repentant sinners; But Hell, and wrath, and judgments, and
fiery indignations, to the obstinate and impenitent, the doctrine of grace and
threats are not contradictories, being wisely managed; yet in this appearance
of Christ of having a sharp two edged sword proceeding out of his mouth, there
is much mercy in it; for understand, that by the sword of Christ's mouth is
meant his word and doctrine: confer with Heb. 4.12. Psalm. 148.6. and 56.5.
Prove. 5.4. for that is two edged, and cuts two ways. First, it cuts off the sin
and corruptions of the faithful, by its kindly operating through the influence
of the Spirit. Secondly, It cuts, confounds, and destroys the wicked, not
through any innate quality in the Word, but by accident; for by their refusal
and contempt thereof, so consequently of the divine Majesty, the Author and
Instituter thereof, God goes out with the other edg or side of his sword
against them, on his black and red horse of wrath and Judgments. Hence Note,

Observe. That God's Judgments toward his back-slidden Churches are mingled
with much mercy.

Though Christ's appearance to Pergamus and Thyatira was much in wrath, for
their defilements and backslidings, yet he added much grace and mercy
thereunto, both in approbation of their graces, and calling them to repentance
for their defections. Christ gives always line upon line, and precept upon
precept; providence after providence, and mercy after mercy, to invite us to
repentance, before he will take his last cause of Judgment with us; his heart
is still toward our amendment, though he is provoked highly by our sins
against us; and who but an heart of Adamant would not believe him, when he
swears, As I live says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn and live? And the very weapons that he uses against
sinners, are the sword of his mouth with two edges; it heals as well as wounds:
the one edge is anointed with the balm of Grace, though the other with the gall
of Judgment.

Verse. 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat
is; and thou heldest fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those
days wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among you, where
Satan dwells.
Christ in the first place goes on in the approbation and encouragement of the
church of Pergamus, and tells her, that he knows her works, and that her
habitation, or domestical conversation, for so the word signifies, is in a
place even where Satan's Seat is, or Throne is, as the Orginal has it: We know
the Seat or Throne is taken in Scripture for the place or ensign of Dominion,
Rule, or Sway, as Psalm. 1. v. 1. Blessed is he that sits not in the seat of
the scornful, that is, in the society of such scorners as go on with a high
hand, and say, their tongues are their own, who shall us control? As Christ
has his Throne and Seat, so Satan has his; as Christ goes out as an absolute
Monarch in his Kingdom, has his Royal Laws and commands, and the observers
thereof therein, so Satan has also his Kingdom, and his Throne set up therein,
where his commands are obeyed by the childen of disobedience without control;
and therefore this (...) where the Throne of Satan is, is rendered in the latter
part of this verse in another variation, (...), where Satan dwells or does
his household affairs. A man's house or habitation is his Throne or his castle,
as the Law term has it; therein he exercises his commands freely, either by his
Paternal or Magisterial authority; and he has better title to this
Sovereignty, it being natural and moral, then any Sovereign has to theirs in
the world. 2. There are therein its subjects, who obey more freely, in respect
of their more divine Economy, then any Prince's Subjects whatsoever. Thirdly,
A man's most private designs and transactions are agitated therein. Fourthly,
A man therein lives, goes in and out, and no place, be it ever so pleasant, is
so complacent to a man, as the place of his own habitation, be it never so
homely, and therefore a man will not spare to spend all his strength, wit, or
wealth, to defend his house and place of habitation, against all pretenders of
right thereunto. Therefore these metaphors of a Throne, Seat, House, or
Habitation, are fitly taken up by the Spirit of God, to signify unto us the
power of Satan in the wicked and ungodly, which in Scriptures, are called his
strong holds and habitations; for in them he commands and acts freely, being as
a Father, Lord, and Master, to us the children of disobedience; for his
servants and children ye are to whom ye obey, and they obey freely and without
any regret as dutiful children and servants to such a Father and Master, even
the Prince that rules in the Air, even the Spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. there he makes his habitation, there he
lives and transacts the highest designs of his Kingdom of darkness, there he
takes his delight to dwell, and takes that pleasure in this place of his
habitation, that before he will forego it, or lose an inch of his possession,
the stronger man in the Gospel must first come, even Christ in his Spirit of
Grace, and that after much struggling and contending between flesh and spirit;
and that Christ shall be sure to make his Title clear and evident by Faith, and
the great charter of the Gospel, before he will be dispossessed of his ancient
freehold Tenures; yea his love, or rather pernicious desire to his old
habitation, is such, that after he is dispossessed thereof by Christ, that if
he can get or make a re-entry into his lost possession, by his diabolical
Stratagems and Temptations, he comes in with seven fold worser spirits then the
first, to make good his right and re-entry, if he may, and the condition of
that house is far more miserable then at the first. O therefore watch, and be
prepared with the armory of Christ to oppose the assaults of Satan, ye
believing and enlightened souls! and though he sometimes may foyl you, yet let
him not overturn you; though he may endeavor to come into your soul, yet let
him not have quiet possession; for greater is he that is with us, then he that
is against us, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you: and, through Christ
we shall have Victory Note hence,

Observe, That Satan rules as absolute Lord and Sovereign over the unbelieving
and disobedient. They are his house, the place of his dwelling, his Throne, his
Kingdom, his Seat; and if that were not enough to describe their malignity, and
Satan's Sovereignty over them, they are called Satan himself, v. 10. The better
to manifest Satan's Seat, Throne, and Habitation, in and over the ungodly:
consider the contrary, The Seat, Throne and Habitation of God. Though God in
his infinite nature, is illocal, infinite, and incomprehensible, as unto any
place or form, yet metaphorically is said to be in a place, that is, from
whence he in any special manner does manifest his glory, power, grace, and
goodness: So God is said to come, depart, and return, in Scriptures, when he
specially manifests himself in grace, mercy, and answers to his people, or unto
any particular believing Soul; and when God withdraws that appearance of mercy,
grace, and glory, nor hears the Prayers of his people, but goes out in
Judgments against them, then he is said to depart, to be gone, and return into
his place. Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge
their Offense. God is said to have three special places of habitation, Seats or
Thrones in Scriptures.

1. Heaven is his Throne, and his dwelling place. Isa. 66.1. 1 Kings 8.30.

2. The hearts of the Saints is his Throne, and dwelling place. Isa. 57.15. 1
Jo. 3.24.

3. The Church or Christ; Zion is the habitation and Tabernacle of his glory.
Psalm. 132.13. The Church is the place where God communicates himself, and gives
his answers unto his people. And therefore in 1 Timothy 3.15. it is called the
House of God, and often in Scriptures, the Kingdom of God. These are the
special habitations of God.

Satan has also three special places of habitation and dominion in Scriptures.

1. In Hell over the damned spirits: And therefore he is called the Prince of
darkness, and the Angel of the bottomless Pit.

2. The hearts of the wicked and unbelievers, is the Seat and habitation of
Satan. Ephesians. 2.2.

3. His Throne is amongst the societies of the wicked; they are his Synagogue,
v. 9. where his Doctrines are transacted and maintained; and they are his Seat
and Throne, from whence all his wicked and pernicious Edicts do proceed against
God and Godliness. Psalm. 2.2, 3.

Therefore in this verse, the Spirit says to the Church of Pergamus, I know
that thou dwell in a place where Satan bears rule in all Idolatries,
wickednesses, and hatred to God and his truths without controulment; and yet,
to thy praise and comfort be it, that thou hold fast my Name, and have not
denied my Faith; that is, that thou do constantly profess my Truth, and have
not been drawn to deny my Gospel, or Doctrine of Faith, not in those very hot
and persecuting days, wherein Antipas, my faithful Martyr, was slain in that
City of yours, by those Tyranical persons there, in whom Satan dwells, and
prevails. There is no farther difficulty in those words; only understand that
Antipas, as Aretus testifies, and some others of Antiquity, was the Pastor or
Bishop to this Church of Ephesus; yet others say, he was only an Assistant to
the Church: However, this blessed St. Antipas, Policarpus, and some others,
were the first Martyrs to the Gospel of Christ after the Apostles, in the reign
of Trajan. From the words thus explained, Note,

Obs. 2. That the godly by the providence of God, are disposed and mingled
amongst the most vilest and wicked in the World. The Church of Christ is
likened to a Lilly amongst Thorns, by the Wiseman in the Canticles: Where the
Synagogue and Throne of Satan was, God had planted those Asiatick Churches.
Righteous Job says of himself, that he was a brother to Dragons, and a
companion to Owls. Chap. 30.29. And holy David's soul was vexed, by sojourning
in Mesech, and dwelling in the Tents of Kedar. Psalm. 120.5. Honest hearted
Joseph had his habitation amongst the Idolatrous Egyptians; and there were
Ezekiel, Daniel, and others of Gods precious children, in Babylon, amongst the
Caldeans. It is the common lot of the godly to be amongst Briars and Thorns,
that will nothing but scratch and tear them; and therefore it should be no
strange thing, nor too great a vexing burden unto us, that God and providence
has disposed of our habitations amongst the ungodly. For hereby,

1. God has the greater glory from us.

2. We are kept closer to him.

3. Our Graces shine more eminently, as Stars in a frosty night shine clearest;
and Fishes in the saltest Seas are sweetest: so we keep our savor the better
for it, and our Graces are more enlivened.

4. Our Conversations, it suitable to Gods word, may be a means of their
conversion amongst whom we live.

Obs. 3. To a Godly soul to have its habitation amongst the wicked, is a Soul
vexing grief. Righteous Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the
Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7. Though God has disposed this in his providence, yet it
is an affliction, and for the present, grievous. Woe is me (says David) that I
sojourn in Mesech, and that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar; with a barbarous and
profane people, that were like to the posterity of Mesech and Kedar. O what a
burden it was to Moses, and to all true Israelites, to dwell amongst the
Egyptians? How did the poor captive Israelites weep, when they were in Caldea,
by the River of Chebar? And what a burden it is still, for honest believing
Souls to dwell amongst a profane and wicked multitude? Where they cannot stir
out of doors, or converse but with very few, but that they shall hear God
profaned, his Name blasphemed; his Truths and Scriptures slighted, vilified,
derided, and jested at; his Saints and Faithful ones, either spitefully
treated, openly persecuted, or at least closely undermined, to bring the rod of
affliction upon them. Therefore among the truly godly, the society and
cohabitation of the Saints is most desirable; but of the wicked, most grievous
and loathed.

Obs. 4. God has the more special eye of care and providence over his people,
that have their habitations amongst the wicked and ungodly. Though they dwell
where Satan's Seat and Throne is, yet God holds them as the seven Stars in
his right hand, verse 1. and he knows their works of tribulation, and where
they dwell, and therefore is present with suitable grace and strength from
himself, for their support and comfort, Thou remembrest us (said David) in our
low estate. Where Christ's Church has the greatest enemies, God will show
himself their greatest friend; where his Saints are most afflicted and
straightened, there he will supply with a greater measure of grace and
enlargement. In Babylon of old, among the inveterate enemies of God and his
Israel, God sent an Ezekiel, Daniel, Ezra, etc. choice men, and Prophets of
God, for their comfort and consolation. So we often see in the most barbarous
and wicked places of the World, that God sends there the greatest, soundest,
and clearest light to his servants that dwells amongst them; Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamus, etc. places of Idolatry and cruelty, and where Satan's seat was, had
their Angels, and Martyrs, that shined in true faith and godliness. The
Churches of Christ of late years have shined more eminent in faith and
holiness, in Switzerland, in Saxony, in Savoy, and the barbarous corners of the
Pyrenean mountains, and Alps, then other places of the World; and so in
England, and Scotland, under the Antichristian and persecuting Bishops of late,
the Saints then living under them, did shine more eminent in their graces, then
now they do in this their day of prosperity; and many then were more faithful
Martyrs unto the truth of Christ, then now they are: for the more high Satan
and his instruments are against the Saints, God's care over them is the more
intense, and the measure of his graces the more enlarged toward them.

Obs. 5. That it is the Saints great duty, and their highest glory, to hold
fast their faith and profession of the truth, in the worst times, and amongst
the worst of people. The Church at Pergamus is approved for holding fast
Christ's Name and Faith, amongst them in whom Satan did bear sway, and in such
a time when Antipas was Martyred, and suffered death for the same profession.
It is an easy matter to carry a full sail of profession, when the soft gale of
prosperity blows; neither is it any difficult matter for an hypocritical
heart to seem godly with the godly, to be sober with the sober, or to be
righteous amongst the righteous: But the spirit of a man is then tried, when
his habitation is amongst the ungodly, that can keep himself sound amongst
their corruptions, upright and perfect amongst the unrighteous, and untainted
with their follies, and sweet, as Fishes in the Brackish Ocean. The three
faithful children would not bow in Babylon, to Nebuchadnezzar's Image, though
death it self attended them: Be thou faithful unto the death, and thou shall
have a Crown of life. Many will follow Christ in smiling times, or when the
State does countenance Christ and godliness; this is to follow Christ for the
loaves sake: But when Christ is hurried to Pilat's Hall of Judgment, his formal
followers will forsake him, yea, Peter himself may deny him; weak Christians
may stumble and draw back, when Pillars of the Church, as Peter, fall so foully.
He is the only approved Christian, that will hold his profession fast before
the face of Nero and Dioclesian, as the virum victoriae which St. Austin
mentions, and at the Stake, can freely with Stephen, forgive his enemies, and
commend his spirit unto his God. Jo: Hus, Hierom of Prague, the poor Waldenses,
and our later Christian Martyrs, as Bradford, Philpot, Glover, etc. in our
English Marian days, has with Antipas, for their constant witnessing unto the
truth and faith of Christ, attained the ever-living and honorable names of
faithful Martyrs of Christ, and that most justly, in that they suffered in the
worst of times, when Antipas was slain, that is, in a persecuting bloody age,
when many godly persons burnt at the Stake, and amongst the worst sort of
people, the wicked Antichristian, Tyranizing, and bloody Prelates, for holding
fast the profession of the truth and faith, in such ungodly times, and amongst
such a divelish crew, amongst whom Satan had his Throne, sway, and full
Dominion, they justly shall ever live, in the memory and hearts of all the
faithful, as Reverend Martyrs unto Christ and his truth. Thus for a man to be a
Lot in Sodom, never touched with Sodom's wickedness, to keep himself pure, and
sincere, and undefiled in the midst of a crooked generation, to shine as a
light in the midst of darkness, this brings honor both to God and man.

Obs. 6. The graces of well approved and faithful Christians departed, are to
be set forth as patterns and examples to the living, both for encouragement and
imitation. Antipas is here set as an example of constancy and faithful
Martyrdom unto Christ and his truth. It is great encouragement to the living,
to have the pattern of former worthy men before them. It is said, that it was
the reading of Achilles life in Homer, that made Alexander ambitious to be his
competitor in noble atchievments. Again Julius Caesar taking up Alexander's
example, endeavored to be sole Lord of the whole World. So also it is on a
spiritual account; Abraham is called the Father of the faithful, for his
approved faith in the promises of God, and they are his children, and the true
seed of Abraham, that walk in the steps of faithful Abraham: And so Abraham,
Abel, Enoch, Noah, Sarah, Moses, etc. are made ever-living examples of faith
and godliness, for imitation to all generations to come, Heb. 11. It much
comforts us and bears up our spirits in sufferings, when we hear that Christ
our head and captain has perfected our salvation by sufferings, he having
trodden to us our first this thorny way, let us not be ashamed to take up our
cross and follow him, whenever he shall call us to it; and so in all things
else in him, that are imitable by us, not as he was Mediator, but as a holy
person, and head of his mystical body, the Church; and so he presents himself
as a gracious example to his Disciples, Jo. 13.15. For I have given you an
example, that ye should do as I have done to you. As he is the perfection of
all the creatures, and the light it self, and wisdom of the Father, so sure o
all patterns and examples, his in the ways of grace, are most sound, wise, and
perfect; And blessed are they they that follow their Lord and Master, for he is
the way and the life.

Verse. 14.15. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast a stumbling
block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and
to commit Fornication. So have thou also them that maintain the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.
The churches of Smyrna, and Laodicea, only of the whole seven, did pass the
approbation of the Spirit without any but prefixed, or annexed to them: The
church of Pergamus had her commendable graces, of constancy in the faith, and
profession of the truth, in the worst of times, and amongst the vilest people,
even where the Seat of Satan was: Yet all in her is not well, or sound, for
Christ comes on with a but against her; But I have a few things against thee,
because, etc. Whence by the way, Observe,

Obs. 1. That many Churches of Christ, and persons, may suffer much for Christ,
and the profession of Christ, yet not sound and right in all the truths of
Christ.

Doubtless the church at Pergamus had and enjoyed but sad and afflicting days,
when Antipas Christ's faithful Martyr was slain, for then she denied not the
faith, but held her profession with much constancy. The church at Thyatira too,
was commended for her faith and her patience, verse 19. yet both these
churches, notwithstanding their fair profession, they had much rottenness and
unsoundness in the root; their Doctrines were not strait that they had among
them, there were those in the one, held the doctrines of Balaam, and the
doctrines of the Niolaitans; in the other, the doctrines of Jezabel, and her
wicked practices; both most unsound both in doctrine and practice, yet both
highly suffering for the Name of Christ. We see that the profession of the Name
of Christ amongst the Gentiles, was sufficient to bring suffering on the
Disciples, but suffering for that profession was not sufficient to make them
sound in all things. Some may prophecy in Christ's Name, and cast out Devils in
his Name, and suffer, and give their bodies to be burnt for his Name, and yet
at the last day Christ may tell them he knew them not. He that will attain a
comfortable Martyrdom for the profession of the Faith of Christ, let him first
see that his ends be right.

First, That it be truly and really for Christ:

Secondly, That it be out of love to Christ and his truth.

Thirdly, That it tends wholly to the glory of God, and not at self.

This is the true suffering that will attain to the crown of life.

But to proceed, Christ has a charge against this church of Pergamus, and it
is, Because thou have there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught
Balack to cast a stumbling block, or a stone of offense (in the Greek (...))
before the children of Israel.

Because thou have, (...), thou have, that is, thou keep, hold, and
intendest to keep and hold; thou have these Balaamites not by accident, or
chance, but by choice; thou have them because thou delightest in them, and wilt
have it so: Thy habendum and tenendum go together, thou have them, and wilt not
part with them, because thou love them; therefore thy sin is the greater
herein.

And what have thou? Those that hold the doctrine of Balaam, etc. the doctrine
of Balaam was, when he saw that God had blessed Jacob, and that there was no
Enchantment against Israel; he cursedly advised Balack the Prince of the
Midianites, to make a great Sacrifice to Baal Peor, and to invite the
Israelites unto it: Now Baal Peor was the filthy, lascivious Idol Priapus, as
Godwin's Jewish Antiquities testify; whose Festivals and Sacrifices were
celebrated by both Sexes, in most shameless postures and manners: And
therefore, Hos. 9.10. It is said, they went to Baal Peor, and discovered
themselves to their shame, because it made them shameless, and to discover
their nakedness before that Idol. Now the cursed advice or doctrine of Balaam
(for a man's doctrine is his advice or counsel) consists of two parts.

First, To sacrifice to Idols, and to participate at their cursed Altars, in
eating of their idolothites, expressly against the Law of God, and that of S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 10.20, 28, Acts 15.29.

Secondly, In mixing with the Midianitish women, a notion utterly forbidden to
the Jewish Nation, not to meddle with in such a way. So that though Balaam
could not curse Israel according to Balack's desires being overmastered by God;
yet it seems his heart went still after the wages of unrighteousness, as, 2
Pet. 2.15. testifies; that is, his desires and heart was to take Balack's hire
and reward to curse Israel, if the Lord had not overmastered both his tongue
and heart, and instead of cursing them, he was enforced to bless them; and
seeing he could not pleasure Balack according to his expectation and desires,
as a Prophet in his malediction, yet he was free, as a private Machavilian, or
an Achitophel, to counsel Balack, that the readiest way to bring the people of
Israel at enmity with their God, was to bring them to Idolatry and Adultery;
and so God that was their keeper and Savior against all enchantments and
cursings, would become their enemy, and deliver them up either to Balack's, or
the Moabites hands, or smite them himself in wrath and judgment. And indeed
Balaam's desire and doctrine took effect, and was right unto its end; and
accordingly they sinned, and accordingly God was angry with them and smote of
them with a Plague, twenty four thousand, Number: 25.9. compare Numb. 31.16. to
cap. 25.1, 2, etc. Now it seems the church at Pergamus had such that held such
doctrines of Balaam, such as pretended fair, as Balaam, and carried, it may be,
a high profession to Christianity, yet laid such a scandal or stumbling block
before the church, as Balaam did to the children of Israel; that is, they held
that it was lawful to eat of things sacrificed to Idols, to participate of the
Idolatrizing Sacrifices, and heathenish Festivals of the Panim Pergamites; as
there was of the same consort in the church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 10. who would
needs participate in the Lord's Supper, and in the Idols sacrifices, which was
the service of devils, v. 20, so pleasant and sweet was the old heathenish
Idolatries to the new converted Christians, that they would needs keep their
old jovial Feasts and Sacrifices to Jupiter, Bacchus, Venus, Adonis, Priapus,
etc. together with the Eucharistical Feast of the Supper of our Lord. And not
only thus turn spiritual fornicators and adulterers, but also commit corporal
whoredoms and fornications; for it was impossible that those loose Idol Feasts
could be celebrated without it: for the Feasts and Sacrifices of Priapus,
Venus, Bacchus, Adonis, etc. the more shame, and bestiality, and lasciviousness
was discovered therein, the more they thought they pleased their God in their
Sacrifices: And therefore doubtless it was in the excess, as all Historians
that treat thereof do witness: And this is clear from the next verse, for it
comes in with a conjunction copulative, Even so have thou them that maintain
the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans; a loose, lascivious, and idolizing doctrine,
agreeing with that of Balaams, only differing in some mysterious notions, being
a branch of the high flown Gnostics, who had peculiar expressions, and
un-intelligible notions, proper to their sect. I refer you to the precedent v.
6. concerning the Nicolaitans more at large.

This was the (...), the stumbling block, the scandal and offense which some
corrupt and unsound Christians laid in the way of others in the church of
Pergamus. This word stumbling block, is here taken up for the manner of men, in
laying stones, blocks, or snares in the way, that make persons fall or stumble
thereat; and this word is used in Scriptures sometimes actively, sometimes
passively: The Pharisees and Scribes were offended, and scandalized at the
Doctrine and Miracles of Christ, Mat. 15.12. here was an offense taken, but
none given. But an active scandal is, when a real offense is given, and a
manifest stumbling block is laid in the way, as Balack did to Israel; and when
any open evil is committed, either contrary to Gods Law, or when our liberty is
used in things indifferent, in an unseasonable time, to the offense of the
weaker, whereby they are made the worse, less godly and honest; this also is an
active scandal, and a stumbling block, Romans 14. and to be avoided of all
knowing Christians. The Notes that arise from this verse thus explained, are,

Obser. 1 That God has a controversy with all such Churches, as hold and
maintain pernicious unsound doctrines, and wicked practices.

This is that God hates in the Churches, and are so abominable to him, that God
has a charge against those back-slidden churches for their erroneous doctrines
and practices, and threatens them that he will come with the sword of his mouth
against them, and will remove their Candlestick from among them, if they do not
repent; which in few-ages after he exempted against them to the utmost. It is
not church privileges will exempt a people sinning against God, from his
desolating judgments.

The people of Israel was God's peculiar own people, chosen out amongst all the
Nations of the world to know his Name; the holy people, Isa. 62.12. Dan. 8.24.
a people near unto God, and blessed above all. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 14. They were the
people that had the holy Land, Temple, Ordinances, Divine worship, Oracles of
God, the Prophets, his Tabernacle, and the most special presence of God. These
were the glory of God, and as dear unto him as the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.8.
Yet when this people fell to wicked practices, and rebelled against God, and
cast off his yoke, his wholesome Laws and Doctrines; none of their
church priviledges could secure or protect them from the desolation and
judgments which came upon them: It is to small purpose to say, when we sin
against God, we have Abraham to our Father; or cry, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; it is neither birth, privilege, nor church, will secure us
from the judgments of God: For the Ax is laid unto the root, and the people
that brings not forth fruit worthy of repentance, shall be^^^ down, and cast
into the fire. O then! seeing God will not spare his, own children, if they sin
and rebel against him, and seeing that Judgment must begin at the house of God,
and if it begin first at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly,
and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.

Observe. 2. That erroneous and corrupt Churches and Persons, are very obstinate
and tenacious of their corrupt principles and practices.

The church of Pergamus had those that held and maintained the Doctrines of
Balaam and the Nicolaitans, they did it not underhand, and in secret, but
openly and professedly, as the Israelites did in the business of Baal Peor at
the advice of Balaam when they committed Idolatry, and whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, they did it not in a corner, but avowedly, professedly, and
shamelesly, as it is evident in Number. 25. from v. 1. to 6. And beholdone of the
children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman, in
the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the Congregation of the children of
Israel, who were weeping before the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.
When Moses, and the faithful amongst the Israelites were mourning and weeping
for the abominations of their brethren, then some of them were so bold and
impudent, as to come before them, even in their faces, with their sins in their
hands, not ashamed of them. Sober Christians will think it strange, that any
professed churches of Christ, or Christians, should openly, and professedly,
hold and maintain Doctrines and practices as bad as Balaam's and the
Nicholaitans, and if not far worse: And yet this carries as much truth with it,
as any Historical relation in the World; and that too, maintained with as much
pertinaciousness, impudency, strength of wit, and policy, as if it were the
most virtuous or gracious principle in the whole word of God. What a doing,
tugging, and patching of counsels there was, for the upholding of Idolatry and
Image worship in the church of Rome for many ages? All were Anathematized by
her, that would not join in that false worship; and it is to this day
maintained by them, in the face of the Sun, which is the great scandal and
stumbling block to the Jews and Turks, to keep them off from the faith unto
this day. O most sad! that professed christians should be the greatest and most
obstinate Idolaters amongst the Nations round about them: And this is not all,
they have their adulteries too, and fornications, professedly owned, avowed,
and allowed; else what means the public Revenues that comes into the
Pope's Coffers from the Stews at Rome, and elsewhere, under his Jurisdiction,
which were authorized and erected by Sixtus the fourth at Rome: And Pope
Nicholas the first, that prohibited the Clergy Marriage, deprived a Priest of
his benefice at Placentia, for having a wife and children; but the said Priest,
afterward proving the said woman to be the wife of another man, and only his
concubine, he was again restored. O abominable! and doctrine of devils!
honorable Marriage forbidden, and Adultery, and Fornication, allowed and
countenanced! And this is not a private opinion, or of some persons in that
harlot church; but it exceeds that of Pergamus: for they had but some amongst
them that held the doctrine of Balaam, but it is here more general; and as
catholic as their church is, so catholic are those their errors and wicked
practices; for as far as the church of Rome's Jurisdiction reach esso far the
worship of Images, her Idolatries and adulteries reach also. But let us turn
our eye from this great Scarlet Whore, and look a little, and reflect upon our
own reformed churches at home, and see whether there is any thing there
maintained and upheld as the Doctrines of Balaam and the Nicolaitans amongst
us: It is no evil to enquire, an enemy discovered is half vanquished. I hope we
have but few of the late generation of Baal's Priests left among us, of that
prelatical party, that endeavored with might and main to bring in the
doctrines of Balaam, and of their abovesaid mother Jezabel, amongst us. It Is
true, they endeavored to lay a stumbling block before the true Israelites of
God in their traveling toward their celestial Canaan, they enticed and
invited the faithful ones of this Nation to the Sacrifices of Baal Peor, and to
commit Fornication with the Midianitish women; and many precious ones did
stumble and fall thereby: but God gave them a day of sorrow and repentance for
it. Now their Idolatries and Adulteries consisted in their Altar worships;
pompous gorgious Services, cringes, and congies at the cross, Musical
church-services, etc. all which are but part of the garment of the Scarlet
whore; but also they committed Fornication with the daughters of Moab; that is,
they mixed Interest and relation with Antichristians, and joined counsels with
Jesuits, etc. and took up professedly Romish principles and practices; As the
doctrine of free will, liberty of plays on the Lord's day, and conformity to
all outward ceremonial rites and services, on purpose to ensnare the
conscientious and godly, and to make them fall: And yet this was not all, but
like true Balaamites, they taught Balack to lay a stumbling block before the
children of Israel; that is, they incited and stirred up their Prince and
Sovereign to do the very same, and to enact heavy and penal Laws against all
Non-conformists, to their forms and false worships, and received from Balack
their foe, the wages or hyre of unrighteousness: It is not he that preaches the
Gospel and lives by the Gospel, that receives the wages of Balaam, as some
Fanatiques of these days would have it, but very sutably it maybe applied to
such Prophets that will teach their Prince and Sovereign to set up and command
a worship which has none of Christ's stamp upon it, and to enforce it on the
consciences of the truly godly, on great penalties, thereby to ensnare them,
and make them stumble, if they may: These are true Balaamites indeed, and for
this their Antichristian service, they expect great revenues, encouragements,
and honors, as wages due unto them, and this is the wages of unrighteousness; 2
Pet 2.15. which Balaam loved. There is another sort amongst us, that hold
professedly the doctrine of the Nicholaitans and Balaam; that hold no
difference betwoeen good and evil, and that good and evil consists only in
opinion, not in reality; and these are high flown Anti-Scripturists, and
Antinomestical Atheists, and are not so much as to be conversed with as
christians, but to be looked on as aliens and strangers to God, his Laws, and
the Commonweal of Israel. The Lord open their eyes to see their madness and
folly, if it be his blessed will.

Observe. 2. The true worship of God, and false, can never stand together.

Dagon and the Ark cannot be competitors under one Roof. Christ will not endure
the doctrines of Balaam, Idolatries and Adulteries, to be practiced in his
churches; if his church will entertain such doctrines and teachers, he will
hate them for it, and he will no longer be their teacher, but will become their
enemy, and come against them with the sword of his mouth. We cannot serve two
Masters, Christ and Mammon at once, either we must love the one, and hate the
other; For there is no fellowship between light and darkness, the one always
expels the other.

Observe. 3. That false Teachers (as Balaam) may carry a high and fair hand of
profession, and yet still Balaamites in their hearts.

Balaam was a Prophet, and prophesied very clearly of Christ, Numb. 24. and
carried a very fair hand in profession, as to desire the death of the
righteous, and yet still loved the wages of unrighteousness: So many false
Prophets of our days may profess fairly, and Prophecy many excellent things of
Christ and his truth, and yet still Balaamites in their hearts, loving the
wages of unrighteousness; willingly they would curse the godly, and blast them
it they could, but God providentially by his wisdom has overpowred them; yet
though they know that there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor divination
against Israel, they will teach Balack, as sly Machiavilians, to lay snares to
entrap the true Israelites of God, and make them fall; advising, as cunning
Politicians, their Sovereign Authority to enact strict Laws, for conformity
unto their false and wil-worships, on purpose to make the conscientious godly
to stumble against the just authority of the Magistrate, and so to sin and
perish. And hereby that honorable and just maintenance which Gospel Ministers
may rightly receive and demand of their flocks, is become unto such the wages
of unrighteousness.

The Papists at this day carry a high hand of profession, and who higher then
they? Who more costly in their services and worships? Who more desiring the
death of the righteous, as then monastical lives, and Votaries of all sorts
testify, then they? Yet who has laid more stumbling blocks in the ways of
christians and the truth, then they, by their Balaamitish doctrines and
practices? It is most usual amongst us to commend the days of our forefathers,
as most imitable and religious, yet how sad to consider, when we find the very
doctrines of Balaam left unto us from them, for though at present I have not
numbered the thirty seventh year of my age, yet I well remember how rise the
doctrines of Balaam were practiced here amongst us, and that too, by imitation
from our predecessors. We had our Floralia, our Feasts and Sacrifices to the
Goddess of Maia, which were carried on with a great and solemn vanity, with
much Paganish customs exercised thereabout, mixed with a great deal of vanity,
sin, shame, and bestiality; and this not only permitted, but maintained and
defended by ungodly Balaamites, in opposition to the godly in their times: Yet
the practice thereof in these parts was so vile, that the same persons, the
same day that they did eat of the body and blood of Christ in his Ordinance of
the Supper, the same day were drunken, and filled with things offered unto
Idols; I mean, in their heathenish sports and vanities; but blessed be God that
has now, taught us otherwise. Yet though at present we make a fair profession,
yet still we have some remainders of this doctrine of Balaam all England over,
even in keeping our Wakes, our Revels, our Parochial Festivals a foot, wherein
there is a great smatch of Antichristian Idolatrizing, and eating things
offered to Idols, and lusting after the Midianitish women, and Flesh pots, and
Onyons of Egypt; in the observation of these and other Roman Festivals. If
Feasts or Festivals, be they never so piously instituted, as the '(...), or
Love Feasts amongst the primitive christians were, once come to be defiled, and
to lose their Primitive virgin institution and ends, and to become Sacrifices
to Bacchus, or Venus, or to any Idol whatsoever; they are to be disanulled,
abrogated, and laid aside, as an unholy thing. The Lord deliver his churches
and people from the politic Balaamites of these times, who will teach Balack
to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel; and the Lord give a
discerning heart unto our Sovereign Magistrate to discover all such that come
unto him, and move or teach him to lay stumbling blocks or snares in the ways
of the true Israelites of God; let such have the wages of Balaam who have
forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the
son of Beor, so let them receive the wages of unrighteousness for their hire.

Observe. 4. That false Prophets and false Teachers, are still ready to
insinuate with, and please the humors of the Princes of the people, in all
their wicked designs.

Balaam was very ready and intense to answer Balack's cursed desires against
Israel, if the Lord had not prevented him: What elsemade Balaam, after he had
the denial of God, that he should not go to Balack, Numb. 22.12. to make
another application to God to get permission to go to Balack? And when he knew
his errand, that it was to curse Israel; how often did he tempt the Lord with
Sacrifices, if possibly he could, to draw God to his design? And though God
did manifest his displeasure to Balaam in his way, in the business he went
about, by the Angel with the sword, and made his Ass miraculously to reprove
him; yet neither miracle, cross, providence, nor prohibition, shall hinder
Balaam to serve Balack against the Israelites if he may. If once false Prophets
perceive the humor of their Princes, they will be sure to sew pillows under
their arm-holes; they will observe the humors of men, and apply themselves to
please answerably: Yet this is not all, they will, as Balaam, instruct Balack
in wicked and cursed designs and practices, though they have commands enough
to the contrary, and witnessed sufficiently from heaven against it; yet they
will justle such cursed and bloody plots into their Princes hearts that they
never thought of, yea that are abhorrent to some of their natures; as it is
witnessed in the History of Q. Mary, That her own natural disposition was good
and merciful, and only instigated and taught to persecution against the Saints,
by the wicked Balaamites, false Teachers, as Bonner, Fisher, etc. It is
observed by some that our late King Charles of England had never split the Ship
of the Commonweal against the Rock, had he not hearkened too much to the advice
of the Balaamites about him, the Bishops, and their corrupt party, who taught
him to lay snares or stumblingblocks in the way of the true Israelites of God
in this Nation; to wit, by the promotion and countenance of Romish Idolatries,
and their Midianitish Fornications: But behold the wisdom of God, they were
both taken in their own snares, and laid in the dust together: And so acording
to that, Numb. 31.8. They slew the King of Midianitish (...) Princes; and
Balaam also, the son of Beor they slew with the sword. Beyond Seas it is a
Proverb, No cursed design afoot, but a Priest has a finger in it: I could pray
it were not in England; I could wish that they in our Israel had less of
Achitophel or Machiavel in them, and more of the simplicity of he Gospel of
Christ in the room thereof.

Observe. 5. False Prophets, as Balaam, lay their designs not only for the
temporal destruction of the godly, but for the eternal also, if they may.

Balaams design in his cursed counsel to Balak was, that the Israelites should
Idolatrize and adulterize, that the judgments of God might both reach their
bodies and souls together. The devil and his agents desire, that all may have
no better portion then themselves; they will not be contented with the
destruction of Saints bodies, but will night and day, like roaring lions, go
about to seek to destroy them, and to cause them to lose and forfeit their
eternal state of happiness, if they could. It was this that made these churches
of Asia to lose their candlesticks, and it will be always the Balaamitish
doctrines and practices, that will cause God to remove his presence of grace,
power, and comfort, from one people to another, that is more sound and
fruitful; O therefore, ye churches of Christ, look to your doctrines and
practices, that they be right and straight to the rule of God's Word, so God
will delight to dwell among you, and will make you the habitation of his glory,
otherwise will leave your place desolate and forsaken; though you be his people
in profession: If you turn to idols, false worships, and wicked practices,
though Moses and Eliah be among you (righteous souls!) they shall only save
themselves, but the wicked shall be cut off from the land of the living, which
is reserved as an inheritance for the pure and undefiled.

Observe. 6. That wheresoever Idolatry is admitted into a church, looseness and
lasciviousness presently follows.

Error is fruitful, and one brings forth another: As Soon as the church of
Pergamus maintained the eating of things offered unto idols, which is the
service of devils, presently they join hands with the obscene sect of the
Nicolaitans: when the Israelites joined to the sacrifices of Baal Peor, Numb.
25. they became shameless, and presently fell on the Midianitish women: in
Ezekiel. 8.14. we shall read, that there were Jewish women weeping for Tammuz,
that is, as some read it, Adonis, or an idol or image of Adonis, who was a
great lover of Venus, and slain by a Boar, in whose memory there were
celebrated yearly solemnities, in which were the weepings of women; or, as
Junius has it, it was Osyris, an Idol of the Egyptians and Phoenicians, in
whose rites they forgot all bounds of modesty, and discovered their nakedness
to the Idol. So corrupt is false worship and idolatry, that it and filthiness
do usually walk hand in hand together: in most part^ (...) ^he jurisdiction of
Rome, but especially Italy and Spain, ^ein the greatest and most notorious
idolatries are committed and countenanced, there are the greatest obscenities
both in words and actions; yea, and that commonly practiced among them which is
unnatural and Sodomitish, and not so much as to be named among christians: so
it was so here once within our memories with us, as soon as we had tasted the
same grapes of Rome, lust was soon promoted both in Court and Country.

Quest. But if you here demand wherein lies the mischievousness and
grievousness of this sin of Idolatry?

I answer, 1. All Idolaters, they forsake the true God.

2. They change the glory of the incorruptible God into the form of creeping
things.

3. They thrust out the Ordinances of God from their holy places, and at last
God himself.

4. They slight God and his help in extremities, and call to their idols, that
see not, hear not, nor understand, as the Papists do to S. Anthony, S. Francis,
etc.

5. They become prodigal toward their idols; as the Adulterer thinks nothing
too much for his harlot, so they nothing too much for their idolatrizing
worship; witness the church of Rome.

6. They become unclean, and Nicolaitans, which thing God hates.

7. They become fools, infatuated, and delivered over to a reprobate sense,
whilst they disclaim the great, infinite, glorious, holy, and all-wise God; and
in the room thereof, adore Batts, Oxen, Moles, Owls, etc. and that which is
worse, little pieces of dead wood, metal, and the like, carved and framed by
the hand of the workman: and this is the just hand of God upon all Idolaters,
who receive not the truth in the love of it, and therefore God gives them over
to strange delusions, and believe a lie.

Observe. 7. The last Note from these words shall be, That it is one of the
difficultest undertakings of the Ministry of Christ, to take off or wean either
new planted Churches or newly reformed ones, from their old false worships and
practices.

Some of the new planted churches, as of Pergamus, Corinth, and other of the
Gentiles, thought that they might still participate of their former sacrifices
of devils, and their idolathites, and of Christ's Table also; but the Apostle
Paul was very bitter against such, in 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. and the Spirit here
also falls foul upon them, and sets a check upon the Pergamitish church for
entertainment of such doctrines: What ado had Paul also to take off the
believing Jews from their circumcision and Mosaical rites; they would needs
have the observation of all the ceremonial Law, and paedagogy of Moses joined
to Christ for justification, and so make Christ of none effect: no less then a
full council of Apostles and Elders were sufficient to remove this stumbling
block out of the way, Acts 15. and what a difficult business it was in the
first Reformation, to reform up fully, all the world knows; what uproars,
commotions, and civil wars there were in K. Edward the sixth's days, when the
Mass Book was but turned into English, as some of K. Edward's counselors
advised our Cornish Rebels, who were then in Arms for their old Mumpsimus, and
Popish worship? And surely Luther, nor Zuinglius, nor Calvin, could go on with
a through Reformation in Germany, France, or other places, in respect of the
unpreparedness, and unsuitable state and condition of the Nations among whom
they begun the Reformation, being so long time settled and fixed upon their old
lees, it was a very difficult work for them to go farther through with it, then
was fit and competent for that generation, who always reserved some relics
remains, and smacks of Popery, though the main works were beaten down; and
therefore some heady people of those times, that would not condescend in any
thing, or have providential carriage toward the weaker and darker sort of
people, would reform things even to the height and full pitch of Reformation
according to the primitive pattern; but the people of them ages being not able
to bear it, it caused much trouble to the church and through intemperate zeal,
much hinderance and obstruction to the begun reformation, and advantage to the
enemy: But since in many places and Nations of the reformed, this reformation
has made a further progress by some steps; yet still amongst most of the
reformed, not only in this Nation, but elsewhere, there are some remains of the
old false worship and practices, and a lusting after them; so strong a desire
we have to the imitation of our predecessors practices, be they never so
corrupt: yet blessed be God for that reformation we enjoy, and liberty to
profess and practice the ordinances of God, according to the most undefiled and
purest pattern that we judge agreeable to the Gospel of Christ. What shall us
desire more on our own parts? Or, what greater blessing can we expect from God
by the sword of the Magistrate then to be protected, secured, and countenanced
in the ways and worship of God according to a good conscience? If the Ministers
and Churches will not reform in such a day when public Edicts are gone forth
from Cyrus to set Israel free, I wonder when they will fall upon it? Do they
expect the Magistrate to command and compel all unto the work? Alas, this is
not the generation that all will be fit for such a work in a whole Nation or
Kingdom; no, never will there be such a golden age, until Christ himself shall
come with the fan in his hand, to purge his garner, and take the Kingdom unto
himself. Is not the church a Lilly among thorns? If the whole Nation be the
church, where are the thorns? Are they the other neighbor Nations about? Alas,
they are Lillies too; churches (on that account) as well as you: Are they the
gentle Nations, as, Turks, Persians, Antichristians, and Popish Nations? As
Italians, Spanish, French, etc? Alas they are no Thorns to you; the reformed
Nations are in equal balance to them, and as apt to hear them, as they you;
But I confess you have those christian societies and churches among you, that
are as Lillies shining in graces among those Thorns and unfruitful Nations; and
to retard our reformation in church and ordinances, till all be squared and
hewn fit for this work, or before the Magistrate compels all unto this work, is
a vain expectation, seeing that there is so much of that old leven of our
ancestors, National Churches, National Officers, Birth privileges and
Ordinances on that account etc. still remaining in the hearts of most amongst
us; that it will not only render the work of a full reformation in this
generation, most difficult, but the attempt thereof rather dangerous and
prejudicial, not only to the faithful in this Land, but generally to the cause
of Christ, in all the reformed Nations round about us. Witness the intemperate
zeal of many that lived in the days of the first reformation; who became a
reproach and a shame in their irregular attempts about this work: Though they
had good hearts, and desired and aimed at good and just things; yet they
prosecuted it not justly, for to denominate a good action or work. The thing it
self desired and attempted, must not only be a good and honest thing in it
self, as a full reformation to God's word is; but it must have other honest
circumstances in it also.

1 The time when must be considered, in such a time when God and a clear
providence calls unto it.

2 The manner how must be considered, in a peaceable manner, it is to be
endeavored and promoted, as the work of the spirit of peace; not with wars,
tumults, and rebellions against Magistrates, which is as the sin of witchcraft:
So that the best action may lose its reward, and the atempters thereof suffer
justly for the unjust prosecution thereof. It is a sure rule to christians,
that they are to do no evil, that good may come thereof. We are not to sin
against the Laws of God, nor his Ordinance of Magistracy (unless cases of
inevitable necessity, where God will rather have mercy then Sacrifice) to
promote any just end or good whatsoever; for we are bound to walk by the rule
of God's commands and precepts, not of events and providence. Therefore all ye
faithful ones of this land, be wise and sober in this your way of temptation,
stop not the current of God's reformation by your precipitate and irregular
actings, be you still and you shall see the salvation of our God: You see the
main hinderance of this full work amongst us, even the old leven of false
worships derived and left unto us from our ancestors; God will remove this more
and more by steps and degrees, and that more generally, and will enlarge the
Tents of Jacob among us, if we provoke not God by our sins toward him: But to
expect a total reformation, never look for it until the day Star shall arise
with an incomparable glory. In the interim, let us walk honestly, and soberly,
like children of the Light, serving and fearing God, and honoring the King; and
then God will make them unto us Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers. And most
happy and blessed are the people that have their portion and lot in such a Land.

Object. But after all this an Objection may be risen. The church of Pergamus
had those among them that held and maintained the doctrines of Balaam and the
Nicolaitans, and practiced spiritual and corporal adulteries; so held the
church of Corinth. Thyatira had the doctrines of Jezabel, Galathia the Jewish
doctrine of circumcision, and many other great corruptions were among those
primitive churches; as, drunkenness, denying the resurrection, incest, eating
things offered unto Idols, and the obscenity of the Nicolaitans: Yet these are
still called the churches of Christ, his seven candlesticks, his faithful ones,
called and elect. And are not then our Parochial churches, our National
churches, as truly churches of Christ as those were? And are they not as sound
in doctrine and practices, as those first primitive christians and churches
were, and so deserve the Name of churches of Christ, faithful, elect and called
as well as they?

1 I Answer, We are to look unto the first institution of all churches; if they
are gathered and planted by the Ministry of the Gospel and Spirit, they are
truly churches of Christ, elect and called; though in process of time, the
envious one sowed plentifully among the good Wheat, his Tares and Darnel, as
among those of Corinth, Pergamus and others in the Primitive time; yet I
believe Christ had but a few things against theirs, in respect what he has
against ours; they were but corrupt in part, ours all leprous; they lost but
some members, we the very vitals: For I much question, whether our National
churches were of this Gospel structure, as those primitive churches were at the
first, seeing we read in History of their civil institution and beginning
being so divided or ordained by the politic Laws of the Nation: Yet withal I
say, we had the sincere faith of Christ here preached amongst us presently
after, if not in the very Apostles days, by Joseph of Arimathea, as Historians
testify; this good seed was almost lost among us, but again revived by the
providence of God in after ages, but held captive and low under the Tyranny of
Antichristian darkness, yet doubtless God had here and elsewhere his invisible
church and elect ones. Our succession to the Apostles is by cleaving to their
doctrines, and so we own a succession from them, but not a visible succession
of churches, for so we have sailed under the Antichrists reign and tyranny over
us: and to plead that our parochial Societies are churches of Christ, is but at
best to plead that our Hundreds or Counties are churchdivisions, Presbyteries,
or Ecclesiastique Jurisdictions, also being of the same civil institution with
the former. But some write that Dionysius Pope of Rome was the first divider
and institutor of Parishes about Anno 267. and brought into England by Honorius
Bishop of Canterbury, as learned Master Seldom in his Book de Decimis testifies.

2 I Answer, If our churches were right in their first institution gathered by
the word and spirit, we have as really lost the very being of our churches
under Antichrist's reign, as the churches of Corinth, Pergamus, Ephesus,
Smyrna, etc. under the Saracenical tyranny and Mahometanism: And therefore
there is as great need to call our churches out of Babylon, and to restore them
from Antichristianisme, as Pergamus etc. of the miserable captivated Asian
churches from Turcism, and Mahometanism; unless we grant, that the whore of
Babylon had the keeping and was the preserver of the Ordinances of the true
Spouse, and had the power of the Keys committed unto her: And therefore the
authority that many churches pretend unto by succession of churches, is but a
sorry one, and at the best, but Antichristian and Popish.

Lastly, I Answer, That it is not corruptions in a church do nullify a church,
though very high, if right and sound in the root, and hold fast the faith. This
gives the very being to a church; and so I say, that many of our National
churches, having now renonunced their institutions and calls from Antichrist,
and being called to the fellowship of the faith by the ministry of the word and
spirit, are become Spouses of Christ, called, and faithful, though mixed with
many corruptions, and unsound Doctrines and practices, as Pergamus, Corinth,
and others were; yet for their Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments amongst them,
are to be accounted as golden candlesticks of the Lord, churches of Christ,
holy, and sanctified: But still observe this, that the church of Smyrna, the
more pure and undefiled one, has the greater praise, greater manifestation of
love, grace, comfort, and glory on her, then any of the others the more unsound
ones; though they be Sisters, yet this is the only one of her Mother; though
all the rest be Daughters yet this is the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the
Valleys; though the rest are Christ's Vineyards too, yet this is the Garden
enclosed, where he takes his delight at Noon. And thus much hereon shall
suffice.

Verse. 16. Repent or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against
them with the sword of my mouth.
Repent,] (...), grow wiser, change thy judgment, and practice from evil to
good, cast off thy Idolatries and adulteries, and do thy first works, and
return unto me in sincerity and holiness; or else it shall not be long before I
come against thee, and make war against thee (for so the word (...) carries it)
and that with a most cutting confounding weapon, the Sword of my mouth, which
is his word and doctrine. Christ makes War with his Enemies by the Sword of his
mouth, or Word, two ways.

First, He manages it (as light to discover darkness) by his Angels and
Ministers, both for the evincing, confounding, and overthrowing all false
worships, doctrines and practices: And thus he manifests his displeasure from
Heaven, by his Word, against all workers of iniquity, as he does here, against
the Balaamitish, and Nicolaish doctrines of Pergamus, and as he has done of
late amongst us, against all Popish and Superstitious Innovations, and false
worships.

But, Secondly, If the ministerial convincing word will not serve to re-call
and bring to repentance his rebellious people or enemies, he will proceed
farther by his terrible doctrine or words of judgment against them. If Pergamus
will not repent upon the conviction of her sins, Christ will go out and fight
against her, and remove her candlestick from amongst her; yea, God will call
for a Nebuchadnezzar, a Mahomet, an Ottoman, and they shall be called his
servants, to execute the Lord's commands, and burdens of Judgment, against his
rebellious sinful churches: And thus Christ's sword of his mouth is to be
understood, with which he fights against his enemies, Chap. 19.21. Thus the
remnant of the followers of the Beast and false Prophet, were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the Horse, which sword proceeds out of his mouth;
that is, (as honest Bishop Hall on the place says) they were slain by the
powerful command of Christ, (not only Spiritually or Analogically, but
corporally) and upon their bodily death all the fowls were filled with their
flesh: thus far Bishop Hall. God commands to take the children of Babel and to
dash them against the wall. Take those mine enemies and slay them before me,
says the Lord. Thus we see what is the sword of Christ's mouth that he draws
against his unrepentant and obstinate wicked churches; first confusion of their
false doctrines, by his powerful ministerial word and spirit. Next of their
persons, by commanding Wars, or Famine, or Pestilence on them, for they are
also his destroying weapons, Jer. 47.7. Now this is done and commanded by
Christ sometimes expressly in Scripture, as, Rev. 18.6, 7, 8. Reward her as she
has rewarded you. and, cap. 12. 10. He that kills with the Sword, must be
killed with the Sword. Sometimes it is done providentially, by moving on the
hearts of Princes to war; the Persian against the Turk, or the Turk against the
Emperor or Venetian, the English against the Spaniard, and Spaniard against
the French; and so in the turmoiles thereof, many corrupt churches of Christ
perish utterly, as to their outward state and policy; and this is the way that
the great whore her self will fall and perish, Rev. 17.16, 17. Or thirdly, God
sends immediately his destroying Angels to execute his wrath; as, Ez. 9.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. against his Idolatrous people the Jews, and as many other places
testify, to smite them for their abominations, and their wickednesses.

Observe. 1. Note from these words, That repentance is the only Gospel remedy to
divert the wrath and judgments of God gone forth against a wicked Church or
People.

Repent, or else, says the Spirit unto the church of Pergamus, you know what
will follow. Turning from sinful ways, and turning to God, is the only way to
keep God's presence still amongst us: If we would have had turned unto God from
our former false ways of worships and wicked practices against God's Laws and
his Saints, we should not have seen those late desolating days amongst us.
Ahab's repentance, though it was formal and outward, yet it stopped the hand of
Gods judgments much in his days; but where there is a real repentance or
turning unto God, by a back-slidden and corrupted church, God really diverts
his threatened judgments: and this is merely a doctrine of grace, and not Legal,
as some would have it, for the Law says, The Soul that sins shall die; the
Law admtis of no sorrow and repentance for sin, but satisfaction and justice;
but the Law of grace or gospel in the hand of Christ, he having fully satisfied
both Law and Justice for sin and the breach of the Law, cries out in the
Streets, and to every creature, Repent and believe, believe and repent, for the
remission of sins. See more at large on the precedent 5. verse. of this cap.
what repentance is. But by the way take a character of true penitents.

First, They abhor themselves in their own eyes; the sight of their sins makes
them to abhor and loath themselves, Ezekiel. 20.43. and Job, 42.6.

Secondly, This they do not so much for the evil that sin brings upon them, as
for the evil it self which is in sin; being an offense against God, and his
Divine Will and holy Laws. Psalm. 51.2.

Thirdly, Their repentance is universal and perfect, as to its parts; it is not
one sin or corruption they leave, but all: Ezekiel. 20.43. Ye shall loath your
selves in your own sight for all the evils that you have committed.

Fourthly, They are afterward the more jealous of God's glory, and fearful to
sin against him, saying, How shall we do this thing, and sin against our God?
Who has washed us, and cleansed us, and sanctified us: How shall we defile our
selves again by sin, lest our state become seven fold worse then the first?
This is the temper of a gracious repentant Spirit.

Observe. God is so gracious that he always premonisheth, before he strikes in
judgment his rebellious and sinful people.

He calls them to repentance before he will go forth to fight with the sword of
his mouth against them: He will not come in wrath upon them unwarned. If God
has decreed a general destruction or desolation to any churches, he will make
it known unto his Prophets, they shall declare it to his people: And therefore
so often here in these two chapters Christ says, Let him that has an ear hear
what the spirit says unto the Churches. Let him that is wise among you
consider well of those Judgments which are to come upon you, and are made known
unto you by your Prophet John; And to what end does God this?

First, that the Lords Elect and precious ones among them may be awakened out
of their sins, and brought to repentance.

Secondly, That they may be secured from eternal ruin, if not from temporal.

Thirdly, That the wicked and impenitent may acknowledge their own evil ways,
and give glory to God, and justify God's righteous proceedings against them:
Yea often God will premonish a long time, and bear long with the sins of his
people, before he will execute the punishment due unto them, Isa. 42.12. Jer.
3.5. God could in a moment crush them all with his breath, yet waits long for
their repentance, 390. years, 1 Pet. 3.20. aabout 100 years, in the days of
Noah whilst the Ark was a preparing, God's long-suffering waited for the
repentance of the old world, by the Preaching of Noah unto them: How long did
God premonish us since the first time of the first reformation, by his faithful
Prophets and Ministers, to purge and cast out the leaven of Antichristianism
from among us, before he would go out in Judgment against us; was not his
long-suffering exercised toward us from Henry 8. and Edward 6. days, unto
these present times, a hundred years and upward, still looking and expecting
that we would pull down the High places and Groves that Jeroboam built, and the
Priests of Baal in the confines of our holy Land; and this was the Lord's
long-suffering to us-wards, sending us Prophet after Prophet, and Precept upon
Precept, to preadmonish us, not willing that any should perish but that all
should come to repentance; yet for all this, and the many days of peace and
plenty God did give unto us, inviting us as by gracious opportunities to
ammendment, we grew worse and worse, and added more abominations in the
services of God then was at first, until at last the Lord came to fight against
us with the Sword of his mouth, of War, Pestilence, and Famine, as we have
lately had sad experience of.

Observe. 3. That though God in mercy to his people, gives them often a long
time of preadmonishments unto repentance, yet if they continue impenitent, he
will come quickly against them.

That time that we look upon as long and far distant, as 100, 500, or 1000
years, is but as a day with God, yea, but a little space, and at present with
him, for he is Eternity it self, without measure or number. Though it was in
some ages after, that Christ came in judgment against those Asian churches for
their sins, yet he came quickly against them, in a time nearer then they
thought of: It is a quick and short time unto sinners when Judgments reach them
unexpectedly: Though it is many hundred years ago that that proud City and
Scarlet Whore began her reign, as Queen, and the time of her reign being for
1260 days, yet it is said, Rev. 18.2. Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen, and
is become the habitation of devils; that is, God sees it as already done for
the certainty of it, and all things future are as present with him. And though
it is above 1600 years since Christ ascended, yet he says Rev. 21.20. Surely I
come quickly, Amen. The people of the old world, and of Sodom and Gomorrah,
thought the day of God's vengeance afar off, till they were all swept away with
the desolating judgments of God. Who would have thought in K. Charles his time,
when Revelling, Quaffing, Dancing, and all vanities were in their Throne, that
God should come and write a sentence of desolation and misery on himself and
Kingdom, as on Belshazzar, Dan. 5.4.5, 25, MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL UPHARSIN. The day
is thy Kingdom taken from thee, and given to Darius the Median, ver. 30, 31.
Therefore if we be found in the same transgressions with our predecessors* let
us not be secure, but fear and tremble, left the same judgments overtake us
also: Happy is the man that fears always, says the Wiseman, Prove. 28.14.
Let God's judgments come sooner or later, they will come quick enough upon
secure unrepentant sinners; It is too late to prevent the fire when the house
is in flames. O let that Proverb in Ezekiel. 12.22. be no longer used in Israel,
saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision fails.

Observe. 4. That God's people and Churches fare the worse for the entertainment
of the wicked among them.

All of the church of Pergamus were not Balaamites or Nicolaitans, but that
they had them among them that held their abominable doctrines, yet however, for
free toleration of them, Christ will come against them all, not only against
the wicked, to fight against them with the sword of his mouth, but also, I will
come against thee quickly, thou whole church of Pergamus, for suffering these
abominations in the midst of thee. The church of Thyatira had the same check
for suffering the woman Jezabel among them; and at last, together with the
church of Pergamus, were both wrapped up in the same desolating judgment and
misery, for the entertainment of these abominations among them. Liberty to sin
is no part of that liberty with which Christ has made us free. Faithful ones
may plead for liberty for different things and judgments, in themselves not
simply morally evil, or against the positive Laws of God; but for for spiritual
or carnal adulteries, such must needs be either the advocates of Antichrist, or
the devils, that plead for their sufferance and toleration: As there are
various diseases in bodies, so they have their various medicines: If the
distemperature grows high and inflames, it may endanger the death of the body:
So it is in Christ's mystical body, his church, if the distempered gangrene
grows high and spreading, and ulcerate, it may endanger the whole vitals of
that church. As there are in natural Physic, blood-lettings, evacuatings,
healing, corroding and cauterizing medicines; so in our spiritual Physic there
are variety of Medicines, suitable to all the distemperatures of the body, the
church; and they that use Lenitives or healing Medicines, when the disease
calls for corroding or cauterizing Plasters, are but merciless Physicians, and
will kill and murder, rather then cure and save alive.

Object. But you will object, How is the justice of God vindicated, if he
smites both godly and ungodly together, for the sins of the wicked among them?

I answer, If the godly in a church do connive, freely tolerate, or wink at the
sins of the wicked, they are come partakers with them also therein, so also
justly in their judgments and miseries. The churches, and faithful, in
Pergamus, and Thyatira, were justly visited by God, for suffering the doctrines
of Balaam, Nicolaitans, and Iezabel among them, and righteously wrapped up in one
common calamity, with the Balaamites and Nicolaitans.

But secondly, if the faithful in a Church do protest, declare against, and
endeavor as much as in them lies, and by all lawful means for the purging out
of the evil and erroneous persons and doctrines among them, they have done
their duty toward God, and delivered their souls from guilt. Though the common
calamity and judgment of God on the wicked may reach these too, without any
derogation to divine justice; for it touches not them as a judgment, but as
trials, and for other good ends of God: Jeremiah, Daniel, Ezekiel, and other
faithful servants of God, suffered very much in the Caldean captivity; yet not
as for their own sins, but for other especial ends of God: But very often God
does and will save his faithful ones, as wheat amongst the chaff, by a temporal
salvation in the midst of judgments, and destruction of wicked ones round
about. God will call out righteous Lot from Sodom, and will provide Noah an
Ark, when he comes with flames of fire, or floods of desolating waters on the
wicked world, did not God's persevering providence and special mark of grace
appear in this Nation in preserving and keeping many precious grains of Wheat
amongst all our chaff, in this late day of our winowing and tribulation. And
many whereof as it were, were taken by the hand by God; as righteous Lot and
Noah, and Arks provided for them by God to pass from Sodom and the wicked
world, over the floods, into a land of rest, the Mountains of Ararat; I mean
the wildernesses of America. And so indeed the faithful witnesses of Christ, by
the Dragon's pouring out of floods of persecution after them, fled into the
wilderness, and were there preserved for some times, until the day of wrath was
over. Therefore when you see your faithful Lots, Noah's, etc. fly from you, or
called by God to places of security, look then for desolating times: Isa.
26.20, 21. When our Halc^^n birds, as Swallows, etc. fly from us, it is a sign
of approaching winter: So when good and godly men are removed out of their
places, or driven into corners, then observe it as a true Prognostic, Judgment
and Indignation is nigh at hand.

Observe. 5. When God is wrath with a people, he turns his sweetest mercies into
the most terrible judgments.

The word of God's mouth, which is the staff and comfort of his people; he can
turn unto the voice of Trumpets, and as the roaring of many waters for
terribleness. When we keep close unto Christ, then all things are ours,
Friends, Servants, Riches, children, and our Tables are mercies to us: But when
we are become enemies to Christ by evil works, then Friends, Servants, Riches,
Children, our Tables, and all are become snares unto us. When the King frowns
on us, all his Courtiers and Nobles will do it also: Whilst God is our Friend
all the whole creation will serve us freely; but if he frowns all will conspire
and rebel against us: His Angels, whom he formerly commanded for our safety to
pitch their Tents about us, will then be commanded to come with slaughter
weapons against us. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies
to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7. Babylon could never have hurt Zion, till
Zion had offended: When Pergamus, Thyatira, and the rest of the offending Asian
churches forsaked God, instead of the powerful sword of Christ's mouth, or word
of grace, in convincing them of sin, and mortifying their corruptions, or
speaking comfortably to them, he sends forth another word, a word of judgment
and indignation, commanding their adversaries to go forth with their destroying
weapons, either of War, Pestilence, or Famine, to sweep them off from the land
of the living, that their place should be no more found. O therefore let us be
sure to keep God our friend.

Verse. 17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and
will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.
He that is wise and has an understanding heart amongst you, let him consider
those premonitions which I have so often inculcated, lest the judgments
threatened for your sins overtake you; and therefore, hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden
Manna; as if Christ had said, although I will come against the wicked ones in
the church of Pergamus and fight against them with the sword of my mouth; yet,
to him that overcomes, that is, that opposes and escapes the temptations of
those pernicious doctrines amongst them, and keep themselves undefiled therein,
to them will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. Here some difficulty or
interpretation offers what is meant by this hidden Manna; many assert it to be
Christ, which is that invisible food received by faith, according to John 6.32,
33, 34. which comes down from Heaven, and there typified forth by Manna; but,
saving due reverence to the learned that goes that way, I cannot join with them
singly in that Interpretation: for,

First, It is here called hidden Manna, or strange Manna, not as yet
undiscovered, now Christ was the known and manifest spiritual food and Manna
unto all believers; and so that of John 6.3. is brought thereby to verify it,
and allude thereunto.

Secondly, Every believer has Christ already as his spiritual food and Manna,
and therefore it is but a surplusage and tautologie to promise that as a crown
and reward to the conquering faithful ones which they enjoy already, even from
their first day, or in their lowest state of faith; therefore surely it must be
somewhat more then Christ spiritually eaten by faith. Manna was the food that
came down from Heaven that God gave to his children of Israel in the
wilderness, Exodus 16.14, 15. etc. And as Antiquity and Jewish Rabbis testify,
in the eating thereof is represented all sorts of meat to the taste that the
appetite or curiosity could wish for; and therefore it was a fit Type for to
represent Christ by, who was the true bread of life that could fill and answer
all our necessities, and that he that should eat thereof should never hunger
more: but this is a hidden Manna, a strange secret bread of life, not yet made
known by enjoyment that is here promised, it is but a variation of the former
promises of a crown of life ver. 10.11. and to eat of the tree of life in the
midst of the Paradise of God, and ver. 18. And I will give unto him the morning
Star, and write the name of my God upon him, and put on him the white raiment,
etc. all these are but various expressions of the future eternal blessedness
that the conquering Saints shall enjoy after the resurrection: And therefore
this hidden Manna that is here promised to them to eat, is the enjoyment of
Christ in such a hidden manner in that day, that it far passes our
understanding for the excellency and the glory thereof, whose eating and
participating will be then in a far higher Key, and on a more spiritual
account, then now we can possibly in the state of weakness enjoy and
comprehend; and therefore it is here called the hidden Manna; and as another
additional degree of blessedness to this hidden Manna there is annexed, And
will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it. Some take this Stone to be the Stone of
free absolution and free justification by Christ, as having allusion to that
ancient practice among those Common-weals that were governed by a Democrasie,
as Athens, Sparta, etc. who when any person was accused of a crime, they that
absolved and acquitted him, cast into the pot a white Stone, and they that
condemned him cast in a black Stone; and so according to the number of the
Stones, the person was either acquitted or convicted: and that this was their
judicious custom, Ovid testifies in his 15. Book of Metamor.

Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis.
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa:
So in allusion to this practice say they, there is a free absolution and
acquittance given to them that overcome, by Christ, and a white Stone given
them wherein there is a new Name written, that no man knows but he that
receives it; that is, say they, it is new and strange to the knowledge of those
that have it not, or are in the state of nature, and no man has any certain
knowledge thereof but he that receives it. But this is not all that is promised
to the conquering christian, for the white Stone of absolution and adoption, he
has in the very first day that he undertakes his christian combat by faith;
for he can make no progress at all in this spritual conflict, unless he has
first received the white Stone of justification, absolution, and adoption by
faith: And though indeed no man knows the name and nature of this Stone
savingly, but he that receives it; and so indeed unto the unregenerate and
unbelievers this Stone has a new name and nature written thereon, that they
can have no certain knowledge of: But unto a believer and the faithful christian
combatant, this white Stone of absolution and justification is no new thing
unto them at all; for this white Stone that is here promised, is but an
additional promise of other terms, and variableness of expressions of that
blessedness that the overcoming christians shall enjoy in the world to come;
therefore as unto them, it has a new name also, and this expression has
rather allusion to that practice of the Anc^ents, who were accustomed to give a
certain white Stone with some such Inscription in it as Detur Vincenti, to
those that got the victory in plays and games. And this the Ancients
accustomed, as Aretus testifies, and we as yet retain some practices answerable
thereunto; as when we set up a silver sword for the Master or conquering
Fencer, a golden Ring for the best Dancer, a golden Cup for the best Racer or
Shooter, or a Golden Ball for the best Runner. These are as several prizes set
forth for him that overcomes in their respective games and pastimes amongst
men. To which the spirit here does allude, and promises him that overcomes in
his christian combat, the white Stone, wherein there is a new Name written, as
a prize of his victory and conquest; and it is such a stone, that there is a
new Name written therein; that is,

First, There is such an excellent glory in this white Stone or prize of
victory, that is as yet most strange and secret, and that never mortal eye yet
saw, and so unspeakable, that the heart of man cannot conceive the glory
thereof; for the Name of God is written on it, and of the City of God, and of
the new Jerusalem that comes down from Heaven, cap. 3. 12. and no man can
perfectly know or describe this glorious new State and Crown of life, or this
prize of inestimable glory, this white Stone wherein this new name is written,
but those that shall receive it in the last day. We know what manner of men we
are at present, but we know not what manner of men we shall be that day, before
it be revealed to us: we know now but in part, darkly, as in a glass, by
medium, figures and resemblances, as a crown of life, white raiment, hidden
manna, white stone, new name, and the like; but then we shall know it as we are
known.

Secondly, This white Stone or prize of glory, is said here to have a new name
written on it, in respect of the strangeness of the dispensation thereof: And
this is Christ's own new name, which the world is yet ignorant of, cap. 3. 12.
little do the world think to see the despicable and afflicted state of Christ
and his Saints, that he has another new Name for himself and them, that no man
knew but he himself: cap. 19. 12. and what is that new Name? Peruse the
subsequent verses, and you shall find, His eyes were as a flaming fire, and on
his head were many crowns, and he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood,
and his name is called the word of God, and out of his mouth goes a sharp two
edged sword, that with it he should smite the Nations, and he shall rule them
with a rod of Iron; and he has on his vesture and on his thigh a Name written,
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. And the same new Name is here written upon
the conquering Saints, and they are made copartners with Christ in this his
Kingdom; see the 26. and 27. verse. of this cap. and cap. 3. 12.

Is it not a strange and new thing think you, for the poor afflicted broken and
despised christians, to receive this white Stone or price of victory, to sit
down with Christ in his Throne and to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron? This
is indeed a new thing and a new Name, both to themselves and others also; and
yet it is here promised as a prize, crown, and reward of their faithful
perseverance and conquest, which when they receive it, they shall fully know
and comprehend it; but as yet it is a new Name written that no man knows but
he that receives it. The Note hence is,

Observe. That God has reserved and treasured up unspeakable glory for his
conquering Saints.

It is a new Name that no man knows, a hidden Manna, a spiritual
participating of Christ that is above our understanding, a new and joint power
given to us, by and with Christ, that we at present are uterly ignorant of;
yea, it is such a prize of glory, that eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
or the heart of man cannot comprehend: And therefore in 2 Cor. 4.17. it is
called a most excellent and eternal weight of glory; and therefore here in this
2. and 3. cap. this prize, this crown of glory, is set forth under various and
diverse figures and resemblances, which are sensible and apt for our capacities;
as ver. 7. under the Tree of life in the Paradise of God: ver. 10. under the
expression of the Crown of life: ver. 17. of the hidden Manna, and white Stone,
and new Name: ver. 26. of power over the Nations, and of the morning Star: in
cap. 3. ver. 5. under the name of white Raiment, and Book of life: ver. 12. of
a Pillar in the Temple of God, the Name of God, and the City of God: and in
ver. 21. of sitting on the Throne, with Christ in his Throne, as Christ has
already sat down on the Father's Throne. All these expressions are taken up by
the Spirit, to represent unto us the inestimable weight of glory, that is set
forth as a prize, and treasured up by God for all faithful persevering and
overcoming christians: And therefore let us all so run as we may obtain.

Use, But by the way here is an Use of Reproof, upon such that would now at
present catch at the Crown before the coronation day: You must first overcome
before you reign, unless you will reign without Christ; it is a hidden Manna, a
new Name; it is not meat for this corrupt world, nor a work for this
generation; It is a white Stone, wherein a new Name is written that yet no man
knows; it is not a dispensation for this corrupt age, it is an excellent and
eternal weight of glory, reserved for the new World, the Golden age, the new
Jerusalem, the new Heaven and Earth, wherein dwells righteousness; and this
will be produced in God's appointed time, by the almighty power and arm of
Christ, who is the great captain, conductor and leader unto this glorious day;
and therefore al such as pretend to lead and advance to this day otherwise then
by a placid submission to the providential dispensations of God in the world,
they only set up stumbling blocks for themselves and their followers to fall
by: They that will rule with Christ must overcome with Christ; they that will
sit with him in his Throne, must first pass to it as he did, by a conquest over
sufferings and temptations, 2 Timothy 2.12. Romans 8.17. If we suffer with Christ we
shall reign with Crist; for this crown is gotten by the way of the cross; but to
seek it by Swords, Pistols, Rapines, and Blood-sheds, you may obtain a crown
and Kingdom in the World, from the Prince that rules in the Air, and the
children of the World; but never from the Lamb that sits on the Throne. O
therefore return to this true Lamb of God and his Lamb-like condition, or else
he will become a Lion against you, and for your highmindedness and sins of
rebellion and blood, will come against you quickly, and fight against you by
the Sword of his mouth. O kiss the Son least he be angry.

Verse. 18. And unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, These things
says the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet
like fine brass.
Here it is evident who ^t is all along that gives these premonitions to each
church, it is Christ the Son of God, who in the former verses is called the
Spirit, for his spiritual appearance in the likness of the Son of man. In the
first cap. from verse. 13. to 16. this Son of God that appeared unto John in the
likness of the Son of Man in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, gives
a general discovery of himself unto John in all his attributes, as God and Man,
as King, Priest and Prophet, as the Savior and Preserver of his church, also
as a just Judge and avenger of his enemies. But now when Christ appears with
the particular charges against each church, he takes as it were his attributes
asunder, and clothes himself with that attribute which is most suitable for the
present condition of the church that he is to deal with. To the churches of
Ephesus and Smyrna, which were the most sound and sincere, he appears under the
attributes of a merciful Father who was dead and is alive, ver, 8. and of a
gracious preserver of his church, ver. 1* who holds the seven Stars in his
right hand. But now unto the churches of Thyatira and Pergamus, which were more
debauched and unsound, Christ manifests himself in a far different resemblance
and posture, having a Sword with two edges proceeding out of his mouth in his
appearance toward the church of Pergamus, and here unto Thyatira, like one
that has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine (or
burning) brass. This is a posture of indignation and wrath; for eyes sparkling
like fire, betokneth wrath; and feet like fine brass, readiness of execution:
Here Christ from head to feet is presented in a fiery color: This is Christ's
posture when he goes out in judgments against a church or Nation, when he goes
out to war against his enemies, he puts on this fiery posture, Rev. 19.11, 12,
13. See more hereon cap. 1. ver. 14, 15.

Observe. That when Christ goes out in judgment against a people, his appearance
is very dreadful.

The Prophet Malachi speaking of the coming of Christ, when he comes who may
abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? For he is
like the Refiner's fire, and shall sit as a Refiner and purifier of silver cap.
3. 2, 3. A Refiners fire is the hottest, it melts, purges, consumes, and is
terrible; such a fire is Christ in his judgments: When he comes to destroy
Antichrist and his Kingdom, Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. He shall come in flames of
fire. Have not most of our western Nations, as Germany, France, England,
Scotland, etc. seen this terrible appearance of Christ of late in his judgments
among us, who has laid many Kingdoms and Nations almost in the dust, destroyed
many ancient Families, Houses, Cities, Towns and Countries by the Sword, and
yet who lays it to heart? And yet Christ will be more terrible, for the great
day of his wrath is at hand, and who will be able to stand? Rev. 6.17. The
great ones of the earth that are found fighting against him, shall that day
call for the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from the face
of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. This is the
terrible and unknown name of Christ, which no man knows but Christ himself,
which one day he will manifest, when all his enemies are made his footstool,
and takes the Kingdom unto himself. O let this thy Kingdom come; and blessed is
he that shall sit down with Christ in his Kingdom.

Observe. 2. Christ is very zealous and intense on the punishment of delinquent
Churches.

Christ comes all in a fiery posture against Thyatira, and withal tells her,
ver. 22 23. that for suffering Jezabel within her; Behold I will cast her into
a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great Tribulation, except
they repent of their deeds: And I will kill her children with death, etc.
Christ when he whipped out of the Temple the buyers and sellers, Jo: 2. did it
so zealously that for that very act it was formerly prophesied of him, The zeal
of thy house has eaten me up. How zealous was Christ in his carriage, and
ready to punish all those delinquent Asian churches? He tells Ephesus in the
first place, Except she repent and recover her first love, and do her first
works, he will come quickly and remove her candlestick out of its place. To
Pergamus he says, Repent or I come quickly against thee with the sword of my
mouth. How zealous was Christ against the zeal-fallen church of Laodicea cap.
3. 15, 16. I know thou art neither hot nor cold, I would thou were cold or hot;
so then because thou art lukewarm, I will spew thee out of my mouth. You see
Christ will not spare his delinquent churches, but come quickly against them
except they repent: And this proceeding of Christ with his Churches, answers to
this apparition of his to John, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire,
and feet like burning brass, cap. 1. 14, 15.

Verse. 19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy
patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first.
All those graces here mentioned by the Spirit and found in the church of
Thyatira, are to be understood of true ^eal graces, not only so in appearance
and opinion, but in truth and sincerity; and therefore Christ before he falls on
the charge against her, first he gives an approbation and an encouragement to
her graces, and in effect tells her: It Is true O church of Thyatira, I must
acknowledge thy works of grace, as thy true love toward me, which has produced
and brought forth in thee the happy fruits of thy zealous service, and thy
faith enlivened by love, together with thy constant patience under sufferings
for my names sake; and by this it appears that thou have received the truth
in the love thereof; and withal I must add unto thy praise, that there is a
growth and improvement in those gracious works, and the last to be more then the
first: That is Though thy first works were done out of much zeal, yet the
latter were done on more certain and sober grounds of knowledge and sincerer
ends then the first; and therefore as thou have made an improvement of thy
graces, so thou art more in esteem and thy works also, then at the first. By
the way here,

Observe. We may Observe, Though the Church of Thyatira be never so
blameworthy, yet Christ will give her her due, and set too his Seal of
approbation to all that is sound and righteous in her:

It seems there were graces sufficient in Thyatira to denominate her a golden
candlestick and a church of Christ, notwithstanding Christ had a few things to
say against her; it savors not of the Dove-like spirit of Christ and love, when
any shall be so rigid as will not acknowledge such societies to be churches of
Christ because some imperfections in them either in doctrine or manners, though
otherwise abounding in works of holiness; as love to God and his Saints, and
faith toward Jesus Christ* zeal toward God's worship and service, and in
suffering for Christ's sake: Doubtless with some rigid persons in these days
the churches of Pergamus and Thyatira would be unchurched and anathematized by
them, had they but authority over them, though Christ had set his Seal upon
them, and marked them as golden candlesticks. As in a natural body some members
may be rotten and dead, and yet a lively body: So in those spiritual bodies
politiques, there may be some members rotten and dead at the root, yet the body
still an organical body, and no great hinderance to the whole. And again, in a
natural body there may be a catholic disease seasing upon every part and
member of the body, which may render it very incapable for its services, and
yet still a lively body. So it may be in a church, a body politic; it may be
catholiquely sick and infected with some venomous disease, some pestifferous
doctrine or other; and yet a church still, though a decrepid, infirm, and lame
one; but when the disease comes to be mortal, leaprous, or incurable, it is
time then to cry out, Sum impurus, sum impurus; Procul hinc, procul ite.

For the words, I know thy works, and thy love etc.] Here we see the good works
that God does approve of in his people, and does also render them as approved
Saints, both unto themselves and the whole world. Christ alone is the public
approved person in the room of all his members in the sight of God, as unto
justification and perfect righteousness: yet before these graces does appear in
the Saints to evidence their calling, they are but the children of wrath as
well as others. Election does secure our eternal estate; but before the spirit
of grace comes to evidence it by faith that works by love, sin and death has
dominion over us: And though we are heirs of all in God's predetermination; yet
differ we not at all from servants in the state of unregeneracy, yea therein we
are slaves and captives to sin and Satan.

These gracious works are called thy works though they are the gifts of God,
and wrought by his spirit in us, yet God's goodness does call them ours,
because they are acted by the instrumentality of our souls, as passing through
our wills, affections and understandings; and here love or charity is put in the
first place among all the graces of the Spirit: Whether love in order of nature
is before faith, I shall not here dispute, only thus much I say that all
generally grant, that faith's first act is an assent to the truth, as unto a
proposition; now unless love come in to ingrediate the affection unto the truth
proposed, it will only be but a bare opinion, and never come to a lively faith,
Secondly, I say, love is here proposed as first in order, as being the most
excellent Gospel grace, 1 Cor. 13. throughout. Now abides faith, hope and
charity, but the greatest of them is charity; its precedence lies in this,

1. In that it perfumes and enlivens all the other graces; faith it self is
dead without it; And to suppose a faith without love, is to suppose a man
without a soul: The gifts of prophesies, tongues, and miracles, are but barren
and usless things without this.

2. This has for its object both God and Man; we exercise our faith and hope
only toward God and his promises, but our charity is extended both toward God
and Man: And therefore love is called, Romans 13.10. (...), the fulfilling of the
Law; it is the whole sum and hinge on which the commandments turn: In this one
word charity, both the Tables of the decalogue are abridged.

3. It excells in that it is the greatest note of our interest in God and
Christ: Faith is that gives right unto the promises, but love is that gives
life to faith: It is the very soul of all our graces; If we gave our bodies to
be burnt for Christ and had not charity, it will profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3.
By this we know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren, 1 John 3.14. and Ia. 1.12. The Crown of life is promised to them that
love God, and Romans 8.28. Love is made the very discovery of effectual calling
and election.

4. Love excells in that it is the perfection of the Law; it is the very end of
the Commandments, 1 Timothy 1.5. and were Love but perfect in us, it would make us
perfect Keepers and Observers of the Law both toward God and Man. Love knits
the Members of Christ's Body together, and so perfects his Body: It unites us to
God, and so makes the perfecting of divine love in us, 1 John 4.12, 17. and
here it is we are commanded twice to put on love above all things, 1 Pet. 4.8.
and Col. 3.14. but once above all things to take the shield of faith.

5. And lastly, when faith, hope patience, and all other graces ceases, charity
abides. Love is not only a portion for the Saints in this life, but in the
other also; then we shall love God and Christ when faith and hope cease;
therefore justly did Christ in this place, and the Apostle in 1 Cor. 13.13.
give it the precedence above al other Graces of the Spirit.

2. Love brings forth another grace, service, external worship and obedience;
him whom we love we obey, we serve, we honor and worship: The service of love
is most intense and effectual. When Christ communed with Simon Peter, John 21.
and asked him thrice, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? Yea Lord thou know
it, says Peter; Christ answered feed my sheep: The more love that Peter
manifested, the more service and duty was put upon him. Services that we
perform to God, not out of love, but formality or custom, are but as scabbed
or lame Sacrifices under the Law, which the Lord hated. Right ends in our
services are, First, Love and zeal to God's glory. Secondly, Love to the
obedience of God's commandments. Thirdly, Love to the edification of others.


These ends makes us a true and sincere worship, love goes through all, and is
the fulfilling of the Law.

3. Thyatira is approved for her faith, made lively and effectual by love. True
faith is never separated from love, they go hand in hand together; but love
has the precedence for the reasons aforesaid, though faith is first in order
of nature; for faith is that grace that gives the first being unto a christian,
but love is the perfection of that being: There must be first a knowledge of
God, and assent unto his truths, which is the first act of faith, before we can
love that God or his Truths; but withal I say, there is so inseparable union
between these two graces, no sooner has faith a being and a body, but love
comes to animate it, to make it sound, lively and perfect.

Observe. hence Note, That it is not a bare opinion or entertainment of the
truth, that is a true lively faith, but that that works by love.

Many will one day say, we have prophesied in thy Name, taught in thy Name,
cast out devils in thy Name, professed and believed thy truths; and yet the
Lord will say unto them, I know you not; and all for want of this grace of love
toward God and his Saints. A sound and true faith contains in it these three
principal ingredients, that gives the very form and being to it.

First, A sound distinct knowledge of the thing believed: I know and am
persuaded, says Paul, Romans 14.14. Persons that are ignorant of Gods promises,
and of the word of eternal life, can never believe aright.

Secondly, A firm persuasion strongly assuming the heart. As a sound believer
must not be an ignorant soul, so must he not be a wavering-minded man, but must
have an undeceivable certainty and truth in that he does believe.

Thirdly, A confident resting and rejoicing with satisfaction unto the Soul,
surely looking to enjoy that it does believe.

True faith has these four acts and degrees in it, 1. Knowledge, 2. Assent. 3.
Adherence. and 4. Assurance. A believer may have the three first acts, and want
the latter; and a sound beleiver and a justified person. Though God for causes
to himself known may never give the grace of Assurance, yet that faith that
only knows God distinctly to be a God of salvation in his promises, to
repentant sinners through Christ, and so takes him and adheres unto him in the
love and truth thereof, doubtless that soul shall never be a castaway, though
God's presence of assurance and joyful satisfaction be never manifested unto
him. If we be saved it is enough, though God reserves his comfortable presence
and inward love for us unto another world.

4. Thyatira has another excellent grace, and that is Patience, or sufferance
with patience, as the word (...) carries it in the Greek. A wicked man may
suffer affliction, but not suffer with patience, without murmuring, swearing,
or blaspheming as the godly does. The wicked may have patience perforce and
unwillingly, when he cannot help it, the afliction being above his reach to
remedy; but the godly is patient as it is an effect of love; because he loves
much, he is ready to suffer much with constancy and patience, as Jacob served
two seven years hardship for his beloved Rachel; so a faithful soul is ready to
suffer all afflictions, cheerfully, and with much patience all the years of his
life, because he loves God and Christ, and so accounts the afflictions of this
life not to be valued with the glory that shall hereafter be revealed to all
those that love God.

5. Thyatira was a growing fruitful church, her latter works were more then her
first, done upon better grounds, and better principles. From whence Note,

Observe. That the gracious works of the more grown Christians do exceed those
of the younger sort in soundness.

The Neophites or young Christians may be more zealous then the approved
Presbiters of a church, but the latter zeal is better ^egulated and more sober
then the former: When I was a child (says Paul) I spoke as a child, I did as a
child, I understood as a child; but when I became a man I put away childish
things: So it is in our spiritual growth, in our first birth; we are very
childish, and zealous of small things; external circumstances in worship, we
then look upon as great things; and if a painted window, a cross, a su^pless, a
cope, etc. stand in our way we presently stumble at them, and think it the most
acceptable service we can perform to God, either to burn them, or break them to
pieces as Antichristian trumperies. Again, if we come a little higher, then we
spend most or all our strength about the defense of external forms of worship;
as whether Presbitery, Independency, or the way of the Anabaptists so called,
be the righter way. This humor too is most prevalent in the Neophites; but the
waightier things of God and his Law, is for the elder and stronger sort: The
one thinks to catch Heaven by Tything Mint and Anniss, by being very intense
about the smaller things of the Law; but the other ^ot leaving the first
undone, falls upon the kernel and substance of Religion, which is fit meat for
stronger men* The grown christian's graces excels the younger, as his love is
more sound; he loves not for interest or opinion sake, as many young ones does,
but he loves the brethren, on this ground as being members of one body, being
made partakers of the same divine truth with himself.

Secondly, His service is more cordial in respect of the larger experience of
the goodness of God to his Soul, he has often met God's presence in his
ordinances, then the younger christian has; and therefore needs must his
desires and affections excel unto God's Ordinances and worships, seeing he
has of^ner met God therein, as in a special habitation of his glory.

Thirdly, An old christian's faith is sounder then the younger; he believes not
because he has heard only with the ear, but he believes because he has seen,
tasted, and experienced the truth and faithfulness of God and his promises to
his soul, which the other it may be as yet has not attained too.

Fourthly, His patience is more tried, more refined then the younger.

Fifthly, and lastly, In effect all his graces are sounder and better
circumstantiated then those of the younger christians, for ends, for grounds,
for manners, for time, and in all other circumstances whatsoever: Therefore it
is our duty to strive, that our last works may be more then our first;
otherwise shame unto us as unprofitable servants.

Verse. 20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and
seduce my servants to commit fornication and to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols.
Yet nevertheless O thou church of Thyatira, though I do approve and encourage
thy gracious works of love, faith, service, and patience, and commend thee for
thy proficiency in them; yet I have a few things, certain offenses to lay in
charge against thee. Hence Note,

Observe. If our sins be few and great, though our graces be many and eminent,
yet God will come against us for them: Few great and scandalous sins, are as
dead flies in precious Ointment, it will defile the whole box of spiritual
graces.

God will not Inhabit quietly and at peace in one mansion with sin and
wickedness. If Ephraim will have Idols, God will let him alone: And if Israel
will uphold wickedness (though his own peculiar people, who were abounding in
sacrifices and holy services) yet that shall not privilege them from a
Babylonish captivity. If his own select people will turn wild Olives and
cruci^^e the Lords Prophets and his Christ; he can cut them off, and make them
a desolate and dispersed people, upon the face of the whole earth. Thyatira had
many excellent graces, and so had Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, etc. yet for their
sins (and especially those of Idolatry and Fornication, the corrupt doctrines
of Balaam, Jezabel, and the Nicolaitans) God came against them in judgment and
fiery indignation, and removed his candlesticks from amongst them, and left
them desolate. If we conceive our graces of Faith, Love, Service, etc. will
secure us from the wrath of God, though we admit Antichristian doctrines of
Idolatry, false and evil worships among us, we shall be much deceived.
Doubtless many of our former Bishops were very godly men, as Jewel, Downham,
Usher, Hall, Davenant, etc. yet their real graces and holiness, could not stop
the hand of God in going forth in wrath against the Antichristian practices and
false worships tolerated and allowed in the churches of Eng^ (...) only could
deliver their own souls; but they themselves (...) main, and the whole function
shall smart for it in the day of (...) Lord's indignation; and though some of
them were godly and pious men, yet for their tolerating and conniving at false
doctrines and worships, they themselves shall suffer in the common judgment,
but their pious and gracious souls shall be saved so as by fire; not that of
Purgatory first kindled in the Popes Kitchen; but by the fire of afflictions
sanctified unto them by that fire of purging and cleansing away our dross, to
wit, God's Spirit and Word. We are therefore to look to it how we admit
offenses amongst us; though they be but few, they may draw God into judgment
against us; and though they may not at present unchurch us, yet if held
unrepented of, they may provoke God to come against us quickly with the sword
of his mouth. O let no man plead for toleration of sin, false doctrines or
worships from the Primitive practices or presidents of the first churches; so
as they sinned first in these particulars, so they were made the first examples
of God's wrath and justice. It is but a sad saying of some, That their present
churches are as sound, straight and holy as the Primitive ones: They had their
drunkards, incestuous followers of the doctrine of Balaam, the Nicolaitans, and
Jezabel; and we, say they, in our Parochial churches have not worse. Alas! they
are now made unto us examples of God's righteous judgments for those and the
rest of their sins, and their very habitations given unto the cursed
Mahometans, and their off springs turned Barbarians and Heathens; and if we be
found in the same sins and transgressions with them, O, May we not fear the
same desolating judgment; Let us not contemn the long-suffering of God, but
speedily repent and do our first works: So far should we be from boasting on
that account, that it should rather be unto us just matter of grief and sorrow.
But to proceed,

The charge against Thyatira was, That thou suffer the woman Jezabel who
calls her self a Prophetess to teach and deceive my servants etc. This woman
Jezebel here mentioned, doubtless was a she Prophetess of the Nicolaitans, and
that she was one of that Sect, is evident from this, that she comes with the
same cursed Nicolaitish doctrines in the 14* and 15. verses mentioned, teaching
and drawing God's people to Idolatry and Fornication. First, herein appears her
impudence, who contrary to the modesty of her sex and Apostolical prohibition,
yet she takes the name of a Prophetess upon her self, and to teach publicly
contrary to the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14* 34. Next observe her falsity and deceit;
she is a Prophetess, and why, it is only to deceive and seduce Christ's
Servants. Thirdly, observe the ways and means of her seductions, it is by false
doctrines, by teaching Idolatry, and communicating in the Sacrifices of Idols,
and Fornications to be things indifferent, for I always take these to be two
great distinct sins and errors of the Nicolaitans, Idolatry and Fornication;
and not only Idolatry, which is a spiritual Fornication or Adultery, for
Balaam's advice was not only that the children of Israel in the business of
Baal Peor, Mumb. 25.1, 2. should fall to Idolatry, but to fornication also with
the Midianitish women; so also Jezabel, Ahab's wife, who provoked him to set up
Idolatry unto Baal in Israel, 1 King. 16.31, 32. compared to 1 King. 21.25. was
also a notable Adultress, as by that of 2 King. 9.22. What peace whilst the
woredoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her witch-crafts are yet in great number,
and her carriage being accordingly impudent ver. 30. does convince her
whoredom; for she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at
window; the posture rather of a Strumpet then of Majesty, as some would have
it: And therefore Balaam and Jezabel are here fitly brought in by the Spirit to
personate this lewd Nicolaitish Sect, and their great Prophetess in the church
of Thyatira.

Observe. 1. Hence Note. That it is no new defigne of Satan's to trouble the
Church with false she Prophetesses.

As there were false Prophets Balaamites and Nicolaitans in the church of
Pergamus, so there was a false Prophetess and a very impudent one of the same
Sect in Thyatira. If God will have he or she Prophets the Devil will be God's
Ape, and will have the same: If God to honor that weaker Sex, sometimes raised
up she Prophets to help his people, be sure the Devil will be upon the same
work, he will have his Jezabels his Maximillae for her service also. We find in
Ezekiel's days there were false Propheteses who sowed Pillows to ahe Arm-holes,
13. 1k. 18. Prophesied pleasing things unto the people; and Neh. 6.14. there is
mention made of one Noadia a Prophetess, she with other false Prophets,
Prophesied against the building of the Temple, encouraged Sanballet and
endeavored to discourage Nehemiah, and the builders of it: And some such there
were and will be in all ages, who with their false doctrines will deceive
unwary people; Simon Magus had his Helena, Carpocrates his Marcellina, Montanus
had his Prisca and Maximillina; and so all erroneous Sects has their she
Prophetesses as well as he Prophets; for the Divel's defign thrives on both
ways.

Observe. 2. False she Prophetesses are not only very bold, but very subtle to
deceive and seduce God's servants from the truth.

And therefore they are likned to Jezabel, a bold setter up of Idolatry and a
subtle deceiver, as in the business of Naboth, and seeking the death of the
true Prophets, appears. And it appears also henbe, that this false
Nicolaitish Prophetess was not only a very impudent one, for she calls herself
a Prophetess to teach, but was also a very sly and subtle one, or else she
could not be said to deceive Christ's Servants. I conjecture that her practice
was somewhat like the ranting Familists and Anti-scripturists of our days, who
pretending some high notions and transcendent matters, above the common pitch
of plain and wholesome doctrine, and so flying beyond sobriety, God suffers them
to fall into the snare of Satan, and to deny the Law of God as a rule to them,
and to stand in awe to sin is but of a legal spirit and of bondage and sin,
cannot at all reach God or offend his Majesty, and then they can freely among
the Heathens, as the Nicolaitish christians did of old, partake of the
Sacrifices of Baal, of Bacchus, Priapus, Venus, or any of their Heathenish
Idols, and can freely without regret eat of their idolothites, and join and
commix with their corporal fornications also: High and untroden speculations
and novelties carries the vizor of deceit with them: wholesome doctrine is old
and plain, but novel and erroneous is held forth in most high and
unintelligible motions, which false ProProphets and Prophetesses on purpose
make use of to amuse, confound, ensnare, and deceive the easy credulous and
simple people, many of these false she Prophetesses goes up and down with their
new Light, new Christ, and new Gospel, and all within them, in these very days
of ours a true branch of the old Gnostics and Nicolaitans.

Observe. 3. Some of God's own faithful Servants may be deceived and carried
away by the Doctrines of false Teachers.

This Jeze^el or false Lady Prophetess, had seduced Christ's Servants, and had
entised them to their filthy Idolatries and Adulteries; we know Peter and
Barnabas were drawn away by such into error, Gal 2.13, 14 The old lying
Prophet deceived the young Prophet of God and drew him into a snare which cost
him his life, for a Lion devoured him, 1 Kin. 13. Christ has foretold us, Mat.
24. That many false Prophets shall arise and deceive many; But whence do they
arise? From the bottomless Pit, and do raise such a smoke with their false
doctrines, Rev. 9. that they darken the Heavens, that is, the Gospel truths
that the Saints cannot clearly see their ways* and therefore not strange if
they stumble. Did not many precious Souls stumble in the late days of Prelacy,
and were turned away with their errors; and have not many stumbled in these
days of liberty, and carried away and deceived by Familistical, Anti-scriptural
errors and the like: But seeing these things are so, let us hearken to the
advice of Peter 2 Epist. 3.17, 18. Beware lest ye also, being led away with the
errors of the wicked, fall from their own stedfastness: But grow in grace and
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But to return to the charge which was against Thyatira, and it was because she
suffered the woman Jezebel. A church is not so blame worthy for having a
Jezebel, a false Prophet or Prophetess among them, but for suffering, for
countenancing, owning, and freely tolerating of them; this was the crime of
this church of Thyatira. Whence Note,

Observe. That the toleration and indulgence of false Teachers in a Church, is a
great evil.

Surely it is not the way of God nor his will, to suffer opinions in a church,
that are dissonant from his truth, that will corrupt the soul with sin: Though
I should plead for a just liberty for tender consciences in points disputable,
and therein are not to be forced against their judgments by any outward power,
to external conformity; for that indeed is the way to bring them into the Unity
of uniformity, but not into the Unity of the truth; it is a way to make
Hypocrites, not Saints: Yet nevertheless I should not offer to open my mouth
for a licentious liberty of pernicious doctrines or practices, that are
blasphemous, idolatrous against God or his worship or the power of godliness;
let such bear their censures and punishments, not only that which is spiritual
and of Gospel warrant, but that of the Magistrates sword also, he is Custos
utriusque tabulae: And to this end he bears the Sword not in vain. But I
would always forelay this caution, That none whose lives are sober and godly
and desire to live peaceably with all in this present world for difference in
judgment, should be ensnared hereby. But for a very little space should we
suffer a Jezebel, and impudent, immodest or Idolatrous false Teacher in a
church, we should not bear with it an hour; for that which God has really
declared himself against from Heaven, we should be adversaries to it also, and
that which God has a controversy with, and is against, must needs be a great
evil; and the great evil of tolerating false Teachers in a church, appears
clearly in these particulars,

First; In that they blaspheme God and his authority, saying, the Lord sent
them and spoke unto them, when the Lord never appeared to them.

Secondly, They cross God in his designs: God calls his people to holiness,
peace and unity, but false Teachers set up some ungodly Doctrines or Practices
to the undoing of Souls.

Thirdly, They sadden the hearts of the righteous by their lies and vanities.

Fourthly, They corrupt the souls of God's servants, they deceive them and
entice them into the snares of their abominations.

Fifthly, They provoke God to become an enemy to such Assemblies as do embrace
them or own them, and finally undo poor souls for ever, without repentance.

Quest. If a free toleration of false Teachers is so great an evil in a church,
the Question will be, In whose power is it lawfully and juridically to remove
them?

Answ. Doubtless the particular church of Thyatira that had the check, and
against whom alone Christ laid the charge for tolerating the woman Iezebel, had
the sole power of removing the evil from amongst them: For what an unreasonable
thing would it be, that God should lay the charge of this sin against Thyatira
for tolerating Iezebel, were it not in the churches power there within
themselves, to remedy, remove and eject that false Prophetess. Christ never
blames any one of those seven churches for the sins that are suffered in
another; not the church of Pergamus for the sins of Thyatira, nor Thyatira for
the sins of Sardis or Laodicea, but every one are charged particularly for
their own sins: Neither are the more pure churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, or
Philadelphia, empowered, commanded or authorized, either joint in a
combination, as a Classical Presbitery; or singly, as a Prelatical
Superintendent over the rest, to remove or reform the evils among the rest; but
every one is commended apart for their respective graces, and every one by it
self is commanded to repent and reform apart from their sinful doctrines and
practices. In the days of those seven churches, and some ages after, there was
no mention of a Lording Episcopacy or Presbitery over many churches of Christ
at once; but that every particular church of Christ had then full power and
jurisdiction within themselves all alike and of one extent within their own
boundaries, and that superiority in churches came in with the defection and
falling away, which was fomented and nourished by the pride of the Bishops,
till at last it became purely Antichristian. We know all churches are sisters,
and therefore equal in power and privileges, under one spiritual head, that is
Christ, Gal. 1.18. Par in parem non habet imperium, Equals can have no power
over equals, unless by usurpation or tyranny, or otherwise by compact; if it be
only by compact and agreement, as when amongst our selves and equals, we choose
our Parliament men to be our Legislators and Rulers; but if so churches that
are of equal authority get a power into their own hands by agreement among
themselves, over the rest of their sister churches, call it what you will,
either Classical, Provincial or National, surely at best, it is but of a
prudential and civil Institution, and to give it a divine stamp is more then it
will bear, peruse cap. 2. verse. 2. last past, where the Spirit says to the
church of Ephesus, Thou can not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles and are not, and thou have found them liars:
M. Perkins on that verse. says, To the church of Ephesus, God gave a full
juridical power either to admit or keep out, examine or cast out, suspend, or
do any other juridical act or acts whatsoever, that was needful in a true
church of Christ.

The Apostles write in all their Epistles to the respective churches as
distinct churches, without dependency upon any but upon Jesus Christ their
Head, King and Sovereign, Act^ 15.22. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Romans 1.6, 1. Col. 1, 2,
24. Ephesians. 5.24. They being all the body of Christ under one head, the Spouses
of Christ to one Husband, Sisters of one Mother, Cant. 8.8. none of them are
servants or slaves to the other, not Hagars but Sarahs, free and equal, all of
them are spouses of Christ, of equal privileges and authority; all of them are
golden candlesticks, shining churches amongst whom Christ equally walks, Rev.
1.12. all having equal and like power of opening and shutting, admitting and
rejecting, receiving or denying. And for one church to usurp authority over
another, is at best but a Diotrephes-like spirit, and of a Prelatical humor,
which do very little comport with the truth of these Scriptures, Mat 16.16.
Act, 9.26.14.23, Rev. 2.2. Act. 1.15, 6, 2, 3. Mat. 18.17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2
Cor. 2.5, 6.

Quest. 2. But another Question may hence arise, Whether the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira, chief Officer, Pastor or Minister, could alone remove this
Iezebel legally and judicially without the consent of the church and fraternity
which were in fellowship with him? Or whither that which is called the power of
the Keys be singly in the Officers and Eldership, or jointly in the whole body
of the church, Elders and Brethren together?

I Answer, First, understand the power of the Keys, that is the sign being put
for the the thing signified, the Keys, the ensign of Authority, for Authority
it self: And this Authority is either,

First, Supreme and Monarchical; and this resides only in Christ, as he is sole
King and Lawgiver of his church, and so he is head of the body, and he has
the Keys of David, and opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens, Rev. 3.7. and so he has the power both in heaven and earth, and
executes the office of a headship and none but him, Isa. 9, 6. Col. 1.18.
Ephesians. 5.23.

Secondly there is a delegated or Ministerial power which is given by Christ to
his church; and this is,

1, Either the power of judgment and election. Or,

2. Of Office and Authority. The whole body has power of choosing, admitting,
receiving, or of rejecting and censuring, and so the whole is above any
particular Member or Officer.

But Secondly the power of Office is not in the Multitude, but in some one or
more, as Pastors, Elders and the like, which they have called to this Authority
and Ministerial offices, and so are in a higher Authority, though inferior to
the whole, then any other private members whatsoever: So that whatsoever the
whole church does judicially act or censure* the power of Office is to precede
therein and all what is done thereby, it is still in ordine ad Ecclesiam. And
hence it is evident that the power of judgment and censuring, is not a power of
Office in the Brethren over their Elders as some would object, but a distinct
power, and the one is essential to a church as that of judgment, but that of
(...) and Rule is merely accidental, and it may be or not be in a church, sine
interritu subjecto. So hence it is evident that the whole church of Thyatira
had the essential power of the Keys in her Officers and Fraternity as in one
origanical body jointly together for the removing of this woman Jezabel; for
how unreasonable a thing is it to conceive that the Spirit of God should lay a
chece upon the whole church of Thyatira for suffering the Idolatries of Jezabel
amongst them, if it were not in theirs but in the Officers power alone for the
removal of them? We should think him a hard Father or Master if not somewhat
senfless and beside himself, that would would would whip all his children and
servants with stripes for the neglects, miscarriages and faults of the chief
Steward of the house; and shall we judge this a hard matter amongst the sons of
men? And shall we not judge it far from the wisdom of God and his mercful
dealings toward us, that he should put a check upoh us and come against us in
wrath and judgment for tolerating evils among us which is not in our power to
reform or remedy? Far be these conceits from our thoughts and judgments
concerning God and his righteous judgments toward us. Doubtless the whole
combined church of Thyatira had power to remove her scandals although the
charge is superscribed (...) the Angel of the Church of Thyatira woite I know
thy love thy service thy faith and thy patience, notwithstanding I have somewhat
against thee. The Pastors Officers or Ministers are God's Angels, they receive
from God his messages and deliver them to the people; they are a^ it were God's
mouth unto them, and acquaint them with the mind of God, what God has to say
unto them, either for their encouragement, or for their reprehension: So this
check and message here was not laid or sent only on the Angel or Pastor of
Thyatira but on the whole church, Col. 1.11. Hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches: The Angel was but the hand and instrument for to receive it; and
though he should first move and lead to the removoving and censuring of this
Harlot Jezabel, and yet be neglegent rmiss and dormant therein; that shall not
excuse this church if they be found guilty with him in the same sinful
connivance and compliance; for, I will give unto every one of you (says
Christ) according to their works: If you will indulge and comply with Jezabel
and her cursed doctrines, you shall suffer with her but if you shall overcome
and escape her falsities, you shall have a crown of life. The power of judgment
and censuring is in the Officers only directively, but in the whole church
formaliter and effectually; the whole church cannot act out of office, neither
can the Officers or Presbiters act in judgment or censuring without the
aprobation and assent of the church and fraternity. Mr. Rutherford the great
learned champion for Presbitery, writes thus, in favor of this way and
judgment Lib. 1. page 49. Here grave Beza, our Divines, Calvin, Bucer,
Bullinger, Melancthon, Bucan, Pareus, Rivetus, Sibrandus, Iunius, Trelcatius:
The Fathers, Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Theodoret, Theophilact, require all to be done (to wit, about excomunication
and censuring) plebe consentiente; and why should their consent be desired, if
the Elders would do it without the consent of the people? Peter Martyr is
peremptory in his Common Places Sect. 9. Unde concluditur, non absque commensa
Ecclesiae quempiam excommunicari posse. And this hereon shall suffice: see more
formerly in the 2 verse. of this cap.

Verse. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.

Verse. 22. Behold, I will cast her into a Bed, and them that commit Adultery
with her, into great tribulation; except they repent of their deeds.


Though the church of Thyatira was very faulty in suffering the false doctrines
of Jezebel within her, and though the abominations of this false Prophetess
were highly provoking sins against the justice of God, yet God was pleased to
give unto this false Prophetess* and to the church that entertained her, a
space, not a little, but a long tract of time, to repent of her spiritual and
corporal fornications; and yet ^he slighting the long suffering of God, which
should lead her to repentance, and she repented not: whereupon Christ lays an
Index, a mark, an Asterisme upon her, not such a mark as he lays on his elect
ones of love and favor; but the contrary, of wrath and indignation. Behold, as
much to say, as let all see, take notice, and admire of the righteous judgment
I am going about to pour forth on this false impenitent Prophetess and her
adherents; I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her,
into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. As she has played
the Harlot under her green covertures, both in her idolatries and adulteries,
and as she made her bed the place of her abominations, so I will cast her into
another bed, a bed of my own making, not of Down, or of wanton dalliance, but a
bed of affliction, a bed of tribulation, and of much anguish: If nothing will
cure her, if she will not hearken to my gracious precautions, if she will not
repent for all my gracious dealings and long sufferings toward her, I will
cast her into a bed, I will make her sick unto the very heart, it shall be a
bed of great tribulation, and if all this will not prevail with her to reform
and amend, I will cast her into another bed, a bed of death; and not only her,
but all that commit adultery with her; she alone shall not suffer for her
adulteries and idolatries, but all those whom she has enticed and deluded to
be sharers and accomplices with her in these her abominations. Hence Note,

Observe. 1. God is very long suffering and merciful toward the worst of
sinners.

God gives this woman Jezabel, most corrupt in doctrine and manners, a space, a
long space or tract of time to repent: God forbore the old sinful world a long
time under the preaching of Noah, before he brought the Flood upon them, to
sweep them away for their transgressions: God suffered long also Sodom and
Gomorrah, most vile cities in abominations, before he sent forth fire from
heaven to consume them: How long did God suffer the provocations of his own
people Israel, in idolatries, murmurings, oppressions, injustices, adulteries,
etc. from one age to another, before he would remove the habitation of his
glory from Israel, yea after they had put the Son of God to death, through
their wicked malice and enmity toward him; yet how willing was God to call
them to repentance, by sending his Apostles and Ministers among them, to bring
them to the faith, if possible, and so be saved: and waited long upon this
work, for fifty, sixty years, and upward, until the days of Vespasian, when
Titus overthrew the city of Jerusalem, when the Jews were sold for a groat a
head, and not one stone left upon another in the Temple, as Christ had foretold
for their obstinate impenitency and wickedness? How long did God forbear us in
this Land for the abominations among us; sins of Jezabel of a bloody nature
against the Saints and Prophets of God, besides the many superstitious
Will-worships, idolatries, and fornications permitted and countenanced, as it
were by authority, for some series of years, before the Lord did break out
against us in wrath and judgment? All this connotes unto us the gracious nature
of our God, that he is a God merciful, gracious, long-suffering, full of bowels
of compassion, ready to forgive and remit the very worst of sinners, as
persecutors, idolaters, adulterers, Jezabels, Balaamites, Nicholaitans, and
what not? upon their repentance, and turning from their sinful ways unto God
and holiness: Therefore, (O sinner!) never complain against God for want of
grace or long-suffering toward thee, if thou perish, the fault is thine own,
through thine own perverseness and unbelief, and not God's, for want of grace,
mercy, or giving time enough of repentance to thee.

From the remarkable word, Behold, Note,

Observe. 2. That Gods judgments upon sinners are to be remarked and taken
notice of by all wise and godly persons.

Behold! says Christ, what I am bringing upon Jezebel and her wicked
associates, for their abominations: consider of it, it is for an example to
you, that if you be found in the same transgressions with her, you shall be
partakers with her in her judgments. God always forewarns of evils before they
are coming, that his own precious ones may be secured and saved in the day of
wrath: in Rev. 18.2. the Angel cries out with an Ecce, Babylon is fallen,
Babylon is fallen, many hundreds of years before the real accomplishment
thereof; and to what end? That the godly may consider and take notice of her
abominations, and of the wrath and judgments denounced against her, that so
they may com^ out of her, and not be partakers with her sins, lest they be
partakers with her plagues also: How many voices of the Lord's Messengers, and
Trumpets, are gone forth with a Behold in their mouths, that the Lord is coming
in fiery indignation against all workers of iniquity, and yet who lays it to
heart?

Observe. 3. It is most just with God when he makes the occasions and
instruments whereby we have sinned against God, to be the instruments of our
punishments and chastisements.

If we turn our Tables into surfeiting and drunkenness, it is just with God to
make them a snare unto us. If we make wine, or our lusts our god, God can make
wine and our lusts to be our executioners, in shortning our days by
intemperancy. If we make gold, riches, or honor our Dalilah, God may justly
lay a wedge of gold in our way, as he did to Achan; or honor, as unto Absalom,
unto our utter ruin and destruction. If Jezabel affects her bed and close
covertures for her whoredoms and idolatries, God can justly make that bed of
folly, a bed of great tribulation to her. If we please our selves in the
society of evil companions, those very consorts of ours, God will make them
rods of affliction to us: for how sad will it be unto the wicked in the last
day, when those that were companions in sin and wickedness, shall curse one
another for their wicked examples and encouragements to evil given to one
another in their life time: Thus God punishes sin by sin. If Pharaoh will have
a hard heart against the Israel of God, God will give Pharaoh a hardened heart
in judgment: God has his hand so far in sin, as in justice he can turn it to a
punishment for sin; and this is according to the equity of that of the Poet:
N^n Lex est justior ulla,
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua.


Observe. 4. Great and grievous tribulations and judgments attend not only false
Teachers themselves, but their followers also.

The Bed in the days of health, peace and quiet, is the place of solace, rest,
and comfort; but in the day of affliction, sickness, or tribulation, it is the
receptacle of our griefs, sorrow, and anguish: All the night long (says David)
I water my Couch with my tears; and therefore most aptly taken up by the
Spirit, to represent unto us a state of sorrow, anguish, and tribulation, into
which Jezebel, and her adherents or followers of her doctrine shall be cast;
for so her adulterers are to be understood: for I cannot think it reasonable*
though this Nicholaitish Prophetess did hold corporal fornication lawful, yet
that all of her Sect, and followers of her doctrine did commit corporal
fornication with her, but th^^ ^ll such as were her disciples and followers,
may be truly sai^ to commit Adultery with her in a spiritual sense and
understanding: And so in cap, 17. verse. 2. The Kings of the earth are said to
commit Fornication with the great Whore, and the Inhabitants of the earth to be
made drunken with the wine of her fornication, that is, with the intoxicating
and abominable Doctrines and Idolatries of Babylon: So here all that do
adulterize with Jezebel, that is follow and join to her abominable doctrines
and practices, shall be cast into the same bed of anguish and tribulation wi^h
her self. They that will partake of Babylons sins, must not think it hard to
partake of Babylons plagues; the Merchants that joined to her Idolatrous
Merchandizings and trade, shall cry, Alas, alas! for that great City; and the
Kings of the earth that committed Fornication with her, shall bewail her and
lament because of the anguish come upon her. cap. 18. The Beast and false
Prophet, joint companions in evil, the one upholding and confirming the other,
the one by an unrighteous and tyrannical Sword, the other by false doctrines
and miracles, till at last both are caught by Christ and his Armies, and cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 19.20. And if common tribulations
were not enough for false teachers and their folowers, Christ will cast them
into a bed wherein they shall roll themselves in grief, cover themselves in
grief, and with great tribulation; and if all this will not do to bring them to
repentance for their wicked deeds and practices, Christ has another bed to
cast them into, a bed of death and destruction in the next verse, And I will
kill her children with death, except they repent of their deeds: Repentance is
the only remedy against divine judgments; turning from sin, and turning to God,
will turn God's wrath from us, and his love toward us. See more hereon about
repentance ver. 5. and 16, of this cap.

Verse. 23. And I will kill her children with death; and all the Churches shall
know that I am he which searches the reins and hearts, and I will give unto
every one of you according to your works.
As the true church of Christ has her children begotten and fostered up by the
immortal seed of the word; so false Teachers and Heretics have their children
also, begotten by the spirit of deceit and falsehood, and nourished by errors
and wickedness: So this false Nicolaitish Prophetess had her children,
followers of her Fornication and Idolatry. In the former verse we read of her
Adulteries; that does commit fornication with her, and promote her doctrines of
Idolatries equally with her self, and that Christ would cast them together into
great tribulation, except they repent; and here we find their Issue, children
of the same cursed stock, which Christ will aso show no mercy to, but kill her
children with death, that is, will sweep them away in judgment, not only with a
violent and precipitant deatnh, ^ut will also slay them with a death eternal.
Hence Note,

Observe. 1. That children that tread in the steps of their wicked parents, are
envolved under the same judgments with themselves.

If we be partakers of our Father's sins, it is just that we should be
partakers of their punishments. If we follow the steps of our faithful parents,
we shall have the same reward with them of our faithfulness in the latter day.
God gives to every one according to his works; the child shall not dye for the
sin of his parent, nor shall the child be saved for the faith or obedience of
his parent: For the Soul that sins shall dye: And he that believes shall be
saved; But as for the little ones that are incapable of actual sin or faith,
their salvation or damnation is according to his will that shows mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens Romans 9.

Quest. But if it be demanded, How will it stand with the justice of God to cut
off little children which are innocent, nor ever yet done good or evil,
together in judgment with their parents.

Answ. Little children that had never committed actual sin, even babes new
born, or in the womb doubtless perished in the flood, and many in Sodom, and
yet without impeachment of, or derogation to divine Justice.

First, God can do it out of Sovereignty and absolute dominion which he has
over his creatures He is the Potter, he that made the Vessel can break it, he
that gave life to babes can take it away, and who can say why do thou this?

Secondly all Infants are defiled with original sin, and as the wages of sin is
death, so God can justly inflict death on them, both temporal and eternal, as
the due wages thereof together with their parents.

Thirdly, Little children are part of their parents substance and family, and
God may justly punish the living parent in his child by death, as well as any
others of his stock and substance, as by a temporal punishment.

Fourthly, Though God may often sweep away in his temporal judgments many
little innocent children, as by the Sword, Famine, etc. and yet they not perish
eternally; for violent or sudden death is no Argument of God's hatred to them;
for many precious souls expire by a more terrible and violent death then that
of the Sword, Pestilence, or Famine.

Fifthly and lastly, For the comfort and the better support of the hopes of
faithful parents, for the well being of their little innocent dying infants,
whether they are taken off by God, either by an ordinary death, or in a common
judgment, let them understand for their comfort, that God has made an
everlasting covenant of grace and salvation with Christ for all his Elect ones,
Gal. 3.16. Isa. 53.11, 12. and though the Infants of believers die before they
can receive the promise of the Spirit by faith, yet the chosen ones in Christ
are secure by virtue of God's eternal love toward them in Christ, being chosen
in him from all eternity, Ephesians. 1.14. and let me with reverence speak it,
Christ may as soon perish as one of them, he being the head, they the members,
making up one mystical church: Had God ever clothed himself with flesh in the
person of the Son, had it not been to lay down a sufficient price and ransom to
divine Justice for all his ever beloved chosen ones? And where there is such a
predeterminating love as God's is toward his Elect, and such an inestimable
and complete price paid for them as Christ's death is, how can any such
possibly perish without violation and impeachment both of divine Love, and
divine Justice? This is a surer ground of the salvation of some dying Infants
of believing parents, then that that some Arminianising persons of these days
do make, to wit, the parents faith, the condition of the Infant's salvation:
Dying Infants with those of that persuasion, I leave these few following
considerations.

First, They should do well in the first place to produce that grant which they
pretend to be in the Gospel covenant, that the parents faith is the condition
of their Infants salvation dying so; but this will be done ad Graecas Calendas:
it savors too much of works of Supererrogation and Popery to be true.

Secondly, If some dying Infants of believing parents are saved on the
condition of their parents faith, then all are so saved that dies so, before
they have forfeited their condition by their own actual transgressions; and if
all of them are saved dying so, then happier would faithful parents be to see
all their children die whilst Infants and innocent, for then they should be sure
of their salvation, then to see them live, for some of them must become
reprobate and wicked; for few godly parents have ever had all godly children,
Abraham had Ishmael as well as Isaac, Isaac had an Esau as well as a Jacob,
Jacob had a Reuben, Simeon, and Levi. brethren in iniquity, as well as
Benjamins, sons of love and comfort.

Thirdly, If all Infants of believers, dying Infants are saved on the condition
of their parents faith, how comes some afterward to forfeit their condition?
Are the conditions of the covenant of grace unstable, and left in the hand of
man that is vain and frail, that would soon forfeit them all if a thousand
salvations were on them? I always thought the death of Christ to be the only
proper and meritorious condition of the covenant of grace, and of our
salvation, and faith to be our principal evidencing condition and
qualification, as the way unto life, Heb. 11.1. and at most I take it but as
the first precedent condition to other graces, for God gives one grace as a
reward of the well improvement of the first grace, he that increases his
Talent, God multiplies his Talents to him; God gives first faith unto his
people, before he gives them the other graces of his spirit, to wit, of
adoption, justification, or sanctification. Faith in order of nature is the
precedaneous grace unto all others though they are conjunct and inseparable to
that faith which is sound and sincere, We receive, says the Apostle, Gal.
3.14. the promise of the Spirit through faith. Faith is made the thorow-fare,
conduit and pipe, whereby God convays all his spiritual blessings and promises
into our souls; it is Man's receptive instrument, and the Spirit's revealing
instrument; the spirit takes the things of God, and reveals them to the
faithful soul by the instrumentality of faith, and the soul receives and
apprehends them by the same instrument of faith, and therefore a blessed
instrument both of God and Man.

4. Are all believers Infants in the covenant of grace and salvable whilst
Infants, and afterward fall away when come to years of discretion? Has not
Christ said that the love of God is unchangeable? Io. 13.1. and is it not
impossible that any one of his chosen ones should be lost? Mat. 24. or is his
covenant broken? Ier. 31.32. or is Christ's death and intercession unavailable?
Io. 17.15, 20, 21. or is God's wisdom deceived, or his power and goodness made
frustrate or overcome by the intervention of man's sin? All which are not only
absurd but impossible.

Fifthly, If the parents faith is the condition of salvation unto their dying
Infants, then Infants are saved one way and grown persons in another way;
Infants by the faith of another, to wit, their parents; and grown persons by
their own faith: and how absurd this is let the judicious consider. God saves
none for faith, but saves some by faith. Faith is not the proper or meritorious
condition of the covenant of grace, that alone is the object of faith, Christ
crucified: Faith is not the condition, but in an improper sense, as repentance
and obedience and all other graces are; but I should rather let the word
condition lie by us unhallowed for this end, in regard many have stumbled at
it, by making it an Idol rampant; but I should rather call faith the fruits,
effects, or some special branch or blessing promised in the covenant of grace,
for it is so mentioned in the new covenant, I will write my Laws in their
inward parts, Heb. 8.10. and what is the great commandment or law of God that
will be written in the heart? That ye believe in Jesus Christ, and faith is the
gift of God: If any take faith to be the condition of the covenant or of
salvation only, as a qualification, a medium, or way without which grown
intelligent persons cannot be justified or saved, with such I should not
contend, or should make it a precedaneous condition unto other subsequent
graces, I should not much quarrel with that neither; for I think it to be the
first foundation grace that the spirit works in the elect Saints of God which
produces, cherishes, and sanctifies all other subsequent graces in the soul
but to make faith, which is our own act, though wrought by God's spirit, the
condition of our salvation in a proper sense, to wit, by performing whereof we
may legally and justly claim it as our due as wages and debt, the thing
promised, to wit, life and salvation on the performance thereof in a legal way:
This is to set up somewhat of our selves, that we may have that whereof to
beast of, and glory in our own strength. And in the next place it derogates
from all sufficient merits of Christ and his precious death, which is the alone
legal condition performed for us, and in our behalfs, and whereby we do legally
and in the way of justice, claim at the hands of Gods justification and
remission of sins, adoption and sanctification, life, salvation, and
glorification, and all the good things of the Gospel: But all these things are
hid unto us, until the spirit comes to reveal them to us by faith, Heb. 11.1.

Sixthly and lastly, If faith therefore will not serve turn, but is too short
and weak a condition properly and legally understood, for the believing parents
own salvation, then surely it will not reach the salvation of their Infants;
therefore vain to trust or bind upon it for such a work; for it is alone the
garment of our elder brother, the white robes of Christ's righteousness, that is
fit to reach and cover not only the faithful parents, but their children also
if so be God has chosen them in Christ by his eternal love of election; but
for such Infants as God has in his eternal preterition passed by, as the
Potter has power over his clay to make thereof either vessels of honor or
dishonor; who shall say unto God why have thou made me thus? I say therefore to
assert the parents faith the condition of their Infants salvation, is a
groundless reasonless assertion, not comporting with the lest savor of truth;
and therefore to be excluded out of the Creed of all sound and orthodox
chr^stians. See more on ver. 5. of this cap.

And all the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the reins and
hearts, etc.] By my righteous Judgments on those children of Idolatry and
Fornication* all the churches round about shall take notice that I am he (says
Christ) that tries the secrets of men's hearts, and so as a God omniscient, and
an all-seeing Judge, can execute righteous judgments on every one according to
his works. Hence Note,

Observe. 1. That God knows our hearts most perfectly, and therefore can judge
of us most perfectly.

Man knows his own heart but in part, but God more perfectly than himself, 1
Cor. 4.4, He that created the heart must know it, and he that himself is
infinite must comprehend that fully which is finite. The Devil knows not our
hearts and thoughts till we do some ways manifest them by words, gestures,
signs, or actions; but God knows our thoughts without those means, Psalm.
39.1, 2. The Devil may guess at men's thoughts by their natural complexions; but
God perfectly knows what is in man without any such helps, Jo. 2.25. The Devil
knows but some of our thoughts at some times; but God knows all our thoughts
and secretest immaginations of our hearts, and that continually: And this is the
reason, because he is the alone Judge of the world, therefore he must know all
secrets, else how can he righteously reward every one according to his works?
Eccles. 12.14. Romans 2.6.

Observe. 2. God in his distributive justice deals with all persons according to
the equity of their works.

He who is Justice in the abstract, will give unto every one what is his. God
will give good things unto good men, and evil things unto evil men: And that
the certain rule and measure of this discriminating judgment will be in the
last day according to our works.

Object, But will it not hence follow, That we may merit by our works?

Answ. It is not here said that God will reward us for our works but according
to our works; and so in Romans 2.6. Works do not merit at the hand of God, Romans
4.2. then we should have whereof to glory, but not before God,

1. Because the best are imperfect in respect of the most perfect Law of God,
requiring perfection in every punctillio and circumstance thereof.

2. Our works being in themselves imperfect and finite, cannot merit before an
infinite perfection as God is.

3. Works cannot merit because they are not our own primarily, but of God's
efficiency.

4. Because men do them as their obliged duties unto God their Creator, but God
is debtor unto none.

5. There is no proportion between works and the reward, the one being finite,
the other infinite, both in time and measure; yet howsoever, though good works
cannot be an even rule of merit with God, as they are with men; yet they are a
manifest rule or measure of equity: For it is very equitable that it go well
or ill with us, as we have done either good or evil; and so every one shall be
rewarded according to his works.

Object. But evil-works merit eternal death as their proper hire, and why not
good works merit Heaven as his due reward and wages?

Answ. True, The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life:
The one is of our selves most perfect, and therefore deserves its wages and
reward; but the other is a free gift of the grace of God, in respect our best
and most perfect works are imperfect in his sight.

Verse. 24. But unto you I say and to the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not
this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, I
will put upon you no other burden:

Verse. 25. But that which ye have already, hold fast till I come.


Though God is a God of Justice and Judgments against Jezabel, her Adulteries,
and their children, their false doctrines and practices; yet as unto those of
Thyatira that had not embraced those wicked ways, God is a God of grace and
mercy unto them: for he tells them, But unto you I say, that is, even to the
rest of them that are at Thyatira, so many of you as have not embraced this
divelish doctrine, and have not approved those depths of Satan, as they speak,
that is, those mysteries, those high and profound speculations, which are no
better then Satan's own devices and stratagems. Hence Note,

Observe. 1. That Satan will have his (...) his mysteries, his profound
speculations, in his false worship, as well as God shall have in his true
worship.

The Devil will be God's Ape, and as God has his wisdom, his depths, his
heights, and misterious doctrines; so the Devil will have his profound
speculations for his Disciples also; if God will have true Prophets and
Prophetesses, the Devil will have his Balaamites, Nicolaitans, and Jezabels;
and those shall have their misterious doctrines, as the Gnostics of old, who
did walk in the way of high speculations and notions hardly intelligible to any
sober christian, somewhat like the Necromantick conjurations of the old Romish
Priests, or the sublevated alegorizing Familists and Quakers of these days, who
when they think they speak with most understanding, when they are least
understood either by themselves or others: I will put upon you no other burden,
but that which ye have already; Burden, in the Prophetical writings of the Old
Testament is taken for the doctrine of God's Judgments against his enemies,
Isa. 13.1.15.1.17.1.19.1. and in the Gospel it is taken for the doctrine of any
person, as in Mat. 23.4. it is said, That the Pharisees laid burdens on other
men's shoulders that they themselves would not touch with one finger, that is,
their strict and severe doctrines and mandates, to which they would have others
bound unto, but would keep themselves at large; in Mat. 11.30. Christ's
doctrine is called his yoke, and his burden; his yoke is easy and his burden
light: And this is that burden that Christ will lay on the Thyatirans, and no
more but this, to wit, Christ's true and Apostolic doctrine which they had
formerly received from John, and other of Christ's Ambassadors. Hence Note,

Observe. The Churches of Christ are to receive no other burdens or doctrines
then what they have already received from Christ.

Christ himself will add no further burden then his first doctrine of truth
delivered by himself and his Apostles: But by what authority do
over-presumptuous men, under pretense of Catholic and Apostolic Traditions,
add unto the christian Religion which is pure and simple, many of their own
vain superstitious ceremonies and inventions, against which Christ has
declared both here, and in Mar, 7. and Luke 11. and other places: Surely one
day it may be asked of them, Who required these things at your hands? To walk
by God's manifest and plain commands, is a sure path, and leads unto eternal
life; but to make superstructures of our own, or kindle sparks of our own fire,
and warm our selves thereat, at least notwithstanding those, we may ly down in
sorrrow. What burdens did the late Prelatical party lay on the consciences of
the godly, which they never had received from Christ or his Apostles? and
therefore they were truly burdens unto them, and very grievous to bear; but
Christ's burden is easy, and his yoke is sweet, Mat. 11.30. Every thing of
Christ is pleasant unto the enlightened soul; though his yoke be heavy unto
flesh and blood, yet it is nothing irksom, but rather sweet as honey to the
regenerate and spiritual christian.

Observe. 2. That true Christian Doctrine is a burden or yoke.

He that takes up a burden must go through with it, and tugg under it, and pass
through all difficulties or else he may loose his reward: It is not a burden or
yoke taken up by our selves, for of our selves we would not willingly come under
it, it is tedious to flesh and blood; and therefore Christ is said to put it on
us, he makes us first willing by his spirit of grace, and then we are ready to
yield our necks unto this gracious yoke, and our backs unto this burden,
therefore it will cost much sweat to go through with it: Christians under
Christ's yoke and burden, must not think to live at ease or at liberty, and
stray whither their fancies call them; they are under a burden, a yoke, they
must attend and keep their work, if they be fruitful proficients in the works
of Christ; though it is a sweet burden and an easy yoke, yet it is still a
yoke and a burden that is to be attended to. Some write that Christ being
reputed Joseph the Carpenter's Son, before he fell to the more public work of
his Ministry, he followed his Father in Laws Trade of making yokes for Oxen,
to which that expression of his in Mat. 11. did allude; but whether that be
true or not, I am sure he made spiritual yokes to lay on the necks of his
Disciples; he lays commands on them both naturally moral, and positively moral,
to which they were obliged unto, and not only they, but all us, and all that
shall believe unto the end of the world; and therefore we are all commanded to
hold fast this burden, this yoke of Christ, his faithful Doctrine and Religion,
until he come, hold fast till I come: This must signify Christ's second and
general, and not of his first, or of his special coming in spirit; for this was
spoken by Christ nere a hundred years after his incarnation, and he was come in
spirit some score years before this was spoken; and such as will have it to be
meant of Christ's coming in spirit, this will handsomely follow as a consequence
of such an interpretation, that when Christ comes in spirit they must then let
go the truth of Christ and his Doctrine; for, hold fast till I come, and no
longer; but at his second and last appearance, he has another glorious
administration to discover to us which yet we are ignorant of; but after he was
come in spirit, he commanded to hold fast the former burden and doctrine
delivered unto the Saints; and therefore sure it must be intended of his second
coming to Judge the world. Hence Note,

Observe. That we are to hold fast the Doctrine of Christ, already received from
Christ and his Apostles, and delivered to the Saints until his second coming to
put an end to all.

Hold fast till I come] Christ's burden or doctrine was not laid upon the
Saints for that first age or generation only wherein it was public, as some
vainly dream, but it was to continue unto all generations, until to him that
did hold fast and overcome, power was given him over the Nations, to rule them
with a rod of Iron; now it is evident this power was not yet given by Christ
unto his Saints; for they are still as Lilies among Thorns, in an afflicted and
wilderness estate, and under the power of the Beast and false Prophet, until
Christ shall come to give them their release and freedom feom all sorrows and
Antichristian servitude; and therefore Christ's doctrine is to continue unto
the end, consult Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Verse. 26. And he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him
will I give power over the Nations.

Verse. 27. (And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a
Potter shall they be broken to shivers) even as I have received of my Father.


Here is a vincenti dabitur, a crown and a reward set forth to him that
overcomes and escapes those assaults and doctrines of Satan, taught by that
false Prophetess and Nicolaitish Jezebel, and withal keeps close unto godly
ways and practices, which are called my works; Christ's works because of his
efficiency therein, and approbation thereunto; and that that will give an
interest unto this crown; it is not following of Christ's works a little season
(as the seed that fell on the way side, and sprung up, but shortly dyed for
want of radical moisture) but a constant persevering, keeping unto Christ's
works and doctrines unto the end, that will do the work.

Observe. 1. Note hence, That it is not enough for us in our way unto the
Kingdom, to escape the pollutions of wicked persons and false Teachers; but we
must close with Christ's true Doctrine, and do good works also.

Our Religion and Righteousness must not be a negative Religion or
Righteousness, but it must be a positive one also: It is not enough for us to
renounce Popery, and all false ways and doctrines, but we must also set up that
Religion, Doctrine, and way of worship which is pure, holy, and according to
the will of God in all things, as the Lord shall be pleased in grace to reveal
unto us. It would be but small commendation to those of Thyatira to overcome
and escape the doctrines of Jezebel, if on the other hand they should fall into
the doctrines of Balaam or worse: What praiseworthy will it be for us to
overcome the assaults of Rome and their depths of Satan, and yet set up as
pernicious doctrines of our own? What gain will it be to cast off Popery, and
embrace Familisme, Anti-scripturisme, Arminianisme, Sarcinianisme, and what
not, in the room thereof? In all our repentances we are willed not only to turn
from the evil way, but to turn into the good; else it will be but a halt and
maimed work, and a lame repentance, and not worthy of the title of any of
Christ's works: And this must be done and observed unto the end. Our christian
life is a race, and he that leaves off in the mid way has no hopes to attain
the prize. Hence Note,

Observe. 2. The Crown is given to the persevering Christian. See more on ver.
7. of this cap.

To him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod
of iron etc.] These words have relation to that of Psalm. 2.8, 9. only the
difficulty lies in this, them words of the Psalm are a Prophesy and a Promise
relating unto Christ, Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost part of the earth for thy Possession, ver. 9. Thou
shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel; and this is spoken and Prophesied of Christ, and again, in Rev.
19.15. Christ is there said to smite the Nations with the sharp Sword of his
mouth, and to rule them with a rod of Iron.

Object. But that power and that work is there attributed to Christ alone, How
is it therefore here attributed to the conquering Saints?

I Answer, By virtue of that union between Christ and his members, they shall
do it also: If Christ the head shall rule the Nations, so his members shall
rule together with him and under him, he as the head, they as his subordinate
lims and assistants: Christ and they make up but one body mistycal, and
therefore they both must reign together, unless you conceive a separation
between them, which is impossible, Dan. 7.13, 14. The Kingdom is said to be
given to Christ, which in verse. 22. and 27. is said to be given unto the
Saints; they are so reciprocal and so united, that what is done by the one, is
said to be done by the other; they are so far from being termed contraria,
that they are hardly diversa, though I shall grant the Saints subordinate unto
Christ, yet what is predicated of the one, is often predicated of the other in
Scriptures; and therefore it is no hard saying to assert that believers under
Christ their head, and as his members, and by his donation and assistance,
shall do his own peculiar work as subordinate instruments unto himself, for,
Qui facit per alium facit per se; and so may the Saints have power over the
Nations, and rule them with a rod of Iron, till they be broken as a Potter's
vessel; and this interpretation stands with best reason; for though our late
Bibles have included all the 27. v. in a Parenthesis saving the last clause
thereof, as if it were on purpose to cut it off from having any applicatory
reference to the conquering Saints in the 25. and 26. v. and to be reserved
solely applicable unto Christ; but surely such Interpreters could not have a
righteous intention in such a service; for in the best Greek copies as
Stephanus and others, there is not a tittle or stroke of a Parenthesis, but the
continued speech, in the 25, and 26. verses it is to the overcoming christian,
and so continued as a farther addition in the 27. verse, until the latter
clause thereof come in, even as I have received of my Father, which makes it
plain: For what had Christ received of his Father? Power over the Nations, to
rule over them with a rod of Iron, and to break them in pieces as a Potter's
vessel, Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 19.15. as if he had said, even as I have received this
power and dominion of my Father over the Nations, so will I give it to him that
shall overcome and get the victory over all false ways and practices, and he
shall be co-partner with me in this my Throne and Kingdom, cap. 3. 21. The
intention of the Spirit being cleared in these words to be the conquering
Saints to whom power is given over the Nations to rule them with a rod of Iron
and to break them in pieces as a Potter's vessel. Next I shall enquire what the
power is that is given them.

First, It is such a power whereby they shall judge the Nations, so our new
Annotations have it.

Secondly, It is such a power that they thereby shall get victory, and subdue
all theirs and the truth's Enemies; so Bishop Hall on the place.

Thirdly, It is such a power whereby they shall break all the obstinate Enemies
of Christ to pieces as a Potter's vessel. The first is confirmed from 1 Cor.
6.2. Mat. 19.28. Jude, 14.15: The second and third are confirmed from this
verse. and Psalm. 2. compared to Rev. 19.18, 19. etc. where Christ and his Armies
powers out the full Vials of divine wrath upon all their obstinate enemies to
the utmost. Again, This power over the Nations, and ruling by a rod of Iron,
and breaking them in pieces as a Potter's vessel, must needs be understood of a
corporal breaking, ruling and overpowering, and not a spiritual: So that
spiritual is a strange work to a rod or Scepter of Iron; Christ's golden
Scepter of his word is the only instrument to make the Nations bow to his
spiritual Kingdom; but for the refusers thereof, he has another Scepter, in
another day to be exercised on them, a rod of Iron and force, whereby he will
destroy the mighty ones of the earth, that are his enemies, and will dash them
in pieces like a Potters vessel, to the making the Kings and Judges of the
earth wise, and to kiss the Son lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.10, 11. Hence Note,

Observe. That Christ's faithful Saints have a day to come, to judge, rule, and
reign over the Nations, as well as now to suffer under them.

Though this be the day of their sufferance and patience, yet there is a
kingdom joined to it, cap. 1. 9. Though John was a brother and companion to the
seven churches in tribulation and patience, yet he was too in the hopes of the
kingdom to be revealed: This Kingdom was never yet fulfilled to the Saints of
God, but still rather the contrary hitherto: the Nations of the world break the
Saints and churches of Christ by their iron Scepters of force and power: Both
Mahometanes and Popish Antichristian Rulers and Princes, not sparing Christ's
little flock, but breaking them in pieces as a Potters Vessels, and therefore
it is most equitable that they shall have a day too, as a reward of their
faithfulness and sufferance, wherein they shall lead captivity captive, and
give their enemies the same measure that they formerly meted forth unto the
Saints, for they are worthy. 2. This kingdom as yet hitherto was not given to
the Saints, nor yet will be; for this power over the Nations, and this rod of
iron is put into their hands, as the result of their perseverance in the truth
at the second coming of Christ, as in the last precedent verse is declared:
Hold fast till I come; and in that day when Christ comes to him that
overcomes, he will give power over the Nations, etc. Now this was promised
long after Christ's first coming in the flesh, and also after his special
coming in the spirit; and therefore yet there will be a day when he will come
again to fulfill this promise, before the ultimate end of all; and for any to
expect this rule over the Nations by the rod of iron, before Christ comes and
appears in the clouds to the performance of this great work: they may reign,
but without Christ; they may get power over the Nations, but not in Christ's
way, or his giving. Hence another Note arises.

Observe. 2. That it is Christ alone that gives power into the hands of his
Saints over the Nations.

They are not to catch at it themselves: This time is Christ's spiritual and
his intercessory kingdom; and if we fight with, or use any other weapons
therein then are spiritual, we may lose the benefit of his second kingdom,
which is reserved as a reward of our obedience under the first kingdom: He that
walks spiritually and soberly under the first of grace and spirit, doubtless
the second also will be his portion; otherwise he is in danger to lose both his
comforts here, and his portion hereafter in the other kingdom also.

Verse 28. And I will give him the morning Star.
This is an additional degree of happiness to the overcoming Saints in that
day, when they shall judge and rule the Nations with a rod of iron: In ver. 17.
it is called Hidden Manna, and a white stone, wherein a new Name is written;
and formerly, a Crown of life, and the Tree of life in the Paradise of God,
etc. all being variety of expressions, to set forth the great and excellent
glories of the other world. Christ did formerly promise the participation of
himself in that his glorious kingdom to the conquering Saints, under the Types
of Hidden Manna, Tree of Life, and in this verse, as the morning Star. Christ
is the bright morning Star: First, Because he then brings comfort with him to
his afflicted churches. Secondly, He brings light with him to his ancient
people the Jews, that now sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Romans
11.25. 2 Pet. 1.19. This morning Star is the same with that Sun that rises in
Malachy 4.2. with healing in his wings, and must of necessity signify Christ's
personal appearance again, as the greatest part of the crown and reward of his
faithful ones, and for the healing, enlightening, and conversion of his ancient
church and people the Jews. Hence Note,

Observe. That Christ will appear again to the comfort of his afflicted Gentile
churches, and to the enlightening and conversion of his ancient people the Jews,
before the ultimate end of all, and general judgment.

Because, then is a day of total destruction, not an appearance for the
conversion of them that are in unbelief. That is the time when the Saints
receive their utmost glory; not striving, ruling, and over-powring the Nations.
Christ then delivers up all power unto the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. therefore that
is no day to give power into their hands over the Nations: In the day of
ultimate judgment, Gog, and Magog, and all the churches enemies, are caught and
cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone for evermore, cap. 19. 20. Therefore
it is no day of ruling over them, for that day then will be past and over. To
conclude, the Saints temporal reign begins with the appearance of this Morning
Star, and ends with the final destruction of all the wicked; but their heavenly
glory shall never end. And for the conclusion of this chapter.

Verse. 29. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.
Let the wise intelligent christian consider and ponder what the Spirit says
to each of these churches, and from the often repetition of the Spirits
memento, in these words take this conclusion.

That Christ's Doctrines and Prophesies cannot be too often inculcated upon the
hearts and memories of his people.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write these these things,
says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars: I know thy
works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.
CHrist proceeds with his charge against the church at Sardis, superscribed
unto the Angel, or chief Minister of that church, for the reasons before
specified, chap. 2. v. 1. Write these things says he that has the Spirits of
God and the seven Stars. I cannot join unto their Interpretation that makes the
seven Spirits and the seven Stars to be all one, to wit, Christ's seven Angels
of his Churches which he carries in his hand, cap. 1. 20. so it would seem a
tautologie, whilst a more convenient sense may be found applicable to it, to
wit, These things says he which has the seven Spirits of God, that is, the
Spirit of God in his sevenfold graces and perfections; for the number seven in
all Prophetical writings does intimate perfection, as cap. 1. 5. and 4. 5. and
this sevenfold spirit of perfection being Christ's own spirit, and being sent
by him and at his disposal; and therefore Christ may be truly verified to have
the seven Spirits of God, or the sevenfold operating Spirit of God, as well as
the seven Stars in his hand and disposal. Hence Note,

Observe. That the Spirit of grace and a gracious Ministry are the special
inseparable gifts of Christ toward his Churches.

They are inseparable companions, where the one does go, the other is present
also: If Christ comes with seven Stars in his right hand, he comes with the
seven Spirits in his left hand to that people also. A true Ministry and the
Spirit are never separated: Though I should not ty up God to those means only,
yet ordinarily it is in vain to expect Christ in the Administration of the
Spirit, without the Ministerial Adminstration of his Stars and Angels: They are
as it were the Charioteers of the Spirit. The Word is the Spirit's Vehiculum or
Chariot, but the Ministers thereof are those that carry and support this
Chariot on the shoulders; never think that the Spirit, the glory of this
Chariot, will come or rest in our Temples, unless it be brought unto us by the
feet of those Stars, those beautiful ones that bring the glad tidings of peace,
God has so linked together in his all-wise decrees and predeterminations the
concatenation of subordinate causes or mediums unto salvation, that ordinarily
one cannot be effected without the other; and so we are saved by faith in
Christ through the sanctification of the spirit and word: One will not do this
work without the concurrence of the other; but when Christ comes with them
jointly together, either to a particular Soul, or Church, he makes them, of a
wilderness and a land of darkness, a Goshen, and a land of light: And happy is
that people to whom Christ so comes with his seven Spirits and his seven
Stars, with his gracious Spirit, and spiritual Ministry; and for such whose lot
is fallen in such a Land, I say, their lot is fallen in a goodly Heritage.

But what is the reason that Christ here appears under this representation of
one that has the seven Spirits of God and the seven Stars?

I Answer, Christ is upon discovery of the hypocritical defections of the
church of Sardis, and thererefore he needs to appear not only under a
searching, piercing and spiritual administration, as one that can search the
reins and hearts, cap. 2. 23. and as one that has the seven spirits of God,
or the sevenfold searching Spirit of God which knows the hidden things of
man; but also under a lightsom administration of the seven Stars, for a further
discovery and conviction of their hypocritical practices; and therefore the
church of Sardis's hidden hypocrisies and inward rottenness, being searched out
by the Spirit of God, and made manifest by the true light and Ministry of the
seven Stars, Angels or Ministers of the word, he falls upon them with his
charge against them, and tells them, I know thy works that thou have a Name
that thou live and art dead. Hence by the way Note,

Observe. That Christ's spiritual Ministry in the hands of his Ministers and
Ambassadors, can try the secret and hidden things of man.

The spiritual man says the Apostle, judges all things, and is judged of
none: And if a private spiritual member may judge, Judicio discretionis, then
surely much more the public Ambassadors and authorized Ministers of Christ;
they can try by the Word and Spirit whither our works and profession be only in
name and outward, or whither inward and sincere; they are the Masters of the
Assemblies, and the experienced Elders of the church, and therefore are and
ought to precede and excel all others in every spiritual work and service
whatsoever.

Observe. Another Note hence is, That the Spirits's Method is first to convince
of sin, before it manifests its remedy against sin.

The whole, says Christ, need not the Physician, but the sensible sick and
wounded: Christ first convinces Sardis that she had only a Name, that she lived
but was dead, before he lays down her remedy in the third ver. in bringing her
to repentance; so he deals with Pergamus, Thyatira, and other delinquent
churches also. It is an Anti-scriptural Method of some that preach up faith and
repentance unto a sinful and backslidden people before they have first fully
convinced them by the Spirit in the Word, that they are under bondage, sin and
misery: This is no legal Method, as the Antinomists do conjecture, but of a
spiritual and Gospel spirit; for unless we be first sensibly convinced of our
loss and misery by sin, how should we look for a Savior or salvation by faith
in Christ? All the primitive converts that we read of, were first pricked unto
their hearts for sin, before they asked, What shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.

But to return to Christ's charge against Sardis; I know thy works, for thou
have a Name that thou live, but thou art dead, as if he had said, Thou have a
name, a reputation that thou live, that is, that thou art a faithful
professing church and live in me by faith, but thou art dead, that is, not
altogether dead, for then it was in vain to put her afterward to strengthen
the remainder of grace, but as good as dead, low, weak, and infirm, and that
faith and profession which thou pretendest to be in thee, is but as a dead
profession, and liveless faith. Hence Note,

Observe. That though Churches may carry a fair outward profession, and a common
reputation of faithful ones, yet they may be very hipocritical, and no better
then dead, liveless, and rotten at the root.

This church at Sardis had a name, that she lived, but she was dead; her graces
were even at deaths door, yet still would keep up the Name of a christian
church: Who higher in profession and name then the church of Rome? Does she not
take unto her self and go under the name of Catholic, as if she had been the
only church that holds the general faith delivered unto the Saints? And yet
what church more dead and rotten then she? Notwithstanding our nominal faith
and common-reputed christianity among us, yet we may be dead to all motions and
operations of all true spiritual life in the church of Smyrna, cap. 2. 9. they
were those which said they were Jews, but they were not, and Christ tells them,
I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not, but are of the
Sinagogue of Satan: It is a kind of blasphemy and dishonor done unto God, when
under the cover of profession we endeavor to excuse our errors and profaness:
Open opposition is less dishonorable unto God, then impure and dead lives under
the vizor of profession, Mat. 21.28, 29. That froward Son in the Parable was
less guilty that said, he would not do the will of his Father, then he that
said I will, and did it not; James resolves the Question in that Interrogation
of his, cap. 2. 14 What does it profit if a man says he has faith and has
not works? can faith save him? meaning a dead nominal faith without fruits and
works: So would I put the question here, what will the pretended faith and
christianity of our nominal and national christians profit or advantage them?
The Devil has such a faith that is only in the tongue and the lip, and yet
fare nough from salvation or the grace of God; these formal outward graces are
so far from bringing in any real comfort or hope of glory in the future to the
souls that only have them, that they bring in real disadvantage and loss unto
them; for they argue a conviction of the truth, yet a refusal thereof in the
love and power thereof. And secondly it has been always a harder work of the
Ministry, to bring pretended and formal professors unto the power of godliness,
then open Harlots, Publicans and Sinners; witness the Pharisees of old in
Christ's days, and the National, Formal Jews, who would boast of their carnal
privileges, and of having Abraham to their Father, and the Oracles and Temple
of God among them, somewhat like the late Levitical Prelatical Tribe among us,
and yet who more blind and dead then they unto true spiritual knowledge? And who
more eager persecutors and enemies to Christ, his ways and Saints, then those
Formal National Jews, who say they are Jews and are not, but are of the
Sinagogue of Satan?

But to give you a test and taste to try whither your profession and faith be a
living profession and faith or not.

First, True and lively faith uniteth us to Christ, and draws life and virtue
from him, I live by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. You know there is life
in a body by the notions and beating of the pulses: A living faith will be
active, and discover it self in some gracious effects and operations: If Christ
be in you, he will live in you, he will not be dead and idle, but be moving in
you to gracious duties and operations; for there is none lives in Christ but
he brings forth much fruits, Io. 15.5. It is true, faith may not always be
alike lively and active; but where it is true and real, it will be always
living; and though you be not sensible of its activity, yet you will be
sensible of deadness and complain under it, which is a sign of a living faith,
though not a lively one.

Secondly, Where this true faith is, there will be its constant concomitant
that forcible principle love. See cap. 2. 19. Affection follows persuasion;
and where love is, there will be service and work, for faith works by love;
for when we apprehend by faith God's love in Christ to us, it begets in us a
return of love, and acts of services and thankfulness to God. True faith will
not be idle, but will be a working faith, and will produce that labor of love
mentioned, Heb. 6.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.

Thirdly, A living faith must needs be active, being wrought by the quickening
spirit of Christ; help engages to action, and where the spirit of Christ shall
work, who shall resist his power?

Fourthly, Where true faith is there will be high aims to glorify God: for it
will not be so dis-ingenious to take and receive mercies from God, but it will
study how to give and render unto God due praises and glory for it; for we are
not redeemed by Christ to live unto our selves, but to glorify God in our
souls, bodies and spirits.

Well then, try your faith and profession whether it be dead or formal, or
active or living, by these few particulars; it is not a naked assent or
unactive outward profession will serve turn, this is dead and liveless, yea
twice dead, and to be plucked up by the roots, Jud. 12. dead in your first
natural condition, and dead in your hypocritical profession; for by this it
appears never to be otherwise with you: But a lively faith is a working
faith, by and through the influence of Christ and his spirit, being zealous of
good works, and all for Christ's sake and his glory. Paul's whole life, Phil.
1.21. was as it were consecrated to Christ; for to me to live is Christ says
he, that is, my life is Christ's, for his uses, his purposes, and his glory: In
short, a true and lively faith works by Christ by the continual supply and
influence of his spirit, and for Christ, and with aim at his glory.

Observe. 2. It Is very usual for dead Formalists to carry a higher hand in
outward profession then the real Christian.

Sardis pretends highly to faith, and to a name that she lived, beyond her
sister churches; and the name was only that she aimed at, for in the truth of
grace she was no better then dead and rotten. It is not very usual still among
dead and carnal christians to boast of their christianity, their baptism,
their church, their external ordinances and the like? They needs would satisfy
themselves in the name of christians, as the carnal Jews, that said they were
Jews and were not verse. 9. So unto these carnal Formalists, the name of
christians is pleasant to them, yet still are enemies to the true Saints of God
and the power of godliness; and the reason of this is, in that they perceive
they want the true working faith which is only acceptable unto God, all being
naturally self-lovers, they would needs content themselves and God too, if they
might with a gilded sophisticate and dead faith and profession, which is to be
had at an easier rate then the true one, which should commend them unto God,
and denominate them his Saints in the eye of the world; but this faith is too
short for such a work, being dead, false, and liveless, as a carcass without a
soul, but that is the faith that justifies and Christ accepts that works
by love, 1 These. 1.3.

Verse. 2. Be thou watchful and strengthen the things which remain that are
ready to die; for I have not found thy works perfect before God.
Esto vigilans, as Beza reads it, (...); and I should rather take it in the
active sense, Be thou awake, or awake thou, then be watchful; for it it argues
the state of life and activity to be watchful, watch and pray; but to awake, it
only shows a dormant dead and sleepy state wherein the church of Sardis was;
for she bore the name that she lived, but she was as good as dead; therefore
Christ tells her (...), rouse up thy self from thy sleepy state, and strengthen
the things which remain; reinforce revive, and stir up those small remaining
sparks of graces that are ready even to give up the very last gasp within
thee; and though thou think and may have a conceit of thy self that thou
art something, in that thou have an external profession and name that thou
live, yet I must tell thee (says Christ) I have not found thy works perfect
before God. Hence Note,

Observe. A state of sin is a great impairing and consumption unto the life of
grace.

Sardis is brought by it even to death's door; her graces that were once
eminent, are come thereby to some small remainders, and they too almost extinct
and near the grave; and though death it self (I mean spiritual) has not yet
seized her, yet she is somewhat near it; she is under the shadow of death, for
she sleeps and is called to awake, and to stir up the remainders of life that
is in her, least she takes her last sleep by the spiritual death of grace here,
and eternal death hereafter. Sin is to the soul as sickness is to the body.

1. It carries with it its distemperatures and disorders of the soul.

2. Ugliness and deformity, it is compared to the Leprosy under the Law,

3. Grief and pain, as sickness causes grief to the body, so sin causes horror
and anguish unto the soul.

4. It causes weakness, for the more sin the more weakness and disability to
spiritual duties: We were without strength says the Apostle, Romans 5.6. weak
feeble souls in the things of God whilst we were in sin and the state of nature.

5. Every sickness of the body, tends to the death of the body; so every sin
tends to the death both of body and soul eternally. The only remedy that we
have against this poison and sting of sin, is to hasten to Christ by faith, who
is the Physician of our souls, and by whose stripes we are healed.

Object. But is it not said here to Sardis to awake and strengthen the things
that remain that are ready to dye? Was it not in the power of Sardis to awake
her self, recover her self and renew her graces without going to Christ by
faith?

I answer, Negatively Christ is set up for that very end, not only for a
propitiation, If any man sin we have an Advocate; but it is also from his
influence and from him, as the Fountain of life whereby all our graces are
maintained and kept alive, For the life I live (as the Apostle says) is by the
life of the Son of God: If Christ should withdraw his gracious presence from
our souls, we should never awake out of sin, nor do our first works, or
renovate our selves by repentance.

Secondly, This duty to awake and renew their graces was set on those of Sardis
that had already received the first grace and Christ by faith; for it is here
said, strengthen the things which remain; therefore they had a being though a
sorry one; and those that have received grace from Christ are in a capacity to
work from the power of that grace: Having received the promises (says the
Apostle, that is, Christ the great end and object of the promises) cleanse your
selves, go on in the work of sanctification in the power of Christ; for all our
gracious acts are to be done in and through his continued power and influence.

Thirdly, When we are commanded to awake, strengthen and renew our selves by
repentance etc. they must be always taken to be as inseparable parts of a
lively faith; for we cannot awake from sin unless we first look upon Christ in
the promises; neither can we possibly renew or restore our fallen graces before
we first eye God in Christ, out of whose fullness we receive grace for grace:
Therefore in vain to set home spiritual duties on persons that have not first
received light and life from Christ. Christ is the first work that must be
offered and received to and by souls before they can act toward God in the
least acceptable services.

Object. But then again, some one may say, If the small remains of grace that
were in Sardis were almost dead or ready to die, does not this argue a falling
away, and a possibility of the faithful to perish totally?

Answ. Grace may be very low and yet not dead, it was as sparks of fire under
much ashes, with Sardis; and yet we know sparks are as real fire, though not as
fervent and virtual as a flaming one. Indeed it was low with Sardis in her
spiritual condition; and it is most just with God when we are great sinners
against him, that he hides much of his gracious presence from us: When by sin
we quench the operations of the spirit of God, God may justly quench its
effects toward us; but no sooner shall we follow the motions of the spirit,
and renew by repentance, but presently God gives a more enlivening and
effectual spirit into our souls; and notwithstanding his former withdrawings,
yet it is but a Fatherly chastisement, not an utter dereliction and forsaking.

Secondly, I answer, Persons that are Elect and have really tasted of the
virtue of Christ's death and intercession, can never utterly fall away, unless
they would make the power, wisdom, and preordination of God to be weak and
fallible, and the death and intercession of Christ impotent and insufficient
unto that end to which it is ordained; yet withal I assert, though Elect
persons cannot utterly fall away, as being given by the Father unto Christ, and
none such can be cast away, being helped by the mighty pow^^ of God unto
salvation; yet Election of a state of persons may fail and perish: As to
instance in the Jewish Nation, the Election thereof did obtain, Romans 11.7. to
wit, those that did pertain to the Election of God in that Nation, did obtain
mercy and reconcilliation by Christ; yet at last for the sin of that Nation,
the Election of God did fail as respecting that State and Nation, and the Ax
was laid unto the root, and that good Olive cut down and cast into the fire,
and the wild Olive or Gentile Nations graffed in upon their Stock. Obstinacy in
sin and unbelief was their cutting off, and faith is the Gentiles incision and
graffing in; as the one is cut off by unbelief, so the other is graffed in by
faith, Romans 11.20. Those few names in Sardis that do hold fast the faith, they
are in a safe condition, whilst all the rest of that church may perish utterly;
the first are marked and written in the eternal book of life, of God, and of
the Lamb, and therefore cannot perish; but after God had finished his work at
Sardis, Thyatira, Rome, Corinth, etc. and called his Elect out of them, and
secured their eternal happiness, he can remove the current of his Election to
another people without any changeableness or shadow of change in him, and make
those very people in their posterities the very seat and Sinagogue of Satan,
who were once his beulahs, darling, and beloved ones.

Thirdly, there are gilded formal hipocritical graces and believers; and such
may not be only ready to die, but dead, twice dead, dead at the root, and fit
for nothing but to be plucked up and cast into the fire; and therefore it is
very ordinary in Scripture, to say that such are fallen away, perished, and
lost from their faith which they seemed to have, all their graces are in the
outward appearance only. So Demas, Simon Magus, Judas, Ananias and Saphira,
etc. may be said to fall away from the faith, because they had never the truth
of real grace in them; all was but seeming formal, hypocritical, and at best
but historical, which the devils may have, and for all this perish
everlastingly.

Observe. 2. It is a great mercy for God to leave some remains of grace in a
sinful Church and people.

If God had not left us a remnant, we had been worse then Sodom and Gomorrah.
Small sparks being blown and cherished, may become a flame; so little grace
though like a Mustard Seed, may become a great Tree. If God should deprive us
of all the seed of grace, there must needs follow a spiritual death unto our
souls; for when the soul of the soul is gone, the soul will be soulless and
dead unto every good and spiritual work: As long as there is life in us,
though it is infirm and weak, yet there is some hopes of recovery; but being
once dead there is no hopes of Redemption from the grave: So as long as we have
the Spirit of Christ, though it works but faintly and weakly by reason of
corruption in us; and if it comes but to the first step and lowest degree of
spiritual life, to wit, to be sensible of its dead and carnal condition, and to
complain under it, there are good hopes of recovery unto such a soul; and unto
such I may boldly say unto its comfort: Awake, and strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to die.

Observe. 3. Though our graces are but weak, and low, and ready to die, yet it is
our duty to cherish, strengthen, and confirm them until we bring forth the
work of Christ within our selves unto perfection.

We are not to contemn the day of small things; for he that improves but one
Talent well, shall be made ruler of many Talents. The Beasts in the Prophet
always went forward, Ezekiel. 1.11. but grubs that are backward are reckoned among
unclean creatures, Lev. 11.10. God has promised that he will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: If we cherish the work of grace in
us, though in never so small a measure, God will add a greater and fuller
supply unto us; God will add unto faith virtue, unto virtue patience, etc. and
according to that word in 2 Pet. 1.5. (...), they shall all come hand in hand
in consort, as following one the other as in a chorus or dance. Doubtless it
would not be labor lost for Sardis to strengthen and revive the remainders of
grace that were ready to expire within her; though Christ would be at hand to
assist her by his grace and spirit, yet he would not do it without her motion
and improvement, as it was once said by Austine, Though God made us without us,
yet he would not save us without us. Grace works most kindly when it meets with
improving hearts that are ready to say with young Samuel, Thy servant hears,
Lord speak. Though God has ascertained and decreed the salvation of his Elect,
yet it does not exclude the duty of creatures, and the work of second causes,
Ezekiel. 36.37. Jer. 29.11, 12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling;
we are to work for life as if life, were to be got by working; and doubtless
the crown will be the more glorious, where the greater improvments of grace are
made: the more grace the Vessel is capable of and filled with here, the more
glory it will be capable of and filled with hereafter: Every Vessel shall have
his fullness in glory, but every one acording to its capacity; as there is a
glory in the Stars, Moon, and Sun, and one differing from another in glory* yet
every one has their fullness: So in the Kingdom o^ glory, when God gives to
every one according to his works; every one shall have the reward of their
works, eternal happiness, but some shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel: all shall be shining Stars, but some of a greater
Magnitude then others. But to proceed,

For I have not found thy works perfect before God. It was not a legal
perfection that Christ could not find in Sardis, he did never seek for that
absolute perfection in them, that would be in vain, seeing they were so full of
Imperfections: But yet this intimates, that the faithful christians and their
works may be perfect before God; although they are not found perfect in Sardis,
yet may be found perfect in others that are more sound and godly: For the
clearing of which understand, that sometimes in Scripture perfection is taken
for sincerity and uprightness, as Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be thou
perfect, that is, upright and sincere, as Job 1.1. he was a man that was
perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil; he was a plain
simple man, honest at the heart, in this sense the works of Sardis were not
perfect before God, they were not honest sincere and upright according to his
will, they were Hypocritical in name, show, and appearance, only not in truth
and sincerity.

Secondly, Perfection may be taken, 1. As respecting our justification. Or, 2.
Our sanctification. The first of these in a strict sense, is a complete
perfection; for the Saints are complete in Christ their head, as unto
justification, and from all sin and the guilt thereof; there is not one sin
left which is not washed away by his blood; in this respect they are perfect;
By one offering Christ has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Heb.
10.14.

Then, Secondly, There is a perfection of sanctification and holiness. And that
is, 1. In the respect of the beginnings and parts thereof. 2. In respect of the
prevailing degree thereof. 3. In respect of the aims thereof. 4. In respect of
the duration and perseverance of it. 5. In respect of others.


First, the Saints in this life have a perfect beginning of holiness, as to its
parts, because it begins in every part; they are sanctified throughout in soul,
body and spirit 1 These. 5.23. though every part be not throughout sanctified,
by reason of the imperfection of mediums by which they are sanctified, yet they
are sanctified in every part throughout, in understandings, wills, affections,
desires, memories, thoughts, and hearts.

Secondly, They have every grace in their souls, not only in the truth thereof,
but in the prevailing degree thereof; as when faith, love, patience, humility,
etc. overcome infidelity, hatred, impatience, pride, and other their opposite
vices and evils: So when this work of sanctification is begun in all parts
thereof, it may be said a perfect work in beginning; and when it comes to the
prevailing degree thereof, it may be called a perfect work, having prevailed
against its contrary.

Thirdly, They are likewise perfect in respect of their aims and desires; God
accepts the will for the deed; and he that aims and strives for perfection, God
accepts as perfect, though mixed with much imperfections: Christ could not find
the works of Sardis perfect in this sense neither.

Fourthly, They are likewise perfect in respect of their duration: Apostasy
from the faith and truth will loose the honor of perfection, and makes their
crown to wither; when a righteous (or perfect) man turns to iniquity, all the
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, Ezekiel. 18.24.

Fifthly, In respect of others the Saints are perfect souls: compare them unto
the gilded out side formal christians, and they are gold and perfect in
respect of them; and so Christ could not find the works of Sardis perfect
before him, as those of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. Hence Note first,

Observe. 1. The great cause that our works are not perfect, but defective
before God, is for want of honest sincerity in them.

Sardis was blamed for this very thing, and for want of this grace; she carried
a fair name that she lived in her pretended graces, but she was dead, there was
no sincerity and truth in them. If we suppose a man to worship God in all his
Ordinances, and avoid all outward evil; yet if there be double-heartedness in
his spirit, all is cast off by God as abominable. Sincerity is that that gives
perfection to every grace, it is the very truth and spirit of every grace; as
when we believe, we must believe sincerely; when we love, we must love
sincerely and cordially; when we sorrow or repent, it must be done sincerely,
that is, truly, fully, without any mixture or hypocrisy; for a double minded
man God does hate: Sincere quasi sine cera, without wax, without composition;
and as the word here bears it in the Greek, (...), I have not found thy works
full, there was somewhat wanting within to make them complete and perfect;
without this ingredient grace of sincerity, all our duties are but as sounding
Brass, and a tinckling Cimbal: But add sincerity unto the least and most
imperfect of our duties, and they will become in the esteem of God most
perfect. God accepts a Lamb from Abel offered in sincerity, rather then clouds
of Incense and thousands of Sacrifices from a wicked and profain Cain: Yea if
it be but a widows mite, or some Goats hair coming from one that is sincere,
God looks upon it as a rich present, and calls the presenter thereof perfect.
Truth of grace and sincerity is our perfection here; but in the world to come,
we shall have perfection in the highest degree, as well as the perfection of
sincerity and truth of grace in this life; therefore let us so walk before God
as becomes perfect ones.

Observe. 2. It is the Saints duty that they aim and press after perfection in
all their graces, works, and duties.

The church of Sardis was worthily blamed for want of this perfection, her
works were not full and entire, there was somewhat wanting, and therefore
blameworthy and imperfect.

First, They are to press after the perfection of justification by faith, and
evidenced by love and works, and so make their election and justification sure
unto their own souls, and manifest it unto others also.

Secondly, To seek after perfection in all graces and parts of christianity, in
souls, bodies, and spirits, to be perfect, entire, wanting nothing, Ja. 1.4. as
ye abound in every thing in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and all
diligence; see that ye abound in this grace also, to wit, charity. 2 Cor. 8.7.
There must not one necessary grace be wanting in true Saints; though some one
may be more eminent then others, yet the truth of all must be there, as they
will have faith, they will have patience, as patience, love, zeal, humility,
self-denial, and all other graces whatsoever; Be ye holy, for I am holy in all
manner of conversation 1 Pet. 1.15.16. and this must be also in the prevailing
degree thereof; for, his servants ye are whom ye obey; if sin be stronger in
thee then grace, then ye are sinners and wicked ones; but if grace prevail,
then are ye gracious and perfect ones.

Thirdly, Their aims and desires must be after perfection, they will not be
contented with a little grace, no less measure will serve their turn then what
they enjoy after the resurrection, I would by any means attain to the
resurrection of the dead (says Paul) Phil. 3.11. their aims are no lower then
unto the glorious and everlasting state, and therefore do always press on unto
perfection, their desires are somewhat infinite, as the glory they expect:
Leaving these things that are behind Heb. 6.1. and herein their aims and
desires will appear more perfect, in that they hate sin so perfectly that they
cannot be quiet until it be abolished, and they freed from it.

1. From the guilt thereof, by justification in the blood of Christ.

2. From the piercing power thereof, by the sanctification of the spirit of
grace.

3. From the very being of it, in their glorification.

4. They are to aim at perfection in duration and perseverance: As they are not
to want any grace in the truth thereof, or in the prevailing degree thereof, so
are they not to want it in any part of their lives, for the Crown is given to
him that overcomes.

5. True Saints press forward to excel and precede other formal and outside
christians in all duties of grace and perfection; he that has any grace will
always desire more; a holy ambition in grace and goodness is very commendable.
God tells Satan that there was none like Job on the face of the earth, Job 1.8.
a perfect and upright man. Many desire to be before others in honor, riches,
and power, but few desire to excel in grace: If we be true Saints and aim at
perfection, we will not think it enough to be like others in grace, but labor
to go beyond others in all good and perfect works: Hence the Quakers may see
and be convinced that we hold a perfection in this life, though not an absolute
legal one, whereunto nothing can be added, as they; but an Evangelical one,
upon better grounds and principles.

Verse 3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast,
and repent; if therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.
Call to mind therefore the doctrine of grace which thou have formerly
received and heard, and cleave fast thereunto, and repent thy straying there
from: But if thou will not repent, and be awakened out of this thy sleep of
sin, I shall come as a thief, suddenly unawares upon thee, and seize on thee
with unexpected judgments. Christ takes up this metaphor and comparison of
coming as a thief, for diverse reasons. 1. Because a thief comes speedily, in a
time when no man looks for, Mat. 24.43. This sets us on a diligent
watchfulness. If the good man of the house did know in what watch the thief
would come, he would watch, and not suffer his house to be broken through, or
his goods stolen. 2. As a thief comes in the dark or dead of night, so Christ
comes when there is the greatest darkness, and deepest night of error on the
whole world; and therefore Christ says in Luke, when he comes, shall he find
faith on earth? True faith will be such a rarity at Christ's coming, that it
will be found in very few, his elect only. This quickens our faith, and puts us
upon the trial of it. 3. A thief comes prepared and resolved to over-master all
oppositions: so Christ's coming in judgment is with power, and to tread down,
and make all his enemies his footstool. This supports and comforts the
distressed afflicted Saints: He formerly came as a Lamb to suffer, and he after
came as a comforter, to support all those for whom he suffered and died: and he
has an other coming, his ordinary particular temporal judgments against his
enemies, which he frequently and very often sends forth against them for their
transgressions, and so he threatens to come here against Sardis and his
offending churches. And lastly, he comes in his last and ultimate judgment
with great power and glory, to overthrow and destroy all his antichristian foes
and enemies whatsoever, in Rev. 16.15. it is said, Lo, I come as a thief: and
presently follows the great battle of Armageddon, and the utter destruction of
Babylon, by the seventh Vial of God's plagues and judgments.

First, from the former part of this verse, observe,

Observe. That a calling to mind of God's former gracious dealings with us, is
not only a great preservative against sin but an effectual means for the
recovery out of sin, by a holy repentance.

Look back unto the Rock from whence thou art hewn, and review thy former
unregenerate state, and how you were therein aliens, strangers, and enemies
unto God by evil works, and how it is far better with you now in your state of
faith, then it was then in sin and wrath: for when ye have sin presented unto
you in its enticements and provocations, it will make gracious souls to reason
thus with themselves, Was I not once an enemy unto God in my sinful
unregenerate state, and shall I again fall back into it, as the Sow into the
mire? God forbid! How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
Will not then my latter estate be far worse then the first? Because God has
been gracious unto my poor soul, and delivered it as a Bird out of the snare,
or snatched it as a brand out of the fire, shall I again cast my self into the
bonds of Satan, and into the flames of hell, by my turning this grace of God
into sin and wantonness? The Lord forbid! Again, for the recovery of
backslidden souls, that are almost spiritually dead, and have almost nothing
but the name and common reputation of living ones; It is most useful and
advantageous to such poor souls, for their recovery, to recognize and look back
on those good things they formerly received of God, and heard concerning him.
For first, They heard that God was a gracious reconciled God, and a merciful
Father in Jesus Christ, ready to receive those of his chosen ones, even in
their blood and sin, that did come to him by faith in Christ to be healed of
their transgressions; and this they not only heard by the hearing of the ear,
but received it also into their hearts by faith: And if God was so ready then
to receive us into reconciliation with himself, whiles enemies unto him, how
much more will he be now ready and willing, being reconciled by his blood, to
receive us again into his gracious favor after our backslidings, upon our
repentance, and turning unto him from our sins then formerly, being now adopted
children, and no longer strangers and enemies. The contemplation of this grace,
made the prodigal child in the Gospel, to return unto his father, and he was
not mistaken of his father's good will toward him; for, as soon as his father
saw him but a far off, he had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him, Luke 15.20. Oh the wonderful grace of God! That no sooner have we
hearts or desires to return unto God, and to have an eye toward him, after we
have played the prodigals, and gone astray from him by evil works, but
presently he meets us more then half way, being yet a far off, and falls upon
our necks, and kisses us with kisses of his love and favor. Though we play the
prodigals, yet we are children still; the prodigal was a son, though he played
the bankcrupt, and spent almost all his stock of grace. The consideration that
we are children, though wanton ones, will make us desire to return unto our
father, though provoked against us by our sinful courses; and for our comfort
and encouragement herein, consider that of John, If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. It is our
advocate, the childrens advocate, believers advocate, and therefore we may come
and return unto the father with the greater boldness.

Observe. 2. Another Note from hence is, That we are to stick close to, and hold
fast that doctrine which was first delivered unto the Saints.

The church of Sardis that was almost lost and dead in her spiritual state and
condition, is not commanded by Christ to seek out any new ways or novel
doctrines; but to call to mind and remember the old ones which they had
formerly received and heard from the faithful Apostles and Ministers of Christ:
They were not to seek after any new discovery of light which was not formerly
delivered to them; there was great danger in such ways: They might attain unto
the new lights of the Gnostics, Nicolaitans, and the high speculations
thereof, or rather, the depths of Satan as they speak, and yet perish
eternally: For the way to life is the good old way discovered first unto Adam
after his fall, in the promised seed of the woman, to break the Serpent's head,
Genesis 3. and more and more manifested under the promises and the darker types
and shaddows of the Law, till at last it came to its meridian and full
discovery by the Son of God himself, in the Gospel: And this Doctrine of this
Gospel of Christ, was it that Sardis was commanded to remember that which she
had formerly received and heard, and to keep close unto it, from which he had
made a defection great and foul? This is the sum of wholesome Doctrine that we
are commanded to keep close unto, and this was that that Paul enjoined Timothy
to attend unto 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. Continue thou in the things which thou have
learned and art persuaded thereof, knowing of whom thou have learned them: and
that thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. The only
way that is to restore and renew the soul that is almost dead in sin, to attain
the new Name, the new Life, the new Jerusalem that comes down from God, is to
keep close to and hold fast the old way, the old Doctrine, the old light
delivered by Christ and his Apostles: For all innovations in Doctrines or
Worship, carry great danger with them.

And I will come on thee as a Thief, etc.

Observe. 3. That Christ will fall upon the wicked with his judgments when they
least think of, in an hour that they shall not know of: his judgments will
prevent their expectations.

None would believe in Jeremiah's time that the captivity would come upon
Jerusalem; but every one would put far away the evil day, Lam. 4.12. as if it
were to come in after generations and not in theirs. See Ezekiel. 12.22, 37. The
Jews little thought in Christ's days that the period of their City and Temple
was so nigh, though he foretold them that shortly it should come to pass, that
not one stone should be left upon another. The old World was secure until Noah
entered into the Arc, and the flood came and destroyed them all. Sodom and
Gomorrah would not believe God's threatenings until they felt the consuming fire
and brimstone Genesis 19. Whilst Belshazzar was carrousing in his cups, God writes
a MEAN, TEKEI UPHARSIN over his head and Kingdom, Dan. 5.4 etc. England and
other Nations did not think that bloody Judgments were so near: Whatsoever
sinners think, Christ is at hand, the Judge and Judgment is at the door.
Sinners are secure and think Judgments slumber, when they are upon the march
and upon the wing, Isa. 5.26. Lam 4.19. Wicked men say as those in Isa. 5.19.
Let him make have and hasten his work that we may see it; and let the counsel
of the holy one of I^rael draw nigh and come that we may know it: They mocked
the Prophets of God that told them of judgments and destruction; but God will
avenge them speedily, I come quickly (says Christ) Rev. 22.20. and the reasons
that God brings on judgments with speed, and sooner then they are looked for,
are,

First, From the sins of the wicked, who highly wrong and provoke God's j^^tice
and patience, and call for his wrath upon them by their sins*

Secondly, Because of the Prayers of the godly, who daily importune God to
avenge them of their enemies, Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not God avenge his own
Elect, which cry night and day unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell
you that he will avenge them speedily. It was the cry of those precious souls
clothed in white, Rev. 6.10. that brought destroying Judgments and desolation
on Babylon. How long O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? It was answered them that they should
rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also, and their
brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. See more
hereon cap. 2. 16.

Observe. 4. The execution of all terrible judgments is committed to the hand of
Christ.

He comes as a thief to destroy, spoil, and undo his enemies; he will not only
rob them of a little, but take all their pretended graces and comforts from
them: Only here lies the difference (for comparisons and parables do not always
run on all four) The wicked and unjust theives spoil and plunder the honest,
thriving, peaceable men; but Christ as the just thief, spoileth and makes
desolate the wicked and unrighteous only. Christ comes as a Thief in the time
of his coming, in the manner of his coming, in the disposition of his coming, it
is to destroy and spoil. When Christ said unto the man that had not the Wedding
Garment, Friend how came thou in hither without thy Wedding Garment? Take
him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness. This was an act
of a dreadful Judge, in cap. 1. ver. 14, 15. Christ eyes and feet were like
unto flames of fire; he had fiery judgments in his hands against his churches,
which destroyed and dissolved them for their sins and transgressions. It was
Christ that sent the miserable desolating judgments on the Jews by Titus, and
continues it over them until this day: It is Christ that sends the sword and
blood unto the Nations round about, for their iniquities: It is Christ that
goes forth on his red Horse of judgments; to War against Babylon, the Beast,
and false Prophet, and all their cursed accomplices and adherents, Rev. 19 We may
conceive, and conceive amiss, when we think that it is man that blows these
coals of War and contentions in the world; but it is Christ that does it, Luke
12.49. I am come to send fire on the earth, and Mat. 10.34. I come not to send
peace, but a sword; for I am come to set a man at variance against his Father;
and the daughter, against her mother; and the daughter in Law, against her
mother in Law; and a man's foes shall be they of his own household: And this fire
has been kindled among us, and other neighbor Nations; and who is able to put
it out unless it be Christ, to whom power is given to compose all our
differences and dissentions; who has the Key of David; and opens, and no man
shuts; and shuts, and no man opens: If Christ opens the sluice and door of his
desolating judgments, who can shut it up, or keep them back? But if he shuts
the door of his wrathful judgments, and sets a stop unto the current and
progress of them, who can open it? For it is he alone that can treat War, and
all the miseries thereof, and can again produce the happy fruits of tranquillity
and peace.

Object. But if any one should unadvisedly Object, This were an evil to affirm
that Christ sends the sword, and war into the world: or think it harsh that he
that is the Lamb of God, should put on such a fiery posture, abhorrent to his
meek and peaceable nature, or say it is not strange for the wicked to do this
work, or to see fire come forth from a bramble, Judge. 9.15. this were but
ordinary; but to see fire come out from the Vine, from Christ, this is most
strange and abhorrent to their understandings.

I answer, As Christ is the Lamb slain, so also he is the Judge of all the
earth, and a Judge you know, must have his Sheriffs, the Executioners of his
Judgments and Sentences: So Christ takes the Sword, War, Famine, and
Pestilence, they are the Executioners of Christ's Judgments against the
delinquent wicked ones of the world, and so he uses them lawfully and justly:
And for such as will not kiss the Son, obey him, fear him, and love him, he can
be angry with them, though they be the Kings, the great ones, and Judges of the
earth: Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Christ can raise up Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar, Heathen
Kings, and call them his Servants, and make them his Instruments to do his
works of Judgments against his rebellious Prophets, and send them forth, as
Ottoman, Mahomet, Selimus, etc. to be just Executioners of Gods wrath upon
dead, formal, and luke warm christians; and therefore I say unto all such as
have but the least spark of grace and true life in them, hold fast, be watchful
and repent, or else Christ will come upon thee suddenly, as a thief, both with
his particular temporal Judgments, and with his eternal also.

Verse. 4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy.
It may be first demanded who the person is that has these few names in
Sardis? Doubtless it is meant of the Angel, Pastor, or Minister of the church,
who principally receives this charge, and to whom the whole is directed, to be
made known unto the church to, and over which the Holy Ghost had made him
Overseer, Pastor, or Angel.

Thou have, that is, under thy charge, a few Names even in Sardis. Names are
here put for Persons, Act. 1.15. The number of the Names (that is, of men or
persons) that were in one place, were about an hundred and twenty: and Rev.
11.13. it is said, that in the Earth quake were slain of men seven thousand, in
the Greek it is (...) The names of men that were slain were seven thousand: And
I conceive this word Names, is not used by the Spirit simply, to denote the
persons of men, as thus, Thou have a few persons in Sardis which have not
defiled etc. but also to demonstrate the quality of the persons, they were a
few Names, that is, a few persons of Name and Quality, they were Names of men,
or men of Name, of excellent spirits, tempers, weight, and quality, for they
had not defiled their garments, they were not so much as outwardly tainted by
the common wickedness and iniquities of Sardis: And those poor souls shall walk
with me in white: To walk with Christ is to be sharer and partaker with him in
his Heavenly enjoyments: With whom we walk we communicate with him, enjoy his
discourse, council, presence, familiarity, friendship, and all other comforts
whatsoever, that is possibly to be enjoyed by him: And they shall not only so
walk with Christ, but they shall walk with him in white. A white raiment was
usually set by antiquity, on the acquitted, innocent, absolved person; but a
black on the guilty, and condemned: This has some allusion to the former white
Stone, which was given either to the conquering, or to the innocent absolved
Saint: So to walk with Christ in white, is no more then to partake with Christ,
either a free absolution at the last day, o^ to be with him as white, innocent
conquering Saints, at the resurection; for they are worthy, that is, those pure
undefiled souls are accepted by me as worthy of such happinesses. Note hence
from the person that had these few names in Sardis.

Observe. 1. That Christians of the best Quality and Name, are under the charge
and oversight of their Pastors and Angels.

Thou have a few names in Sardis: Christ is the supreme ruling, teaching and
influencing head over his church; but the Pastor or Minister is the subordinate
organical head to every particular church: And so the hand or eye cannot say
unto the head, I have no need of thee, a body without a head will be but a
trunck unfit for lively motion: So a church without a Pastor or Minister, may
be a body, but very liveless and useless unto its operations and offices. I can
but judge them very immorigerous unto the sweet and easy yoke of Christ, that
will not endure a Pastor, an Angel, a Minister over them, to precede in all
official duties unto the flock of Christ: It is unto such that the Holy Ghost
has committed the oversight of the flock; and therefore all are to submit unto
them, as unto the Lord: For though I should grant many things unto the members
in common with their Officers, yet not to be Officers or Pastors in common with
them; for there are none such as Pastors of Pastors in the Gospel of Christ,
but Pastors of the flock of Christ: And therefore as I could never brook a
lawless community, or leveling in the churches of Christ, all to be Rulers and
Teachers, and none to be taught and ruled; so neither would it comport with
truth, according to my judgment, to admit of Pastors over Pastors, or one
Presbitery over another, no farther then prudence will lead unto, but not of
Divine right and equity. It is evident these seven Asian churches, and all the
other the Primitive Apostolical ones, were Pastoral, Episcopal, Independent
ones. I think it no Paradox to assert, that an Episcopal church may be
Independent; for I take such a one to be of Divine right indeed, whilst the
Prelatical Episcopal church has lost its jure divino, by exalting it self
beyond Christ's bounds, and taking too much upon it.

Observe. 2. That the pure undefiled Saints of Christ, are persons of high
esteem and account with God.

They are men of Name and Quality; God takes notice of them, as men of most
excellent and eminent spirits; all the rest of Sardis besides them, are but
such that had the name that they were living, but are dead: Those are they that
shall walk with Christ in white; for they are worthy: All the rest of the world
are not of the same value with these in the sight of God; for they are those
for whom the world was made; yea, God reproves Kings for their sakes, saying,
Touch not mine Anointed, Psalm. 105.15. They are God's Jewels, his Precious ones
which he makes up in safty and sec^rity: When all the world is on fire, and
combustion besides, they are in a Land of Goshen, of light, peace, and comfort,
Mal. 3.17. And the great reason of this is, in that they have the image and
likness of God upon them, and his spirit dwelling in them, and every thing does
love and highly esteem its like; for likness is the root of love, much more
God's, who is love it self, will highly esteem and love his Saints, being the
workmanship of his own hands.

Even in Sardis thou have a few Names. Hence Note,

Observe. 3. That in the most corrupted Church state, Christ may have some
chosen and precious Saints.

Sardis had but the name that show as living, and was dead; and yet in this
nominal, dead, formal church, God had a few Names there that were precious to
him. The church of God did never totally fail upon the earth, nor never shall;
though the visibility thereof may fail, yet the invisible church will never
fail: When all flesh had corrupted its ways, and wickedness of man grown great,
and the earth filled with violence, before the Flood, Genesis 6.11, 12. yet then
was Noah undefiled, and a faithful Preacher of righteousness; yea he was just
and perfect in his generation, and walked with God. In the corrupted church
state in the days of Ahab. when Jezebel cut off the Prophets of the Lord, and
set up Idolatries in the room of them, true worship of God, and the godly and
righteous, so vexed and wasted, that Elijah the Prophet thought none but
himself left in Israel: Even then the Lord tells him there were seven thousand
which had not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 Kings, 1.18.

In the time when Christ came in the flesh, which was in an exceeding bad and
corrupted church state, and in a time when the Jewish church was never more
corrupt then when he came; yet there was then a Joseph, a Mary, a Zachariah,
and Elizabeth, a Simeon, and Anna, and some few others that truly feared God.
In the darkest and deepest night of Popery, there were some faithful witnesses
unto the truth; The Waldenses, the Abigenses, Pauperes, Lugdunenses, etc. of
whom some of the Popish Writers themselves testify, that they were upright in
their carriages, and believed aright concerning God; only they blasphemed the
church of Rome: So there was a Huc, a Jerome of Prague; a Wickliff,
Berengarius, Peter de Bruis, Luther, Oecolompadius, Melancthon, etc. in a time
and state bad enough: So here in England, when the church was exceeding corrupt
under the Prelacy, yet then appeared here a Cartwright, Hooker, Ames, Parker,
Bolton, Robinson, Reynolds, Aynsworth, Baynes, and many other precious Saints
and faithful Witnesses unto the truths of Christ.

Observe. 4. God accepts the pure and undefiled as worthy of eternal life.

at. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: They are those
that shall walk in white with Christ, and inherit the Kingdom with him.

Quest. But if it be demanded, Does not this assert a merit in works; or that
purity in the life does exact from God in the way of Justice, some answerable
compensation to it.

I answer, first, and assert, That holiness or purity of heart is the
descriptive quality of those that shall see God; they and they only (of Adult
persons) are accepted by God to that high privilege.

Secondly, I grant too, that the eternal life of happiness is set forth and
given as a prize, as a reward, as a crown to the conquering Saints; so in this
and the last chapter it is often promised unto such holy ones under such a
notion of a crown and reward.

Thirdly, but I utterly deny that it has the least proportion to satisfy
Divine Justice, or merit the least in strict Justice from God, toward eternal
life.

1. Because eternal life is the free gift of God, and he gives it to whom he
pleases, Joh, 17.2. 1 John 5.11.

2. Because Divine Justice requires exact obedience, which says that he that
is guilty of the breach of one tittle of the Law, is guilty of the
transgression of the whole: For the best Saints being so imperfect in their
obedience, that they come far short in obtaining any thing at the hands of God
in strict Justice.

3. Because our sanctification and holiness is the alone work of God's own
grace and spirit, and therefore improperly said to merit at his own hands. A
child may merit from his Father in Justice, by his filial obedience, the parent
being under a natural Law of compensation, as well as the child is under the
law of obedience toward him: But God our heavenly Father is tied up unto no
such Laws, being a free agent, and gives life to whom he pleases.

4. And therefore Lastly, Because man has forfeited his first covenant of
merit and life by righteousness in Adam, and that being made null, God has
instituted a most gracious one, wherein he has freely given eternal life to
all his chosen ones; merited by the blood of his Son, and received here in the
first fruits thereof by faith and the sanctification of the spirit.

Object. But here comes the Sophistical Jesuits, and say, It Is true, in rigor
or Justice we cannot merit at God's hands, we cannot give him quid pro quo; but
in his favorable acceptance we may give him some satisfaction, wherein there is
a kind of imperfect proportion to divine justice, and accepted by God in his
goodness and mercy, as good payment from us; and if you will take it rather in
their own words whom they design, and say there is either, 1. Sat is factio
Justiciae, ex rigore Justiciae, ad absolutam and perfectam equalitatem
quantitatis. Or, 2. Acceptationis facti ex gratia donante ad imperfectam
aequalitatem proportionis and ex condigno. The first satisfaction they deny,
but the latter they grant, and assert that our own works though imperfect in
themselves to answer strict Justice, yet being now dyed in the blood of Christ,
becomes current for good payment; and Christ having merited to set a value upon
them, now they are able to stand by themselves, and merit upon their own
account at the hands of God. These are some of Belarmines's expressions.

I answer, This distinction of satisfaction in strict Justice, and satisfaction
in favorable acceptance; is but vain and sophistical unto this Question: I
grant that our good works and holiness done out of faith, are pleasing to God
and accepted of him; but where does it appear that God accepts them as the
least satisfaction to his Justice in Scriptures? God is not like man in humane
satisfaction, ready to take twenty Pounds for one hundred Pounds from his
debtor, where no more is to be had; God will make no such complemental
compositions with his debtors: Divine Justice will exact the utmost farthing;
either it will have full satisfaction of the sinner, or of his surety: either
of our selves, and upon our own persons, or upon Christ for us: And therefore
it is vain to imagine such a facility or partiality in Divine Justice, as to be
satisfied with a few poor unworthy rags of our own imperfect righteousness. No
satisfactions will suit and comport with Divine Justice, but such as are by the
same Justice reputed sufficient, such as are Christ's satisfactions, and they
only can do the work: And therefore those pure undefiled names at Sardis are
accounted worthy to walk with Christ in white, not out of their own merits, or
the least satisfaction that they can render unto Divine Justice; but out of
God's mere gracious acceptance and free love toward them: They are worthy not
out of Merit and Justice, but out of fitness, aptness, and excellency, in
comparison of others: And so God accepts them as gracious, lovely, and worthy
to be in his presence for ever and ever.

Verse. 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I
will not blot his name out of the book of life: but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels.
To the overcoming Saints in Sardis, that shall escape the pollutions of the
times, there is promised a glorious white Vestment, to represent the innocence
of their bodies, and the majesty of the glory they shall enjoy, when Christ
shall appear, with whom they shall walk in white, as in the former verse more
fully. Hence Note.

Observe. The future blessed state of the Saints, is not only a sinless innocent
one, but a most glorious one also.

This is manifested by their solemn investiture into that state, being clothed
in white raiment, which does typifie and represent, as the Priests vestures of
old, both Innocence and Majesty: and there is all reason for it; for, We are
then made both Kings and Priests unto our God, Rev. 5.10. and we shall reign
on earth.

And I will not blot out his name out of the book of life. This is an other
addition, or further degree of blessedness to the conquering Saints: The Spirit
of God has taken up this expression of the book of life, and writing in this
book, and blotting out of it, from the manner of men, metaphorically borrowed
from their practice, and is very often used in the Scriptures, as in that
prayer of Moses, Exodus 32.32. I pray thee raze me out of the book which thou
have written: and according to that Imprecation of David, Psalm 69.28. Let them
be put out of the book of life: and Rev. 22.^9. If any man shall diminish of
the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of
the book of life: add to these Psalm. 139.16. Dan. 12.12. Rev. 20.12. Mal. 3.15.
Rev. 13.8. and 17.8. All which do signify, that God has (as it were) a book
of remembrance, according to the practice of men, wherein he writes and blots
out, that the things therein signified may be made plain and obvious to our
understanding. But by the way, we must not be so gross, to imagine that God
has a book for the help of his memory, or that he writes or blotteth out, as
men usually do; God is no such corporeal Being, to use such helps: but it is to
be understood metaphorically, as abovesaid, and per Anthropopathean, according
to his condescension to the capacities of men; as when eyes, face, hearing,
hands, etc. are ascribed unto God: He needs not books of writings for help of
his knowledge or memory, for all things past, present, and to come, are in his
fight. But to understand the terms a little more distinctly, know, God has a
double book of life, wherein he is said to write and blot out: The one is that
of his Decrees of his Election unto life; the other is the book of the
execution of those Decrees. In the first book, persons may be said to be
written in it two ways, either really, or seemingly so unto others: for the
first, they can never be expunged or blotted out of that book, unless Divine
Omniscience and Omnipotency should fail, that is engaged for their support and
perseverance; which more fully hereafter shall be declared. But the second
sort, that are but seemingly written in this book of life in the judgment of
others, may be said to be blotted out, and cast-aways, for in truth they were
never really written in it. So also in the other book of the execution of Gods
decrees, persons may be said to be written in that also two ways. First really
and in truth, when God executes his decree of Election, by bringing and
receiving his elect ones into the Gospel covenant by believing, and so enrolls
them in the number of his faithful ones, church, and family. Secondly, Others
also may be said to be written in this book, which are but only seeming and
ti^ulary christians, in respect they have taken up the profession of the faith,
and are added to the church visible as members thereof, and are so justly
reputed by others, because they have submitted to the ordinances of the church,
which is sufficient, nothing appearing to the contrary, to denominate them
Saints, called, elect, and written in the book of life.

Now when God is said to blot out names (names being put for persons) out of
the book of life, it only signifies, that God will manifestly declare and make
it known, both to the parties themselves, and others, that they never were true
members of the church, nor in the state of election and salvation, nor never
written in the book of life.

I will not blot his name out of the book of life. Under this negative promise
unto the conquering Saint, is contained a strong Affirmation of the continuance
of the contrary blessing: Christ will not only not blot out his name out of the
book of life, that is, confirm and continue his undoubted right and title unto
eternal life, but he will also manifestly declare and make known unto others
his lawful Title and interest, according as he has ordained him thereunto in
his book of life from all eternity: and so the subsequent words do intimate; I
will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels: often in
Scripture things are then said to be done, when they are only manifested to be
done, according to that saying, Res tum demum dicuntur fieri cum incipiantur
manifestari. Reg. Petrum. As to instance by Heb. 1.5. Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. The Spirit in that Scripture not intending that the Son
was not begotten of the Father before that day when that word was uttered, but
that on that day he was more eminently declared and manifested to be the only
begotten Son of God, then formerly: So that when it is said in Scripture, that
God will blot their names out of the book of life, it only imports, That God
will discover to themselves and others, that their names were never written in
the book of life, nor had any right or interest at all in election or
salvation, farther then in the outward appearance. From the words Note,

Observe. That the eternal state of God's chosen ones, is sealed and secured by
God from everlasting.

Their names are written in the eternal book of God's decrees of life, and he
will not blot them out; for being once enrolled in the book of God's election,
and among the catalogue of his Saints in the church invisible, they can never
be razed out; for the foundation of God continues sure, Romans 9.11. and has a
twofold seal, 2 Timothy 2.19. First, God's knowledge, whereby he knows them that
are his. Secondly, His Spirit of Regeneration, which seals them unto eternal
life. Now if any thing would blot out those that are thus enrolled or written
in the book of life, it must be their sins and pollutions that would do it: but
the sins of God's chosen ones, cannot move the Lord to raze us out of his book
of life; for, then the foresight and knowledge of our sins in God's eternal
counsel, would much more have hindered him from choosing and enrolling us in the
book of his Election; seeing every one knows, that a less cause will hinder
the choice of any, then move them to reject the person once chosen: nay rather,
because the Lord has chosen us, therefore he will give us his holy Spirit,
whereby he will preserve us (though not altogether from falling into sin, yet)
from finally lying dormant and impenitent therein: and as he has freely chosen
us to eternal life, without any respect to our own worthiness; so also he will
freely execute this decree, by giving us all the good means conducing to that
end.

Object. But some may say, Though the conquering Saints are secure, and their
names shall not be blotted out of this book, yet this does intimate, that
others whose names are written therein, for their sinful pollutions and
iniquities unrepented of, may be blotted out; according to that of Exodus 32.33.
Whosoever has sinned against me (says God) him will I blot out of my Book.
And as David prays, Psalm. 69.28. Let them be put out of the book of the
living, and not be written with the righteous.

Answ. First, This threatening is not against the true members of Christ, or his
church, who are enrolled in the book of life, but those that are the members of
the visible church only, and are only seemingly written in the book of life,
members in show, and not in truth; branches in the Vine by profession, but not
in practice and life; of the Lord's family, and in the number of his servants,
in their own, and others opinion, but not really and in truth according to
God's estimation.

Secondly, Whereas God says he will blot such out of his book; we are not to
understand thereby, that he would blot them out of the book of his election
unto life, wherein they were never written; or, that he would reject them whom
he had chosen: but that he would raze them out of the other book of life, the
book of the execution of his decrees, to wit, the book and roll ^f his visible
church: and that it might be manifestly declared that they who in their own
opinion, and in respect of their outward profession in the opinion of others,
might seem to be written in both books, or both parts of the book of life, of
that of God's decrees, which only relates to the invisible members and church
of Christ; and also of that other book or roll of the visible church, yet were
not in truth ever enrolled in either, farther then in outward profession and
appearance only.

And lastly, Whereas David prays, that the obstinate enemies of God and
himself, might be put out of the book of the living, and not be written with
the righteous, is no more, but as if David had said, Do not (O Lord) write them
down, or reckon them in the number of thy faithful ones; or, if they come to be
numbered among thy church and people, and to be accounted written in the book of
the living, in respect of their outward profession, and external walking with
the people of God, yet discover such, and display them, that it may manifestly
appear that they were never truly written in the book of the living, nor are to
be accounted among the righteous, that so they may be put out of the company of
thy church and children, that all may know that they were but hypocrites. For
in regard that God's decree of election is unsearchable to man, those are said
to be elected and written in the book of life, who are outwardly called, and
added to the visible church, professing themselves members thereof, which are
the outward, but not the infallible signs of God's election, because they are
common both to hypocrites and sound believers: and so likewise God is said to
blot persons out of this book, whose sins and hypocrisies are discovered, and
so thrust out of the company of the faithful; and therefore David, because he
would have God's vengeance against these wicked ones plainly manifested,
desires the Lord to discover them, that they have no portion, right, or part
in the book of the living, nor worthy to be written or numbered among the
righteous, but that all might sensibly discern them to be but reprobates. And
thus far David's prayer is imitable, as unto us.

Quest. But by the way I shall put a question, Whether it is lawful or
consonant to the will of God, for any of the Saints of God, to pray to God, as
Moses did, Exodus 32.32. I pray thee raze me out of the book which thou have
written: and as Paul wished, To be separated from Christ for his brethren
according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. Or secondly, To pray that other men's names,
though wicked, may be blotted out of the book of the living, as David in Psalm.
69.28. prayed against the enemies of God and himself?

Answ. 1. It is not lawful to pray for any thing contrary to the known will of
God, for there are no commands or promises annexed to such a prayer, but
abundantly to the contrary, therefore surely such prayer must be most vain and
sinful; for neither Moses nor Paul were bound to prefer the good of their
brethren, before the fruition of God, and their own salvation.

Moses nor Paul did pray so absolute, but conditionally, like to that of
Christ, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: so they, if it
would stand with God's will, and be approved by him, could desire and wish to
be razed out, and anathematized from the roll of God's church, and from life
itself, so that they could deliver their lost brethren of Israel from the curse
and damnation that hung over them for their infidelity and impenitency: this
they did desire under the loss of their own salvation, had it been possible.
But whether Moses or Paul had so an eye and respect in these particular prayers
to the will of God, is uncertain: for I think it is no sin to say, that either
Moses or Paul might be carried aside by an over misled zeal to their brethren
the Jews: for, In many things we sin all, says the Apostle James, cap. 3. 2.

3. Lastly, if David did pray unto God absolutely, that the names of the
ungodly might be put out of the book of the living, I think it not warrantable
nor Imitable in us. David being a Prophet, and having the spirit of prophecy,
he well knew against whom he prayed, prophesied, and imprecated, and so his
prayers and imprecations to this effect, were but as so many prophetical
denunciations, and predictions of God's judgments against his impenitent
enemies; which are no patterns or examples to us: for we are commanded to pray
for all men, even for the conversion of the most vilest persons in the world,
as long as there is hope of their returning. But secondly, Though we may not
pray absolutely, yet we may conditionally, with submission to God's will,
against all his, and our antichristian enemies, that God would either convert
them, or bring them to shame and ruin, that his glory, and the Saints peace
and comforts may be more enlarged and multiplied thereby. But to proceed.

I will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels.

Christ having assured the overcoming Saints of Sardis, that they should
participate of his glory, and be clothed with majesty in the other world, and
having undoubtedly assured them the confirmation and continuance of their
blessed estate, and their right thereunto, in not blotting out their names out
of his blessed roll and register of the book of life; and having promised not
only to do all this good for them, but will also acknowledge them, confess them
to be his by name, before God and his holy Angels; that is, as if Christ had
said, Those whom I present before thee, O Father, and thy holy ministering
Spirits, clothed in white raiment, in innocence and majesty, and which are from
eternity registered in thy book, I avouch and acknowledge them to be of my own
name, members of my own body, anointed with the same unction and Spirit that I
am of, truly christians, faithful followers of me and my doctrine through their
whole course of regeneration, and new life which they have led unto this
present day. Hence Note,

Observe. That Christ will not be ashamed, but will publicly own and
acknowledge his faithful ones at the last day, before God his Father, and all
his holy Angels.

This he promises Mat. 10.32. to confess and own them before his Father in
heaven, who shall faithfully confess and own him here on earth. Christ calls
such here his sheep, his friends, his brethren, his members, yea himself, by
his own name, Christ; 1 Cor. 12.12. and therefore Christ tells them John 20.17.
I ascend to your Father, and my Father, to my God, and your God. And seeing God
and Christ are not ashamed to be called their God, and their Christ in this
life, surely in the life to come they will not be ashamed of them, but will
acknowledge them to be the the godly, or God-like christians, that faithfully
owned God and Christ in their several generations.

This is a great motive and encouragement unto us, boldly, and with constancy,
in the worst of times, and under the greatest defections, to confess and own so
worthy a Lord and Master as Christ and his ways, seeing we shall be no losers
by it, but rather great gainers; for before God and his Angels he will not
spare by name to confess us, and to honor us as his own before so glorious a
presence, although of our selves we be most unworthy creatures. Who ever truly
honored God and Christ in an open sincere profession, and following of their
ways of truth, and was not honored both by God and Christ? Them that honor
me, I will honor (says God) and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed? 1 Samuel 2.30. If we only lose our honor among men for our profession,
and among the basest and vilest sort (for all scornful ungodly ones are so to
be accounted, be they never otherwise in the eye of the world so great, rich,
mighty or honorable, and win honor with God; if we be vilified on earth, and
among earthly minded men, and be accepted in heaven, we have no cause to be
discouraged, or murmr at our loss. When Christ owned Stephen from heaven in
the midst of his enemies, it was more then a sufficient recompense for his
stoning, Acts 7. What loss did the three children sustain when they kept their
consciences undefiled, by not obeying Nebuchadnezzar's command, in worshipping
his golden Image, but openly professing, and praying with their windows open to
the God of Israel? Dan. 3. Did not the Lord for this their faithful honoring
of him, honor them with his presence, with safety and deliverance, and made
them ever-living examples to all that truly fear God, to trust in him for help
in all extremities that fall on them for his names sake ^o all generations for
ever?

But if it be asked, How we shall honor God faithfully this way?

It is answered, we must (as those few undefiled names, or Saints of Sardis)
overcome the corruptions and pollutions of the times, by witnessing against
them, and openly stand for, and profess the contrary truths and ways of God,
and follow the advice of Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man purge himself
from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the
Masters use. And therefore let the understanding christian mark and consider
this, as it is in the advice of the Spirit in the immediate subsequent verse.

Verse 6. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.
This verse formerly opened, therefore needs no farther explanation.

Verse 7. And to the Angel of the church of Philadelphia, write, These things
says he that is holy, he that is true, he that has the key of David, he that
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens.
This Epistle inscribed to the Angel of the church of Philadelphia, is directed
also from Christ under various remarkable descriptions for holiness, truth, and
sovereignty, having the key of David, which he bears not idly, for with it he
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. This church of
Philadelphia was one of those seven famous churches situate in the lesser
Asia, now called Natolia, whose Angel or Pastor was Demas or Damias, as
Ignatius Epistles testify. And indeed it was a church, by the Spirit's
description, which was the fairest among the Sisters, the most comely, orthodox,
and sound among all the seven, whose very name does set forth her gracious
nature and qualities; Philadelphia signifying Brotherly love, or love of the
Brethren; which does notably agree to the excellency of grace that was found in
this church, being not openly convinced of any crime, but altogether extolled
for her gracious deportment. M. Brightman makes this his darling and beloved
Philadelphia to typifie and represent his reformed Geneva, French, or Scottish)
church model; but upon further enquiry, I doubt his counterpane will fall short
of their first pattern in purity and soundness; and he makes the church of
England, as then governed by Bishops, for their luke-warmness and remisness in
matters of Religion, to be the counterpane of Laodicea, his blear-eyed Leah:
but Philadelphia, the Geneva, Helvetian, and French Reformed church, begun by
Zuinglius and Calvin, to be his much adored darling and Rachel: and so he makes
Sardis to represent the German Reformed church under Luther and his associates:
Pergamus to represent the degenerate church of Rome, as then in being about the
time of Luther; and so upward he makes the several states and ages of the
church, the counterpanes of Thyatira, Smyrna, and Ephesus, unto the Apostles
times.

But by what warrant M. Brightman does this, or why he is so luxuriant in his
applications, I know not; and I conceive, under due respect to so learned an
Author as M. Brightman, that it is beside the intention of the Spirit, that
ever those seven Asian churches should typifie or represent any other churches,
or state of churches that should rise in futurity; only they are left unto us,
and to all ages to come, as examples and patterns, to understand and know the
dealings of God with them; that if we be partakers in the same graces with
them, we shall have the same encouragements, approbation, and reward as they
had; but if we be found guilty of the same transgressions as they were, we
shall fall under the same judgments as they did; and that that made M.
Brightman thus over-free in his applications in his counterpanes, I verily
believe to be the variety of conditions both good and had, found in those seven
churches, which by a good wit, may be stretched out to represent the condition
and state of any church whatsoever, which is not altogether beside the scope or
intention of the Spirit in them: for it is often inculcated in this and the
former chapter, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto
the churches. What was written unto them, was not only for themselves, but for
the cognizance of all others in the future also, coming under the same
conditions and qualifications with themselves. But to proceed.

These things says he that is holy, he that is true, etc.

These words contain a description of Christ, who sends this Epistle to the
Angel of Philadelphia, whose two first properties are taken out of the nature
of the Son of God, to wit, Holiness and truth: Christ makes this discovery of
himself, suitable to the condition of the church of Philadelphia, which was an
eminent shining star, both for the profession of the truth, and for holiness:
to the other the more delinquent churches, he discovers himself in another
posture, with eyes and feet like burning brass, and with a two edged sword
proceeding out of his mouth: but with the gracious he appears more gracious,
and to the truly godly he appears in his own proper nature, in Truth and
Holiness. Hence Note

Observe. Christ discovers himself unto his people, not only as the holy One,
but as the God of Truth also. (...). These things says he that is holy, he
that is true. They are much deceived that aim at holiness without the truth.
They that own not Christ according to the truth, can never be truly holy ones,
or sanctified persons; for truth sanctifies; John 17.17. Let their actions be
never so highly estimated in the eye of the world, as proceeding from holy
self-denying persons, yet if they be not done in the truth, that is, from a
true fountain, and to right ends, they will lose their reward, and be at best
but as tinkling Cymbals. What profit does it yield the monastical Votaries of
Rome when they devote themselves to so rigid austerities, and pretend so high
to holiness, whiles they have banished truth from their borders, when neither
their ends nor their aims are right according to the truth of God's word? To
what end is the Quakers austere carriage, and outward holiness, whilst they
deny Redemption or Satisfaction by the blood of Christ? Will their inherent
holiness, or their austere upright carriage, serve instead of Christ's imputed
righteousness? Holiness and truth must go together to denominate a true Saint.
Heathen Philosophers will quite outstrip the best of christians in diverse acts
of virtue; but when proceeding from a christian according unto truth, they are
to be called by another name; holy or godly actions. If you try the doctrines
of men only by the holiness of the persons that brings them, you may entertain
errors instead of truth; for truth is not always with the most seeming holiest
men: But if doctrines come from persons holding the truth in sincerity, and
professing the same truth in purity and integrity of their souls, doubtless
such doctrines in their first origin were from heaven, and not from men. Hence
it is that the Spirit of God is not only called the holy Spirit, but also the
Spirit of Truth, John 14.17. because it leads and guides into all truth: and
wheresoever the Spirit comes, as a holy Spirit, to sanctify, it comes in the
first place as a Spirit of Truth, to lead the soul into the ways of truth. If
Christ makes any discoveries unto thy soul, it will be as unto Philadelphia, as
the holy One, and as the true One: As he is the way unto holiness, so he is the
way, the truth, and the life; and no man comes unto the Father, but in, by,
and through him, John 14.6.

Which has the Key of David, that opens, and no man shuteth; and shuts,
and no man opens.

These words have relation to that prophecy of Isaiah, cap. 22. 20. 22. about
the calling of Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who should be a Father unto
Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah, into whose hands the Government should be
committed; and in verse. 22. The Key of the House of David will I lay upon his
shoulder (says the Lord) so he shall open, and no man shall shut; and he shall
shut, and none shall open. This Eliakim in the days of Hezekiah, was his chief
Steward, or master of his household, as appears by 2 Kings 18.18, 26. and it
seems by the transactions between him and Senacharib, none were suffered to go
in or out to treat with Senacharib, but Eliakim, and whom he did approve of; he
was a man in great authority with the King, and carried the Key and Sovereignty
ever his whole household; and therefore he is prophesied of by Isaiah, to come,
or to be called again of God, not in person, but in his antitype and true
counterpane, Jesus Christ, the true Eliakim, who bears the Keys of David,
etc. Christ may well be typified by Eliakim, and to be called the spiritual
Eliakim promised in Isa. 22. both for his name and nature: Eliakim signifying
(as Hierom de interpretatione nominum) the God of the Resurrection, or God that
rose again: and who was this true Eliakim but Christ?

In the next place, Christ was descended from this Eliakim, Luke 3.30.
therefore rightly brought by the Spirit in Isaiah to typifie him forth.

But lastly, and chiefly, Christ is the true spiritual Eliakim, in respect of
his Kingly office and Sovereignty which he bears over his spiritual house,
his church, as Eliakim bore it over the house of David.

The Key is put metonymice, the ensign of Authority, for Authority it self: But
why the Key of David, and not the Key of the House of David? Isa. 2^.22.

I answer, Either it is to be taken metonimically, the Master being put for the
House, or else for the more excellency of this Key that Christ bears before
that of Eliakim's, the truth it self exceeding the Type: Eliakim was but an
inferior Minister, as the Steward, and that in the family of David; but Christ
he bore the Key of David, that is, that was born before or by David himself,
due unto the highest Governor, and extending to the whole Kingdom. And
therefore excels that of Eliakim's, being limited only to the household of
David.

But why is the Key of David brought by the Spirit to represent Christ's
Sovereignty and Kingdom over his church?

I answer, for diverse reasons.

First, God promised an everlasting Kingdom to David, and therefore a fit Type
of the church of Christ, who are loved with the everlasting and sure mercies of
David.

Secondly, David's Kingdom was over the Israel of God; so Christ over the true
Israel of God according to the Spirit.

Thirdly, David was an absolute Lord over his Kingdom, he suffered no Jebusites
nor Canaanites to domineer within his Realm and Jurisdiction: so Christ within
the verge of his Government and Sovereignty, he suffers no unclean Canaanite to
rule and reign, nor any unclean thing to enter therein; but he will be sole
Lord and Sovereign within his House, as was David, and therefore in the next
words it is said, That opens, and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man
opens. The same Key that opens, the same Key shuts: Christ's Key, Power,
or Authority, does open and shut in a threefold respect.

First, It opens the true Doctrine of Salvation and Redemption by Christ, that
none ever hereafter shall shut it up, or obscure it; and again, he shuts it up
to many unworthy and impenitent people, which none, but by him, shall be able
again to open and discover.

Secondly, It opens and shuts in respect of the Government and Sovereignty that
Christ bears over his Kingdom, his holy Temple and Church, either in admission
or exclusion of members, Isa. 9.6. Zeah. 6.12. and herein no man can open or
shut, admit or exclude, but as Christ has laid down the rules and directions
thereunto in his word.

Thirdly, It opens and shuts into Christ's hidden, mystical, and everlasting
Kingdom, the church of the Elect and invisible Saints, and to whom Christ does
open to enter herein, no man can shut, and to whom Christ shuts, no man can
ever open: so absolute a Lord is Christ in the whole work and administration of
his Kingdom, that what he does, no man can undo or hinder, and what he will not
have done, none can bring to pass; He opens, and no man shuts; and
shuts, and no man opens. From the words thus explicated,

Observe. That Christ is the sole absolute Lord, sovereign Giver, and Disposer
of all the blessings relating unto his Kingdom.

Christ is a Lord by power, Mat. 28.18. 2. He is a Lord by purchase, Romans 7.20.
3. He is a Lord by conquest, John 16.30. 4. He is a Lord by donation, Ps. 2.8.
5. He is a Lord by election, as from God, Mat. 12.18. Isa. 22.20. etc. And
doubtless such a Lord has an absolute power over all the Ministrations of his
Kingdom, to promote, execute, or hinder as he pleases. The magistrate walks
not in this sphere, he has another Kingdom to deal with; the Magistrate cannot
here shut nor open, though Erastus vainly dreamt the contrary. Christ's Key, or
the Key of David, only fits this lock. As the spiritual Key of David cannot
open or shut in the civil kingdoms of the world, neither can their civil keys
open or shut in the spiritual house of David, being fitted for another lock;
and who proves the contrary, disorders the whole lock, and brings always ruin
instead of blessing upon the experiencers thereof. Christ fits not upon
Caesar's Throne, nor Caesar upon his: Each must remember and keep their place
and station. If Christ open with his Key, and receive into his visible Kingdom,
Caesar has no key to shut out: If Christ shut against any, Caesar has no key
to open. (...). Caesar may shut the door to true Saints, and open it to the
debauched world, and so make an Image like to that of Nebuchadnezzar's, whose
feet were partly iron, partly clay: But when Christ in his Ministry opens and
shuts, there is such an excellent Image erected, like the first part of that in
Dan. 2.32. Whose Head was of fine gold, his Breast and Arms of silver. It was a
notable and noble saying of Constantine the Emperor, unto the Pastors and
Bishops of his time, Vos est is in Ecclesia, sed ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus.
Though he was the great champion of the church, and the christians temporal
Savior, yet he would not meddle with opening or shutting in Christ's church,
nor extort the Key of David, or Christ's, out of their hands to whom Christ
left it; for what is done by them, is done by Christ, as by his delegated
power; what they bind in earth, is bound in heaven; and what they loose on
earth, is loosed in heaven. Christ will not suffer any to weild his Keys, but
those to whose hands he has committed them, according to his own method and
way of directions: who uses them contrary to this, they will find them
Scorpions in their hands, ready to bite and destroy them, instead of healing
and curing. Remember the example of Uzziah, and tremble, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. Was it
not the downfall to Popery, when Spiritual men turned Layicks, and Bishops
became Princes? And on the other side, Secular Princes handled the Spiritual
Keys, opened and shut as they pleased; made Laws, Edicts, and Rules unto the
church, which was Christ's and his churches prerogative only? What undid our
late Episcopal hierarchy in England, but mixing sacred things with profane,
making Christ's and Caesar's Laws all one? The Bishop, he was made a temporal
Lord, to act in the Parliamentary and civil affairs of the Nation; and in
requital hereof, the supreme Magistrate, he is made supreme Head of the church,
to enact what Laws he pleases, as in reference to the church, and to open and
shut to whom he will, by his high courts of Delegates and high commission, etc.
such a church, such a head; a civil church, a civil head: such a church, such
laws, such officers, such keys, such pow-Ar: all prudentials, and all of the
present worlds wisdom and fabricating; and therefore not strange that the
fabric lasted no longer, but fell wit^in few ages after the first structure
thereof. And is it not now to be feared, that the church amongst us may be
lulled asleep, as in the lap of Constantine, by overmuch indulgence and
temporal honors cast upon her, and her Ministers? Though I am not an enemy to
their just maintenance and temporal comforts, yet I am jealous of them, that
all is not Lamb-skin that appears so about them, but that somewhat (if not too
much) of the Foxes tail lies undiscovered within: What means else the bleatings
of the cattle? I mean, their pressing after preferments, extraneous as to their
churches, as Heads of Universities, State-chaplains, great Parsonages,
Commissioners and Tryers, etc. and so by reason of the want of Christ's own
Key, do often open to persons against whom Christ has shut, and shut against
some to whom Christ has opened. So fallible are men that open with the wooden
key of their own Politiques: the Lord deliver our Sovereign Magistrate from the
snares of these spiritual Machiavilians, or Machiavilian Doctors, that do teach
the Magistrate to lay his Politiques as rules to Christ's church; that would
have him open, where Christ shuts; and shut, where Christ opens. It is equally
dangerous unto both Magistrate and Minister, to move or act out of their own
proper spheres; but acting in their own Orbs, the one in his Civil Government
and State, the other in his Spiritual policy and church, so both becomes
gracious and honorable in their respective governments and dominions.

Quest. But what? Shall not christian Magistrates do nothing in the church, or
execute no part of their Authority therein, which God has given them for the
good of the church?

I answer, First, The Magistrate may exercise his authority for the good of the
church in several respects,

First, In protecting, encouraging, and countenancing the church in the service
of Christ, and defending their liberty therein, and so become Nursing Fathers
unto the church.

Secondly, As Christ does approve and command obedience from all to
Magistrates, and their Laws, as for God's sake, Romans 13. So Magistrates should
approve and command Christ's Laws and Government to be observed of all within
their respective boundaries and jurisdictions.

Thirdly, If any proves turbulent, seditious, or factious in the church, under
pretense of liberty, and so become a peace-breaker in the Commonweal, the
Magistrate may restrain him by his civil power.

Fourthly, If any church member become a blasphemer, an idolater, an open
delinquent against the first Table, or transgressor of the second, the
Magistrate may chastise him for it, over and above the censure of the church;
not as required thereunto by the church, but by virtue of his own civil Laws,
that equally reaches all persons that transgress them, whether Ecclesiastiques
or others.

2. But secondly in the Negative, I answer, That Magistrates have nothing to
do, nor are competent Judges, as Magistrates, of controversal points, opinions,
doctrines, or of things merely relating to the church; Christ never endued the
Magistrate with such a power: Therefore the argument is very prevalent a
Negative, That they have no such power. The church alone (under Christ) is
endued with that power of trying doctrines, suppressing errors in opinions and
judgments, according to the rule of the Word. Now to whom this rule was given,
the foresaid power was given; but the rule was committed to the church only,
and not to Magistrates, Mat. 18. therefore the said power of trying doctrines,
and suppressing errors, was committed only to the church, and not to
Magistrates.

Object. But may not Magistrates suppress errors, and use their authority to
that end, when they are thereunto well advised by a Learned Assembly of
Divines, or able Ministers of the church?

Answ. The Ministers of Christ, if they be such advisers herein, do first
betray their trust and calling in their Master's service, into the hands of the
Magistrate, plainly acknowledging, that their Lord and Master has not provided
an Armory sufficient in his House and Kingdom to overthrow errors, as well as
means for their discovery. Is not this to run for carnal weapons, whilst they
lay by those made by God, spiritual ones, and mighty through God, to pull down
Powers, Principalities, and all the works of darkness.

Secondly, If Magistrates act thus upon the advice of others, they must not
only see with other men's eyes, and act upon an implicit faith, but do also
hereby become but the executioners of their Assemblies Decrees: What more does
the Popish Princes, when they execute the Edicts of the Romish conclave? And
what otherwise did Pilate, when he became the executioner of the Priests
sentence upon Christ, in crucifying him? A Sea-mark to all to take notice on
this account.

Thirdly, Magistrates, as Magistrates, are not to suppress errors, because
Christ has other Laws, Ordinances, and Ways to suppress them, then what
Magistrates, as such, can take cognizance of, 1 Timothy 1.20. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor.
5.4, 5. and by those Laws in the Apostles and Primitive times were errors
depressed and punished, and not by the Laws of Magistrates, there was no
appealing unto Caesar for this work.

Object. But some Erastianizing, or rather sycophantizing Doctors of these
days, that are willing and ready to gratify the Magistrate with a boon more
then is justly due unto him, comes and objects: Is not the Magistrate
subordinate, as unto Christ as Mediator, to make Laws for him, and to rule next
and immediate under him in his church?

Answ. Indeed this objection was of some weight, when by Act of Parliament
Henry 8. was made Supreme Head of the church, and whilst the sound thereof was
continued down to his Successors, even till ten years since, in the constant
public prayers for a blessing on the chief Magistrate, under the Title of the
Supreme Head of the church, next and immediate under Christ: Then I say this
objection was somewhat; but now it is judged to savor of too much levity and
ostentation.

Secondly, But to answer more fully. I grant that all Magistrates are
subordinate unto Christ, not only by the law of creation and gubernation, by
which (as God) he rules the whole Universe; but also, by the law of Redemption,
and his Mediatorship; so by him Kings reign, and decree justice. If Christ had
not died, there had been no King or Subject in the whole world: There Is a
common temporal salvation attained for all by the death of Christ; all had so
died, if Christ had not died. Many have benefit by the death of Christ this way
in a temporal salvation, which shall never taste the benefit of Christ's death
savingly, or eternally. Christ is a Savior of all, but especially of those
that believe. So I say, all Sovereign Authorities in the world, have a being by
virtue of Christ's death and Mediatorship, and by virtue of that purchase, are
subordinate unto him, holding their Kingdoms and Principalities, as in chief
from him; for all power is given unto him as a reward of his sufferings, and
the travels of his soul, both in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28.18. In heaven
over the Saints militant and tryumphant; and in earth, over all Powers and
principalities thereof. So that Christ has at present a twofold kingdom and
people to govern and rule; the one is of the world, and the Nations thereof,
which now he governs and rules only providentially, by placing Kings and
Princes over them, to rule and reign next and immediate under him, by laws
which the Legislators conceive most conducing to the well-being of their States
and Kingdoms: and herein Christ's concurrence is no more but in common
providence and preservation, which he exercises equally toward all the works
of his creation and redemption. But he has another Kingdom and people to rule
and govern, which are a spiritual people, his church, which were the main and
principal purchase of his death: Christ has another eye, a more distinguishing
respect to those then to the others, and therefore more especially he provides
for them, to reign and rule over them with special and peculiar Laws, suiting
to their spiritual conditions; not that Christ exempts them from the wholesome
temporal laws of Magistrates, but that he suits them laws and ordinances fit
for his own body, whereof he himself is Head, influendo and infundendo: And for
this spiritual body and economy, Christ has his Laws, his Ordinances, and his
subordinate Officers, which are for the perfecting of the body, till all come
to the unity of the faith, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. And amongst the whole catalogue of
Christ's Officers, we can find no mention of King, Prince, or Parliament, that
are ordained to such a work, and therefore sure their work is another work then
to make Laws for so spiritual a people as Christ's church is; they are to hear
no other voice but their masters, nor to derogate so far from their spiritual
Head, Lord, and Sovereign, as to suffer any to reign and rule over them in
this spiritual economy, but him alone who has his Laws, his Ordinances, his
Officers, to which they must obey, and he substitutes none next and immediate
under him in this his dispensatory Kingdom of Grace, but his Vicar general, the
holy Spirit, which does virtuate all his holy Laws and Ordinances unto their
ends: And therefore such Powers of the world as go about as subordinate to
Christ, to make and impose Laws on the church of Christ, should as soon attempt
to give Laws and Ordinances to the Stars of heaven; for though they are
creatures of this world, yet too high for their laws to reach: so are the other
Stars, God's churches, for they are from heaven, and born from above, neither
are they of this world: and therefore, how vain and absurd it is, for the
Magistracy of this world to make laws and rules for them that have their
conversation in heaven, and live in another world: they live in heaven, and by
heavenly laws they are governed; their life is hid with God in Christ, and
Christ's Edicts they only hear and follow: They live in a spiritual blessed
state, and nothing but spiritual Laws will they hearken to: Their lot is fallen
into an Utopia, and none but Utopian laws shall be their rules: But if they
fall as men let the laws of men take hold upon them: Though man cannot make
Laws suitable to the Saints conditions, yet it the Saints transgress the
wholesome Ordinances of man, they shall justly suffer as men, and not as Saints;
for, in things honest and indifferent, the canon is universal: Let every soul
be subject to the higher Powers, whether Saint or other, Therefore give God his
due, and Caesar his.

Verse. 8. I know thy works, behold I have set before thee an open door, and no
man can shut it; for thou have a little strength, and have kept my Word, and
have not denied my Name.
Christ comes to a narration of the gracious works of the church of
Philadelphia; and first tolls what he has done for her: Behold I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: As if Christ had said,
Behold, I have given thee a fair opportunity and access to the knowledge of my
Gospel, and to preach the same to others, and none shall be ever able to
bereave or hide the same from thee any more: for an open door is either put for
the power of preaching the Gospel, Col. 4.13. as the Apostle Paul would have
the Colossians to pray earnestly to God for him, That God would open a door of
speech unto him. Or secondly, For a readiness of the reception of the Gospel;
as Paul in 1. Cor. 16.9. A great and effectual door is opened unto me: and 2
Cor. 2.12. And this door is opened, when men's hearts are opened, as was Lidias,
ready to receive the truth revealed by the Spirit of Truth. The church of
Philadelphia may be said to have this double door opened, a free power given
her by Christ to preach the Gospel, and ready and willing hearts to receive it,
which no man should be able to take away from her: for it is the great
Key-bearer of David himself that has opened it; and maugre all the malice of
devils, and wicked men in their hellish designs, it can never be obscured and
shut up more. Hence Note,

Observe. That it is Christ alone that vouchsafes and gives fair opportunities,
and accesses to preach the Gospel, and opens the hearts of the hearers for a
kindly entertainment of it also.

It Is not the force of man's wit, conceit or eloquence of words will open this
door, either to one self, or others. Christ must first open and give a door of
utterance, or else the tongue will be as dumb as Zachariah's, before John was
born, unto all Gospel mysteries: Next, the hearers will be as deaf unto the
sound thereof, as dumb unto the utterance of it, before the Spirit comes and
works kindly on their hearts, to a fruitful reception thereof. How possibly
else could twelve plain Tradesmen, Mechanics, Fishermen, etc. go on with that
boldness in preaching the Gospel, and have that door of utterance and
entertainment almost in the whole world, amongst inveterate and malicious
enemies of God and Christ; if the great Key-bearer of David had not touched
their tongues, and unshut their mouths, and t^^ hearts of their hearers both at
once; the one with a power of speaking, the other with a power and willingness
of hearing, receiving, and treasuring up what they had heard and learned. What
a large door has Christ laid open since the first days of reformation, to this
present day? This could never be attained unto by the power of man, but by
Christ, who by weak and despicable things and persons, has confounded the wise
and mighty of the antichristian world: as Luther was wont to say, consider with
what weapons I have overcome their errors, I have never touched them with a
finger, but Christ has destroyed them all with the Spirit of his mouth, i. e.
the word of his Gospel. What doings, what imprisonings, what finings, what
punishments, what tortures, what punishments, what deaths did the old Popish
Doctors and clergy, and of late, the prelatical Bishops raise and invent to
shut up this door that Christ had opened to his faithful witnesses in this
land? and yet, what did they prevail and get thereby, but by dashing themselves
against the corner stone, and by endeavoring to suffocate and shut up the true
light, became themselves the children of darkness, and broke themselves to
pieces against the corner stone, and became the scorn of the whole world? And
if such endeavors are again set on foot against Christ's faithful witnesses,
to shut that door which Christ has laid open to them; let the experience of
the time past toward the Prelatical persons, and others of the same stamp, be
a curb unto such undertakers, and an encouragement to all his faithful ones,
that they need not fear the reproaches or actings of men against them; for it
is Christ that has opened a door unto them, and no man shall shut it.

For thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my
name. These words are no diminution to the praise of the church of
Philadelphia, for having a little strength; for the sense runs thus, Because
though thy strength be but small, and thy gifts be but low in respect of
others, yet thou have well improved those which thou have, and have maintained
my truth, and have not denied my name. This manner of speaking is usual among
the Hebrews, who put the coupling particle and, for the disjunctive thou^h or
yet. This is called little strength, not in opposition of much corruption that
reigned in Philadelphia; as Sardis that had but a few names alive, because the
greatest part were dead; but this is called little strength, being apparently
no great strength comparatively to what others had, and that God had given her
for her talent, which she improving, and putting to profitable uses, according
to the parable Matthew. 25. and therefore of all the seven churches this is most
commended of God, and in nothing reproved by him. Hence Note.

Observe. That a small Talent well improved, is followed both by a benediction
and a commendation from God himself.

The Parable in Mat^h. 25. confirms this, where he that increases his Talent,
is made owner of more, and Governor of many Cities. This church of
Philadelphia bears the name from all her Sisters for her proficiency in the
Truths of Christ. Though her strength was not so great, nor her profession and
abilities seemed so high as the rest, yet she was more fruitful then the rest;
and therefore she surpasses them all, and has the greatest portion and
blessing given her then to any other; and so becoms the only daughter of her
mother, the peerless Sister of the seven. Have not of late many low despicable
churches and persons for well improving their small Talents, became fragrant
gardens and eminent workmen in God's Vineyard, whiles others of higher
profession, parts, and abilities, for want of husbanding their Talents, both
lost their Talents, and became barren Deserts; and like unsavory Salt, fit
only to be cast into the Dunghill? Though my years be but few, and my experience
small, yet for want of this improvement, I have known great Doctors to become
Wittalls in the things of Christ; and on the other hand, children, and babes,
by bettering of their Talents, though but of small and of a little strength,
and as but a Mustard Seed in the beginning, yet to become sound Doctors in the
church of Christ, and at last, to grow up as great Trees in the Vineyard of
God, whereunto the Birds of the Air may fly for shelter.

Verse. 9. Behold I will make them of the Sinagogue of Satan, which call
themselves Jews and are not, but do lie: Behold, I say, I will make them that
they shall come and worship before thy feet, and they shall know that I have
loved thee:
By this double remarkable Asterisme, or twice repeated Note of attention,
Behold! In one verse Christ is about to bring to pass some notable work in his
church; and what is it, but to make the perverse Jews that troubled the peace
of the churches, in blaspheming the truths of Christ, and endeavoring to bring
afflictions and tribulations on the true Professors thereof, but to make them
stoop to the Scepter of Christ, and to make them worship him before their feet,
to make them one flock and one church, and to make them know that this Christ
and this church whom they have vilified, blasphemed and persecuted, to be the
only special object of God's Law, and the only way and means to salvation and
eternal life. But to explicate the words more fully.

Behold, I will make them of the Sinagogue of Satan: The words in the Greek
copy are (...): Beza's Version reads them, Prebebo eos qui sunt ex Synaga
Satana: The Verb is in the Present tense I give, and not in the Future; and
what is given? Those that call themselves Jews; I give, or I yield, is put in
the present tense, either for the more certain denotation of the certainty of
the good promised to come in the future; (for so the latter clause does
intimate, I will make them that they shall come and worship, etc.) Or else,
Secondly, it denotes unto us, that God did at that present time make some of
the Jews to submit themselves unto his church, as it were, a taste and first
fruits, or as a pawn and earnest of their more full, general and universal call
and subjection to the Scepter of Jesus Christ, which should ensue in future
ages, which the latter clause of this verse is full unto, whereof, more
hereafter.

I formerly she wed on cap. 2. ver. 9. how those Jews that are only so by
lineage and descent do lie, when they call themselves Jews and are not: To call
ones self a Jew in those days when John wrote this Revelation, was as much as
to profess and to arrogate to themselves, that they were the seed of Jacob, and
had Abraham to their Father, and were the Israel of God, the only people of
God, his peculiar Inheritage, to whom the promises appertained, the children of
the Kingdom, to whom the Oracles of God were committed; and all others Aliens
and Barbarians in respect of them, who alone had the privileges of the
children, a holy Nation, the Lord's Portion, who alone had the Temple, Divine
Ordinances, Worship, and clear Visions of God. Now when those persons that
boasted themselves of those privileges, yet persecuted, reviled and blasphemed
Christ and his churches, as they did that of Smyrna, cap. 2. 9. They cease to
be true Jews, and make a lie, when they call or profess themselves Jews, true
Israelites of God, when indeed they are children of the Devil, and of the
Sinagogue of Satan; for his works and counsels they do really execute and
perform; they do synagere, work together, plot, study, and execute one and the
same thing; and therefore worthy to be denominated his Disciples, of this
infernal College and Synagogue, and not of Christ's church, college, or of the
Society of Jesus, Hence Note,

Observe. That many are apt to call and boast themselves to be true Jews, true
Israelites of God, true Christians, that in truth are not: for their evil works
and blasphemies both toward Christ and true Christians, does evidently show
that they do lie in their Profession, and Indeed are not true inward Jews and
Christians, but of the Synagogue of Satan.

You would have thought it strange to hear of a Sinagogue of Satan, an
University as it were, for the Devil, set up among the holy people of God, his
own Inheritance; and yet it was most true: John Baptist could have called them
a generation of Vipers, and Christ more plainly the children of the Devil, for
his works they did do, and John here a Synagogue of Satan, and that most
deservedly, for their contumelious reproaches and oppositions against the
Gospel of Christ and true Believers: We have a true counterpane of these carnal
Jews among the christian churches in those days, who call themselves christians
and children of the Kingdom, and yet only fit to be cast into utter darkness:
They crack of the Temple of God, of Ministry, of Ordinances, of true Visions of
God and the truth; and yet who more enemies to the truth and to true godliness?
They are just like the Jews of old, that boast of Abraham to be their Father,
and that they are Israelites as from Jacob, and yet are ready with the Jews to
crucify the Lord of life in his Saints and followers.

They think it enough with their elder Brethren the Jews, to have Abraham's and
Jacobs to their Ancestors and Progenitors; but for Abraham's faith, or Jacob's
spirit in wrestling with God, let that alone for them that will: They think it
safe enough to be of Israel according to the flesh, to be born in a christian
Nation or church, and to have some external badges and privileges of children,
as Baptism, or the like, then all is well, whilst the weightiest things of the
Law, and the most substaintial parts of Religion, they let ly by and contemn:
And what are all their arrogating Titles when truth is wanting, but a kind of
blasphemy and a lie? I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and
are not, cap. 2. 9. for indeed he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly in
circumcision of the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, whose heart
is circumcised, and is one in the spirit Romans 2.28. There were two sorts of
people that did call themselves Jews and were not, but did lie. 1. The
Samaritans. 2. They of Judea and Jerusalem; and both by their perverse
carriages to Christ and the truth, did blaspheme and dishonor the honorable
name of a Jew. So among christians there are two sorts that wound this
honorable name of christians, who call themselves christian churches, and are
not, but do wrong and blaspheme the honorable name of church and christians; I
mean the Romish Popish Synagogue, and many of the pretended reformed churches:
The first like the Jews of old cry out, The Temple of the Lord! The Temple of
the Lord! O, The Church! The holy Catholic Church! The Chair of Peter! The
infallible Chair of Peter! We are the only Spouse of Christ, no salvation
without our jurisdiction, and yet who greater blasphemers, reproachers, and
persecutors of the true christian churches and Saints then they? And seeing
they will not part with the Title of the church, let them keep it; but is such
a one as is here mentioned the church or Synagogue of Satan, not of Christ; and
as long as their Idolatries continue, she will ever be a Babel, not a Bethel,
counterfeit Jews, no real spiritual ones, christians only in Title and show,
not in truth, notwithstanding all their high pretentions and claims to the
contrary* 2. So many of the pretended reformed christians cry out, We are of
the reformation we are baptized, we are of the Lutheranes confession, we are of
the Calvinists; and yet no Papist more blind, more ignorant, more vile, more
profane, or greater enemies to Christ in the power of godliness. The names
titles and honor of christians they love, they esteem, they expect; and yet
who vainer, who more profane, more ungodly, or less deserve it then they? They
are only nominal christians, outward Jews; but to the inward spiritual Jew, who
more strangers to it then they: Let them therefore look to it notwithstanding
their high and honorable affected titles, least the spirit of God shall
declare the very truth, and manifest to all true christians, that they are only
seeming Jews, and do lie when they call themselves so, and that they are not of
the true christian church, but of the Synagogue of Satan. See more hereon, cap.
2. verse. 9.

Behold I will make them that they shall come and worship before thy feet, and
they shall know that I have loved thee. These words contain a promise to the
church of Philadelphia, that Christ would make those enemies of hers the
blaspheming Jews, to come and worship before her feet, that is, would make them
to submit to the Scepter of Jesus, Christ, and to worship him in the presence
of Philadelphia, which for her purity and soundness may pass for a type and
figure of the true church of Christ, before whom these carnal formal Jews shall
fall low and worship.

Object. But if it be demanded, Whom shall they be made to worship?

I answer, First, God in Christ, whom they have blasphemed and dishonored; the
sole object of Divine worship, which Philadelphia and the true church do honor
and obey.

Secondly, They shall civilly worship and reverence Philadelphia, and the true
church, for the honor that Christ has put upon her, and so will think it an
honor indeed to come under the same profession, worship, and discipline with
the christian church: And when I have done this, says Christ, they shall know
that I always loved thee, and that thou were most dear unto me. Now this
Prophesy and promise was never fulfilled unto Philadelphia in the full extent
thereof: only we read of some few of the malignant Jews, given by Christ to the
church of Philadelphia, and others of that age; but how this promise was
fulfilled in the Latitude thereof, it cannot enter into my understanding to
comprehend: For when ever did those perverse Jews that for their notorious
malignity against Christ and the truth, were justly called the Synagogue of
Satan, come and worship or bow down before the feet of Philadelphia? Or when
did they submit to the worship of the the churches of Christ, only but in some
first fruits, and that before this was written to Philadelphia? And when did
the Jewish Sinagogue of Satan, even to this day ever since, become the true
church of Christ more then some few scattering persons that were converted to
the faith, inconsiderable to the fulfilling of this promise? Or when did ever
God make it it eminently appear to them, that the christian churches were the
only beloved people and societys in the eye of God, above all others in the
world? Seeing those things were never yet acomplished according to the fullness
of this promise, surely there is yet a time to come, when there shall be a more
universal call of the Jewish Synagogue into holy Philadelphia or the christian
church, then ever yet have been to this present day. A Note hence will rise,

Observe. That God will not only make the natural obstinate Jews, but also their
true counterpanes the nominal seeming Christians, to come and bow before the
true Spouse of Christ, before the latter day.

This is confirmed from this verse, wherein it is promised by Christ that the
obstinate Jews should come in and worship before the feet of the church of
Philadelphia; but toward Philadelphia in the latter, this was never as yet
performed in the extensiveness of this Scripture, as is above manifested,
therefore as yet to come to pass before the feet of the true Philadelphia the
holy church of Christ: And not only the natural Jews shall come in, submit and
join to the holy church of Christ; but al formal birth christians shall also
either come in and worship before this true church, or else shall at least wise
reverence this true holy church, as the only beloved of Christ, for the glory
of the Lamb will be upon her; and the Nations of them which are saved shall
walk in the light of it; and for her greater honor the Kings of the earth do
bring their glory and honor into it, Rev, 21.23. And it is but just that God's
true church and people should have a day too, as well as their adversaries had
theirs. We know how that the great and lofty ones of the world, have put all
possible reproaches and afflictions on the Saints of God, and churches of the
purest judgment; but yet the time is at hand that they shall be convinced, and
shall know the Saints to be the only beloved of God, and the great interest and
stay of Kingdoms, and then the greatest Monarch will be glad to take hold on
the skirt of a Jew to come under the protection of this holy church, for their
God is the Lord of Hosts.

Quest. And if any one ask when this shall be?

Answ. When the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be
saved, Romans 11. When Christ shall appear again for the restoring of his
Kingdom, then the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole Heaven shall be given unto the people of the Saints of the Most
High, Dan. 7.27. then shall all come and worship before Philadelphia, the
glorious new united christian church, of Jews and Gentiles: And this shall be
the true Sion, the dwelling place of God's glory, whereunto all Nations shall
flock, and worship before it, and become one with it; or otherwise shall be
made bow unto the Iron Scepter of Christ, whereby he will make all the Nations
of the earth to submit to his Sovereign Authority, and fall and worship before
his feet. Rev. 19.15.

Verse. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try
them that dwell upon the earth.
That for which Philadelphia is commended for by Christ, is for keeping the
word of his patience: This has either respect to Christ, or unto the church;
as if Christ had said, because thou have kept the word of my patience, that is,
the word and doctrine which with a great deal of patience I have taught the
world and with a like patience Preached it from time to time; or else the
effect being put for the cause, Because thou have kept the word of my patience,
that is, the word of my Gospel, which enjoineth and works patience: Either or
both of these senses may aptly be raised and entertained from these words,
without any prejudice unto the truth and intention of the Spirit in these
words. or, 2. as respecting the Church of Philadelphia: This word as it was the
word of Christ's patience which he taught patiently, the word is, for many
generations; so it was received and kept by her with patience and constancy;
for which she had the reward of being kept from the hour of temptation.

Quest. But whither was Philadelphia so saved and kept from the hour of
temptation, that fell upon all other her Sister churches, that she was so freed
that she was not touched by it?

Answ. It is not probable that Philadelphia went free when the ten days of
persecution under the Emperors Domitian, Trajane, etc. reached the rest of the
neighbor Asian churches; but she had her portion also of affliction and
trials, under them ten persecutions: But it seems by the Spirit's expression
here, her portion herein was not so large as others had; and therefore as to
her, it is called an hour of temptation, a small particle of time respecting
the former ten days that went over Smyrna, cap. 2. 10.

Quest. How then is it said here that she is kept or saved from this hour of
temptation?

Answ. It is as if Christ had said, I will deliver thee from the hour of
temptation: Now Christ is said to save or deliver from the hour of temptation
several manner of ways.

First, That the temptation or trial should not at all touch them, this was not
promised to Philadelphia.

Secondly, That though it should come upon them, yet they should not suffer or
quail under it, but should overcome the temptation or calamity manfully, by
receiving strength from Christ to undergo it.

Thirdly, That though they should suffer under this hour of trial, yet it shall
not so reach them as to undo their eternal state and condition; this is sealed,
secured, and kept safe by Christ.

Fourthly, They are saved and delivered from this hour of temptation,
comparatively as unto others, there is no more laid upon them then they are
able to bear, it is but an hour, a taste of affliction, whiles others pass
under ten burning days of trials. In these three latter senses Philadelphia may
be said to be kept safe from the hour of temptation, either from failing under
it, or loosing by it in their eternal estate, or comparatively unto others;
Hence Note,

Observe. That though the Saints may suffer in a day of trial, yet they receive
little loss by it, but rather gain and profit.

It is but for a trial and refinement of their graces, not for a destruction of
them; It is but for an hour, not for an age; and though the common calamity or
hour of temptation should so reach them as to deprive them of this life, as
often it does; yet know there are saved and delivered from the judgments and
evil of the temptation; they are above that, they are eternaly marked by God,
and not one of them shall be lost, but shall be gathered and made up as his
Jewels, from out of the Ashes of the world. In the execution of God's
judgments, God looks with a distinguishing and considering eye upon all persons
that he touches therewith; his eye distinguishes between the precious and the
vile, Psalm. 34.15, 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and the face
of the Lord is against them that do evil; that when the hour of temptation is
coming upon the whole world, Christ is then taking a special care for his, in
saving them and sealing them from the evil of that hour: In Rev. 7.3. when
Christ sent forth his four destroying Angels, a special charge was in the first
place given them, saying, Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees,
till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads; and so they
went presently on to the sealing and securing of the servants of God, before
they went on with their destroying weapons compare Ezekiel. 9.4. etc. hereunto. O
the goodness of our God, who has a special care of us, and eye toward us in
the common calamities of the world, who will either preserve us as Israel in a
Goshen, or as Christ himself was in Egypt, whilst the Herod's of the world do
wrack their cursed malice upon the Infants of Judea for Christ's sake: And so
our temptation will be but for an hour as respecting others; and if it reaches
us further and seizes our persons, and the relations most dear unto us, be
assured and know it is but an hour of temptation, and we shall be delivered
from it, and become more then conquerors through Christ. Master Brightman on
this verse (that makes the reformed church according to Calvine, the
counterpane of this of Philadelphia) that the reformed church, asserts, the
conterpane, as the type formerly had, is to have an hour of temptation, a more
grievous affliction, far above all others, yet a short one, and is to come to
pass by the Romish Antichrist in the West, and the Turkish Mahometane in the
East; but yet herein the church shall get the victory: And I am thus far of
opinion with Master Brightman, that before the great Battle of Almighty God and
destruction of Antichrist, the true church of Christ shall more eminently and
signally be slain and trod under foot by her Antichristian enemies, then at
present she is: For this is the day of striving and only of endeavoring to
bring forth, and Antichrist still hinders and prevails; for it was given him
all the time of his reign to make War with the Saints and to prevail, Rev.
13.7. but before the end of his reign, and about the finishing the Testimony of
the faithful witnesses of Christ, the Beast that ascends out of the
Bottomless Pit, and shall make war against them, and not only overcome them,
but kill them, Rev. 11.7, 8. etc. And their dead bodies shall ly in the street
of the great City for three days and a half, as the reproach and scorn of all
their enemies; and the expectancy of this signal day of affliction over the
churches of Christ before the utter overthrow of the Antichristian Beast, it
far more conduces to the good of the churches of Christ, then an overhasty
expectancy thereof, that every one may be prepared by faith and holiness, and
remain unmovable in that day, it being still the usual Method of Christ, after
great and signal calamities and afflictions, to come with salvation joy and
rest unto the church of God; for he himself by the way of the cross, entered
into his glory: Therefore you Saints think it not strange when such an hour of
temptation comes over you, Christ will save and keep you from it, and ye shall
be conquerors at the last, and shall reign on earth, Rev. 5.11. To proceed to
the next words,

Which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.
This hour of temptation that was to come upon all the world, is not to be
understood of all the world indefinitely, but in a limited sense, as that, God
so loved the world, that he gave his only Son etc. that is, the world, that
Christ died for his holy church and members; for it is evident (whatsoever the
Armin^^n and Universalist says to the contrary) that by the world here is
meant the churches of Christ, dispersed in Asia and else where; for Christ
never sends a day or hour of trial on the wicked world for what need he so to
do; for they are neither regenerate, nor under grace, and therefore have no
graces to make trial of, either by way of quickening, strengthening, or
confirming; so that when Christ promises to Philadelphia that he will keep her
from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth, is no more in effect, but as if Christ had said* I
will keep thee from the hurt and danger of the hour of temptation which shall
come upon all the christian churches in the world, for the trial of their faith
and constancy in all the quarters of the earth. Hence Note,

Observe. That not any of Christ's churches are exempted from trials and
temptations:

And the great reason of this is, that the church most thrives and grows this
way; it is observed a Lily among Thorns grows fairest and largest; and it was
anciently said, that the blood of the Martyrs was the seed-plot of the church;
the more times that gold is refined by the Refiners fire, the more ductible and
solid it becomes: So Christ's churches, the more trials they go under, the more
eminent and resplendent they become in grace: In the day of affliction under
Bishops and Prelates, more true godliness did appear, then at present, in the
day of prosperity and peace. A beloved child never scapes without a rod from
his Father when he offends; neither a true church from Gods fatherly trials and
chastisements; for in some things we offend all, and the best has their
maculae, their spots, dross, and defections, to be purged from, therefore not
strange when we fall into diverse trials; by this we know that we are not
bastards, but sons beloved of God, Heb. 12. And all things shall work together
for good to those that fear God.

Observe. 2. Another Note hence is, That the greatest hour of calamity and
temptation that comes upon the world, is but a trial unto the godly.

Temptations unto the wicked are God's Judgments toward them, they are the
executioners of his wrath and justice; He destroys the wicked in his fiery
indignation: But unto the godly they are only for their trial, strengthening,
and bettering. To one God gives riches, honor, preferment, etc., as a mercy;
to the other they become snares unto, and destructive. So also on the godly, as
on Job, God sends the plundering Sabaeans, as a trial of their patience; on the
other, as the executioners of his wrath: Sword, famine, or death, that equally
sweeps away both, yet unto the one, they are but the instruments, gate, or door
to a higher glory; yet unto the others, an entrance unto final judgments.
Therefore Saints think it neither no loss when temptations seize upon them,
they become more weighty, more solid, more sound, more sincere, more
experimental, more gracious, and at last more glorious thereby: and on this
ground, how little are they troubled when all the world is on fire, and in
combustion about their ears; when many do call for the mountains to fall upon
them, and hide them from the fiery indignation that is passing over, yet they
are placide, serene, and in a Halcion condition, all is peace with them, though
all the world is fire about them, being so far above the world.

Verse. 11. Behold I come quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man
take thy crown.
Christ tells Philadelphia, that he is about a remarkable and notable work; and
it is, Behold I come quickly. This is not to be understood of Christ's second
coming to judgment, nor of his spiritual coming, but of his coming with the
hour of temptation and trial upon his churches; this is somewhat agreeable unto
that expression of Christ to the church of Ephesus, cap. 2. 5. Else I will come
unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick, etc. So Christ tells the church
of Philadelphia, with a Behold to usher it in, I come quickly: what to do? But
with that hour of temptation, upon all the world, to try all that dwell upon
the earth: which happened and fell out presently after this Vision was given unto
John, in the time of Trajan the Emperor, who succeeded Domitian, in whose days
this Revelation was given to John at Patmos; and in the days of Trajan his
successor, this hour of temptation, trial, affliction, and persecution seized
upon all the churches of Christ in Asia, and else where. Therefore she is
exhorted to hold fast what she had received, and that is, the word of Christ,
and his patience, which she had formerly received and kept, and that she is now
again exhorted to hold fast, maintain, and persevere in, when that hour of
temptation comes on all them that dwell upon the earth. Hence Note,

Observe. That the consideration of Christ's speedy coming with times of trials
upon his churches, is a special motive to persevere with constancy in the
profession of Christ and his truth.

If we knew that judgment was so near at the door, it would make us to trim up
our lamps, to have them furnished with the oil of faith, and light of good
works, that we may be able to stand in the day of trial. No greater motive to
set an edge upon our graces, then to know that Christ is near with times of
trials. If we knew the good man of the house would return this present day, we
would have all things garnished to bid him welcome Hold fast, for I come
quickly; or else, as in the next words, you will lose your honor, and your
crown.

Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown. As if Christ had
said to the church of Philadelphia, Thou have hitherto kept the word of my
patience, kept close unto my Gospel, go on courageously in that course which
thou have begun, hold fast, and persevere therein, lest if thou fail in thy
course, another come and take away thy crown and reward.

Here lies a difficulty, what is meant by this crown.

Some would have it eternal life, which is the crown of our faithful adhering
to Christ and his doctrine; but I cannot adhere to this opinion: for this crown
can never be taken away from the faithful; for though many that are only
externally called, may be said for non-persevering, to lose their crown which
they once hoped for, and indeed, they never had true right and title to it, but
only in their outward seeming call, and in the book of the visible church, but
not of God's election and predetermination, as formerly more at large is
manifested verse 5. on the book of life; Therefore surely this crown which may
be taken away from the faithful, and given to another; for inconstancy or
non-perseverance in the truth, is that honor and reward which was promised
Philadelphia in verse 9. preceding: That all her enemies should fall low before
her, and worship before her feet: which kind of crown and reward indeed may be
taken away from the faithful for their looseness, slothfulness, or remisness in
duties of godliness, to which they are often promised and annexed, and for want
thereof, are often removed and given to a more proficient and worthy people. So
you see what is this crown that may be taken away from the faithful for their
remisness and inconstancy in the truth, to wit, the honor and reverence which
their sincere profession acquired from the churches, and all persons round
about them. Hence Note,

Observe. That those churches that hold fast the truths of christ with most
constancy and courage in the times of trial, become the most honorable and
worthy of a crown, of any people in the world.

Who but Philadelphia was worthy that the obstinate Jews, enemies unto the
truth, should come, and bow, and worship before her? She kept close to the word
of Christ's patience, therefore none shall take away her crown; her honor
shall still remain among the churches, as long as any churches shall endure. If
we tread in the steps of faithful Philadelphia, and hold fast, and go on
manfully in the profession of the faith, God will make the formal Jews of our
times, the high pretending catholic churchmen, to bow and worship before our
feet. Is not our name, I mean the name of England, grown honorable among the
Nations, their friends abroad, and terrible unto their enemies? And how comes
this to pass, but by means of the faithful in the land, that held fast and
maintained with courage and constancy the word of Christ's patience among us,
in an hour of temptation and trial, when the Prelatical fire of persecutions
were on foot? If we hold fast to Christ, and persist in his truth and doctrine,
none shall be able to take away our crown; but if we flag in our duties to him,
our crown will be the less, and our honor will soon flag also. When Israel
kept close to God, and reformed up unto his holy pattern in the Mount, God made
them famous among the Nations, and a burdensome stone to all that meddled with
them: but when they departed from God by their evil and abominable courses, God
gave them up into the hands of their enemies, and led them into the Land of
captivity: and since for their obstinacy in iniquity, they have quite lost
their crown, and become a dispersed people, and a reproach among all Nations
where they live. And this is according to that good advice given by godly
David, as his last Legacy to his wise son Solomon, in 1 Chronicles. 28.9. which is
applicable to every faithful soul: And thou Solomon my son, Know thou the God
of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind;
for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of
the thoughts, If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for ever.

Verse 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out: And I will write upon him the Name of my God, and
the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out
of heaven from my God: And I will write upon him my new Name.
In the Greek, (...) He that overcomes. The Nominative case is put absolutely
by a defect of a Preposition, to, of, or for; which is an Hebraisme; the words
are thus to be read: As for him that overcomes, I will make a pillar, etc.
Agreeable to this are those places, Romans 8.3. For what was impossible to the
Law, by an Hebraism ought to be read, as for, or touching the impossibility of
the Law; and Psalm 18.30. Jehovah, his way is perfect, which we read, The way
of God, or, As for God, his way is perfect. The same reading is in Rev. cap. 2.
26.

The reward of him that overcomes is double, 1. I will make him a Pillar in
the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out. 2. Christ sets upon him a
threefold Name, The Name of his God, The Name of New Jerusalem, and His own new
Name.

This allusion of a Pillar is taken up by the Spirit, from those two Brazen
Pillars in Solomon's Temple, which was a Type of the true Temple and church of
Christ, and so nothing was made or placed therein in vain, though they seemed
small, but did typifie and signify somewhat to us. Solomon called his two
pillars which he erected, by two remarkable Names, 1 Kings 7.21. The right
Pillar by the name of J^hin, and the left by the name of Boaz* The one
signifying He will stablish; and the other, In it there is strength. So in the
Antitype, those overcoming Saints, that Christ makes Pillars in the Temple of
his God, have these two qualities or properties put upon them, establishment
and perpetuity, both in their spiritual strength and graces, and also in their
new church state which comes down from heaven: and lest any should think that
those new Pillars of the Temple of God might fail, as those of Solomon's did,
when they were broken, and the brass thereof carried away by Nebuchadnezzar
into Babel Jer. 52.17. there is another additional property put upon them then
that of perpetuity and strength, even of eternity, in those words, And he shall
go no more out. After the conquering Saints are taken into this holy Temple,
there is no fear of being turned out of possession of it; no Nebuchadnezzar
shall ever come and break them in pieces, or carry them by force into
captivity. The Nebuchadnezzars of the world have always hitherto under several
forms of Beasts and Governments, carried away, and broken to pieces the weak
and infirm pillars of the visible church; fot indeed they were given into their
hands by God to be overcomed and trodden under foot by them, Rev. 11. but
having at last overcommed by suffering and patience, Christ will raise them up
again, to become Pillars in his New Temple, that shall never go out any more,
and will make them other gates persons then ever formerly they were; for he
will write upon them the name of his God: and what is that? Jehovah Shaddai,
The Lord, the mighty God; and the name of the new Jerusalem which comes down
from heaven, and his own new Name, Phil. 2.9. All intimating their glorious
state and dignity that Christ will put them in possession of in that new
church state which is promised them before the ultimate day of judgment, which
shall never perish, nor any more be taken from them. But on this more hereafter.

From the words, I will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, Note,

Observe. The overcoming Saints of Christ, shall be made most honorable in the
New Jerusalem, the new Temple of God, the new Church state that Christ will
restore on earth, before the end of all, prophesied of Rev. 21.1, etc.

They are made pillars, and pillars in the church are honorable; James and
John are called pillars, great eminent Apostles, and those were placed in the
porch of Solomon's Temple, for the great ornament and glory thereof: They sit
on Thrones, judging the Nations round about: They are made Kings and Priests
unto their God: And what more honorable then those high callings to the eye of
men, of Kings, Priests, and Judges? Yea, the name of God, of Christ, and the
new Jerusalem is written upon them, and therefore sure most honorable. Little
do the high ones of this present generation, with their counterfeit and
mock-honour, think that the now poor despicable Saints of Christ, whom they so
much scorn and trample under-foot, are those for whose sakes the world is
preserved from flaming fires, and that one day shall become the only Kings,
Rulers, and Princes thereof, maugre all the malice of Satan, and all their
antichristian enemies in the world to the contrary. If the great and honorable
persons of the world did but verily believe that the Saints of Christ should
one day become so honorable in the presence of the whole world, they would
more esteem them then they do, as Heirs, born unto so great a Kingdom. It is
the common, and not unwise practice of politic courtiers, when their old
Sovereign or Prince is upon declining, they adore and worship the next Heir, or
reputed Successor, as the rising Sun, as the nearest step to their preferments.
And will ye not be so wise ye sons of men, to make good your interest with the
rising Heirs, and children of this great ensuing Monarch? Three of the great
Monarchs of the world are dead, and we have seen their graves, the fourth is
sick with age, if not even at deaths door, having one foot in his grave
already, for his weakness and infirmity being but as an Image of the first
Beast, or of himself, when he was in his youth, under his Caesarian Heads and
Empire: And the fifth is drawing nigh, having already poured out many Vials of
ruin upon the fourth, to make way for the appearance of himself, this heavenly
one. And think ye, is it not good and honest policy to come under the skirts of
the c^^rtiers of this great and heavenly Prince, to become one in faith,
manners, discipline, and interest with them, that when he appears, ye may
jointly reign with him and them in his new and heavenly Kingdom? It will be
the first step unto honor and your rising; to become one in interest with the
now despicable and vilified Saints of Christ; for though at present they differ
nothing from servants, yet know they will be one day heirs of all.

Observe. 2. That Christ's new restored Church State, new Temple, new Jerusalem
that comes down from heaven, shall never perish, but be established for ever.

Though some would have these words, to be made pillars in the Temple of God,
and to go out no more, to signify the stability of the faith of the elect,
whereunto I cannot wholly assent; for though I grant, that the faithful (as
Philadelphia) are made pillars for their stability in the faith and strength of
grace in the Temple of God, and their faith is so confirmed to them, that they
never need to fear of utter failing or perishing; yet there is more promised in
this verse, then a mere confirmation of the elect from non-falling away; for
the next coherent words do connote so much: when Christ promises to write the
name of the new Jerusalem, and the new name of Christ upon them, to be made
pillars in the faith, and to be established therein, was always a continued
promise, and always performed to the church in all ages: but the name of the
new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven, and the new name of Christ, which
are annexed hereunto, were never yet made good unto the church, but has
reference unto a more glorious future church state on earth, spoken of Rev.
21*1. I saw a new heaven, and a new earth; which in verse. 10. is called the
great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, which on the
subsequent words of this verse, shall more evidently be explained. But to
return, This new church state, new Temple, is to continue to perpetuity, yea
for everlasting; they that enter thereinto, are made firm as pillars, not to be
removed; they that enter into the gates of the present visible Temple, may
again be removed, ejected, and lose their station, for being not rooted in the
faith, yea, and the Temple it self, as those seven Asian Temples, removed,
overthrown, and extirpated for their iniquities. But they that enter into this
holy new Temple that comes down from heaven, they are made pillars therein, and
shall never go forth more, until Christ lays down his Kingdom unto the Father,
and God shall be all in all. Not as some vainly object against the expectant
tryumphing Saints, That they shall reign for the term of a thousand years, and
then their kingdom shall cease: But the truth is, that when Gog and Magog shall
be destroyed, and all Christ's open enemies cast into the bottomless Lake of
fire, about the end of the Saints tryumphant thousand years, Rev. 20.10. then
that Kingdom which Christ during all that former happy millenary ruled and
reigned in as Mediator and God-man, which properly is called his Throne and his
Kingdom, shall be devolved and swallowed up by a more glorious Kingdom, and the
Saints translated in the highest heavenly glory, which for the most excellent
and God-like properties thereof, is called in 1 Cor. 15.24. The Kingdom of God,
even the Father: and wherein all Ordinances shall cease; for John in Rev.
21.22. says, And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God almighty, and the
Lamb are the Temple of it: and in chap. 22. v. 5. describing further this
glorious state, he says, And there shall be no night there, and they need no
candle, neither light of the Sun (that is, those ordinances, or the like
thereunto we now enjoy) for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
reign for^ver and ever. They do therefore vainly cavil that say, That Christ
shall utterly and altogether cease to reign in his Headship over his church
tryumphant, from that of 1 Cor. 15.24. where it is said, When he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down
all Rule, and all Authority and power: And in v. 28. And when all things shall
be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Now the Apostles meaning
was not, that Christ should cease to be Head of his church, and so ever, or at
any time, to cease to rule over them, as the members of his body mystical,
whereof he himself is Head: but when all his enemies are put under his feet,
and all Rules, Powers, and Authorities in the world, are by him utterly
vanquished and put down, and when the last enemy (death) shall be destroyed,
and death and hell cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 20.14. after the general
and last judgment of the dead; then I say, Christ shall deliver up to God, even
the Father, his former Mediatory and Judiciary Kingdom, whereby he ruled and
reigned, not only over his holy faithful ones, by his Laws and ordinances, but
also over all the Nations and Kingdoms of the earth by his rod of Iron during
the thousand years: and this is that which is called Christ's own special
Throne, Rev. 3.21. and Christ's own Kingdom, which he has purchased and
merited by his death; which Kingdom, after the destruction of the new raised
enemies of the church miraculously by fire from heaven, in the Gogigan war, at
that time when they encompassed the Saints of the most High, and the beloved
City, about the finishing of their millenary Imperial reign on earth, I say,
that that Kingdom shall then expire, and be delivered up by Christ unto God,
even the Father. But in the Fathers kingdom, both Christ and them shall reign
for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5. And observe, that Christ's kingdom, and the
Father's, are diversa, but not contraria; or rather, that Christ's kingdom is
but the morning prelude, prodromus, or first part of that everlasting one of
God, even the Father: Christ's millenary kingdom was for Ruling, Judging, and
Reigning over the obstinate enemies of his, until all (by his rod of Iron) are
brought subject to him, and destroyed, that opposed him; and so shall have an
end when that work is done, and delivered up unto God, even the Father;
whereupon begins that heavenly one of the Father's, wherein the Son himself
shall be also subject unto him, that put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15.28. so
that thereby there will be no loss to the Saints in the expiration of this of
Christ's Mediatory and Judicial kingdom, when they are translated into a more
glorious and heavenly Kingdom, and City, whose Builder is God, and wherein
there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be
in it, and his servants shall serve him, Rev. 22.3. The great work in this New
Jerusalem, is praise and Hallelujahs to the most high and beatifical Vision, as
it is in the fourth verse; and they shall see his face, and his Name shall be
in their foreheads, all tears, sorrow, and the curse shall be quite wiped off
in this new heaven-like state of the Father's Kingdom, which were not from all
persons in the former of the Son's happy millenary Kingdom; for though Satan
was bound therein, that none was found to hurt in all that holy mountain, or
that happy Kingdom, yet still subject under it there remains the Nations of the
four quarters of the world, during the whole term of that holy Imperial reign;
or else, whom had the Saints to reign over and govern during that time? And
otherwise, How possibly could they convene as the sands of the Seashore, to
make war against the holy city under Gog and Magog, cap. 20. 8. by the
instigation of Satan let loose among them? And if those Nations shall still
remain (as evident they shall) during the Saints dominion and Empire, doubtless
though Satan and they shall be restrained from opposing the peace and quiet of
the Saints in their Reign and Kingdom, yet they shall not be so restrained, as
to be void of corruptions, sins, and impieties among themselves, which
therefore are not void of the curse, as respecting themselves, nor consequently
of tears and sorrow, and death, the most due wages of sin. Neither shall I ever
think it reasonable to conceive, that Gog and Magog, and their numberless
followers in that war against the camp of the Saints, and the beloved City,
were all innocent sinless creatures all the time of the Saints Imperial reign
over them, for doubtless they had sins enough, and wicked dispositions
sufficient within, or else they would not be so ready unto the entertainment of
Satan's delusions, and promoting his designs against their Lords and Rulers,
the holy Saints of Christ, toward the latter end of their Reign, and in
casting off their bonds, if possibly they could. In short, I conceive, Satan
and they, during the Saints Imperial Reign, to be bound up from open opposing,
hurting, or violating the peace, comfort, or interest of the Saints; but not
so, as Satan should not tempt the Nations subject unto the Saints, that they
thereby should be free from sin, which will be alone the privilege and
prerogative only of the reigning Saints; and therefore I am of opinion, that
the Saints thousand years Empire, is but the beginning and first fruits of
their happy new church state and heavenly city, that comes down from God; and
is transitory, and shall pass away, after all things are made subject unto
Christ: But another more glorious shall immediately succeed in the room
thereof, which is from God even the Father, and is everlasting; and this city
had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of
God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. 21.23. and to
conclude this, I am of the mind notwithstanding; That Christ's Kingdom and the
Father's, do only differ in the administration, and in the equality of glory,
but not in glory it self: both are sinless, both sorrowless, both deathless,
both glorious: but herein they differ, That that of the Sons is a Kingdom of
Justice and judgment, which shall have an end; and therefore less glorious
then that of the Father's, though in it self most glorious; but that of God the
Father's, is a Kingdom of praises and Hallelujahs to the most High, endless and
everlasting.

Grant O God, that thy poor servant may be kept faithful unto thee, and become
a true Philadelphian, overcoming his temptations in this life, that he may be
made at last a pillar in thy New Temple, a partaker in the great hopes of the
Saints in the Kingdom of the Son, and of God, even the Father, Amen.

And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my
God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven from my God, and I
will write upon him my new Name.

There is a threefold name to be written on the conquering Saints of
Philadelphia; of God, of the new Jerusalem, and the new Name of the Son. This
name shall be set upon the overcoming Saints, to denote whose they are; as the
followers of the Beast and Antichrist have the mark of Antichrist and the Beast
upon them, Rev. 13. that they may be known and manifest, so God's peculiar
chosen ones have also his mark upon them, to declare forth unto others whose
they are. And this name herein promised, is not the ordinary name of God that
the Saints bear this present time, of holy, godly, or the like; for this is to
be written on in the future, that all may see it without hesitating or doubting
that they are God's, in that time when that new Jerusalem comes down from
heaven. The Saints had always, and at all times the name of God and Christ upon
them, being called godly christians, etc. But here is a new name of Christ and
God to be written on them, which formerly they were unacquainted with: and what
is that name of God but El-Shaddai, God of power and strength, that shall be
set upon them? And when will it be, but in that day when the new Jerusalem
comes down from God out of heaven? Rev. 21.2. Then the weakest Saint shall be
as David, and the house of David as Elohim, Zach. 12.

2. The second name that is put upon them, is that of the new Jerusalem coming
down from heaven: They shall not only visibly appear to have God's name and
nature upon them, but they shall also visibly appear to be citizens of that new
Jerusalem that comes down from God; and if it comes down from God, and from
heaven, then surely it is meant of an estate here on earth, and not in the
supernal heavens, as many dream of concerning this place, and that of Rev.
21.2. That Jerusalem which is above, and is celestial, that abides, and is
fixed, and shall not descend nor come down, but this Jerusalem is to come down,
and to be with men, Rev. 21.3. and God will dwell with them; it were b^t a
superfluous promise, for God to tell the blessed in heaven, he would dwell with
them there, that was beyond all doubt, and therefore it must be here meant,
That the Tabernacle of God is with men, when Christ comes before the last day,
to the great restoration of his church on earth: And this new city and
church state is called by Christ, The City of my God, because God is the
builder of it; and it is said to come down from heaven, and from God, because
the rise and dignity thereof shall be so great and wonderful, that all shall
acknowledge the power of God in the erecting thereof, and that his hand did
wholly rear it, for God will have all the glory of it.

3. Christ will write his own new Name upon them; and what is that but that
name mentioned in Rev. 19.16. King of kings, and Lord of lords, and this
corresponds with that name, in Phil. 2.9. which God had given Christ, which is
above every name, at which name every knee should bow, of things in heaven,
things in earth, and things under the earth, and in Heb. 2.8. Thou have put all
things in subjection under his feet: But now we see not yet all things put
under him: Surely Christ as yet had never this new name put upon him, though he
is exalted above the heavens into glory: But we see not yet all things put in
subjection under his feet, nor yet every knee on earth to bow unto him, or to
worship him; five parts in six of the world being Pagans or Mahometans, that do
not so much as take notice of him, therefore sure not bow unto him; and among
professed christians, how few do sincerely bow unto him, all the godly know.
Neither as yet has that new name of King of Kings, and Lord of lords been put
upon him as Mediator and God-man; I grant, that by virtue of his death and
mediation, all Kings in the world reign, and decree justice; and as God, he is
the supreme Lord; and King of kings: But this is not all, he must as Man, be
King of kings, and Lord of lords, and he must rule and reign in another mode
and posture then ever hitherto he has done: We have known him hitherto only as
a Lamb, and as a man of sorrows, ruling by his spiritual Laws and Ordinances in
and over his Saints only, but we shall know him yet again with another new name
written on him, that no man knew but himself, with his head crowned with many
crowns, and out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite
the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, Rev. 19.12.15. The
Nimrods of the world have hitherto reigned and trodden under-foot the holy city
of God, and Christ has been hitherto King of the Jews in Title only; when
Christ came first in the flesh, he was only King of the Jews in jure, in right,
and in God's purpose and decrees, but never in possession, and in esse. Christ
in his first coming was as an heir, under years, in the form of a servant,
though Lord of all, which will be completely manifested at the accomplishment
of his full age, at his second coming, he was promised and prophesied to be
King of the Jews, and so acknowledged, not only by the three Wise men that
offered to him in his swaddling clouts, Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense, but by
himself also, and by that inscription on his cross, though ironically set
thereon by Pilate and the Jews, yet by divine ordination it was written, Jesus
of Nazareth King of the Jews. And this Kingly power of his shall one day be
manifested, when he will arise, and take the iron Scepter of power and force in
his hand, to destroy all his enemies, and opposers of his kingdom: He then will
make it appear^, that he was he that was born King of the Jews; and then will
become King of Kings, and Lord of lords. And this new name of his, he will
write upon his faithful followers: As he shall reign and triumph over all the
powers of the world, so they shall be compartners and sharers with him in the
honor and glory of this Kingdom, they shall be taken into the fellowship of
this glory, and shall sit with him on his Throne, as Kings, judging the nations
of the world, Rev. 3.21. From the words Note,

Observe. That God will make his Church most glorious and triumphant here on
earth, before the end of all.

He will put his own name upon her, she shall be God-like in power, strength,
and glory, she shall have the name of the new Jerusalem that comes down from
God written on her, that for her strength and glory is described in Rev. 21. To
have her walls and gates strong and high, and of precious stones, built on the
foundation of the twelve Apostles, and the new name of Christ set upon ber: As
Christ shall be then King of kings, so she shall be the Queen-city of the
world: Rome, or Babylon, shall be no longer the Empress of the Universe, she
shall lie in dust and ashes, and become the habitation of Owls and Satyrs;
whiles this new Jerusalem, or new church state, shall become the great city of
the living God, wherein his glory and light shall more eminently appear, then
in any other Society ever hitherto in the world. All other Monarchies were but
partial in respect of this: Nebuchadnezzar's and the Persians reached but part
of Asia. Alexander's but a little further then theirs. The Roman Caesar's,
though farther in the West then the former, yet not so extensive in the East as
theirs. The Spanish, Mohammedan. Turkish, Persian, Tartarian, and the rest of
the Monarchies that are now a foot in the world, the several branches, heads,
or horns of the latter, former, Roman Beast, are but small in respect of this
universal Monarchy the church shall enjoy before the end of the world here on
earth: This mountain shall be set on the top of all other mountains: Christ and
his Saints shall be the universal Monarchy in the world: He and they shall rule
the Nations, not one of them, but all of them, with a rod of iron; which never
as yet was fulfilled, but rather the contrary, and therefore to be expected in
its due time and season.

Quest. But the great question and doubt is, whether this Triumphant state of
the church shall be here on earth, or in the supernal heavens, as some would
have it.

Answ. I answer, The new Jerusalem, or new church state, is to come down from
God out of heaven, as aforesaid, and therefore sure not in heaven.

Secondly, It is a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,
according to 2 Pet. 3.13. now righteousness or justice is properly in earth
among living Saints, and is given unto them as an additional promise of future
happiness: in heaven above there was no fear to miss it, or needed any promise
for the confirmation of it.

Thirdly, In this new State Christ shall rule the Nations with a rod of iron;
now surely it is well known there are no Nations in heaven to be ruled with a
rod of iron, and therefore it must be on earth.

Fourthly, This new city was measured by the Angel, Rev. 21.17. and it was
found according to the measure of man, that is of the Angel, one hundred forty
and four cubits: and how this finite measure can suit with the infiniteness and
immeasurableness of the supernal heavens, let the wise consider: therefore
surely it must be meant of an estate on earth.

Fifthly, In verse 24. it is said, That the Kings of the earth do bring their
glory and honor unto it; now this cannot be said of the supernal heavens, for
they can bring no addition unto that.

6. To this new state there is promised; That God will wipe off all sorrow and
tears, and that there shall be no night there. Now this were superfluous to be
promised and added to the supernal heaven, the habitation of Gods glory, and
therefore it must be fulfilled to a new church state here on earth.

Seventhly and lastly, How unreasonable would it be to describe the invisible
heavens above, with rivers, with streets, and with trees therein, suitable only
to an estate here on earth, as this is in Rev. 22.1, 2. And this is that
Jerusalem which is above, that Paul speaks of, Gal. 4.26. which is the mother
of us all; it is called heavenly, and from above, because of its divine
original, and of its right of inheritance; and it is said to descend, or come
down from God, because God's singular power and mercy shall gloriously appear
in building this new city: And this new heaven or heavenly church state, shall
be on earth, according to Rev. 21.1. and understand that subordi^ata non sunt
contraria. There may be a heaven on earth, and yet a heaven above; there may be
a church triumphant on earth, and yet in heaven also: And therefore to close
with that of Rev. 5.11. which is very downright and positive for the earth to
be the place of the Saints triumphant reign: And we shall reign on earth.

Quest. But another question may be made, whether this Imperial reign of the
Saints, shall be after the general resurrection and judgment, or before.

Answ. I answer, after the particular resurrection of the Saints, and before
the ultimate end of the judgment of the Nations and wicked of the world, the
Saints shall first arise and come with Christ, and meet him in the clouds, and
be joined to the Saints that are then alive, which at the sounding of Christ's
trump, and in a moment, shall be changed, and made immortal, as their brethren,
the raised ones are, and they shall reign a thousand years, and over whom? but
over the unbelieving Nations of the world. And this is Christ's great day of
judgment, and the day of his reign, wherein himself with his Saints and
members do reign over, and judge the wicked of the world, wherein a thousand
years is but as one day with God; and this he does before the ultimate act of
all, for toward the evening of this great day, God suffers Satan to gather
together all the wicked of the world, as the sand of the Sea shore, under the
conduct of Gog and Magog, to endeavor the ruin of these immortal Saints, if
it were possible, Rev. 20.8, 9. but they are all taken in that enterprise, with
their leader Satan, and cast into the lake of everlasting fire, and presently
thereon follows the general resurrection and judgment of all, and all that
were not found written in the book of life, were cast into that lake of fire,
which is the second death. And I would willingly demand of all that are
contrary minded, to what end should this new Jerusalem come down from heaven
after the general judgment, or after the ultimate end of all, when all the
elect Saints of God shall be translated into heaven, into the Kingdom of God,
even the Father? They that should conceive that the new Jerusalem, or church
state should descend unto the earth after all the Saints are carried by Christ
unto his long before prepared mansion, even into that heavenly place where
himself shall be, and so we also shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 These: 4.17.
John 17.24. I should judge them to want some Hellebore, or rather, true light
from above, to enlighten their dark understandings in this particular: and
therefore sure the time of the Saints triumphant reign, is to be here on
earth, before the ultimate end, and general judgment of all the world.

From the words, Which shall come down from heaven from my God, Observe,

Observe. 2. That that glorious new Church State that the Saints shall enjoy, or
otherwise, That the ^aints Imperial reign, shall be most eminently
conspicuo^^, and openly known and acknowledged by all the Nations of the world.

Now the great question is, Who are the true church, or the only Saints in the
world?

This question then will be cleared, and put out of doubt, and not till then
wholly, but in part, according to the several measures of outward tokens and
characters* which may be counterfeit and hypocritical; but then there shall be
no deceit, no hypocrisy shall lie hid; the name of God will be writ upon them,
and of the new Jerusalem, and of the Son of God, and it will be so eminently
obvious to all beholders, and so plainly demonstrated in the operations and
effects thereof, as if the very name had been written in their foreheads: and
surely it must needs be so, for this new city comes down from God, he being the
builder of it, and John saw (by a prophetical Vision) this new City coming down
from God out of heaven, Rev. 20.2. And if it were already come down from God,
as some of those days do vainly dream of, it would surely be known and
acknowledged both by the godly and ungodly also: by the godly, as being the
especial workmanship of his own hand only, in which their souls would delight:
Neither can they be ignorant thereof, being to be sharers and compartners in
that Kingdom, though differing from one another in judgments and opinions: the
weak christian shall be a partner therein as well as the strong, and therefore
all of this sort must needs know it, if it were come down from heaven on earth
already.

2. In the next place, the wicked and ungodly of the world must needs then take
notice of it also; for, there is written thereon the name of God, of new
Jerusalem, and the new name of the same, all signifying power, strength, and
glory, which they must needs be sensible of, and feel the effects thereof unto
their pain, if the time were at hand that they should rule and break them as a
Potters vessel, as in cap. 2. v. 27. with a rod of iron. That Kingdom that
comes down from heaven from God, shall surely be seen and acknowledged of all,
and especially coming with tha^ power and glory, as the day of the Saints
triumphant reign does being ushered in with the most glorious appearing of the
morning (...) Christ in the clouds, with myriads of his Angels, and ra^^^d
Sa^^^s, that none can possibly be ignorant of it: Therefore that I may deal
plainly with those that would have the Saints to reign before their Leader,
Head, and King appears, it is much to be doubted, that their spirits are not
right with their master's spirit, who was meek, peaceable, ready to suffer
under the powers of the world, not drawing the sword to free or revenge
himself, or his followers, but checked Peter for it, when he attempted it on
Malchas and the rest that laid hands upon him. Christ well knew that his
Kingdom was not of this world, of this age of sin and corruption, and therefore
his way was not to enter upon it by swords and blood, but by suffering and
patience, and so entered into his glory: and they that go another way, may
build a city, but not such a one as comes down from God out of heaven, whose
builder is God: they may erect a city, whose builder is man, and on whose gates
and walls are written their own names, not of God, or of Christ's, nor of the
new Jerusalem: they may build a Babel, not a Bethel, a Kingdom wherein the
Beast may reign in, not Christ and his Saints; a Kingdom of weakness and
imperfection, whereby they themselves, and all that trust thereunto, may be
justly involved into utter ruin and misery, for trusting to the weak arm of
flesh, and leaving off their hopes in the living God, and of that everlasting
new city, promised to the conquering, suffering, patient Saints, and not to the
heady, rebellious, or precipitant ones of the earth: and whereon the name of
God, of the new Jerusalem, and the new name of Christ is written and inscribed,
so plain and so evident, that he that runs may read it, and say at the time
when it descends, that this is the Spouse, the Lamb's wife, the great city, the
holy Jerusalem, that came down from God, which shall be so universal and
conspicuous for light and glory, that all Nations of the earth that are saved,
shall walk in the light thereof, and bring their glory to it; and this city had
no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God
did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. 21.23.

Verse. 13. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
churches.
If it be demanded why these words are so often inculcated at the end of each
particular Epistle to the several churches?

I answer, What was written to them, was not only peculiarly relating unto
themselves, but unto all others to take notice of also unto the ends of the
world, coming under the same conditions with themselves; according to that of
Paul, Romans 15.4. It was not only written for them, but for our instruction
also: And therefore let the wise christian consider what the Spirit says unto
the churches.

Ver. 14. And unto the Angel of the church of the Laodiceans, write these
things, says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creation of God.
The seventh and last of Christ's monitory Epistles, is written to the chief
Minister or Pastor of the church of the Laodiceans, which was Archippus, as
some say, mentioned Coloss. 4.17. not far from Philadelphia, in the lesser
Asia. It was called Laodicea, from Laodice, wife of Antiochus, who built it in
honor of his wife, and called it according to her name* Laodicea; which name
in the Greek signifies as much as Commandress, Princess, or Dictatrix of the
people.

The nature and disposition of this church was somewhat agreeable to the nature
of her name: She conceived her self to be a glorious church, a Princess amongst
the rest of her Sister churches, for so in verse. 17. she vaunts her self to be
rich, to be increased with goods, and to want nothing: But when the Spirit of
Christ brought her to the trial, she was found wretched, miserable, poor,
blind, and naked. Hence by the way Note,

Observe. That God does often in his providence ordain names to persons and
places, suitable and well comporting with their natural dispositions and
qualities.

Christ was called Jesus, because he was the Savior of the world: Joshua had a
name also from the same root, he being also a temporal Savior unto Israel,
leading them into the land of Canaan, saving and delivering them from the hands
and fury of the Canaanites, the ancient inhabitants of the holy Land. Many
examples are found of the like kind, as John, whose name and nature both were
gracious: Chrysostom he was an eloquent golden mouthed Father, and he had a
name suitable to his nature. Many more of the like kind will offer themselves
to the observant eye, but these shall suffice.

2. For places and churches, Rome was called Roma, from Romulus, from some old
word of the like sound, which signifies strength. Babylon, from Babel,
confusion. Philadelphia had a beloved name, and she was a beloved church.
Laodicea had a vainglorious name, and she was a vainglorious church, much
boasting of her spiritual riches, whiles miserable, poor, and naked.

These things says the Amen, etc.]

Christ is here described under a threefold property, 1. As the Amen. 2. As the
faithful and true witness. 3. As the beginning of the Creation of God. These
three properties are taken out of the general description of Christ in the
preliminary Epistle to the seven churches in the first chapter.

First he is called the Amen, out of the eighteenth verse of the first chapter,
to denote unto us,

Observe. That what Christ promises and predicteth in this book of Prophesies,
must surely come to pass.

And that the truth hereof may not fail, he adds another property taken out of
chap. 1. v. 5. He being the faithful and true witness. Now what this Amen has
promised, predicted, and said in these prophesies must needs be sure and firm;
for, In him, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.20. are all the
promises of God, yea and Amen: and that he may get the better faith and
credence thereunto, he adds another title, The faithful and true witness. Paul
could publicly profess, That he was a faithful witness of the mind and
counsel of God to his discsples, and that he had hid nothing back that did
necessarily conduce to their salvation: and think ye that Christ in these
Revelations has not dealt as the faithful and true witness, who is the God of
all truth himself? O ye of little faith, that will not believe the truth of
those Prophesies, the downfall of the Beast, Babylon, and the whore, together
with the resurrection of the witnesses, and the churches glorious restored
state on earth before the end of the world, which are clearly and fully
asserted and evidenced from this book of Prophesies? Has not Christ promised
it that is the Amen? in whom all the promises are yea and Amen, and coming from
him that is the true and faithful witness, that can never fail? And to take off
all suspicion of failure of the truth of those prophesies, there is a third
property here added, The beginning of the Creation of God. This has relation
to that description of Christ in chap. 1. v. 8. (...). It may be rendered
either, The beginning of the Creation of God, or, The principality of the
Creation of God. For Christ is both the beginning of all creatures; for, by him
all things were made, and without him nothing were made: and he is also the
supreme Prince and Governor of all the works of the creation; for so it
necessarily follows, That all things should be subject to his principality and
government, who did at first create them, and give a Being to them. Therefore
to shut up this, The sayings of these Prophesies in this book must needs be
sure and come to pass in their appointed seasons, seeing the Amen, the faithful
and true witness, and the Creator, Preserver, and Governor of all the works of
the Creation has said and spoken them; who will not then believe them, coming
first from so faithful and true a witness, and from one who is the beginning
and Prince of the whole creation, and therefore most able to perform them?

Verse 15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou
were cold or hot.
This church of Laodicea, as she comes last in place, so she comes last in
spiritual graces of all her sister churches: Christ finds nothing in her that
is truly commendable: Even in the churches of Sardis and Pergamus, though as
good as dead, and mixed with much corruptions* yet there was found in them
somewhat praiseworthy, some undefiled Names that were not carried aside by the
false Doctrines of Jezebel; but in Laodicea nothing is found commendable; and
therefore she hears of nothing from Christ but matter of reproof, and of the
desperateness of her spiritual state and condition. Doubtless there were some
sincere faithful Witnesses in this church of Laodicea, notwithstanding the
Spirit's silence in it, or else she could not be properly numbered as one of the
golden candlesticks, or as a church of Christ, their number being but small,
they were not sufficient to give a denomination unto the whole; for indeed a
body politic whither civil or spiritual, is to be denominated sound or
unsound from the major part; as in the case of particular souls or persons, if
grace be more prevalent in degree in the soul then sin and corruption, it is to
be termed a sincere gracious soul; but if sin be most prevalent, it may be
justly termed a sinful and unregenerate soul. So is the case of political
churches, if their frame constitution and matter be most unsound and corrupt,
such churches are not to be denominated sound healthful bodies: We are not to
call darkness light, or light darkness: Though for their profession of their
faith they be called churches of Christ; yet for the deadness thereof, they may
with Sardis be rightly termed dead ones, yea twice dead and to be plucked up
by the roots. Doubtless under Prelacy, both English and Romish, there were and
are diverse precious christians and Saints of Christ; as in the days of Elijah,
when the Idol of Baal and his worship and the Priests thereof were exalted, yet
then in that corrupt state of Israel, there were seven thousand that bow^d not
the knee to Baal; yet them few faithful ones in the days of Elijah, or those in
the days of Prelacy, etc. Popery came far short to denominate Israel at that
time, or our English or Foreign Nations, under that corrupt frame or temper of
antichristian Prelacy, to be praiseworthy churches, or sound, sincere and
healthful in their general matter frame or constitution. But to return to the
charge against Laodicea,

I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot.] Laodicea was of a
strange mongrel composure and temper, neither cold nor hot, molded and
compacted as a certain odd extraction of two contraries, cold and heat: I
thought before this, that that maxim was in all things unquestionable, In
medio consistit virtus: It seems true Religion will not admit of that
Principle; for Laodicea is here blamed to be in the mean; that is, in a frame
or temper which is neither hot nor cold. By hot is here understood one that is
zealous, fervent in spirit; for the truth and worship of God, that cannot
endure any corruptions, will-worships or superstitions shall be admitted in the
true christian Worship and Religion; and such a one is called a hot fervent or
zealous christian; and this can never be too intense as unto the degrees
thereof, if it be considerate, and according to sound knowledge. The ignorant
inconsiderate zeal is reproved and condemned as dangerous and pernicious, not
the sound and orthodox: It is not with God's graces as with moral habits of
virtues, wherein both the extremes straying from mediocrity, either in the
excess or in the defect, are faults and vices; as the excess of liberality may
run into prodigality, and the defect into covetous parsimony; or the excess in
fortitude may be called temerity and fool-hardiness, and the defect cowardice
and pusilanimity, and so in the rest: but in gracious habits the case is
different, Souls cannot exceed therein, Be ye holy as your heavenly Father is
holy; no less then an aim unto perfection will serve turn; be zealous, fervent,
boiling hot for God and his truth, it being sound and considerate, it will
admit of no mediocrity: Lukewarmness, or half friend to God and his ways, is
equally an abomination in God's sight (for he requires the whole heart) as is
coldness or deadness it self; and therefore this strange commixture of tempers
in Laodicea is exploded by Christ as most dangerous and pernicious, and
therefore adds, I would thou were cold or hot. Hence Note,

Observe. A lukewarm temper among Christians is not only disaproved of by
Christ, but also dangerous and pernicious to their Souls welfare.

Christ could not give one good word of Laodicea for this very reason; but in
the next verse was ready to spew her out, for this her remissness and
mediocrity. Some will neither be fast friends to Religion, nor yet utterly
opposite unto it, a true hermaphroditical Laodicean temper: But what makes them
thus to hancker and halt between two extremes, that they are neither hot nor
cold? In their very foreheads you may read the reason, worldly intrest, worldly
profit, worldly honors do so over-bias them that they will be partly
religious, and so far forth friends unto it, as may get them repute, and so be
accounted prudent, civil, and honest men; but for the better part of it, to
have the heart upright for God, and the affections kindled and intense upon and
for the glory of God in the day of trials and persecutions, they will not touch
upon that, they did not take Christ upon such account, to follow him to his
cross, there they will leave him; as long as he provides loaves for them they
will follow him, but when he is dragged to the Judgment Hall, as our true
summer-bird at the approach of winter, they fly into their holes for security,
and will not appear more for Christ, until he returns with a sun shine and
spring of prosperity upon them. These are our moderate politic state
christians, who are neither hot nor cold, true Hermophrodites in Religion, that
will not move a foot farther in matters thereof then what the State dictates to
them: If the Prince, as in the days of Q. Mary, command Popery, Popery shall up
for them; if a Q. Elizabeth succeed, all presently reform and become
Protestants; if she will have Prelacy in the church maintained, there will be
found assertors enough of its jure divino; if Presbitery shall take the Throne,
all of our State christians will presently fall in to the Geneva and Scottish
garb; if Independency shall get at top, presently our Laodiceans run to New-
England for a model; if that again come out of fashion, they are ready to run
to Amsterdam for a new pattern: So indifferent are such Laodicean christians in
matters of Religion, that whatsoever form or intrest of all sorts shall be
uppermost, they will be sure to be of that side; and this proceeds from their
lukewarm temper and defect, or want of heat or true zeal in the Religion they
profess; if they were zealous in any form, though unsound, yet they would more
closely stick unto it: Paul, whiles he was a persecuting Saul, was zealous
though in a bad case: So the Jews had a zeal unto God, though not according to
knowledge: Rom, 10.1. The Papists to this day continue zealous to their
Superstitions and will Worship: Only those that pretend highest and to be
raised out of the graves of Antichrist, and to come to a higher pitch of
Reformation then any other christian Professors in the world, are like true
Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold. I believe that Master Brightman though not
Prophetically, yet prudentially enough, likned and applied the state of our
English church, as a true counterpane of its pattern, to Laodicea, in the times
when he wrote; for we may observe still the same natural temper in her children
at present, as he observed in their forefathers in his time; they are of that
mediocrity, that they care not what Religion they follow, so their intrests,
honors, and estates are secured and maintained; I confess they are willing to
admit of part of the truths of Christ in Doctrines; but for the ministration of
Discipline, Governments, and Ministerial Functions, they are very well still
contented to retain them that come from Egypt and Babylon, and not from Christ
and his holy church; therefore they are to look to it least they are spewed out
as their forefathers the Prelates, for their Laodicean temper and half
Reformation, which hitherto they have but as yet attained to.

Object. But here it may be said, May not christians be too hot, too zealous in
their intentions toward things of their Religion? were not a moderater
carriage and temperature more commendable in them, and more advantageous to the
work of the Gospel then an over fiery zealous one?

To answer this Question, first understand, whereof zeal is compounded, and
that is, first of an intention of the affections, or an enlarged love on the
thing beloved. Secondly, Of jealousy, which is with great indignation and
grief, when an injury (true or supposed) is offered to the thing so fervently
loved: So this affection of zeal is not simply good or evil but is an
indifferent passion* found in men both good and evil; for the Apostles were
zealous, and so were the Pharisees, Christians were zealous, so were the Jews;
so some of the reformed are zealous in their ways, so many also of the Papists;
but that that denominates zeal either good or evil, is first in respect of its
object; godly zeal must have the knowledge of a right object; it must be truly
God's glory, God's worship, God's truth, God's will and doctrine either in part
or in the whole, and that indubitably, that denominates a godly zeal: A zeal to
God out of Christ, as the Jews had, will not suffice to call it a truly godly
zeal, because it was not according to knowledge, nor having an adequate and
complete object; it is true, their zeal toward God was good and commendable in
them, but because it was not guided by sound knowledge, it was blind and
erroneous; and therefore vicious for want of a complete object.

Secondly, It grieveth for the wrong truly done and not supposed, as the Jews
thought was done by the preaching of the Gospel unto the glory of God and his
true worship. True godly zeal must have right ends, it ever affects and
seeks the honor of God, and not self praise and vain glory. Examples of this
true godly zeal we have in Christ, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out
of the Temple, Joh. 2.15. and in Phineas, Numb. 25.8, 11. in Paul and Barnabas
when they rent their clothes, Act. 14.19. and Moses when he broke the Tables,
Exodus 23. and in Paul for the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.11. and for the Galatians,
Gal. 4.19. But many for want of right objects, right ends, and other due
ingredients, have missed of true zeal, as Demetrius his zeal for Diana, Act.
19. whom he ought not to have loved; so Paul a Pharisee was zealous, but he
loved that that he should not have loved, that is, his own righteousness by the
Law, as the rest of the Pharisaical Jews did. Jehu was zealous but failed in
the manner, 2 King. 10.6. The Apostles out of zeal wishing fire upon the
Inhabitants of Samaria, Luke 9.54. failed in the end of their zeal, it being
not out of pure affection to God's glory, or out of charity unto their
neighbors, but out of revenge and impatience, as from Bonarges, Sons of
Thunder; and how zealous and hot are the Papists this day for their scarlet
Strumpet and her fornications, which ought not to be loved, and therefore no
true zeal, but spurious and impious. The reason of all this is that a man's
intentions are never good, be they never so highly pretending thereunto; but
when they are built upon a good warrant, to wit, the Word of God, and referred
to right ends, namely, the praise of God, and the good of his church and people.

Now to return to answer the doubt proposed, having cleared what true zeal is;
with the circumstances thereof, I answer, That we cannot be too zealous when a
right object and right ends are proposed. Paul in Romans 12.11. exhorts men to
be fervent in the Spirit, hot, boiling hot in spiritual affairs: What think ye
of Paul when he opposed Peter to his face in the business of circumcision, and
would not give way to his dissimulation, no not for an hour? so zealous was he
for the truth of God. God is so zealous of his own honor and glory, that he
smote Uzzah, 2 Samuel 6, 7. for putting only his hand unto the Ark, out of an
ignorant zeal to save it from falling unto the ground; one would have thought,
that God would have commended his zeal, and spared his ignorance herein, but
being not according unto knowledge, but contrary to the command of God, he
suffered for it. No good intentions and meanings will make that action or duty
good or lawful, be it ever so speciously religious and gracious, that is not
warranted by the rule of the Scriptures: the best duties for want of this
scantling, are turned into sin. And as God is zealous of his glory, so he makes
his Ministers like himself, Heb. 1.7. He makes his Ministers a flame of fire. I
would have all indifferent lukewarm moderate State-christians to consider with
themselves, whether could the Apostles and first Disciples of Christ,
ordinarily propagate the Gospel through the world, if they had been all of an
indifferent lukewarm Laodicean temper? Christ himself was thought by the people
to be one too hot, that his zeal was beyond his judgment, Mark 3.21. and
therefore said, He was beside himself: Paul was also accounted mad, not only by
Festus, for his zeal toward God, Acts 26.24. but also by the christian
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5*13. So Michel scoft at David as one of the fools for his
zeal; yet though they, and other Saints of God were vilified and reproached by
the ignorant world, yet their zeal have laid that corner stone, and foundation
of salvation, that all the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. What
think you, will the scarlet whore that sits as a Queen be dethroned, or
Antichrist be discovered and overthrown by a moderate lukewarm Laodicean State,
Religion, and Temper? Surely the first Beginners and Founders of our
Reformation, were of another spirit then we in these days are of, or else it
would have made but a slow procedure: for want of this true zeal, our
Reformation is at a stand, and in spiritual growth, non progredi, est regredi.
But I would still be understood, that it must be a zeal mixed with the former
ingredients, and with sound knowledge, that it may be as an eye, and a guide,
to direct and conduct it aright, both in the things to be loved, and in the
manner and ends of their love, or else, zeal not rightly regulated, may be
dangerous and pernicious. There are three sorts of people that offend and fail
in their zeal.

First, Those that are stark cold, and have no zeal at all to Gods glory, or
his worship, as the profane worldling is.

Secondly, Those indifferent lukewarm christians, that are neither hot nor
cold, as those Laodiceans were, and as the Israelites of old, halting between
God and Baal, 1 Kings 18.21.

The third sort are, They whose zeal is blind, void of sound knowledge and
godly wisdom, who covering their own carnal affections with the cloak of
glorifying of God, rush on inconsiderately into many evil and unlawful actions:
Some on this pretense, endeavor again in these our days, to set up Antichrist
in his Throne among us: Others, on the other hand, for want of this sound
knowledge joined to their zeal, under pretense of pulling down Antichrist and
the Scarlet whore, they endeavor to undermine and pull down all Magistracy,
Ministry, Scriptures, and all the Ordinances in Christ's churches whatsoever,
whereof this age of ours affords as many lamentable examples as any former
whatsoever; therefore let every one be instant with God in prayer, to add
wisdom and sound knowledge unto his zeal.

Secondly I answer, That in controverted opinions of Religion, that lie deep
and dark, whether they are the will of God or not, moderation in such things is
most commendable, and let every one walk as he has attained unto; for I am of
opinion, that all controverted points and mysteries in the Word of God, will
not be made manifest unto us, until the day of the revelation of all things,
when Christ the great Key-bearer of the House of David shall appear, to open
all the sealed books, and no man shall shut again; and so that Scripture in
such things may be rightly applied, Be not righteous over much: that is, be not
over zealous, hot, or fervent for them. But for plain, obvious, and perspicuous
commands and truths of God, as whether Christ's precepts and commands, or
Antichrist's, are to be followed and embraced* our zeal and intentions here
cannot be too hot, we cannot possibly here admit of a Syncratism, or a mean, as
worldly wise Cassander would endeavor between Papist and Protestant; either
God must be God, or Baal must be God: either Christ must have the Throne, or
else Antichrist must reign; they cannot possibly inhabit in one Temple, God
and Dagon will not correspond; no degree of zeal herein will suffice, but what
is the highest, and aims at perfection: the defect whereof, either that of
coldness, which is more remote, or that of lukewarmness, which is nearer, is
equally faulty in this particular; either let us be altogether Romish, or
altogether Reformed; either fully zealous for Christ and his ways, or else cold
thereunto; for no mean will serve turn, Therefore Christ in the next words says
to lukewarm Laodicea, I would thou were cold or hot. That is, I would thou were
resolved one way or other, I rather thou were any thing then what thou art; I
would as rather thou were of no Religion, as of this mongrel uncertain
hotchpotch Religion that thou art of. From these words Note,

Observe. That a lukewarm Religion is equally, if not more displeasing unto
God, then irreligion, or profaness itself.

Christ here prefers coldness, the most remote degree in Religion, before a
nearer luke-warmness: Christ wished Laodicea, either to be hot, zealous in the
things of God, or else cold, that is, dead, strange, and alienated to the
things of God, rather then indifferent and lukewarm, as she was. It is as good,
and there were as much hopes of us, if we were altogether Romish, then half
Reformed as we are.

The reasons that this lukewarm temper is more blameworthy and dangerous then
coldness it self, are,

First, Because where there are most means of grace, there should be greatest
improvement; Sin is more sinful, where grace is more abounding, the servant
that knows his masters will and does i^ not, is worthy of many stripes; the sin
of our first parents was the more aggravating, being committed in paradise; the
fall of the Angels in heaven left them remediless and unpardonable: and that
idolatry of those twenty five men in Ezekiel. 8.16. between the Porch and the
Altar, was most detestable: God would rather that his grace should not be
known, then that it should be neglected and despised; he will be sanctified of
all that come near unto him; Therefore if Baal be God, follow him: why halt ye
between both! God hates such scrupulous inquisition, as if it were hard to
determine which part to follow.

Secondly, Because there are greater hopes of the conversion of the irreligious
profane of the world, if God shall be pleased to afford them the means, then of
the lukewarm christians, who think all is well with them because of their
moderation and peaceableness, which indeed is honored of the world, and for
some other external privileges that they enjoy: O! How hard a thing it is this
day, to persuade the moderate indifferent State-christians into the true power
of godliness, or unto a fervent zeal for God and his Truths, they think they
have enough in their birthright, church privileges, or common profession, to
make them everlastingly happy, and therefore think they, what need they trouble
themselves more, they never intended to take heaven by violence, if it would
descend unto them in a bed of Down, in an easy way, then they would be in for
it; but if otherwise it be to be taken by striving and violence, then let the
violent take it for them, they will have nothing more to do with it: Therefore
surely Publicans and Harlots shall sooner enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
then such easy lukewarm Professors, who are neither hot nor cold, I would
they were hot or cold.

Verse. 16. Therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it
will come to pass that I will spew thee out of my mouth.
The greatness of Laodicea's sin for her lukewarm temper, appears by the
severe punishment afflicted on her for the same; one would have thought that
luke-warmness being some degrees nearer unto heat then coldness, should be
somewhat more commendable, as nearest unto heat, yet they are equally abominable
unto God; for he will spue out all such indifferent Professors out of his
mouth, as offensive and nauseous to his stomach: It is said by Naturalists,
That the stomach will rather admit of hot or cold things in it quietly, then
tepid or lukewarm, by reason that it puts forth its digestive faculty more
operative and effective toward such things in which work it is delighted; but
lukewarm things being near to its own natural heat and temper, gives not so
much delight unto it, nor puts it so a working, as the contrary quality does,
and therefore remains therein unconcocted, and of easy egestion, as by
experiment of drinking warm water it appears. If it be demanded who is to be
spewed out? The answer is ready, Thou lukewarm Angel of Laodicea, and thou
lukewarm church of Laodicea; for though the charge be directed to the
particular Angels of each church; yet the churches too being guilty of the same
sins, are under the same judgments and threats which are inscribed unto their
Angels or Pastors; and therefore there is still added as an Epiphonema to each
Epistle, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches.

For the matter of their sin, it is luke-warmness, an indifferent disposition
and temper in Religion, which is neither hot nor cold, which was opened in the
last precedent verse, and the danger thereof demonstrated accordingly: but in
this (by the way) I would be understood, not that Christ simply allows
coldness in Religion, but only prefers it before luke-warmness, for the
reasons before on the last verse expressed; and we daily see, that God spares
longer notoriously wicked persons, or those that are strangers from him
altogether, rather then the lukewarm Professors: and this appears from God's
long forbearance of the church of Rome, who has played egregiously the harlot,
and departed from the truth, and yet flourishes outwardly, whiles the Reformed
churches are corrected and chastised out of hand, when they incline unto
luke-warmness and indifferency in Religion. Hence Note,

Observe. God's judgments on lukewarm Christians are dreadfully judicious.

This appears, if we consider but what Christ means, when he says, He will
spew him out of his mouth; by which is meant, an utter casting out of this
lukewarm church from her church state and profession, he will no longer
entertain her as his candlestick, but will discharge his care of her in that
particular, as a stomack-sick person with eating or drinking that which he
loatheth, desires vomit to ease him of his sickness; so Christ desires to
discharge his stomach, his care, his vigilance of this loathed lukewarm church.

2. As meat once vomited up lies loathed and abhorred, and never to be licked
up again but by Dogs or Sows; so this lukewarm church is to be spewed out as a
loathed thing, not that Christ would ever return to so unclean a thing again.

3. As in vomiting, an unclean place is sought for, so Christ will seek for an
unclean place, to spew out those lukewarm Professors into: He will make the
place of their habitation a Cage of all unclean birds, Ziim and Oiim shall
dwell there.

Has not Christ begun this work of spewing out of his mouth the lukewarm
Prelatical church within our days? How long did it lie as a loathed and
indigested lump in the stomach of Christ before it came to egestion? This was
Christ's goodness, long expecting repentance and through reformation from our
churches, who began in the days of Queen Elisabeth to be warm in Religion, and
never came to a farther degree then luke-warmness, or a moderate civil
State-religion; and therefore Christ's stomach being long troubled with this
undigested bit, up it must come at last. So it was in Germany, in Bohemia, the
Palatinate, Stiria, Alsatia, Austria, and other Provinces there, whiles God
expected they should reform up to the pattern in the Mount, they only stick'd
to Luthers and Zuinglius first principles, and moved no farther, and withal,
abated so much of their first heat, that they became lukewarm and indifferent
to things of Religion, as if Popery and Reformation were things indifferent;
and so clothed their reformed doctrines and worship with many of the Harlots
rags, rites, and trumperies; for which tepid and mongrel disposition of
theirs, they were severely chastised by Christ, and some of the churches quite
spewed out of his mouth for this their sin: has not God done the very same
thing with us here in England here of late for this hermaphrodical religion
that was professed amongst us, half popish, half reformed, half rotten, half
sound, even spewed it out root and branch, never to be licked up more? Is it
not also to be feared, that the same mongrel lukewarm condition is creeping in
upon us again? What means else the many vindications that are set forth of
late, of the lawfulness of their practices, doctrines, missions, calls,
hyerarchical superintendencies, national churches, and maintenancies, and the
like? If Christ have vomited them out as unholy things, he will not return
again to take them up, they are loathed of him for their mongrel temper, and
therefore spewed out; and if you will know who they are that endeavors to lick
them up again, They are dogs, I mean, whelps of Rome, that desire to return to
their vomit; They are Sows, I mean, unclean worldlings, that make their belly
their God, that desire to return to wallow in the mire of Antichristian
fooleries. I shall say no more but this, If Reformation according to Gospel
pattern be the way, be zealous in it, burn in it, walk in it, stoutly,
courageously, as children of light: but if Rome be the way to the new
Jerusalem, take her mark, follow her, and be not ashamed of her; for Christ
will not endure a middle temperature between both, either be all Romish, or all
Reformed; there is no medium between heaven and hell, neither between true
christian and antichristian; either be the one or the other: for, because thou
art neither hot nor cold, it will come to pass to thee, as it did to Laodicea,
Christ will spew thee out of his mouth. Be wise therefore ye children of light,
Hold fast the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free; Have not your faces
or thoughts toward the onyons and flesh pots of Egypt again, but let your
faces be to Zion-wards, to build up the breaches thereof, and be hot, zealous,
fervent therein, and that according to knowledge, and then doubtless, God will
be with you, and lead you into Goshen, into a land of peace and rest.

Verse. 17. Because thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.
Laodiceas sin of luke-warmness, had a twofold ground or rise. 1. Proceeding
from a false persuasion of her own worthiness. 2. From the ignorance of her own
misery. Her vain persuasion of her own worth, proceeds from the consideration
and conceit of her great wealth and riches, not only spiritual, which she
wanted, and Christ advises her to buy of him in the next verse, but temporal
and worldly; she boasts her self not only to be rich, and abounding in riches
of both sorts, but also to want nothing, she had such a fullness, that her
contentation was complete: Many persons may abound, and be rich, and yet want
much of fullness of satisfaction and contentation: but the church of Laodicea,
it seemed, abounded to contentation, in her own conceit, which is the highest
pitch of riches; for, she had need of nothing: and hence grew that sin of hers,
luke-warmness, and half christianity. From hence Note,

Observe. 1. That the most rich and abounding wealthy churches, are aptest to
become the more remiss, moderate, indifferent, and lukewarm christians.

In the primitive times, when the churches were poor and low in the world, they
were purest, more zealous and eminent for truth and martyrdom; but when the
church was indulged, and lulled in the lap of Constantine the great, she grew
more remiss, and as riches and preferments were heaped on her, she grew daily
more lukewarm, till at the last she became key-cold, as unto the truth as it
is in Jesus, and so shortly became purely Antichristian: when the great
preferments of Episcopal Lordships, Deanries, Arch-deanries, Prebendaries, etc.
were on foot among us, Christ's Pastors became silken Priests, and where was
then true zeal for the truth? That was driven into corners, among some poor
Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, so scornfully called, and the like, but for
the rest, they were but half christians, a medley of moral civilians, half
Romish, half Reformed: and this proceeds from the nature of riches and
prosperity, which is apter to choke the seed of grace, then adversity, and to
bring a forgetfulness of God, and a luke-warmness upon the hearts of those that
do abound therein: and therefore the children of God are so often warned in the
Word, that they take heed to themselves, lest when they are full, and cloyed
with God's blessings, through over-fulness they should forget the Lord.

Thou say thou art rich, etc.

And know not that thou art wretched and miserable, etc.

The other cause of Laodiceas sin, is the ignorance of her misery, which she
could not see and perceive, by reason she, was blinded by her outward
prosperity and riches. From whence Observe,

Observe. 2. That the most ignorant, and wretchedly miserable Church, is the
most boasting, and highest pretending to spiritual riches and graces.

Does not the church of Rome this day vaunt, that she is the only rich one,
increased with goods, and have need of nothing? And it is true, if she only
meant of worldly goods, she is most pompous and replete therein, but that is
not all, she vaunts too of her spiritual riches, she calls her self Roma
sancta, the only Mother church, the holy catholic church, and no salvation
without her pales, the only Keeper of the Treasures of the Spirit, and
dispenses them where she pleases; and yet notwithstanding this high claim and
pretense, who more truly wretched, miserable, blind, ignorant, naked, and
destitute of all true graces then she? Laodicea was so vainglorious, that she
could boast of her riches, and yet she was the poorest of the seven of all the
Reformed churches. Our English (under Episcopacy) was wont to bear the Bell for
outward splendor and glorying, not only in her external riches, but also of
the magnificence of her worship beyond all others; and yet among them all, who
nearer and dearer to her Sister Rome then she? She was then looked upon as the
first returning daughter to her Mother Harlot; as the Apostate Bailey in his
Epistle to the Reader of his book called End to Controversy, testifies, page
67. where he says, That there were no other difference between them, but that
the Tapers upon their Altars wanted light, and their Altars Priests, and their
Ceremonies purpose. But the Lord since has made a wider breach, his name be
praised for it, and rendered her more irreconcilable to Rome then ever
heretofore, and we trust, never more to be made up between them.

For further describing the wretchedness of the highly pretending church of
Rome, which may be truly paralleled to the church of Laodicea in this
particular of vain-glorying and boasting, she has here five degrees ascribed
to her. The two first are as common affections or accidents of her disease* in
respect of her self, or of others, she was in a pitiful, lamentable, and
miserable state and condition: The three latter declare the very nature of her
disease; she was poor, blind, and naked: you know to be poor, is to be
beggarly, so the word (...) in the Greek signifies, a beggar: She was not poor
in spirit and in her own eyes, which is a blessed poverty, Mat. 5.3. but she
was a poor beggarly miserable one, one that is proud and beggarly, which is
hateful, odious: She is a true beggar, beg she will, and never leave begging of
the Kings, Princes, Nobles, and Potentates of the world, till she have gotten
the choicest fat things of the earth to become her patrimony. She is a stout
sturdy beggar; if you will not give, she will take: Beggars lie in the cross
lanes, and highways, to beg of all they meet; so beggars of this rampant
church lie close to all great Assemblies, to Dyets, Parliaments,
Counsel-Tables, Great Men's houses, to beg the Advowsons, and to catch the
scraps of preferments that fall in their way: I could wish there were none of
this beggarly poverty among us at this day* Christ's true Ministers should be
of a nobler temper and Spirit then to serve at Tables for lucre sake; their
master will provide for them in a more honorable way, if they can but trust on
him for their sustentation and livelihood. It was a wise observation of M.
Brightman's concerning our English clergy in his days under Episcopacy, That
the Angel of England in plain terms grew wealthy by begging, and as he further
says, neither is he in very truth, nor is to be called ought, save my Lord
Beggar. In the next place, blindness is added to her beggarliness, to make it
the more grievous: a blind beggar is the most deplored and miserable of all
beggars, for being necessitated to seek and beg for his living abroad, yet want
of sight will not let him seek; so blindness of mind, want of true spiritual
understanding, where true riches lies, is a great addition of misery to a poor
beggarly church that makes her to seek amiss, and to call that riches which is
not truly riches; from this ignorance and blindness it proceeds, that the
church of Rome, and others that follow her steps, do beg and seek greedily
after riches, honors, and preferments, that are merely transitory and vain,
and leaves alone the true riches, the treasure which is from above, that never
perishes: yea they are so blind, and obstinately blind, that they are ready
to strike at him that endeavors to convince them of blindness, and to show
them the way unto everlasting treasure. In the last place there is added
Nakedness, as an aggravation of the misery of this church. When one is stripped
of his garments, and rendered naked, his shame is laid open to the view,
according to that of Nahum 3.5. It is not sufficient that she is a poor blind
beggar, but she is a naked blind beggar, the most contemptible of all sorts:
We have seen the poverty, the blindness and ignorance of the church of Rome,
and Christ has also discovered her nakedness unto us, we know her shames, and
wherein her secret abominations does consist: it is in vain for her now to
boast of her spiritual pomps and trumperies, whiles Christ has discovered her
skirts, and shown us that she is a beggarly one, void of all true spiritual
riches, that she is a blind one, ignorant of the ways of true happiness, that
she is naked, that is, for want of spiritual garments about her, she is left
open and bare to all shame and reproaches that are cast against her for her
deformities, which are obvious to every spiritual discerning eye. O that God
would make the Reformed churches amongst us, to discern between true riches,
and those which are not so, but only in pretense; that he would put a nobler
spirit into them then that of Laodicea, a beggarly poor one, waiting for the
crumbs of preferments at the Tables of the Great ones of the world: Is not their
Lord and Master the Lord and Sovereign of the whole creation, and shall he
provide for the Ravens, and the Lions whelps, their meat in due season, and
will he forget the members of his own body? God forbid! Oh Christ, which art
the true light of the Father, anoint our eyes with eye salve, that our
blindness may be done away, and discover our nakedness unto us, that we may
seek unto thee for a covering, for gold that is tried, and for a raiment, that
we may be clothed, that our nakedness may not appear before thee, to our utter
shame and confusion, Amen.

Verse 18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may
be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be elothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see.
You have hitherto heard of Laodiceas sin, want and misery, here follows her
remedy proportionable to her disease; here is gold, not outward glittering or
pretended gold, but tried gold, offered to help her of her poverty: Here is
white raiment, a glorious raiment of Christ's righteousness offered, to cover
her shame and nakedness: and here is Eye Salve offered, even true knowledge and
wisdom from above, that she may see the way unto everlasting happiness.

But to open the words a little more fully: I counsel thee. It is Christ that
counsels and advises, and who will not follow it? The matter of his counsel is
offered to the church of Laodicea, and unto us also, if we be found in the same
vainglorious, yet beggarly condition as she was in; for the word was not
written only to them, but to us; for observe what the Spirit often says; He
that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches. So the
matter of Christ's counsel is as well unto us, as unto Laodicea, and that
threefold, as the disease was threefold. 1. To buy gold, tried gold, which is
set against poverty. 2. White Garments, which is for a covering of her
nakedness. 3. Eye Salve, which is a remedy for her blindness.

First by the way, from the party counselling to buy, he being the same from
whom it is bought, I counsel thee to buy gold of me, Note,

Observe. That all true spiritual riches and graces are to be fetched from
Christ alone.

Christ sends us not to our own works, or to his blessed mother, or to any
other Saint departed, with so many Ave Marias, so many Pater Nosters, or so
many Vows and Pilgrimages to buy them at their hands; but he tells us, Come buy
them of me: Christ alone is the great dispenser of his Fathers Treasure, all
power is given into his hands, and in vain to seek the Kingdom of God or the
treasures thereof, but in, by, and through the Son; and it is most just it
should be so, it being the purchase of his death and passion; he powered out his
soul unto death for us that he might have power to heal our souls of all their
infirmities; therefore he is made unto us both wisdom, justification,
sanctification, and all in all.

The manner of seeking this gold is by bargain and sale, I counsel thee to buy
of me: I shall inquire how this bargain is made up,

First, Understand in all legal contracts, there is an agreement of both
parties, or else it cannot be a bargain.

Secondly, In some bargains and contracts there is a legal consideration given
for the thing bargained for, either to the full value, or somewhat equitably
proportionable thereunto. or,

Lastly, There are other absolute bargains and sales of lands and goods,
disposed therein freely, only on the consideration of the donors or granters of
love, affection and preferment to the parties beloved, and so given freely to
them and to their heirs for ever, without so much as paying a penny by way of
legal retribution for it; yea the donor often is so free in his deed of gift,
that the donee is freed of all fear of forfeiture of his Estate; for there is
not reserved so much as a Rose or Pepper corn by way of Rent, that for non
payment thereof, the State should be become forfeited: And that party that
would not be thankful to such a free giver, is worse then an Infidel.

Now to our heavenly bargain, and to apply: If we will buy of Christ gold and
heavenly Treasure, we must first come unto him, and strike up the bargain with
him; he will not sell unto us against our wills (though he himself must make us
first willing) and therefore he cries, Isa. 55.1. Come unto the waters, come ye
buy and eat: and Rev. 22.17. Christ is very willing to sell us freely, and we
must be ready to buy it and accept it freely; all that he expects at our hands,
is to agree with him on his own terms, and that is to accept it and receive it
freely, believe that he can and will do it, and it is done.

Secondly, He ties us up to no legal consideration or conditions on our part,
that on nonperformance thereof, be they ever so small, we should forfeit the
State of our Inheritance; he has paid and performed fully all our dues and
legal conditions unto the Father for us, and in our stead; and he has taken
the possession of the whole Inheritance into his own hand; and therefore in the
third place he is upon a free deed of gift with us, and if we will buy at his
hands; we are to come and buy* wine and milk without money, without price, Isa.
55.1. and Christ calls in Rev. 22.17. to him that is athirst, Come, and
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely; and they now that will
not be obedient to the commands and laws of this gracious donor; by way of
gratitude and thankfulness for so glorious and free an Inheritance, bestowed
upon them, are not worthy of the least mercy in his Kingdom if this
Inheritance were entailed on us on condition of payment or performance of a
small petty grain of corn or the like, as is the mite of our faith or
obedience, etc. as the Arminians would have it, we should be in bondage fear
and danger all our life long, if not at least forfeit all by our non-payment
and performance; therefore blessed be God, that has not left our salvation in
our own hands, but founded it on the rock Christ, which cannot be removed.

Quest. But why does Christ here counsel us to buy gold of him?

I answer, He that goes about to buy a great Treasure is very careful,
diligent, and his affections intense upon it, that none put him out of his
bargain: So it must be here for this heavenly Treasure, we must be earnest with
Christ to strike up this bargain, we must not let him alone by our prayers
until we have obtained this precious pearl at his hands: It Is true, Christ will
sell us this pear^ freely, yet we must agree with him for it; though we have
nothing to give him in the least, by way of legal compensation for it, yet we
must buy it, receive it in its own way and method. If you will buy any gods
that you want, you must repair to the Fair or place where it is to be bought:
So if you want tried gold to enrich you, or garments to cover you, or eye salve
to enlighten you, you must come to Christ who is the Merchant of these heavenly
wares, upon his Fair days, when such precious wares are set to sale, and to his
Ordinances in his Assemblies, on the public days of his heavenly Bartering,
if you will attain unto this* heavenly Treasure. But to proceed, And that you
may the better know the nature of this heavenly Treasure, it is here called,
Gold tried in the fire. You formerly heard that the church of Laodicea was an
outside golden candlestick, yea, she boasted and pretended high to true riches,
yet for all her vaunting she was (...) mendicus, a poor beggarly church; but
here is gold that will enrich her to purpose, it is gold tried in the fire; it
is not sophisticate or hipocritical gold, but real tried gold Hence Note,

Observe. That the graces that come from Christ, are the only true and real
graces.

The church of Laodicea doubtless was rich enough in some respects, yet she was
a beggarly one because her riches was not from Christ. If we in those days come
to our Ecclesiastical Functions, Livings and Benefices, not by a call^ from
Christ, but by our own struglings, beginnings, strivings and endeavors
thereunto, though thereby we may become outwardly rich, yet at best we are but
basely beggarly rich; but the tried gold that comes from Christ is such that
makes the souls truly gracious where it is: It is not gotten by begging at the
doors of the great ones of the world, but at the gates of the Temple, in that
holy way and order of calling, choosing, ordaining, which Christ himself has
ordained in his word, this is truly refined gold, because it is the wisdom and
way of God, which is as gold refined, Prove. 8.10. and Psalm. 12.7. This is
tried, and therefore will hold water: It is true, we may become rich in the eye
of the world, in parts, abilities. and humane learning, and they may shine like
gold in the eyes of the injudicious, simple and ignorant; but alas! if Christ
does not sanctify them to us, they may make us the worse, not the better for
them: Major Cleri^us, major Hereticus. If Christ gives us hearts to seek after
his refined gold, then surely we shall no longer be so beggarly base, as to set
up our own gilded parts in the room of Christ's true wisdom, which is as gold
thrice refined; neither shall we any longer set up our own church ways and
orders, according to our own prudential dictates, but shall come into the truly
golden way of Christ, which is often tried and approved by the fire, and
therefore avoideth not the touchstone or fire of trial, but stands firm as
the pillars of the house of God, and they that trust unto it and are partakers
of it, do become rich, exceeding rich in all true spiritual graces, to their
eternal glory: Therefore for shame ye Ministers and servants of Christ, that
are truly such, and conscientious of your duties, leave of your beggarly trade,
in pursuing that that is no riches, and come to Christ and buy gold of him
tried in the fire, that will make you rich to purpose, and so shall ye shine
like Stars of the greater magnitude, within the Firmament of your churches; I
fear me all is not gold that glisters with you; O how dangerous it is to be in
such a seeming fair condition, when we conceit we are rich and lack nothing,
whiles indeed we are poor, miserable, blind and naked. The Angel of Laodicea
once thought as well of himself, as the Angel of England at present; but see
his judgment, for his hypocritical, outside and half Religion, which is much to
be feared by us also if we grow not hotter and repent; to wit, that it will
shortly come to pass, that Christ will spew us out of his mouth, and leave our
place desolate unto us; and this Christ doubtless would long since have done,
if he had not a remnant amongst us that are tried gold, for whose sake he does
preserve us; yet understand, that Christ knows how to cast off and burn up all
the chaff, as he did the Prelatical party of late, in his judgments and fiery
indignations, and to preserve the wheat, the godly, safe and secure; he will
preserve them as gold in the Refiners fire, it shall suffer no diminution,
whiles the dross suffers loss, and is quite burned up and consumed by it;
therefore in time be wise, repent and follow, hear Christ's counsel, buy gold
of him tried in the fire, that thou may be rich.

Secondly, The second part of this heavenly purchase is white raiment that thou
may be clothed: We formerly heard of Laodiceas nakedness, of her shameful
nakedness, now here is a covering for her, a white garment that she may be
clothed, and that the shame of her nakedness do not appear: We know nakedness
in it self was no shame before the fall, but since sin has prevailed, it is
become vile and shameful, as God provided for Adam after his fall, garments of
skins to hide his shame; so Christ has provided spiritually a white raiment,
for the covering of all the spiritual defects and shame of the members of
himself, the second Adam. Now this white raiment that is here provided and
offered by Christ to Laodicea to cover her nakedness, may be taken two ways, as
Laodicea had a twofold nakedness and shame upon her, so here is a garment
proportionable to her wants. First she was naked in respect of true
righteousness, she was rich enough and righteous enough in her own eyes, as
many of these days are; yet here is a garment provided by Christ for her, to
cover her nakedness: This is that garment spoken of, Rev. 17.13, 14. which is
the long white Robes that the undefiled followers of the Lamb do walk in, that
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Our sins
bring shame, and misery, and nakedness upon us, and defilement on our souls,
and it is Christ's blood that washes them white, takes off the stains, the
guilt and obligation to wrath thereon, and serves for a white garment to cover,
to hide and keep quite out of sight all our bloody spots and stains, as if they
were never done or committed, and so are carried away on the head of this
Scapegoat, into the land of forgetfulness never to be remembered more.
Secondly, She is naked too in respect of her outward garments, church officers,
orders and ordinances; she might be rich enough in outward endowments, as
riches, worldly wisdom, learning, etc. as some of our churches amongst us
are, yet beggarly, poor and naked to the true calls, orders, ministrations and
graces of the spirit; and therefore Christ here offers her a white raiment of
his own making, for a covering of this her shame and nakedness, to wit a
ministry of officers and ordinances, squared out in the Temple of God's holy
Word, for call, for mission, for matter, for form, and not according to humane
invention, notwithstanding which she might be naked still, open to shame still,
and miserable still. Hence Note,

Observe. That the raiment of Christ's making is the only raiment that will reach
all our necessities, and cover all our nakedness; all other garments will come
short of this work.

If we should ma^e a linsey-woolsey garment, partly of Christ's and partly of
our own commixture, it would be like that in the Law, that was partly linen
and partly woollen, an abomination unto the Lord, yea for all that we might be
cold and naked. Christ's garment is such a garment that it will reach us from
top to toe, that no part of our shame or nakedness shall appear: Sin brings
shame, and sin brings contempt and nakedness upon us, and Christ's raiment is a
white raiment, an inocent raiment, a glorious honorable raiment, it will cover
all our shame and nakedness, and therefore worth the buying; our own rayments
are spotted, defiled, and will not serve the turn, but Christ's is white all
over. If we expect to appear perfectly righteous, holy and just before God (or
otherwise we shall never appear before him to approbation, for no unclean thing
shall enter into his presence) then we must be sure to cloth our selves in the
white raiment of this our elder brother. In the next place, if we have a desire
to have the nakedness, shame, contempt and scorn that is cast upon our
churches, and is obvious to the whole world, to be healed, covered, and done
away; then let us make haste, and clothe our selves with this white raiment
that Christ does counsel us to buy of him; that is, let us speedily look into
the holy Vestry of Christ's Word, and see what Garments Christ has provided
for his Spouse there: The King's Daughter is all glorious within; yea thou art
all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7, 11. and the smell of thy
garments are like the smell of Lebanon. When we cast off Christ's order in
Discipline, church ordinances, offices, and missions, we cast off Christ's
white raiment, and presently discover our shame and nakedness to the eye of the
whole world. It was the advice of Paul in Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man
despise thy youth. And why? Because he had on the white raiment of Christ's
true Ministry, and according to Christ's mind, which garment is so full of
Majesty, though Timothy was but a youth, yet being clothed therewith, it
rendered him not only above contempt, but truly gracious and honorable in the
eyes of all. Some in the room of this, of Christ's own white raiment to cover
their shame and nakedness, think it sufficient that they have their silken
coats, or their formal Rochets, a call from a rich personage, and some Lording
Prelates, and then all is well; but alas, they see not that they are miserable
and naked for all this: Though I should not contemn moderate and modest
garments, yet Elijah in his hayrie mantle, or John Baptist in his leather
girdle, and garment of Camels hair in the way of Christ, will attain the honor
of true Prophets unto themselves, whilst the silken Priests in their own way,
lie naked unto the shame and contempt of all: I speak not this to the reproach
of any, but to discharge my conscience, like a good Physician, must ly open the
wound, and search it fully before he will cure it; or like a faithful Pilot, that
will discover the dangerous shelves and Rocks to all passengers, that they may
avoid the danger, and if I be judged by any to have said too much herein, or
beside the purpose, I answer in the words of Paul, in 2 Cor. 5.13. For whether
we be beside our selves, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your
sakes Christians.

3. In the last place, Christ advises Laodicea, To anoint her eyes with
Eye Salve. Indeed she was dark and blind to purpose, and therefore had need of
Eye Salve to make her see the way to everlasting happiness: And where is she to
get it? But from Christ, who applies the whole remedy for her disease, Gold to
relieve her poverty, white Raiment to cover her nakedness, and Eye Salve to
cure her blindness. Hence Note,

Observe. That they that will truly see the way to eternal life, must come to
Christ to receive Eye Salve from him.

He is given as a covenant to open the eyes of the blind, and to lead them in
the paths of life: its in vain to go to our own prudence or carnal wisdom, that
would more entangle us, and lead us out of the way, according to that saying of
Christ in John 9.39. I am come into this world for judgment, that they that
see not, should see; and that they that see (that is, in their own wisdom)
should be made blind. Christ made an Eye Salve for the cure of a blind person
in John 9.6. of his spittle and clay, of a compound matter, proceeding from his
mouth and the earth, whereby he made the blind man see: Christ somewhat follows
the same method in his compositions of Eye-salves, which he uses toward his
spiritual blind souls that he takes to cure: first he gives us the knowledge
of our selves, and of our own earthy matter, and that we savor in our
unregeneracy nothing but of earth and earthliness: Next, he brings us to the
knowledge of himself, and his Word which proceeds out of his mouth, and so
makes us an happy composition and Eye Salve, whereby we see our poverty, our
shame, and nakedness, and all our spiritual wants, and also where remedy is to
be had to heal and to save us from all our maladies: and indeed, this is as
great a blessing as Christ can bestow upon us, to be truly sensible, and to
have a clear sight of our condition; it is the next step to amendment: it is
ignorance and blindness that makes us err and go astray, but true saving
knowledge will keep us close to God's commandments: If we take any other
Eye Salve to anoint our eyes with, save what Christ has prepared for us in the
Panacea or Treasury of his Word, we may take Bird-lime instead of Eye Salve,
which will close our eyes the faster: They are not the traditions of men, nor
the wisdom and understanding of the wise that will make this precious ointment,
but it is a spiritual quintessential extraction and ointment, drawn out by the
Spirit of Christ out of the holy Limbeck of his Word, and applied by him unto
the blind Patient, that will make him see the glory of God, and his grace, and
to praise him for it unto eternity.

Verse. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be Zealous therefore, and
Repent.
If it be demanded how this verse coheres, or has relation to the precedent
discourse?

I answer, Very much, it being added as a motive, reason, or argument to the
church of Laodicea, to use the remedy which Christ counsels her unto: If Christ
will not spare his own children when they refuse his counsel, it is time for
them to look about, to be more zealous, and repent. And secondly, To assure
her, That though Christ comes with a most bitter chastisement against her for
her sin, yet it is as a father, in love, with the rod of wholesome discipline,
as admonition, reproof, correction, etc. That the man of God may be perfected,
and prepared to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16. and if all will not do, Christ
has another rod, a bitter rod, even for those his professed children too, a
quite casting off, and spewing them out of his mouth for ever. --

Quest. But how can Christ be said to love such that he so bitterly chastises?

I answer, Christ chastises his children, not to destroy them, but to bring
them to amendment, and to save them, if possibly he may: Christ's rod of
Discipline is not a destructive rod, but according to that of David, With thy
rod and staff thou have supported me; and therefore he tells Laodicea here,
that she should not despair of his gracious acceptance, for the great
punishment that was coming on her, for he tells her, that they are such as he
loves whom he rebukes and chastens; and therefore adds, Be Zealous, and repent,
if she expects his fatherly goodness to be continued toward her.

Here are two degrees of this chastisement, Reproof, and a Smiting: Whence Note,

Observe. When the word of reproof will not serve turn to reclaim obstinate
sinners, a smiting chastisement must be added thereunto.

If the word of reproof will not fasten on a Delinquent, the stroke of
Discipline must; but always in Christ's order and method, not presently,
passionately, and rashly, but advisedly, soberly, and in love, according to the
advice of the Apostle, after the second or third admonition, that is, after
several ways taken for his recovery, and all in vain, then such an obstinate
sinner is to be rejected, and chastised with the sharp rod of Discipline: What
else is to be expected after Christ's long admonitions and reproofs toward us,
but that he should come with his sharp rods and chastisements toward us, when
all his convincements will do us no good, nor his rebukes draw any profit or
fruits of amendment from us. Surely if he do love us, he will chasten us, which
is another Note.

Observe. 2. That as many as Christ loves, them he chastens.

If we be children, and not bastards, his rod shall walk among us, Heb. 12.7,
8. Think it not strange when the Saints of God are afflicted chastised, and
corrected, it is because they are children, because they are sons, and beloved
of God; if we were not of his family, he would leave us alone, to run on in our
own perverse ways, until destruction and hell overwhelmed us.

Be zealous therefore, and repent What zeal is, see formerly on the fifteenth
and sixteenth verses. Christ in the former verse prescribed the remedy to the
church of Laodicea for her disease, and here he advises to the application of
it. Be zealous, be fervent, be hot: cast away thy half mongrel Religion, which
is neither hot nor cold. Purge out O England thy Romish leven, that makes thee
hang even half way between heaven and hell, between Christ and Antichrist: Be
zealous and repent, O Laodicea! cast out, O England! thy pretended riches,
honors, and preferments, which works a conceit in thee that thou art rich,
whiles thou art but beggarly, and naked, and buy gold tried of the fire of
Christ, and true honors from him; and that white raiment of his,
righteousness; and of his holy Spouse in her external offices and ordinances,
which will make thee truly honorable, beautiful, rich, and comely: Be zealous I
say, and fervent hot after those precious jewels, and spiritual riches, and
repent of thy former follies and vain conceits, and then thou will be wise to
purpose, and become as a Lilly among the Thorns, and the fairest of all thy
Sisters.

Verse. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
Christ adds here another motive to the poor blind Laodiceans to come unto him
for gold, for white raiment, for eye salve, to supply all their wants, which is
drawn from his willingness and readiness to come in and converse with all such
that are but willing to receive him, and to close with him; and therefore he
tells them, Behold I stand at the door and knock. Christ comes as one desiring
to have entrance, he knocks first, that they may know to whom it is that they
must open: Christ coming in his first grace, is irresistible, and as the strong
man, dispossesses Satan, and takes possession of the house, the soul, by a
spiritual force and over-powering hand: But if the soul, after faith received,
by its own sloth, remisness, or backsliding, shall shut the door or entrance
thereof against the kindly operations of Christ and his Spirit, Christ is not
obliged to break up the door of that heart again by violence, as at his first
coming in unto it, but will come and call, and knock for entrance, that is,
will wait with mercies, with providence, with precepts, commands, with
exhortations and reproofs, that if possible, to melt the straying and erring
soul into compunction, and to open again unto him, that the King of glory may
enter in. From which posture of Christ, Observe.

Observe. That Christ uses all possible means for the reclaiming and regaining
erring souls into the ways of life.

He comes as it were a supplicant at their doors, and desires them to give
entrance to him: He stands and knocks, he waits, and waits long, and calls, and
calls again, by diverse and various ways of mercies and grace; he puts them in
mind of his former loving kindnesses, and how ready he is to help them, if
they will but open to him, and follow his direction, and hearken to his voice.
Sometimes he shakes his rod over them, to bring them to repentance, and tells
them, as many as he loves, he rebukes and chastens: sometimes he invites them by
mercies and gracious considerations to return unto him: then again he takes the
terrors of the Law to make them see their danger, if they continue obstinate
unto his calls: and lastly, he sends his Ambassadors with precept upon
precept, and line upon line, beseeching in Christ's name the straying souls to
return unto him: Christ will never be wanting to them unless they be wanting
unto themselves.

Quest. But why does not Christ himself use his force, and open the door
himself by his Spirits power to these poor Laodiceans: Is not he the great
Key-bearer of David, who opens, and no man shuts; and if he would but
speak the word, he need not stand knocking at their doors, they would fly open
to him, that he might enter in?

I answer, 1. It Is true, At Christ's first entering into the soul, our base
natures are so resistable and abhorrent to the work of grace, that he must come
by force, by a spiritual force, with his Key of David, to unlock the doors of
our hearts, if he will have an entrance thereinto. But secondly, Having first
shed abroad his first grace into our hearts, then he commands us to work in the
power of that grace to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; Having
received the promises (says the Apostle) cleanse your selves from all
filthiness: 2 Cor. 7.1. and Christ puts us then upon doing, that we may stir up
our graces, improve our talents, and become active, growing, and fruitful
christians: and on this account Christ here knocks at the door of the hearts of
the church of Laodicea, and bids her to hearken to his voice, and to open to
him. She had received the first grace of faith from Christ, or else she could
not be numbered among the seven golden candlesticks, though she was a sad,
disorderly, and rusty one, yet she was a church of Christ still, and therefore
might very well be commanded to set her power and grace a working, to open unto
Christ, the operations of whose Spirit she had shut out and quenched by her
uneven carriage and lukewarm temper.

Thirdly, and in the last place, Know that Laodicea had not quite shut the door
to Christ, as unto the operation of his graces; she was a church of Christ,
though a lukewarm one: but she had shut the door, and denied him passage in
some of his Ordinances, by which Christ usually and ordinarily enters; she had
shut the door unto a true spiritual Ministry, Discipline, orderly calls, and
regular dispensing of his Ordinances, and instead thereof, entertains a formal,
lazy, indifferent lukewarm Ministry, State-discipline, Officers, and calls,
and so all Ordinances are brought to the scantling of the will of man, not of
God, or of Christ, and so makes up a mongrel Hermaphroditical worship, part of
God's, and part of man's, which indeed is purely neither God's, nor man's, and
therefore an abomination both to God and man: She had shut this door and way of
entrance against Christ, as some of our churches has done this day, and
therefore Christ comes and knocks; and how? By the Ministry of his Word, and
faithful Witnesses: And as John was sent with an Epistle in his hand to
Laodicea, and the rest of the delinquent Asian churches. so Christ sends his
faithful Teachers and Prophets with a burden in their mouths, against all such
false worship and doctrine, to unshut the doors, if it may be, that the King of
glory may enter in.

Use. From the discoursed premises it plainly appears, That this Scripture
stands little in stead unto the Papists, and their champion Bellarmine in his
book of Grace and Free will, cap. 1. to maintain from hence their Pelagian
doctrine, The power of man's Free Will before conversion unto Faith, and
amendment: For Bellarmine therein triumphantly interrogates, were not he
foolish that would knock at his neighbors door, if he knew for certain that
there were no man within that could open? It is true, it were so, but
Bellarmine (for all his great learning) herein is much mistaken: Christ here
knocks at a door where there was one within that was able to open, the party
was only asleep, he was not dead, or quite departed from his house, and
therefore he knocks, and calls unto him to awake and open unto him; like the
Spouse in the Canticles 5.2. She was asleep when her beloved came and knocked,
saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. So Christ comes
to the church of Sardis, verse. 2. and bids her, to awake and strengthen the
things that remain: and commands Laodicea to open unto him, who had a power and
ability to open, though it was grown weak and remiss, and therefore had need of
a knocking, a vigorous call to rouse her up unto her duty. And therefore
Bellarmine is quite mistaken when from hence he asserts, That Christ bids the
reprobate and unregenerate to open to him; it is only a believing church, a
backslidden lukewarm believing church, that he bids to rise up and open to
him, it is not one altogether dead, but a sleepy, careless, lukewarm church
that he stirs up to this duty of opening to him.

Secondly I answer, Though it were granted Bellarmine that Christ sometimes
knocks at the doors of Reprobates and unregenerate persons, and calls to open
to him, though they neither will or can open to him, yet Christ may do this (as
often he does) without any impeachment to his wisdom; he hereby shows what
their duty is, and requires it from them, and justly he may, though they are
not in a possibility to perform it, they having forfeited and lost their
ability by their own fault, not only in their common parent, the first Adam,
but also by walking in the same steps of disobedience with him; and Christ is
not bound by any Law to restore it again unto them. And therefore Christ in the
last place does often call to open to him upon the very reprobate themselves,
as in a judiciary way, for the aggravation of their condemnation upon their
refusal, according to that of John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken to them,
they had no sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. Thus much in answer
to Bellarmine, and his doctrine of Free Will, and the power of the merely
natural man in the works of grace and faith; which are in the first place to be
wrought by the Spirit, to be nourished by the Spirit, to be consummated and
perfected by the same Spirit. But to proceed.

If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will
sup with him, and he with me.

As if Christ had said, If any man will be obedient to the word of my mouth,
opening the door of their hearts, yiedling obedience to my many and earnest
solicitations, I will then come and dwell in that soul, and impart my self unto
him, and sup with him; that is, communicate, and have mutual fellowship with
him, and he with me. Note hence,

Observe. 1. That it is the Saints highest privilege, to have fellowship with
Christ, and he with them.

Where there are those heavenly intercourses, there is a heaven upon earth, or
earth ascending into heaven, and heaven coming down upon earth; persons hereby
do become the Temples of the holy Spirit: I will come in to him, says Christ;
that is, Christ will dwell in him spiritually, really, operatively by his
grace: and he shall dwell in me; that is, by faith: and so such become and are
made the sons of God, Luke 19.5. and are made partakers of his holy nature. Is
it not a great shame to our christian churches, to deny themselves this great
privilege, in not harkening to the voice of Christ, or opening the door unto
him? It is true, we are ready to hearken to the voice of Christ, so far as
stands with our interest, that we may not be accounted heathens abroad in the
world, and indeed that is all, if it will amount so far; for the ordinance of
preaching is no distinguishing Ordinance, Go Teach all Nations: and the
Ordinances of Prayer and Praise, are but natural duties, which all persons in
the world are bound unto as well as christians: but where is the opening the
door to Christ in his especial distinguishing Ordinances? Where is the mutual
feasting, supping, and communicating between Christ and his churches in his
holy Ordinances of the Supper, tasting and feeding on the several and various
gifts of the Spirit of Christ in his members? Where is the improving of his
Discipline? Where are his Gardens enclosed? Are not all like a Forest or
Wilderness, without any culture or hedge about them? It Is true, there are some
few gardens, whose savoury spices, and precious ointment does cast a sweet
smelling savor abroad; but their tender Grapes are but weak, and it is to be
feared, if God's mercy prevent not, that either the little Foxes will undermine
them, or the wild Boar root them out: I speak it according to my judgment and
conscience, that our contentation and sitting satisfied under a formal and
lukewarm preaching, and some other natural duties only, will be a means to
provoke God to spew us out of his mouth for our half way Religion; the one
ought to be done, and the other not left undone: we ought to have a respect to
the whole will of God, not so far only as our carnal wisdom thinks sufficient,
and no farther. It was once, and not long since, a just complaint, That common
Prayer and other church Discipline, and Episcopal Ruling, had thrust out of
doors a true preaching, and diverse other holy Ordinances of Christ: But observe
the change, now it is to be feared, that preaching will silence and invalidate
many other of the Ordinances of Christ, and render them useless to us:
Therefore we are to hearken to the voice of God, the whole voice of God, and
open to it, if we expect Christ to come in, and to sup with us, and we with
him. We are first to hearken to his Word, open the door to him of our hearts in
the preaching thereof; then we are to proceed, and not sit still, as those
silly ones that are ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge or
practice of the truth; we are to go on to the work of perfection; that is, to
walk in all the Ways and Ordinances of Christ, which will build up our souls
unto the measure of a perfect man in Christ, and make us wise indeed unto
salvation.

Lastly, I conceive there is more in these words, I will sup with him, and he
with me, then a spiritual participating of Christ in his Ordinances in this
life. The words have respect unto futurity, and the other life, as the next
verse intimates, and that of Luke 13.29. Then shall they come from the East,
and West, North and South, and shall sit at Table in the Kingdom of God: And
when is that time? But in that day when Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
faithful shall appear in the Kingdom of Christ, and all the wicked thrust out
of doors, verse. 28. And this is that which Christ intimates in Matthew. 26.29.
to his Disciples after his last Supper, That henceforth he would not drink of
this fruit of the Vine, until that day when he should drink it new with them in
his Fathers Kingdom. Christ will again feast, communicate, and entertain mutual
fellowship with his Disciples, before the ultimate end; though not in a carnal
and sensual manner, yet in a more heavenly and spiritual manner; and therefore
it is called New Wine, in respect it is received not in the old common way, but
in a more singular and spiritual way and manner: it is called new, as Jerusalem
that comes down from God is called new, in respect of its perfection, the old
being passed away: And that day when this heavenly Supper or Feast will be, is,
when that Royal Nuptial feast is prepared, at that wedding mentioned Rev. 21.2,
9. for the heavenly Bride, the Lamb's wife, when Abraham. Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the faithful, shall sit at Table together with Christ in his most glorious
and happy Millenary Reign and Kingdom: and I can see no inconvenience why this
should not be so literally understood, it being a sure rule in interpreting
Scriptures, That we are not to depart from the plain literal sense thereof,
unless there be some evident cause to the contrary, as being contrary to the
coherence, against the Analogy of faith, or some other more plain and express
Scriptures: But this sense accords and harmonizes with a full consort of other
Scriptures; and therefore Piscator well observes upon this of Matthew. 26.29.
Quare non videtur hoc intelligendum de Vino, quod una cum Discipulis biberet
Dominus post Resurrectionem suum. Nam etsi per dies illos quadraginta, sese
illis subinde ostendit, atque etiam cum iis edit, nulla tamen potus sit mentio:
nec moris erat apud Judaeos bibere Vinum in Prandiis ac Coenis quo^idianis, sed
tantum in solemnioribus Conviviis. Though it is mentioned that Christ did eat
with his Disciples, after his resurrection, before he ascended, yet there is no
mention of drinking this new wine, which was reserved for the day of his
Kingdom which was not then in being; for he told his Disciples, that he was
then a going to prepare a place, a Kingdom for them, John 14.2. wherein they
should sup with him, have fellowship with him, and sit on his Throne, and
Reign with him, as the procedure of the next verse will manifest.

Verse 21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.
Christ here adds a third reason to the lukewarm Laodiceans to come unto him,
it being by way of reward, a Throne: Christ tells the sons of Zebedee, Matthew.
20.23. That to sit on his right hand, and on his left, is not his to give; but
he having since by his death purchased this power into his hands, for all power
is given unto him in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28.18. He has a just right to
dispose and grant to sit with him in his Throne to all his conquering Saints;
Christ's Throne here, and the Father's are contradistinguished, as two distinct
Thrones, and not one and the same: Subordinata, or diversa, non sunt contraria:
My Throne, and the Father's Throne carries a variety, not a contrariety in
them. The Son is not the Father, neither is the Father the Son. So neither is
the Son's Throne the Father's Throne, nor on the other side, the Father's
Throne the Son's Throne. Christ will have his Throne as God-man here on earth,
wherein himself and members shall have a share, though inferior unto the Head;
for they shall reign on earth, Rev. 5.10. and the Father has his Throne, the
highest heaven of glory, Psalm. 11.4. Isa. 66.1. where^n Christ is set down, Col
3.1. and this cannot be called Christ's Throne, properly as his own; for
Christ's Kingdom or Throne is a Throne of executing judgment and righteousness,
and breaking all his enemies as a Potters vessel with a rod of Iron, cap. 2.27.
2 Pet. 3.13. Now this cannot be commodiously applied to the Father's Throne,
which Christ at present enjoys in the highest heavens: that is the Holiest of
Holies into which Christ is entered, a place only meet for Angelical
hallelujahs, and spirits of men made perfect, not for ruling, reigning, judging
and breaking his obstinate enemies, which he (as man) must do on earth. But
more of this hereafter. Only hence Note,

Observe. That the time is yet to come when Christ is to have a Throne of his
own, on which, together with him, the overcoming Saints shall sit and reign on
earth.

That this Throne is to commence in futurity, is plain from Christ's promise
made here to the overcoming Saints, long after Christ's ascension into the
Father's Throne; and that it shall be here on earth, is plain from cap. 5. 10.
where the Elders triumphant song does clear it: Thou have made us unto our God
Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on earth, compared to chap 20 v. 11. and
that of Matthew 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth;
all is in the future tense: for I am sure experience shows, they have not yet
inherited the earth, for they have in all past times complained, We have been
strangers and Pilgrims; and in all ages hitherto afflicted, distressed, and
persecuted, as servants, and never as yet inherited the earth, that is become
the only Lords as the true heirs and proprietors thereof, and therefore yet to
come. I shall only add that of Luke 20.28, 29, 30. Ye are they which have
continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my
Father has appointed unto me: That ye may eat and drink at my Table in my
Kingdom, and sit on Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. I see no
inconvenience of understanding these words literally, as unto the general scope
thereof, according to that ancient rule; Non est a litera seu propria
Scripturae significatione reced^ndum, nisi evidens aliqua necessitas cogat and
Scripturae veritas in ipsa litera periclitari videatur. And by the way take
notice, That there are many godly learned men, both in our own Nation, and
others also, that though they take not up this opinion as their own, nor cannot
wholly comport with it in their judgment, yet speak very favorably of it, and
very ingeniously call it a harmless opinion, not directly or indirectly
striking or undermining any the fundamentals of the Faith. But to proceed.

In this last Scripture take notice, 1. What therein is promised as a peculiar
reward to them that abide temptations with or for Christ: and it is a Kingdom,
Christ's Kingdom, my Kingdom, verse. 30. compare this with Rev. 11.18. and Rev.
20.4.

2. Christ appoints unto them a Kingdom as his Father had appointed to him a
kingdom, but the Father (as is on all sides agreed) appointed not a particular
kingdom for Christ, after the ultimate judgment in the supernal heavens; for
it is affirmed on all hands, that Christ then and there shall deliver up the
Kingdom, the power and ruling into the hands of the Father, that God may be all
in all, according to that of 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Now in a Kingdom there are
relations, persons to rule, and persons ruled, to wit, Christ and his Saints to
rule, and unbelievers to be ruled: but in the highest heavens there is nothing
to be made subject to Christ and his Saints, no unbeliever or unclean thing
must enter thereinto, the blessed Angels, the ministering Spirits, being only
subject to Christ, Heb. 1.13, 14. Neither can this be meant of Christ's
spiritual Kingdom, wherein Believers then were, and in all ages formerly, and
therefore cannot be meant of this Kingdom promised and prophesied of in this
Scripture: Besides, the spiritual Kingdom of Christ is called often by John,
the Kingdom o^ patience, wherein the Saints endure temptations, afflictions,
and trials, which Christ here mentions, and so cannot with the least reason
signify the Kingdom of Reward, which Christ promises as the effects, crown,
result, and reward of that enduring and patience.

3. Eating, drinking, and such actions, are unsuitable actions and expressions
to signify the glory of the highest heavens; but very suitable to express
Christ's glorious Kingdom here on earth, for it is promised as a Paradise, and
a Tree of life therein, Rev. 2.7. and 22.2. And it is such a high spiritual
eating and drinking, it being as yet a hidden Manna unto us, that we cannot
possibly comprehend the excellency thereof, but under Types and Figures meet
for our capacities.

4. The conquering Saints are to sit on Thrones to judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel: In Christ's spiritual Kingdom this was never yet done, but such were
rather judged and trampled under foot by the powers of the world, and
Antichrist, and in the supremest ultimate glory there is nothing to be judged,
neither persons nor things; for that is the Father's Throne, wherein Christ
shall lay down all Authority, and himself be also subject unto the Father, as
that 1 Cor. 15.24 25, 28.

Therefore this Kingdom here meant, which Christ calls My Kingdom, and My
Throne, is yet to come here on earth before the ultimate day of judgment, and
the Saints highest state of glory in the supreamest heavens, which is the
Father's Throne.

Object. But some will object, That this which is called Christ's Kingdom, is
also the same with the Father's Kingdom, and not distinct from it, but one and
the same, and to this purpose urge that Scripture, Matthew. 26.29. I will not
drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new
with you in my Father's Kingdom. Now that which you interpret to be the Son's
Kingdom, is here called the Father's Kingdom, and therefore one and the same.

Answ. I answer, It Is true, The Son's Kingdom is called in Scripture the
Father's Kingdom, for diverse reasons.

1. Because the Father gives it to Christ, and therefore he is called, Psalm.
2.8. His King.

2. Because the Father and the Son are one by an unspeakable Union, and so the
Kingdom of the Son, may be called the Kingdom of the Father; that is the
Kingdom of God: for Father is often ascribed in Scripture to the Godhead, as
that of John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they know thee, to wit, the
Father, to be the only true God, etc. And by reason of the union of both
natures in one person, Christ; it is called Ephesians. 5.5. The Kingdom of Christ,
and of God: and The Throne of God and the Lamb, Rev. 22.3. in the holy City,
the New Jerusalem. So that Christ, as man, as one with the Father, or God,
reigns in this happy millenary Kingdom, and so may be also called the Father's
Kingdom, wherein he will drink his new wine with his faithful ones before the
ultimate day of judgment, so this makes not at all against the distinct
Kingdoms of the Father and Christ, which is before asserted, and plainly
evidenced from diverse Scriptures; Let the industrious enquiring Reader, read
more at large in D. Homes, M. Maton, and M. Mede hereon, and verse 12. of this
chapter.

But for a more full explicating and opening the Truth of this point,
understand, That Christ's Kingdom in Scripture has a diverse acceptance.
First, Christ is King by right of creation, Heb. 1.2. and this is his natural
Kingdom, which he has as one God with the Father from everlasting. Secondly,
Christ is King by right of Purchase; as the first, he rules and governs all the
Kings and Nations of the world, and so is King of Kings: But by the second, he
governs more especially his church and people; and this he does as God-man, and
is properly called Christ's Mediatory Kingdom. And this his Mediatory Kingdom
has in it diverse periods, some more lowly; some more exaltant and triumphant.
Christ was a born King; witness the Magi's enquiry after him that was born King
of the Jews, and their majestique presents of Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense;
but his power was then but obscure and low, which appeared afterward somewhat
more radiant, in imposing his commands, doctrines, and ordinances upon his
followers and disciples; but this was but dark, and somewhat lowly also; as an
Heir in his minority: After his Resurrection and Ascension, he commands his
Agents and Ambassadors to negotiate the great affairs of his Kingdom in his
absence, by the help and concomitancy of his Spirit with them; and this is
therefore called Christ's Spiritual or Ministerial Kingdom, which is to
continue unto his second coming, the great work wherein is, to preach the
Messiah, and his Doctrine of Faith, and his second coming: but this is mixed
too with a great deal of affliction, trouble, and obscurity. But there is
another period of this Mediatory Kingdom of Christ, which is most glorious and
triumphant, and that is, at his last appearance, when all these low
dispensations shall be done away, when he shall reign, and none shall let; All
other periods were mixed with much tears and sorrow: but in this they shall be
quite wiped off. In this last period there is given him, not only as God, but
as man, or rather as God-man, Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all
people, Nations, and Languages should serve him, Dan. 7.14. and Psalm. 2.8. Ask
^f me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of
the earth for thy possession: Now this cannot with any reason be attributed to
that Kingdom which Christ had as God with the Father by right of Creation in
the first sense, because it is to be given to the Son of Man coming in the
clouds by the Ancient of days, long after the time of Daniel's prophecy; and
Christ had long before the time of Daniel, even from the beginning, that
natural Kingdom of his, as one with the Father. Neither secondly can it be
applied with any more show of reason to the spiritual Kingdom of Christ now
under the Gospel, because how few of the Nations of the world, and Languages,
do as much as own or profess the name of Christ? It being, as some Learned
observe, and that aright, That not a tenth part of all the Nations and Tongues
in the world, do as much as own or acknowledge the Name of Christ: and then
again, among those that profess Christ, how great a part thereof are Apostate
Antichristians and even violent persecutors of the Truth, as it is in Jesus?
Yea again, consider how few of those in the Reformed Nations, where the Gospel
of Christ is in more clearness and light discovered and preached, are truly
sincere servants of Christ, submitting with cheerfulness unto the Scepter of
his righteousness, owning Christ and godliness in the power thereof? Therefore
surely this Kingdom and happy period is yet to come, as Christ says, John
18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world; that is, of this present world: but
that that is to come after the Resurrection, and wherein dwells
righteousness, and is here promised as a reward to the overcoming Saints, and
for which we pray in the Lord's prayer, Thy Kingdom come; which will not be
given by the Ancient of days unto the Son of man, until he comes in the clouds,
Dan. 7.13. compared to Rev. 14.14.

Lastly, I shall add one humane testimony, and I believe, will not be the least
with some; and that is, of our late Assembly of Divines in their Annotations
only on two Scriptures, to prove the matter and substance I contend for; to
wit, a more glorious triumphant state of the church of Christ before the
ultimate day of Judgment.

First, They in their new Annotations, on Rev. 5.10. And we shall reign on
earth, confess; That this may signify the prosperous times of the church under
christian Kings and Emperors; Dan. 7.27. Psalm. 37.11. The meek shall inherit
the earth. And on Rev. 2.25, 26. they say, Hold fast till I come, signifies,
Till Christ's second coming, general or special. Power over the Nations,
signifies, To join with Christ in judging the Nations, etc. And, that giving
the Morning Star, signifies, Christ's giving the full fruition of himself. Thus
far they: Which is not yet fulfilled in the full extent thereof, and therefore
yet to be accomplished in futurity.

But here by the way I shall take leave to show their great mistake, that
expect a triumphant state of the church, or that Christ's Reign or Monarchy
shall be set up in his church, before Christ's second appearance in the clouds
to accomplish this work. This opinion is not a little dangerous and pernicious
both unto the peace and quiet of the Saints, and unto all Magistracy that such
opinionists live under: for once entertain the judgment that Christ's Kingdom
is now to be set up, all other Opposites and Kingdoms must down before it: for
who would count it a hard saying, or sinful, to remove humane Powers, and
Magistrates, be they ever so just, that stands in the way of the setting up of
the all-righteous Scepter of Christ? Is it not on this very ground and
principle that every party and faction that pretends highest to Christ, has
endeavored to set it self in the Throne? How was Episcopacy dethroned, but
that Presbytery thought it self of Divine Right, and up the Kingdom of Christ
must go with them? Whether Prelacy or Presbytery be of the Diviner or better
Size, that is not the dispute, but having once entertained the conceit that
the Kingdom of Christ did consist in their Geneva model and Presbytery; what
Nation was at peace among the Reformed, before it was exalted and had the
Throne? Again, This principle being again entertained by some others pretending
to more holiness and truth then they; O! How they labor for an eruption, like
an inbred wind within the bowels of the earth, never at rest, till it sets up
its interest, or its pretended Kingdom of Christ up at top? Was not this the
very principle and fancy that carried on those irregular heads of Munster, and
John of Leyden, etc. that made them dream of a new State come down among them
from God, when they were as weak, frail, and sinful, as any others? Did not
this excite them to contemn all Powers and Magistracy whatsoever, and to tread
all under foot that stood in the way of their new Camaera? And is not this
again attempted and acted by some in our days that have taken up the same
principle? And who knows where it will rest being once set on foot, or working
by a fiery irregular zeal? Judicious M. Hooker in his preface to his
Ecclesiastical Policy, though an Episcopal man, yet wisely foresaw the evil of
this judgment and principle, and gave forewarning of the danger of it: It did
destroy Episcopacy, and it will destroy Presbytery, and all Government
whatsoever, if it be not moderated and wisely regulated by an over-mastering
spirit of Grace: and herein I hope I have done but my duty, and discharged my
conscience, in showing the false ground of many men's miscarriages about the
prosecution and attainment of this Kingdom of Christ, which indeed will never
be attained to in this infirm and corrupt generation, which is partly
spiritual, and partly carnal, and they that endeavor to set it up, may justly
perish in the attempt, being not called to it, neither by God nor Christ:
Neither let any say hence, that I contemn full and sincere endeavors of
reforming of the Doctrine and Discipline of our churches unto the primitive
pattern; this is all that is required at our hands, when God opens a door unto
us unto this work, it is not to set up the church triumphant before Christ
shall appear to be her Captain and Leader on, which then will be with great
power and might, and none shall hinder: we are now commanded to suffer, and to
overcome our temptations patiently, not to reign and triumph, which is
reserved as a reward of our patience unto another life. He that thus
overcomes, shall sit down with Christ in his Throne, and reign with him,
whiles others may be shut out for their sin of rebellion and disobedience to
the Powers they live under.

Having showed the danger of this false principle, to wit, an expectancy to
reign with Christ at present, let all wise christians shun it, as a ruinous
house, that is ready to overwhelm all that is under it, and having plucked up
the rotten prop, the building thereon must needs fall to ground, and come to
naught; Cum tollitur causa, tollitur effectus: and instead of this broken reed,
let the faithful soul comfort and support it self in patience with the hopes of
Christ's true and real Kingdom, wherewith John was affected and supported, Rev.
1.9. which shall come in glory and great power: and none shall say as now, Lo
here is Christ, or there is Christ, but he shall be most evident and
perspicuously glorious, Lo, He comes in the clouds, and every eye shall see
him, and they that pierced him, and every one shall mourn because of him, v. 7.
This Kingdom of Christ is not advanced by any capricious whimsies of ours, but
is brought to light in power and great Majesty, where Christ comes with his
Armies, and myriads of Angels and raised Saints, Rev. 19.14. and 20.4. to take
the Kingdom unto himself, when Antichrist and all his adherents are destroyed
by the appearance of the Lord Christ, then shall they fly unto the Rocks and
the Mountains, and call to them to fall upon them, to hide them from the
presence of the Lamb that sits on the Throne: and then all the Kingdoms of
the world shall become the Kingdoms of our God, and his Christ's; and he shall
reign for ever and ever, Hallelujah, Amen.

And for a conclusion of all, let the faithful ones of Christ hearken to the
often repeated admonition of the Spirit in the last verse,

Verse. 22. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.
He that is an understanding christian among you, let him consider what graces
the Spirit has set forth to their imitation, and approved of by various
encouragements, and promises of rewards, and what sins and faults he has
reproved and menaced with dreadful judgments in each and every one of those
seven Asian churches, that he may avoid the one, and embrace the other, that so
his portion may fall in the land of the living: What was written to them, was
written for our example; and if we be found in their conditions, we shall
receive our rewards accordingly, for every one shall receive according to his
works.

O Lord Christ, that has moved the heart of thy servant to make these things
known unto the children of men, let him be a learner himself at the footstool
of thy grace, and blessed be thy holy Name, that has gone thus far with thy
poor servant. O let his own words be imprinted in his own heart: Keep him
humble, Lord, that he be not lifted up in his own eyes, lest whiles he comes a
Teacher unto others, he himself becomes a castaway. O Lord Christ, Give thy
servant power from thy self to overcome his temptations, that he may sit with
thee in thy Throne, even as thou have overcome, and art set down in thy Fathers
Throne. Pardon, O Christ, not only the faults of this undertaking, but the many
sins and errors of all his life. O cover him and them with thy white raiment,
and then he shall walk in white before thee, and at thy appearance, his
nakedness shall not appear. Remember, O Lord, thy Church and People among us,
for good: O let them hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, That thy
Name may be gloriously exalted within our days, That thy Truth may run to and
fro, and be increased, and that all be kept and preserved within the compass of
their duty, both toward God and Man, That so we may have sweet smelling
Gardens, holy Assemblies within our Land, where the Lord may take delight to
dwell in.

Hear O Lord thy poor servant, for thy wonted mercies sake, in and through the
Son of thy own love; to whom with thy Self, and holy Spirit, one Eternal,
Ever-living Lord God, be all glory, dominion, praise, and power, for ever and
for ever, Amen*

Dox mon t THe.
FINIS.

