portrait of man The Effigies here on which you look,
Contributes nothing to this Book:
It Is but a shadow at the most,
No Body sure, (much less a Ghost.)
The Book peruse, the faults pass by,
The rules observe most carefully:
Which if you do, then you may find
Content in Marriage to your mind.


Conjugall Counsel: OR, Seasonable Advise, both to Unmarried, and Married
PERSONS.

Directing the first how to enter into the Marriage Estate: And the other how
to demean themselves in the Christian discharge of all such duties as that
Estate of life binds them to, that God may have Glory, the Church Edification,
and themselves and Families, present and future Comfort,

Tending much (by the blessing of God) to a through Reformation of all the
Enormities of these evil Times.

By T. H. of Sandwich in Kent.

Two are better than one,

Eccles. 4 9. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge,

Heb 13.4. LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House
at the George at Fleet-Bridge. 1653.

Imprimatur JOHN DOVVNAM.

To his highly Esteemed, and very Choicely beloved Children, Samuel, Mehetabel,
and Anne Hilder, the yearning Bowels, and Rolling Affections of your
tenderhearted Father, wishes the happiness of all saving-grace in this life,
and Eternal glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Right dearly beloved Children,
THe Great God of Heaven and Earth, who is wisdom it self, and all
perfections, did not think fit to bestow you on me as the fruit of my Youth,
and the Quintessence of my strength: But in my Old Age, and when I was a dry
stick he made me Bud, Bloome Blossoms, and bring forth such pleasant Almonds
as indeed you are. Your bodies are very dear to me, I desire your souls may
be much more precious. The preservation of your Natural lives is my duty to
take care after, in a way of subordination to God: But the seeking of the good
of your souls (as an Instrument under God) in this life in the state of grace,
and as the way leading to glory and bliss hereafter is that which I am bound
to regard in a more singular and special manner. My dear hearts, I desire
Natural Affection may not so far carry me forth toward you; as spiritual and
Ardent desires transport me with much enlargednesse of heart and spirit to
seek there all good both of your Bodies and Souls to all Eternity through
free grace in Jesus Christ. It is said, Israel loved Joseph more than all his
Children, because he was the Son of his old Age, and he made him a Coat of many
colors, Genesis 37.3. Now, if because Joseph was the Son of his Fathers old Age
was a good Argument to Israel to love him with such a large love; Then (for
ought I know) I am not to be blamed if I manifest my love to you in an
extraordinary manner, having the same reason for it as before expressed. True it
is, I cannot cloth you with Garments of many colors, (I mean in a rich and
costly manner) yet I desire to bless the Lord that not one of you hitherto
have known want; Ah my soul desires you may be like the Kings Daughter, Psalm.
15.13. Even all glorious within, that your hearts may be beautified with saving
grace, and clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. My dear Children,
I cannot out look upon you as poor fatherless babes; for (...) ^^lesse the
time of my departing is at hand, (so far as can be thought in all probabili^^)
for I have the sentence of death within me, I finding Nature spending and
wasting peace, and diverse symptoms of short life; Therefore as Isaac desired
to bless Esau before his death: So I desire (yet not as having a spirit of
Prediction, as Isaac had, Gen* 27.4.) to bless you before I dye, viz. to
communicate some Counsel to you from the Word of God, that you in following
the same may be both blessed here, and for ever. Now herein I shall proceed (by
the Lords assistance) for the general in a sententiall way, desiring you to
make them the matter of your Meditations, that so they may be amplified and
enlarged in your own thoughts. (My dearly beloved ones) let me in the first
place lay to you, and to every one of you as David said to his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. My Children know you the God of your Fathers, and serve him with
perfect hearts, and with willing minds: This is your duty in general. But to
come to some particulars (yet in an abstractive way:) Take them as follows,
that is, labor to make God the object of your love, and the chief of all your
desires, Psalm. 73.15. Ibid. 31.23. Mark 12, 30. Seek to have the fear of God
continually in your hearts, Psalm. 86.11. Psalm. 34 9. but be careful that it
be filial and Child-like, (not servile and slavish.) Remember your Creator in
the days of your youth, Eccl. 12.1. Begin your spiritual Race betimes, Psa.
63.1. Prove. 8.17. And strive to hold out to the end, 1 Cor. 9.24. Mark. 13.13.
Mind your own mortality, Heb. 9.27. Ioh. 9.4. Psalm. 6.5. Put not off working in
Gods Vineyard till the Eleventh hour, Mat. 20.6. Your Sun may set at Noone,
(as spoken in another case,) Amos 8.9. Improve all your Talents to the glory of
God, Mat. 25.20. Mind the account you must pass, for you are but stewards, Luke
16.2. Forget not the day of Judgment, Eccl. 11.9. Chap. 12. ult. Mat. 12.38.
Be very strict in the observation of the Sabbath, Exodus 28.10, 11. Isa. 56.2.
Chap. 58.13. Prize the means of grace, Psalm. 119, 70, 97. Frequent the
Assembly of the Saints, Hebrews 12.25. But mistake not the Sheepfold, Cant.
1.28. Labor to live a life of faith against, and above sense, Gal. 2.10. Hab.
2.4. Chap. 3.17, 18. Labor for an humble spirit, Micah 6.8. James 4.6.
Practice all known truths, Joh. 13.17. Hold forth the power of godliness in
your lives, 1 Cor. 4.20. 2 Timothy 3.5. Keep your hearts always waking, Cant.
5.2. for the Times are evil, Ephesians. 5.16. Labor for found principles, Tit.
1.13. And stability in them, 1 Timothy 4.1. James 5.8. 2 Pet. 1.12. Study to be
quiet, and to do your own business, 1 These. 4.12. Keep within the limits of
your Callings, 1 Cor. 7.24. Labor to be approved to God, 2 Cor. 10. ult. Pass
not for the judgment of men, 1 Cor. 4.3. Yet beware of giving just offense to
any, Mat. 18.7. 1 Cor. 10.32. Shun all occasions of sinning, Prove. 5.8. Gal.
5.13. Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. Do not think you can
be too strickt in a holy life, Ephesians. 5.15. But always walk by a just Rule,
Gal. 6.16. Be upright in heart: hate hypocrisy, Ps. 26.1, 2. Ioh. 1.47. Follow
not a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. Be not partakers of other men's sins,
keep your selves pu^e, 1 Timothy 5.22. Beware of diversity of opinions, and diverse
Doctrines, Heb. 13.9. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Romans 16. Cha. 17.18. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4 For
these various ways are but mere figments and fruits of Addle brains, though
varnished with some splendent gilt of holiness, and denominated New Lights, and
Divine Revelations. I say beware of these, for they are but the Devil peeping
with a white Vizard to cover his all-silthy and deformed face; stand upon your
Watchtower, look out sharply lest you be led away by the error of the Wicked,
2 Pet. 2.17. My dear Children, labor to arm your selves against the croking
Frogs of these last and worst times; you are borne in an hour of Temptation
you had great need to labor to try the spirits. 1 Ioh. 4.1. which that you
may do, you must follow the Counsel of Christ that is, you must daily search
the Scriptures, John 5.39. Imitate also the example of the Bereans, who would
not believe Paul and Sylas, until by searching the Scriptures they found the
truth of what they delivered, Acts 17 11. And the Holy Ghost commends and
honors them for the same; and this duty God did command his people of Old,
Isa. 8.20. Lean not on your own understanding, Pro. 3 5. Be not high minded,
but fear, Romans 11.20. Let him (says the Apostle) that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. For there is a way that seems right,
but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove. 16.25. Beware of other men's
sins and punishments, Judge. 4.7. Still walk with God as Enoch did Genesis 5.24.
Graspe fast hold on Christ as the Church did, and lean upon him, Cant. 8.5.
You are safe if Christ put forth his hand to you in your times of danger, as he
did to Peter, Mat. 14.31. Endeavor to keep a good conscience in your whole
life, Acts 23.1. which will be to you a continual feast, Pro. 15.15. (so the
Geneva Translation renders it) Therefore hearken unto the Checks and
Admonitions of it. Sympathize with the Church and every particular Member
therein in the times of Affliction, Neh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Amos 6.6. Romans 12.15.
Spend much time in the perusal of Orthodoxe Writers, both Ancient and Modern;
for next unto the Scriptures (in both the Old And New Testament) you shall find
the most glorious beams and araies of light and truth shining from them, to
enlighten you in the way of truth, and to heat and quicken your Affections to
walk in the way that is called Holy. I even beseech you to labor to gain,
and to maintain in your d^a^e hearts an invaluable and incomparable esteem of
these Authors here mentioned, and (...) as they, (who are indeed all Reverend
and sound Divines, viz. Mr Perkins, Bishop Hall, Bishop Usher, (and in
particular his body of Divinity,) Dr Preston, Dr Sibbs, Mr Nicholas Eyfield, Mr
Robert Bou^ton, Mr Jeremy, and Mr Daniel Dike, Mr Symonds on the case and cure
of a deserted soul, Mr Smith on the Great Assize, and Ursinus on the Sum of
Christian Religion, etc.

But on the contrary, take notice it is your duty, both to God and your own
souls, to labor to abhor, with a kind of infinite detestation, all heretical
and schismatic, (yea) all fanaticall and whimsicall Pamphlets, Treatises,
and their Authors, how specious soever Frontispieces and deluding Titles be for
all such are but the Devils Factors, Agents, and Engines to seduce and poison
the judgments of poor ignorant souls, that they may run with a full careere
to the pit of hell, to the high dishonor of God, and their own inevitable
destruction both of body and soul, unless infinite mercy prevent; these
Vermin a^e like the Locusts, Rev. 9.7.8. if not the same, who have Crowns like
Gold, (not Gold though they glister) faces like men, and hair like women, but
teeth like Lions. These are Clouds without water, etc. and wandering stars, etc.
Jude 12, 13. These are they whose words f^et like a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.16, 17.
These trouble Coasts you may know them by their fruit, they still oppugn the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, and spit out of their black mouths many
opprobrious, false, and diabolical calumniations against them (but their
tongues and pens can be no slanders to them, nor cast them out of the hearts of
the real godly party,) that thereby they may heave them out of the Ministry,
and make room for their uncalled and ungifted fraternity to possess their
places if they can bring their cursed designs to pass; and by this hellish
means hinder the propagation of the Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances, and so
foyst in their own hell-bred inventions. These (my dear Children) are such
nonsensicall Ignoramus's, and so full of blockish stupidity, that they are many
degrees worse than those Babel builders, Genesis 11. from ver. 1. to the end of
ver. 8. For they did desist from their work of confusion when God had
confounded their Language: But these Impostors, though the Lord have divided
their tongues (and so has answered the Prophet David's Imprecation, Psa. 55.9.)
that they speak not the same things: yea, and their hearts too, that they walk
in contradictory ways one from the other, (and all from the Rule of truth:)
yet most pertinaciously with brows of brass they proceed to bring paultry
trash, and filthy Rubbish to patch up their tottering structure (founded on the
sand) to be a habitation for doleful Creatures, etc. Isa. 13.21. And for such
as the Holy Ghost mentions in Rev. 18.2. But down must their Chaos go, Mat.
7.26, 27. And all their vile plants must be plucked up, Mat. 15.13. But to
conclude this particular, these Sons of Belial are false Meteors, and can
metamorphose a real Saint into a Devil, and a Devil incarnate into a Saint.
These persons are good Arithmeticians, for they are well versed in the rules of
Addition and Substraction, (nay, and in the black art of Detraction too;) and
whether they are acute both in the Theory and Practique part of Division or
not, let all moralized men, much more real Christians judge. These persons
can, and do put darkness for light, and light for darkness, etc. In one word,
their aim is to extinguish the power of godliness, and to procure liberty for
all licentiousness, which God prevent. But to proceed onward. Set not your
Affections on things beneath, but on things above, Col. 3.2. For the love of
the world, and worldly things is an enemy both to God and your own souls,
James 4.4. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. But cast your selves (in the use of lawful means)
upon God for all outward things, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. And be
content to be at his allowance, and with your present condition, Phil. 4.12. 1 Timothy 6.8. Heb. 13.5. In all your Afflictions exercise much patience, Pro.
24.10. James 5.10. Heb. 12.1.2. Yet be much in Prayer for deliverance, Psalm.
50.15. Also mind for this purpose the Title immediately before Psa. 102. (As
touching your duties to your Parents I omit the hinting at them here, but refer
you to that part of the ensuing Treatise, where there is something spoken more
at large of them.) Deal uprightly and justly with all men, as in the presence
of God, 1 These. 4.6. And as you would have others deal with you so deal with
all men, Mat. 7.12. You must prefer the good and safety of Church and State
before your own, this may be deduced from the Message Mordecai sent to Queen
Hester when she was fearful to put forth her self for the safety of the Jews
in their extreme exigency, Hest. 4. the latter part of v^r. 14. Romans 12.11.
Not sloathfull to do service (for so the Geneva has it.) Now my dear
Children, I beseech you in the Name of God (and I hope your heavenly Father) to
labor to maintain the life and heat of love, unity, Amity, sweet Accord and
Concord between your selves. Consider for this purpose, that it is a special
duty God requires of you all to be performed each to other, 1 Pet. 3.8. And the
Lord hates and abominates such as low discord between Brethren, Pro. 6. ver.
16. compared with ver. 19. Genesis 45.24. And well worth your observation for your
encouragement to perform this duty here urged, is that which the Spirit of God
lays down, Psalm. 133.1. Behold (says the Psalmist) how good and how pleasant
it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity, which in the remaining verses is
amplified by two choice similitudes, and with a comfortable conclusion. Nature
has Characterized this so strongly upon the hearts of Men, that some have
taken revenge upon such as have done wrong to Brethren or Sisters. Simeon and
Levi slew all the Inhabitants of a whole City for the wrong that Shechem the
son of Hamor had done to their Sister Dinah, Genesis 34.25, 26, 27, 31. Gideon put
Zebah and Zalmunna to death for their slaying his Brethren, Judge. 8.19, 21.
Abner slew Asahel the Brother of Joab, 2 Samuel 2.23. but Joab slayes Abner for
it, 2 Samuel 3.27. Amnon deflowrs Tamar the sister of Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.14. but
Absalom did cause him to lose his life for it, ver. 28, 29. Now these things
(my dear Children) I mention, not to put you upon such courses, for they were
Acts of murder in those that did them, and that in a high degree, and you have
not, nor cannot have any warrant to do such vile things; all you can do in such
cases is to go to God by prayer, and to the Civil Magistrate by complaint for
the security of each one of you. But I make use of these Instances to convince
you, that if you love not one another you sin even against Nature, how much
more then against God. And truly, you sin also against your selves, for by
unbrotherly breaches you weaken your own strength; The uniting of Brethren and
Sisters together by love fortifies them against the danger of oppositions. The
earth will with more ease swallow up one single drop of water than many drops
and buckets-full met together in one. A threefold Cord is not quickly broken.
Eccl. 4.12. Most excellent to this purpose is the story of the old dying man,
who having many Children, and desiring they might be all united together in
love, he was ambitious to leave something upon their hearts and spirits as an
Impression not easily to be forgotten, but that might remain for the end
beforesaid: Who having them all present before him, calls for a sheafe of
Arrows, which when brought he gives to diverse of his Children a single Arrow
and bids them break them, which with great case they did: But then he takes all
the rest of them and with a cord he binds them in one bundle, and then bids
them break them if they could, which they aslaying to do could not so much as
bend them. Then he applies himself to them by way of counsel, and tells them,
that if they were divided one from another in affection they would expose
themselves to ruin: But if they were all firmly conjoined together as one,
they might be able to preserve themselves, and one another. (Ah) my dear
hearts, it is the desire and prayer of your poor Father for you unto the
Blessed, and for ever blessed Trinity, who are three in Persons, and but one in
Essence, that you all might have but one heart, and one soul in relation one
to another, that thereby God might be glorified, others edified, and your
selves for ever comforted by your mutual love, and sweet deportment one to
another.

Thus, my much endeared Children, I have labored to give you an Epitome of
particular duties you owe unto God, to his Church, and to your own souls and
bodies. Now to all the advice I have given you in particular, I shall in the
Apostles own words add this in general, only changing the Appellation;
Finally my Children, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things; And the God of peace shall be with
you, Phil. 4.8. and the latter end of ver. 9.

Now my dear Children, because I am convinced that it is the duty of a Father
to seek the complete happiness of his Children, both Internal and External,
and though chiefly the good of their souls, in relation to a better life: Yet
in a second place, the good also of their bodies, and their outward comfortable
enjoyments in this Terrestiall World. I cannot therefore omit, in order to your
well-being here, to communicate unto you some advise, in reference to the
change of your conditions by Marriage, if the Lord be pleased to bring you to
such a time for seasonablenesse, and to give you opportunities to embrace the
same; Let me tell you, that for you to enjoy meet helpers in that estate, you
may reckon to be one of the greatest out ward favors that God does bestow on
his Children to sweeten their condition otherwise mixed with diverse Afflictions
in this life. But in the discharge of this last duty I shall be very concise,
because you may meet with variety of directions this way in the ensuing lines,
and body of the discourse, all which I beseech you to mind in your reading of
them, and much more in your practice in walking up to them; but I shall here
take the liberty to add in general this one thing, (viz.) That it is a Rule,
Case, and Maxim in Divinity, that whatsoever Action any one is called to
perform, which is of high concernment, (especially to Gods glory,) and relates
to the good of man, and but once (in probability) to be done in his whole life,
and which being done is unalterable, and remains like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, Dan. 5.8.12. There is required more than ordinary caution and
circumspection in the undertaking and managing of the same. Now the entering
into the Marriage Estate is an Action of the same nature before expressed; nay,
to speak properly, it is that Action, and none but it that fully answers the
description beforesaid; And if so, then judge you what singular care should
fill your hearts and heads when you mind Marriage, and use the means
conducible for that end.

Dear hearts, I cannot but think it necessary to acquaint you concerning this
poor piece ensuing, which is denominated Conjugall Counsel, that the
Original Copy of it was compiled six and twenty years since, which being
then brought into a compendious way, (and truly it is little more now) I did
present it, not only to very intelligible private Christians, but to three very
Orthodoxe Divines for their Approbation of it, (it being then in my intentions
to make it public,) which approbation of theirs I had, and counsel from one
of them to print the Book, who did also put me in a fair way to accomplish
the same, and it had been extant, but that those times did obstruct it, since
which time it has lain even as dead and buried; But (my choisely beloved
ones,) Now God having (in the riches of his grace) bestowed you on me, (who are
as dear to me as my own soul,) what could I do less than seek your complete
happiness? And I apprehending this poor work might contribut a small mite
thereto (by the blessing of God) I could not be so unjust to detain it from
you. Truly, (next the seeking the glory of God) I have chiefly for your sakes
made it obvious to public view; I must confess, the good of all poor souls
I desire to prize; and if any receive benefit by this my poor pains, I desire
to take it as a very large engagement to my poor soul to praise the Lord for
his infinite goodness and grace herein; Further I must acquaint you, that I
have in some things altered this from the first Copy, and I hope it is not for
the worst, but for the better; And now my poor hearts, on whom can I so
properly bestow it as on you, who are bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh? I
have two special reasons, amongst many, to write this Epistle Dedicatory to
you: First, to manifest my Cordial love to your souls. Secondly, that hereby
I may oblige you to endeare it the more, and to make it your Rule to walk by.

Now if either you or any others should marvel I should make my self so
pupiller as to make use of your names at the beginning, and my own at the end
of this Epistle: And secondly, that I should affix my Effigies at the Front of
this Book, to both I shall give a candid answer. But first I must tell you,
that it was not to gain popular applause; for first, I know nothing in it that
can advance so course an end. Secondly, I do profess I desire with my soul to
abominate all popularity: I can with much comfort aver that my sincere
design is to avoid it, for nothing is more contrary to my mind than to set so
much as half a foot on the stage of this world. But to give you a brief, but
real positive answer of the first, It was that it might take the deeper, and
more kindly impression on the hearts of you my poor Children, that you may
look on all contained both in this Epistle, and in the Treatise as the
Counsel of your own dear Father. That you may say, this Counsel, these
directions, these reproves, etc. were directed to us from our Father, and they
were all evidences that we were dear to him, and we plainly see he loved our
poor souls, which I hope (by the grace of God) will be to you as a spur to
quicken you to practice all. But for my Effigies, I have desired that should
stand in the place beforesaid, to be a means to preserve the memory of my
self always fresh upon your hearts who are my Children. For I am not ashamed
to confess (if it were before all the world) that I desire my Children in
years to come (if God see it good) may be able to take notice what kind of man
their Father was even in person; I care not who bury me in oblivion so my
Children do not; But these things being only circumstantials, let them pass
without more said to them.

Now if you (my dear Children,) or any other should be unsatisfied in relation
to the uncouth Method of the following directions in reference to the duties of
Superiors and Inferiors each to others, it being contrary to the order, not
only of the way of all Elaborate Writers on such a Subject, but also to the way
of the Holy Ghost, to lay down the duties of Superiors in the first place, and
then of Inferiors. I desire to pass this account for it; You may be pleased
to mind what is my chief aim in the foresaid discourse, Truly, it is to
provoke such as desire to enter into the Marriage estate, not only to mind
their Call unto the same, and to inform them in the way they must walk in,
and the means they must use tending to atchieving their desires, but also to
put them upon an earnest endeavor to be acquainted with the duties that their
consciences will then be bound to the performance of. Now it is clearly
necessary, that every Christian man should first learn what his own duties are
that he may discharge them; and then the duties of others, that within his
place and Calling he must teach, and stir them up to perform the same, Thou
that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Romans 2.21. He that
reproves another had need to be unreprovable, our Savior teaches as much,
Mat. 7 3.

Much endeared Children, you cannot but remember that I have acquainted you,
that I cannot but conceive my abode here with you is short, and I may truly
say, my desire is to depart this life and to be with Christ, which for me is
best of all, yet to remain in the flesh is more profitable for you, Phil.
1.23, 24. But however the Lord be pleased to deal with me I hope your Mother
will discharge her duties toward you both for soul and body, and will
endeavor to walk before you in good examples, and that may prove to you all
matter of joy and singular comfort.

But you my dear Son, I must here take the liberty to tell you, (and I cannot
do less,) that you are descended from the Loins of a most choice and precious
Mother (who by divine providence lost her natural life in being a means to
bring you forth to live in this World.) Truly, I might here dip a golden Pen in
Odoriferous Oil, and therewith write an Encomium of her, both of her life, and
of her death. She was indeed a Margaret by Name, and much more by sweetness of
Nature; But above all, by the super-abundant grace of God toward her, and in
her, she was of a most transcendent, exemplary, and holy life. She did (through
the grace of God) walk sweetly with her Savior in all pious ways; she did
highly prize the means of grace; She did really hold forth the power of
godliness in an unblameable Conversation; She was frequent in secret prayer;
and let me tell you (to your comfort) she has lodged in the bosom of God (by
the assistance of the Holy Spirit, and in the Mediation of her dear Savior)
many an ardent and most affectionate prayer for your poor soul while she was
here in the flesh; which I doubt not but the Lord will return answer of
(through his free grace) upon your head and heart, upon your body and upon your
soul. She was full of the overflowings of love to her most unworthy (yet much
endeared) Consort. She was of a very peaceable and amiable life toward all
persons. She did live much in a little time; And as she was of an exact life
(in comparison of most,) so through the infinite grace of God) she ended her
days in the peace of a good conscience, and did enjoy peace with God which
passes understanding, Phil. 4.7. Psalm. 37.37. God gave her the white stone,
and therein the new Name written, which none knew but her self who received
it, Rev. 2.17. She was full of heavenly Raptures, and Divine manifestations of
the love of God to her soul on her deathbed. She went not out by death like
the snuff of a stinking Candle, leaving an ill savor behind, but like Jumper,
or the choicest sweet Perfumes. Dyed Abner as a fool? 2 Samuel 3.33. No. Or dyed
this precious Christian as a Daughter of Belial? No. (The thoughts thereof in
the least measure is to be abhorred with a kind of infinite detestation;) it
may be truly affirmed, that she lived like a Saint, and dyed like a Daughter of
the most High God. To her to live was Christ, and her death was her gain,
Phil. 1.21. And to her infinite gain she has found it, for she does now rest
in the bosom of her sweet and precious Savior, and shall to all Eternity. I
dare not say, many Daughters have done virtuously, and that this glorious Saint
has excelled them all, Pro. 31.29. But this I will be bold to say, that though
many Daughters have done virtuously, yet that not one of them did ever excel
her. I could do no less than present you my dear Son with the knowledge of
these things, both for your Imitation, and Consolation. And since Divine
providence has given me such an opportunity as this, to attest before all the
World the real super-eminency of such a Saint, so nearely related to you my
Son, much more to me, I dare not omit it; certainly if the Righteous should
be had in everlasting remembrance, Psa. 12.6. it must be then as much my duty
to endeavor it as the duty of any: Nay more my duty, in reference to this
glorified soul, than the duty of any other in the world.

My very dear and choicely beloved Children, I have been somewhat longer in
this Epistle Dedicatory than I intended at the first, but the strength of my
Affections to your souls has carried me forth in this way. Truly, the good of
those precious souls of yours I desire to seek as the good of my own. I know
to my grief and sorrow that there has been a world of evil infused into your
whole man by, and from me. (O) that God would honor me in making me an
instrument under his blessed self of plucking you out of the mire of your
corruptions, Jude ver. 23. And God does know that in all these lines I have had
an aim, and very ardent desires and sincere endeavors to contribute something
this way. But to draw toward a close let me say (in some sense) as Solomon,
Prove. 22.20 I have written to you excellent things in Counsel and Knowledge,
yet not as they flow from me, (for out of me who am but an empty and dark
creature can no such things come,) but as God has enabled me (through his
grace) to gather them together as so many precious flowers springing in the
Garden of his own word. Dear hearts, it is said of Abel, that whilst he is
dead he yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. (Ah) let me tell you, that by these lines of
mine I shall speak to you when I shall have no ears to hear you, nor eyes to
see you. Now I beseech you for the Lords sake, and for your precious souls
sake, that you would seriously mind what I have presented to you, and be
careful to practice the same, and whatsoever else the Lord shall be pleased to
provide for your instruction to further you in a holy life; for else let me
plainly tell you, that these eyes of mine shall see you, and these ears of
mine shall hear you arraigned, sentenced, and condemned at the Bar of Gods
Tribunal Seat to everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9. And then I shall want an heart to mourn
over you. And yet if not only my self, but men and Angels should melt away by
tears of sorrow unto nothing in sympathizing and condoling your most exceeding
sad and dolorous conditions, it could not contribute to ease you of so much as
one sigh, sob groan, or cry unto Eternity. (Ah) my poor soul, shall it ever
be said that I have begotten Children to be made Companions for Devils. (Ah,
Dear God I beseech thee for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake forbid it.) But I
bless God I hope better things of you (my sweet Children,) and such as
concern salvation, though I thus speak, Heb. 6.9. Or else I should go
mourning, and pouring forth floods of salt tears unto my g^oanes, and never in
this world see one happy day more. But if the Lord shall be graciously pleased
to add a span of time to my days here, I trust he will give me a tender heart
toward you, and that (through his abundant grace) I shall labor to improve
time, gifts, and opportunities, to seek by all means (and in special by
humble addresses, and earnest prayers to the God of all grace to give you all
all-saving grace) your real Tranquillity, and true felicity here, (and so
grant me to see real and royal demonstrations of his free grace upon, and in
your souls, discovering on your hearts, and in your lives the spots of his
Children, Deuteronomy. 32.5.) And your Eternal happiness and bliss in the life to
come, in, through, and for the only merits of Jesus Christ your blessed, and
for ever blessed Savior. Now unto him who is able to keep you from falling,
and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy; To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, now and ever, Jude 24, 25. verses. Thus my dear, sweet, and precious
Children I take my leave of you in this kind, and Subscribe my self what I am,
and desire to remain (by the grace of God) to the end of my life, (viz.)

Your dear, tenderhearted and most Affectionate Father to love and serve you,
THOMAS HILDER.

To the much Honored and Eminently Virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Sackvill, some
years since Wife and Religious Consort of Sir Thomas Sackvill of Selscombe in
Sussex, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, the unworthy Author wishes
all Happiness External, Internal, and Eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Madam,
THe Subject matter upon which the Genius of this Discourse does spend it
self, is (within very few days) of as great Antiquity as Time it self, Genesis
2.24. compared with Chap. 1.27. and shall continue till the extirpation of Time
again in this Terrestiall World, Luke 17.26, 27, 30. Very conspicuous it is
(blessed be God) that on this Theme there are many Learned and Elaborate
Treatises now, and of long time since Extant, unto all which this may serve
only as a dark color to set them forth the more Illustriously. And truly, but
upon the maine consideration, expressed in the other Dedicatory Epistle, this
should have been stifled as an Abortive Child, never to have seen the Sun. But
since Divine Providence will have it exposed to open view (and that in a
Critical Age,) My desire has been to take a faithful witness (instead of
Witnesses) to Record. Yet to denominate it by some other name than
Mahcr-shal-al-hash-baz, Isa. 8.2, 3.

Madam, I beseech your Ladyship to excuse my boldness in making use of your
Name for the end before hinted at. I am able to affirm it as a truth, that I
have not thus done in a rash and inconsiderate way, but upon advised and mature
deliberation, and serious consideration; two motives I shall make hold to
insert, which have been prevalent with me this way, viz.

First, that by long and comfortable experience I have found in your Ladyship
both the Theory and Practique part of Religion, The form and power of
Godliness, Orthodox Principles in relation to faith, and zealous endeavors to
walk up to them in holiness of life. Truly, I have great ground and
confidence (and do therefore believe) that God has been pleased to honor your
Ladyship in keeping your heart upright with him, and keeping you from deviating
from the Rule of truth both in faith and life in this hour of Temptation which
is come upon all, so on your self, to try you whether you are Gold, yea,
refined Gold, or impure, filthy, and abominable dross, or not, 1 Pet. 1.7.
Doubtless Madam, you are none of them the Spirit speaks expressly of, 1 Timothy
4.1. It is a most choice expression of our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke 5. ult.
(which by way of allusion too I desire to make use of, (and I am confident may
be applicable to your Ladyship,) No man (says he) having drunk Old Wine
straight way desires to drink New* for he says, the Old is better.

Madam, It is well known unto, and confessed by the Learned, that in
Scripture Language that by Wine and strong drink many times Errors are
intended. And that by drunkenness, staggering, and vomiting, the intosticated
brains of false Prophets, Heretics, and Seducers are pointed out, Isa.
28.78. Chap. 29.9, 10. Ah doubtless should God plague the drunkards of this
Nation, both in a corporal and spiritual sense, there are (and that of the
latter sort) more than a good many would lie under the lash of Divine
vengeance; but is Gods patience their privilege? Yea, it is so if well
improved: else none at all, 2 Pet. 2 1, 2, 3. Truly, there are many of these
persons, who do not only paddle at the Swine, Trough, but sw^ll till they
swell, and then vomit out their filth to the dishonor of God, and the
detriment of many poor ignorant souls.

Madam, these are bad (and therefore sad) Times; For real Christians (every
where) may too too palpably see many formerly seeming tall and well rooted
Cedars green and flourishing, now blown up by the roots, and all their fruit
and leaves blasted, withered, and fallen off, and nothing remaining but vain
Notions, and high swollen conceits (not for want of Ignorance) such as the
Prophet speaks of, Isa. 65.5. What Agur also speaks, Prove. 30 12. is worth
our observation; neither must we forget what Jude affirms in verse 19. of his
Epistle.

Madam, there are some are so impudent as to aver that none do so much hate
the Power of Godliness as the old English Puritan, (but it is well observed by
the most intelligible that their tongues can slander no man.) But it is a truth
that the old English Puritans do abhor such power of Godliness as too many of
these men hold forth, which is eminently taken notice of to be Pride,
Experientia docet.
Malice, Selfe-Interest, Designs to exalt themselves to high places,
Partiality, Uncharitable censuring such as are more unblameable than
themselves, and fashioning themselves according to this world, both in antique
attire and manners. etc.

But if any say to me as the Lawyer did to our Lord and Savior, Luke 11 45. I
will not answer as Christ did 46. yet let him that reads consider it, (as
Christ also said in another case, Mat. 24.15.) But this I will say, the Lord
grant them sound Conviction, and through Conversion, the fruit of which is
new^esse of heart and life, and then doubtless all that are the real godly
party will give them not only the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9 but also
their very hearts and souls for the Gospel sake. Ah, what need have all
Christians to labor for humility and self-denial, and to walk close with
God according to Divine prescriptions, which will be a very choice and
effectual means to prevent apostatizing.

Madam, In that God has been pleased to be so gracious to you as to keep you
from defiling your garments by walking in by-waies; It is a very clear
demonstration that the groundwork of your Profession has been laid on the
Rock of Ages. And hence it is that your structure stands firm and unshaken in
these stormy times of diversity of opinions (especially in relation to
fundamental truths, (for in points merely circumstantial Christians ought to
bear one with another, and not to be disjoined in affections to each other,
they agreeing in the maine. And hence it is in the first place, that I have
gathered up some encouragement to presume thus upon your Ladyship by this bold
Intrusion. But

Secondly, When I weigh with my self the many and ponderous favors (which so
undeservedly on my part) I have received (under God) at your Lad^ships hands, I
stand convinced that all possible gratitude is due from me unto you. But that
this presumption of mine may (even in the least measure) be esteemed of to such
an end it only rests in your Ladyships Candid Acceptance of it. Which
Acceptance of Yours I most humbly beg, for without it I am at an exceeding
great stand in this particular.

Madam, be pleased therefore I beseech you so far to deny your self as to cast
a favorable aspect upon this poor ensuing piece, which (under God) will be
some supportation to it; for truly it is a weak and poor Babe. But how can it
be otherwise, when the worthless Author of it is not only full of Imbecility,
but is weakness it self? Yet God can make this foresaid Babe a fruitful
Mother of many Children in this our Israel, who may both bless the Lord for
it, and for your self, worthy Madam, for accepting, and to your power
Patronizing the same.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope through Grace
comfort your heart, and establish you in every good word, and work: Thus
prays he who is,

Madam, Your Ladyships humble, most affectionate, and much more obliged servant
till death, THOMAS HILDER.

TO THE Impartial and Judicious READER.
Christian Friend,
OF all the Creatures which Almighty God has Created in this nethermost World,
he has been pleased, in the riches of his mercy, to deal most liberally with
man, for God has not only given him a being, (as he has to all other
Creatures,) but also has provided all things to sweeten, and make his being
here very comfortable. And amongst variety of choice enjoyments he has Created
for Man a meet helper, which is the most precious piece of all others, And
indeed the Quintiscence, Cream, and Crown of all Temporal felicity. Which
blessing God has united to Man, and made one with him by Matrimonial
Conjunction; And has appointed and sanctified means for his entering into, and
enjoying of this happy (and also honorable) Estate, But by reason of that
blindness and ignorance that is in man since the Fall, and by reason of the
corruption and pravity of his nature he does by indirect ways and means seek
the enjoyment of this happiness, yet falls not only short of it, but implungeth
himself into a dead sea, and Gulf of all Crosses, Discomforts, troubles,
vexations, Turbulent cares, distractions, and griefs of all kinds: And passes
through this his Pilgrimage with plenty of tears, sighs, sobs, and extreme
dolorous complaints; With wearings, wastings, and pinings away, finding life it
self a burden until he come to be dissolved into the dust of death. Now (dear
Christian) the means before hinted at to enjoy the happiness first mentioned,
and to avoid the miseries last expressed, these poor, weak, (and perhaps
contemptible) Lines ensuing will point out, though with a palsy hand. But thou
must not despise the day of small things, Zach. 4.10. The less of the
Creature, the more of God. Gods strength is made perfect in our weakness, 2
Cor. 12.9. The excellency of power is still in God, and not in us, 2 Cor. 4.7.
This Treatise was at first intended (next the glory of God) wholly for the
general good. But now in my promulgating of it I do in a special manner
reflect upon my Children, they being in their nonage; But they must not, nor
can they monopolize it to themselves, but it will present it self to thy view,
and tender some service to thee, if thou please to accept of it. (Courteous
Reader) I can easily believe there will be diverse circumstantiall, if not some
substantial Errata's in it, (and some persons of dainty palats will seek to
multiply them, be they more or less (I know where the pricking thorn puts
out, but it must not be pulled in, (for it will disturb none but the gauled
conscience.) Truly, I can aver (and God does know it true) that during almost
all the time I was writing this out from a former Copy, I could neither stand,
sit, or lie, but in very great pain, which caused much distraction of mind.
But gentle Reader, my Request to thee is, that what thou find good in these
lines following, bless the Lord for; Secondly, live up to the life of it in
thy practice. But what resembles thy worthless Author, and speaks him
indigent, not only in the Concrete, but almost in the Abstract, (and yet no
Hyperbole) that I beseech thee to make as candid a construction of as thou
can, and so to cast the mantle of thy love upon it, and censure not, but
pity and pray for him who desires to pray for thee, and should rejoice to
bless God for any benefit that may accrue unto thee by these ensuing Lines.
Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, THOMAS HILDER.

IF thou desire good days to see
Here in this life of Ceare;
Then seek a Wife that does with thee
The Lord desire to fear:
For she will endeavor all her days
That here she does remain,
To quicken thee in holy ways,
That Heaven thou may attain:
And she will still ambitious be,
That thou may comfort find,
And in this life good days may see
According to thy mind.
But such a Wife as will regard
Thy good still as she ought,
For to be found is very hard,
And seldom is she sought.
Would thou this Jewel then obtain,
Worth more than worldly Treasure,
And it enjoy as thy great gain,
And therein take much pleasure?
Then unto God pray thou alone,
Who good Wives does bestow,
Desiring him to give thee one
That does him truly know.
For therein comfort thou may have
In midst of many losses,
As thou go marching to thy grave
Loaded with outward Crosses.
And if the Lord this gift thee give,
Then highly prize the same,
So long as thou one day do live,
And ever praise his Name.
Conjugall Counsel: OR, Seasonable advice, both to unmarried and married
persons, directing the first how to enter into the Marriage estate, and the
other, how to demean themselves in the Christian discharge of all such duties
as that estate of life binds them to; That God may have glory, the Church
edification, and themselves and Families, present and future comfort.
WHen the Omnipotent, Immense, All-powerfull, and All-glorious Jehovah, had
made and perfected that super eminent structure of the Celestial and
Terrestrial world, and all Creatures in general contained in them, Man only
excepted, the Lord did then consult with himself (as we may say) about making
Man in his own Image and likeness, Genesis 1.26. which he accordingly did (and
therein stood the complete felicity of man in a special and peculiar manner)
But in a second place, man was made glorious (though in a way of much
subordination to his foresaid felicity) in that God made him to be a
Microcosmus, viz. a little world, or a lively Emblem of what was before
created, his body being Terrestrial, and his soul (the better part)
Celestial (Oh happy man, had he continued in his Original perfection!)
Wherein we may observe the singular benevolence and beneficence of God to man.
But though these were transcendent degrees of man's happiness, yet this was not
all, for God provides a place for man's residence on Earth, which was the most
pleasant and fertile of the whole Creation here below (and therefore might well
be called Paradise) whereinto God put the man, not only to dress the Garden,
but to enjoy all the fruit thereof, only the Tree of the knowledge of good and
evil excepted, Genesis 2.15, 16.17 But to consummate and complete man's outward
full and sweet enjoyments, the Lord God resolves to make man a meet help,
because he saw it not good for man to be alone, verse 18. which accordingly he
did, for he made woman of a rib taken out of a man, verse 22. which Adam ownes
peculiarly, v. 23. Therefore the Lord joins them together in Marriage, and so
makes them one flesh, v. 24. And then institutes Marriage to be an Ordinance in
his Church to the end of the world; and says, a man shall forsake Father and
Mother and cleave unto his Wife, for they twain shall be one flesh: Which
Institution of Marriage our Savior repeats in Matthew, 1^.5. also in Mark 10.7.
And the Apostle says, Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed
undefiled, Heb. 13.4. From all which places there is a full confirmation, that
God (and that in Man's Innocence) did ordain Matrimony, and that Matrimony is
an holy Ordinance of God.

From which (as has been premised) it does necessarily follow, that they
deserve to lie under abundance of just reproof, that either speak
contemptibly of, or any other ways do abuse this holy Ordinance of the Lord;
but this but by the way.

Marriage we say is an holy Ordinance of God, and if it were entered into
according to Divine directions, and used in a holy manner, it would be (as we
may say) a Heaven upon Earth, full of all outward joy; Nay, an help (being
sanctified of God) to further us in the way to the fruition of glory in Heaven
hereafter. But since the fall of Adam from the state of Innocence, such is the
accursed deprivation of his Posterity, that out of those things which are most
Excellently good in themselves, they will with the Spider suck out venomous
poison, to their own destruction. And indeed, from men and women's unlawful
entering into this (otherwise blessed) state of Life, and their unholy use of
it, does spring, first dishonor to God, who did Institute Marriage; Secondly,
accessarinesse to the sin of those that contemn the Ordinance, and are afraid
to enjoy it, rather choosing an unclean and beastly life. And lastly, an
occasion of others rash and inconsiderate running into this estate, to the
ruin of themselves and Posterity, and the increase of many poor Families: to
the great prejudice of Church and Commonwealth, and diverse other evils are
hence produced.

Four things to be considered of before Marriage.
In the next place we shall (by Gods assistance) come to propose (for preventing
evil and procuring good in the estate of Marriage) three things, very
necessary (if not of absolute necessity) for every man to consider of: (and
that very seriously) before Marriage, as directions about entering into that
estate; Yea, and a fourth consideration to be minded in the theory before hand
too (though the practique part thereof must be duly performed after words, even
in the enjoyment of the Marriage condition:) First, before a man seek to enjoy
the honorable estate of Marriage, he must consider what calling he has to
change his life; Secondly, what ends he ought to propound to himself in
desiring such change. Thirdly, what means he is to use to obtain his desires.
Lastly, he must before Marriage labor to be thoroughly instructed in the duties
that Married persons owe each to other, and both to their Families as they
consist both of Children and Servants.

First, before any man labor to enjoy the marriage condition, he must clearly
see he has a lawful calling thereto; if it be demanded, How shall a man know
that?

I answer, Thou may know it, first, by thy fitness for that condition;
Secondly, by thy unfitness for a single life.

If it be again demanded, how may a man know when he is fit to enter into the
marriage condition?

I answer, There is a threefold fitness which every man must have in some
competent measure, before he use means to change his single life for the
Marriage estate; First, spiritual gifts; Secondly, fitness of Age; Thirdly,
fitness of Estate or outward ability for such a condition.

But if it be again demanded, what need is there of spiritual gifts in such
as enter the Marriage estate?

I answer, there is need, yea, such great need of them, that where they are not
in some good measure, there is no fitness for Marriage; for,

When a man enters into that estate, he becomes the Husband of a Wife, and in
process of time the Father of Children, and the Master of Servants, and these
souls are committed to his Charge, and God has made him a Watchman over them.
Now if souls be not well Governed by such as have the Charge of them, they
will go astray, (if not lost for ever) and if they receive prejudice through
thy in^bility, or neglect, God will require their blood ^t thy hands; Consider
that dreadful threatening Ezekiel. 33.8. I assure thee it will reach full home in
this case.

Now I demand of thee, how will thou, or how can thou govern souls without
spiritual gifts? See then the necessity of them, and labor for them before
hand.

But if any do yet again demand, what spiritual gifts are requisite to enable
a man to govern the souls of such as are committed to him? I answer,

The first spiritual gift requisite to Governors.
The first spiritual gift necessary as before said, is Divine knowledge; A man
had not need to be an Ignorant lot that is to govern others, it cannot but be
supposed that in the best Families there are some know nothing of Jesus Christ;
now our Savior tells us, that if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditch, Mat. 15.14. Peter does require Knowledge in Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.17.
Knowledge is of great use if it be but in the managing some outward calling, it
is of much more use in spiritual employments. David had much knowledge, Psalm.
119.99. and he does well improve it, Psalm. 34.11. to teach and instruct his
Children. God complains his People were destroyed for want of knowledge, Ho^.
4.6. Truly Beloved, those poor souls that live in a Family where the Master
is ignorant cannot gain knowledge in such a Family. Abraham did teach his
Children and Servants, which he could not do without knowledge, Genesis 18.19.
Joshuah will himself and his Family fear the Lord, so that doubtless
himself was a very knowing Christian. Beloved, every Christian is as well a
Prophet in his own house to teach, as a King to rule, or as a Priest to offer
the sacrifice of prayer to God. Private Christians may (observing due rules)
exercise their gifts in their Families, when it is most notorious presumption
to do it in public; but how can they that have no gifts exercise any; besides,
a Family is a Society, and (if Godly) a Church. Now in all societies or
Churches there must be Discipline exercised, and good Government maintained, as
the Apostle does imply, 1 Timothy 3 5. Now an ignorant Householder is fitter to be
governed by others than be a Governor, I desire to mention it, to the shame of
such as are Ignorant (I mean such as are wholly ignorant) of the duties of a
Master of a Family, and yet dare sit down in his place.

A second spiritual gift, etc.
A second spiritual gift, necessary for the governing a Family, is Wisdom, for
Wisdom and Knowledge are two distinct gifts, or graces; for a man may have
Knowledge, 2 Chr. 1.10.
and yet want Wisdom: Solomon prays to the Lord to give him Wisdom and
Knowledge (Wisdom he mentions in the first place) to go out and come in before
that great People, that is, to walk wisely before them and that he might be
able to govern them, and to teach them. I will walk wisely (says David) in
the midst of my house, Psa. 101.2. A man must have Wisdom to walk before his
Wife and Family, in giving good Examples unto them, that they (seeing his wise
and Christian carriage in every thing) may be provoked to follow him; he must
likewise have Wisdom, that he may be able to encourage them that do well in
well-doing, and to reprove them that do ill; he must have Wisdom to moderate
his love, his anger, and all his passions, toward all that are under him. Thus
you see what great need there is (also) of Wisdom, in such men as have the
government of others committed to them.

The third spiritual gift.
The third spiritual gift which Governors must labor after, is patience; There
must be a patient bearing with Infirmities, and great forbearing, when they are
not enormities, and especially when the party is easily convinced, and
reformed. Paul propounds his long-suffering, charity and patience to Timothy
(in 2 Timothy 3.10.) for him to imitate, and practice toward them that God had set
him over. Saint James would have Patience have her perfect work, James 1.4.
the grace of Patience is necessary for a Christian in the general course of
his life; Therefore for domestique Government too; Impatience is a Gangrene,
which eats out the heart and vitals of Love, a man (much more a Christian)
must not give sharp words, much less fall to blows for every trivial offense,
for that will discourage (especially) young people, and dull their spirits; it
will sometimes be a man's discretion to look but with half an eye upon a fault,
yet he may give a loving admonition, which will be sufficient where good
natures are especially to be found; whatever is the duty of a Bishop in
relation to household government, is undoubtedly the duty of every Christian, as
the Master of a Family, and such a one must not be a brawler, but patient, 1 Timothy 3.3.

The fourth and last spiritual gift, The fourth spiritual gift.
which Governors must labor for, is Humility; which gift, or grace, I dare not
lay down as an essential qualification for one empowered over other, but only
as a very necessary concomitant to such a person to help him against vainglory,
pride, and abuse of his place to sin, and so to his own hurt; for there is a
time, says Solomon, Eccles. 8.9. that one man rules over another to his own
hurt; Rehoboam his roughness, and Imperious carriage toward those, over whom
by right of Succession he was to rule as their King, made the Major part of
them to revolt, and cast off their due subjection, to the loss of his own
Honor, and their extreme prejudice both of soul and body, 2 Chro. 10.6, 8,
13, 16, 17. Yet though it be very necessary that a person elevated to a place
of Government over others should be humble, and that for the premised
considerations; This does not tie up the genius of a man in power that he may
not, upon some occasion, (and in his carriage to some persons) behave himself
with much gravity and reservednesse, yea, and with some kind of Majesty too, to
preserve his person and place from contempt and scorn, and from disesteeme
from Children and Servants; ^or, some such Children and Servants there are,
that if they can esp^e cut in their Parents and Masters a spirit of
Puss^lanimity, they will trample all their Commands, and the Authority it self
by which they command, under their swinish feet, which a wise Governor will
labor to prevent, by shunning the occasions of it: Thus we have done with
discussing the three essential gifts, and the fourth (which has been handled
with Caution) being a very necessary one, all which do or may concern every
man, intending the marriage estate; and therefore he must beforehand labor to
have the knowledge of them, which are as you have seen, first, Knowledge;
secondly, Wisdom; thirdly, Patience; and lastly, Humility: And so we proceed
to the consideration of the second qualication fitting for the Marriage
condition.

The second qualification considerable on the first head.
The second qualification to be considered of beforehand, is fitness of Age;
None can be thought fit for Marriage in None-age, there must be Maturity and
ripenesse-both in body and mind for that Estate, or else the entrance into it
is unlawful; The gifts of mind before mentioned cannot be expected in Youths
and Children; There cannot be prudence to manage a Calling to bring
maintenance in by it such; such cannot be profitable in Church not Common
wealth. Yea, Nature does teach us, that there is a deficiency in all persons
until they be come to some reasonable Age, to perform some duties that the
Marriage condition requires. Juda gave Tamar a fair Account why at present he
would not give Shelah to her in the Marriage Bed; Which was because he was not
grown, (but it was his sin that he did it not when he was fit for that
condition,) Genesis 38.11. Isaac was forty years old when he marries Rebeccah,
Genesis 25.20. But in this Age of the World it is not convenient to stay so long
before change of our conditions, for few that so do, do enjoy that great
blessing of living to see their Children to be grown to some maturity, settled
in some good Calling, and bestowed in Marriage, much less to see their
Childrens Children, which is a blessing God promises to his people, Psalm.
128.6. Yet it is undeniable that there must be (as we said) a ripeness of Age
before Marriage: But we proceed no further in this particular in this place,
because we shall have an occasion to fall upon it again in another.

The third and last qualification, The third qualification fitting for Marriage
from the first head.
or consideration before Marriage, is, to see a fitness in Estate for such a
condition of life. The Marriage estate brings with it great Charge and Expense,
therefore, before this fall upon a man, he had need to see some probable ways
and means to carry him thorough all. A man will not take a chargeable journey
but he will put money in his purse to supply his necessities, unless he know
he shall meet with supplies by the way; so in this case, a discreet Christian
will not Marry until he can comfortably conclude that his present, or future
means will be sufficient to keep him from poverty, pinching poverty, and
destruction, and from lying as a burden on others, that place in Romans 12. the
latter end of the 17. verse may be applicable here: Provide things honest in
the sight of all men; He that does not provide for his own, especially such as
are of his own Family, has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Jacob took care for his own Family, Genesis 30.30. But some may say,
that was after, not only his Marriages, but after he had many Children;
Therefore when his condition becomes mine I will take the like care, but it may
be I shall never have any Chargeable Family. But for answer, know, that if thy
condition did run parallel with his, before, and at the time of Marriage, thou
needst take no great care beforehand; for, first his Father was exceeding
rich, and had but two Children, (and no doubt but that Jacob had a large
portion in due time of his Fathers estate, though the Holy Ghost mention no
such thing;) but secondly, Jacob married with a very wealthy Family, and his
Father in Law had reason to maintain him and his Charge, and that liberally,
when Jacob was no way spating in his great pains and care to increase Labans
estate, which indeed Laban himself does acknowledge. Genesis 39.27. When the
Servant of Abraham was to go to Padan Aram, to treat about a Marriage for
Isaac his Masters Son, it is very observable, That in the first place he makes
a Narrative to Bethuel and Laban of his Masters plentiful estate, and then
comes to the business of the desired Marriage, he having implicitly made it
appear, that his young Master was well provided for to maintain a Wife, and
any Charge God should cast on him, Genesis 24.35. Doubtless there is much to be
minded in the Lords own method this way; We know God did plentifully provide
for Adam and Eve before they were (and then surely before their Marriage) But
these things premised occasions a question to be propounded, and that is,
Whether a man may not Marry until he have Lands, or stock in Money, or in
Goods and Chattels? I answer, that in case a man have neither of them, yet if
God have given him an honest Calling, and a Heart to depend upon Divine
providence in the use of lawful means, and in special find himself (through
free grace) to have an interest in the promises of God for all good things; He
may conclude his call to Marriage is as clear as the call of any person in the
world, upon his yearly revenue and stock in any kind, for such a man shall have
for necessity, if not for delight, (except the Lord see a straight and wanting
condition best, in relation to his own glory, and such a poor man's present
good, and eternal happiness.) God has promised, the hand of the diligent
shall make rich, Pro. 10.4. and that he that labors shall be filled with
bread, Pro. 12.11. God will give his Beloved plenty with quiet sleep, Psalm.
127.2. God tells Abraham he was a God all-sufficient: only bids him walk
before him and be upright, Genesis 17.1. First seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof (says Christ) and all other things shall be administered
to you, Mat. 6.33. read that place in Heb. 13.5. to all which Promises there
might be a large addition, if necessary, only let me here add that of Solomon,
Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with
it; where note, that these outward things are called blessings, (and indeed so
they are) which does imply, that we must beg them at the hand of God by Prayer,
and indeed God tells us as much, Ezekiel. 36.37. and if you mind that Chapter, you
shall find that temporal things (and of those we treat) as well as spiritual
are there promised; but if you would speed when you ask these blessings, take
heed you regard not wickedness in your hearts, for if you do, God will not
hear you Secondly, take heed you turn not your ears from hearing the Law of
God, for if you do, your Prayers shall be abominable, Pro. 27.9. Thirdly,
beware thou ask not these blessings to consume them on thy lusts, for if you
do, you are like to miss of them, James 4.2 3. Fourthly, be sure thou ask no
outward thing of God but with a willingness to be denied, if he think it
best. Its an easy thing for such poor Ignorant Creatures as we are to be much
mistaken about the nature of outward blessings, and the fittest seasons for God
to bestow, and we to receive them. But the Lord cannot be mistaken. Most
excellent to this purpose is the saying of Luther, upon Psalm. 1^0.1. God (says
he) in that he is good can give nothing but tha^ which is good, but we many
times do crave that thing which is not good indeed, but seems so to us. Thus
Luther. Also Bernard is singular this way: Brethren (says he) as concerning
your Prayers have no doubt, but assure your selves, that as soon as the word
passes out of your Mouth it is Written and Registered in Heaven, in the
presence and sight of God, and either it shall be done as ye have asked, or
else it is expedient not to be done. Thus far Bernard likewise. Take heed, be
not inordinate, but easily denied of God; ask no outward things, but on
condition God see it expedient to bestow them, for if thou will not be denied,
thou may have the seeming sweet meat, but the real sour ^ace Rachel had,
when she must have Children or dye, Genesis 30.1. but mind the issue of it, Genesis
35.16, 17, 18, 19. And so the Children of Israel must have flesh, Number. 11.4, 5,
6. They cannot be satisfied without it; but they had it (as one well said) with
a vengeance, as appears in the 31, 32, and 33. verses of this Chapter. Lastly,
labor to promote the worship of God to thy power, for else thy estate may be
deplorable enough, Hag. 1.6. But if it should be the good pleasure of the Lord
to exercise thee with seeming want, yet, if he be also pleased to sanctify
such a condition to thee, thou have that which is more then equivalent to all
outward mercies in the world; Beloved, if thou can live upon God, and enjoy a
holy contentation in thy soul in the want of outward things thou art one of
the richest men on this side Heaven, labor then, I say, to have an interest in
God, in and through Christ. Thus I hope I have put no discouragements on thee
to stave thee off from taking the benefit and comfort of Marriage, for want of
Lands or stock in any kind, but I rather desire thee to take it, especially if
thou can not with comfort to thy body, and safety to thy soul, contain thy
self longer in the single life, which brings me to the next particular, which
is the second demonstration of a lawful call to Marriage.

A second and clear ground for Marriage.
A second, and clear ground, demonstrating a man's call to enter into the
Marriage life, is, when the Lord is pleased to deny him the gift of chastity
and continency (for the gift of chastity is given of God, to whom he please,
and when he please, and denied as he thinks fit) for when it is wanting, a man
is disabled to keep his soul and body for to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and for his residence, 1 Cor. 6.19. being carried away with noisome lusts, by
beastly and impure affections: Now when thou art in this condition it is thy
sin if thou neglect any good opportunity to help thy self by entering into the
state of Marriage, for it is one kind of grieving the spirit, when he would
make choice of thy body to live in, and thou do baracado up thy heart against
him, by nourishing uncleanness in thee, whereby thou do invite the Devil to
possess thee, and do set open the doors of thy heart to receive him, to
rule in thee, as in his own Vassal, to Gods dishonor, and thy own ruin, it
is time I say, for thee then to look about thee, and to use that remedy which
God has sanctified and appointed for thy spiritual and corporal benefit; To
avoid Fornication let (says the Apostle) every man have his own wife, etc. 1
Cor. 7.2. it is better to marry than to burn by carnal Lusts, and fleshly
concupiscence. This may suffice to inform thee of thy call to Marriage; first,
by thy fitness for that Estate; secondly, thy unfitness for the single life.

It will in the next place be necessary to consider what ends thou must aim at
in desiring the marriage Estate, and they are three in special; First, the
glory of God in the propagating of his Church. Secondly, The mortifying (not
satisfying) thy own corruptions. Thirdly, The mutual comfort which that Estate
does afford both to man and wife.

The first and principal end every man is to aim at in his desiring Marriage,
The first end of Marriage.
is (I say) Gods glory in the propagating of his Church; That there may be a
certain number of men and women to glorify God by their holy lives unto the
end of the world, which without Marriage cannot be expected. There may be (I
confess) an unclean Generation of Men and Women to the end of Time without
Marriage, but the Lord would have a godly seed preserved, Mal. 2.15. Even such
a seed as may glorify God in this life, and be everlastingly glorified in the
world to come. If then the propagating of Gods Church ought to be the chiefest
thing we are to aim at in our desiring the Estate of Marriage, (which neither
Men nor Angels can deny) Then by the way, it may be a word of just reproof to
many Men and Women that are afraid of Marriage lest they should have Children;
as also of diverse who are married, that use all means possible to prevent
great increase of Children: But let these, both married, and unmarried, know,
that they have a diabolical spirit, they would counter-worke God if possible,
and frustrate his holy aims by their impure principles; this their carriage
(so far as they approve of it) does evidently declare, they are wholly
self-seekers; but let them seek for grounds of comfort where they can, I know
not where, nor from whence they can expect it: And as for you who are married,
and use means to frustrate the Lords own principal end in instituting of
Marriage; I beseech you seriously to mind the sin, and punishment of a bird of
your own feather, (viz) Onan, Genesis 38.9, 10. Now what if the Lord never since
punished the same sin in the same kind, dare you conclude, that God hates not
such a sin now as he then did? I dare more safely conclude, that God hates your
groundless presumption, and were your eyes but open you might fear the Lord
has punished you long ago with a heavy punishment, even with hardness of
heart, and wilful Impenitency, which is far worse than all temporal
punishment in the world; (and doubtless none can conclude infallibly that
Onans punishment was more than temporal.) But some may perhaps say, We are not
against having of Children, we much desire to see the fruit of our own Bodies:
But we are afraid indeed of having many, lest we should not be able to put
bread into their mouths. Truly, let me tell thee, that if thy Children were
created by thee, and so none of Gods Creatures, (take this as spoken only by
way of supposition) there would no bread be found on Earth, nor Manna from
Heaven, neither Terrestrial, nor Celestial means to preserve them from
perishing (and that immediately) both in their souls and bodies; for God would
take no care for them, and thou could take none: But poor soul I know, that
thy Children being as much Gods Creatures as thy self, or as the Angels in
Heaven, thou must labor (even in relation to thy Children) to have faith in
God, as well in this case, as Christ exhorted his Disciples in another, Mark.
11.22. God gives the beast his food, and to the young Ravens when they cry,
Psalm. 147.9. Naturalists do observe, that when the old Raven has hatched her
Eggs, and that the Young come forth, they being for ten days covered with a
kind of white downy feathers, the old one ownes them not, takes no pains to
feed them till this white down be off and the black feathers put forth, and
they say, that during those ten days (that the old one neglects them) the Lord
feeds them with the influence of the Air, but let that pass, we know God
feeds not only the young Ravens, but the old too; consider further that God
feeds the Fowls of the Air, (that is, all the Fowls,) Mat. 6.26. Read the
place and mark the Inference by way of Interrogation; and Interrogations (we
say) imply sometimes the strongest Negations: and sometimes the clearest
Affirmations, the last is here implied. God clothes the Lillies of the field,
Mat. 6.28, 29, 30. pray mind the Inference there too; We sometimes use a choice
Proverb, God never makes mouths but he provides meat; Oh that we could well
improve this Proverb to a more full relying on God than we ever attained to, to
this day. Beloved, let me tell you, you cannot distractingly care for your
selves, or for your Children, but you question either the Attributes of God, or
your Interest in him; Do you doubt whether God be Omnipotent, and so able to do
you and yours good? Or his willingness, or faithfulness to perform his
promises? Truly, if you do you infinitely derogate from God, and much provoke
him; Mind the sin of the Israelites, can God prepare a Table in the
Wilderness? Psalm. 78.19, 20, 21. Mind also the sad effects of this
God-provoking sin. Truly, I shall tell thee, (and I beseech thee to consider
what I say) Thou can as well keep one hundred Children as one, (I know this
is a Paradox,) But thou must know, thou can not keep one (to speak
properly) no not thy self, for thou and thine, yea, and all the Creatures in
the world have their allowance from God, and are kept at his Table (as we may
say) and at his Charge; The Lord has a great Family, but were it ten thousand
times bigger, he has such an inexhausted storehouse of provision of all
kinds, that not one of them could want; ease thy self then of thy cares (I
mean distracting, and distrustful cares) and cast them upon God, who cares
for thee, 1 Pet. 5.7. I am God all-sufficient, (says the Lord to Abraham) walk
before me and be upright; Do thou but labor to walk before God and to be
upright, and then thou may act faith on Gods Al-sufficiency to do good to,
and for thee and thine. Let me yet a little further argue with thee about this
particular; Thou say (in effect) thou art afraid that if thou should have
many Children they would undo thee; How can this be? when the Lord affirms
Children to be a blessing; mind these two places, first, Psalm. 127.5. where the
Holy Ghost speaking of Children, says, Blessed is the man who has his quiver
full of them; Secondly, Psalm. 128. Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist) that
fears the Lord, and walks in his way; (But how is he blessed?) truly, this
is one part of his blessedness, that his Wife shall be like a fruitful Vine,
and his Children like Olive branches round about his Table, Lothus (says he)
shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord, v. 3, 4. Children you see then
are a blessing; Nay, many Children are a blessing; yea, they are as so many
several blessings. Now to apply this, what a preposterous thing is this for
thee to say, many Children will undo thee; Will blessings undo any? It is
very Incongruous to speak or think so; it is impossible that blessings, as
they are blessings, can hurt, much less undo any; I confess the abuse of
blessings may undo thee, but this is per accidens, and springs from thy self;
it is not the having many Children that can undo thee, but thy abuse of so
rich a blessing; there is no blessings in the world enjoyed by any, but if they
are unsanctified they will undo those that have the fruition of them; I have
been the longer in this point, because distrust of the Lords providence in
general, (but more especially) relating to means for maintenance of many
Children is grown to be an Epidemicall disease, overspreading the face of the
Christian World. Ah, truly let me say, that thou, whosoever thou art, and my
self too, should not be ashamed to take shame for this exceeding vile sin; Be
then in the fear of God convinced, that the propagating of the Church in the
procreation of Children was an essential, and principal end why God did
ordain Marriage, and that which was the Lords end must be thy aim: and this
shall suffice for this particular.

The second end of Marriage.
The second end we are to aim at in desisiring Marriage, is, the subduing our
corruptions and base lusts, especially when we find them to be predominant;
There is no man in this life but his Regeneration is only in part;
(Sanctification here is at best but inchoate, in Heaven it shall be
consummated) and therefore is obnoxious to temptations as in all kinds (having
the seed of all sins in him) so to the sin of uncleanness in particular; Yet
it must be granted, that such men as do enjoy this holy Ordinance of Marriage
are more free from the concupiscence of the flesh (especially the violence of
them) than they ordinarily are who enjoy not this blessed help. And the Apostle
does intimate as much, when he says, To avoid fornication let every man have
his own Wife, and every woman her own Husband, 1 Cor. 7.2. (which place to the
like occasion was mentioned before, though on another head) and in ver. 8, 9.
he adds, if the unmarried cannot contain let them marry, and backs his
exhortation with a reason (viz) it is better to marry than to burn; it is the
duty of every one to labor to preserve themselves pure and chaste Virgins unto
Christ, which that person cannot do who has an impure heart, though free from
the acts of uncleanness. He that looks on a woman to lust after her has
committed Adultery in his heart, says our Savior, Mat. 5.28. Christ also
makes the heart the proper seat and receptacle of Adultery and Fornication, Mat
15.19. Now for this heart-defilement every soul has cause, not only to be
humbled, but also thankfully to make use of the remedy prescribed of God
against the same. When our Savior reproves divorce between Man and Wife but
in case of Fornication, and the sin of those that are justly divorced if they
marry, the sin also of those who marry such, his Disciples say, if the case be
so, it is not good to marry; Our Savior Answers, All men cannot receive this
saying save those to whom it is given, Mat. 19.11. That is to say, all men
cannot (nay, no man can) at pleasure attain this gift of Chastity (for it is
the gift of God) Therefore such to whom the Lord denies it ought to take the
help of Marriage. But if the end of Men's Marrying be rather to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh than to subdue the same, they may justly fear themselves as
persons never like to be gainers by such conjunctions, but to have the fire of
lust so enkindled in their impure Natures, as that Chastity shall be made but
combustible matter to be wholly consumed thereby, and so made unsufferable
losers, which is a Judgment most dreadful; let therefore the destruction and
extirpation of impure-selfe be sincerely thy aim, and endeavor in seeking the
Marriage condition. We have done with this second end of Marriage, and proceed
to the last.

The last end we are to aim at in desiring Marriage, is, comfortable Society,
to enjoy a solid, sweet, and bosom Companion; in which Estate (for the most
part) it may be expected man is a sociable Creature, and therefore God would not
have him live alone, but creates him a meet helper, Genesis 2.18. And Solomon
says, Two are better than one, Eccl. 4.9. Truly, they speak most profanely,
and are every way unworthy of the comfort that Marriage does afford, that say,
A woman is a necessary evil, we may rather say she is a singular and necessary
Good; yet understand she is only so, when she answers the end God made her for,
that is, a meet helper, (and it is such a one that in the sequel of this small
Treatise I shall endeavor to put thee on, and stir thee up to seek) such a
one will fit (as we say) for every occasion, both in prosperity and adversity:
in sickness and health. Next the glory of God, she will spend and be spent for
the good of thee and thine; she will help bear thy burdens in every kind, she
will sympathize and condole with thee in all thy sufferings: In her bosom
there is a passage to receive in any secrets thou shall think fit to impart,
but no vent to let them out at to thy danger or disgrace; she will apply her
self, and imply her parts of grace to help thee with spiritual Cordials in
times of spiritual desertion; she will labor to further thee in the Religious
and Civil government of thy Family, both of Children and Servants. She will be
ready to draw with thee (as a true Yoak-fellow) in the plow of thy Calling, to
the utmost of her knowledge and strength with all dexterity: She will with much
frugality manage thy Family-expence; She will labor to help thee against thy
infirmities, to prevent them if possible, however to conceal them; She will
labor to comfort thee in times of sorrow and losses; Isaac lost a dear,
precious, and tenderhearted Mother, and no doubt but he was very sensible of
his loss, and laid it sadly to heart, yet betaking himself to a Wife, who was
indeed a very gracious Woman, it is said, he was comforted after his Mothers
death, Genesis 24.67. Lastly she will put forth her self to her utter most power
with much pains of body, and with much and enlarged, dear, and tender
Affections of heart to help thee in times of loss o^ health, and when thou
lie conflicting with grievous pains, and burdensome (and perhaps loathsome)
diseases; I have read in Reverend Mr Bolton, his general directions for^
comfortable walking with God; (A Treatis^ worth the weight of it in Gold) in
page 252 A Narrative (which was borrowed from Vives) of a president in this
kind, (to which I desire to refer thee) which is so singular that the whole
world (I am confident) cannot produc^ any that ever did out-goe her in the
discharg^ of this duty. Beloved in Christ, I am so taken up in my affections in
walking in this Garden of pleasure and profit, (I had almost said i^ Paradise)
that I should not be able to leave i^ (and that for thy sake) until I had
gathere^ more flowers to bind together to present the^ with, to enamour thee to
labor to gain a part therein. Yet because when thou shall take notice of the
duty the Wife does owe to the Husband, (which so far as she is a meet helpe^
she will endeavor to discharge) I presum^ thou will be able to add to this
Nosegay, and ^ doubt not but they will be persuasive arguments to carry thy
affections (in seasonabl^ time) that way, and in the mean time, mak^ thee
speak with much reverence of this blessed Ordinance of God. I shall here
(having ^easonable occasion) note by the way, That from this last particular,
(viz.) that comfortable ^ociety is one end that persons may aim at in
Marriage, does appear ground sufficient to ^ustifie the Marriage of Ancient
persons, and ^uch as have over-lived the years for genera^ion, though they
cannot in some way be means of increasing the Church, yet they may use any
means to live comfortably in the Church.

If you should demand the question of Ancient Married persons, whether they
find the Marriage estate comfortable to them in their old Age or not? They
would readily return you an Affirmative Answer, that if God should ^ake away
either of them, that the surviver could not live with comfort. When God took
away old Sarah by death from old Abraham, Genesis 23.2.
^he mourned and wept for parting with her; which does imply he had comfort in
her, though he could have no Children by her; but this being a mere unnecessary
Nicety we shall ^pend no more words about it, and shall also ^desist from
further prosecuting the ends to be ^imed at in Marriage, which you may perceive
to be three; first, the glory of God in the propagating his Church; Secondly,
the subduing our corruptions and fleshly lusts; Lastly, the enjoyment of
comfortable society.

We are in the next place to come to consider some things of the means we are
to use to obtain a meet helper. The first means to obtain a good wife.
The first means to drive on so precious a design by, as the gaining a meet
helper, is prayer; The Lord takes it as his own prerogative in a special
manner to be the bestower of good Wives. House and Riches are the Inheritance
of the Fathers, but a virtuous Wife is the gift of God, Pro. 19.14. Beloved in
the Lord, there is no gift the Lord bestows but is richly worth asking; and
how can we ask but by Prayer? It is a mercy that God will let us know where a
mercy is lodged: Now this mercy as well as others is lodged in Heaven, Every
good gift, and every perfect giving is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17. Faithful Prayer has a long Arm, it can reach
from Earth to Heaven; labor then to improve prayer aright for the obtaining
this blessing, and wait upon God in the use of other means, and doubt not of
good speed; I am very confident, that these mercies are fullest of juice that
are given us from Heaven, as in answer to faithful prayer; how full of
splendour will thy Wife be in thy eye when thou look on her as given from
Heaven? And by the way let me add, that happy are those Wives that are
obtained by the faithful prayers of their Husbands: For they shall be best
beloved, and most prized, because they are received by their Husbands as a
love-token sent them from Heaven. The Servant of Abraham was well acquainted
with the means to gain a good Wife for his Masters Son; Ask some how they
come by such and such a thing, and they will tell you they got it with a silver
hook, and such a hook they have that will bring them any thing in, (if you
will believe them.) But this godly servant was furnished with silver and gold
enough to make use of a hook or hooks to have driven on his design by, but
he was better furnished than so, son he had the gracious hook of Prayer, and
with that he penetrates Heaven, and there lies he tugging till he had obtained
the mercy of a good Wife, and meet helper for his young Master. The same course
must thou take for to obtain this mercy for thy self; and thou may receive
encouragement to walk first in this way of seeking God by prayer, before any
other means be used, if thou will but take a survey diligently of the blessed
event the servant of Abraham had of his going to God for direction in this
case: And so a blessing on his journey. As he that takes a wife without consent
of Parents can look for no portion with her; so be sure that he that takes a
wife without the Lords consent (as he does in a sense that begs her not of him
by prayer, (can look for no comfort, and comfort is the portion which God
gives with his Daughters; nay, on the contrary, such a man may expect
discomfort instead of comfort, and a curse instead of a blessing. God knows how
to meet with thee, and to cause all thy Gourds of comfort to wither; make thy
self certain of this, That is, if thou do neglect the performance of this duty
of seeking God by prayer for a good Wife, that except thou be afterward deeply
humbled for this sin, the Marriage condition shall not be sanctified to thee,
and if not, thou were better a thousand times not live in that Estate of life;
for thou can not expect so much as one Honey Month, (as we say) but many
months and years of Gall and Wormwood. We sometimes advise our friends that
they take heed they do not marry in have, lest they repent at leisure, Truly,
they make too much haste to marry that forget (much more slight) seeking God
for direction, and a blessing this way, therefore they shall have cause enough
to repent; (but God grant they may repent aright, that the curse may be turned
into a blessing.) We have done with the first means we must use to obtain a
good Wife, that is, prayer.

The second means to obtain this desirable blessing, is, to look at such
things in the choice of a Wife which makes her a good Wife, and a meet helper.

Thou will say, what things are they? (or what particulars) that a man ought to
look on in a woman as fitting her to be a good Wife, and meet helper?

I answer, there may be some things inward, and some things outward making her
such, if she enjoy them, or if not, the contrary.

If it be demanded, what those inward qualifications be that make a woman a
meet helper? The first qualification of a good wife.
I answer, The first is Grace, or the manifestation of the true fear of God in
the heart, by the fruits of holiness in the life; without this it is not
possible that a woman can be a meet helper; for if she be unable (as an
instrument) to contribute something to make supplies to the necessities of the
best part of a man, (that is, the soul;) How can she be a meet helper? But a
graceless Wife is unable to contribute the least mite this way, therefore she
can be no meet helper. Be not (says the Apostle) unequally yoaked with
Infidels, 2 Cor. 6.14. which in the verses following he labors to amplify;
There can be no spiritual society between a gracious and ungracious spirit.
The Apostle speaks of Marrying in the Lord. The Wife is bound by the Law
(says the Apostle) as long as her Husband lives: but if her Husband be dead
she is at liberty to marry whom she will, only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. And to
be joined in holy wedlock to a gracious person, is to marry in the Lord. The
Apostle, in laboring to maintain his own, and his fellow Apostles privileges
at large, particularizeth his, and their liberty to marry. Have we not power to
lead about a Sister, a Wife, etc. power they had to marry, but his Wife must be
a Sister, 1 Cor. 9.5. In the old world it was one of the principal sins that
did provoke God to drown the Inhabitants thereof, that the Sons of God (and
they were the godly men of that time) did marry with the Daughters of men,
(that is, ungodly persons,) Genesis 6.2. David tells us, that all his delight was
in the Saints, even in those that did excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.3. It was the
sin of Solomon that he took Idolatrous Wives, which was the cause of sad
judgments spiritual and temporal on him; his Wives drew away his heart from
God to their false Gods, which was a spiritual judgment: And for his
idolatrous Marriages, and his Idolatry God divides his Kingdom, and leaves but
a small fag of it to him in his Sons days, which was a temporal judgment, 1
King. 11. to the end of the 11. verse. Nay, for his sins (whereof ungodly
Marriages was a special one,) it has been disputable by many good Divines,
whether he were saved or not? though the most Orthodoxe do conclude
affirmatively; and they ground their Charity first upon that place, Neh. 13.26.
where he is said to be beloved of his God (And whom God loves, he loves to
the end, Joh. 13.1.) Their second ground is, that he was a Penman of Scripture,
and such are called Holy men of God, 2 Pet. 1. ult. from whence they conclude
he could not perish, for God will not damn holy ones. But we may safely
conclude, that this sin was very fearful; Sampson must have his Dalilah to
dally with as a companion for his Bed, but it cost him the loss of his eyes
first, and then of his life and limbs, he had a bad and sad portion with her.
By the way, we may see they are much deceived, that think it may be lawful
for a godly man to marry with a profane Wife, even in hopes to be a means to
convert her; I grant, that sometimes it pleases God to honor the believing
Husband, or believing Wife to be an Instrument to convert the unbeliever: But
for any to presume of this at the time of woing, or Wedding the Party opposite
to the ways of God, is a groundless presumption; But were she tractable to
good Counsel, and a diligent frequenter of the means of Grace, there might be
some footing for hope: But if not, fear having any society with her, keep thy
self at more than staves length from her, for she is more like to pervert thee
than thou art like to convert her. Solomon, whom we mentioned before, 1 King.
11.9.
was better fenced against the danger of such temptations than thou art; for
God had appeared unto him twice, which any good heart would have concluded,
would so have conjoined him to God, and to his Worship, that he would never
have made so much as a seeme-separation from God; yet we see, that in the day
of his temptation he fell back and started from God like a broken bow. Beloved,
let me then tell thee, that thou have no cause to presume of doing such a
person good who is averse from God, but of fear of thy own steadfastness, 1
King. 21.25.
evil wives do many times make good men bad, but always bad men worse; a very
Jade will draw more downhill than many good Horses will be able to draw up
again: A carnal Wife will draw a man further from God, than many good
Christians with all their Exhortations, reproves, and good Counsels will be
able to regaine back. Beloved, it is then but need for thee to make grace the
object of thy love, that thou may be guarded against those dangers thou art
other wise like to be environed with, even of being drawn from God, and the
ways of his grace. Secondly, thou must make grace the Object of thy love in
regard of the helps thou shall find by a woman of a gracious spirit to further
thee in thy holy profession; She will be a means to rouse thee up against
security and worldly mindedness; She will be a means of strengthening thy
weak faith, and to help thee against all diffidence and doubtings, Judge.
13.22, 23. She will be a means to stir thee up to love and good works; She
will be a means to help thee in the growth of grace here, and so a means of
thy happiness hereafter; (Here are more flowers to add to thy begun-Nosegay
in the last end of Marriage) bind them together and they will be very
Odoriferous to please thy senses. Thirdly, thou have need to make grace the
Object of thy love in choosing a Wife, as thou desire thy love should hold out
to the end; For if thou make Riches the Object of thy love, they may be lost,
they are subject to many casualties. Riches have wings like an Eagle and may
fly away, Prove. 23.5. and when they are gone thy love will fly after. If thou
make beauty the Object of thy love, that may vanish away, for favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vanity, Prove. 31.30. Beauty may be taken away by
sickness, or by some accidental blow in the face, by loss of an Eye, by a
Canker in the Nose, or some other means, and if once gone, love will go too.
If thou make Person the Object of thy love, that may suffer much detriment,
crookedness may grow in a body formerly straight, such a comely body may come
to want a Leg or an Arm, which will be a blemish to it; Now Person being
defective, love will be the same. If thou make hope of Honor the Object of thy
love, Thy wives great Kindred may fail of power to advance thee, nay of power
to hold up themselves; (we want not plentiful experience of this:) Or they may
be prejudiced against thee and frustrate thy expectations, and make thee see
too late that thou have but built Castles in the Air to depend on them, so all
hopes that way being lost, thy love will be lost too. Now when thy love has
fetched its last gasp, it may be, happy were it for thee (in some sense) if
thou and thy love might be buried both in one grave, for after love is once
departed, what will, or can thy life be but a condition of grief and
heart-sorrow, and great coffeehouse, that thou should have a wife whom
thou can take no pleasure in, and would with all thy heart part with, and
yet it may be thou shall not part with her until death cut thee off first. But
if thou make Grace the Object of thy love, (and withal, art no whit mistaken,
but thou find it to be in the heart of thy wife in deed, and in truth;) Then
as grace does increase, so thy love will abound, but grace cannot but increase
continually, therefore love will multiply in thy heart exceedingly. Now as thou
desire to be kept from Apostasy, or falling from God, and the ways of his
grace: And as thou desire to be helped forward in all Christian Counsels, and
good ways: And as thou do desire to keep life in thy love, and to increase
therein, to thy own comfort, and the comfort of thy wife, so let it be thy
care, in the fear of God, to look to thy own heart, that it deceive thee not,
but that thou do indeed make Grace the Object of thy love in the choice of
thy wife; then thou may certainly expect by the blessing of God much comfort
in such a Yoak-fellow in all thy wants of wealth, or health of soul or body,
and may whilst thou enjoyest her begin to write encomiums of her, and when
she is dead, Gen 35.19, 20.
then with Jacob set up a pillar upon her Grave, and perhaps may truly say,
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all; for favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall
be praised: Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise
her in the Gates. Here we shall turn in and proceed no further in the
amplification of the first inward qualification of a good wife.

The second qualification of a good wife.
In the second place, the chief qualification of a good wife (next saving
Grace) is sweet disposition of Nature, that she be of a quiet and peaceable
spirit; for it is much to be bewailed, that in diverse men and women, that we
doubt not in the least measure but that they are very gracious, and desire to
prove their souls to God in all ways of holiness, yet are of bad Natures,
and themselves cannot but see it, and I doubt not but they desire to bewail it
before God in secret, and yet cannot attain to have their Corruptions in this
kind mortified in any comfortable way; yet it must be granted, that such
persons are not (many times) comfortable Consorts; And therefore thou that art
to make choice of a wife have cause enough to endeavor to avoid laying a
Conjugall tie upon thy self, to live and dye with such a woman, though
otherwise one of good parts. If a woman be of churlish nature, and of cross
dispositons in the abstract, she will cast such a cool damp on her Husbands
love, as may not only chill, but kill it; whereby (though she may be a sad
sufferer her self) she will abundantly prejudice her Husband in his comforts,
and may shorten his days: For a man cannot live that cannot love; the love of
any thing gives contentment to the mind to enjoy the same. A cross and tarte
nature in a wife un-wifes her, (as I may say) for she that is not a meet
helper, is either not a wife, or else a very imperfect one; for how can she be
said to be a wife that is not a meet helper, who is unfit for comfortable
society? but such a wife is as sharp and bitter, touchy and tangue by nature,
will not (ordinarily) be sociable, loving, kind, and amiable in her carriages
and deportments to her Husband; and does it not concern thee to avoid her in
thy choice of a wife, for such a woman as we speak of will not make a good
Wife, nor good Mother, nor good Dame, or Mistress, she will not be good in any
relation, (I mean, in the latter part of this discourse, where an untoward
nature is predominant in a woman.) Solomon says, It is is better to dwell in a
corner of the house top, than with a brawling woman in a wide house, Prove.
21.9. He also says, The contentions of a wife are a continual dropping, Pro.
19.13. A continual dropping will wear, wast, and consume stone, (as
observation will prove). And truly, this dropping from a contentious wife will
wear, waste, and consume, not only all the comforts that her Husband otherwise
might have in her, but his skin, flesh, bone, marrow, and vital spirits, and
all in time. The Apostle tells us, that a meek and quiet spirit in a woman is
of great price with God, 1 Pet. 3.4. And so it is doubtless with every
rational man; therefore as thou would avoid many inconveniences in the
Marriage Estate, and wear the comforts of it as a Crown of all temporal
felicity: So labor to gain a woman of sweet natural dispositions, of a very
Amiable and Affable carriage, of a meek and quiet spirit, the happiness
whereof will be permanent.

In the next place we shall proceed (by the help of God) to some outward (yet
very necessary) qualifications for thee to pitch thy thoughts on, and to labor
to obtain, that so thou may lay a good groundwork to prevent too late
Repentance in thee for thy Rashness.

The third qualification.
In the third place, to make an addition to thy comforts in the Marriage
Estate, be very careful in thy Choice to satisfy thine Eye, both in the
Person and Favor of such a One as thou would enjoy for thy Consort, both in
Bed, and at Board, (as we say) And in this thou must be somewhat curious.
Beloved, there is a threefold Curiosity; First, there is an unnecessary
Curiosity; thou may be nice, and this is fleshly and carnal, and may come
within just suspicion of that sin of making provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. Secondly, there is a Prudentiall Curiosity, and
that is, when a man lays a groundwork of Contentation beforehand (yet
therein observing a Mediocrity too) for the future. Thirdly, there is a
conscientious Curiosity; and that is when a Christian labors to prevent
temptations, and so to circumvent his spiritual Adversaries. Now the first,
that is, Unnecessary Curiosity is to be condemned, but the other two to be
commended, for they provide for purity of heart and life, as also for
perpetuating love and sweet society. First, it provides for purity, etc. and
prevents the contrary; for by undeniable consequence it will follow, That he
who does not rejoice in the Wife of his Youth; and he whose Wife is not to him
as a loving Hind and pleasant Roe, will be ravished with a strange woman, and
embrace the bosom of a stranger, Prove. 5.18, 19, 20. Rebecca was beautiful
and fair, Genesis 26.7. And her Husband was taken therewith, for he could not
forbear dalliance with her when it was dangerous to his life, ver. 8, 9. Which
strength of his affections to her being so abundantly satisfied with her
beauty; Divines render as a reason, that he only, of all the Patriarchs, was
preserved from the sin of Polygamy; strength of affections between married
persons is a sovereign antidote against all uncleanness; And how can strength
of Affections be expected where there is not satisfaction in each others
persons? But where there is, there Temporal mercies become spiritual
advantages; then judge, whether it be not (under this maine consideration) of
very great concernment to mind meeting with both person and favor in such a
one as thou desire to wed: But in a second place (yet in a way of
subordination to the former) this satisfaction before spoken of, tends to the
perpetuating love between thee and thy pleasing Consort. Jacob had two wives,
Leah and Rachel; Now the Holy Ghost mentions no deformity in Leah, but that she
was tender-eyed, but Rachel (says the Text) was beautiful and fair (or
well-favoured.) Genesis 19.17. Then in ver. 18. the Text says, and Jacob loved
Rachel, and said (to her Father) I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy
youngest Daughter. He was so taken with her beauty, that he was content to
serve even a seven years apprentiship (as we may say) for her; and verse 30.
it is said, He loved Rachel more than Leah; But some may say, Hot love is soon
cold, did this love hold out? I answer, Gen 35.19.
yea, longer than life; for after God took Rachel away by death, (who died in
Childbearing) her Husband takes care two ways to preserve the remembrance of
her; First, he calls her Son (whom she died of) Benjamin, (the son of my right
hand;) as if he had said, this Benjamin was the son of my wife Rachel, who was
as dear to me as my right hand; His mother had called him Benoni (as much as
to say, the son of my sorrow;) but that name must not pass, because it would
not hold out the strength of Jacobs affection to Rachel; Secondly, Rachel must
have a Pillar erected on her grave (as we noted before on another occasion) for
an Honorable remembrance of her to posterity, and it was called the pillar of
Rachels grave, says the Text, Genesis 35.20. Yet further mark the expressions of
Jacob concerning Rachel, (many years after her death, as the Narrative of them
are made by Judah,) And thy Servant my Father said unto us, Ye know that my
wife bare me two Sons, Genesis 44.27. [My Wife] which as it is here used is an
emphaticall expression, he does not say one of my wives, nor yet my wife
Rachel, but my wife; he seems to forget that Leah was his wife, or as if he
had no wives lying in his bosom but only Rachel. I say, A man being fully
satisfied in his Wives person and favor, his love is perpetuated, it prevents
many sad eruptions, heart-breakings, and unkindnesses; it sweetens society, it
helps to a comfortable bearing of afflictions, it eases cares; do not think
it to be a trivial thing to labor to receive full content in the person of
thy wife; I am able to acquaint thee, that I knew a Gentleman who was very
godly, that being to look out for a Wife (which was indeed to be a second
wife,) he took special care to meet with one truly gracious, and of a sweet,
loving, and meek nature, (and I am able with much confidence to aver he was
not frustrate therein;) But in the mean time did deny himself about her
person, for he was so taken with the other two, that he accepted of a person
crooked, and of hard favor; but within short time (sad is it to tell) he takes
her defects into consideration, and by degrees falls to slight his wife, and
then to hate her, and take no delight in society with her, who being once (in
special) in a great passion and rage against her in the time of Family Prayer,
did in her own hearing, and in the presence of diverse of his Children, (grown
up to some discretion) and also in the hearing of his Servants, earnestly beg
of God to discover unto him that great sin of his that did provoke him to give
him a crooked wife. Truly, it was a crooked prayer, and did mightily disturb
(and not without cause) this precious wife. It is true, that favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vanity, as has been considered already: But that
has been only in relation to the making it the Object of thy love, for so it
is vain and sinful; yet it has its use, and some eyes must have many grains
of it too to make a well accomplished wife for them. Here by the way, how much
then are those Parents to blame, that strain their power over their Children
beyond due limits, in laying engagements and commands on them to like of such
persons for Husbands, and Wives, for them, as they shall think most meet,
which if they will not (because many times they cannot, by reason they are not
able to close in their hearts and affections with their persons and favors;)
then they must be frowned upon, called disobedient Children, and disinherited,
cast off as if they were but a bastard Generation: But if this (in a special
manner) be not a provoking Children to wrath, and a discouraging of them, I
know not what is; which sin of Parents the Apostle forbids, Col. 3.21. Now in
the fear of God let Parents be admonished to beware of this sin, of enforcing
their Children to accept of such Husbands, and Wives, as themselves only chose
without, nay, against the free consent of their Children. But if Parents will
not be exhorted to the contrary, let them know, that they are in a high degree
accessory to all the brawlings and contentions that fall out after such
Marriages between their Children, and they must answer before the Bar of Gods
Tribunal for all breach of Covenant, all Marriage Bed defilement, for all
poysonings, or other bloody plots to take away the natural lives of either
person; and they are guilty of all disorders, of all nonperformance of Family
duties, of all dishonor brought to God by their Children in the Marriage
estate, and (so by undeniable consequence) of their Childrens Damnation for
such sins, though the Children are accomptable before God for their own sins
too. Thou that art a Father, or Mother, remember that saying, Call the Maid and
ask at her mouth, Genesis 24.57. We have been larger on this particular than was
at first intended, but (Beloved) we hope for thy profit; and so we conclude it,
and pass on.

The fourth qualification, etc.
In the fourth place, if thou would have a meet helper thou must look at
fitness of Age in that woman whom thou desire to be thy Wife; Or else how
can thou expect meet help from her in all conditions; If a man of fit age
for Marriage choose a girl for his Wife, or if a Young Man Marry with an old
woman, and expect furtherance from such in that estate of life, they befoole
themselves; for the Girl stands in need of a Dame to instruct her in all
points of womanhood to fit her for to be a good wife, and the old woman stands
in need of a Nurse to wait on her in her decrepid Age. Now in this particular
we shall use the more concisenesse, because we have spent some time this way
before, yet we must confess, those lines did chiefly relate to cautionate the
Man not to mind Marriage before ripe in Age for that state of life; But as a
man must not marry till of fit Age, so neither must he choose a wife therein
unfit; yet both Divinity and Philosophy will justify that man that does match
himself to a Girl, rather than he who does marry an old woman; for a Girl
may in time become a woman fit to bear Children, and guide the house, as the
Apostle requires, 1 Timothy 5.14. which are spiritual ends of Marriage: But the
old woman will be more and more unfit; Now though it be not convenient that a
woman of eight or ten years older than the man should be joined in Marriage
with him, yet no man of understanding dare deny, but that it may be lawful,
provided that the woman be not past Childbearing, and withal, be of an able
and healthful constitution: But if otherwise, two special ends of Marriage
are frustrate, and then it is a sin against God, and Nature too, to be so
joined in Marriage: But when a man about twenty six years old shall be
married to a Maid of about twenty, or a Man about thirty years old shall marry
with a maid about twenty four, such Conjunctions are of good report; and such
persons, as they are Youthful together, so they grow aged together, and are
never estranged in their affections one toward another, if other
qualifications also correspond. And besides, the fruit of such Marriages
ordinarily (by the blessing of God) is to have Children betimes in youthful
days, when their Parents can best care for them, and take pains with them,
which Children, if the Lord give them grace, prove as a staff or support to
their Parents, (under God) in their old Age, which is a blessing abundantly
desirable. But all men both Religious and Moral do condemn such men as in
their youthful days will (for any sinister end in the world) join themselves
in Marriage with women of above fifty (nay, Gen 18.23.
sometimes above sixty) years Old. There can be no Issue from such Marriages,
unless God work a miracle, which who can expect without great presumption.
And besides, this disagreement in years breeds a disagreement in life; for a
young man cannot entirely love a woman so much older than himself, that when
he is in the prime of his years and strength, that then his wife should be
crazie, unhealthfull, unhandsome (for him to have near society with,) and of a
withered body, whereby he is Obnoxious to an inundation of temptations of all
kinds, from his spiritual enemies (even) to uncleanness, to unbridled
passions, to Company-keeping, and so to the neglect of the duties of his
Calling, and of his Family, and so to lavish expense, to the undoing of him and
his; thus I leave to thy self to judge, whether a fit Age be a good
qualification in a woman to make her a meet helper to thee in the Marriage
estate or no.

The fifth qualification, etc.
The fifth Qualification necessary to make a woman a meet helper, is, to be
descended from the Loins of godly Parents: But before I proceed to show thee
how this is necessary, I shall briefly premise one thing, (viz.) That thou
may warrantably take a wife from India, (whose Parents were Heathens,) from
Rome, from Spain, or out of any profane and irreligious Family, provided,
that her self be a sincere Convert, a godly, pious, and religious woman; for
it is not her Parents and thee, but she and thou that make but one flesh; this
premised, I say, it is necessary to marry a wife out of a godly Family; First,
in relation to thy Offspring; Secondly, to thy self; First in relation to thy
Offspring; for hereby the Covenant of Grace runs to them in the fuller
stream, the entaile is the stronger, (as I may say.) God threatens to visit
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, but to the third and fourth
Generation, of them that hate him: But he promises, to show mercy unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.5, 6. God
makes a Covenant with seeds seed, Isa. 59.21. If thy Children can look back,
and upon good grounds conceive their Progenitors for many Ages past did fear
the Lord, they may (if they fear the Lord themselves) comfortably conclude,
that through free Grace they have an Interest in the Covenant of Grace, even in
that Covenant that God made with Abraham to be the God of him and his seed for
ever, and so may comfortably improve that Covenant, by a true and lively faith,
to assure their souls that they are, not only members of the visible, but of
the Invisible Church of Christ; and that they may do this, remember that I
said, they must fear the Lord themselves, and they must have a ^ively faith,
or else all the faith and holiness of their Parents, at a further or nearer
distance, will stand them in no stead, in relation to spiritual advantages:
But as for outward blessings, ^ll the Children of the faithful may have the
greater portion of them for their faithful Parents sake on both sides, I say,
on the Mothers side, as well as on the Fathers; I have been young (says David)
but now am old, yet never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
bread, Psalm. 3.7.25. Then in the 26 ver. He is ever merciful and lends, and
his seed is blessed. Again, if thy wife be of the seed of the faithful, then
both she and her Children are interested into the benefit of their Fore fathers
prayers, (we mean in this place only for outward things.) Abraham prays unto
God for Ishmael Oh (says he) that Ishmael might live in thy sight. Gen 17.18.
Then in the 20. v. God answers him, As for Ishmael (says God) I have heard
thee, Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, twelve Princes
shall he beget, and I will make him a great Nation. Beloved, you may here note,
That not only Ismael himself shall have the benefit of Abraham's prayers, but
his seed also, for they should be Princes, and indeed a great Nation, and yet
they were Abraham's seed only according to the flesh; (but had they been his
spiritual seed too, these mercies might have been sanctified to them and so
made the greater.) Indeed, the Prayers of the righteous avail much, Jam. 5.16.
Lastly, as thou desire to have comfort in thy Wives kindred, thou must labor
to choose her, as one springing from the stock of the faithful; for as thou
do marry her to be thy wife, so thou do marry her kindred (as I may say) to
be thy kindred. And what comfort can thou have (when thou art of a Heavenly
frame of spirit thy self) to have society and communion with a carnal and
irreligious kindred? Surely but little: So much also for this fifth particular.

The sixth qualification which is necessary to be looked after in the choice of
a Wife, is, The sixth qualificati^n, etc. ^
a competent outward Estate; And herein I might save my labor to put this down
for a direction to some, for it is the first thing, nay, the all in all their
hearts are affected with, except the Amorous reflectings of their wanton eyes
on some paint, and Features in the Face, and compleatnesse of person, merely to
satisfy their wanton, fleshly, and sensual appetites (which in this kind is
unlawful, though otherwise commendable, as before discussed.) I would have
every man in a due place, and with some moderation of his exorbitant
affections, not only look after, but labor for, a convenient portion with his
wife in Marriage, and that as he desires her to be a meet helper. And first,
because the things of this life are the good Creatures of God: they are
blessings, nay, singular blessings, when sanctified to us, and of special use
to us whilst we are in this our Pilgrimage, to carry us through the world
without distractions and worldly encumbrances, that we may with the more
enlargednesse of heart walk with our God in a holy Conversation and that with
cheerfulness: Only, we had need take great heed we trust not in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, 1 Timothy 6 17. and that if Riches increase we set
not our hearts upon them, Psalm. 62.10. I say, we have need to prevent these
evils, because all blessings both spiritual and temporal are sanctified to us
but in part. Again in the second place, it is lawful for a man to mind a
portion with his Wife, because it is the duty of Parents to lay up portions
for, and to give portions to their Children, 2 Cor. 12.14. The Apostle lays it
down positively, that it is the duty of Parents to lay up for their Children:
though he apply the same in a spiritual sense. Job gave his Daughters
Inheritance among their Brethren, Job 42.15. Elkanab gives unto his Sons and
Daughters Portions, 1 Samuel 1.4. When Galeb bestows his Daughter in Marriage to
Othniel, he gave him a portion with her over a Southland, and after on her
demand, the upper and nether springs, Judge. 1.13.15. In the third and last
place, a man may look at portion with a wife, because he cannot live at so low
a rate when he is married as he could when he was a single man, and his wife
does increase (or help to increase) this his Charge, therefore there is all the
reason in the world she should bring some additionall maintenance; For Money
answers all things, says Solomon, Eccl. 10.19. We have a Proverb, that
Money will keep love warm; I must confess, that it may be true thus, that as
Money answers all things, (as Solomon has before said) so it takes away all
distractions and perturbations from the spirit, and so leaves a man free with
the greater torrent of love to run into the bosom of his wife, and in a
Reciprocal way to receive the like from her again. But Beloved, I beseech thee
beware of wedding a purse of Money; I have acquainted thee with the casualties
and dangers that may overtake those that make wealth the Object of their love:
And let me tell thee whoever thou art that art Muck-warme, thou may fear,
that all the happiness thou will meet with in thy choice of a Wife will be
confined in a purse, or in a bag of trash, (for so is the gold of Ophir in
comparison of a virtuous wife, nay her price is far above riches; Pro. 31.10.
) Therefore if God has lent thee a sufficient outward Estate to carry the
charge of Marriage about withal, then, though it may be lawful for thee to
look at some portion with a yoke fellow, and thou may thankefully receive
what God has provided for thee; yet if the portion be but small, nay, if none
at all but spiritual virtues, even the riches of the mind, let (in such a
case) the thoughts of riches pass, and accept of the woman with her inward
treasure; and as Mordecai said unto Hoster in another case, Who knows whether
thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this, Hos. 4.14. So I say unto
thee, who knows but that God has given thee thy wealth for such a time as
this, even to enlarge the outward comfortable living of such a precious woman,
who spiritually does live in the bosom of Jesus Christ; We shall desist from
further prosecution of this sixth qualification, The seventh qualification in a
woman.
and proceed to the next.

The seventh qualification (or necessary engredient) to make a woman a meet
helper, is, frugality or good Housewifery, and this does in a fit place succeed
the last foregoing qualification: for that did fully and clearly make it out
to be lawful for a man to have an eye in Marriage to a woman's outward estate
(always provided, that it must be in due place, and moderate.) But what
advantage will it be to a man to have a great portion with his wife, if she be
expensive, wastefull, profuse, and prodigal in her carriage; such a wife will
make good two Proverbs, that is, she will bring a noble soon to nine-pence; And
what she brings in with a rake she will disperse with a forke: This is the
foolish woman Solomon complains of, that p^^s down her house with her hands,
Prove. 14.1. Such a woman will soon bring her Self, her Husband and Children to
a Morsel of bread. Its too well known, that some painful, careful and
industrious Husbands cannot get beforehand in the world, but are always
hinderly, and beggarly, by means of their wives, who are most jolly, jocund,
and junketting Dames in the Towns and Places where they live; These will rob
their Husbands at every ruin, take Money out of his purse; nay, make Money of
Meat out of the powdering tubs, Come out of their Chambers, Bread out of the
Cupbords. Oh these are worse than Highway Thieves, for they might be avoided,
but these sometimes are not so much as suspected; but were they, how shall a
man's ruin be prevented from being brought by such Caterpillars perpendicularly
upon his head? Beloved, if thou would avoid such an unsufferable Cross in the
Marriage condition, take heed then beforehand that thou be not ensnared with a
Maid or Widow of a frollick disposition beware of those who are gadders abroad
to Faires, and every meeting of pleasure; take heed of such as are full of
levity, figging here and there, not knowing in what place, nor in what company
to spend their time; Its very true, that if thou can meet with a wife
qualified with true grace, thou needst not fear such an unmeet wife as we here
mention, but (with great grief be it expressed, that) though it be a man's duty
to aim at obtaining a gracious wife, as we have said, yet there is a kind of
infinite difficulty in meeting with such an one; And you shall hear a woman
(even the Mother of King Solomon) say as much, Pro. 31.10. And according to the
judgment of diverse Orthodoxe Divines, Solomon does aver the self same in
his Eccles. a book which he wrote after his repentance for his Idolatry and
loose walking with his God, wherein he does complain that among his thousand
Wives and Concubines together (for so many he had in all, seven hundred of one,
and three hundred of the other, 1 King. 11.3.) he found not one that was a
godly woman, Eccl. 7.27, 28. Therefore to conclude this particular likewise,
let me entreat thee to take up this direction to labor to walk thereby, and I
dare assure thee thou shall no whit repent of thy pains herein.

The eighth qualification in a woman.
The eighth and last qualification to be eyed by thee in a woman whom thou
would enjoy as thy Wife, is, so much Education and breeding as is necessary
in a woman in relation to thy rank and condition; yet this I shall not urge as
upon clear and absolute Necessity, but upon necessary convenience: For as an
absurd, clownish, and fordid behavior ill becomes a man: so all unworthy,
fliggish, hoydenly carriage as ill becomes a woman; And herein I appeal to all
rational and intelligible persons of both Sexes. The complete and comely
behavior of a woman, both at home and abroad, is an Ornament both to her self
and Husband, and if thou be a wise man thou will be ashamed to see the contrary
in thy wife; I shall content my self in the bare naming of this. I might urge
at large the comely behavior of Rebecca when she met with her Husband Isaac the
first time, how she alighted from the Camel, and covered her face with a veil,
Genesis 24 64, 65. which carriage of hers was very comely, and did demonstrate her
education and breeding to be singularly good. Thus we have done with the second
means to be used to gain a good wife, and a meet helper; You may be pleased
to remember we told you the first means was to go to God by prayer, to beseech
him to bestow a good wife, and a meet helper on you. The second was, that you
must look on such things, or qualifications, as made a woman to be a good wife,
and meet helper, and these qualifications are in number Eight. First, Grace;
Secondly, Sweetness of Nature; Thirdly, Comeliness of person and favor;
Fourthly, A fit Age; Fifthly, An honest descent; Sixthly, A Competent portion
of outward things; Seventhly, Frugality and good Huswifery; And lastly, Good
Education and Breeding: Through all which particulars, in the strength of our
God, we have proceeded. Now by the same assistance we shall proceed to handle
two means more, and then come to the duties Married persons owe each to other,
and to their Families.

Thirdly, The third means to obtain a good wife.
if thou do desire to have a good wife, and a meet helper; Thou must labor
by honest and just means to obtain the consent of Parents on both sides,
which if thou be wanting in, thy marriage will be rather cursed of God than
blessed, and thou shall have cause rather to mourn, than to rejoice in that
condition; for thou must be convinced in this, that the very Essence of
Marriage is the agreement of the parties, and the consent of Parents. Great is
the Interest that Parents have in their Children, and the power that God has
invested them with over them; First, for their interest in them, as the Apostle
says in another case, You are not your own, but are bought with a price, 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. So may I say to Children, You are not your own, but you are
bought with a price; Your Parents have bought you, (for though to speak most
properly God be the giver of Children, as no man nor Angel can deny, for
Children are the Inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward, Psalm. 127 31. It was the Lord that opened Leahs womb, Genesis 29.31. And
it was the Lord that did withold from Rachel the fruit of her womb, Genesis
30.2.) yet in some sense Parents may be said to have bought their Children, for
their Mothers buy them dear, they conceive them, bear them, and bring them
into the world with great pain and grief, sometimes Children cost their
Mothers their lives in Childbirth, or Childbed; Benjamin cost his precious
Mother her life at such a time, Genesis 35.17.18. The Tree does sometimes wither
and dye that the fruit may live: And when Children are borne they cost both
Fathers and Mothers much pain, cost, grief, and fear in bringing them up.
They have much trouble and watchings early and late about them* Besides, what
heartbreaking pains does Parents take to leave some maintenance for their
Children? Children then you see cost their Parents dear. There is no man can
say that he has so good an Interest in any thing he does enjoy as Parents have
in their Children, they are bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh. Now
then from this Interest Parents have in their Children, as appears evidently,
we may conclude thus much, That it is an offense and a sin of an high nature
for Children to bestow themselves in Marriage without, much more if against,
the free consent of their Parents; First, humbly sought and obtained; Secondly,
Great is the power which the Lord of all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth has
Invested (I say) Parents with over the bodies of their Children; (for we must
know, that God is the Father of spirits in a more peculiar manner, and has
them wholly and solely at his own command,) and that in relation to the
bestowing them in Marriage. Parents have power to bestow their Daughters in
Marriage, and to take wives for their Sons, Deuteronomy. 7.3. which I gather from that
place by the rule of contraries, but the Text is most properly an Inhibition of
corrupt Marriages; but more full to this purpose is that place in Jer. 29.6.
Where the Lord speaks thus, Take ye Wives and beget Sons and Daughters. And
take you Wives for your Sons, and give your Daughters to Husbands; Which makes
this point clear. That the Lord (I once more say) does Invest Parents with a
full power over their Children in relation to Marriage; (yet mistake me not, I
dare not think, much less say, that Parents have a power to force their
Children against their own wills to marry or be married as they please; I only
intend, that though Children must have their own free consents to marry with
such or such a person, that yet they may not, nor lawfully cannot without the
consent of their Parents;) So that from this power God has given Parents over
their Children, we do again aver the truth of the former Conclusion, that
is, That it is an Offense and sin of an high nature for Children to bestow
themselves in marriage without (much more if against) the free consent of their
Parents. But to lay this sin yet closer to the hearts of cursed and rebellious
Children, let them know, and know it assuredly, that it is as clear a truth as
is involved in Gods Book (with reverence be it expressed) that for them to
bestow themselves in Marriage thus without (much more, I say, against) the
consent of their Parents, is a Capital breach of the fifth, seventh, and
eighth Commandments of the Decalogue; First, they transgress against the
fifth Commandment, for therein God commands them to honor their Father and
Mother; And by this their bestowing themselves in Marriage against their
consents they cast the greatest dishonor upon them that can be thought, for by
this act of theirs they seem to dispute (nay, they do dispute) their Parents
Interest over them: nay, further, the validity of the free Donation of Jehovah
himself, who has, as you have heard, given Children to be under their
command, even in this particular to which we speak; and these Miscreants,
these Rakehels, say with those in Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bonds asunder,
and cast away their cords from us. Secondly, these undutifull Children do
violate the seventh Commandment, wherein God says, Thou shall not commit
Adultery; Now this is a most undeniable truth, that those who presume to step
into the Marriage condition, in a way point blanke to that which God has
ordained, never lawfully enter into such a condition; but such as having
Parents living do Marry against their consent, do step into that condition,
point blanke to that way which God has ordained: Therefore such as so marry
never lawfully enter into that condition; and if two be not lawfully Married,
they be not man and wife, then what they are you may easily determine: You may
say they are a couple of unclean persons, or a Whoremonger and a Whore, and so
they will be till they labor to be humbled for their unclean societies, and
for their disobedience against God and their Parents, and have gained God and
their Parents to be reconciled to them, and till then I once more say, they
live in the continual breach of the seventh Commandment. Lastly, They
transgress against the eighth Commandment, for therein God says, Thou shall
not steal; Now such as marry against the consent of Parents are the greatest
thieves in the world. You may remember that I told you that Children are dearer
to their Parents than all that besides they enjoy, and that they have bought
them very dear: Now if thieves break the eighth Commandment, then surely
these that thus marry against their Parents consent, being thieves, do break
that Commandment. How fearful then is the condition of such persons as they?
The Apostle James says, that he which keeps the whole Law and fails but in
one point is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. How much more guilty must such be who
fail in three points, as those hot-spurs do who make more haste than good
speed? Sampson had better learned, and did better practice, He tells his Father
and Mother that he had seen a woman in Timnah that pleased him well, Judge.
14.2. then in ver. 3. he pleads for their consent; Now until he had gotten the
consent of his Parents he would not marry, then in ver. 10. his Father and
Mother went down with him to Timnah to his Marriage; Mind well the carriage of
Abraham's Servant, which was made use of before on another occasion, Genesis 24.33.
and so forward. Therefore when thou do desire to marry, and have spied out a
person whom thou can love, then first acquaint thy own Parents with it, seek
their counsel and consent, which when thou have obtained, break the matter to
the Maids friends, but step not one foot further till Parents are satisfied on
both sides, and then do as God and friends shall direct. I shall wade no
further in this third means, but come to the last.

Yet, before we proceed thereto, here falls in a case of Conscience, arising
from the last particular, namely, whether a man may under no consideration
bestow himself in Marriage against the consent of parents? This is necessary
to be spoken to in this place for some poor soul may object, and say,

I apprehend in my self a clear Call to change my single condition, and to
enjoy the Marriage estate, for I find my self in some poor measure fit for
it; God having graciously bestowed on me those gifts before spoken of in some
degrees; and this I am sure of, I am unfit for the single life, having not the
gift of Chastity, but upon all occasions burn with fleshly concupiscence, to
Gods dishonor, and to the wasting of all my spiritual comforts. I have used
those means you mention to obtain a good wife, and by Gods gracious
providence I have found out a maid largely qualified to make a good wife; and
now the obstacle is, my Parents like it not that I should enjoy her as my wife,
and that because she has too much of the fear of God in her, as they think,
and not outward portion so much as they would have me enjoy with a wife; and
truly, I have long waited for their consents, and used the best means I can to
enjoy the same, but do even despair of ever gaining of it; now Sir, I beseech
you, give me a word or two of counsel and direction what I shall do in this
case.

I answer, Dear heart, I condole thy condition, and cannot but sympathize with
thee; I see thou art in a conflicting estate with the devil, with thy
corruptions, and with thy unnatural and degenerate Parents; yet there is some
Balm in Gilead for thee, only first take by the way a word or two of advise;
It appears thou art qualified for, and called to the Marriage estate, and have
a fit opportunity to change thy life, only the obstruction sticks here, thy
Parents will not consent, and that upon the grounds thou have spoken of; Then
(I say) in the fear of the Lord set apart a day, two, or three, to seek God
by Fasting, Humiliation and Prayer, there bewail thy own sins in general,
that they may have had an Influence on the hearts of thy Parents to bind them
up and harden them against thee; But if thou do know any particular sin that
thou have perpetrated, and that God may maintain a controversy against thee
for it this way, be sure Anatomize that before the Lord (on that day of thy
humiliation) rip it up, let all the cursed lineaments of it appear, labor to
affect thy Heart with the consideration of all the sad circumstances and
aggravations of the same, and rent the Caul of thy heart before the Lord by
unfeigned humiliation, and implore his Mercy for pardon and reconciliation.
Then in a second place seek to God to humble thee likewise for thy Parents sin.
Thirdly, seek God to humble thy Parents for their Iniquities, and to pardon
their sin. Lastly, seek God to be gracious to thee in wheeling their hearts
toward thee. Now when thou have this done, and yet have not prevailed, beg the
prayers of such as have an interest in God, both for thy self, and for thy
Parents; which done, if no cloud yet appear for thy comfort so big as a man's
hand, then desire some godly Ministers, and other worthy Christians to grapple
with thy Parents by persuasive Arguments tending to the melting their frozen
hearts, and for the turning them toward thee. Now if none of these means can
prevail, then wait a convenient time, expecting some comfort for thee; but if
none come, and that thy necessities remain still for the enjoyment of the
Marriage estate, Acts 5.29.
then know thou art bound to obey God rather than man: God commands thee to
marry, though thy Parents forbid thee. In such a case, I am confident, that
thou shall not sin by marrying against the unreasonable desires of thy Parents;
Mind that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for
that is right. Parents must not be obeyed but in the Lord. God is the Father of
souls and spirits, now the spirit is the better part of a man, we must obey
our spiritual Father rather than our Earthly. When the Apostle had spoke of
subjection to our Earthly Fathers, Heb. 13.9. he adds, Shall we not much rather
be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live. To draw to a conclusion,
Obey thy heavenly Fathers call in this particular, and with all humility and
thankfulness enter into the Marriage condition; yet one thing let me add, thou
must labor to carry thy self with much care in the humble observance of thy
Parents in all lawful things, and to counsel thy wife to do the same, and
then thou know not but that the Lord may give thee in their hearts, to thine,
and thy Yoak-fellowes great comfort even after Marriage. But to shut up all,
let not any thing here discust be understood as to weaken the power of Parents
over their Children, in relation to their Marriage, for that power is of God,
and it is inviolable, but in this singular condition, which blessed be the Lord
does not often fall out, though too often.

The fourth means to obtain a good wife.
In the fourth and last place, If thou do desire to have a good Wife, and a
meet helper: Then thou must be very careful to seek by honest means and (by
no other) to obtain the love of the woman whom thou do affect with Conjugall
love, and whom thou do desire may be thy yoke fellow to live and dye with.
Now for thy orderly and Christian proceeding with her, I shall endeavor very
briefly to give thee a few directions. When thou shall come first to speech
with her (thou having first gained the consent of Parents on both sides,) then
let her understand with as much brevity as thou can (in regard of her
bashfulnesse and modesty) the truth of thy love and hearty affection to her;
desiring her to take it into her consideration, and to consult with God, and
her Parents about it; and then to do as God shall persuade her heart, and
Parents advise her. Thou may also then (or at the next meeting) declare unto
her the dispositions of thy Nature, also what Estate thou have to live on, and
what Calling thou art of, (if she be a stranger thereto:) But be sure thou tell
her the truth, and nothing but the truth, dealing faithfully with her in these,
and in whatsoever else is necessary for her to know: After which give her a
seasonable time to consider of all. Now when thou have thus done let thy
affections sleep, (but thy judgment be kept waking.) leave all to God, commit
this thy way to him, trust also in the Lord, and if it be for his glory and thy
good he will bring it to pass, Psalm. 37.5. In the mean time sit down quietly,
and rest patiently, not distracting thy self for the event of any thing. Now
if after all this thou receive an Answer to this effect, That she can love thy
Person, like thy Nature, accept of thy Estate, and approve of thy Calling, and
that she is very well content to live and dye with thee: Then in the Name and
fear of God thou may proceed to a Contraction, and in seasonable time to
consummate the Marriage, and thou may expect (through the blessing of God a
great deal of Comfort, and be sure to find it when thy proceedings have been
so upright. But suppose that when she returns an Answer to thee, that it be an
answer of repulse, That she cannot love thee, nor approve of any thing (in
relation to thee) so well as to bestow her self on thee, and does entreat thee
to be well satisfied, and to take it for an Answer, I say, suppose it to be
thus: Then thou must labor to search into thy heart and life to find out the
cause of it; for God has some hand in it to humble thee for some sin; happily
thou have hid some cursed thing in thy heart, as Achan did the wedge of gold
and Babylonish Garment in the Earth in the midst of his Tent, for which sin
of his all Israel were beaten back by the Citizens of A^, Josh. 7 5. And we
know God would not go forth with Israel to bless them, and to give them
victory over their Adversaries until this sin was purged out; But if this be
thy case, that (as I said) there is some secret sin lying hid in thy heart, do
not delude thy self, thou must set thy self to the work of humiliation and
reformation before thou can expect a gracious speeding in thy suit; but when
that is done, rouse up thy spirit, be not discouraged, but set on afresh with
vigor again and again, and if it be for Gods glory and the mutual good of
you both, thou shall certainly speed, (and further thou ought not to desire
it.) But I desire to add one thing yet further, (and that by way of Advice,)
Be very circumspect that before Marriage thou be not prodigal in thy
engagements, be sure thou promise her no more Maintenance than thou art well
assured thy means will make good, o^ that may beseem her in that condition,
as being thy wife. Again, take care in a special manner that thou promise her
no more than thy honest purpose is to make good, and perform to the full: For
otherwise when things come to pass contrary to thy promises, it will be a
cause of much variance, and of great breaches between you, which like a
fretting gangrene will eat out the very vitals of love; for upon thy
nonperformance, or unability to make good all thou have unadvisedly and
wickedly promised, she will both twit thee, and exclaim against thee for
cheating and deluding of her with fair and golden promises, which since are
vanished into mere vapors; it is more safe and creditable for thee rather to
promise nothing to her that way, (but yet to do what with reason may be
fitting.) One thing more, and no more of this, Conceal not beforehand any
deficiency in Nature that may disable thee to perform any Conjugall duties
whatsoever. Thus much may suffice to inform thee in all the means thou art to
use to obtain a good wife and a meet helper.

We are in then n^xt place (with the Lords leave and assistance) to come to
take a view of the duties which Married persons are obliged to perform,
wherein we shall consider the duties the Husband does owe unto his Wife; and
the rather shall we do this in the first place to draw on the Wife to a
cheerful performance of hers likewise to her Husband.

The first duty the Husband does owe unto his Wife, is, Conjugall Affections:
The first duty of the Husband to his Wife.
(Or Matrimonial and special love.) The greatest part of a woman's outward
comfort in Marriage stands in the entire love and hearty Affections of her
Husband toward her, and if she miss of this from her Husband, she may fear
his falling short in all the rest, for the love of a Husband to his Wife is as
the foundation stone of all his other duties; it is as the chief wheel in the
Clock which gives a dexterous motion to all the other wheels; thy cordial
love to thy Wife will sweeten her condition in this life in her worst outward
crosses, in want of health, wealth, the society of good Neighbors, pleasures,
and what not; nay, let her life be filled with the Affluence and Confluence of
all the comforts under the Sun; yet the bare want of the apprehension of her
Husbands Affections toward her will make her dip all her Morsels in vinegar and
gall, and make her complain that she does not see one good day. Now that it is
the duty of the Husband to love his Wife, appears, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands (says
the Apostle) love your Wives as Christ loved his Church, that is, for kind, not
for measure; for the measure of the love of Christ to his Church no dimensions
can demonstrate; for to know the love of Christ, the Apostle says, it passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 2.19. and in Col. 3.19. the Apostle bids Husbands to love their
wives, and not be bitter unto them. The woman was made of a Rib taken out of
the side of man, and therefore Adam says, she was bone of his bone, and flesh
of his flesh, Genesis 2.23. Nay, by Gods Ordinance they are no more twain but one
flesh; and from hence Paul takes an Argument to persuade the Husband to love
his Wife, because no man yet did ever hate his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.28, 29. You
may remember that upon another occasion we did observe that Jacob esteemed
Rachel his Wife as his right hand, he called his Sons name, of whom she died,
Benjamin, (or the Son of his right hand,) Genesis 35.18. God calls the wife of
Ezekiel the desire of his eyes, Son of man I take from thee the desire of thine
eyes with a stroke, Ezekiel. 24.16, 18. The Prophet Nathan tells David in a
Parable, that Bathsheba the wife of Uriah lay in his bosom, that is, in the
bosom of her Husbands Affections, 2 Samuel 12.3. You plainly see then that it is
the duty of the Husband to love his Wife. Now that there are Scripture
Incitations for it, and Scripture Presidents for it too, you must know you sin
against God if you perform it not; and if you do it not, then as you have
heard, you bring affliction and grief on your Wife, so likewise you bring much
prejudice on your own self, for you discourage her from drawing in the same
Yoke with you; you disable her to be a meet helper; you make her to be
uncheerfull in all the duties of her general and particular calling; and which
is worse, you expose your self to the strength of many noisome lusts, as
elsewhere has been mentioned; be thou so convinced that it is a special duty
that the Husband does owe to his Wife, even to love her with Conjugall and
entire love, as that thou set thy self to the practice of it, wherein stands
thy own and her comfort.

The second Duty which the Husband does owe unto his wife, is, Cohabitation,
The secon^ duty of the Husband to his Wife.
(or to live together in one Family, mutually to enjoy intimate society both in
bed and at board,) for where this is not, there no duty which a Husband does
owe unto his Wife can be performed. Nay, the very ends of Marriage are hereby
null and frustrate. The Apostle Peter lays a command on Husbands to dwell with
their Wives, Ye Husbands dwell with your Wives, etc. 1 Pet. 3.7. Can a man have
any true comfort in his Wife, or she in him, if they do not dwell together?
Truly, it is not only against Grace, but against Nature too, for them to do
otherwise, for the Husband is the head of his Wife, and of his Family: When he
then shall deny this Cohabitation there is a headless body behind, and what is
that short (in some sense) of a Monster? It had been infinitely better (as we
may say) that they had never been man and wife, than being such not to live
together; This truth being so generally acknowledged, (and rarely, if at all
denied) we shall use much brevity in handling of it: but by the way,
notoriously abominable are such persons as falter in the performance of this
duty: Whether it be Husband or Wife.

The third duty of the Husband to the Wife.
In the third place the Husbands duty to his Wife, is, to labor to edify and
build her up more and more in the saving knowledge of God, and in the ways of
his Grace, and to seek especially the happiness of her soul, to help her
forward to glorify God here, that she may be everlastingly glorified in Heaven
hereafter; hence it is that the Apostle in the place quoted before in 1 Pet.
3.7. requires the Husband to dwell with his wife as a man of knowledge. If the
Wife will learn (says Paul) let her ask her Husband at home, 1 Cor. 14.35.
which implies two things, First, that the Husband ought himself to labor for
Illumination and abundance of the knowledge of God: Then secondly, that it is
his duty to inform, and to instruct his wife. As the head of a Natural body
carries the Eyes, so it sees not only for it self, but for all the members of
the body; so it should be in this case. The Husband is the Candlestick, and
Divine knowledge in him is the Light; Now our Savior says, Luke 8.16.
No man lights a Candle and covers it with a vessel, or puts it under a
bed, but sets it on a Candlestick, that they that come in may see the light.
The knowledge that is in the Husband should be communicative to all in the
Family in general, and to his Wife in particular. Now the Husband must labor
to edify and build up his Wife, and to further her in the way of holiness by
his performance of these particular duties, (viz.) By Dehortations,
Exhortations, Reprehensions, (and as occasion is) by laboring to give her
Consolations: So also by praying for her, and with her; by reading the Word of
God to her, and by holy Conference as frequently as may be: For by praying for
her he may find the Lord graciously entreated to confer and bestow Grace into
her heart, and to give her a daily increase thereof. Secondly, By praying with
her he may be a means to put life and quickening into her spirit in all duties.
Thirdly, By reading the Word of God to her he may instruct her. Fourthly, By
using holy Conference with her he may stir up in her ardent desires, and
Heavenly Affections in minding things of a more sublime Nature than any thing
in this transitory life: And if she be ignorant of the ways of God, and the
duties she does owe unto God and man, it must be the care of her Husband to
inform her, to teach and instruct her in those things: But if she know them,
then he must labor to rub them afresh upon her Memory, as the Apostle Peter
did on them to whom he wrote, 2 Pet. 1.12. that she may set her self the more
seriously to the practice of them. Beloved, a man is no way able to show his
love more unto his Wife than by laboring that she may be everlastingly happy
as well as himself: And happy is that woman who does enjoy such a Husband as
is very tender of her souls health; and who does labor to further her in the
discharging of all her duties in her general and particular Calling, even in
doing the Will of God, and insuffering his pleasure. We might have been larger
in this particular, and doubtless should, but that in the next head we shall
have occasion to mention some of the forementioned directions again, as very
proper to the next duty of the Husband to the Wife, and so desist here.

The fourth duty of the Husband to his Wife.
In the fourth place, the duty of the Husband to the Wife, is, to labor to
reclaim her from any sin, and sinful course she does live in; for sin is of a
deceitful nature, and will deceive the souls of the choicest Christians in
the world if not rooted out betimes before the heart be hardened therein: And
therefore the Holy Ghost bids us exhort one another to day to prevent the same,
Heb. 3.13. Therefore if a man see his wife nourish any sin in her heart or
life, he had need to bestir himself to make opposition against it; Note.
for mind it well, if sin be not mortified early, we may fear that in time it
will mortify Grace: They cannot be both fruitful in one poor heart; and if
Grace die, an exceeding sad Funeral will follow. But if it be demanded what be
the means the Husband must use to reclaim his Wife from any sin? I answer, --
First, Earnest Prayer and Supplication to God in her behalf this way. When the
Church had gone astray from God, and had run themselves into many miseries, the
Prophet Jeremy seeks unto God in their behalf, thus, Turn thou unto us O
Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our days as of old, Lam. 5.21. Genesis 25.21.
As God heard Isaac praying for his Wife for a fruitful womb, that she might
conceive and bear; so how know thou but that thou may by Prayer prevail
with God in thy Wives behalf, that she may conceive the seed of saving Grace
in her heart, and bring forth the fruit of it in her life, even the
Mortification of that sin or sins that are most predominant in her? and with
much comfort may thou expect such a blessing on thy Prayers if they be
fervent, Iam. 5.16. God has the hearts of all men and women in his hands, and
can turn them at his own pleasure; he can make a proud heart humble, a hard
heart soft, an Earthly heart Heavenly, a crooked heart straight; he can help
the perverseness of the Will, and the disorder of the Affections; God has a
Plaster for every sore, and a proper remedy for every disease; God can help
the blindness of the Mind, the Error of the Judgment, the irregularity of
the whole man Then (I say) go unto God in the first place, and importune him
for mercy for, and for cure of, thy Wives soule-sicknesse and distempers. In
the second place thou must kindly (and with all possible sweetness) admonish
her of the danger of sin, and of the fearful fruits and sad effects of it; as
that thereby she dishonors a good God, she wounds her own Conscience, she
brings discredit to the Gospel, she provokes the Lords indignation and wrath
against her, to her confusion, if she persevere in sin; labor to persuade her
that sin has a long tail of judgments at the heels of it, External,
Internal, and Eternal, Inchoated on Earth, Consummated in Hell. But if by
these loving Admonitions thou can not prevail, thou must then proceed to
sharp ^ proofs and rebukes; Thou shall not hate (says God) thy Brother in
thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him Lev. 19.17. Now if a man should be tender of the salvation of a Brother,
and of a Neighbor, then much more of the salvation of a Wife, who has a kind
of oneness with thy self. Rachel was Jacobs best beloved Wife, yet when in a
discontented humor she comes to him, and says, give me Children or else I
dye, thereby derogating from God, and arrogating to her Husband, (which sin of
her we read not that ever before she did commit^) Yet the Text notes, that when
Jacob heard i^ his Anger was kindled, and he says unto her, Am I in Gods
stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? Genesis 30.1, 2. The
wife of Job bids him curse God and dye (which was her fearful sin;) her
husband replies with a word of sharp reproof, and tells her, that she spoke
like a foolish woman, Job 2.10. When the Tumor is swollen to such a bigness it
is full time to lance it, and apply Corrasives to it to eat out the
Corruption, else it may gangrene to the destruction of the body: But herein use
thy best wisdom to choose the fittest time and place to seek to fasten a
reproof on her. Now a seasonable and fit time thus to deal with her, is, when
she is out of her passions, and free from perturbation of spirit, for if she be
in the heat of anger, and the boiling of her Choler, she is very unfit to be
dealt with in this way. 1 Samuel 25.36, 37.
Nabal when drunk with wine was full as capable of a word of reproof from his
discreet wife, for his churlish and absurd carriage to David, as a woman (or
man) can be, when drunk with outrageous Anger and Passion, from the wisest and
most judicious ^^iend they have in the world; for indeed, thou taking an
unseasonable time to reprove thy wife, thou do not only lose thy labor of
winning her, but thou may fear she will be the more incorrigible thereby.
But if thou take a fit time to deal with her in this kind, thou may hope
(through the Lords blessing) to see some good effect of thy pains, and of the
discharge of thy duty. Secondly, thou must make choice of a convenient place to
perform this duty of reproof; which place is a secret and private Room, free
from the hearing of any others; for if thou rip up her faults in the hearing of
others, that will be a means the more to enrage her, and to make her the more
obstinate in her evil way, and the more refractory against all means of good
unto her: But if she perceive thou do tender her credit and reputation, thou
may find her more flexible and docible than perhaps thou art a ware of. But
if thou do yet lose thy labor, then in the third place, make trial of a
more public way of reproof, to see if she will be ashamed of her vileness,
and labor to reform. If this will not work upon her for amendment, then in
the fourth place thou shall do well to withdraw all appearance of love from
her, al^ Amiable deportments and gestures, and stil^ carry thy self in an
Austere way toward her, with knit brows, and a restriction of discourse with
her so long as she remains obstinate Now if all these means be unavaileable,
the^ in the last place shorten her maintenance, keep her at bare Commons, let
her have only for necessity, nothing for delight; let her know that so long as
she remains an Enemy to Go^ and to her own soul, that she shall not fin^ thee
a friend to her, unless it be to check curb and control her, on purpose to
help he^ out of the snare of the Devil; But if none nor all these means will
do her good, to dra^ her from sin to God, then her condition is fa^ indeed, and
does deserve to be lamented with ^eares of blood, and thou have cause to weep
for her in secret, as Jeremy for the obstinate Jews, Jer. 13.17. Truly, thou
have cause to ^eare (and she much more) the Lord has a purpose to destroy her,
and so make her punishment like the punishment of Elies Sons, who would not
hearken to the reprehensions of their Father, 1 Samuel 2.25. And let such a woman
sadly lay that thundering place in Prove. ^9.1. to heart, (for she may tremble to
read it;) The words are these, that is, He that being often reproved hardens
his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy; and let her not
be so absurd as to think that place concerns not her, because it is said [He]
and no mention of the word [She,] for though the threatening be expressed in the
Masculine gender, yet it shall be made good in the Feminine. But thou who have
conscienciously used all these means to reclaim thy poor yoak-fellow (though
they have done her no good) yet thou have delivered thy own soul, Ezekiel. 3.19.
But if it please the Lord to bless thy endeavors, and to make thee an
instrument to bring thy Wife to a saving sight of her sins, (of which godly
sorrow is a fruit) then know, thou have saved a soul from death, and have
covered a multitude of sins, James 5.20. And thy recocovered wife may even upon
her bare knees, abundantly bless the Lord that ever she was so happy as to
enjoy such a sweet and tenderhearted Companion in the Marriage Estate. We
proceed to the following duty.

The fifth duty of the Husband to his Wife.
It is the duty of the Husband to walk before his wife in all good
conversation, to give her good examples of encouragement from his own holy
course of life. It is undeniable, that it is the duty of all whom God has set
in Authority over others, that they should labor to teach those that are under
them, both by precept, and by example: for the first will do no good
(ordinarily) without the other. Look at me, says Gideon, and do likewise,
Judge. 7.17. Gideon as a Captain speaks to his Soldiers being under his
Command and Authority, to follow his Example. Now the Lord has invested the
Husband with as much Authority over his wife as Gideon had over his Soldiers
and more: Therefore he walking in good ways, may say to his wife, look on me
and do likewise. Timothy having the charge of souls committed to him, the
Apostle exhorts him to be an example to Believers in Word, it Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith and in Purity, 1 Pet. 5.3.
1 Timothy 4.12. The Apostle Peter likewise does exhort the Elders to be examples
to the Flock; (And it is not now to make out, that a Husband has the charge of
his Wife's soul committed to him, for that point is as clear as the Sun at
Noone,) so must the Husband be to his Wife. Now this he should do the more
carefully, that is, walk in a good conversation before his wife, because most
men and women in the world are apt to be led by example, (good or bad,) more
than by precept; The examples of Superiors are of ^n attractive nature to
Inferiors, especially if the Inferior do love and reverence the Superior, as
the wife does if her heart be married ^o her Husbands; there is an intrinsecall
principle in her to carry out her desires and endeavors to tread in his steps;
she will endeavor ^o imitate her Husband in his words and acti^ns. The Wives
of Jacob were brought up in ^dolatry: but they having better examples set them
by their Husbands of worshipping the ^ue God, they will be of his Religion;
Their ^ather worshipped false Gods, Genesis 31.19, 30. But they will pray to the
true God; it is said, God hearkened unto Leah, Genesis 30.17. then ^oubtlesse she
prayed, that must be implied; ^en in ver. 22. God hearkened unto Rachel ^o,
sure she had also prayed. Mahlon and ^hilion take them wives in Moab who were
^otorious Idolaters, but from their Husbands ^imples they had learned to serve
the true ^od of Israel. Ruth especially was brought to constant love of the
true God; for when her other in Law had put her upon the trial (and ^d
persuaded her Sister to return back ^aine to her people, and to her gods,)
yet ^e would by no means follow her Mothers ^ounsell, nor her Sisters
Apostatizing exam^e, but strongly adheres to the true God of ^ael, and will
forsake Country and dear na^rall friends besides, rather than depart from ^e
God of her Husband; read the whole ^hapter of the first of Ruth. Thus we see
that good examples from Husbands may gain upon the spirits of their wives some
good Affections to goodness, and care to imitate the best Patterns. Now as
good examples in Husbands may with Gods blessing produce glorious and
comfortable effects upon the hearts, and in the Conversations of good wives, so
on the contrary, bad examples from Husbands before their wives may bring them
to the height of all wickedness, and pertinaciousness in those their perishing
ways (without the infinite mercy of God in Christ;) Of which take a president
or two, in 1 King. 16.25. it is said, that Omri wrought evil in the eyes of
the Lord, and did worse than all that were before him: And then in ver. 30. it
is said that Ahab the Son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all
that were before him: Where (by the way) we see the Son imitates the Father in
his wicked ways. Now as Ahab was a worshipper of false Gods: so he was an
enemy to the Prophets of the true God; for proof whereof mind the 9, 10. and
17. verses of the 18. Chap. of 1 King. Also Chap, 21.20. so again in Chap.
22.8. where he plainly says, he hated Micaiah; but observe how his accursed
wife Jezebel follows his vile way of persecuting, Elijah she hates, and
seeks his life, 1 Kings. 19.2. But if it be said, it is to no purpose this way
to insert passages of wickedness relating to Omri and Ahab, they were not
Husband and Wife, but Father and Son. I answer, it is true they were so, but
that is taken notice of only to prove Ahab was a wicked man before he had
Jezebel to wife who did stir him up to wickedness, 1 Kings 21.25. for she
might be both a follower of his bad examples (as doubtless she was) and yet a
provoker of him to abundance of notorious vileness. But take a president
clear from all exception from Ananias and Saphira his wife; Ananias observing
the forwardness of many true Chistians whom God had blessed with some temporal
Estates in the time of others great extremities by reason of poverty in times
of persecution, that they were willing to sell all and communicate it to others
(which held out the life of love to Christ;) Ananias, I say, observing this, he
plays the close hypocrite, and bids as fair to maintain the name and form
of a Christian as others did, but he detaines a part of the money in a private
way for to maintain him and his wife, yet pretends, and affirms the contrary:
His wife Saphira follows his example of hypocrisy, joins with him in false
affirmations, and so both perish together. Acts 5.1. to the end of ver. 10.
Beloved, Thou that art a Husband (as chiefly in relation to God and thy own
soul,) have need to walk accurately with all circumspection in the whole
course of thy life, to beware of any scandalous ways out of pity to thy poor
yoak-fellow, that by thy example thou lead her not into the way of sin, and so
to hell for ever (without the infinite and boundless mercy of God;) For if
thou be careless herein, Dives in Hell will rise up in judgment against thee
at the last day, for in that place of torment he had some charity (as we may
say) to his poor Brethren; (I know it is but a Parable, but yet there is much
in Parables,) and thou have none on Earth to the soul of thy poor wife; yet
this I must grant, that in Hell there can be no charity, (for that is a grace,
and so cannot be there;) but to speak properly it was a fruit of self-love,
he knew he had led his Brethren by his example into the way of sin, and that
leads to Hell, and that if they should come there it would aggravate his
horror and guilt: And truly, if thou should shun giving evil examples to
thy wife on that ground, that is, out of self-love, it were better to do it so
than not at all; for we see it by daily experience, that such as the Husband
is, the Wife is diverse times the same; if he be zealous in good duties, and
frequent therein; if he be full of self-denial, and of patience under the Rod
of God, resigning himself to be at his dispose; if he be of an humble spirit,
full of Temperance, Sobriety, Love, and of a pitiful and tender heart to those
that are in misery, and ready to every good work, and laboring to hold forth
the power of godliness in Mortification, and Vivification, in dying to sin, and
living to righteousness; If he labor to live by faith against sense; If he
labor to worship God publicly, privately, and secretly, I say, if the Husband
have these graces, these qualifications, and Divine Operations: O how will a
gracious wife heave and strive, pant after, and gasp for spiritual vigor in
the strength of God to imitate the same in her sweet, precious, heavenly and
Angelical Husband. Ah (Dear heart) let me beg of thee, and beseech thee with
all the obsecrations in the world, that thou would give thy wife no worse
examples than those; for hereby thou shall glorify God. Edify and build up
thy wife in grace, discharge a grand Matrimonial duty, and gain
demonstrations of thy present gracious condition here, and of thy future
tranquillity, glory and bliss at the right hand of thy dearest Savior in
Heaven to all Eternity hereafter.

In the sixth place, The sixth duty of the Husband to his Wife.
it is the duty of the Husband to his wife, to bear with her infirmities; We
that are strong ought (says the Apostle) to bear the infirmities of the
weak, Romans 15.1. And Peter in 1 Pet. 3.7. says, the woman is the weaker
vessel, Ergo, A man ought to bear with the Infirmities of his wife. But the
question is, what faults may be said to be Infirmities to be borne with in any
in general, and in the woman in particular? I answer, these and such like, as
forgetfulness of some material business, some unusual neglect of duty to
the Husband, Children, or Servants; some wasting and spoiling of the Creature
contrary to Custom formerly, or purpose then; or some (not ordinary) breakings
forth into extravagant, and exorbitant passions, heat and Choler, of the last
kind we shall find two very sad presidents from two gracious women, and of two
patterns of admirable patience in their Husbands: The first is the extreme
(but groundless) passion of Sarah (formerly Sarai) raised against her Husband
Abraham, Genesis 16 2, 3.4, 5, 6.
(we shall abbreviate the Divine History,) Sarai was barren and Aged, she
despaires of being natural mother to any Children, who did therefore desire to
be the reputed mother of Children, she makes a motion (such a one as it was)
unto her Husband to go in to her Maid Hagar; Abraham hearkens to her voice and
does it; Hagar conceives, then is elevated in herself, and casts off due
honor from her Mistress, which she discerning is presently full of passion, and
vents it very uncivilly into the bosom of her Husband, and speaks thus that
is, My wrong be upon thee, I gave thee my maid into thy bosom, and when she
saw that she had conceived I was despised in her eyes; the Lord judge between
me and thee; Well Sara^ what is the matter? Here is a great complaint out who
has done thee the wrong? What Abram? No, he poor man is innocent in
comparison of thy self; what a false charge i^ here drawn up against Abram?
What clamor upon it? What appeals to God about it? But how does Abram demean
himself in the condition? Truly singularly well, he beats wi^ this infirmity
in his wife; he knew this w^ not the frame and temper of her spirit, an^
therefore answers very mildly, and says to be behold thy Maid is in thy hand,
do to her at pleases thee. The second sad president, as beforesaid, is that of
the carraige of Zipporah to her husband Moses, Ex. 4.19, 20, 21, 25, 26 Moses
being commanded by God to leave the land of Midian, and to return into Egypt,
about the delivering of the Children of Israel out of bondage, he takes his
Wife, and Sons, and the Rod of God in his hand, and begins his journey but be
having neglected the observation of a special Ordinance of God, viz. the
circumcising of his Son, God (says the Text) met him in the Inn and sought to
kill him; (where note by the way, that it is a dangerous thing for a man to
take a journey, though upon as lawful an occasion as can be, with the neglect
of a duty, or the guilt of any sin lying on the conscience unrepented of.)
Moses you see is in great danger of death, and his wife knowing the cause of
it, takes a sharp stone and cuts off the foreskin of her Son and throws it at
his feet (with these words) surely a bloody husband art thou unto me; which was
a very Contemptible, Contumelious, uncivil, and unmannerly behavior in her,
yet he is silent, bears with her infirmities; and no doubt but he did consider
there lay a sad temptation on her spirit, and withal was conscientious of his
own sin against God, and so sweetly passes by his wives weakness. Now these
infirmities which a Husband out of duty to his wife must bear with must not be
public, nor giving scandal and offense to others; Nay, whatever they are he
must take a fit opportunity to give her a sweet reproof; for such a Husband as
is in a passion for his wives infirmities will make such a smoke in his house
as shall disturb all in, or near it; The discretion of a man deferreth his
anger, and it is his glory to pass by a transgression, Prove. 19.11.

The seventh duty of the Husband to his Wife.
The seventh duty the Husband does owe unto his Wife, is, due maintenance in all
things, both inward and outward, for her comfortable bodily subsistence here,
both in life, and livelihood, for supportation of health whilst it is enjoyed,
and for restoration of it when decayed. And this to be performed with as much
dearness of affections, and tenderness of heart as to himself; which duty
the Apostle clearly requires husbands to perform to their wives, Ephesians 5.28,
29. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies, be that loves his
wife loves himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh: but cherishes,
and nourishes it, even as Christ does his Church. Now we know all men will
nourish their own bodies with such meat, and drink, and Physic, with such
Preservatives, and Restoratives of health as is necessary. And they will
cherish their own body with such Apparel as may not only keep them warm in
their bodies, but be some delight unto their minds. The same for kind, and
measure, for quality and quantity they must allow unto their wives, (if it be
of necessity or necessary for them, which I dare presume it is almost always.)
Yet this must be granted, that a man must not maintain himself in any thing,
either for food or raiment, above his ability, or unbecoming his place and
Calling: Neither must he allow it his wife; and doubtless no discreet wife
will desire the same. Beloved you have heard at large that it is the duty of
the Husband to his Wife to tender the good of her soul, and can any man think
that the good of her body is to be neglected? Truly, it were absurd for any to
conceit any such thing. God would not have the mouth of the Ox to be muzled
when he treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4.
and will he have the mouth of her muzled that does draw with thee in the same
yoke? Surely no, The Apostle says, that he is worse than an Infidel that does
not provide for his own Family, 1 Timothy 5.8. Now if the whole Family must be
provided for, as none dare deny, then much more she who in thy absence is the
head of the Family, and in thy own presence thy right hand Mate. What
encouragement can thy wife have to seek thy good when thou shall in whole, or
in part neglect hers. Besides, when thou shall (especially with cheerfulness)
allow thy wife all due and necessary maintenance for her comfort and
encouragement in this life, if she have any ingenuity of nature in her she will
soon give the fruit of the same into thy bosom by a more vigorous and
dexterous putting forth her utmost abilities to serve, help, and comfort thee
in all thy various conditions; but it herein thou who art her Husband art
niggardly, penurious, and base hearted and handed toward thy wife, thou may
perhaps (though it be her sin) have such poor returns, that thou shall not
crack of thy gains and incombs; But be thou persuaded that maintenance is the
wives due, and be thou careful to discharge that debt.

The eighth duty of the Husband to his Wife.
The eighth duty which the Husband does owe unto his wife, is, to labor to be
an Instrument (under God) to protect her from all injuries, wrongs,
insolences, and contumelious abuses, that any of the Sons or Daughters of
Belial shall put upon her, to the utmost of his power. In Ephesians. 5.23. the
Apostle tells us that the Husband is the head of his wife, even as Christ is the
head of his Church; and he is the Savior of his body: where take notice, that
first this duty of a Husbands protecting his wife is employed. Secondly, a
president propounded to incite us to the performance of it. First, this duty is
employed, the husband is denominated to be the head of his wife: Now the head
does labor to foresee, first, the danger the body is in. Secondly, to
contrive means to prevent it. And thirdly, to project and contrive some means
afterward for the removing of the evil if it fall. And thus must a Husband
labor to do in relation to his wife; He must labor to foresee what wrongs
may fall upon his wife beforehand, lest they come unawares. Secondly, he must
wisely prevent them if he can, which if he cannot, then in the third place he
must labor to remove them, and so to ease his wife from the burden of them.
Secondly, here is a president propounded to incite the Husband to labor to
protect his wife, and that from the example of Christ himself, Christ is the
Savior of his body (the Church) which is his spouse: so must the husband
labor to defend and protect his wife, his spouse, his body; yet further are we
to labor this to do even from the practice of very Heathens. The wife of
Potiphar tells a seeming fair tale (but it was a most Diabolical lie) to her
husband, that Joseph had done her wrong, and had mocked her, which complaint of
hers was believed by her husband. Now though Joseph was choicely beloved of his
Master before, yet now his wrath is kindled against him, and Joseph must to
prison for the pretended injury, Genesis 39.17, 19, 20. Hester had put up a
complaint to Ahasuerus her husband, (and a just complaint too,) That she and
her people were sold to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. The King her
husband demands who he was? and where he was that durst presume in his heart to
do this? Hester returns answer, that the Adversary that had done this was that
wicked Haman; upon which the Kings wrath was so enkindled against him, (though
he were his chief favorite,) that he could not be pacified until such time
as Haman was hanged, Hest. 7.4, 5, 6, 10.

In the ninth place it is the duty of the husband to his wife, in a prudentiall
way, The ninth duty of the Husband to his Wife.
with all sweetness and love, to labor to prevent her from an idle and
unprofitable expense of time. A husband in the general should labor to make
his wife a complete Christian. Now he or she that are not fit for Christian
society are no complete Christians: But the Apostle commands the Thessalonians
to withdraw themselves from every brother that did walk disorderly, 2 These.
3.6. Now if you would know what that sin was which is called a disorderly
walking, if you please to confer with the 10. and 11. verses, you will find it
was the sin of not working, the sin of Idleness. Now in this point I would not
be mistaken, I would have none conceive that I should think that it were fit
for a husband to be a Task-master to his wife, to set her a stint of work, and
to exact it of her, (which was the sin of the cruel Egyptians against the
Hebrews, (who were Gods own people,) Exodus 5.6, 7, 8.) But if it be demanded,
what employment is most proper for the wife to look after? I answer, with the
mother of Solomon (in the first place,) Prove. 21.27. she must look well to the
ways of her Household, Secondly, I answer with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.14. she
must guide the house; it is an excellent and well beseeming carriage in a wife
to look out sharp (as we may say,) to prevent servants Idleness, and
wastefulness, for there was never worse servants in an Age than now; they must
have great wages, but do little work for it; they will not gather up the
broken fragments that nothing be lost, Joh. 6.12. Nay, they will purloine, (
Tit. 2.10.) not showing all good fidelity, for they will filtch, p^fer, and
steal, waste, and consume the estates of their Masters, which might well be
prevented by the industry of a careful wife, whereby her husbands estate might
be preserved, and livelihood maintained for him, her self, and their children;
for want of which care many a Family has been brought to ruin, and Children
to a morsel of bread. And as it is an excellent and well-beseeming carriage in
a wife thus to oversee the ways of her Family, so it is a very choice piece of
service in her in the acceptance of her husband. Again, in answer to the
former demand, (that is,) What is the proper employment of a wife to look
after? In the third place, it is not out of a woman's Calling to spend
seasonable time in intimate society with her husband to quicken and enlive the
affections of each other, one to another. But for that sin of a woman's in
mispending her time in an idle and letty way, the husband (as beforesaid)
should take care to prevent; for idleness is (as we say) the mother of all
mischief; And I well like that speech of a grave Divine, that is, That the
Divill has a Commission to take up all idle persons, and to employ them in his
service. This shall suffice for this ninth duty of the husband to his wife, and
so we proceed to the tenth and last duty that the husband does owe as
beforesaid.

In the last place it is the duty of the husband to the wife, The tenth duty of
the Husband to his Wife.
to take care so to manage his estate whilst opportunity serves, that he may
be able to leave some competent estate for her to maintain her when God shall
take him away by death, (if God think fit she shall be the surviver.) we have
already taken notice, that Parents must lay up for their Children, 2 Cor.
12.14. But a man's wife should be accounted of him much dearer than children,
and that because they are one flesh, which Parents and Children are not.
Therefore a man ought in his will to have more respect to his wife than to his
children, except first the children be Infants, or every way unhelpfull to
themselves; and that their mother be youthful and of an able body, and in a
capacity to look out in a probable way to have a competent maintenance; and
also in a second place, except the mother be of a very harsh and bitter spirit
to her Children, and so like to be as a stepmother rather than a natural
mother; but if there be no ground for these considerations, it is still the
most Christian and prudent way for the husband to be more liberal to his wife
than unto his children when he is to set his house in order, and to make his
Will: And for this we have a Christian president from the practice of Elkanah.
A very judicious Divine (whom the Christian world does reverence for a very
learned Expositor Mr Cotton of Boston in New England.
) says, that it was the custom of the Jews before they took any large journey
to make their Wills, and dispose of their estates, not knowing whether they
should return again; upon which occasion Elkanah living far from Shiloh, and
being to appear there before the Lord, he makes his Will, unto which he gave
unto Peninnah his wife, and to his Sons and Daughters portions; But unto Hannah
he gave a worthy portion, (because he loved her,) 1 Samuel 1.3, 4, 5. As a man
that loves his wife would not only have her fare well when he is at home, but
when absent from home also: So if thou do love thy wife with a cordial love
thou would not only have her live well in this world whilst thou art her
companion here, but also when thou art, through the Lords free Grace a
Companion with Saints and Angels in Heaven at the right hand of God, and in the
bosom of thy dearest Savior. But if thou art not careful to provide for thy
wife as well as thou can whilst thou live here, thou can have but little
hope that she should live well hereafter when thou art gone; which duty of
thine if thou neglect, thou will leave a brand upon thy name to Posterity to
judge by, that thy wife never lay in the bosom of thy affections; for if she
had, thou would have expressed more sincere love to her at your parting. Thus
God has carried us through the consideration of ten special duties which the
husband does owe unto his wife; which to help thy memory take the heads of them
as they have been laid down in order, viz. First, Conjugall Affections.
Secondly, Cohabitation. Thirdly, a Godly care to build her up in the knowledge
of God. Fourthly, To seek to reclaim her from sin. Fifthly, To walk before
her in good examples. Sixthly, To bear with her infirmities. Seventhly, To
allow her due maintenance. Eighthly, To protect her. Ninthly, To be careful
she improve her time so as not to live idly. Lastly, To take care to leave her
some competent maintenance; we come now by the Lords assistance to consider of
some duties the wife does owe unto the husband, which in the fear of God she
must labor to perform and discharge.

The first duty of the Wife to the Husband.
The first duty the wife does owe unto the husband, is, also Conjugall
Affections, or a singular, choice, and special love; you may remember we gave
this duty of love the precedence (in a superlative way) of all other duties the
husband does owe to his wife; Love is the sap, bud, and blossom from whence
all other Matrimonial duties do spring. And answerable to the degrees hereof
(be they more or less) does the other incline or decline in the heart of the
wife to, or from, the husband. The wife ought to love her husband with a most
entire and ardent love; yea, such a love as is only proper and peculiar unto
him; He ought to be unto her the chief part of her outward joy and enjoyments;
as one said of a choice dish of meat, that he could cut out of it all the
variety of dainties that the best furnished board in the world was provided of;
so may a woman say, that in her husband (under God) she has all outward good
things that any have the fruition of; which as it gives abundance of
satisfaction to her own heart, so the reflection of it does return back into
the bosom of her husband to fill him with much solace and delight in her
again. Elkanah says to Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.8.
Am I not better to thee than ten sons; thereby implying what an high esteem^
the wife should have of her Husband. Paul would have Titus teach young women to
love their Husbands, Tit. 2.4. (And doubtless it is the duty of elder women to
do the same, but young women are particularized, because of the levity of their
minds, they being apt above others to close with vain pleasures, and so more
likely to neglect their maine duty to their Husbands.) In 1 Cor. 7.28. the
Apostle speaks of such as are married, that they shall have no trouble in the
flesh, that is, diverse outward troubles and encumbrances in the mind; for in
the Marriage Estate there is an intermixture of discomforts with comforts.
There may be sometimes too many wild Gourds shred and put into that pottage, by
reason whereof death may be there, as in 2 Kings 4.39, 40. but in the 41. verse
the Prophet bids them bring meal and cast it into the pot, and so they did,
and then it was wholesome; so thou that art a wife if thou do sometimes meet
with losses and crosses, pains and troubles, cares and turmoiles, whereby
death (that is, sorrows and griefs) lay hold on thee to imbitter that
otherwise blessed condition unto thee; then bring meal (and that is love) and
cast it into the bosom of thy Husband, and that will sweeten all; it will
turn gall and wormwood into sugar and honey. As Christ is to his Spouse the
chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. so must thy Husband be unto thee, which
if he be not, it may be much suspected that thou have an Adulterous heart, at
least, if thou be not also outwardly defiled too. Then in the next place.

The second duty of the Wife to the Husband.
Cohabitation is also a duty the wife does owe unto her Husband: it is not only
the duty of the Husband to live with his wife, but hers to live with him. And
among other ends she was created for this, that is, to be his Companion. God
found it not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2.18. And indeed, how can she be a
meet helper to him if she live apart from him. There may be many necessary
occasions for a man to change the place of his habitation, sometimes to enjoy
better means of Grace, sometimes to enjoy better means of health, sometimes
to enjoy better means of livelihood, and sometimes to enjoy society of choice
friends; there be none of these but may give a man a clear call sometimes to
remove his habitation, and he must (if he be a Christian) obey God herein. Now
take this for a most undeniable truth, that whatever passage of Divine
providence will warrant the lawfulness of the Husbands change of place of
dwelling, will also warrant the Wives call to travel with her Husband, and to
live with him wheresoever he pitch his Tent. Mark the Apostles phrase, 1 Cor.
9.5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other
Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord, and as Cephas; where you may note,
that the Apostles, the Brethren of the Lord, and Cephas did lead about their
wives (which they could not have done against their wills) and Paul does
challenge the same privilege as due to him as well as to the other. But to add
a clear demonstration to this truth yet further by joining presidents to
privileges, consider the practice of Sarah, when God calls Abraham to leave his
country and go into that which he would show him, she goes with him, Genesis
12.5. When God calls him the second time to remove, that is, to go into Egypt
because of the Famine in the Land where he did live, you shall find his wife
did go with him, ver, 10, 11. who did also return with him, Chap. 13.1.
Again, when God calls Isaac to go to Gerar, to sojourne there for a time, (and
that by reason of Famine too,) Rebekah (his wife) goes with him, Genesis 26.1, 7.
But in a special manner mind the practice of Leah and Rachel, they are willing
to leave their Fathers house and kindred (not being enforced by Famine) to
enjoy society with Jacob their husband, Genesis 31.4. to the end of ver. 18. As
Ruth said to Naomi (her mother in Law,) Where thou go I will go, and where
thou lodgest I will lodge, and where thou dyest I will dye, and there will I be
buried. The Lord do so to me and more also if ought but death part thee and me,
Ruth. 1.16, 17. So must every Christian wife say to her husband, where thou
live I will live, and where thou die I will die, and there will I be
buried, for naught but death shall part thee and me. By all which it does (or
may) appear that it is the duty of the wife to her husband to Cohabit with him
in what place soever God shall call him; and if she perform not this duty, she
disables her self to the observation of others; But in case, first, that the
husband will live in a Popish Country, out of either a superstitious, or
fantastical end or humor: The wife is not bound to follow him, for she must
look more after the true worship of God, and the salvation of her own soul,
than after any outward comfortable condition in the world. Or secondly, if the
Husband be an unbeliever, and does not like to live with a believing wife, then
such a wife is at liberty (if I mistake not the Apostle) to live from him, 1
Cor. 7.13, 15. But lastly, in case the husband do violate the Covenant of
Marriage by Adultery, Fornication, etc. Then if the wife please she may forsake
him, which by necessary consequence may appear from the words of Christ, Mat.
5.32. Chap. 19 9. For if the husband may put his wife away for such breach of
Marriage-Contract, why not the wife put away her husband on the like occasion.
But if upon ordinary occasion the wife shall refuse the performance of this
duty to her husband, she does make void and null one special end of Marriage,
and so sins against God the ordainer of that happy estate; also against her
Husband, in depriving him of his due comfort; and lastly, against her soul and
conscience, as contracting sin and guilt; and against her body, in a violent
cutting the thread of her chiefest external felicity. So much for this
particular duty from the wife to the husband.

In the third place, The third duty of the Wife to the Husband.
the duty of the Wife to her Husband, is, to improve her spiritual abilities,
to be helpful to him in the best things for the good of his soul, to stir him
up to good duties when she takes notice of any remissness and carnal security
in him; by sweet exhortations, and holy conference she must labor to quicken
him against a spiritual Lethargy, which if it seize on him, will so becloud
and benight his senses, that he shall have neither head nor heart, with any
cheerfulness of spirit, to walk with his God; which if his wife discern him
inclining to, (but in a special manner captivated under) she had need to
bestir her self to salute him often with such Texts of Scripture as these,
viz. Luke 9.62. 1 Cor. 9 the later part of ver 24. Phil. 3.13, 14. Rev. 2.4.
and the beginning of ver. 5. Rev. 3.15, 16. Luke 17.32. Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. She
must labor to stir him up to love and good works, and therein follow the
example of the Shunamite, 2 King 4 9, 10. (thou that art a Wife read the place,
and follow the Precept.) She must labor to strengthen her Husbands faith when
he shows most weakness. After Manoah had offered a sacrifice to God, the
Angel of the Lord did wonderfully in the presence of him and his wife: The
good Man's faith began to fail, We shall dye, says he, because we have seen
God, (want of faith was like to kill the poor man:) Now his wife steps in very
opportunely, and labors to strengthen his faith, If, says she, the Lord would
have killed us he would not have told us these things, nor accepted a Sacrifice
at our hands. Judge. 13.20, 22, 23. so she makes good that place in Eccl. 4.9,
10. Two are bettter than one, for if one fall the other will lift up his
fellow: but woe be to him that is alone, for he has not another to help him
up. Truly, there is a mavelous Sympathy between Husband and Wife in all
conditions (I mean, when they live, and love together as man and wife) one
will labor to support another. And one thing let me put thee on in a special
manner, that is, be sure as thou do desire to improve thy gifts and parts for
the good of thy Husbands soul. That thou do never neglect to pray for him. As
Aaron did bear the names of the Children of Israel before the Lord on his two
shoulders for a memorial, Exodus 28.9, 12. So be thou sure to bear the
remembrance of thy Husbands poor soul upon thy heart when thou art to appear
before the Lord in thy Closet-worship, that thou may prevail with God for a
blessing for him, that he may be heavenly and spiritual in all his deportments
toward God, and toward man^ that in the strength of Gods grace he may be a
selfe-denying, and a selfe-mortifying Christian. That he may be furnished with
saving Faith, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Repentance unto life, strength
against corruptions; that he may abound in every good work; that he may be an
Instrument of Gods glory here, and a Vessel of Mercy hereafter: And in thy
drawing forth and improving thy parts thus for thy Husbands spiritual
advantages men and Angels shall witness for thee, that thou have labored to
answer one end of Gods creating of thee, that is, to be a meet helper to thy
Husband; nay, the spirit of God shall attest the same to thy own soul, to thy
comfort here, and permanent happiness hereafter.

Fourthly, The duty of a wife to her Husband, The fourth duty of the Wife to
the Husband.
is, a comely and Christian-like subjection to him; she must not contend for
equality with him, much less superiority over him, but must content her self
in the same station or condition wherein the God of wisdom (or that God who is
wisdom it self) has set her. Now that this is a duty, take Scripture
evidence for it, (for I know it will not down, but sticks in the throat with
too too many, but to a mortified Christian a Command from God is enough to
sweeten that which to flesh and blood is as bitter as gall,) Col. 3.8. The
Apostle says, Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it is fit in
the Lord. So Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands as unto
the Lord; where mark the diversity of terms. In the former place it is, Wives
submit, etc. as it is fit in the Lord: But in this latter, Wives submit, etc.
as unto the Lord; For some women may say, we are willing to submit our selves
to our own Husbands as it is fit in the Lord; But what submission may be said
to be fit in the Lord? I answer, That submission is fit in the Lord that has
respect to any Command the Husband shall lay on his wife which is grounded upon
Scripture Precepts or Presidents. Secondly, That submission of Wives to their
Husbands is fit in the Lord, which is not forbidden in Scripture, neither
expressly, nor implicitly, neither plainly, nor by necessary consequence; but
to answer such as would pretend scrupulosity, (when they intend only the
discharging of themselves from all submission to their Husbands,) let them
ruminate or chew the end upon the last term, where Wives are commanded to
submit to their own Husbands as unto the Lord, and see what they can gather
from those words as a ground to satisfy their consciences for their
non-submission. Now because the Holy Ghost did foresee that women (nay, some
good women) would not fall down before this truth, but endeavor to maintain
that rotten and unsound maxim, viz. that the Wife is the Husbands equal,
therefore does the Spirit of God in Ephesians. 5.23. (which was last quoted) lay down
an undeniable reason why Wives should submit to their Husbands, For (says he)
the Husband is the head of his Wife as Christ is the head of his Church; And
then in ver. 24. the Spirit of God comes to a Corrollary or Conclusion, thus,
Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so, let the Wives be unto their
own Husbands in every thing. Now the reason here brought (for the end
beforesaid) stands thus, That as the Church does submit to Christ's Authority,
(he being her head,) so must the wife submit to the Authority of her husband,
because he is the head likewise; and that he is so, consider also that of the
Apostle, in 1 Cor. 11.3. The head of the woman is the man. Now Headship implies
Authority, (that is beyond dispute,) and Authority requires subjection. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, whosoever resists the power
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, Romans 13.1, 2. And none can deny but that Headship,
Authority, and power is one and the same. Yet further, concerning this duty of
the wife to her husband in relation to subjection to him; mind that of the
Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet. 3.1. where he says, Likewise ye Wives be in
subjection to your own Husbands. Then in ver. 6. he brings you a President for
it, (and that from a singular woman,) Even as Sarai obeyed Abraham calling him
Lord, whose Daughters you are as long as you do well. Now, as it is a glorious
privilege to be a Son of Abraham, (in a spiritual sense,) so it is a high
honor to be a Daughter of Sarai. And thou who art a Christian-woman, by no
means forget, that from the original of time God did ordain that the Husband
should rule over his Wife, Genesis 3.16. Nay, the very Heathens thought it fit
that every man should bear rule in his own house, Hester. 1.20, 22. But some
woman may say, what if my husband be a Son of Belial? One who has no grace in
him? who bears not the Image of God, but of the Devil? Must a Christian be
subject to a Heathen? A Saint to a Devil incarnate? I answer, that if thou be
so matched in the Marriage Estate, then thy condition is sad, and very sad, and
much to be lamented. But still it is a clear truth, that thou must be subject
to even such a Husband in all his lawful Commands, and further thou must not
obey a godly husband;) And this the Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet, 3.1, 2. does hint
at plainly. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own Husbands; And then
adds this as a reason to excite them to the performance of this duty, that is,
That if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the
Conversation of the wives, while they behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear. I see no cause to add one word more to demonstrate that subjection
in a wife to her husband is a duty she does owe him. But let me beseech thee
that art a Husband, that all the Commands thou do lay on thy wife may be in
the nature of requests and entreaties; for know it, that though thy wife be not
equal to thee in power, yet she is not so subordinate to thee as thy Children
and Servants, command service from them but desire thy Wife to be subservient
to thee, and if she have any commendable qualifications in her thou may be
sure thou have her heart to serve thee, and therefore can not want her hand.
Nay, she will rejoice that at any time she has any intimation of thy mind in
any business that she is able to perform.

The fifth duty that the Wife does owe unto her Husband, is, due and comely
Reverence; The fifth duty of the Wife to the Husband.
Wives must not only submit to their Husbands, and obey them but they must
reverence them likewise, and this the Apostle does charge them to perform; Let
the Wife see (says he) that she reverence her Husband; where observe that in
the particle [see] there is an Emphasis, it is an Emphaticall expression, for
it is as if he had said, be sure let the wife take diligent care of this, and
mind it in a special manner, that she omit it not by any means to reverence
her Husband, Ephesians. 5.33. But if it be demanded, how this Reverence should be
performed? I answer, two ways, in her words, and in her gestures. First, in
her words, and that two ways; first, when she speaks to him; Secondly, when
she speaks of him. First, when she speaks to him, by avoiding Clamor, and
high language; Secondly, by avoiding of unnecessary repetitions and
Tautologies, (especially if her Husband be a judicious and prudent man,) for
take this for an undeniable truth, that a man of parts cannot endure a
multitude of words, and large preambles. Thirdly, When she makes her desires
known to him rather by requests than by peremptory demands, (yet this must be
granted, that a Woman may speak to her Husband in a way of intimate
familiarity.) Lastly, when she takes a fit time and place to fasten some
Christian reproof on him, and then to do it with much meekness and tender
love. Secondly, a woman must reverence her Husband in her words when she
speaks of him to others; First by giving him on all occasions (that are just)
due praise and commendations; And secondly, by being ready to vindicate his
reputation against all unjust aspersions and Calumniations that do impeach his
credit, and obstruct his well-deserved Estimation in the hearts of such as are
wise and godly, whereby she shall not only reverence him her self, but cause
others to do the same. Secondly, The Wife must reverence her Husband in her
Gestures and Actions; First, by giving him due respect before others abroad,
and before Children and Servants at home, not behaving her self in a rude and
uncivil way toward him, as slighting his presence. Secondly, in leaving to him
the wise and orderly government of the Family, and all Domestique Discipline
without contradiction. Lastly, (and in special) in observing his good
Counsel, and in following his religious and godly examples. I might here take
occasion to fasten a just reproof upon many Women, that are so far from
reverencing their Husbands, that on the contrary they are Instruments (but
cursed ones) of much disrespect, disgrace, and dishonor to be call upon their
Husbands by their Contumelious words to them, their scandalous and contemptible
words behind their backs, and in their unworthy, and unbeseeming gestures and
actions toward them; but let such women know, that as they are transgressors
against the Commands of God relating to the Wives duty of reverencing her
Husband, (which is most of all) so they are no gainers hereby; it may be they
make their Husbands good esteem fall to the ground among the baser conditioned
people, but to be sure their own good names (if ever they had any) they make to
stink in the Nostrils of all men who have but moral honesty, and much more
with those who are pious and godly indeed. But I shall not prosecute this,
because I think it rarely the sin of a godly woman, and I despair of doing
good on others.

In the sixth place it is the duty of the Wife to bear with her Husbands
infirmities; The sixth duty of the Wife to the Husband.
though the woman be the weaker Vessel, yet the man is not free from, but
Obnoxious to many weaknesses, and infirmities, which a loving and
tenderhearted wife must labor to bear with; sometimes it does come to pass
(and often too) that the Husband meeting with turbulent and cross businesses,
may have such perturbations of mind, that for a time it may interrupt his
otherwise sweet composure of spirit, and make him malecontent, and wayward, and
hard to please by his dearest relations, that neither Wife nor Children can
have a cheerful look from him, nor a good word of him, which the wife with a
sweet silence, or amiable carriage, both in words and actions must pass by,
and it will be her great wisdom and godly discretion so to do. And hereby his
passions of mind will waste the faster, and he return to his usual temper the
sooner; but if on the contrary the Wife to his enkindled coals add fuel and
combustible matter by bad words, and a crosse-grain'd behavior, the whole
house will not only be in a disturbing smoke, but in a burning flame; Grievous
words stir up Anger, Pro. 15.1. whereas on the contrary, A soft Answer turns
away wrath. It was the sin of Zipporah who failed in her duty in not bearing
with her Husbands infirmity; but (as has been observed) Moses did well to
bear with hers, Exodus 4.25. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ, says the Apostle, Gal. 6.2. This duty concerned all Christians
to practice in general, but in the case we speak to it does concern the Wife
most to practice in relation to her Husband, but for her to take a fit
opportunity (with Abigail) to acquaint him that his carriage was not good, but
(he being godly) very ill-beseeming him, and of scandal to others, this will
be an ornament of grace to her (especially if she perform it in a right way.)
There may be many other infirmities in a man besides Anger and Passion, which
his Wife must, I say, bear with, which we shall not endeavor to
particularize, but leave to her to judge of; only we shall in one word give her
the rule to proceed by, viz. A man's infirmity (properly) is an unvoluntary
deviation from that rule of exactness whereby (by the grace of God) he does
walk in the general course of his life, both in relation to God and man,
having first respect to the duties of piety required in the first Table, and
secondly, to the duties of righteousness in the second Table of the Decalogue,
or ten Commandments.

In the seventh place, The seventh duty of the Wife to the Husband.
it is the duty of the Wife to the Husband to yield him help and furtherance in
his outward Estate. But in the prosecution of this duty we shall use the more
concisenesse; having mentioned something this way in the ninth duty of the
Husband to his Wife, only what was there delivered was upon another Account,
that is, to put it upon the Husband to stir up his Wife to avoid idleness, and
to labor to be industrious; where her chief Employment was expressed to be, to
guide the house, and to look well to the ways of her Family. But here we must
labor to stir her up to the practice of this her duty, and we hope the
convincing her that it is a duty will be Motive sufficient to that end. Now
here it will be necessary for the Wife to take notice of the injunction of the
Apostle in 1 Timothy 5.14. where he says, I will (which is as much as to say I
command) that the younger women marry, (bear Children) and guide the house.
Now to guide the house, (at least well, for that must be understood) is to see
every servant perform their duty, and every one in the Family to have food in
due season, and that it be good for quality, and enough for quantity, and
nothing spoiled for want of seasonable spending; she must have a jealous eye
upon such servants in whom there is the least ground of suspicion of
unfaithfulness, to prevent their passages out of the back door (as we ^ay)
and to take heed of laying temptations on them, by letting them enjoy any
opportunities to come at such things which concern them not to have to do with
but at times of washings, or cleansing the corners of the house; for the
Proverb is, that the temptation makes the Thief. She must in a special
manner be careful of the Education and breeding of the Children (they being
the chiefest part of her Husbands, and her own Estate;) she must be as
helpful as she may (if need require) to her Husband in his outward Calling.
But thou that art a Wife, if thou desire to perform thy duty this way, then
for thy imitation read often, and consider seriously of the ways of the good
Houswife in Pro. 31.10. to the end of that Chapter. And truly, let me tell
thee, that if thou be not conscientious to further thy Husband in his outward
estate, thou art very unworthy to have any share in that honor of being
reputed among the number of meet helpers. There has many a man been raised to
a good outward estate by the industry of his wife, for the hand of the diligent
makes rich, Prove. 10.4. (whether the hand of Husband or Wife.) And many a man
has been brought to miserable penury and beggary by the Idleness (and such
qualities as attend thereon,) of his wife. Lastly, The Wife may very much help
her Husband in his outward Estate by laboring to prevent him, or to seek to
reclaim him from profuse, unthrifty, and expensive ways; I say, she should
first labor to prevent him from such Estate-consuming courses, which she may
do by laboring to provide all necessary and wholesome diet at home for him,
with due attendance and a quiet Family; for many a man having wanted these at
home has sought them abroad, and so by little and little custom in unthrifty
courses has brought a necessity on him of continuance in them, a necessity
indeed, but yet springing from his own wicked heart. But thou that art a Wife,
if thou can not prevent this plague from falling on thy Family, then in the
second place thou must labor in all ways of wisdom and sweetness to
reclaim him out of these pernicious courses. Beseech him to consider his sin
(by this wicked way of his) against God; Secondly, against his own soul;
Thirdly, against his body by unhealthfulnesse and noisome diseases; Fourthly,
against his Credit; Fifthly, Against his own Estate; Sixthly, Against thy
self. Lastly, Against his poor Children. Thou must also labor to be as
amiable in his eye as possible, that he may delight in thy company; (truly,
they are no good means that some women use to reclaim their Husbands by, as
to follow them with an enraged spirit to an Alehouse, and there to rail, and
foame, pull, and tear, as if they would throw the house out of the window (as
we say) for this course seldom or never does do any good.) But if all the
means thou can use prove in vain, beg of God to sanctify this sore
afflicton to thee and thine, and the more expensive thy Husband is abroad, the
more sparing be thou at home, that if possible the Estate may hold out to be a
means to bring up thy Children, until (under God) they can shift by good
ways for themselves. But for thy own condition, whether in such a desperate
case thou may make a purse for thy self (as we say) or not, I shall say
very little, (and that under correction too, submitting to the judgment of
learned and judicious Divines,) but I am fully satisfied in my own conscience,
that thou may not (contrary to thy Husbands allowance) lay by one penny (as
we lay) against a wet day; and the reason why I thus think, is, because thy
Husband alone has the propriety in his Estate, unless some agreement between
you before Marriage, or between thy friends and him have altered the case. And
we must for ever walk by this Rule, that we must not do evil that good may
come thereby, Romans 3.8. for their damnation is just. But this thou must do,
(and in so doing approve thy self a Christian.) thou must act faith on God,
Hab. 3.17, 18. And that thou can not do if thou neglect lawful means, or
use any that is unlawful.

The eighth duty of the Wife to the Husband.
Now in the eighth and last place, the duty of the Wife to her Husband, is, to
put forth her self with all tenderness and endeared Affections, with all
readiness, enlargednesse, and cheerfulness, to yield him comfort and succor
in the time of bodily affliction, sickness, and weakness, (we have seen
before, that the aiming at comfort in all conditions is one end (and a
principal one too) of our desiring the Marriage condition.) And if a woman be
any way negligent herein, she does leave unperformed one special duty she does
owe to her Husband; for if ever a man stand in need of his Wives help, he does
so in a special manner when he cannot help himself. Now the time of sickness
and weakness is such a time, and then the wife must in an extraordinary way
put forth her best abilities in her own person to contribute to the foresaid
purpose; and not only so, but she must labor to procure able and faithful
attendants about him; and by no means neglect to look out to procure (under
God) help from such Physicians as have both the Theory and practique part of
their profession, and manifest most tenderness, care, and honesty for the good
and recovery of their patients. But what means soever she makes use of, she
must depend on the God of means for a blessing, which she must crave of him by
earnest and fervent prayer, for such prayer is a means sanctified of God to
save the sick, Jam. 5.15. We shall turn in here, and proceed no further to lay
down the particular duties that the Wife does owe to her Husband, of which she
must make conscience as in the presence of God. And that as she will approve
her self to be a meet helper to her Husband; the number of which duties you
see are eight, first, Matrimonial love; Secondly, Cohabitation; Thirdly, To be
helpful to him in the best things for the good of his soul; Fourthly,
Submission to him; Fifthly, To reverence him; Sixthly, To labor to bear with
his Infirmities; Seventhly, To yield him furtherance in his outward Estate;
Eighthly, and lastly, To labor to help and comfort him in time of Illness and
weakness of any kind.

We have endeavored hitherto to consider of the distinct duties of the Husband
to his Wife: And of the Wives duties to her Husband; or which duties some that
the Husband does owe unto his Wife are the same that the Wife does owe unto
her Husband: And some that the Wife does owe unto her Husband are the same
that the Husband does owe unto his Wife, yet with some apparent differences.

But now there remains some duties to be considered of that are equally due to
each other, (though not before proposed) and must be so handled.

The first joint duty between a man and wife.
The first joint duty between man and wife equally obliging both, is, that they
labor to maintain a good opinion one of another touching their faithfulness
in keeping the Marriage Covenant, and that neither of them have violated the
same by lodging their hearts in the bosom of strangers, or defiling their
bodies with them; For, if for want of care herein there appear ground of just
suspicion of unfaithfulness, jealousy will get into the heart, and take up
its residence there until it have consumed the sap, and devoured the root of
all true love; And then miserable days in all probability will be the portion
of both as long as their unhappy lives last. Mark how Solomon in the Canticles
does describe jealousy, Jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof
are coals of fire which have a most vehement flame, Eccl. 8.6. this fire will
not admit of any limits. I say again, it will eat out love, it will consume
joy and all comfort in the Marriage-Estate; yea, it will waste the flesh, the
marrow, and the bone, and shorten life it self. Jealousy, says the Holy
Ghost, is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance. He will not regard a Ransom; neither will he rest content though
thou give many gifts, Prove. 6.34, 35. Of all wrongs that can be offered to
man, or wife, they will not endure this breach of the Conjugall Contract; good
natures (especially gracious hearts) in man and wife will bear with the
Infirmities of each other, but they will not be patient when they see this
cursed enormity. Here then you see that this care that is to be taken by both
parties to labor to preserve in their hearts a good opinion of each other this
way, may well fall in as a duty to be minded of exceeding high concernment.

The second joint duty between man and wife equally concerning both, is, The
second joint duty between a man and wife.
the yielding to each other due benevolence; the Apostle expressly requires
it, 1 Cor. 7.3. and gives an undeniable reason for it in ver. 4. and in ver. 5.
he tells us (upon the matter) that to deny the same each to other, is, to
defraud each other, but I refer you to the place and will not add one syllable
more on this point for special reason.

The third joint duty between a man and Wife.
The third and last joint duty of man and wife equally concerning both, is, that
they do not pollute or defile the Marriage bed, for it may be polluted etc. two
ways. First, by Inordinatenesse; Secondly, by unseasonableness. First, by
Inordinatenesse, when Married persons abuse their liberty in
Marriage-Conjunctions to excess, and so make it a means rather to increase
Concupiscence than to mortify the same; they should cast on water to quench
lust, and not Oil to inflame the fury thereof. God has ordained Marriage as a
means to avoid Fornication, but this excess we speak of, makes (even) such
persons more obnoxious to temptations to that sin, than happily most are that
are in the single condition. And God does many times severely punish this sin,
but the Philosopher will tell you how; He will acquaint you, that by this
inordinate and over-frequent actings you do evacuate the best spirits which God
and Nature has not only appointed for generation, but for the supportation of
the body of man, which otherwise would be full of Imbecility, but being so
profusely cast away there follows much weakness in the body, raging pains
in the head, and sometimes that exceeding sad affliction of the running of the
Reins, and sometimes the effect of these distempers brings death. Now it is
true, both sexes are not joint sufferers alike, but they are joint sinners, and
should jointly be humbled and reformed. Thus much for the first head; but
secondly, the Marriage Bed may be polluted by using it in unseasonable times;
for there are two times that God does prohibit these conjunctions in; First,
in case the Lord call us to the duty of Fasting and Prayer, then there must be
a cessation and intermission this way, 1 Cor. 7 5. Defraud not one another
except with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to Fasting and
prayer. The Lord also by the Prophet Joel requires the Bridegroom to go forth
of his Chamber in the day of humiliation, Joel 2.15, 16. When the people of
God make their approaches before the Lord on extraordinary occasions there must
be very serious preparations to such duties; And as jewels and rich apparel
must be laid aside in some cases, as Exodus 33.4, 5, 6. So upon some other
approaches they must not come at their wives, Exo. 19.15. Thus much for the
first unseasonable time, whereby the Marriage Bed is polluted. But secondly, In
a special manner this sin may be committed in those ordinary seasons of
extraordinary flux, or over-flowings of nature in the Feminine gender, for then
the Lord has forbidden all near approaches in such a way as we speak to, and
that under a special penalty: even the being cut off from their people, which
was either by death, or castings out from Church-society, (to the later I
incline,) Lev. 18.19. Chap. 20.18. and in Ezekiel. 22.10. the Lord complains that
in Jerusalem there were a very flagitious people this way. Now then, by these
pollutions of the Marriage Bed, first, by Inordinatenesse; Secondly,
Unseasonablenesse, the opinion of an Orthodoxe Divine will be confirmed, which
is, that as a man may be a drunkard with his own drink, and a glutton with his
own meat, so a man may be a filthy and unclean person with his own wife. And
for the sin of these last persons defiling the Marriage Bed by their unnatural
and unclean Conjunctions, God does punish it (according to the observation of
the Philosopher) with an unhealthfull and leprous Offspring. And for ought
thou know with spiritual judgments on thy soul, even hardness of heart,
and final Impenitency. Therefore in the name and fear of the great God it
concerns you both to keep at a far distance from these pollutions in the
Marriage-condition. This may suffice for these three last and joint duties
concerning both man and wife; First, to avoid the giving any cause for
jealousy to enter into the heart; Secondly, the yielding to each other due
benevolence; And lastly, a religious care to shun all pollution in the
Marriage Bed, either by Inordinatenesse, or unseasonablenesse in the use
thereof.

We are now by the Lords good leave and divine assistance to proceed to the
last thing (propounded in the beginning,) which we are to consider of before
Marriage, namely, the duties that both Husband and Wife do owe unto their
Family in relation to both Children and Servants. Which because most of these
duties concern both Husband and Wife, we shall endeavor to handle them
together for brevities sake, yet make some distinction, that they may both take
notice of their duties, where distinction is to be made.

The first duty that both Husband and Wife do owe unto their Family, The first
duty of Governors to their Family.
is to Catechize and instruct their Children and Servants in the knowledge of
God, and fear of his Name This duty does chiefly belong to the Husband, yet in
his absence it does properly concern his wife likewise. Now the Great God does
not only enjoyne this duty upon the Children of Israel, but does much inculcate
the same, Deuteronomy. 4 6. Take heed to thy self diligently lest thou forget the
things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the
days of thy life, but thou shall teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons. Then
again, Deuteronomy. 6. 6.7. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, etc. Yet
further, Deuteronomy. 11.19. Ye shall lay up these my words in your hearts, and in
your souls, and bind them for a sign upon your hands, that they may be as
frontlets between your eyes, and ye shall teach them your Children, etc. The
Apostle requires the same duty of Parents, Ephesians. 6.4. Ye Parents provoke not
your Children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the
Lord. Solomon exhorts us to the same duty, Prove. 22 6. Train up a Child in the
way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Now in
Scripture you shall find this duty of teaching and instructing Children and
Servants was frequently performed by the godly: first see it in the practice of
Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Further view it in the resolution of Joshuah, Josh. 24 15
Also in the care of David, both in 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and in Psalm 34.11. And can we
conceive that Cor^el^us did neglect this duty? who feared God with all his
household, Acts 10.2. Or that any of those holy men did omit this duty, whose
houses were Churches? Romans 16.^. Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. If we should so think we
give ground enough for others to conclude we are very uncharitable. Besides, if
the judgment of Ancient and Modern Divines, in relation to this truth, be of
force with you to confirm you herein, you must then be satisfied, that it is
the duty of Parents and Governors of Families to take much pains to teach and
instruct their Children and Servants to fear and serve the Lord; Or else what
mean all their Orthodoxe forms of Catechism to yield help to conscientious
Christians in the discharge of this duty, (of which there be many extant --
blessed be the Lord, and have been in ages past,) Doubtless you must be
convinced that it is your duty, only if you know these things blessed are you
if you do them, The second du^^ of Gover^^urs of (...) ^s
Joh. 13.17.

The second duty that both man and wife do owe unto their Children and
Servants, is to pray with them, and for them. Ye have seen but now that Parents
must take pains to teach and instruct their Children and Servants in the
knowledge of God; But what success can there be expected as the blessed fruit
of such a duty without prayer with, and for them? Paul may plant, and Apollos
may water, but God gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. But this increase must be
humbly sought of God by Prayer. There is a spirit of Indotionablenesse in all
by nature, but it does abound many times in some Children and Servants. I will
instruct and teach thee (says David) in the way thou shall go: I will guide
thee with mine eye, Psalm. 32.8. Then instantly adds in the very next verse, Be
ye not as the horse or Mule which have no understanding, etc. There is a great
deal of ignorance and blockish stupidity in all sorts of persons, (and
therefore in Children and Servants,) which none but God can take away; it was
God that opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things that were
spoken of Paul, Acts 16.14. Therefore there is great need to pray unto God to
take away all obstacles that may obstruct the edification of thy Family in
saving knowledge, and Grace, or else thou may have small hopes of doing them
any good by all thy other pains in the discharging thy duties. Mind the
imprecation of Jeremy, Pour out thy wrath (says he) upon the Heathen, and
upon the Families that call not on thy Name, Jer. 10.25. Holy Job was very
conscientious in this duty of prayer for his, Job 1.15. He offers burnt
Offerings to God in relation to his Sons and Daughters; with which duty the
Learned do conclude he offered Prayer, and of that there can be no doubt,
because when he offered burnt Offerings for his three Friends, he also prayed
for them, Job 42.7, 8, 10. David he prays for Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. And can
any with reason conclude that he did not pray for his other Children upon all
Occasions? A very gross absurdity it were so to do; Certainly we may desist
from further prosecution of this point as to Information, that it is the duty
of Parents to pray with, and for their Children and Servants, (because all men
will confess it;) but for their neglect of it we shall by the help of God (in
due place) labor to meet with them by just reproof. But for such as are godly
Children and Servants, who take notice of the extreme remissness of their
Parents and Masters in performing this, demonstrating evidently that they are
Christians by praying for them; I exhort that they would themselves go to God
in secret, to beg of him to open the eyes of such Governors to see with godly
sorrow this their abominable sin, and to give them grace to reform it, lest
such Governor of Families sink into the bottomless pit o^ hell for it to all
Eternity.

The third duty of Governors of Families.
In the third place it is the duty of Paren^ and Governors of Families to
labor to wa^ before their Children and Servants in all holy and religious
ways, and to be very circumspect herein. We have taken some notice that it is
the duty of such Governors to teach those that are under their government the
knowledge of God, and to inform them in the ways of his fear. Now if this be
done only by precept, and not by example, there is small hope of doing them any
good, for a man may teach his Child or Servant the way to heaven by Precept,
and the way to hell by bad example; the leaders of this people cause them to
^erre, and they that are led of them are destroyed, says the Prophet, Isa. 9,
16. It is to no and to teach the first way if ye neglect the second; (or at
least to little purpose.) The Scribes and Pharisees (says Christ) sit in Moses
chair, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but after their
doings do not, for they say and do not, Mat. 23.2, 3. So if Parents, etc. ^e
like them in teaching, and in practice too, well they may lead them to sin by
their examples, but if they lead them to good it will be very rare; for the
evil examples of Superiors are of great force to lead the Inferiors unto
vile ways, and this daily experience will ^eare witness to. If Parents and
Masters be given over to swearing, Blaspheming, lying, ^runkenness,
uncleanness, hating of God, his ways, and people, or to any other sin, of
such ^ves many times are their Children and Ser^ants; for of this take special
notice that evil ^xamples are of a far more drawing nature for Imitation, than
good are hopeful for Reformation; You that are Governors if you tread in
filth but over shoes, may occasion those that are under you to wade over their
boot tops. They that pervert souls in any kind may make them that are under
their charge seven fold more the children of hell than themselves. Good men are
easily misled by bad examples. Peter gives a bad example, Gal. 2.11, 12. then
in ver. 13. the Jews and Barnabas are corrupted by it: Now if such men may be
so abused by bad examples, there is much more cause of fear of those who
deserve no good repute.

The fourth duty of Governors of Families.
Now in the fourth and last place, it is the duty of Parents and Masters to
their Children and Servants, to labor to restrain them from walking in
scandalous and evil ways, and this to do betimes; for since the fall of Adam
there is in all his posterity such a cursed depravity that there remains no
principles of good in them to further the soul in gracious ways; the mind is
stuffed with ignorance, the will is perverse, and all the Affections are out of
order. Now the will is the chief Agitator of all evill^ and opposer of good;
the will should be guided by a rectified understanding, but it rebels against
it, or else how comes it to pass that a man is violently carried to sin
against conscience, and against an enlightened judgment, as it is often seen?
yet this is a truth that so far forth as the will is regenerate it desires to
walk closely with God, and not t^ deviate from his Commandments; and the is
the Will our Savior speaks of, that was in his Disciples when they were with
him in the time of his Agony, (though he spoke more particularly to Peter,) The
spirit is willing, (or ready) but the flesh is weak, Mat. 26.41. And of this
Will the Apostle speaks of, Romans 7.18. To will is present with me; but this is
not the will we speak of, there must be no restrictions laid on this, but we
must rather labor after maintaining the liberty of it, but it is the perverse
wills of Children and Servants that their Superiors must labor to check and
bridle. A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed, Prove. 29.15. But it
may be here demanded, What means must be used by Superiors to restrain
Inferiors from walking in scandalous ways? And for curbing the perverse wills
of such as God has set under them to be governed by them? I answer, First,
loving Admonitions, and sweet endeavors to convince them of their evil ways,
(only this I must premise, that what course is to be taken with Church Members
upon their uneven walking must in some particulars of them be taken with
Domestique Members.) The Apostle speaks to the believing Romans of his
confidence of their abilities to admonish one another, Romans 15.14. And can we
conceive that they did not improve those abilities upon occasions when Brethren
did offend? Sure we cannot. Now this way of admonition God himself takes with
Cain, Genesis 4.7. And Jesus Christ in Mat. 18.15. prescribes this rule^ very full
is the Apostle in 1 These. 5.14. Now we exhort you Brethren, warn them that are
unruly: be patient toward all men; So in 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to
the acknowledgement of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of
the snare of the Devil. Now when thou do thus admonish the offender, or
offenders, under thy charge, tell him, or them, that by such courses they sin
against God, (where lay down Scripture proof that they may be convinced.)
Secondly, that they sin against their own souls. Thirdly, That they do provoke
God to execute upon them all judgments spiritual, temporal, and eternal, and
in these two last particulars labor to amaze them with terror and dread. But
if this gentle means will not prevail with them, thou must sharply reprove
them, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.15. And this sharpness may
be included in that phrase in Jud. 23. pulling them out of the fire. So Lev.
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy Neighbor and not suffer sin upon him. But if this means also
produce no amendment, then in the last place thou must make use of the
ordinance of Correction; For foolishness is bound up in the heart of a Child,
but the rod of correction will drive it away, Prove. 22, 15. And it may so be
too, that a servant will not be corrected with words, Prove. 29.19. And yet
certainly God would have them reformed too: But take notice of this also, that
the procrastination, or putting off of Correction of your Children, will but
fit them to be incorrigible; the bowing trees whilst they are young is a
similitude often on this occasion made use of, but too seldom practiced, Prove.
13.24. He that spares his Rod hates his Son; but he that loves him
corrects him betimes. Prove. 23.23, 24. Withold not Correction from the
Child; for if thou beat him with the Rod, he shall not dye; thou shall beat him
with the Rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell. But in making use of this
Ordinance of Correction, whether of Children or Servants, observe with care
these three things: First, a fit time; Secondly, that your ends be good; and
lastly, that it be in a right manner. First, for a fit time: which time is,
when the heat of Passion is over; for we must be just in the measure of
Correction, which we cannot be if Passion have command. Passion may provoke us
to play the Tyrants, and to make the party corrected despised in our eyes,
Deuteronomy. 25.3. And that will dishearten and deject them. In the second place,
propose a right end in correcting any under your charge, you must not give
correction to manifest your Authority, or to be Revenged on them for crossing
you, but sincerely to kill sin in them, to subdue their exorbitant lust, to
make them more sit to glorify God, and perform service unto men: these and
such like ought to be purely your aims. And lastly, you must administer this
Ordinance in a a right manner; that is, with lifting up your hearts to God,
desiring him with the correction to vouchsafe to them Instruction, to sanctify
it to them, so that it may prove effectual for their Reformation, to make them
obedient to God in word and deed, and faithtull in the discharge of all the
duties they owe unto you. Now when your carriage is truly thus in your
correcting Children or Servants, you may (by the blessing of God) expect some
gracious effects of it, except the Lord have a controversy with, and against
them, to harden their hearts, by this (and other means) to their own perdition.

Thus we have done with the four general Duties which both Husband and wife
owe unto both Children and Servants: as first to instruct them in the ways of
God. Secondly, to pray with them, and for them. Thirdly, to walk before them in
good examples. Fourthly, and lastly, to seek to reclaim them from bad ways.
Now because the neglect of these Duties is a prime cause of infinite dishonor
to God, the means of many souls perishing to all eternity, and the breeding of
multitudes of rotten and vile members in Church and State, we shall endeavor
with the Lords Assistance, to proceed to some reasons, enforcing the
performance of these Duties by all godly Governors, and then come to make some
Application thereof.

of all these duties at thy hands: for thou have seen by variety of Scripture
Texts, that these duties are not Arbitrary or of an Indifferent nature, that
thou may do them, or leave them undone at thy own discretion. Now as the
Promises of God are to be the ground of thy Faith; so the Commands of God are
to be the ground of thy obedience. That God requires these Duties of thee, from
hence thou may gather an Argument, that thou art bound to set thy self with
all thy might to the performance of them: A good understanding have all they
that do his Commandments, Psalm 111. ult. If ye know these things, blessed
are ye if ye do them, John 13.17. The life of a Christian lies chiefly in
doing; What singular thing do ye? Matthew. 5.47. for so it is rendered in the
old Translation. What is the Theory of Religion, if the practick part be
wanting? Now as you would approve your selves to be the Children of God, you
must obey him in all things; for, His servants you are whom you obey, Romans 6.16.

The second Reason inforeing from you the in hell for evermore; He (says
James) that converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul
from death, Jam. 5.20.
and hide a multitude of sins; (and what know thou but by thy conscionable
use of these means thou may instrumentally do it.) In Exodus 23.4. the Lord
commands, that if thou meet thy Enemies Ox, or his Ass going astray, that
thou shall surely bring him back again. How much more then ought thou to be
careful when thou see thy Children and Servants go astray from God in the
wales that lead to hell, to be careful to bring them back again, and so to
secure their poor souls from perishing. Now in the way to hell thy Children
and Servants always walk when they are in a state of ignorance, and in the
practice of any sin. My people (says God) are destroyed for lack of knowledge,
Hos. 4.6. And as for thy poor Children thy own Loins have been the
Conduit-pipe to convey into their hearts and souls (from Adam the fountain)
all that corruption of nature which is in them, and all that propensity to sin
which is in their wills. Truly, it is not only against a gracious principle, but
against an Humane and Moral one too, that thou should thrust thy poor Child
into a dangerous quagmire, and then deny him thy hand to help pluck him back
again; and that thou should give him many a deadly and mortal wound, and
refuse to apply a plaster for his cure; (these similitudes are infinitely too
short to set forth this case fully.) Now when thou do neglect these means
beforesaid thou do show thy self to be a cruel and bloody Man, a most
savage beast, there is no terms in the world that can fully set forth the
intolerable vileness of thy condition; be thou amazed and tremble like
Belshazzar in another case, Dan. 5.6. and set thy self to reform.

The third reason to quicken thee to the performance Ezekiel. 33.8. Eli the Priest
was by reason of his indulgence to his Children a very defective man this way,
(yet many thousand Millions of men are more.) He sought to reclaim his Sons
from their wickedness only by admonishing them of it, and of the judgments of
God for the same, (which is more perhaps than thou did ever do,) but there
unseasonably came to a period; God punished this sin of his; First, upon those
his wicked and degenerate Sons; then on his own person; and lastly, on his
whole house; His Sons were slain both in one day, himself brake his neck, and
his house lost the Priests Office, 1 Samuel 2.22, 23, 24, 34, 35, 36. Chap. 4.11,
18. Read the Story and lay it sadly to thy heart. But the Learned do conceive,
that the personal punishment of Eli was but temporal, because he was
gracious, though in the case beforementioned a grievous offender; I say, read
and and consider, and as thou likest the punishment so practice the sin; it is
true, God is patient, but this his patience (if further abused by thee) will
not prove thy privilege, but thy infinite disadvantage: For thou shall (when
it is too late) find thou art rather reserved for hell than preserved from the
evil of punishment; the patience of God will be but his omission of
punishment, and not the remission of thy sin.

That they that are wise shall shine as the firmament, but they that convert
many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.
And what know thou but thou may have the presence and assistance of the
spirit of God with thee in thy discharge of these duties (if thou be
conscientious therein) both for the information of thy Children and Servants,
and the reformation of their lives.

Thus much for the Reasons (or Motives) to actuate and provoke your spirits to
the discharge of those duties you owe to your Children and Servants; First,
taken from the command of God. Secondly, From those bowels of Compassions to
their souls that ought to be in you. Thirdly, From that account you must pass
to God for their souls if they perish by your default. And lastly, from that
respect you may have to the recompense of reward; We shall come to a few words
of Application, before we proceed to the ensuing matter.

This in the first place may serve for Information, of corrupt liberty on their
necks, whereby they run a full careere into all ways of sin, and so to hell at
last. The Lord has cause to complain of the multitude and heinousness of the
sins of these times as once he did of the sins of Israel, Amor ^.13. Behold
(says God) I am pressed under you as a Cart is pressed that is full of
sheaves; and truly, it is only his mercy that the Land does not spue us out,
Lev. 18 28. And that which aggravates our sins, is, that after the faithful
Ministers of God in the later, and this present Age have cried out against the
horrid sins of the Times and have spent the strength of their Reins, and
wasted their best spirits, that they may sit down and mourn over us, and say,
they have spent their labor in vain, and their strength to no purpose, Isa.
49.4. For custom in sin does bring a necessity to sin, and that in such an
habitual way that no means without a miracle of mercy can reform the evil
manners of most, for the Ministers of the Gospel cannot preach down sin, nor
the Civil Magistrate cut it down with the sword of justice. But Beloved, how
easily (by the blessing of God) might many, if not all, the Exorbitances of
these times have been prevented by the Christian and prudent care of Domestique
Governors; they might have broke the Egg betimes, and so have prevented it
from bringing forth a Serpent; they might have taken and dashed Babylons little
ones against the stones, Psalm. 137. ult. Every Family is a little Nursery to
the great Orchards of Church and Commonwealth. Now Family Discipline is the
pruning, ingrafting, Enoculating, and digging about the root of the tender Imps
to qualify and fit them for transplantation into either or both the foresaid
Orchards. But if the means beforementioned be not used, instead of removing
fruitful trees you shall replant Crabs, briars and thorns, and such Vines as
shall bring forth no Grapes, but such as Moses mentions in his Song, Deuteronomy.
32.32. Their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. They shall bring forth
such grapes as the Lord complains of, Isa. 5.2. Now as Parents and Masters may
be charged to be the original cause of all the sins beforesaid, (and of the
sins of the like kind) so may all the Errors fundamental, and
circumstantiall, now maintained with a Whores forehead, be brought and laid
down at their doors likewise; for had they taken more pains with their
Children and Servants to season their hearts, and inform their judgments by a
Catechisticall way in the solid and profound truths of God, both concerning
faith, and life, (things to be believed, and duties to be practiced,) there
might (by the blessing of God on their sincere endeavors) have been better
fruit expected in these days of sadness and sorrow than declining pure truth,
vilifying Gods Ordinances and faithful Ministers; raging against, and worrying
of the tender Lambs of Christ. In which they take the same diabolical course
that some heathens of old took, that is, clothed the Saints in the skins of
Bears, and other wild beasts, that so their dogs might fasten their impoysoned
fangs in their tender hearts; so these calumniate such (who by the grace of
God, walk closer to the Rule than themselves) with many opprobrious and vile
(but notoriously false) aspersions; they are (say they) enemies to the State,
disturbers of the peace of a Nation, and many other hellish accusations they
have against them which I forbear to name, (not doubting but in Gods time the
guilt of their abominations will settle in their own bosoms, and so clap to
their hearts, and so sting their souls, that by the goodness of God they
shall be awakened to see their evil, and repent of it before it be too late.)
By reason whereof all their beagles and bloud-hounds take the sent, (not by the
feet of the non-guilty) from the cursed vomit of the accuser of the Brethren,
and run with so much hellish fury at them, that did not God graciously, and the
precious Laws of the times preserve them, they must inevitably perish; but
blessed be God there is yet hopes in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2.
For in order to the reforming of the destructive errors of these times, the
higher powers do declare their sense of the same, and do protest against them,
and we hope they will make a hedge of thorns against them. Now as wicked
Parents and Masters have by their neglect of their duties occasioned all the
evils of sin beforementioned, and pointed at, so they have been the occasion
(by good consequence) of all the evil of punishments that this day the
righteous God has inflicted on the Nation, for sin is the Antecedent of
punishment, for the plagues and vengeance of God do follow sin as the thread
does the needle. And here we might run in Infinitum in making this clear from
Scripture demonstrations, some we shall produce, and but a few to what we
might; Read Deuteronomy. 28. the whole Chapter, consider Lam. 3.39. also 2 Chronicles
36.14, 15, 16. and Hos 4.1, 2, 3, 5. lastly, Mat. 23.37, 38. Thus for the first
Use.

In the second place it may serve for just reproof, like Jonah, set the sea of
the world all in a raging? And art thou fast asleep? Ah poor soul, thy
condition is to be lamented with tears of blood, both in regard of thy guilt,
and also of thy punishment; thou art guilty first of the sins of thy Family,
(and by their bad examples) of the sins of whole Towns, Cities, Counties, and
of the whole Nation; thou art guilty of the precious blood of their souls;
thou have sent souls to hell by Millions and Legions; thou have crammed and
ramm'd souls into hell. Oh thou unmercilesse Canniball, what have thou done?
Have thou married a wife to send her to Hell? Have thou begot Children to make
them fuel for Hell? Have thou hired Servants to thrust them head and shoulder
(as we say) into Hell? Ah thou blood-hound, thou hell-hound, do thou lie
under so much guilt, and yet have an Adamantine soul? Oh how infinitely
miserable art thou by reason of sin? But that is not all, (yet I must confess
the evil of sin is worse than the evil of punishment,) thou art liable to
undergo more punishment than men or Angels can conceive, (much less acquaint
thee with.) He that shall cut the throat, (or otherwise murder) but one man,
the Laws of men will both sentence him to, and execute death on him; how then
shall thou escape at the Bar of Gods Tribunal for thy cutting the throats of
such multitudes, of multitudes of poor precious souls? (one whereof is worth
more than worlds of treasure?) Do thou think that the Judge of all the World
will not do right? Genesis 28.25
Foster not in ^hy self such a thought, for God will araigne ^hee, sentence,
doom, and damn thee to Hell ^t the Bar of his terrible Tribunal seat, from
whence thou must go pinioned, mancled, and ^ettered to hell, guarded with the
infernal ^rew of devils thy companions in sin and torment, and at thy first
entrance into that pit of ^erdition thou shall rouse up all the damned Ghosts
to make way for thee; read that place, ^a. 14.9. (it may make thy loins to
tremble, ^hy knees to smite one against another, and the ^aire of thy head to
stand on end,) and for such ^f thy relations to whom God gave no repen^ance. Oh
how will they salute thee, and up^raid thee? and say here is my cursed Husband,
^ill thy Wife say. Oh here is my cursed Father, says thy poor Children; and
say the ^ervants here is my cursed Master. Oh say ^hey all, had he instructed
us in the ways of God, prayed with us, and for us, lived a holy ^fe for an
example to us, and used all means ^reclaime us from our evil ways, though he
^ad beat us black and blew, and given us stripes within the bowels of the
belly, Prove. 20.30. ^ look the old Translation,) he might have sa^ed us from
hence, but now we are irrecove^ably lost for ever. After all which down thou
^nkest with mountains of sins and curses into ^he bottomless pit, when the
hatches of hell shall be shut upon thee, and then thou shall be ^ormented with
a vengeance, with forked In^^ruments with iron teeth, with Serpents, and
Scorpions, and the biting and gnawing of the worm of conscience, then thou
shall not have one drop of water to cool thy tongue, nor one breath of air to
refresh thee with; and that which will aggravate thy misery will be this, that
the time of thy torments in hell will be Millions of Millions of years; nay,
it will be beyond time, (even all time) for ever, and for evermore; and
therefore well said a Reverend Modern Divine, that this word ever kills the
heart. Thus much likewise for the use of reproof and terror.

and what is that but blasphemy in a high degree, for hereby thou do derogate
from the infinite wisdom of God, and arrogate to thy own, but know thou that
the foolishness of God is wiser than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. Yet mistake not the
Apostle, as if he did grant that in God there were a deficiency in
understanding; for that cannot be, for if God were imperfect in any one of his
Attributes it would make the duty it self null, and so God could not have an
essential being; but the Apostle speaks after the manner of men, as if he did
grant that (which must not be granted,) by way of supposition; yet says he,
that deficiency (or that foolishness which foolish and wicked men think to be
in God) is wiser than all the Wit, parts, and understanding that the wisest men
in the world have. What a degenerate Creature then art thou (whosoever thou
art,) that once dare enter the lists of dispute against thy Creator, as thou
do that censurest such as obey God in any kind to be fools, and ridiculous,
and absurd fellows, (for that, if not worse, is thy language.) I am certain
that by this means thou come within the lists of that woe, Isa. 5.20. Woe
unto them who call evil good, and good evil, etc. Thou condemnest Gods ways,
and justifiest thy own ways. Let men walk in the ways ^o get wealth, or
pleasure, or carnal profit, or worldly honor, or run apace in the high road
^o hell: These ungodly persons before spoken of will not dishearten them, but
rather encourage them by keeping company with them; but let any men or women
whose hearts God has warmed with zeal for his glory, and tender love to such
poor souls as are under them, let them but lend them a little finger to guide
them, or but a small spark of light to conduct them by in the way to heaven,
then they are in their Bedlam-fits, not knowing how to contain themselves
within the bounds of civility. But these men have either never learned, or soon
forgotten that place of our Savior, The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. and other places, Luke 13.24,
Heb. 12.14. Luke 11.52. Such opposite spirited men and women as these will by
no means endure that any Child or Friend of theirs shall come within the walls
of a godly Family to live in, for fear they should become Puritans, (as they
call them;) but to conclude this Point, or Use, let me tell them, that without
abundance of repentance for, and reformation of this sin they shall have as
large a share (if not more) of those inconceivable miseries which are
imperfectly mentioned in the use of reproof and terror, as the portion of
such as do any way neglect the performance of those duties they owe unto
Children and Servants, and it may be they shall have a larger share than the
others, because for ought can be known such scoffing Ishmaels as these have
been a special cause of hindering many from the performance of their duties to
their Family-relations which otherwise would have set themselves to the
discharge of those duties.

The use in the last place may be for exhortation, David had made a large
preparation for building the House of God in Jerusalem, having got together
abundance of materials for that Magnificent Work, what says he to his Son
Solomon? Arise (says he) therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee, 1
Chro. 22.16. Now (if without offense) I might allude to to this, I may say, I
have endeavored as God has graciously enabled me to prepare in some poor
measure some materials to help thee to ^uild God a temple (or Church) in his
own Family, (unto which I desire thou may add in thy retired Meditations.)
Now I also say to thee arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with ^hee. Thou will say, thou art a poor weak creature, thy knowledge is little, and thy
parts ^re small; let me advise thee to gain good forms of Catechism, be
studious in them, be diligent to improve them for the good of all under thee;
by this means, (if thou be conscientious indeed, and seek to approve thy
self to God in thy discharge of these duties, and abundantly desire to yield
furtherance to the souls of thy Wife, Children and Servants,) By this means,
I say, thou shall find, that in teaching others thy own knowledge shall
increase, and thou have a promise from the mouth of Christ for this, that to
him that has more shall be given, and he shall have in abundance, Mat, 13.12.
We have a good proverb applicable here, that is, Use legs and have legs; and
thou say thy parts are weak; if thou can not pray with thy Family but in
a very weak manner, then I say, pray to God to teach thee to pray, pray in
secret for both the spirit and gift of prayer, that thou may be able to
Perform it in thy Family; but beware thou set not too high a rate on the gift
of prayer, for it often goes alone without the Spirit; thou were better of the
two have the Spirit of Prayer than the gift, but both together does best,
(especially in relation to edifying others.) Simon Magus desired to purchase a
power to give the Holy Ghost to whom he pleased, his ends were base, as well as
his tender vile; he did aim (as good Divines think) at popular applause,
besides a cursed gain. Truly, I much fear popular applause, and vain
ostentation is too too much the aim of some in our Times; where I see a gift
of prayer, (yea, and of preaching too) and a spirit of predominant pride, I
must take the liberty to think of such a man as I do apprehend clear ground
for. This last passage I do insert for this end principally, to take off the
inordinate affections of any poor soul from the gift of prayer; sincerity in
all thy walkings with God will comfort thee in the midst of all defects; and
what know thou (dear Christian) but God will join his strength with thy
weakness, and make thee an instrument of begetting souls to God as well as
bodies, and so make thee (in a sense) a spiritual Father as well as a bodily,
and enable thee at the last day to say to God, Behold here am I, and the
Children whom thou have given me; where we may allude to that which the Apostle
applies and makes proper to Christ, Heb. 2.13. Now in the last place, (for it
deserves no other) by thy religious care to further thy Children and Servants
in the ways of God thou may make such Children and Servants very profitable
to thee in outward respects. Paul takes notice that Onesimus was no profitable
servant to his Master when he was graceless, but after he was converted he
tells Philemon that now he was profitable, Phil. 11. There is much crying out in
the world (and not without cause) against stubborn, disobedient, and
undutifull Children; and against refractory, and unprofitable Servants; But may
not the neglect of Parents and Masters about making their Children (in the use
of means) Gods Children, and their Servants by the foresaid means the
servants of God; may not I say, this be a special cause of all this confusion;
doubtless yea, for it is just with God that when thou will not make thy
Children and Servants to answer Gods ends, (at least so far as possible thou
may) that thy own should be wholly frustrate. Thus much for the uses.

Beloved, be pleased to remember that we have urged Parents and Masters to the
performance of diverse duties both to Children and Servants jointly together,
but that those duties did relate to the good of their souls only; but now
there remain some duties relating to their outward good; and because some of
them have reference to Children particularly, in which Servants can make no
claim: And some others do belong to Servants, (but I cannot say peculiarly,
because Children have an interest in them,) we shall therefore endeavor to
advance toward the handling of them likewise, (leaning on God for assistance;)
In order whereunto we shall labor to give Children the precedence, for Grace
and Nature does teach the same.

The 1 duty of Parents to their Children in outward respects.
The first duty which Parents owe unto their Children, in relation to their
outward Estate, is, to further them in the means for their attaining of a
competent measure of Learning for such condition and state of life as God shall
call them to, whether in Church or Commonwealth. An illiterate man can receive
no content in himself, neither can he be profitable to others; a man without
learning is like a man who has but half an eye, he sees diverse things, but
in a confused and rude form, even men walking like trees, like him in the
Gospel, Mar. 8.24. but he that has good eyes discernes things in a
transparent way, to the great satisfaction of his mind; so a man without
Learning sees things that have much beauty in themselves, but to him they are
clothed and shadowed in dark and black colors, he sees nothing but an
outside, whereas he who has Learning sees through and through them (as we
say;) he has a distinguishing knowledge of them, he can anatomize them, and
dive into the nature of them, he can gain by every Creature, and squeeze out
the quintiscence and benefit of every Calling; he can improve all times, all
changes, and all things to his advantage. Secondly, a man without learning
cannot be profitable to others, such a man is like a stone that is dug out
of the quarrey and not squared, nor any way fitted for the building, fit for
nothing but to be laid by and overlooked, or to use in common employment, no
way qualified for public service; but a man of Learning is like a stone
squared, polished, and carved, that is very useful for the choicest building;
such a man (especially if he be of good life,) is principled and in a choice
capacity for the highest employments in Church and State; take a few instances,
what Moses was for learning, see Acts 7.22. And what he was in public service
the Scriptures will demonstrate, for under God he was the most eminent
deliverer of the Church from a state of bondage and slavery that any Age since
the Creation can produce, and therefore is said to be King in Jesurun when the
heads of the people, and Tribes of Israel were gathered together, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
It is said of Daniel, and the other three Children, that God gave them
knowledge and skill in all Learning, Dan. 1.17. Then in verse. 19. they were
preferred to stand before the King; and in Chap. 2 48, 49. they were put into
the highest places for command in the whole Province of Babylon. So Paul of all
the Apostles was the most learned man, being brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel: which was a place of learning, Acts 22.3. And all men know he was the
most eminent amongst them for parts and pains, and himself does modestly
confess that he was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.5.
and for pains he did outstrip them all, for he wrote more Epistles to the
Churches than all the other, and showed more Rhetoric in that short Epistle of
his to Philemon than you shall meet with in large Volumes. Truly, he had
greater gifts then they who boast of the spirit, (but what spirit they are led
by is not hard to guess at;) and yet he prizeth his books as well as his
Parchments (which Parchments were as some conceive some sermon Notes,) 2 Timothy
4.13. But if it be objected that it is not of necessity to give Children more
learning then the Calling which they are like to be put into does require; nor
secondly, to give them more learning than their Parents estate can bear; I
answer, it is true, there is no necessity for Children to have much Learning to
help them in managing some mean and common Callings, but it is necessary in
any Calling to be able to read in their mother tongue (as we say) and to write
to, but had they more it would be no burden to them; it might fit them for
society and choice discourse with those of higher breeding than themselves, for
in persons of the greatest parts there would be some condescension to those
less parted. And also true it is Parents are not tied to ruin themselves, nor
any of their Children, to breed up others great Scholars, And yet I could
heartily wish that Parents would strive to give their Children good breeding
this way, though it should be their greatest outward portions. I have been the
larger in this particular, because it may be observed frequently that there are
some who are very rich men, but yet so glew'd to their cursed
earthly-mindednesse that they will spare nothing (or very little) to give their
Children learning; they may leave them good estates whereby they may wear good
clothes, but all that know them may point at them, and say, they are the
arrantest clownes, and meanest bred fellows in, or near, the places where they
dwell; It was falsely said of Paul that much learning did make him mad, Act
126.24. But it may be truly said that such persons as we speak of, for want of
Learning they are the unusefullest persons of any to be Isntrumental for the
good of Church or Commonwealth, and their Parents deserve the least respect of
all others in the places where they live. And therefore thou who art a Parent
mind it, that it is thy duty in a special manner to thy Children to vouchsafe
them the means of Learning, and be careful to discharge thy duty herein.

The second duty Parents owe unto their Children for their outward estate.
Secondly, it is the duty of Parents to provide for their Children some honest
Callings, either in Church or Commonwealth, wherein they may both do, and
receive good, that by them God may have glory, and others benefit, and
themselves comfort, for all persons of what quality or condition soever, must
eat their bread in the sweat of their own brows, for this is the Ordinance of
God himself, and so indispensable with, Genesis 3.19. Yet this must be granted,
that there is the labor of the mind as well as the labor of the body; and
such as labor with the head and heart may be as truly said to eat their bread
in the sweat of their faces, as they that strike many a heavy blow, or groan
under many a ponderous burden; so that one way or other every one must be
exercised in a lawful Calling. David was a Shepherd to look to Sheep, before
the shepherd over the house of Israel, Psalm. 78.70.71. Peter and Andrew, and
other of the Apostles were fishermen. Mark. 1.16.19. before fishers of men,
Paul was a Tent-maker, Acts 18.1, 2, 3. Joseph the husband of Mary was a
Carpenter, Mat. 13.54, 55. And it is somewhat probable that our Savior
himself, before he entered into his Ministerial Office, did work at his Fathers
Trade, Mark. 6.3. You see then that there is a command from God, that all
persons must have honest Callings. Secondly, here are presidents enough to make
it clear from all exceptions. And therefore it is the duty of Parents to
labor to provide for their Children honest and lawful Callings; but in your
endeavors this way let me advise you to take care of three things: First, Be
careful to gain for them such Masters as fear the Lord, for else thou may
fear that all thy pains thou have taken with them for the good of their
souls may be lost. Secondly, Be careful to put them to such Callings as they
are most capable of. Some Histories report, that the Jews before they would put
their Children to any Calling, would first bring them into a large Room (which
they did furnish with all Artificers tools) and if there they did take up any
tool and seem to take delight therein, they would put them to that Calling
unto which the same did belong. Thirdly and lastly, thou must take care to put
them to such Callings as require no more stock of money to manage them than
thou art like to leave to them, for else when their Time is out they can make
no benefit by their Trades, unless they remain in a state of servitude by
working under others. The Apostle says, Art thou called a Servant, care not
for it, (that is, be not dejected therefore) but if thou may be free, use it
rather, 1 Cor. 7.21. And then in the 23. verse he adds, Ye are bought with a
price, be not servants of men. Therefore thou that art a Parent, let thy care
be such for thy children, that thou make them servants to others but for a
convenient time, that after they may live in a free and honorable way.

The third duty Parents owe unto their Children for their outward estate.
The third Duty Parents owe unto their Children, is, to labor to provide them
fit Marriages, in seasonable time: And for this, we have first a word of
Command from God. Secondly command from Christian Parents. In Jeremiah 29.6.
God requires his People to take Wives for their Sons, and to give their
Daughters in Marriage, Thirdly, for examples mind the practice of of Abraham
(before made use of) Genesis 24.3.4. Consider the practice of Isaac, and Rebecca
his wife, for Jacob, in Genesis 27.46. And then in the first verse of the next
Chapter, the carriage of Naomi for Ruth is a singular example; Shall I not seek
rest for thee (says she) that it may be well with thee? (which was a Husband,
as does after appear,) Ruth 3.1. By which Scriptures it does appear clearly, to
be the duty of Parents in seasonable time to labor to provide Marriages for
their Children. Now there are some symptoms of this seasonable time, whereof I
shall name, and only name four. First, fullness and maturity of body.
Secondly, solidity of understanding. Thirdly, their Constitutions: And lastly,
the seeming delight they take in keeping company with the contrary sex. This
shall suffice, for this third duty, of Parents to their Children.

The fourth and last duty Parents owe unto their Children in relation to their
outward condition, is to provide for them, The fourth duty of Parents to their
Children in outward respects.
and to bestow on them competent maintenance, (if not more.) Jacob will travail
for his own house, Genesis 30.30. Prove. 13.22. A good man leaves an inheritance
to his Children, but the eldest Son must have the double portion. Deuteronomy. 21.16,
17. unless he dis-inherit himself by any profaneness, as Esau, Heb. 12.16.
And this maintenance, must be bestowed on them in seasonable time, not too
soon, as the Father of the Prodigal Son did, Luke 15.12. but when they have
necessary occcasion to use it; as when with their parents consent they shall
begin to look out for themselves in worthy employments, though before Marriage:
But especially at the time of marriage* such are sordid Parents that will part
with nothing till death, they do much discourage their children, and provoke
them to wrath; against the Apostles Injunction, Ephesians. 6.4. These are Persons
without natural affection, and to be hist at, as they go. Here then you see
Parents must perform four Duties to their Children, in relation to their
outward condition. First, to bring them up to learning. Secondly, to provide
for them honest and lawful Callings. Thirdly, to labor to further them in the
change of their conditions by marriage: And fourthly, and lastly, to make
provision for them by competent maintenance.

The first outward duty that Masters owe to their servants.
The next thing in order to what was first propounded, is, to consider what
duties Governors of Families do owe unto their servants, for their outward
comfortable subsistence. And,

In the first place, it is the duty of Masters, etc. to provide for their
servants wholesome, and well-conditioned Meat and Drink, in due time, and
sufficient of that too: as also lodging and washing, and what else is necessary
for to maintain life and livelihood. In order to which, the wife must take
notice that the chief care of this, in reference to the distribution of it, and
the well-ordering of all things herein, concerns her self. And therefore the
Holy Ghost puts upon record the practice of the good Huswife in Proverbs 31.15.
of whom it is said, That she rises whilst it is yet Night, and gives meat to
her Household, and a portion unto her Maids: For doubtless the comfortable
allowance of these things is one special means (by the blessing of God) to
maintain health, and to make them able and strong in body, and cheerful in
mind, to perform such service as is required of them. But if it please the
Lord to visit them with sickness or lameness in body or limbs, and thereby to
abate strength and vigor of body and spirit, then it is the duty of their
Masters and Dames to look out in the use of means for their recovery, to make
use both of Physicians and Physic, and all helps Providence may provide for
comfort under affliction, and restoration to health again. Naaman a servant to
the King of Syria, being afflicted by the Plague of Leprosy, his Master writes
a letter in his behalf to the King of Israel, and sends it by the hand of
Naaman, in order to the recovery of his health again, 2 Kings 5.5. The good
Centurion we read of in Matthew. 8.6, 8. when his servant was sick of the Palsy,
and grievously tormented, he goes in person to Jesus Christ, (who was a
Physician both for body and soul) and humbly beseeches him for his servants
cure, and through the free grace of Christ obtains it: its good to go to God
in the first place for supplies of all the wants of our selves and our
relations;) He that is in misery ought to be comforted of his neighbor, (as
it is in the Geneva Translation) Job 6.14. Now if Neighbors must put forth
themselves to comfort (or relieve and help) such as are in any misery. How much
more must Governors of Families labor to perform this duty to their sick and
distempered servants, (the inference is undeniable) A good man is merciful to
his beast, says one Translation; And another says, A righteous man regards
the life of his Beast, Proverbs 12.10. And how much better is a man than a
sheep? Mat. 12.12. But it is much to be bewailed, that many servants who have
in their health and strength well discharged their duties to their Masters, yet
find small comfort and regard from them when the hand of God is fallen upon
them: for they are then either sent home to their poor and indigent Parents to
take care after, or else mued up in a hole, and small attendance, and less
allowance of means for their good provided for them: such Governors of
Families are cursed and hard-hearted persons; and pity it is, that ever good
servants should step over their Thresholds to serve them; for such have neither
mercy nor justice in them, neither grace nor good nature: And yet of this stamp
and hell-bred crew, there are great swarms: but let them take heed, (God is
just) their own children be not so served, when they are servants to others,
but I wish them better speed. We might here add a Word concerning seasonable
Recreations to be allowed to servants, for they may stand in great need of them
sometimes, after long and sore labor, to quicken their spirits, and to enliven
them with all alacrity to return to their employment, (we say, Whet is no let:)
And without doubt, if Masters would grant it them, they would be rather gainers
by in the quick and wel-managing their businesses, than losers. But when
Masters grant this liberty as before said, I would advise them to take much
care that the Recreations allowed, be lawful, the time seasonable, and their
servants company civil, or else both Masters and servants may repent, the one
that they gave the liberty: and the other that they so ill improved the same.

In the second place, it is the duty of Masters, etc. The second outward duty
that Masters owe to their servants.
to allow their servants sufficient wages for their labor, and to pay it to
them when it is due. If they have not sufficient wages they cannot maintain
themselves for the preservation of health and decency, both which must be
allowed, (nay, and more too, if their deserts challenge the same;) servants may
spend thoughts of changing their estate; (we say, service is no heritage,) and
must they make no preparation in order thereunto? That were absurd to think;
would you that are Masters have your servants barely live? You would not like
that if you would be pleased to put your selves in their condition. But in the
second place, it is the duty of Masters to pay their servants their wages in
due time, and that is when it is due by the conditions of the Contract between
you and them, Mal. 3.5. God threatens to be a swift witness against this
particular sin of oppressing the hireling in his wages, (amongst other sins.)
Now a man may be guilty of this sin as well in deteining due wages, in relation
to time of payment of it, as in overreaching a servant in contract for it;
turn to that place, Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant,
at his day, thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon
it. The Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7. Masters give unto your
servants that which is just and equal, Col. 4.1. James tells you, that the
detaining wages from Laborers cries, and the cries of them are entered into
the cares of the Lord of Sabbath, James 5.4. And surely when ever the Lord
gives an ear to cries, whether the cry of Innocent blood, as that of Abel,
Genesis 4.10. or any other occasion, some fearful vengeance does fall upon the
heads of such as cause them to ascend; and therefore the Apostle James bids
those worldlings houle for those miseries that should come upon them. Now you
that are Masters, etc. as you would keep off the curse prevent the cry.

The third duty of Masters to their Servants.
In the third and last place, the duty of Masters, etc. to their servants, is,
to be liberal to them at times of parting, in case they have been servants a
considerable time, and have been diligent and faithful, and so a blessing to
them, Deuteronomy. 15.12, 13, 14. So Prove. 17.2. There be many Masters who are
strangers to this duty, even in the knowledge of it, and more in the practice
thereof. Yet some (I dare not say in conscience to the performance of this
duty, but rather from the freeness of their nature,) do upon the matter that
which is equivalent hereunto, namely those, that if their servants part from
them by Marriage will give them beneficial wedding dinners, and sometimes
diverse pieces of necessary household stuff, which is a great advantage to them;
and this is so laudable a thing that I could wish all would more practice the
same, provided, they prevent all abusivenesse of the Creature by luxury, and
excess, and disorder of every kind at such meetings. Thus you see that
Governors of Families do owe three duties to their servants, in relation to
their outward conditions. First, to allow unthem meat, drink, and all other
necessaries for their comfortable subsistence. Secondly, to yield them
sufficient wages. And lastly, to be liberal to them at time of parting.

And thus by the gracious assistance of God we have finished all that was
proposed at first to be considered of by such as desire to enter into the
Marriage estate, relating to the duties which each person in that condition of
life owe one to another, and both of them to such as God shall set under them,
viz. to children and servants. But here it will be of some concernment to take
notice of what duty children and servants owe unto Parents and Masters, that
they may call upon them to perform the same; where we shall first observe the
duties Children owe unto their Parents, and then the duties of Servants to
their Masters, etc.

In the first place it is the duty of Children to yield unto their Parents all
due Reverence and Honor; The first duty Children owe unto their Parents.
this duty is expressly commanded by God in Exodus 20.12. Honor thy father and
thy mother; which the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.2. takes notice of to be the first
Commandment with promise, Mal. 6.6. A son honors his Father: If I be a
Father where is my honor? But how should this Honor and Reverence be expressed
may some say? I answer, first, in words; Secondly, in actions and gestures.
First, in words, Children must reverence their Parents by using few words in
their Parents presence or hearing; Silence for the general well becomes the
younger sort before the Elder, but more properly Children before their Parents.
And when they speak to them they must make use of the choicest expression that
may be to hold forth their dutiful respect by. And for their Action too, they
must be full of Humility, as rising up before them, and standing in their
presence if they expect it, being uncovered so long as they think fit, and
making obeisance on all occasions, by showing all filial and Child-like
dispositions to them, by harkening to all their grave Counsels and Admonitions
with diligent attention, Prove. 1.8. Chap. 5.1. As also by submitting, and
subjecting themselves to all their godly reprehensions, and by treading in
their religious steps, and imitating their unblameable examples, and by
covering all their imperfections and weaknesses, as Shem and Japhet did when
their Father lay drunk and naked in his Tent. Solomon is a singular example of
honoring his Mother in another kind, 1 Kings 2.19.

The second duty of Children to their Parents.
In the second place, it is the duty of Children to obey their Parents in all
things lawful, and that with all readiness. Children obey your Parents in the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well
pleasing unto the Lord, Col 3.20. Now this must be a cheerful obedience
without contending. Isaac will submit to his Father though it be in matter of
death, Genesis 22 9, 10. And so will the Daughter of Jephtha, Judge. 11 39. The
Rechabus obey Jonadab their Father in things that required a great deal of
self-denial, Ier. 35.5, 6, 7. which the Lord rewards them for in ver. 18, 19.
A Bishop must rule his own house well, and have his Children in subjection, 1 Timothy 3.4. Now subjection of all Children to Parents is as much a duty as it is
in the children of the Ministers of the Gospel. And of this obedience unto
Parents we have an example beyond all presidents in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, of whom it is said, he went down with his Parents to Nazareth and was
subject to them, Luke 2.51. Children must not make their own wills a rule of
their actions, but the Commandments of God, and the Precepts of their Parents
that are not contrary to the revealed will of God; they must also quietly
submit to such correction as they shall think fit to inflict on them for their
faults.

In the third and last place it is the duty of Children to their Parents to
labor to provide safty for them in the times of danger, The third duty of
Children to their Parents.
and competent maintenance in their necessitous conditions to their utmost
abilities; for the first, take a president from Rahab the Harlot, which is laid
down at large in Josh. 2.12, 13. where she does indent with the Spies (sent to
view the land) to save her Fathers house, and to preserve her Father, and her
Mother, etc. And for the duty of Children to relieve their Parents in their
want; consider what the Apostle says in 1 Timothy 5.4. That to requite our
Parents is good and acceptable before God. When Parents have been at great
pains and charge to bring up their Children, and then come to poverty, (which
perhaps may be occasioned by such charge.) it is not only against grace, but
against good nature too, to cast them off without due care to relieve them; it
was the pestilent doctrine of the Pharisees to maintain that Children were
discharged from their duty herein, provided, they did offer a gift at the Altar
(which was indeed but to fill their pouches,) Mar. 7.11, 12, 13. Which practice
of theirs, as well as their doctrine, our Savior there condemns. We may
learn a better example from the practice of Joseph when he was in prosperity,
and his Fathers house in want, Genesis 47.11, 12. For he nourished his Father and
his whole Family in Ramases, which was the most fertile place of all Egypt.
When Naomi returned very poor out of the Land of Moab into the Land of Israel,
Ruth 1.21. then her Daughter in Law wrought hard, and took great pains to
gain provision for her maintenance. God condemns the formal fasts of the
Children of Israel, as for other things, so for this, that they did hide
themselves from their own flesh, Isa. 58.6, 7. Now Parents may be more truly
said to be our own flesh than others in common can be said to be; our Savior
in that place of Mark makes it one kind of honoring Parents to relieve them
in their want; and to honor our Parents you have it proved before to be a duty
from children. There be other duties which children owe unto their Parents, but
they may be included in these: If these be conscientiously performed they will
be all discharged. The duties then which children owe unto their Parents, which
are obvious to your eye, are, first, to reverence them. Secondly, to obey them.
Thirdly, to labor to preserve them from danger, and to maintain them in their
wants.

In the last place, we are to proceed to discuss the duties which servants owe
unto their Masters* etc. and then we shall draw to a conclusion of this poor
Treatise, and so leave all upon your hearts to practice in your lives.

The first duty that servants owe unto their Masters, The first duty of
servants to their Masters, etc.
is the same that children owe to their Parents, that is, Honor and Reverence;
this duty all Inferiors owe to their Superiors, and therefore it must be a
duty here; Now that it is so, consider the fore quoted place, Mal. 1.6. A son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If I be a Master (says God)
where is my fear, (or Reverence?) Implying that honor and reverence is a duty
servants owe to their Masters, and that they are obliged to the performance of
it. That place in 1 Timothy 6.1. is much to be observed for this purpose, where
the Apostle requires all servants that are under the yoke to count their own
Masters worthy of all honor, and then adds a reason for the same, which is
this, That the name of God and his doctrine be not blasph^med; Then it is very
clear that such servants as make no conscience to perform this duty of giving
honor to their Masters do expose the name and word of eternal God to
contempt, and to be blasphemed; and how shall such servants ever be able to
answer for this sin of theirs before the great and all-powerfull God, who is
always armed with divine vengeance to be powered down upon the heads and hearts
of such as are offenders in this kind; and such are all servants that discharge
not the duty here mentioned. Now if servants would know how, and in what way
this duty should be performed, for their help therein I refer them to those
means briefly nominated for direction to children in the performance of this
very duty to their Parents; and by the way it is worth observing, that in a
real and true sense it may be said, and proved, that Masters, etc. are Parents
to then servants as well as to their children, yet with a great deal of
difference.

In the second place it is the duty of servants to be obedient unto their
Manners, etc. This duty has some affinity with the former, for if servants do
not readily obey their Masters they cannot honor them, they rather vilify
them, and expose them to contempt and disgrace; there are many Scripture texts
that offer themselves to confirm this truth: Servants be obedient to your
Masters according to the flesh, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants obey in all things your
Masters according to the flesh, Col 3.22. Exhort servants (says Paul) to be
obedient to their Masters in all things, not answering again, Tit. 2.9. The
Apostle Peter does further press this duty, Servants (says he) be subject to
your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. From all these places you may see this duty has the Word
of God for its foundation. The Centurion which we read of in the Gospel had
choice servants for their readiness to obey him, for he tells Christ, that if
he bid one go, he went, and if another come, he came, and if he bid his servant
do this, he did it; we must not doubt of the truth of what he said, though he
spoke those things to illustrate and set forth the power of Christ over all
sicknesses and all things; for he does acknowledge that that sickness that had
arrested his servant was the servant of Christ, and that as it did afflict his
servant when Christ commanded it so to do, so it must leave his servant and
depart when Christ should require the same, Mat 8.8 9. It were much to be
wished that every Master had such a servant, or such servants as this Centurion
had, there would be more quietness in Families, and better success in all
their employments than now there is. But many servants in our times will go and
come at their own pleasures, and do what is good in their own eyes: Their
Masters must be subject to them, and not they to their Masters; but such
servants will be the greatest losers at last; Mark what the Apostle says.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable to you, Heb. 13.17. which is
an exhortation in general, yet it concerns servants in special. Servants
must not do any thing contrary to their Masters minds, though they give no
particular command to the contrary. Elisha did not command his servant Gehazi
not to go after Naaman to receive a gratuity, yet he went and did receive a
Talent of Silver and two changes of raiment of him; but he could not crack of
his profit (as we say) for he had the plague of Leprosy with them into the
bargain, 2 Kings 5.20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27. Can any man with any show of reason
conceive that this example of disobedience in Gehazi to his Master, and of the
severe hand of God on him for it does stand upon Record for nothing; Whatsoever
things were written aforetime were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. And
this was written to terrify rebellious and disobedient servants, whereof the
world is full, but gracious servants will learn and practice better.

The third duty of servants to their Masters.
In the third and last place it is the duty of servants to their Masters to show
all diligence, fidelity, and faithfulness in the discharging their businesses,
and answering the trust committed to them, and that as in the presence of God.
When the Apostle in that place of Ephesians. 7.5, 9. (which we made use of before.)
had exhorted servants to be obedient to their Masters according to the flesh
with fear and trembling in singleness of heart as to Christ; he adds, Not
with eye-service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will
of God from the heart, the very same you find in Col. 3.22. In Tit. 2.9, 10.
Exhort servants (says the Apostle) to be obedient to their Masters, not
purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of
God. When servants serve their Masters not with eye-service, but with all
faithfulness and singleness of heart with a good conscience, they also serve
Jesus Christ who will plentifully recompense the same, either in temporal, or
spiritual blessings, or in both; he is a blessed servant who obeyes his
Masters commands chiefly in relation to Gods injunctions; such a one (no doubt)
was the servant of Abraham, and Jacob to his Father Laban, and Joseph to
Potiphar, and after to the keeper of the prison, Genesis 30.27. Chap. 39.3, ult.
There be diverse ways and means by which servants must show themselves
faithful to their Masters and Dames; First, by praying for them. Secondly, by
being diligent in the dispatch of their business. Thirdly, by preserving their
Estates, and in helping to increase them. Fourthly, by laboring to protect
their persons from violence to their power. And fifthly, by laboring to
preserve their reputations, in order whereunto they must keep their secrets
undisclosed, and their infirmities from being published. But such servants as
walk in ways contrary hereunto, it were incomparably better for a Christian
Householder to have them out than in his Family; and indeed it were far better
that such servants should lie under the cudgel of a Turkish patron than set
their feet under an honest man's Table. Thus we have with much brevity past
through the duties which servants owe unto their Masters and Dames; First, they
must labor to honor them. Secondly, they must submit to them, and obey them.
Thirdly and lastly, they must show all diligence, fidelity, and faithfulness
to them, in doing their business, and in answering the trust committed to them.

Now to come to a full period of all, and conclude, we shall endeavor to make
some application of that which has been before laid down by way of duty.

England, where having affirmed the Estate of Marriage to be honorable among
all men (which indeed it is) the words following contain an Admonition, and
run thus; Therefore is not to be enterprized, (that is Marriage) nor taken in
hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly, to satisfy men's carnal lusts and
appetites, like brute Beasts that have no understanding, but Reverently,
discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God, duly considering the
causes for which Matrimony was ordained, etc. such rash, inconsiderate, heady
and unadvised persons as these never labor to see themselves to have a clear
Call to change their conditions by entering into the Marriage estate. They
desire no spiritual gifts to enable them to perform spiritual duties. They
look not upon any qualifications in the party they desire to enjoy in such a
condition, provided, there be person and beauty to satisfy their brutish
lusts; and money to please their covetous humor, they will marry their hearts
and souls to a bag of silver or gold; these answer the Proverb, What has
she, what is she; and so they make money to answer all things. As Solomon
speaks, yet to other ends, Eccl. 10.19 And as for the way and means which God
has sanctified and appointed for men to walk in, and make use of to obtain
good wives, and meet helpers, they will not set one foot in them; they will not
go to God by prayer for direction this way, and for success herein; they
scarce know what God is; and for the duty of Prayer, they know not so much as
the A B C of it; and as for Parents consent they regard not that, all they
desire is to inveigle maids to love them, and enchant their foolish affections
to answer their unreasonable desires; let Parents consent or not consent what
care they (but for some sinister ends, for portion sake, or to attain
preferment by their favor.) There is an impure generation, who have overspread
the Nation, (yea, and many other parts too,) like the Locusts in Egypt, Exodus
10.14. who purposely do invent obscene, lascivious, scurrilous, and filthy
songs and Ballads, on purpose to pollute and poison young Virgins and Maids
with carnal, fleshly, and abominable lusts, that so they may bring them over
to themselves for unclean dalliance at present, and then make them yield to
their hellish Motions, and run point blanke against the consent of their
Parents to bestow themselves on them; but poor Creatures, when they think
they are good wives, they are but filthy Whores, so long as Parents consent is
not obtained, by means whereof the Commonwealth is filled with abundance of
Whores Bastards, by which means also it comes to pass that Towns and
Parishes are so overcharged with poor that there can scarce be an able Family
there. And where be they who labor to inform themselves in the duties which
married persons are called to perform each to other, and both to their
Families? And these duties to mind (as I have said) before Marriage, that
afterward they might practice them? Truly, this is the condition of multitudes
of Men and Women now conjoined together (after their way) in Marriage, by
reason whereof the Land is full of ignorant and extremely profane Families; by
this means it is come to pass that the power of Godliness is slighted; here
is the cause why Sabbaths are profaned; this is the cause why faithful
Ministers are the scorn of this Age; this is the cause of so much Whoredom,
Drunkenness. Lying, Cheating, Overreaching, and what not amongst us; Ah, you
poor souls who have contracted Marriage before you were called to it, and
have so wickedly entered into, and lived in it, all the sins beforementioned,
and also what sins else can be named, must like so many illegitimate children,
be brought and laid at your door, and you must be Fathers and Mothers to them.
Never look to prosper (in your souls especially) until you labor to remove
the guilt by repentance and tears of godly Compunction, and until thou
reform, for which end be careful to be informed in the duties thou art called
to perform in the state of Marriage, and then set about the discharge of them
as in the presence of God; labor to redeem lost time by double diligence in
the well improving the future, and so God may yet be gracious to you and yours,
and make you blessings both to Church and Commonwealth.

In the last place it may serve for instruction. say) to change thy condition
(as beforesaid) and would thou feign enjoy a meet helper in all conditions
God shall put thee into, whether prosperity or adversity? Then let me exhort
thee (and be thou exhorted) in the name and fear of God to see God going
before thee by a clear Call to enterprise so great a business, even, in
fitting thee for the same, as has been before laid down; and in particular
labor to get an humble spirit, and an understanding heart to discharge all
duties to every relation that God shall set under thee, and that for their good
both of body and soul, that thou may be a blessing to them, and they under
God a comfort to thee; labor to propound to thy self lawful ends in that thy
undertaking, and be sure walk in warrantable ways, and use godly and lawful
means to carry on thy desires by; and amongst those means set down for thy
direction, mind well (in a way of practice) the going to God by Prayer; then
use double care and diligence to meet with one for thy companion who is of a
gracious frame both of heart and life, so far as possibly can be discerned. And
for those other qualifications beforementioned, be so far from slighting them,
that rather on the contrary be unsatisfied in thy thoughts if thou find any one
of them wanting: Yet not so unsatisfied as to divert thy affections from such a
party, because some one of them are undiscerned, and perhaps some others a
little defective; but if the maine be there, then in the name and fear of the
great God proceed gradually to put a period to all thy cares, pains, and
endeavors that way, and now being married, if thou would have God say amen
to all those joys thy friends and acquaintance wish thee, then set thy self
the work that lies before thee, namely, thy godly and Christian-like
discharging of all the duty that estate calls for from thee, which brings me to
the second thing proposed in this Use, that is, to speak a word or two of
Instruction to those in the Marriage condition. It is a true saying, that
Marriage is either Merry-age, or Mar-age: But if thou would have it to thee
Merry-age, and not Mar-age, then now labor to walk with God in the
conscientious discharge of all the duties that the same estate ties thee to.
Art thou a Husband? Labor to perform thy duties to thy Wife. Art thou a Wife?
Labor to discharge all those duties thou owe to thy Husband; and both of you
neglect not any of your duties you are obliged to discharge to your Children
and Servants. And it also concerns you to take care to see that your Children,
etc. perform their duties to you; which duties of all kinds you must mind, and
be informed in, because hereby (as you have heard) God is glorified, and both
Church and State furthered in tranquillity and happiness; for by this means
(as before expressed) you shall prevent a whole Catalogue of grievous sins from
being perpetrated; And so shall save the Ministers of God a great deal of
pains, ease their Loins, and preserve their Lungs; And prevent a great deal
of trouble to all truly godly Magistrates, who dare not bear the sword in
vain, who had rather praise you and all others when they see you do that which
is good than otherwise to be a terror to you. Beloved, these are times looked
upon by many as times of Reformation; (And truly, I look upon them as calling
for much in that kind.) But let me tell you, that let Ministers do their
duties, and Magistrates perform theirs, yet if Governors of Families be
remiss in the discharge of what concerns them in their relations in their
little Churches, and private Commonwealths, all will come to nothing. I
profess the well instructing and right governing of Families is the eye of the
work; I could wish with my soul that such as have power to make and
constitute Laws would lay a very considerable Mulct upon all Governors of
Families that neglect their duties to their Children and Servants to instruct
and reform them; and that the same might not only extend to their purses, but
to their persons too. You have heard before that by this means souls are sent
to hell by multitudes; such evil persons as these are, what are they but the
devils Factors? and their sin and punishment one day (without repentance) will
find them out; but most sad of all men is the condition of such (as even out of
conscience (as they pretend) cast off the care of the souls of such as are
under their charge; they say, and plead hard for it, that none ought to be
restrained from sin by use of means, all Ordinances public and private must
be laid aside, nay, cast off with scorn and disdain; and men and women, they
say, must wait for revelations from heaven; sure they have had revelations from
hell for their direction herein, but from heaven they shall never have any,
unless it be in the demonstration of the wrath of God if they persist
impenitently; and for Family discipline there must be none, let their Children
Swear, Lie, profane the Sabbaths, or run in any vile way, (provided they call
not their Parents and Masters vile Heretics, and abominable Schismatics, and
offer to prove them such from the Word of God,) all is well; for they say, they
can put no grace into their hearts, but God will (if they belong to him) in due
time. Oh what tongue can tell, or what heart can think what will be the portion
of these men without Gods infinite mercy in converting and reforming them.
Truly, contrary to intention, when we first entered upon this Use, we have made
this digression, it should have been a part of the other Use, but being then
omitted I was loath to let it wholly pass. You may be pleased to remember,
that but even now I told you that were Governors of Families, that if you did
conscientiously discharge the duties which you owe, etc. you might hereby
glorify God, and the tranquillity both of Church and Commonwealth would
hereby be furthered, etc. So in the last place, from hence you may conclude,
(that as you glorify God by this means, and do good unto his poor Church on
Earth by the increasing and purging the members thereof,) that through the
Lords free Grace in Christ you are Members of the Church of Christ here
Militant, and shall be of the Church Triumphant in the highest Heavens, There
to enjoy the fullness of happiness at the right hand of Christ, and all
glorious and blessed Union and Communion with God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, and with innumerable and blessed Angels and Saints, even
the souls of just men made perfect, even for ever and ever. O my soul praise
thou the Lord; praise ye the Lord.

FINIS.
Christian Friend, By reason of the Authors living, far from London, and also
his urgent Employments hindering him that he could not attend the Press there
has some faults escaped, and are here inserted in this ensuing Errata, which
thou may be bleased to mend with thy Pen, etc.

In the Paternal Advice in p. 21. l. 11. f. groans r. grave. In the Epistle
Dedicator. p. 2. l. 22. f. and r. for. l. 28. r. as upon.

Page 2 line 29 for a, read the. p. 11 l. 32 and 33 f. poverty r. penury. the
same l. f. destruction r. distraction. p. 12. l. 21. f. with r. into. p. 24 l.
26 put a period at expected. p. 28 l. 18 f. these r. those. p. 36 l. 31 f.
prove r. approve. p. 37 l. 11 f. churlish r. a churlish. l. 25 r. as ^. p. 38
l. 8 f. stone r. a stone. p. 39 l. 7 r. be too nice. p. 45 l. 1 f. spiritual
r. special. p. 46 l 9 f. unhandsome r. unwholesome. p. 50 l. 15 f. over r.
even. p. 51 l. 6 r. a muckworme. l. 15 f. Hos. r. Hest. p. 93 l. 1 f. unto r.
in. p. 95 l. 13 dele no. l. 15 dele the. p. 108 l. 14 f. concerned r.
concerns. l. 32 f. does r. should. p. 141 l. 10 f. duty r. Deity. p. 143 l.
27 f. his r. thy. p. 152 l. 16 f. command r. examples. l. 19 f. thirdly r.
secondly. p. 164 l. 6 r. the eternal. p. 169 l. 19 r. not what is she. p. 173
l. 6 r. to the. p. 174 l. 17 f. eye r. Key.


