Corrigenda and mutanda.
Page 45. lin. 11. lege ab aliis dissidet. 47.21. translatio nostra. 105.4.
omnesque ad unumfere. Nam sunt inter Reformatos, qui de lectione hujus nominis
non male sentiant: quos aliquando nominabo, si a me nominari volent. 107.7.
Loca ubi Iehova etc. Tota haec notatio deleri posset, ^uum antea verbis Merceri
cadem dicta sint.

INSTITUTIONS OR ADVICE TO HIS GRANDSON, In Three Parts.

By William Higford Esquire

Disce Puer virtutem ex me.

Virg. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Edmund Thor^ of Oxford. MDCLVIII.

To his Noble friend John Higford Esquire;
SIR,
I Have, by your permission, gathered out of your Manuscript, what I conceive
to be fittest for the public use.

Young Gentlemen, who shall read this, will acknowledge your favor in imparting
it: And I shall think my pains well requited, if they please to take the good
Advice humbly presented to them from the Noble and Learned Author, under your
beloved Name, by the Transcriber.

Epitaphium Gulielmi Higford.
HIc jacet Higfordus. Quis? Saxo suffici^ i^i
Inscriptum Nomen. Caetera Fama docet.
Higford lies here: we only write his Name
upon the Grave, and leave the rest to Fame.
Fama loquitur.
Give me my Trumpet that I may proclaim,
^b lasting sounds the Noble Higfords Name:
That this ungrateful world may know He Is gone,
And know whom they have lost. For he was one
Whom only few, that is, the wise did know,
And rightly value, while he lived: but now
All must lament and love. So the sun's light
It estimate by the dark shade of night.
He was a light indeed: when he drew nigh,
And with his beams shined on our Company,
All clouded brows were cleared, and every Face
It Is beautified with smiles; such comely Grace
Appeared in his behavior; such true wit,
Sharp wit, but inoffensive, always fit
For the occasion and the persons, still
Mingled with his discourse; ^ad wit at will.
And Learning too he had in readiness,
Such as his Book conteins, worthy o'th press,
His Manuscript to his ^o^s son. O when
Will it come forth, for the use of Gentlemen!
He was well read in Books, and Men; both these,
Studied, made what he s^ke or wrote to please:
Old Authors he loved best; and well he knew
The Old Religion from the late and n^w,
And though he read and honored Bellarmine
And great Aquinas, he did not decline
From the English Church, but held fast to his death
The Reformation of Queen Elzabeth,
Wherein he had been bred; ever the same;
Warping neither to Rome nor Amsterdam.
One note of his Religious mind take hence
(Exemplar to us all) his Patience.
Among his Papers, Gather what his Muse
Has left us in remembrance ('it was his use)
Of Honored persons; Chandos, Button, do
Live in his Verses still, and Capel too.
Let Higford also live with them; His Name
With lasting sounds my Trumpet shall proclaim.
THE PREFACE.
MAn is a proud Creature, ambitious of Immortality; but it is denied him by the
immutable Law of God edicted against all flesh, Once to dye.

Omnia mors poscit; lex est non poena perire. But yet he solaceth himself with
a phansy of Immortality, at leastwise to live in specie, and by his Posterity,
more conspicuously in his Firstborn to recontinue his memory: Haeres est alter
ipse (says Syracides) and filius est pars patris: mortuus est pater, and quasi
non est mortuus, quia reliquit similem sibi.

The Application, Dear Cousin, reflecteth upon you. You are to me both my Cousin
and my Son, my Cousin by the remotion of a degree, but my Son according to the
Civil Law, Jure repraesentationis, because you represent the person of my dear
Son, your late Father, now with God: so that in you are invested all his Rights
and Prerogatives of Birth, and upon you (by Gods mercy) it likely to descend
all the Honor (if any such be) right and travel of our Ancesters, and in you
we all must live.

And because, in this your absence from Dixton, I cannot impart my solicitous
thoughts unto you, nor acquit my self of that reciprocal duty I owe you, nor
manifest the entire affection which I bear you by personal conference; love
must creep where it cannot go: and therefore not knowing otherwise how to make
my approaches unto you, I have framed and dedicated unto you this ensuing
address, that it may be (if worthy your perusal a support to your tender
youth, apt to slip, and a Guide unto you in this your journey upon earth, and
also a Present or Token of my love unto you upon the entrance of this new year,
which together with the whole course of your life, I heartily pray may be
successful and happy.

Machiavel in his third book of his Decads upon Livy. chapter 34. a book which I
would recommend unto to you in his due time, for I am not of the opinion of
those rigid Divines, that place so deep a searcher into Histories and Roman
Antiquities amongst their Apocrypha books) recounteth that in the institution
of a young Nobleman or Gentleman (for Gentlemen are Nobiles minores) three
things are very considerable.

1. That he descend from worthy parents; for that will be presumed, that
Children will be such as their parents were (until the contrary does appear.)

Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis. 2. The choice of his Company and Converse;
for this does very much demonstrate what the person is in his Genius and
disposition, as Syracides well observes: All flesh will resort unto their
like, and every man will keep company with such as himself.

3. That he be very careful, how he demean himself in the entrance of his
youth that he act nothing, which shall be vile, sluggish or remiss: but that
his actions savor of quickness and magnanimity: and if opportunity invite him
thereunto, that he undertake some noble Essay, aliquod egregium facinus, some
notable adventure, thereby to give reputation and luster unto his subsequent
life.

INSTITUTIONS OR ADVICE TO HIS GRANDSON. The First Part.
NOSCE TEIPSUM was a document in especial esteem amongst the ancient
Philosophers, and to know your Origin and birth is to know a good part of your
self.

I have in my custody six Offices or Inquisitions in serie (which also are
transcribed into the several Offices at London) all which I will take care
faithfully to leave unto you, because it shall not be through my default, that
you lose any of your just rights either in honor or profit: these Offices and
the quiet enjoyment of your Ancestors ensuing thereupon, being in truth the
very Nerves and Sinews of your estate, and the Conduits whereby it does appear
how their blood runs in your veins, of all which I shall be ready to give
you an account.

But I beseech you (this your descent be it what it will) that you make no
boasting or ostentation thereof, or comparisons with other Gentlemen; than
which nothing is more vile or putid: but lay it aside by you to vindicate you
from indignities and affronts, and when you find your self disparaged, or the
title of your land questioned, then with modesty (the comeliest ornament of
youth) and with such weapons as are left unto you, defend the same. Let
upstarts and buyers of honor bragg and boast.

Pervia dant vada plus murmin is, alta nihil. Armories have suffixed unto them
Mottoes or short sentences: and that which your Ancestors have long used is,
VIRTUS VERUS HONOS.

By which it does appear, that unless you imitate their virtues, you cannot
participate their honors. Without virtue, honor is but a false gloss: for
Titles of honor do not ennoble men, but worthy men ennoble their Titles of
Honor.

Virtute decet non sanguine niti. This Honor, though it be a character
indelible, which cannot be lost, but by your own default; yet it will be much
impaired and in effect lost, neither can it be well preserved, without the
preservation of your estate also. They are like two twins, inseparable, born
together, and must live and dye together.

Vnijugis vitae est una, necisque dies. Poverty and Honor are very unsuitable
Companions. Every Acre of land you sell, you lose in proportion so much gentile
blood: And therefore you may take notice that you are but Fiduciarius, that is
(according to the Civil Law) a Trustee for others: and that Piety which your
Ancestors had to preserve an Estate for you, you are to extend the same unto
those who shall succeed you. If you dissipate, you break that tacit and
implicit Trust, which so many Ancestors, in so many Ages, have reposed in you.

Now to preserve an Estate is an Art and skill, as Ovid tells you:

Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri:
Casus inest illis, hic erit artis opus:
The virtue which best conduces to this end, is the most excellent virtue
Parsimony, I mean the medium between nimium and parum, sordid Avarice, and
profuse Prodigality. Cato being demanded what was the greatest Revenue, made
Answer, Maximum vectigal Parsimonia. Use Parsimony betimes before a wast be
made, for Seneca tells you, Sera est in fundo Parsimonia.

In respect of the distance of years which is between us, you are very likely
to be Master of your Estate, in part or in whole, betimes, yea in the very
entrance of your youth.

The Civil Law limiting the majority of Males at the Age of 25. better
provideth for the security of Estates than the Common Law of our Land, which
appoints the full Age at 21. More Families, I dare say, have decayed, or at
least received the deadly wound in this intervall, which is but four years,
than in all other years of man's life. Be not therefore too jolly at the first,
nor apt to be blown by Parasites and Flatterers (the bane of youth, who as
Summer birds, but withal birds of prey, do always resort to the Spring of an
Estate) that your estate is greater than it is: this has deceived many. Make
your self rather less then you are. Good grounds of Frugality at first once
well laid will make your Estate continue firm and stable.

Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet. Land, by which a man is fed, is most
honorable: money (as Syracides has it) answers all things, but it is not so
honorable, and more casual. Land and money sort best together. If you cannot
set your land, you may stock it. When it is more profitable for you to distock,
you can take your best market. Cast your self once behind, whereby you must be
enforced to recieve your Rents before they are due, or to engage your Tenants
and servants, it is wonderful what ways and projects will be laid to keep you
down.

Riches may be well compared unto Cisternes or Pooles, which a small stream
will easily fill, if there be no leaks or wastes, but small wastes and expenses
continuing, and not prevented, have decieved, and undone many, no man knows
how. Look to your exports, as well as your Imports, and so prevent growing
mischiefs. Idem facit sentina neglecta, quod flumen irruens. Ista levia noli
contemnere. Qui spernit modica, paulatim decidet.

The Ancient Historians agree that by this Virtue Parsimony most especially,
the State of Rome came to Sovereignty over the whole World. Quintus Cincinnatus
was taken from the Plough and made Dictator, and at the end of his Dictatorship
returned to the Plough again. But the Roman State, after the conquest of Asia
being rotten with luxury, and the delicacies thereof (prope ad summum prope ad
exitum) fell as fast, and at last resting in sinu imperatoris, the whole Roman
Empire was not sufficient to satiate the throat of one Man, as did well appear
in those Monsters of men, Vitellius and Heliogabalus.

But what do we seek for examples of Parsimony so ancient and remote, when you
have so lively one of your own. Your worthy Mother, you see, bred up in all
affluence, denies herself all the conveniences and contentments becoming her
sex and Honor. What to do? to give your self and Brothers a Virtuous
Education. Certainly, you will much degenerate, if you comply not with Her in
so eminent a virtue.

Much more might be added by comparing the contrary effects to this Virtue,
because Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt: but they are all checked by
this rare Virtue Parsimony, the wholesome Preservative against all Inordination.

Another, and that an especial means to preserve your Estate is your choice of
a wife, when as Maturity of years and your own affections shall incline you
thereunto: which also by your care will add unto you both an Increment of
Estate, and Strength and Alliance of friends. It is the weightiest action you
can perform in all your life, and it is resembled to War, in which it is said,
you cannot err twice. Non est in bello bis peccandum. If love be your
incentive, let Discretion de your directive. Take your worthy Mother by the
hand with you; She looks upon you with a double aspect, as entrusted by your
late Father, and by her own Goodness, and indulgence toward you, exacting by
the Laws of God and Nature duty and obedience from you. To whose advice, if
you join your Prayers to the Allmighty, you shall then know that a good wife is
a Portion from the Lord.

Love is a fire which requires fuel, and therefore I trust you will take care
by your Marriage to advance and augment your estate, that thereby your
affectionate Mother may be enabled to make provision for your Brothers, to
undergo those progressions into which they have made so happy and Virtuous a
Commencement.

And this is also another preservation of your Estate, and security, if your
self should fail, these like two Arches will preserve the same. These are
noble Emissaries, which are sent abroad to afford you honor and reputation at
home. If any sad adventure happen to them, your House must be an Asylum or
Sanctuary unto them. You are three in number: Numero Deus impare gaudet.

And as Solomon says, The triple twisted cord is not easily broken.

Nemo laeditur nisi a scipso. There be many ways and middesses by which
Families have decayed, and many seeming wise men have overthrown their own
estates. Such are they that grasp more than they can hold. Mortgage not your
own land upon a certain title, for other land of whose title you cannot be so
well assured. Such as these Syracides well notes: He that buyeth land with
other men's money, is like one that buyeth a heap of stones to bury himself. It
is not the number of acres will give you content, when you are besieged and
oppressed with debts and necessities. Melior est pauper (says Solomon) sibi
sufficiens, quam qui multa possidet, and tamen egenus.

Such as these are Gamesters also, who out of a covetous desire and overweening
to gain, sometimes make a Patrimony, but a Christmas-Cast. Others have more
sport for their Money, who adventure bag after bag, and never leave off till
all be lost. This has accelerated the ruin of many noble Families.

I am not so supercilious to conceive, but that it may be a firting decorum,
for you to play, when by noble company you are invited thereunto: nay, not to
play is a defect: but then not to adventure more than you can well spare, and
for which the loss will not discontent you. And in this your disport, you are
to have some respect unto time, and not to make that to be your vocation which
is only intended for your recreation. Ludendi modus est retinendus, says
Tully.

And it will also become you to know the advantages of games; so shall you not
altogether commit your money, which is so precious, to the temerity of fortune:
Money is the hand to all actions, and it is also called alter sanguis, and
Regina pecunia, cui omnia obediunt.

A consequent of the two former is the taking up of money upon Interest: What
though you see many of the Nobility and Gentry involved and plunged therein,
Multitudo errrantium non parat errori patrocinium. Cato being demanded, Quid
est foenerare, made answer, Hominem jugulare. The Jews (well versed in the
trade ever since) were permitted to lend upon usury, to those Nations, whom God
had commanded to be cast out before them, thereby to ext^rp them. It devoureth
States and Kingdoms. The King of Spain, called the King of the golden purse,
upon whose Dominions the Sun never sets; was not able to pay the Interest of
money, taken up from the Merchants of Genoa, for the supply of his Army in the
Low Countries.

A concomitant to this of Usury is Suretyship, which has also undone many.
Money cannot be procured but upon high security; whereby you must make use of
your friends, even of your best friends. If you suffer them to be sued and
impleaded, Actum est de Amicitia. But for the most part the borrowers of money
(as at a mart) are engaged one for another, by a law of congruity. Those that
stand engaged for you; you must underwrite for them also: so that thereby your
person and estate will not only lie exposed to your own engagements, which
might be weighty enough to pull you down, but for other men's debts also. And
then it will be too late for you to hearken unto Solomon, whose advice is: If
thou be surety for thy Neighbor, and have stricken hands with a stranger, give
no sleep to thine eyes, not slumber to thine eyelids. Deliver thy self as a Do
from the hands of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fouler. Your
own engagements, with others also, by a figure of multiplication, may so
redouble and treble upon you, that in a moment you may be swallowed up alive,
and that House wherein your Ancestors have been glorious for bounty and
hospitality, may become the Den of a merciless Usurer: Your enemies will laugh
you to scorn, your friends passing by will lament and say, O domus antiqua,
quam dispari dominaris domino! But to prevent these and other the like
mischiefs, you have a sure way. Be you the fruitful servant of Almighty God,
you shall take deeper root: You shall be like a tree planted by the water side,
which will bring forth fruit in due season: your leaf also shall not wither,
and whatsoever you do, it shall prosper.

Thus much for the preservation of your Honor and Estate, which descend upon
you from your Ancestors. You may take breath a little, and then proceed to the
second part of this Discourse, concerning your Company and Converse.

INSTRUCTIONS OR ADVICE TO HIS GRANDSON. The second Part.
HOmo est Animal sociale: and he that is not sociable (says Aristotle) is more
than a man, or less than a man, aut Deus aut bellua, either a God which has
need of none, or a beast that will do good to none. And from this principle or
instinct of nature (for men to live together) he deduceth Families, Villages,
Cities and Commonwealths. But the best things have a mixture of ill, and a
difficulty arises, since Mundus in maligno positus, how shall we converse and
not participate with other men's sins; touch pitch and not be defiled, or be
like fishes of the Sea, bred up in salt waters, and always sweet.

Pelagius affirmed that man only sinned by imitation: and certainly by seeing
others sin before us, we insensible suck in the poison of Vice. This has been
the cause, that diverse pious and devout men have dissociated and retired
themselves into rocks, caves and desert places, thereby to avoid the contagion
of Evil: such as John the Baptist, Father of the Eremites.

But man by his Fall being judged to eat his bread Sudore vultus sai, is
necessitated to live and make choice of an active life, which consists in
labor and commerce, and thereby is engaged to the society of others. And
because of temptations, it is good in the first place to avoid the converse of
all known wicked persons, such as ^e Cheaters, Ruffians and Debauched, who
glory in their shame. A ^nis bona perdisces (says Seneca) quod si malis
adhaeseris, mentem ^uam habes proculdubio perdes. But because the Assemblies of
^en (and those also of the better ^ort, which is to be bewailed) ^o abound with
such, we are to fortify our selves with the moral Virtues, and put on the
Christian Armor, that thereby (by Gods assistance) we may avoid the baits and
engines wherewith they endeavor to ensnare us, as Solomon advises us; Si
alliciant te peccatores, ne acquiescas eis, etc. Seneca also gives us excellent
direction: Cum tuis versare, quite meliorem facturi sunt: illos admit, quos
tu potes facere meliores. Good is diffusive, and it is a happy Converse, when
we either profit others or our selves.

The first place in our Affections must be for our Friends. True friendship is
(as Tully says) inter bonos in bonis; All compacts with wicked men, or in
wicked things, are male icta foedera. A Friend is tried in Adversity: Si
possides amicum (says Syracides) (...) tentationibus posside eum, and (...)
facile credas ei. A good close, not to be too credulous, but to try before you
trust, true friends being very rare among so many Professors of friendship.

Tuta frequensque, via est per amici fallere nomen. The Italians have a
proverb, God shield me from my friends, I will look to my Enemies my self. It
may be an advantage to have an Enemy: he will make you stand the surer upon
your guard: you eye his motions and avenues: but a friend, which bosometh with
you, who can prevent? He is like a subterraneous engine, which will blow you up
before you hear the report. And therefore Seneca well advises: Sic am a
tanquam osurus, etc. Never love so much, but reserve your self, that if your
friend shall become your enemy, he shall not have power to do you hurt: and yet
withal, never hate so much, but leave an open gap or overture to let in love.
Your hatred must be mortal, your love immortal. Love abides for ever.

The next in order are your Neighbors, (a good Neighbor near, is better than
a brother afar off:) with whom, in respect of nearness, you are to converse.

There are two Honorable Neighbors, that in effect encircle your Estate: 1 The
Right Honorable Viscount Tracy, w^o has the pre-eminence of all the Families
in these parts for Antiquity. Your Ancestors have from them received much
honor by diverse Trusts and Services recommended and reposed in them. Their
lands at Alderton lie promiscuously with yours, and many differences have
arisen between the respective Lords and Tenants, which have been always
composed in an amicable way. Many graces and favors I have received in my
Country; have proceeded from this Honorable Lord, and his Son Sir Robert Tracy,
the true Inheritor of his Honors and Virtues. And though I might command you,
yet had I rather entreat you to assist me to pay that deep debt of duty and
service which I ow to those of that Honorable Family.

The other is the Lord Chandos; nay, the Lord Butlers long before, as I am very
well able to set forth. The Lord Edmund Chandos Knight of the Garter, in much
infirmity of body did adventure toward Gloucester to do Sr. John Higford
honor, when he was first High Sheriff, but falling more sick in the Journey,
returned to his Castle and died before the Assizes were ended. The Lord Giles
Chandos employed Sr. John Higford in the Government of his Estate, and in the
Lieutenancy of the County: and for his good service done therein promoved him
to the Queens Majesty (a great Housewife of her Honor) who dignified him with
the order of a Knight (in those days communicable only to persons of worth and
quality) 14. Sept. 1591. At which time also her said Majesty created Sr John
Scudamore Knight, the goodlyest Parsonage then in the Court of England, and in
high favor, her Majesty using many gracious speches to them both. The Lord
Gray Chandos, truly noble both in learning and Arms brought me first into the
Commission of the Peace, and did me many Graces both in Court and Country. This
noble Lord, with whom you are almost coetaneous, has showed many remarkable
Indices of his Prowess and Honor.

Nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
Follow the train of your Ancestors, and so grow up in his favor.

Principibus placuisse viris haud ultima laus est. You have also many other
worthy Gentlemen your Neighbors, and some of your Alliance too, from whom your
Ancestors have received many high favors. Your Ancestors knew no other way to
continue their good Affections, but Affability, Sweetness, and mutual Offices
of love. Morosity and strangeness will loose your friends, and benefit you
nothing at all.

Descendendo ascendes. The next Companions in order are your servants and
Domestics, but these are ill companions, lest they prove insolent. It is
written of Nero, the worst of Princes, Non habuisse ingenium supra servos; when
the great affairs of State were in debate in the Senate house, he was
conversant with his Favorite Tigillinus and the rest of his servants. And this
has also been a disparagement to many worthy Gentlemen, who affecting to be
the best of their company, have negclected the converse of their superiors,
many times to their great disadvantage.

That you may be the better obeyed by your servants, you must carefully govern
your self, that by your own example you may the better govern them. Longum est
iter per praecepta; breve and efficax per exempla.

In the choice of your servants, you must take care, that they be negotiis
pares, and then enjoin them business enough, and exact accounts from them, lest
by remissness they grow idle and unserviceable. Pay them their due Salaries: so
will they be the more tied and assured to you: Non manebit apud te opus
mercenarti usque mane. Your Commands must be lawful, pious, and religious,
tantum in Domino: remembering, that as they are your Servants, so they are Gods
Freemen. Holy David will direct you in the choice of them: He that leads a
Godly life, he shall be my servant. Faithful Abraham will inform you how to
govern them: I know, says God, that Abraham will Command his Household, that
they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. Abraham had a
good servant whom he employed in the negotiation of his sons marriage: if you
find such a servant, let your soul love him, and defraud him not of liberty,
neither leave him a poor man.

The next Companions will be your Tenants, who are your Neighbors, and will
have recourse unto you, in respect of their Estates which they hold of you.
Tillage is the preservation of a Commonwealth in providing bread, which is
called the Staff of man, whereupon he leans: which Staff, if it fail, Man
falls to the ground. Terra dicitur a terendo: and in a Fine Tillage-land is
first set down, because it is worthyer than any other land. For, as Cicero
says, Omnium rerum ex quibus aliquid exprmiitur, nihil est Agricultura melius,
nihil uberius, nihil dulcius, nihil homine libero dignius. By this Kings have
their Subsidies, and the Bodies of men for supply of their Armies, (for, as
Tacitus says, Ex agro supplendum robur exercitus) and Incumbents also recieve
their full Tithes. These Men live innocent lives without deceit: they only
rely upon God, who gives the former and the later rain. To enclose, or not to
suffer them to renew their Estates, whereby desolation shall ensue, draws on
a woe.

They hold of you by Fealty, that is, Fidelity, to be faithful unto you for
the Lands they hold. you must in Relation give them protection, whereby they
may follow their excessive labors.

Finiunt, reaprantque labores. Your Ancestors have been moderate in their
Fines, and I trust God will bless you the better for it. Let these men of bread
enjoy and eat the bread which they dearly labor for and earn: Panis pauperum,
vita pauperum: qui defrandat eos, vir sanguinis.

To your Tenements and Manor you have an Advousion that is Appendant. An
Advousion, in the eye and construction of the law, is no more but a Pleasure
for a Friend, a good friend indeed which may lead you to God. Omnia cum amico
delibera, sed de ipso prius,

Cardinal Ximenes Archbishop of Sevilla in Spain would never conferr any
Benefice to any person who made suit for the same. K. Henry 7. one of the Sages
of the Kings of England did never promote any one to any Office or dignity upon
the motion of another. Give your Benefice your self, so shall you have the
thanks: Give it with Judgment, not with partial affection, St. Paul will direct
you how to choose: Irreprehensibilem, ornatum, prudentem, pudicum, hospitalem,
doctorem; non violentum, non percussorem, non cupidum; sed modestum, non
neophytum, ne in superbiam elatus in judicium incidat diaboli. Against this
young man I should except a little. Young men are Aguish, their pots are
boiling, and they have many Meanders. The Cardinals in their conclave would
once adventure (and that but once) to make a young Pope, which was Leo the 10.
of the House of Medices: but see what followed: This young Pope by promiscuous
granting and selling of Pardons and Indulgences to the German Nation, gave
occasion to Luther to write against him what a defection has since ensued from
that See? The Cardinals since grown more wary in their choice, do except
against any one (though otherwise well parted for so high a function) unless he
be also old enough to be Pope.

Coram cano capite consurge, (says Syracides.) The Elder man fixes a deeper
impression in the hearts of his Auditors, and the gray hairs exact a better
attention, as it is lively expressed by Virgil.

Tum pietate gravem, and meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant:
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
The elder man also, if he be froward, is of less continuance.

Non datur beneficium nisi propter officium, says the Law. If you have
provided him of the temporal part, he must afford you the spiritual. Amongst
other his qualifications, peaceable must be one; in respect of the Interest he
shall have in yours and your Tenants Estates. When you make a feast, though
furnished with variety of delicacies, your feast will be much impaired, if you
have no salt. This is your Salt.

It will be an especial act of Piety in you to settle a godly preaching
Minister to officiate at Dixton; It will be a singular comfort to you and your
Family, to be informed in your duty to God by the example of his life and by
his doctrine. It is said, Facundus comes in via est pro vehiculo: certainly, in
this your journey ad patri am, which is Heaven (for we are all but pilgrims
upon earth) such a companion will be as a Chariot to bring you to Almighty God:
and perhaps some of your Ancestors have been less successful by the omission
thereof.

Now, being upon the Treaty of Sacred things, I shall recommend and transmit
unto you the care of certain Lands piously bequeathed by William Higford Esquire;
to the use of the Church of Alderton by his Deed bearing date in October, the
28. Henry 8.

The Church does pray in aid of Brachium saeculare to support it, and the first
Law in the Statutes of Magna Carta, whereunto the King at his Coronation is
solemnly sworn, is, That the Church of England shall be free, and have all her
Rights entire, and her liberties inviolate. You are and must be a Brachium
seculare, and support to those Lands, which being separated and set apart from
profane uses, must be now only employed according to the disposition of the
Donour per formam doni. To alien or divert the profits to any other use (which
is often attempted by the Parishioners to save their own money) or to endeavor
to gain these Lands to your self, is Sacrilege, a crying sin, greatly tending
to the dishonor of Almighty God, and which also may infect your other lands.
There are many examples of such who have broken the Trusts reposed in them, but
their Names do rot upon the earth. Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei. You
will find other pious Acts of your Ancestors, which to their glory and honor
you are to maintain, as you will expect to be honored your self.

You have also another Companion, which reads to you. Generosus Animus
facilius ducitur quam trahitur. You must hearken to him as substituted by your
worthy Mother, unto whom God has confirmed a power over you. The Heir (says
the Apostle) differs in nothing from a Servant (in his Minority) but is under
Tutors and Governors. Disobedience in this kind is destructive. Maledictio
Matris eradicat fundamenta. This your Overseer is to give you your first
liquor: and then you know.

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu.
Sir John Higford, who was an eminent man in his Country, had for his Tutor the
famous Bishop Jewel; my Father Doctor Cole, an excellent Governor; My self
Doctor Sebastian Benefield, native of Presbury, a very learned man: All three
of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxon. And if we may transcend higher, Alexander who
conquered the world, had for his Tutor Aristotle, who conquered the Arts:
Thomas Aquinas, the Champion of the Roman host (of whom they boast, Toll
Thomam and dissipa Ecclesiam) had for his Tutor our Countryman and near
Neighbor Alexander of Hales, surnamed Doctor irrefragabilis: Charles the
Great, Emperor of the West, Alcuinus: Charles the fifth, Pope Adrian: King
James, a King of learning as well as of power, had for his Tutor the famous
Buchanan. These Princes and great Persons obtained great renown by their
Institution from their Tutors.

The Jesuits boast, that Imperium literaerum penes Iesuitas: and they profit
and raise their Scholars most by the choicest Lecturers that may be gotten to
read unto their youth (and so also do Both our Universities, both in private
Colleges and public schools) after the lecture they meet together, hold
disputation, whet their wits by discourse, and rivet what they have heard,
adding thereunto writing the heads for the helps of fallible memory: thus the
work is done. Reading makes an able man, Discourse a ready man, and writing a
perfect man.

There are also other Companions, and these are Books, held to be the best
companions of all, because they will not flatter: but in the choice of them you
ought to be very curious. And therefore in the first place cast away from you
all wanton, lewd and licentious Pamplhets: and read good books, and those in
order and method. For as in your diet, health is preserved by a few dishes, and
those of good juice and nourishment: so in learning, a few Books well studied
and digested will profit you more than a great number not will chosen. Lectio
certa prodest: says Seneca.

The Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Scudamore is best able to direct you
(when you can have access to his Lordship) he is (...), a great lover of
learning and very learned: and a most bountiful Mecaenas to all Scholars and
men of parts.

The Book, wherein you are to be most conversant, is the Holy Scriptures. This
must be your Vade mecum. Non recedat Volumen legis hujus ab ore tuo, sed
meditaberis in eo diebus and noctibus. This word is a lantern unto your feet,
and a light unto your paths. The Scripture is compared to a River, wherein a
Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim: in some places easy, in some places
hard to be understood. The easy must expound the harder: and where you doubt,
you must follow the Advice of St. James Si quis indiget sapientia, postulet a
Deo: and also have recourse to Gods learned Ministers and Ambassadors, of whom
it is said, Vobis datum est nosse mysteria doi, whereto the Prophet Malache
agrees: The Priests lips preserve knowledge: seek the law at his Mouth. Thus
doing, yo must acquiesce, and captivate your understanding to the obedience of
Christ.

The Psalms of Holy David you are to read as they are appointed for the Day,
being a chioce part of the word of God, and the ejaculations of a person
according to Gods heart.

Among other Books I would commend unto you especially, in divinity, the
learned Hookers, Ecclesiastical polity; in History, the honor of our Nation
Sr. Walter Raliegh and Plutarchs Lives; for the knowledge of our own Country,
Mr. Camdens Britannia, and my friend Sr. Richard Baker's Chronicle; for
precepts of Morality and virtuous Education, Xenophons Cyrus, and Tullies
Offices, together with K. James Basilicon Doron: and to refresh your self with
poetical stories, you may take Sr. Philip Sydney in steed of all. When I was
young, it was a defect for a Gentleman not to be versed in Him.

Alfred, one of the Saxon Kings during the Heptarchy, and Founder of the
University of Oxford, divided the 24. hours of the Day into 3. parts: whereof
one third part he spent in the necessities of Nature, viz. eating, drinking,
dressing, sleeping etc. another third part he employed in hearing and composing
matters of state, and negotiations of his Kingdom: but the other third part he
constantly devoted to Meditation and acquisition of wisdom. Kings and Princes
have many and great difficulties, and Crowns have thorns: and so in like sort
all Masters of Families and Trades, in their several mysteries and vocations,
have a full employment of their time: of whom it may be said, as Seneca, Ipsa
vita vitae apparatu consumitur: But in you, who are freed frem all those
encumbrances, it were noble to vindicate from sleep and sports some Hours every
day, and to dispose them in the exercise of learning.

Of all professions the Lawyer is most painful: and it may well be so: Gold is
an especial Invitement to industry. I have known diverse Students of the Law,
who have, without any failer, set apart eight, nay some ten hours and more
every day in study of the Law: whereby they became great Gainers, and were
advanced to the highest place of Judicature.

Titus the son of the Emperor Vespasian, called Deliciae Generis Humani
(because he was of so sweet a disposition, that it is said, Neminem ab eo
tristem discessisse) this Titus kept a Diary of all his Actions, and when at
night he had found upon examination, that he had acted nothing memorable, he
would exclame, Amici diem perdidimus. This example I commend to you, Dear
Cousin, and add no more here, concerning your converse either with Men or Books.

INSTRUCTIONS OR ADVICE TO HIS GRANDSON. The third Part.
THE last part of our discourse will concern your Actions. Virtutis laus omnis
in Action consistit. The World is a Stage, and every one is to act his part
before that great Spectator, God Almighty: which must make you careful how you
act under his all-seeing eye.

The highest acts you can perform are the acts of Religion: whcich raises up
your mind from earth to Heaven. Your Religion must be accompanied with zeal,
and your zeal tempered with discretion, that you may not be one of them whom
the Apostle censureth: Habentes zelum, sed non secundum scientiam.

In your Access to Heaven you are to be led by two Virgins, prayer and
preaching, by the one you talk with God, by the other God speaks unto you.

In your prayer, you are to be frequent and fervent. Holy David in the Evening,
Morning and Noon did pray unto the Lord, and that instantly, and the Lord heard
his prayer. He did rise also at midnight to give thanks unto the Lord. Our
Savior Christ pernoctabat in Oratione.

As for preaching, when you enter into the house of God, be ready and attentive
in hearing the word of God, and make it your own by meditation and practice.
Those beasts only were accounted clean that ruminate and chew the cud.

It is practice, and the careful observance of Gods Commandments, which
brings the Reward, Hoc fac and vives. This is it that does most lively
denominate a Christian. You shall know him by his fruits.

For the better observance of Gods Law, you are to pray in aid of Grace, as
St. Austin advises, Facere quod possumus, and petere quod non possumus. When
you fall, let your prayer be, Ne derelinquas me, Domine: Strive to raise your
self again by repentance, which is no more but peccata praeterita plangere, and
plangenda iterum non committere, called by St. Ierom, Secunda post naufragium
Tabula.

The Theological Virtues which attend Religion are three, Faith, Hope, and
Charity: with which you must join Humility. This is the basis or foundation of
all other virtues: the first step of Jacobs ladder. He that humbles himself
shall be exalted.

But the Moral virtues are a more proper subject for Me, the first in order is
Justice.

This is the bond of all Societies, Families, Kingdoms and Commonwealths.
Justitia amota quid sunt regna, nisi magna Latrocinia, Justice is, Suum cuique
tribuere, to perform your word and contracts, and thereby you will command
other men's Estates as your own. And let this be a Rule unto you, Nullum utile
quod non honestum; that which is unjustly extorted from others will never
prosper: De male quaesitis non gaudet ter^ius haeres.

Think not to be registered a Saint in the Court of Heaven, unless you make
restitution (aut voto ^t facto) of that which you have wrongfully exacted upon
earth. Non remittitur peccatum (say the Casuists) nisi restituitur ablatum.

But how will you be able to ^ender every one his own, unless you have the
knowledge of Laws, which limit every one their own, especially of the common
or Municipal Law of this Kingdom, under which you live, and by which you hold
your Estate.

Yet some caution is to be had, that your knowledge of the Law provoke you not
to commence suits, which are the country-mans wars. It is the counsel of
Moses, Priusquam expugnaveris aliquam civitatem, offeras ei pacem. Have no
suits in Law, if you can avoid them, or if you may have peace without them. Use
law as your last remedy. Suits in law will cause an extreme distraction in your
affairs, estate and mind. Sapientis est modico damno molestiam rei exclusisse.
The Counsel of the Psalmist is not only, Sequenore, but Sectare pacem: The
frequentative notes, you must seek it often.

For the procuring and effecting of peace, it concerns you in all your
affairs to act nothing without the best and choicest Counsel may be had, that
your contracts and settlements of your Estate be valid and perfect; and as much
as in you lies, foresee all inconveniences which may happen; leave as little
as you can to incertainty: Fraud is so inquisitive and searching, that if you
lay open the least gap, Fraud will enter thereinto, and will not only weaken
and make void contracts and bargains, but even Laws also, never so judiciously
debated and enacted.

There is an Adage among the Lawyers, Qui habet terras habet guerras, It is
incident unto land to have suits; and the greater your Estate, the more suits;
but if any such be, you must therein be vigilant and industrious to apprehend
opportunities, nothing is gained by sleeping, says the common Law.
Vigilantibus and non dormientibus jura subvenient.

I am not of the opinion of some of our Nobility and Gentry, who, when their
sons leave the Universities, omit the Innes of Court, and send them beyond the
Seas. Travail is a necessary Accomplishment of a Gentleman, and an especial
part of his Education: but what is it to be conversant abroad, and a stranger
at home? These Innes of Court are virtuous and fruitful seminaries for the
breeding of youth, where they study the known Laws of the Land and other noble
exercises.

Another part of Justice is the well disposing of your own, and this virtue is
called Liberality, you are to scatter your Alms as seed upon the earth, to
gain thereby a plentiful Harvest. You shall have the prayers of many imploring
God for you: and if the curse of the poor shall ascend to his Maker, shall not
his prayers conduce to your good. We are but dispensators of Gods blessings,
and the poor must have a part. This is the most gainful Commerce of all other.
Da temporaria, ut consequaris aeterna. Melius pecunia servatur, quae in manu
pauperis collocatur.

Quas dederis solus samper habebis opes. The next in order is Prudence,
Prudentia non est tantum virtus, sed auriga virtutum. This virtue is the
directress of all other virtues, sits at the helm to guide the ship, holds
the judgment seat, distinguishes bonum a malo, verum a falso.

A wise man's eyes, says Solomon, are always in his head: and if his own eyes
are deficient he will use the eyes of others: Plus vident oculi quam oculus.

From hence arises the necessity of Counsel: for in counsel is health: Sine
consilio facias nihil, and non poenitebis, says Syracides. It is said of God
himself, who is infinite in knowledge, that he acts all things according to
the counsel of his will. Whence we may learn to do nothing rashly or by
praecipitation: Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est semel.

A Counselors part is, not only to give counsel, but to keep counsel, to be
secret and reserved. To keep your friends secrets, is Religion: to keep your
own, is safety. For so shall you not be prevented in your designs, which will
be sooner effected by a prudent disguising of your purposes, like the Watermen,
who in rowing turn their backs to the landing place.

Depend not upon humane wisdom and policy, but depend on God: choose the
fittest means to your just ends, and leave the success to him.

After follows Fortitude, what can be more expected: Prudence to direct what
to do, and Fortitude or courage to dare to do. But this virtue is best observed
in our selves. Man has for his object bonum sensibile, and bonum
supernaturale: the one draws him upward, the other downward. And hence
arises the conflict which is in Man, himself against himself. Whereupon it was
the daily prayer of St. Austin, Domine, salve me a me. To triumph in the
conquest of your self, and to subjugate your affections and appetite to the
Government of Reason, is more than to conquer the World: which some men have
effected, and yet could never conquer themselves, Fortior est qui se quam qui
fortissima vincit.
Moenia.


And here great care is to be had to withstand the blandishments of Prosperity,
by which more inconsiderately fall, than by the blasts and storms of
Adversity. Magnae virtutis est cum faelicitate luctari: magnae faelicitatis a
faelicitate non vinci. The Traveller put off his Claok in the sunshine, which
he held fast during the rain and storm.

Another effect of Fortitude is to exclude all fear: Degeneres animos timor
arguit.

Fear is defined by Solomon to be the betraying of the succors, which Reason
offers. Base cowardice, which suggests panick fears, makes shadows substances,
molehils to seem mountains. Pavor omnem sapientiam ex animo expectorat. And
therefore in difficile and dangerous actions, it concerns you to make a
collection of your self, for re cognita cessat timor, the Justice of your cause
and the clearness of your conscience will make you as bold as a Lion, and the
ugliness of Death will not affright you.

Another part of Fortitude is Patience, by many of our Gallants called virtus
asinina, but in truth it is virtus heroica: the most Heroical of all the rest,
and which gives you assurance of Victory: Vincit qui patitur, The patient man,
like the skillful Seaman, when the Winds are contrary, tacketh about, and so
arriveth at the Port desired.

I will present you with one instance for many. The Lord Pawlett, the first
Lord Marquess of Winchester, so created by Edward the sixth, continued a privy
Counselor, and in especial favor, to four Princes, Henry 8. Edward 6. Q.
Mary, and was Lord Treasurer of England unto Q. Elizabeth, and being demanded
how he could continue in prime favor with four Princes so differing in
Disposition, Religion, Age, and Sex, made answer: Patiendo, tacendo,
blandiloquendo, injurias non ulciscendo. Agreeable whereunto was another saying
of the same Marquess: Ortus sum ex salice, non ex quercu. But Virgil the Poet
shall conclude for all.

Superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. The last, but not the least, is the most
rare and excellent Virtue Temperance. Epictetus taught this virtue in two
words: Sustine and Abstine Aristotle defines it: Virtus cohibens appetitum in
jis quae turpiter appetuntur. But St. Gregory goes farther: Qui non temperat a
licitis, incidet in illicita. It is not enough to abstain from things forbidden
and unlawful, but even from the immoderate use of lawful things also.

This is the sweet virtue, nay the Lady and Mistress of all the rest. This must
be your consort both at Bed and at Board. At Bed to preserve your Chastity: at
Board to preserve your Health. Chastity is a great gift of God: the chaste shall
follow the Lamb: They lead an Angelical life here, in carne, sine carne. Health
is the greatest Worldly blessing. As it is an Axiom in Philosophy, Anima
sequitur temperaturam corporis: so certainly the distempers of the body do dog
and disturb the faculties of the mind.

This virtue will preserve you from the loathsome sin of Drunkenness: which if
it once get possession of you, will increase with your age and gather strength.
Other vices may have some Generosity in them, this savoureth too much of the
Pigg. It excludes a man from the Kingdom of God: it depriveth him of his
reason: it exposes him to contempt and scorn: it brings many other sad
consequences and disasters.

I know there is sometimes a joviality amongst men upon prosperous events,
whereby you may be drawn perhaps to exceed by Persons of Honor. But be sure,
if you drink ad hilaritatem, drink not ad ebrietatem. Make not your self a
Bruers Horse to carry Drink. Pretend other business and fair excuses to come
off. Wine and strong drink is a traitor. The Wine sparkleth in the Cup, it
runs sweetly down the throat, but it biteth like a Serpent, and the end is
bitterness, as the wisest man has observed.

I presume I might have forborne this to you, but because it is morbus patrius,
so catching and infectious, I have taken leave to deliver mine opinion thereof.

There is another sort of Temperance, to restrain Anger. It will be good for
you to resist the beginnings of Anger, and to kill this raging serpent in the
egg. Augustus Caesar, before he would do any thing in his Anger, would say
over the Greek Alphabet: but let your direction be, when your Anger arises, to
say over the Lords Prayer, twice or thrice, the oftener the better: and
remember what Solomon says: It is the discretion of a man to defer his anger,
and his glory to pass by offenses.

From these Cardinal Virtues I shall now proceed to some good Additions, and
comely Ornaments of a Gentleman.

And the first that I shall propose unto you is the noble exercise of Riding
the great Horse. A knight on Horseback is one of the goodlyest sights in the
World. Methinkes I see Sr. James Scudamore, your thrice noble Grandfather, a
brave Man of Arms both at Tilt and Barriers, after the voyage of Cales and the
Cana^y Islands (wherein he performed very remarkable and signal service, under
the Conduct of the Earl of Essex) enter the Tiltyard in a handsome equipage,
all in complete Armor, embelished with Plumes, his Beaver close, mounted upon
a very high bounding horse (I have seen the shoes of his horse glister above
the heads of all the people) and when he came to the encounter or shock, brake
as many Spears as the most, her Majesty Q Elizabeth, with a Train of Ladies,
like the Stars in the Firmament, and the whole Court looking upon him with a
very gracious aspect. And when he came to reside with Sr. John Scudamore, his
Father (Two braver Gentlemen shall I never see together at one time, such a
Father, such a Son) Himself and other brave Cavalliers, and some of their
Menials and of his suit, to manage every morning Six or more brave well-ridden
Horses, every Horse brought forth by his Groom in such decency, order and
honor, that Holme-Lacy, at that time, seemed not only an Academy, but even
the very Court of a Prince.

Sir, you may not boast your self to descend from such Ancestors, unless also
you have an earnest emulation to succeed them in their virtues.

The next is the most noble Art of Defense. You may note it is not called the
Art of Offense: to offend and to do wrong, is inhumane and barbarous. Nihil
intolerabilius (says Tully) in been morata republica, quam aliquid fie^i per
vim.

If you wrong your Superior, then you know that will be impar congressus: upon
the shock the Iron pot will quickly break in pieces the sides of the earthen
pot. And if you wrong your Inferior, then shall you descend, and make him
equal with your self; and if you be vanquished, it will tend the more to your
d^shonour. But above all things you are to avoid duelling. To be engaged in a
Duel, is to be accursed from your Mothers Womb. Two great extremities, to kill
or to be killed. By the one you will be no other, than Cain after the killing
of his Brother Abel, a runnagate upon the face of the earth, with the horror
of conscience, whose worm dies not; and by the other you die out of Charity, in
the disfavour of Almighty God, a most fearful condition.

To prevent and avoid Quarrels, wise men have observed 4. things First hold no
Arguments vehemently. Every man loves the child of his own brain, as well as
the child of his body, and few men will yield. Reason with your Antagonist
soberly, repeat his Argument, in some measure seem to approve it, though never
so absurd, crave his pardon that you dissent from him, and then press your
Reasons fairly and perspicuously: you are not bound to make another man of your
opinion: if you cannot gain him, fall off.

Secondly, Make no Comparisons. Comparisons are odious, says our Proverb. For
either you will over-praise, which will be a fault in you: a noble Gentleman, a
brave Gentleman, an honest Gentleman, ^s praise sufficient: or else you will
detract, and that will offend also.

Thirdly, Lay no wagers. This has been an occasion of many Quarrels kindled by
Avarice.

Lastly, Avoid all scurrility: rubb no old sores, and lose not your friend for
your Jest. Facetiae (says Tacitus) quae nimium de vero traxerint, acrem sui
memoriam relinquent.

But to defend your self in a just cause, that is agreeable to the Laws of
God, nature, and man: and to do it with judgment and resolution will
marvellously tend to your honor and safety,

The use of Arms does much differ in these times I hear now the single Rapier
is altogether in use: when I was young, the Rapier and Dagger. And I cannot
understand, seeing God has given a man two Hands, why he should not use them
both for his defense.

The bravest Gentlemen of Arms, which I have seen, were Sr. Charles Candish,
and the now Marquess of New Castle, his son, Sr. Kenelm Digby, and Sr. Lewis
Dives; whom I have seen compose their whole bodies in such a posture, that they
seemed to be a Fort impregnable. They were the Scholars of John de Nardes of
Sevilla in Spain, who with the Dagger alone would encounter the single Rapier
and worst him. This exercise is most necessary for you, and also excellent for
your Health.

And from this Principle or Ground of Nature, to defend your self, appears
the lawfullness of War, when as the Honor, Religion and safety of a
Commonwealth is concerned therein. Justum est bellum, quod idem est
necessarium: and pia arma, ubi nulla nisi in armis spes est.

Our Savior advises, that He who will go to War should compute first. In the
computation you are to make, you must survey bona animi, bona corporis and bona
fortunae. In the first you are to measure your Abilities of mind: for if you
enter into war, you must either go on like a man of Honor, or die in the Bed
of Honor: Next you are to consider, whether your Body be able to endure the
labors of War, and the extremities of hunger, thirst, cold, heat, watching
etc. And lastly, what salary or entertainment you shall have (for the name
soldier is derived from the name Sold, which is pay) that you may follow the
Wars in an honorable way, therein to use no violence or plundering, which
will be unworthy of you; but follow St. John Baptists command: Neminem
concutiatis: sed contenti estote stipendiis vestris.

But now from the rude noise of Arms I shall call you to the harmonious sounds
of Music, worthily placed among the liberal Arts. All creatures have an
Inclination thereunto: the Birds chanting in the woods: the laborious Husband
man and Artificer, in their several vocations alleviate their toilsome labors
by their rude Accents, making melody to themselves: and in all Ages Music has
been esteemed quality becoming a noble personage. Themistocles the Athenian, as
Tully says) Quia non poter at fidibus canere, habitus est indoctior.

Music is either Vocal or Instumental. Vocal is best, because made by God
himself, adding thereunto the livelyness of the Musician, singing some
excellent composed Poem, well fitted to the Music: and in this kind these
latter times have been most exquisite. But you will be most complete, when you
join the vocal and instrumental both together.

Great is the power of Music. In the Kingdom of Naples, there is a small
creature called the Tarantula; any one bitten with it falls into a phrensy,
and the proper cure for him is Music; whereby he is recovered.

Music did allay the evil spirit of Saul. Music prepared Elisha the Prophet
to recieve his Inspirations. Music advanced Gods honor and service in the
Temple, and the Happiness in Heaven ^s described and set forth unto ^s by
Music and Singing.

Memorable is that which St. Austin relates of his conversion in the book of
his Confessions) ^um reminiscor lacrymas meas ^as fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae tuae
^ primordiis recuperatae fidei meae, ^agnam instituti hujus utilitatem ^gnosco.

They say in our English Colonies in Virginia and New England, and the summer
Islands, the ^g^ns give wonderful attention to the Singing of Psalms, and
hereby are so taken and delighted, that it is a special means of their
conversion to the Christian Faith.

I have sent you a book of the Psalms composed in four parts, an excellent
composure, whereby you may be invited to proceed farther in this divine
faculty. When you are oppressed with serious and weighty business, to take your
viol and sing to it, will be a singular ease and refreshment.

Subservient to this faculty of Music is Dancing, a measure of the feet: and
this is also a singular Ornament to a Gentleman, conducing to a comely posture
of his Body in his salutation of others, or otherwise to adapt him to a Decorum
in his deportment and behavior.

This Quality has advanced many persons unto Honor. Q. Elizabeth, a Princess
of singular judgment in the choice of her Servants and great Officers of
State, by seeing Sr. Christopher Hatton dancing in a Mask (then but a private
Gentleman of the Inner Temple) advanced him to the Dignity and place of Lord
High Chancellor of England, the highest officer of State, next unto ^er Person,
for honor and trust.

Some rigid Divines hold it unlawful and impious to dance, affirming that
Chorea est circulus cu^us centrum est diabolus, but others, quorum melior
sententia menti, esteem it not only lawful, but useful also, for the raising
of noble spirits to high and heroic actions. Masks and other Courtly
recreations of Gallant Gentlemen and Ladies of Honor, striving to exceed one
the other in their measures and changes, and in their reparts of wit and
complement have been beyond the Power of envy to disgrace.

Amongst other Arts I must commend unto you, that which is of very great
necessity, especially for Economy and Government of your House: I mean,
Arithmetic. Sir John Higford, famous for his Hospitality, kept a diary of all
his expenses. The Great Earls of Warwick, unto whom our Ancestors had some
Relation, took accounts from their officers and servants of all the Charge and
Provision of their House keeping (which I can yet produce) even to the gaging
of the Hogsheds of Beer.

The Right Honorable the Lord Scudamore is in an extraordinary measure versed
in this rare faculty, and when I had the honor to wait upon his Lordship,
concerning the Treaty of Marriage with your worthy Mother, the Government of
his House was so well contrived, every officer recieving the Provision, one
from another, with such order, honor and bounty, that the managing of his
Housekeeping (I want expression) did appear to be tanquam ^ies ordinata,
Believe it, Thrift is the Jewel of Magnificence.

I may no longer omit that which I account an Essential part of a Gentleman,
namely, Travel beyond the seas into foreign Countries: And I could heartily
wish, that with some other young Gentleman, under the conduct of some Grave and
learned person, you might resort to some famous University, either in the
remotest part of France, or Italy, from the converse of the English Nation;
that you might for a time study Philosophy and the Arts. Certainly, upon his
dunghill, the English Gentleman is somewhat stubborn and churlish: Travel will
sweeten him very much, and imbreed in him Courtesy, Affability, Respect and
Reservation.

In your Travel, it will be obvious to you to observe the situations of
Towns, Cities, Rivers, and the distances of high ways and stages for your
Journey: so also for the commodities of each Province or Country: Et quid
quaeque ferat regio, and quid far recuset.

But you must not rest there: You must transcend to higher Notions.

Tu regere Imperio populos, Roman, memento. Your observations in Travel must
be versed in the polity and ordering of States, especially Monarchies, because
almost all the World is under the subjection of Monarchs.

In the Monarchies therefore, you are especially to observe the state and
magnificence of the Prince, his Nobility, his Pensioners, his Gaurds, his
Genius and disposition, his prime Favorites, his Great Officers of State, his
Counselors of State, the manner of their procession, how they take places;
their several Commands, Authorities and jurisdictions. Then, to observe his
Courts of Justice, the quality of his Judges; the processes, pleadings and
progressions for Hearing, as well in causes criminal as civil; and the Results,
Sentences, Appeals, Arrests, Judgments depending thereupon: The latitude also
and power of every Court of Justice. Then are you to consider his Forces, what
number he is able to bring into the Field, his Cavalry, his Infantry, the
condition of his soldiers, whether mercenary, auxiliar, or natural (which is
the best sort) their discipline and order. Next, to consider his Forces at Sea,
the situation, capacity and convenience of his Havens and ports; what vessels
and of what burden he is able to set to Sea: and then, for the maintenance of
both, you may survey his Ammunition, his Storehouses, Magazins and Arsenalls:
Then, what revenewes and intreates he has to maintain, support and defray the
charge of his Forces both by Sea and Land: And therein to take notice of his
marks of soveraingnty, what he can do, with, and without his people: And
therein to consider his Trea^ry, his Exchecker and Finaces, his Crown Lands,
his Customs, Privileges and Flowers of his Crown: Then, his extraordina^es,
what Contributions, Subsides, ^ids, Impositions and Gabells ^e raises from his
People. Then ^e you to consider his Friends and Allies: what his leagues are,
^hither offensive, or defensive, ^r both: and of what continuance ^ey are like
to be. Then you ^ay look upon his Religion, his ^leargy and the Government ^
them, their Rites and Ceremo^es, Liturgy, Sermons and Te^ers. Then are you to
have re^urse to the Universities, and in ^em the most famous Men, their
^putations and controversies, and whatsoever more you shall find rare and fit
for imitation, when you return into England.

Now for the Commodiousness of your Travel, it concerns you to be skild in
the Languages of such countries, wherein you are to travel. The French is most
in use. It is a most sweet Tongue, called the Woman's Tongue; and, as I think,
for the Addresses from the servant to the Mistress, and from the subject to the
Sovereign there is no sweeter, nor more civil Language in the World. Some
progression were fit for you to make in this useful Language.

Some of your good friends have very much enabled themselves, and gained much
honor and reputation by their Residence in foreign parts.

The Lord Scudamore has required much honor to our Nation by his Embassage
into France: his directtion and Addresses to some of his noble Friends there,
will be an especial Advantage to you.

The late Sr. John Scudamore, unfortunately deceased, brought come many rare
Books, and observations of his Travel, which are well worth your perusal, if
they might be gotten. I was in my particular much bound unto him for his
Favors. He visited and caressed me when I was a Prisoner, and did me noble
offices, which here I mention in honor to his Memory.

I must not forget the Princely exercise of Hunting, wherein the ^gacity of the
irrational creature ^s very observable, Et odora canum vis.

Hunting is useful, to know the situation and distance of places, and to enure
your Body to labor, and by the bounty of your Horse to clime the Hills and
descend the Valleys, like young Ascanius, Nunc hos cursu, nunc praeterit illos.

So also is the Gentile exercise of Hawking, more especially at the River, to
see the Falcon lessen her self, and to fall down upon the Foul like a
Thunderbolt.

These are noble erercises, if the convenience of your Estate and affairs may
afford you a dispensation to make use of them.

There are also other parts becoming a Gentleman, as Limming, Portraying with
the Pensile and many other, which I leave to your own Election and Judgment.

The Conclusion.
TO conclude with a story: Sempronius Gracchus, Father of Caius and Tiberius
Gracchus, observing the turbulent dispositions of his two Sons, persuaded them
to reside in the Country at his Farm, there to negotiate in his affairs of
husbandry: but his said Sons, being of a more boiling and tumultuous humor
(They afterward became incendiaries in the State of Rome) would not hearken to
their Fathers commands, but resolved to abide in the City, at that time the
Theater of the World for high Achievements and Actions. Their Father not
prevailing with them, used and delivered unto them these words: My Sons, if you
will not return into the Country, as I desired, then take care, I pray you that
you act nothing Indignum Nomine Sempronio.

You My dear Coson, derive some honor from your late Father, much more
ennobled by your worthy Mother. Act nothing, I beseech you, that shall be
unworthy of your Ancestors, from whom you descend.

But I have a better confidence of you; and your Name has been also very
fortunate to our family: Bonum nomen, bonum Omen. I hope it will be verifyed of
you, as it was of Jhon Baptist in the person of Elias: Joannes cum venerit
restituet omnia.

And for Dixton, I hope it will be said, the same which was said of Rome under
the Government of Augustus, L^teritiam invenit, reliquit marmoream.

And to that purpose I shall commend you to God in my prayers: God so bless and
govern you, that you may be a contentment to your self, a comfort to your
worthy Mother, an Honor to our decayed Family (to me your well doing an
unspeakable Joy) and which is the sum of all, that you may be the faithful
Servant of Almighty God, to live in his fear, and die in his Favor Amen.

DEO GLORIA.

