A Word of Advice To all such as are going on in SIN, and more particularly to
my Neighbors and Townsmen in and about Colchester; to forsake their Evil Ways,
and turn to the Lord while they have time, with a Word of Encouragement to such
as Mourn for want of Salvation.
And a Word of Advice to the Priests of this Nation, that they choke not the
tender desires that are begotten in People after Holiness.
I Have been concerned many a time on your behalf who still lies in wickedness,
with cries and tears to my God, that you might be gathered into a Sense of your
Condition, how it stands between God and your Souls: For many of you seem to
have a profession of Godliness, and to change from one Religion unto another,
but I desire you in the Love of God, that as you change your Religion you may
also change your Lives and Conversations, Isaiah. 1 chapter from 10. to the 17. ver.
and so serve God in earnest in your day and Generation. You young ones
especially who were my Companions in Wickedness, I have been concerned for you
many a day, that as I have found Mercy at the hand of God, you may find it
also. For I know by experience that God is Me^^iful, and slow to anger, as ever
he was, if he had not I had surely been in a miserable State, as I fear many of
you are, and yet would be called Christians. Joel 2.13. Exodus 34.6.7. Mal. 3.6,
Lam. 3.40. Mat. 11.29. John 10.3.16.27 chap. 8.12. v. Acts 26.17.18. Isai.
30.20.21. Mica. 4.12. Jer. 31.32, 33, 34. Isa. 58.10.11. Job. 22.21. Amos 4.13
Ps. 17.7. Pro. 30.5. Isa. 59.1. v. ch 63.1. v. He. 7.25.
But examine your selves, have you learned of Christ by his Spirit, who said,
Learn of me, I am meek and low in heart; this is the Teacher I was directed to,
after I had heard many Teachers who Teach for Money, and would say there was no
living without Sin in this Life, which is an encouragement to Youth to go on in
Sin (and so it was to me) till this Teacher that cannot be removed into a
Corner condemned me for Sin, and never consented to Sin, neither in you nor me)
Come examine a little and acquaint your selves with God and be at peace, some
perhaps may be so blind (as I was) to say where or how can I acquaint my self
with God. I will tell thee, the Prophet Amos said, he that shows unto man what
his thoughts are, the Lord the God of Hosts is his name: Now, thou needst not
go to any man to teach thee, but try what the Spirit of God can do for thee,
whoever thou art when thou art tempted to do evil by the Devil or his Servants,
then try whether he that searches thy heart, and shows unto thee thy evil be
not able, if thou be truly willing to forsake it, to keep thee out of the evil;
none that truly trust in God dare say the contrary, but will be ready to say as
Joseph did when he was tempted by his Mistress, how can I do this evil, and sin
against God, Genesis 39.9. 2 Cor. 5.11.20.1 Joh. 1.7. Ps 144.15.
Oh that I could see you my acquaintance and others to be afraid to sin against
God, and if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light then have we fellowship
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin. This
is a better fellowship then you and I had in our Wickedness, which as we come
to know, then shall we be ready to say to one another, Come hither and I will
tell you what God has done for my Soul, and this little Experience of the
Dealings of the Lord in your selves is better then all hearsay of him:
Therefore seek the Lord while he may be found and call upon him while he is
near, for the Lord has said my Spirit shall not always strive with man. Job
42.6. Is. 55 6. Genesis 6.3. Jude 18.
Therefore do not mock at the Spirit of God, nor at them that are guided by it,
for as the Scripture faith, he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of
his, and they are the Sons of God, that are led or guided by the spirit of God.
Gal. 6.7.8. Romans 8.9. Jude 1.9 Romans 8.1, 2, v. 4.9, 11, 14.15.16.26. Romans 6.16.
Thus with Examination with lowlin^ss of mind, you may know whose Servants you
are, surely his to whom you yield your Members Servants to obey, whether it be
of Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness: Come you young ones serve
God, and fear him, and then you will begin to be wise, For the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of true wisdom, and to depart from Iniquity is a good
understanding. Therefore first seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness
thereof, and all other things shall be added. Job 28.29 Luke 12.31 Is. 57.15.
Mat. 11.28.
For the Lord knows such as truly seek him, and that goes bowed down in Spirit
all the day of what profession soever, through the Sense of the weight of their
Iniquity, and that mourns for want of Gods Salvation, and that desires to find
peace with him. Acts 10.35. 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Eccl. 12.1. Lam. 3.26.27.
If you fear God, and work Righteousness you shall be accepted of him; but if
you be Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, Drunkards, or proud persons, then
remember that no unclean thing can enter into Gods Kingdom.

Therefore you that are young and would be Gods Children, bend your necks to
the Yoke of Christ in the days of your youth. Job 20. chapter Job 36.13.14. Ec.
9.12.2 Joh. 4 ver. La. 3.22.
For if I should ask you when you would be willing to serve God, it may be some
of you would be ready to say in your old Age, but how many do we see are taken
away in their Youth and in their Sins. It would be more commendable in the
fight of Men, and much more acceptable in the sight of God, to see young Men
and Women walk in the Truth, and remember their Creator in the days of their
Youth, Romans 13.11.
least the evil day come upon them and overtake them a^ unawares: Therefore
awake unto righteousness, and consider what the Lord has done for you in
Sparing you unto this day. 1 Cor. 15.34. Ephesians. 5.14. Romans 2.3, 4. Jer. 2.27, 28.
Hos. 5.15. Isa. 1.5. Job. 22.27. Ps. 22.25. cha. 50.14. Ga. 6.7.8.
Do you think it was for any desert of yours, No it was his love in pr^serving
us hitherto, when other Nations and Countries have been distressed with Wars
and Earthquakes: And how have some of you been ready to make promise when the
Judgments of the Lord seemed to be coming upon you as when the Earthquake was
here; and also when there was a report raised of the Irish being coming, and
also since of the French being Landed upon our Coast; at the hearing whereof
many went Crying about the Streets, and wringing their Hands; and some
promising to live a better life, if the Lord would preserve them; and some upon
a Bed of sickness have made promises to the Lord, that if he would restore them
again, they would serve him in newness of Life. Isa. 63.8. Mat. 12.36.37. Psa.
139.4.
Friends, as this may come to any of your hands, who in times of Distress have
been making such promises before the Lord when your hearts have been tendered
by his Judgments; see to it, they you keep your Promises and look unto him,
and he will look unto you; for he has promised and said, that unto that man
will I look that is of a broken heart, and contrite spirit and that trembles at
my Word: Is 45.22. chapter 66.2. v.
He wills not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should repent and live;
but the way to life is by taking up a daily Cross, and denying thy self; Thy
will to vain Delights may be to Gaming, Sporting and Pastimes, so called, and
sometimes when thy old Companions are at ease in these things, doing them
willingly; Ez. 3^. 11 Mat 16.24. Mar. 8.24. Luk 9.23. Jam. 5.5. Romans 13.13.
then the Devil may be ready to tempt thee, who in some Measure may be gathered
out of them; to return back to them again, and if thou do not join with them,
they may laugh at thee and say, why can you not do as you used to do. Now thou
my fellow Traveller, 1 Pet. 4.3.4 Luke 9 62. 2 Pet. 2.19.20.21. To. 6.21.22.
Pr^. 14.34. Job 7.20. Ps. 31.23. chapter 116.62. Mat. 5.16. Genesis 18.14 Ps. 103.11.
Isa. 41.10.11.12.13.14, Romans 8.28, Deu. 28 2, 3, 4, 5
this is my Testimony for the Lord, that if thou keep low before him, he
will give thee victory over them all, and they shall be ashamed (for
Righteousness exaltes a Nation, but sin is a reproach and shame to any people)
and thou may be a Preacher of Righteousness in thy Life and Conversation,
wherever thou comes, and thy Yea will be thy Yea, and thy Nay, Nay; and if some
things seem hard for thee; then look to the Lord, and he will make hard things
easy, and rough things plain, and all things will work together for good, Mat.
6.22
if thou truly love and fear the Lord, and he will bless thee in thy goings
out, and in thy coming in; and thus if thou keep thy Eye single to the Lord,
thy whole Body will be full of Light, and thou will see thy prosperity in thee
truth, and give God the Honor, unto whom it does belong, both now, henceforth
and for evermore.

And all you Priests of this Nation, of what sort soever, Is. 3.12.9. chapter 9.16.
Ps. 4.6. Ez. 36.10.
where you meet with any tender hearted People, that are breathing after the
Sincere milk of the Word of God, which gives spiritual Satisfaction to the
Mou^ners: I warn and entreat you to have a care of stifling these desires that
are begotten in them, for these are as the hindmost of the Flock of God,
therefore be not found seizing upon them as the Amalkites did, for some of you
to my knowledge have sought to hinder the Light and Truth from shining, and
have been offended with me when I have said, that if we followed and obeyed
Christ, he was able to keep us out of Sin in this Life, Ma. ^3.13 Joh. 7.47. c.
3.20. v. Heb, 7, 25. Mat 1.21 Joh. 15.5. Phil. 4.13. Psa. 37.37 5, Is. 7.1.2
for he was called Jesus, because he should save his People from their Sins,
(not in them) and why should any be dissatisfied that we extol the love and
strength of God, for we do not say we can save our selves from one Sin, nay we
cannot think a good thought, and yet in and through him there is a possibility
to do all things that he requires of us, as the Apostle said, through him that
strengthens us we are able to do all things, and if so, then to live free from
sin in this Life, which is my desire for you as for my self, that so through
his cleansing power you may come to know it, and so enjoy that peace that
passes all under standing.

Your Friend in the Truth JOHN HAILES.
Colchester the 3d. of the 6th. Month 1693.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving for long time gone with a bowed down Spirit before the Lord, to see sin
and wickedness, abound in this Age and time, and to see that many both Priests
and People do conclude that it is impossible to live without sin on this side
the Grave, which is not only a great contradiction to the Scrip^ures, but does
also cast contempt upon Jesus Christ, who was sent for that very purpose to
save his People from their sins, Mat. 1.21. It Reflects upon him, as if he were
not able to finish the work that his Father gave him to do, which was to
destroy the Work of the Devil (whose work is to cause People to sin) 1 John
3.8. It is therefore in my heart to answer three or four Objections which are
commonly made against those that say that there is a possibility through the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to live without or be free from sin in this
life. The first Objection is from Proverbs 24.16. for a just man falls seven
times and rises up again: Now if people wou^d seriously weigh these words,
they would find that those words m^ke nothing to their Purpose, for the Text
does not say, that a just man sins seven times, etc. ^ut that he falls
seven times and rises up again: Understood of troubles and temptations. James
1.2. Rejoice when ye fall into temptations (or trials;) such a fall must this
be understood to be; which is the tryi^g Lot of all good men at one time or
other; And it is no sin to be tempted but to be overcome with the temptation,
which the just man that fears God is not; for his God upholds him by his
hand, Psalms 37.24. and succors him in his tempted state, Heb. 2.18. And with
the temptation makes out a way for his escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. and he rises
again, as says the Scripture or Text. So though he falls, which fall is into
temptation, yet he is not overcome; but by the Divine help of the Divine Power
does stand his trial and becomes a Victor.

Object. 2. But John says, John 1.8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us, Answer, so James says Chap. 3. v. 9.
Concerning the Tongue, saying, therewith bless we God, and therewith curse we
men. I hope no man will be so rash to conclude that the Apostle was a Curser
but it was the manner of the Apostles to condescend so for the sake of the
weak, to rank themselves amongst them, and so put the word [we] instead of
[you] so no more then the Apostle James was a Curser, nor John then a sinner,
for he bends his whole Epistle against sin.

Object. 3. But Paul cried out he was a wretched man, and asked the Question who
should deliver him. Romans 7.24.

Answer. Paul was a telling the State he was in in times past, as does appear,
for when he had asked the Question, who should deliver him, he answered the
Question himself, saying, Thanks be to God who has given me the Victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. So he could not be a wretched man and Victor
over sin, and all at the same time, 1 Cor. 15.57. the Conside^atio^ of these
things dear Reader, I leave unto thee, and leave thee to the heart melting
Power of God, that is able to change and save thy Soul.

Farewell.

London, Printed by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in Holy-wel-lane in
Shoreditch, 1693.


