Religio Jurisprudentis: OR, THE LAWYER'S ADVICE to His SON. IN COUNSELS,
ESSAYS, and other MISCELLANIES.

Calculated chiefly to prevent the Miscarriages of YOUTH, and for the Orthodox
Establishment of their Morals in Years of Maturity.

Per PHILANTHROPUM.

Pudet haec opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
(...).
Macte nova virtute, puer, sic itur ad astra,
Sacculus e coelo descendit, (...).
London, Printed for J. Harrison at Lincolns-Inn-Gate, and R. Tailor in
Amen-Corner. Anno Regni Regis Jacobi II. Primo, 1685.

blazon or coat of arms I'ESPERE BIEN



Viro praenobili, nec non Reverendo admodum in Christo Patri HENRICO Dom.
Episc. LONDINENSI.

Indagator, hicve (plus minus) Juris Peritus,

Salutem plurimam internam, externam, aeternamque (Religionis ergo) cum toto
valde dicit, Hasee suas Lucubrationes (Patronorum de Jure Reverende) quantae
quantae sint de facto, candide vestri Patrocinii Clementissimi, nec non Eruditi
Tutamine decorari valde velit.

Tuorum Servorum omnium humillimus, and Juris-prudentium minimior,
PHILANTHROPUS.

Panegyricks.
To the Jurisprudent Author.
DRaw near (my Muse) how can I silent be,
When I these learned Works of Plato see?
We have seen many Books, let us admire this,
All that is praiseworthy, here comprised is.
Learning and Wit, Philosophy and Grace,
Together dwell (sage Author!) in thy face.
Per Anonymum.

SCripsit (at ingenue) Lector parvo hocce libello,
Causidicus, mentem scripsit (at ingenue.)
Scripsit (at ingenue) qua religione fruatur,
Quos sequitur mores scripsit, (at ingenue.)
Scripsit (at ingenue) quos veros credat amicos,
Quosque putat fictos scripsit, (at ingenue.)
Scripsit (at ingenue.) graviter leviterque (...) veram,
Et placid im mentem scripsit, (at ingenue)
Scripsit (at ingenue) quae sint prudentia docti
Verba viri, quid non scripsit? (and ingenue)
Upon the Author of Religio Juris Prudentis.
I.
GO, Atheist, go, with all thy Worlds repine,
The Lawyer's now commenced Divine,
Has alterd's Gown, and for a moral Fight,
Schools both Des Carts, and the Stagyrite:
Marching at Fame's Trumpet's call,
More politic than Hannibal,
Through Rocks of Vice our Author melts the way
With poynant Council, vinegard Essay.
II.
Who, maugre spies, dares boldly speak his Mind,
Not unto Words, but Sense confined,
Who slights false Colors, scorns the husky shape,
And whilst his Critics pick the painte^ Grape,
Presents us here with solid Fare,
Viands, which substantial are:
Non-suits quaint Phrases, Transports lew^ Romance;
Makes That, and Error cross the Seas t^ France.
III.
Vice now, methinks, though full moon'd to the Sense
Within her bright Circumference,
Will hourly wane, then leave her dusky shell,
No more a Link, no more a Guide to Hell.
The Virtues they succeed, and all
Within one Peck concentrical,
Embrace each other, whilsh eyed Justice spies,
And glides once more down from the lofty Skies.
IV.
Dull Earth, cheer up, here, here is the heavenly Fire,
Thy tender Plants for to inspire
With lively heat, due moisture, growth and all
To make thy Offspring truly Sensible.
Here Prudence with her Angels Quill
Points out the Labyrinths of Ill,
Shows wandering Youth, nay, gouty Age their way,
Felicities great Road, Et caetera.
R. J.

A few Thoughts on Religio Juris-Prudentis.
THey that peruse this little Book may find
The sage Suggestions of the Lawyers mind,
How learnedly the Author does impart
His Sentiments, with Judgment and with Art;
In Language solid, singular, acute,
Authentic Resolutions ( sans dispute.)
His Subject's weighty, and his Lines concise,
The Juris-Prudent does philosophise;
In style most elegant, in sense profound,
In morals practical, and Doctrine sound;
Agreeable to all, candid, upright,
Pleading at once for Profit and Delight.
Avoid the Court Detraction, since you see
The Lawyer gives Advice without his Fee,
A President of Generosity.
R. B.

In Authorem Juris-Prudentem. per Sir J. H.
CAusidicus bonus hic nequeat been perdere causam,
Nam, quae non prosint singula juvant
Dogmata Causidici ( Jove consule, dogmata digna.)
Salve, disce, doce, vive, senesce, vale.
A Prefatory Line TO THE READERS.
POssibly (Sirs) the very Title of this brief Rapsody of Sentiments and
Opinions of a Jurisprudent (or Man of Law) may disgust the Pallats of some kind
of its Perusers; who presume, that a Person of that Character, commonly is
little or nothing acquainted with, or at least ties not himself up to the Rules
and Practices of real Virtue and Religion (and I wish there were not so much
weight in that Objection) whereunto I hold it here both reasonable and
seasonable to make you this Reply, ss. that admitting de facto, such a violent
Presumption, be tantamount to an half proof of the Point; yet that de Jure, it
ought by no means to be the Case or Condition of one, that in sano Sensensu, is
a Jurisprudent, or Sage of the Law; of the Truth whereof, we have a renowned
President on Record, among some others, viz. of that incomparable and Religious
Jurisprudent lately deceased, Sir Matthew Hales, Lord Chief Justice of England,
in his Moral Considerations, and other as Learned, as Religious Suggestions of
his in print. But we use the Jurisprudent Word in a larger and more indefinite
Sense, than applicable to the Professor or Practiser of the Municipal Laws of
our Realm; as the true Etimology thereof imports. ss. A Man of Sense or
Prudence, a Man of moral Conduct, that distinguishes well between, and judges
well of Right and Wrong, for generally the Mobile, or Vulgar (we truly say) non
Distinguit; but the Proverb says, as the Bell Clinks, so the Fool (or
Jurisimprudent) thinks. To the intent and purpose, therefore, that by relation
to the Councels or Essays, and other Missellanies herein, afterward exerted,
it may more fully and particularly appear, that an immoral, or irreligious
Person, young or old, Puny or Ancient, is neither a Man of Law, Prudence, nor
good Sense, and to represent in several fundamental particulars; the Character
and Complexion of such an one, as all Intellectual voluntary Agents ought to
be, and to obviate, and anticipate, as far as may be, the Epidemical
Miscarriages that happen to less thinking and considerate ones of all Ages and
Sexes in this Conjuncture of time especially, and to encourage all Actings for
the reason of the things, and consequently to smooth our Path through this
Wilderness of the World, unto the Land of promise, which is, or ought to be in
our constant Prospect, is the Tenor and Effect, true Scope and Drift of these
ensuing Suggestions of Philanthropus; which he violently presumes, and heartily
hopes will be acceptable unto all Mankind, until fuller and further Discoveries
and Auxiliaries be exhibited, pro bone publico; by more learned and elaborate
Heads and Hands than is pretended to, or owned by,

SIR, Your well meaning Man of Law, Philanthropus,

PHILANTHROPUS AD Filiolum Pythagoram Juris-prudentem.
QVanquam sibi te charissimum, indolisque spei Filiolum, etsi non admodum
(forte) spectabilitate corporis indutum, paterculus tuus tam per Patricium,
quam quendam Peripateticum Carthusianum jamdudum (bonis avibus) in Artibus and
Scientiis quibusdam liberalibus institutum and per modulo tuo de been esse
imbutum summopere curave^rit; attamen, ut ad Herculis columnas in omnimoda
Virtu^te nova faelicissime pervenire videaris, Haec (suis in annis, ni fallor,
provectioribus excogitata, ipse dixit tibi documenta: ut pote quos scopulos
ille vix (and ne vix quidem) evaserit post ipsius (saltem Metampsycosin aut)
obitum, Tu ipse faeliciter effugias. Vt igitur haec sua lucubratiuncula, quanta
quanta sint, aequ^ bonique consules Lex ita postulare videatur. Quo minus
reliquis tribus, ut opinor, adhuc superstitibus tui ipsius fratribus tam
exemplo tuo, quam concilio animadvertere videaris; hoc praecipue aenigmatico,
Aio, tres Fratres, unum Don vincere posse.


Quippe quoniam Tuo clementissimo Paterculo praedicto malesano, contigisse mihi
videtur (utique bona fide fertur) ut in arcta and salva custodia Legis
retineretur (cum quibusdam secum Cantabrigiensibus in Arenam Cancellariam
descendentibus Euphoniae potius quam meriti gratia) donec quorundam nummorum
summa ab ipso solveretur praefatis Cantabrigiensibus conquerentibus, quae
quidem absque debita causa, and de injuria sua propria, non sibi solum, verum
etiam aliis Jurisprudentibus expostulari aut ista summa soluta esse non posse
videbatur. At vero quod luit admodum in corpore, quia non habnit in aere, neque
habituro Fas aut Jus redditura, vel potius reddita; aliunde, ni fallor, satis
superque patet per Recorda, utcunque pro supposito praedicto contemptu, in non
solutionem circumcirca centum Marcarum Summam; poenas dedit, and dabundus erit;
tecum autem quoniam per aliquot dierum spatium incarceratus ipse peculiare
habuit Consortium (licet (...), Donec erat faelix multos numerabatamicos.
Parvus ad amissas ibat amicus opes.
Ideoque tibi Filiolo praeclaro (ni maxim fallor) partim Gratitudinis, partim
Amoris ergo dedicari velit haec sua conamina, ut nec oleum, nec operam suam
(omnino) perdidisse videatur. Mihi revera non innotescere admodum confiteor
(charissime Pythagoras!) suavem sibi esse Fratris tui penultimi memoria,
etiamsi probe intellexi de isto, Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos.
Vltimi vero non minus obsequii parentalis, quam indefatigabilitatis ergo,
paulisper gratior. Antepenultimi, autem (nisi maximopere fallor) degenerationis
ergo minime grata. Tui ipsius, denique licet (...) memoria (ut mihi videtur)
est sibi suavissima, tantoque caeteris Triumviris eximior memoria, quanto Te
liberalium Artium and Scientiarum Virtutumque novarum Encyclopaediam assequi
pro virili tuo conari semet ipsi proculdubio valde videaris; viz Deo Optimo
Maximo, Dominoque nostro Regi, necnon parentibus (in loco positis) reverendas
mores geris and praestiteris. Verum enimvero denique (mi Pythagoras amicissime)
cave sis ab amicis, ne tam temporis, quam nummorum aeque ac Libertatis fures
esse videantur, de inimicis autem eadem non indigeas cautela -- ipsi ssima
namque (prout tui amabundi Paterculi Diagrammata se habent) FLETA ARMA
MINISTRANT; utique (spero de) Te ex meliore Luto finxit praecordia Titan,
Pythagoras sperabunde, vive and vale; Deus Opt. Max. Te tuaque diu servet
incolumia, in omnimoda nova Virtute dirigat, Roreque coelesti conamina madesca^
faci atque (precor) omnia Tui (...) Paterculi, tibi (...). Sic obtestatur,

Tuus Amicorum, non minimus, licet ANONIMUS.

To Jurisprudent Philanthropus.
SUre Plato's rediviv'd -- Philosophy,
Law, Gospel, and true Morals, all agree.
Doubtless he never can (bona fide) be
A Jurisprudent, that approves not thee,
Who reconcilest Learning altogether,
Either take Law and Gospel, or take neither.
For Jurisprudence really comprizes
Them both, and he that don't divide them, wise is.
Thou have philosophiz'd, and as a Friend
To all Mankind have acted, MARK
The End.
Per Anonymum.

Twenty Moot-points or Queries put by PYTHAGORAS to the Jurisprudent
PHILANTHROPUS, to be argued and determined in the next Edition.
Quaerere, dat sapere quae sunt legitima vera.

Qu. 1. AN? Scientia habet nullum immicum, nisi ignorantem?

Q. 2. An? Filiatio non potest probari?

Q. 3 An? Been qui latuit, been vixit?

Q 4. Annon? Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and Apostata facta, dote sua careat?

Q. 5. Annon? Jurisprudens captus in vetito Namio sit replegiabilis?

Q. 6. An? Unicuique in Art sua perito credendum est?

Q. 7. Annon? Touts vient apoint, que puet attiendra?

Q. 8. Annon? (...).

Q. 9. Annon? Laesa patientia b^n^ fiat furor?

Q. 10. Annon? Omnis Protectio trahit Subjectionem?

Q. 11. An non? Divortium a Mensa and Thoro, sit Divortium a vinculo?

Q. 12. An? Qui condouat peccatori, de Jure debet oblivisci?

Q. 13. An? Mendaci de facto credatur in re vera de Jure?

Q. 14. An non? Ictus perfidiosus, aut Secretorum detectio, sit dissolutio de
vinculo amicitiae?

Q.i 15. An non? Filius (non sui Juris) ducit in uxorem mulierem Dispar gabilem
absque consensu, vel notitia utriusque Parentis adtunc superstitum sit de Jure
Repudiandus?

Q. 16. An non? Frustra fit per plura, quo^ fiat per Pauciora?

Q. 17. An? Res humanae Succedant? ub^ negliguntur Divinae.

Q. 18. An? Edere Libros, vel edere Liberes sit Jurisprudentius?

Q. 19. An non? Est virtus placidis abstin^ isse bonis?

Q. 20. An non? Interest Regno, ut sit L^tium

FINIS.
Religio Jurisprudentis: OR, THE LAWYERS ADVICE to His SON.
In XX. COUNCELS.
THAT every Man in the World starts into it, (at first) under more apparent
characters of a Divine impress, than any other sublunary Creature, is obvi^us
to all contemplative understandings; and that not only in reference to the
con^^ture and frame of his Body, which the Heathen Philosophers of old had well
observed, in saying, Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram
Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre jussi^
Et erectos ad sidera tollere vultum.
All other Creatures looking down,
Man's countenance, of more renown,
More lofty's made with darting Eyes
Erected to the Starry Skies.


But also and chiefly in regard to the composure and shape of his mind, or
i^tellectual faculties, whose spontaneous an natural operations and motions are
su^lime and generous, indefatigable and tra^scendently comprehensive of the
knowledge of his Maker, of the Universe, an^ of Himself; which endowments are
mo^^ highly improvable by contemplation, reflection, and ratiocination, which
endowments and accomplishments are no whe^else extant below Angelical Beings.
H^ nature as we are very well assured being but a very little lower than the
holy A^gels themselves.

Man thus entering on this stage of t^ World, as Abrasa tabula, a blank paper
becomes at second-hand obnoxious to su^ impressions on his Intellectuals, as
Examples, Customs, and Education happen ^ make upon them, and inscribe; being
ye^ while, but Udum and molle Lutum, soft Cl^ and for some considerable time,
has not ^ use of his (...), or Reason, and Conscience, to discriminate between
right and wrong, good and bad notions or actions; nor to understand his own
constitution, concerns, or origination; nay, not so much as to know what to
make or do with himself, till he walk and converse with Men; which is the
lesson he is to learn in this his Pilgrimage: Namely, first, To take cognizance
of Himself; and secondly, Of his Creator, Sovereign Proprietor, and Benefactor.
As for example, His Eyes and his Ears begin to teach him what is his business
here below; the former of which makes the quickest and most tenacious
impressions upon him, the latter more uncertain and tedious; as that Divine
Philosopher Seneca tells us, Longum and incertum est ^ter per praecepta; breve
and efficax per exemplu: The reason whereof is because Man is naturally most
Mimical. Hence arises his greatest hazard as to his moral Principles, that he
sucks in almost with his Milk; which commonly (for the forementioned causes)
proves radical and veterate by tract of time and inward habits, that such
prepossessions of his mind can very hardly, by all moral arguments imaginable
be ever extirpated, or removed. From which grounds it was that I could not in a
long time prevail with my own will to comply with the ultimate dictates of my
best and maturer understanding, in disbelieving that weighty position which my
juvenile faculties were prepossest withal, that much of Mankind are eternally
damned upon the account of Adam's original Apostasy, till I found it so
manifestly repugnant to, and inconsistent with, the nature of Divine
Philanthropy to destroy any of his Creatures, whom he made voluntary
intellectual agents, before ever they had or could sin, after the similitude of
our forefathers transgression; to wit, commit actual obliquities. And until I
clearly discerned that the plaster of our blessed Savior's atonement, was
broader than the sore of Adam's apostasy, or of Mankinds original or actual
delinquencies: His grace has superabounded in our recovery; and that by him we
are reduced into a greater capacity of Eternal Happiness, than by the first
Adam we were in danger of Everlasting Ruin. Wherefore,

I. Council. I advise all Parents to be superlatively careful in the first
rudiments o^ Knowledge, that they may happen to be instrumental to the infusion
of, into their Children, at their early minorities of years.

II. Council. Is as soon as your Son is o^ years of discretion, that he
superstitiously addict and betake himself to a Calling o^ Profession, which his
own Genius and hi^ Parents judgment best suits withal, whereby he may be useful
and adjuvant to the community of Mankind, for whose sake (in a great measure)
he came into Being; as the old Philosophers well observed, Non nobis solum nati
sumus, partem Patria, partem Parents; partem amici sibi vendicant.

Our Country, and our Parents, and

Our Friends, some part of us demand.

Hereby also (besides the particular improvement of his Talent, and
augmentation of Estate, and Provisions for himself or dependants) he will
secure himself against the snares of idle and unreasonable Men, that have not
Faith nor Truth to ^ear by; and likewise keeps his Mind in Tranquillity, his
Body in Health and Ease, and his Soul in Cheerfulness and in Safety, from
allurements of Sin and Vanity, that Mankind is in hazard daily to be demolished
by; for its well becoming the Richest ^o be, and unaccountable in the Poorest,
not ^o be engaged in a Profession: wherefore ^he Grand Sultan himself is
renouned for his principle of Politics, for he will make ^rrow-heads rather
than be counted one ^f no Employment. A vulgar Error, I ^ave observed, that
many if not most of ^arents will bias their Childrens inclina^ons herein.
Another frequent fault of ^any, I have observed, that would quit ^eir Trades,
and forsake their Professions, before their Age, or improvements laudably
require it; which I wholly disapprove.

III. Council. Is to cherish your Invention in all points where the Utile is in
conjunction with Dulce, to wit, profit an^ pleasure are united, although it
operate coll^terally and not directly upon your part^cular employ; for tho it
be difficile inveni^ yet its facile inventis addere; its easy to (...) on
where another Virtuoso leaves off; At nihil invita dices, faciesve Minerva.
Against your Genius (I warn you)
One thing, nor other, say nor do.


IV. Council. Tho you study never so ha^ or to purpose, acquiess not in that
Labo^^tory; but converse as well (tho not much) with the Living, as with the
De^ I mean with Men and Manners, as well Books, and your Self. Hence it is that
if you Wickam's motto s^
You Will not find meat, but manners make a M^
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat a^
Your knowledge signifies not that,
Unless others know, you know what.


Study accurately the humors and ^pers both of Men, and Times, and course you
will then understand Wo^ and Wine.

Uno namque modo vina, venusque nocent.
I recommend (in the scarcity of this joyment) such Books as exert the Lives
Moral endowments of brave Heroes, Worthy, Learned and Wise Men, especially of
modern impression, that have been most useful upon the stage of the World. A
taste of History, Poetry, Music, and the Mathematics is enuff. If his Trade
be Navigatory or Seafaring, be critically careful of Maritine Observations,
and to keep a Journal. If Merchandising, to study the nature of that Commerce,
and those Commodities that are al a mode, and agreeable to the present Traffic
of those Countries wherein you adventure, or with whom you deal; and what the
respective Climates most adequately and naturally afford. If in Land-trade be
your Province, well remark the rates, qualities and condition of the Wares you
most deal in, and the variation of the Market compasses, and exactly to keep
your Books of account, as to profit and loss; a journal or diary of Memoirs and
accidents as well as expenses. ^ vigorously recommend to you what ever point of
the compass your employ stands at. Ab Jove principium Magni Jovis omnia ple^a.
Could the wiser Heathen say and practice.

V. Council. Wherefore be sure to keep an early and particular account of
eminent and remarkable occurrences of providence, ^oth of mercies or judgments,
all your Life ^ong, and frequently reflect on and animadvert them. This early
and late, sick and well, abroad and at home, is an essential and easy
practice, and both delightful and wonderfully beneficial for both Soul and
Body, a little time will convince you. It will create in you often venerable
and grateful sentiments of your heavenly Fathers benefactions, which the
commonness of the enjoyment renders us less mindful off: tho perhaps you will
find them that we most frequently enjoy none of the least in value.

VI. Council. Let the first and last of you^ Thoughts and Considerations,
waking and going to sleep, be more or less of the Mos^ High, and of your
circumstances and relation to him who is, intimior vobis intim nostro, the
intimatest thing to us, original and final; let his Goodness melt you into
intense Love of him, his Greatness into fillial Fear and Reverence, his Wisdom
and Faithfulness into an entire resignation o^ all you are and have, to his
will and disposal, imprecate his conduct and countenance, deprecate his
displeasure; daily* hourly, and thankfully, ejaculate to him acknowledge him as
your Sovereign Lord and Proprietor, as well as Creator an^ Benefactor; adore
him for his Divine Philanthropy; and implore his direction particularly in
every enterprise of moment* Be not high-minded, but fear; especiall^ in Company
you cannot be too circumspect, nor cautious; Abundans cautelae non nocet. Least
you be trepan'd or bubbl'd, or engaged in feuds or debates of public
importance, in this Age and conjuncture especially.

VII. Council. In the Election of your acquaintance, besure they be such as you
are like to be benefited by, or them by you, or else you will find them to be
pilferers of both your time and money; and remember the old Rule, That Turpius
ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes.


Preventive Physic is ever best; and you cannot so easily be rid of an ill
Companion, as you can decline his acquaintance, ab initio -- Ill acquaintance
is the epidemical bane of Mankind; and as to Morals an honest Tailor or Cobbler
is better than a profligate Don John of Austria, or Libertine. Let your
deportment, with whatever of Mankind you happen to be Conversant, (and as
little as possible converse with Women and Children) be complaisant, humble,
and with an unaffected charity, universal affability, and modest generosity; be
just and generous unto all Mankind -- to superiors (especially Parents and
Masters, reverently observant, courteous and cheerful to inferiors and equals,
which will conciliate or beget both interest and friendship, and (which is most
to purpose of all) Gods blessing and good providence, besides a high
satisfaction of Mind, and peac^ of Conscience (which is a constant Feast.)

VIII. Council. Your time is the greatest talent (one of them) that you are
entrusted withal; and therefore be very thristy thereof, the rather because
feeding, sleeping, sickness, and other inevitable Ceremonies of humane Life
will spung upon you a great share of it; and remember that, Solius Temporis
honesta Avaritia:
Cover nothing in your prime,
Unless it be your precious Time.


IX. Council. Parsimony or Frugality of ^oin is a fundamental Council; for
Seneca said very truly, Magnum est vectigal parsimonia; that is Frugality is a
great fortune, for its not how much comes into your fund, but how little goes
out that inriches any Man; and a penny in the pocket (to Cross the Proverb) is
worth two Friends at Court. The attainment will infallibly and quickly qualify
a Man to be bountiful, opulent, and considerably regarded in the World, and in
short its the key of Industry and Virtue, or Learning; for observe, Haud facile
emergunt quorum
-- virtutibus obstat
Res angusta Domi --
Nil habet infoelix paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
This Indigence is such a scurvy School,
Nothing makes Man to look more like a Fool.


X. Council. Rarely or never exert a passion what ever provocation you meet
withal either of Love, Fear or Anger; to which end be as fearful to give, as
careful not to take any provocation, for its as true of Amor and Timor as Ira.
That furor brevis est, and Res est solliciti pl^na timoris Amor.

That is, As Anger is a dreadful madness,
So Love is a most fearful sadness.
Especially beware of an incensed Woman.
Cui pronum dedit natura pectus
Et instruxit dolis; sed vim negavit
Ne inexpugnabilis esset.
As Seneca the Tragedian says Philosophically. Nature h'as given her craft and
Breast
Fit for the purpose, but the rest.
ss. Power he has denied her, least
She Would b'an unconquerable beast.


XI. Council. Exercise and Recreation, are as necessary and advisable, as
employment and a regular Profession, but to be used only as Salt or Sauces with
Meats, to make them wholsomer and palatable; but great caution must be taken,
of what kinds, what times, and what places are most prudent to be used.

And the variety of such divertions being so numerous and great, its easy to
habituate your self unto such as are most innocent, expedient, and significant;
as Riding, Rowing, Walking, Singing, Dancing, Swinging, etc. which I account
most laudable, natural, and expedient for the preservation of health, and
exhilaration of the mind and spirits; but Gaming with Cards or Dice, or hazard
of Coin and Credit, by Horse-racing, Bull-baiting, Cock-fighting, etc. I
explode and utterly disapprove* being a kin to witchcraft, and the highway to
ruin both Estate, Reputation and Conscience.

Mathematics and Music, I recommend as the most innocent and intellectual
recreations, and such is Poetry; the Italians say, Quem non amat Deus, non amat
ille Musas.
Whom God loves not, that Man loves not Music.


Not that I value my self a jot the more, that I in fifty years never played at
Cards or Dice, which perhaps none else at those years can truly say; nor that I
hold them absolutely unlawful, but generally very inexpedient and mischievous,
especially for such as are endued with an Athletick habit of Body; and may
habituate themselves much better to other Exercises and Recreations many ways.

XII. Council. As I can advise few or none to, so dare I not diswade all from
Marrying, wherein they cast a Dice for their felicity (at the best) but I
verily believe that few or none ere repented that they died Virgins; and few or
none that had issue but have (upon a double experiment). I must needs say, it
is not a condition indifferent, but much mends or mars the parties, be their
circumstances what they will, young or old, rich or poor, etc. Perhaps (if
Utinam were not too late) I could have wished (as St. Paul did) that I had
taken the more eligible side in keeping my Virginity still: I Am sure for the
present distress, which by means of marriage, I can truly say, I lie under, as
well as for many other weighty causes, I had done better and been wiser, for
not to have touched a Woman in that sense: yet because all that is lawful is not
expedient; I must needs think that as those that with great agreeableness of
years, Principles, Tempers and Fortunes, and with approbation of Parents are
married, may be happy and do well; yet such as have power over their own wills
and refraign, do much better: and of this opinion was our Savior himself, when
his Disciples put him the case, tho he superadded that all cannot bear that
Doctrine, as to castrate themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven sake; or devote
themselves to a ( Caelibate or) single life; A Fabis Abstineto, was great
Pythagoras's Doctrine to his Proselites also, and Solomon thought not one
amongst ten thousand of that Sex scarce to be found fit for a true help meet
unto Man; but because I refer the Reader in this point to my Essay, De
Conjugio, for a fuller account of my opinion. I will only add this further
remarkable saying, De sapientia veterum satius est cavere semper, quam perire
semel. Its better always to avoid dangers, than once to be destroyed.

XIII. Council. Guard your Mouth and disclose not a secret, except to one that
is nearer than a Brother.

XIV. Council. Contract no friendship with a very near relation, nor Matrimony
especially without the confent as well as privity of your Parents.

XV. Council. Be as punctual in your word, and appointments with all mankind,
as is possible, the benefit redounding to you thereby is unimaginable.

XVI. Council. Lie not upon any account, but rather deny to speak the truth,
which you are afraid or ashamed to reveal; for he that lies of course will not
be believed when he speaks truth. There Is no more necessity to tell a lie, then
for any Man to burn, that so he may pretend to mar himself by an extempore
Marriage.

XVII. Council. Use an exact method in all your motions and negotiations, or
imploys (be they what they will) which will facillitate all business much, and
incredibly; the Creation was in number, weight, method and measure: In your
least as well as biggest affairs speak and act ever, pro ratione rei; never pro
imperio, if you would be easy, or successful.

XVIII. Council. In Eating and Drinking no exact rule can be given in
particulars; wherefore observe your own Body as to proportion, and your own
occasions as to times; my rule is, ut sit men's sana, in Corpore sano, sic ede,
bibe, lude.

So Eat, so Drink, Carouse and Play,

That Strength, and Sense may nere decay. But rather take too little at some
time, than too much at any time, valetudinis ergo.

XIX. Council. To be continually very busy, and very cheerful (unless upon
sacred Duties, or upon your Recreations) which unless guilt obstruct you cannot
be warrantably otherwise: for you are obliged to rejoice ever more; conster it
as you please; and also to be very diligent and assiduous in business, which
assiduity indeed is but pleasure and profit in conjunction; and your greatest
security against Temptations unto Degeneration: and a mighty preservation also
against extravagant expenses of time or money; which if you comply not withal
you will with an heavy Heart say, (if death do not surprise you) What fruit
have I had in those things whereof I am now ashamed; and whereat upon
reflection I am (if not undone) astonished. You may think this very hard and
ruinous, but upon practice remember you will find this true, that periisses, nisi
(ita) periisses.

XX. Council. To be very charitable, so far as the tenth part at least of your
improved acquirements shall extend to; but let your Charity not be confined to
common petitioners (for that seldom proves truly Eleemosinary or Charitable)
but where you are very probably satisfied, in your judgment, that the case is
Compassionate, if ever you be profuse in any thing be so there; for I have
found (and you may be sure that you will also) that such benefactions turn to
better account to you, and are more pleasant to your self, than to the
recipients, tho never so indigent. For to Charity and Frugality, you must ever
remember nothing is your own property, so much, but what you must be seriously
accountable for. God lends to you, besure lend you (this way) to the Lord, than
will you be blessed; in sempiterna secula, sine Fine.

Religio Jurisprudentis: OR, THE LAWYERS ADVICE to His SON.
De Religione and Virtute. Of Religion and Virtue.
REligion (ex vi termini,) Etimologically, imports Allegiance, or a Natural (as
well as Moral) obligation or Duty to God, to ones Self, and to all Mankind. To
God, as our Sovereign Maker, Lord and Proprietor, and constant and Eternal
Benefactor: To own and acknowledge him, so to be Ruled entirely by him, to
Depend sincerely upon him (in the use of the means of his own prescription to
us) and to Resign up our selves unto him, as both Original and Final to us in
all points. To our selves, to be Just, Chaste, Temperate and Charitable, for
neither are our Bodies, nor our Souls our own. To the rest of God's family,
both Man and Beast, we owe the Tribute of Justice, Respect, Love, Charity, to
behave our selves toward them all according to the dictates of Natural Light,
and superadded Reason (God's Candle) and Divine Revelation, couched in Holy
Writ: Homo homini Deus, and not Lupus; we should act toward our fellow
Creatures after that Copy that God blessed for ever has set us, in his
Philanthropy, or kindness to us; that is, to help, instruct, respect, and
compassionate them upon all occasions and emergencies that happen; and not at
all hurt, injure, defraud, or disquiet any one part or member of his Family in
the World: This is real Religion or true Virtue.

So that real Religion consists in an humble, just and generous Disposition or
Temper of Mind, that habitually prompts and inclines a Man to Love and Goodwil,
toward the whole Family of God, to visit and relieve such as are distressed,
or uneasy, to deal fairly and honestly withal Mankind, even Foes as well as
Friends and Allies; and to preserve our selves, and (as far as we can) others
from the pollutions of the Mind and Body, to do Justly, walk Humbly (that is
Holily) and to love Mercy. And it does by no means consist in those things
which (is an Epidemical mistake of well affected persons in the World) are not
the End, but the means of acquiring it, as Hearing, Reading, Praying, and
Christian conference and meditation; but a frame and constitution of Heart,
vigorously actuated by an energetical Faith, a lively Hope, and an universal
Charity. For to love and respect only Benefactors, and to revenge indignities
and affronts offered to us, without any just provocation given, etc. Tantum
Religio potuit suadere malorum.


Scribes, Pharisees and Heathens, arrived to that pass; but Evangelical
Precepts and Presidents extend a great deal further, as to teach us to embrace
a common Enemy; and neither to give, nor yet receive provocations to wrath. To
deny our selves in many things indifferent, and to restrain our appetites and
passions in many cases where not exorbitant. To be as cunning as a Serpent, and
harmless as a Dove in the whole course of our Conversations; to become all
things to all Men, that we may gain upon some; and in some cases, and for some
persons, even to venture our Lives and Fortunes for them.

Revealed Religion no where enterferes with, or controuls, that natural
Religion, or Law of Nature which we are endued with, upon our entrance into the
World; but all the Rules and Directions thereof are in affirmation and in
enlargement of them; which is worthy our Observation.

Religion (in sano sensu) extends it self all over the World, (as well as the
Gospel does all over Christendom) and is seated in the Conscience, which is
God's Vicegerent, that approves or condemns, accuses or excuses, all the
actions of intellectual voluntary Agents; read Romans 1. The fundamental part of
Religion is co-natural to, and as inherent in, an Intelligent Agent, as Reason
it self is; wherefore whoever of them lives without some sense of his
subjection to, or dependence upon his Maker, is a moral Monster; (which is the
greatest prodigy in the whole World) for an Ox to know his Owner, and an Ass
his Master, and yet for a Man of higher senses, and intellectual faculties,
framed on purpose to reflect on, grope after, and understand his own
Constitution, Duty, and Dependence; to disown or be ignorant of a Deity, is an
unaccountable thing in Morality.

Religion is (in short) that thing which does distinguish a Man from a Brute.
And Virtue or Piety is that which makes a Man appear to be an intellectual
voluntary Agent, for nothing else can be such; to wit, a thing that can choose
or refuse good or bad; and that owns his dependence upon a Sovereign goodness:
without whose Care, Conduct, and Authentication, he could neither have nor
continue in a Being. Men and Angels are only such a sort of existency; and
Virtue or Religion belongs properly to no body else in Nature, some shadows and
umbrages there are of a seeming Religion in inferior Entities, but they cannot
amount unto true Religion, because they are only prompted by Instinct, or
natural Laws, that oblige them to choose, or refuse, what only is Decorous and
Healthy, which are their summa bona, or chief good.

But he that is truly Religious or Virtuous, takes a real delight in regular
motions and rational operations, as homogeneal and connatural to his
Constitution and Nature. This is a right Jurisprudent; for it is a true Maxim,
as well as an old one, that Plures sunt quos cogit Timor, sed Meliores, quos
ducit Amor; or in Meter thus, Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae,
Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore.


That is, A good Man's so for goodness sake,
A bad Man fears (not Love) so make.


A Jurisprudent in our sense is radically Religious, that is, ready to do all
good Offices unto all Mankind, and loves so to do. And I am of Opinion, that
Anima^ Religiosum, a Religious Animal is a more proper Definition of a Man,
than Anima^ Rationale, or a Reasonable Creature; for as much as Virtue or
Religion is an inseparable property, as the Logicians call it Quarto Modo, or
four ways. That is, 1. It belongs unto all Men. 2. It belongs only unto
Mankind. 3. It belongs at all times unto Man. 4. It belongs necessarily to Men;
but Sociabillity or Rationality possibly do to others besides Man.


Religion is so co-natural and essential to an humane constitution, that the
most Barbarous, as well as Moralized Nations under Heaven, ever own some kind
o^ other of a Religation or Religion, or reference to a Deity, or Supreme Being
that gave them a Commencement or Beginning, and is conservative of them in
Being; and final and ultimate to them after their expirations. For Religion and
Virtue must be considered off two ways; there is a Natural Religion, or Law of
Nature ingrost upon all Men's minds in the World, that discovers to them their
derivation from and dependence upon a Supreme Proprietor, and Benefactor to all
effects and purposes; and persuant thereof, is the revealed Religion in Holy
Writ; and in Works of Divine Providence, not at all thwarting or controulling
but confirming the Religion we call Natural. Wherefore I infer that (tho there
be too too many Practical yet) there is not one Speculative Atheist in the
whole World; tho some fools have been so silly as to say so, or would if they
could conceive so, yet none have been so mad as to think and really believe
(tho they lived without regard of him in the World) that there is no God. A Man
can view nothing within him or without but what has palpable indications of
Religion and Virtue, namely a relation to a Sovereign Goodness and Greatness;
and consequently more or less must induce him to acknowledge his Dependence
upon, and Subordination to an infinite Independency; which conceptions of his
are radical Religion, and prompt him to Adoration, Homage and to Fealty by
virtue of the tenure of his Being: But for the understanding that which is the
quintessence of all Religion, which is the Divine Philanthropy, o^ God in
Christ reconciling the lapsed Creation to himself again; we are wholly beholden
here to Divine Revelation, which is the glad tidings, to that effect and
purpose, disclosed to us by the Gospel; the sound whereof perhaps two thirds of
the habitable World have not heard of or known to this day, yet understand to
do justly, converse humbly, and act compassionately to the rest of God's family
below: And that by the (...), the written Law of natural Religion within them,
Romans c. 1. makes this a plain case; whosoever steers not by this compass is a
Jurisprudent, in the worst sense. Whatsoever a Man is for parts or other
accomplishments or endowments, that has not a real sense of Virtue and
Religion, he is the greatest prodigy; and despicablest thing in Nature. And yet
which is to me one of the (magnalia naturae) wonderfullest thing in Nature,
that no part of the Creation prevaricates so much, or deviates from their
Homogeneal Principles or Instincts, as does Mankind; an Ox understands and
complies with his Owners intimations and pleasure, and an Ass with his Feeder's
conduct; but Man (the top of the Creation) swerves from his Sovereign
Proprietor's Rules and Principles, and runs retrograde (of course) in so much
that its almost as hard to find a truly Religious Jurisprudent amongst mankind;
as it was for Solomon to find a Prudent and Virtuous one among a Thousand
Women. Religion and Virtue are the Varnish of the Creation, and renders it
Illustrious; but Vice and Enormity blots and stains it. A Wise or Religious Man
keeps the Peace, but an Irreligious Person is like a common Barretor, that sets
the Family of God together by the Ears; a Boutefean or Incendiary. The former
is a Man of Council and of Conduct; the latter is a common Nuisance, not to be
countenanced or endured with patience. Of the former that authentic Maxim is
verified, scil. Homo homini Deus; he is a God (upon Earth) to Mankind. Of the
latter, the other part of it, too true, scil. Homo, homini Lupus; he is a Wolf
among Mankind, a destroyer. The former is a Man of sense, of honor, and every
way eximious; but the latter is a Dunce, and a Bruit in Morality. A Religious
Man is a Sage in the Law, and the best Jurisprudent in the Land of the Living.

II. De Deo and Eternitate. Of God and Eternity.
WHereof who can speak without a Solecism, or write without a Barbarism, or
think without an Extacy. Deus optimus, maximus intimior nobis est intimo
nostro; could the Heathen say: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus ipso,

That is, God, the best and greatest thing,
Animates us with his Wing:
Nothing in us is so near,
Nor any object half so dear.
(...).


Man is his offspring, derives from him, subsists by him, and lives in him, and
returns to him; he is both original and final to him: The Fountain and Father
of Love, Life, Power, Wisdom and Immortality; whereupon the best Philosophers
assert and hold, That Animus cujusque est is quisque* the mind is the Man: He
is that he is which is the best definition that he has given us of himself,
who cannot conceive aright of him, but (ex post facto,) by his Backparts or the
results and effects of his glorious and transcendent Attributes of Wisdom,
Power, Goodness and Patience so long as we stand committed to a Body, from
which when emancipated and released possibly we may enjoy a more adequate
knowledge of him, (...), a part ante and a part post. Our fullest
apprehensions both of him and of Eternity, while incarcerated with Flesh and
Bone, consisting principally in Negative notions of his Nature, and
incomprehensible excellencies and perfections. Howbeit, our Dignity and our
Duty it is, here below, to ruminate very frequently, and pathetically, upon
those eternal enjoyments that are so radical to our very constitutions; for
want of the lively hopes whereof (whereunto we are begotten by the Resurrection
of our blessed Emanuel) we had been the most miserable part of all God's
Creation. Our topping seize here are to Copy out his imitable Attributes
and Perfections, as the genuine Child does patrissare, that is imitate his
Parent, and strives to be as exquisite as his Father in all accomplishments and
perfections that he is capable off: Homo homini Deus, is a certain Rule, Man's
made, framed, and designed to be in the foresaid regards, a God to the rest of
his heavenly Father's family here in the World, as the holy Angels in that
upper-family are subservient Spirits unto the Heirs of Salvation.

Its high time for us to begin so to Ruminate and Consider (as aforesaid) as
soon as ere we are capable to prevaricate after the similitude of our
Forefather Adam's enormity or trespass.

Nullum numen abest ubi sit prudentia, quamqu^,
Nos colimus (Faustine) Deam, coeloque locamus.
God is eternal Prudence or Wisdom, and the only source and original of all
other existencies and excellencies, and also final and ultimate of all: the
serious and digested consideration whereof; that we must terminate in Eternity
either in point of happiness or misery, is enuff to astonish any intellectual
voluntary agent that is created, who has not a deep sense of his relation to
and dependence on him for ever. He is by no means a Jurisprudent, who aims not
in all his Councels, Cogitations and Contrivances at Eternity; and has not a
mediate or immediate regard to it in omnibus; and that considers not
universally, and handles all points of humane affairs accordingly; that he is
here but as it were by the By, and at best in a state of Probation and
Pilgrimage, for a spurt of time not worth a thought, were it not in order to,
and in persuance of, and preparatory for Eternity. God's infinite Love, the
dwelling upon which contemplation for some considerable time, would animate and
steer the course of Mankind by the true compass, and prevent an innumerable
company of destructions and irreparable mischiefs, which daily happen unto
stupid or unconsiderate Men. Time, as one (wittily but truly) called it, is the
needle that draws after it the long thread of Eternity, but for the enjoyment
whereof, it were worth no Man's while to be hurli-burlied here in the World. A
calm and steady notion, or conception of Eternity, is alone sufficient to a
Jurisprudent to make him weary of the World's achievements and blandishments,
and utterly wean him from an eager persuite of any temporary acquisition, it
will direct him to serve himself of (and not to be enslaved to) the present
World; and to be a Council in no Cause which has not a prospect of an Eternal
Fee or Reward. Prudent was the practice of that Heathen Poet, who declared, Et
mihi res, non me rebus submittere conor.
My business is, to take care, and to see
That business evermore stoop unto me.
Prudens incipit a fine, say Philosophers, A wise Man begins at the End, that
is, its first in intention, tho last in execution. To square our means and
methods so, as they may be sure to tend (ad Infinitum) toward Eternity, which
is our ultimate End, is the genuine character and practice of our Jurisprudent,
ss. Eternal weal, not woe; which principles of his reduced into practice, will
seal his conveyance thither for certain; since one of his best principles is,
Id certum est, quod certum reddi potest:
That has enuff of Certainty
Which does demonstrate ere we dye
The prospect of Eternity.


That the felicity of Heavenly enjoyments is Eternal, was never yet a
Moo^-point (as I know) tho the Eternity o^ Torment has; howbeit its agreed on
al^ Hands, by Sage and Religious Jurisprudents that a part post, or for the
future ever voluntary and intelligent agent, as Man is must expect an Eternal
duration, when united again, after a mortal divorce o^ Soul and Body: Wherefore
we hold that Satius est cavere semper, quam perire semel Its much more
adviceable to be alway^ Cautious, than once to be ruined either i^ Time, or
Eternity. Summum Jus, is God and Eternity; that is, the supreme Righ^ and Law,
and the proper center of i^ mortal Souls; therefore all the lines (...) our
circumferences regularly ought to t^minate there. That is, all our contriva^ces
and transactions here in time, should be framed and steered by that Eternal
co^pass: For we are here but by the by,
Only to be tried and to try,
What it is to live, and how to dye,
Sleep, dream, and wake t'Eternity.
I am fully of opinion, that this one Po^ or Consideration of God and Eternit^
(which we cannot easily separate in our thoughts) well and daily weighed and
digested duly, will prove the best Panpharmacon, or universal Antidote, against
all extrajudicial and degenerate deportments of our selves, unbecoming the Rank
and Quality of our State and Profession here below; and our Relation that we
stand in unto God and Man.

He that well understands that he is not sui Juris, not his own property, nor
put into Being only to serve himself, or to control others; but to be ruled
and managed by the Laws of his Creation, and is but a precarious and dependant
Creature, though in the uppermost form here. And that he hourly is continued and
supported in Being, to the end that he may be obsequious to the Laws of his
Sovereign Benefactor, and Auxiliary and useful to the rest of Mankind,
according to his capacity and qualification from above; in promoting his own
and their both Temporal and Eternal welfare, will easily be persuaded, that he
is divinae particula aurae: that is, a spark of an Eternal flame, and a divine
offspring; and that his principal interest, concern and acquaintance is vested
in the next World, whither he is swiftly hastening out of this unto God and
Eternity; and consequently make use of this but as of a Scale or Ladder to
climb up to that, withal al reasonable and prudent expedition and security.
Now to conceive a right of Eternal Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, that the notion
may best affect and influence our minds, which are not capable to comprehend so
vast an object; we may judiciously collect in our serenest imaginations the
abstract of his imitable perfections, of Love, Power, Wisdom, Patience, Justice
and Mercy, etc. by those glorious instances that his Word and Works exert. And
then adore and admire what you possibly cannot comprehend, the Clemency, Glory
and Eternal goodness of that God that has allied you to him so transcendently,
and been so superlatively beneficent to you and all Mankind, in your narrow
tract of time, whom Eternity it self will be a pattern strait enuff to bless
and magnify when time shall be no more. Having not only made a World for us,
and planted us as Vicegerents to him in it; but after we made defection from
him, by our violation of his original Sanction in Paradise, to contrive that
the seed of the Woman (that was the occasion of our Degeneration and Apostasy)
should break the Serpents head that was the fundamental cause of our failing:
For as the Logicians distinguist well, Satan was the Causa procatarctica, o^
original cause of our Lapes; but the Woman Causa proegumene, or main inducement
thereof; and that after the fullness of time was accomplished, for the said
breaking his Head, that had bruised our Heel; that still that Divine and
adorable Philanthropy, or Love to Mankind, should further extend it self, as
after our Savior's Ascension and departure from us, to commissionate his Holy
Spirit to succeed him, and to comfort and encourage Mankind in all the ways of
new obedience, that nothing supernatural (as well as rational) should be
wanting to perfect our both Temporal and Eternal felicity. This is worth our
while a little further to ruminate upon, and to consider how far we are
supplied with a further Auxiliary, how the Divine Spirit, or the Holy Ghost,
negotiates with Mankind, in persuance of his Eternal happiness; is a noble
Point, and worthy of the contemplation of a Jurisprudent to purpose, and (with
submission to greater Theological Judgments) we are of Opinion that it operates
not Enthusiastically, (as many hold) or indirectly and imperceptibly
influencing of the minds of Men, out of the usual course of means, prescribed
to us in the Gospel, or Divine revelation for our acquiring of Eternal
happiness, which we call Salvation; but by the mediation of our rational
faculties, and diligent persute of such means of Grace and Glory, we are
obliged to entertain as consideration, conference, instruction, and
applications by Prayer, and thankful Recognitions of, and Praisings for, and
Rejoycings in such Benefactions, Comforts, and Aids Divine, which we daily and
hourly enjoy, by that miraculous undertaking of our Savior's passion, and
intercession, together with the subsequent negotiations of the Holy Ghost, by
the ministration of Angels, and the co-operations of him with our sincere and
rational, operations, in and about the accomplishment of our Salvation or
Eternal felicity. He it is that works in us and for us, both a velleity, or
willingness; and excites and helps us forward to action, as St. Paul expressly
declares, The same Holy Spirit does doubtless help our infirmities, and
animates us in our defects of humane frailties; and as well in meditations of,
as in application to him, prompts us to and prevents us in our persuits after
Eternal happiness. He that lives without God in the World, surely lives without
any sense of this Divine superintendence over and in us all; how can else our
Saviors words be verified, That this Comforter (which is himself under another
notion) should teach and conduct us in the knowledge of whatsoever may conduce
unto Eternal life. If we heed and regard him, questionless he is at hand,
rebuking, reinforcing, and inciting us to every good Word or Work. But this is
a new (or rather unconsidered on) Doctrine, since our Saviors departure from
us, who told us when he went away, that he would not leave us destitute of the
like aids and supplies, (as he afforded us when he was among us) to inform, to
encourage, and to direct us in the dark, how to grope out our way to
everlasting hapiness. He sometimes by the Ministry of good Angels prompts us,
sometimes by the mediation of our rational and considerate faculties suggests
and influences us, sometimes by the interposition of evil Angels suffers us to
be tempted and prevented from many a good enterprise, or undertaking, of his
good pleasure and free condescension; all which Divine aids and influences, as
procured for us, by the prodigious merits and intercession of our Redeemer,
whereof no man can give a particular account any more than of the motion of the
Wind, that blows when and where it lists, the impression whereof we mortals
find and feel, but cannot unfold whence it comes, or whether it goes; but are
sure that every regenerate person do perticipate of those operations, to all
good effects and purposes, and without them are wholly impotent: This is that
Lite that is kindled in all that are born, this is that Dove that brooding on
the Waters, in six days, hatched the visible World; and this is that Spiritus
intus alens, that Energy that stimulates Mankind to all good Works; as the Poet
himself of old darkly discerned, Est Deus in nobis agitante calescimus illo.
God is within us actuating, and
We tepifie by feeling his warm Hand.
Hereupon lies a Jursprudent his stress, that if he be true to himself, he is
secure of Divine aid in his Study and Practice of the Canon, Civil, or the
Common Law of Mankind, be it Secular or Supernatural, and further acquiesces
herein also; that the Humane Verdicts or Judgments, whether for the Plaintiff
or Defendant, in the cause of his Clyent, will be Arrested and set aside one
day or other, if not entered, or given according to the pattern of sound words;
which is his original Warrant for all his Sentiments, Pleas, Opinions and
Practices, from the first day of his Practice to his life End.

Deo optimo maximo sit Gloria in sempiterno secula sine Fine.
To God the Best, the Greatest, send
Thanks and praises World without End.
III. De Angelis and Animis. Of Angels and Souls.
THe Soul (in statu seperato) unbodyed is very near a Kin to an Angel, and in
point of Constitution, but a little lower. It Is the Duty and Dignity of them
both, to be particularly subservient and ministerial Agents unto Mankind's
eternal Interest and Happiness, the one as Spirits commissionated from Heaven
to negotiate for the Heirs of Salvation, the other to imitate his Maker in
becoming (Homo Homini Deus) God's Proxy to his fellow Creature, for it is truly
said, Animus cujusque est is quisque; It Is the Mind that is the Man, the Care
and charge or Commission aforesaid of the Angels, the Father of Lies himself
owned to be true before the blessed Archangel of the new Covent in the
Wilderness, Luk* 4.10.

But, whether every Individual Man and Woman have a Tutelar Angel, which has
by worthy and learned Divines, and others, from that expression in holy Writ of
Peter's Angel; been so long controverted, that it remains a Polemical or
moot-point to this day. All that I therefore judge advisable as yet to assert
therein is that it is valde probabile, non probatum very probable, but not
proved; Howbeit both the new and especially the old Testament demonstrate their
general care of, and concern for the Church of God, and every numerical member
thereof, and that with eagerness and outstretched necks they pry into the
misterious Contrivance of Divine Philanthropy, and our Saviors Incarnation for
the Redemption of the lapst Creation, and the Immortality of our Souls has
more probable and pregnant Jndications than the Existence, nature, or
operations of the holy Angels out of the holy Writ; as the inadequateness
(sensibly to be perceived by us) of any sublunary or created enjoyment in point
of plenary satisfaction to the powers and faculties of our Souls we still
discern a plus ultra, or a further reach and aspiration after more, both in
quantity and quality, than we can upon our highest pitch of attainment meet
withal here below; as the Poet said, Quo plus sunt Potae, plus sitiuntur aquae.
The more of these waters we drink,
The thirstier we grow, we think.
Also the indefatigability of our Minds and Souls, ex vi termini, imports an
Immortal temper and Constitution of them, all thing else by toyls and fatigues
languish and require recruits by rest, but the more vigorous and athletick our
Souls are, without repose or intermissions, the more they improve and prosper,
Sleep, nor Sickness prevents not their nimble and strenuous operation, tho they
clog them.

Whether they are propagated or infused has been another Polemical (or moot)
point time out of mind, but (for my part) I cannot imagine any good reason to
evince the Infusion, nor to invalidate the belief that they are (ex traduce)
propagated; the original fiat of Almighty Power may reasonably be supposed to
infuse at first such an Energy as to produce an Homogeneal Derivation of the
whole Compositum, and as a Candle kindles ten thousand more by the same Light,
which it receives by another Hand, without any diminution of its own flame: so
may the production of infinite pluralities, of the same species, be
apprehended, to commence without any miraculous or supernatural concurrence,
since the Work of God's Creation is ceased.

And as to the Transmigration of them, which the Pythagorean Philosophers of
old, and many other Modern Virtuosoes since, have tenaciously asserted: I can
by no means reconcile that Notion, to the Principles of Reason or Religion, and
therefore hold it not operae pretium to attempt the refutation thereof.

How and in what manner its subsistence is, after separation from, until its
reunion unto the Body natural; some probable conjectures from Divine Writ, and
reason may be plausibly made, as that it is in a passive condition, or lesser
degree of happiness than after the Resurrection of the Body, and their mutual
glorification, it can be capable of enjoying, from that expression of our
blessed Savior on the Cross, to the Malefactor in his Crucifiction, That he
should be that very day with him in Paradise; which word we meet not with
elsewhere in Scripture save once, 2 Cor. 12. and may seem therefore to import
some other degree of happiness than may reasonably be presumed, Soul and Body
in conjunction may perceive and enjoy, its certainly received (if a sanctified
Soul) into Abram's bosom, or into its Creators custody, care and possession, as
the surrendering thereof into his Hands clearly implies; and must therefore
needs be in ease, and happiness; but we are as incapable here to comprehend
distinctly the nature and quality of its felicity, as we are of our
circumstances upon Earth, whilst in the Womb. That the degrees of future
happiness are as various as of our present atainments here in (Statu viatorum)
our pilgrimage, is evident enuff to intellectual Optics, both from Scripture
and Reason there be least and there be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, as
the Gospel declares; and Thomas Aquinas his Rule may reasonably be understood
as well de futuris as praesentibus, of our future as well as present
capacities, that Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; that is,
according to the capacity of the subject must all be received to its utmost.
Happiness includes full satisfaction; and such an enjoyment implies an
exemption from further desires or expectations, and (Si magnis componere parva
licebit) if the comparison be not odious, we may take some measure (methinks)
of the nature and quality of future bliss and happiness, by the highest degree
of humane felicity which (we know) does consist in a plerofory, or exuberance
of Health, Wealth, Peace, Power, Love and Delight, to such a pitch and degree,
that there remains no more room for further wishes, or desires within the
confines of Mortality.

And the more intellectual and refined, are the results of our satisfaction, in
and from these sensible objects and fruitions the nearer is their resemblance,
and affinity to those Eternal and increated felicities and enjoyments in
Revertion in the other World. Angels are proper Company for immortal Souls, by
Divine Designation, as well as agreeable Constitutions; but the nature of
either the one or the other, we are not here in Circumstances or Capacities to
understand, but darkly, and by conjecture; though we are well enough assured of
their Employments and supernatural Existencies, and Words would b^ wanting to
express if their Faculties were not to conceive of the future State of either
of their Felicities, that are filled with the fruition of the beatifical
Visions of the most High.

Of the Souls immortality, many of the Jurisprudent Heathens were sensible:
Witness one of their final Ejaculations.

Animula, vagula, blaudula
-- quo vadis? etc.
Thou volatile, affable, little Soul of mine,
Whether art thou going? Oh most Divine
IV. De Coelo and Foelicitate. Of Heaven and Happiness.
QUestionless, Happiness, is Heaven and neither of them are Local, bu^ are a
State and Condition of Existence with the best Advantages and Circumstances
that human or Divine Nature is capable of; which Enjoyments consist of rarified
and intellectual Pleasures and Satisfactions. And very remarkable it is, that
as Felicity and Heaven consists in a Frame and Temper of Mind and Spirit
agreeable to the Company wherewith the Party is circumstantiated out of all
reach of Danger, Pain, or Disturbance.

So that Happiness arises from the reflection of our Minds upon past and
present actions, and rumination on the future. A good and a wise Man must needs
be happy (be he where he will), but a wicked Man (and a fool) cannot be truly
so, let the World smile upon him never so much, for the Reasons aforesaid, that
its no local thing, nor depends not (wholly) upon athing without us, but a
Temper and Constitution of Mind, Religious and Virtuous Inclinations and
Actions; whence it observably happens, that such a man takes more pleasure and
delight really in all that he does to, or suffers unjustly from other Folks,
than they can do that receive his Benefactions, be they never so indigent; or
that inflict Pain or Scorn upon him, be they never so potent or malicious.

Happiness being our Summum Bonum, or topping Attainment here as well as
hereafter. Rather than miss of the main Chance, all sorts of Mankind flatter
themselves with the Picture and Shadow of it, where they cant meet with the
Substance, and strive to cheat themselves with Wine or Women, Gaming, or
counterfeit Friendship, and other Enjoyments (or Experiments in Consort, for
Felicity is not genuine, nor can subsist in Egoity or Selfishness) rather than
endure the Fatigue and Misery that a sense of Unhappiness naturally produces.

Happiness is the Quintessence of all true and rational Pleasure and Delight,
its resolved unanimously by almost all the Philosophers in the World, that its
better not to be at all, than not to be happy more or less. So lies it within
the reach and compass of every individual, considerate, intelligent Agent (of
what Rank or Quality soever) to be happy, and at ease (if they be in a right
and healthy temper and constitution;) whence it follows, that Heaven and
Happiness are not things wholly in Abeyance or future, but may and often do
commence in this Life; and differ not essentially (but gradually) from eternal
Felicity, and as the Schoolmen say, Quoad magis and minus, more or less, as the
Sun differs from the Stars; and as the Spirit (or intellectual Faculties) of
Man is a Lamp or Candle of his Creators lighting up (as the Sophy Solomon
assures us) Prove. 24, So are all our sublunary Felicities, but
Lightning-flashes, (as it were) derived from the Father of Lights, and
Homogenial, with those eternal Heavenly Flames of Happiness; above which, as
well as our selves, may truly be called his Offspring; for Happiness (in sano
sensn) is utterly inconsistent with Uncleanness, and depravity of Mind and
Temper.

Denominatio fit a Majori, as the Schoolmen observe; that is, a Denomination
(or Character must ever be made or deduced from the greater part of the
Constitution; as for instance, no man lives who is not emfatically sinful, nor
scarce any man in being, that sometime or other does not exert and discover
virtuous and commendable Acts and Inclinations; but we must not call or account
him a Religious or a Virtuous man, that makes the Course of his Life generally
a Trade and Practice of Immorality and Villainy; nor him an irreligious and
profligate Wretch, that in the main Course of his Conversation, acts uprightly,
and walks humbly and honestly and conscientiously before and toward God and
Man; so neither can we pronounce him an happy man, who steers his general
Conversation counter to all virtuous Precepts and Presidents, though he seem to
enjoy and possess great Affluence and Health in the World; nor him miserable or
unhappy, that is just and gene^ous, compassionate and well affected toward all
Mankind, though he seem to be indigent, and his Foot often slip, but he
recovers himself, and runs his true Course of Virtue with Resolution and
Delight.

Happiness consists not at all in the Quan^um but the Quale of Enjoyment; not
in Quantity but Quality of our Seize, and particularly in the Mind.
Whoever is at ease in his Mind, under a rational sense of his own Sincerity,
and of Divine Benefactions to him, is questionless the happy Man, and without
such well grounded Apprehensions, and intellectual Reflections, no man (adult)
can be possibly happy: Let his other Circumstances and Concerns in the World be
what you can imagine them to be, notwithstanding. As for that (improperly so
called) Happiness, which is chiefly sensual, but laudable, and often adjuvant
or contributory to the true intellectual and immortal Happiness of the Soul or
Mind. Solomon gives me the best account in the World o^ it, and assures us with
all, that its a singular divine Benefaction, to wit, for a Man to taste and
enjoy the sweet of all his Pains and Fruit of his Endeavors, by eating and
drinking his Bread and Wine with a cheerful Heart, and grateful Resentmen^ of
the Bounty of the most High, who has been pleased to create much more
abundance for man, his Delight, than necessity of support, and is pleased with
the cheerfulness of his Creature, filling their Heart with Joy and Gladness, as
well as furnishing them with fruitful Seasons, upon which consideration, I
conceive is, that Jotha^ tells us, Wine chears the Heart of God an^ Man.

And the Wise Man (Prove. ult.) advises his Son Lemuel to give to such as are
Sorrowful and Chagreen, Wine and strong Drink (to choose, rather than to others
that live at a Luxurious Rate already) to the end that they may divert or
forget their Poverty and Sorrow, and be happy. If the greatest of all the
Apostles was translated out of the Body into the third Heaven, and when
returned, was not able to describe the excellency of it; but negatively, all
Mankind after him may well be at a Loss, to express what no man's mind is able
to conceive of future happiness. Heaven in the Abstract (methinks) can be
nothing else but a State of Enjoyment, which can neither admit of alteration or
addition of further Satisfaction, and that must needs be the Center of infinite
Goodness. That great Egyptian Philosopher Moses, seemed to commit a great
Solecism, when he desired with mortal Eyes to view the Face of ^he most High,
for we know that Ingens visibile destruit sensum, the vastness and
disproportion of the Object confounds the Sense, as the Sun dazles the Eyes
that stares upon it.

Happiness contains therefore an adequat proportion of Joy or Delight, upon the
Reflection of the good Circumstances that any one is sensible he is in, and
therefore ^o Creature but Angels and Men can properly be counted happy for;
Faelicitas fundatur in intellectu, Felicity is founded in Intellectuals; so
that its a State or Condition incompetent to, non Intelligent, or sensual
Agents; who acquiess in being easy and at rest, and free from Pain, or a
negative Happiness; in which sense they are happy that are unconcerned. True
Happiness is begotten, conceived and brought forth between the Sentiments of
doing, and o^ receiving good; reciprocally, as between God and Man, and between
Man and Man, or Man and Woman, and is not a mere passive Enjoyment, but active
and diffusive; in which sense I apprehend the genuine Meaning of those Words of
our Creator (who continued Man's Happiness ab initio, and promotes it de futuro)
that it is not good for him to subsist alone, tha^ is not a State of true
Happiness until h^ had accompanied him with an Help-meet, that is commensurate
in all points to Man^ Circumstances and Condition not only o^ prolification,
but chiefly of Conversation and Correspondence. God only is capable of
Happiness within himself; all Creatures incapable, but ab extra, by Derivation,
or Communication from, without himself, I am persuaded, that the happiest
condition of humane Life in this World, is where, and when he finds the least
noise, and pains, and most quiet and peace, for we cant pretend here to arrive
at more than a passive or negative Felicity at best; to be free from Cares and
Fears and Pains; (actual or active Felicity is a dainty reserved for Eternity)
as the Lyrick Poet expresses it: Faelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula,
Nec malis divulsa querimoniis,
The greatest Happiness to us,
Is for to want Obstreperus
Complaints, and Litigations; hence
We maintain good Correspondence.


The ready way to arrive at this Point, is to be as unconcerned in the World as
may be possible; especially in giving Hostages to Fortune, as a wise and
learned Jurisprudent Lord Bacon of the last Age expresses it, that is,
prolification; generally such seeming Cordials become Corrosives; for the
Confirmation whereof, I Will only appeal to general Experience, though I might
quote the Opinion of that Sage Lawyer St. Paul (in this point) who was Pupil to
Gamaliel. The less any one is immerst in the Affairs, Cares, and Hurliburlies
of Life, the more advantage he has abundantly to be happy, easy, and quietly
affected. In short, no Man or Woman in the World are happy, except they are
morally sure that their proper and best Interest is secure; that is, that they
are exempted and freed from any contracted Guilt that will be charged upon
them, for want either of regularly acting according to the Principles of their
Creation, or else for lack of recanting and revoking in sincerity what e're
they have done amiss, which is Tantamount to a non-Peccance; for the Heathen
said truly.

Quem penitet peccasse, pene est innocens.
Who e're does really repent and rue
What he has failed in, does renew.
All Felicity, both above and below, is founded in Innocence and sincerity, and
according to the genuine meaning of all Words and Actions must be the right
Acceptance and Construction on a moral account.

Honi Soit qui mal y pense,
The Evil belongs to him that takes it so.
Happiness lies in a little room, and he that would obtain it, must never think
amiss of any thing or person that he ca^ reasonably think well on; this Jewel
is not to be procured ab extra, from without us, but ab intra, from within. All
outward accidents can never make any on^ happy or unhappy, but Happiness and
Felicity lie within our own reach; in the temper of Mind, and the good
Discipline, Order and Decorum of the intellectual Faculties, and to all effects
and purposes when all is done.

Nemo ante obitum, supremaque fnnera faelix.
There Is no man truly happy till
He Is hence translated from all ill.
V. De Diabolo and Gehenna. Of the Devil and Hell.
NEither of which can I conceive to be any particular Place or Person; the
later being evidently a state of all imaginaginable extremity of misery,
contracted by contumacious Impenitence, under the ^rrecoverable and endless
sense of Divine Displeasure, upon a guilty Conscience, exactly opposite every
way to divine Happiness. The former may be therefore most probably described to
be the Apostat Angels, influencing the Faculties of man's Soul, who has by ill
Customs and Principles, depraved and thereby rendered himself liable and
obnoxious to the Impressions and Temptations of those envious and incorrigibly
wicked and tormented Spirits; who being under the desperate sense and pains of
Divine Vengeance, make it their whole business, finally to ruin Mankind; in
pursuance of the first insolent Invasion made upon our Fore-father in Paradise.
They are Legions, and their Quarters not Local. Devil, is nomen Collectivum,
(...), a Destroyer of, or common Enemy to Mankind, none of those evil Spirits
can hurt us, till they have gained our Consent; wherefore, so long as we retain
the Power over our own Wills, we are out of danger of their Temptations, so
that as a wise man cannot love, so he need not at all fear them while he stands
upon the Guard of his Reason and Religion, which (by that all-sufficient and
divine Grace, that is not wan^ing unto any man, who is not grossy negligent of,
and wanting to himself) are hi^ Shield and Buckler against all Assaults for all
Diabolical Advantages upon us, an^ gained by Fraud and Treachery, and almost
always by Surprizal, before we tak^ a little time to consider on the
Temptation, which is very observable; but the^ must we be sure to hold on, and
perseve^^ in well doing, or we cheat our selve worse than we were cheated
before, which re-minds me of the old Saying.

The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be;
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.
Without our Consent to obliquity, the evil Spirits which haunt us, have no
Pow^ over, or Influence on us, because we a^ both Intellectual or Rational, and
voluntary or free Agents. Deliberate but a while and your Reason will convince
you the his Temptations are weak; and if you act not against your own Judgment,
Almighty Grace, that is ever cooperating with you in your Determinations, will
infallibly make you too hard for them all. A serious and through Persuasion of
the Torments of Hell, one would think, should be the most cogent Argument in
the World, to frighten an intelligent and immortal Agent from the greatest
Pleasures that he can imagine (if they were never so real) may be enjoyed in
the ways of Obliquity and Vice. Plures sunt quos cogit timor, sed meliores quos
ducir Amor. More are they that fear drives, but better they whom Love leads,
said a wise Father of old. As (ex Ungue Leonem) a Lion may be con^ectured at by
his Claw; so may the dreadful Pains of Hell hereafter, by the Flashes and
Twitches of a guilty Conscience, under a through Sense of God's high
Displeasure, and Desperation of Pardon, after final Obstinacy and Impenitence,
which undoubtedly many Desparadoes in ^his World feel the smarts of bitterly;
and that is truly Hell in its Inchoation, or Beginning; when a guilty
Conscience is tho^owly awakned, and those Divine Terrors ^tuck like Arrows of
eternal Vengeance. unto the Soul of such a Malefactor.

VI. De Vitio and Peccato. Of Sin and Vice.
IN the Sense and Opinion of a Jurisprudent, whatsoever is irregular or
obliquity, is castigable or reprimandable; that is whatever deviates or swerves
from its Original Constitution is Vice, and is morally monstrous; if it be an
intellectual Agen^ that departs or transgresses. It is very remarkable, that
all inferior Agents kee^ their Course better and more steddily that Man does:
Sense and Instinct is the^ Conduct; but Reason and Opinion an^ Humor induces
man to degenerate, which i^ strange it should (if duly considered.) Depravation
of Appetite and of Desires seduc^ him, for that which is most useful to him and
most agreeable for him, he seldo^ complies withal, because of that Pravi^ that
the Guise and Custom of his Education or Examples disposes him unto, ^
inconsiderately folllows and pursues.

This vulgar Error is easily corrected (...) our Jurisprudent, If he does but
serious consider, that there can be no real and intellectual Pleasure in
Obliquity, and a ce^tain shame, Remorse and Pain will be su^^ to follow. All
Experience evinces the Truth, that while a Man keeps his Min^ company, the very
present and sensual Enjoyments are truly unpleasant and uneasy, as well as
unwarrantable and vicious. Reflection upon a vicious Word or Deed, will give any
one the best Account of this Consideration, and of the Deformity of that, it is
altogether Nonsense upon a Rational or Moral account, for any one to say Video
meliora, proboque,
and yet, Deteriora sequor --
That is, I see what is better, and approve't;
But yet what is vicious, I love't.
As Plato said of Virtue, that if we did but view Her naked, we should all be
in love with her Features; so may we as truly say of Vice, that if we narrowly
contemplated Her Deformity and ill Consequences, we all should prima Facie,
detest her at the first View, renounce and defy Her; and it is a mere palpable
Cheat by Her Dress and Attire, that at any time She beguiles and seduces a
thinking well-affected Agent. And observe it well, it is unnatural, as well as
improper and unaccountable, for an intelligent and voluntary Agent to consent
unto Obliquity, that is, to what is plainly pernicious and ruinous to his very
Constitution and Principles. Its also less pains for any one to keep himself to
rights, than it is to be Eccentrick and extravagant. To determine our selves
(in the use of our Liberty) to that which is right, or which is wrong, is that
that denominates any Man Vicious or Virtuous, and its the frivolous Suggestions
and Guises of the inconsiderate part of the World, that biasses and perverts
such settled Determinations. --

Sin and Vice interrupts the Intercourse that would otherwise be considerable
between God and Men, between Men and Angels, between Man and Man; for it is the
greatest Deformity in the whole Creation; Man had never been acquainted with
Pain, Sorrow, or with Death, but for this.

To be Vicious or Sinful, is to deviate and swerve from the Rule of Right,
which is implanted in us radically as soon as we come into being. By that
Hegemonicon, our Reason, we come to discern, and discriminate judiciously
between Wrong and Right, Good and Bad, Virtue and Vice; it is not a Quality
that we bring with us into the World; but by ill Habits or Examples we take it
up here; although we are all Born and Conceived of sinful Parents, yet we come
into the World at first (as the Platonists well observe) as abrasa tabula, like
a white piece of Paper, and no more inclinable to Vice than to Virtue, nor
possibly half so much, if well considered. So that (the Taint of Adams
Defection, notwithstanding,) I am of Opinion, that were it not for the
contracted Contagion of ill Examples, ill Customs, and ill Educations that
quickly become Habits (for the Logicians rightly assert, that Habits are
acquired by repeated Actions.) A Man (that is naturally Animal, Mite,
Rationale, and Religiosum too) would easier receive virtuous Impressions (ab
incunabulis) from his Cradle, than vicious, for the former are more homogeneal
to his nature than the latter, for vicious Men themselves, disapprove (in cool
Blood, we find) vicious Courses in others, and choose to entrust or to deal with
virtuous rather than vicious ones in any Matters of importance; which very
thing makes it out plainly, that Vice is Heterogeneal to the Nature and
Constitution of Mankind, as well as every way pernicious. What a Disease or
Sickness is to the Body, that is an Obliquity to the Mind, a Man's Crop-sick
and uneasy under Guilt of Sin; let him say what he please, if his intellectual
Sentiments are awake, and his Conscience not seerd and stupefied; but a just
and sincere man's as bold and healthy as a Lion; whereas a Man of a vicious
Conversation is never easy, but when in a Hurry, and imposes upon, and cheats
his own best Understanding; and whensoe're he gives himself time to consider
and reflect, he is at his Wits End, and confounded; I will but appeal to
individual persons on Experience in this Point. Every one has a Conscience,
and every one's Conscience that listens to its Language does unquestionably
accuse and excuse him by fits and turns, according as he is Virtuously or
Viciously affected in the general Course of his Life: Allowances are and will
hereafter be made to Humane Failings and Miscarriages by Surprisal, or
Inadvertency in many cases; but it is the Tenor and Cours^ of Life, in the main,
that does denominate any Virtuous or Vicious. If Honesty and Sincerity be at
the bottom, a Man has much to say for himself that miscarries; but if
Hypocrisy or obstinate Humou^ conduct him, he is a moral Prodigy, and
emphatically Vicious and Sinful: For it is the Consent of the Mind, and the
Allowance of a Man's self in a Course of Prevarication or Obliquity, that makes
him properly bear the Character of a Wicked or Vicious Person, for there is no
Man lives that is not Extravagant and Sinful, pro hoc Cunum, as the Schoolmen
distinguish (now and then) nor the most Lewd and Vicious, but sometimes says or
does that which is Orthodox and Regular, but the Habit, or general wont of any
one's Conversation is the main Point that denominates; I say, him one or the
other, and generally we may observe, that half the Pains and Cost and Care that
men take to deboach themselves, would serve turn to keep themselve up to the
Rules of Right and of Virtue; remarkable further it is, that Uno dato absurdo
infivita sequuntur, that is, Enormities are very prolifical, for admit but one
profound Absurdity or Obliquity, and ten thousand follow of Course. So that a
Sinner of this sort cannot tell where to stint himself; such is the
Concatenation of Cardinal Vices; the like may be said of Cardinal Virtues, and
therefore Plato said very well, that there is but one Virtue in the World; to
wit, Sanity of Mind, or an healthy Constitution in the Soul. And it is very
observable, that the most vicious People are the idlest of all sorts, the
Heathens could make this Remark, Otia dant Vitia, and without that.

-- Periere Cupidinis Aruis,
Contemptaeque jacent, and sine Luce faces.
It Is Idleness that makes a Vicious Man,
Vices a busy Man seldom trappan;
For he despises Cupids Darts and Bows,
And Sins and Vices vain, and gilded shows. For a thinking and well employed
Person has neither Leisure vacare exiguis, to play with Bables and little
Impertinencies, nor has so little a Soul, as if he were at leisure to debase
himself therewith. Reverence your self, could the Heathen say, and he that does
so well understand himself, and value his Constitution, would scorn to
prostitute his Intellectuals to the greatest Debauchery, were there not other
weighty Motives to diswade him from so mean, so fearful, so unaccountable a
thing as Desection and Degeneration from the Laws of his Maker? and of his
Being is, for that is the least that can be said of Profligation and Vice. If
there were not a future Punishment entailed upon it, the present Mischiefs,
Shame, Pain, Infamy and Damages attendant are enough to frighten from it any
serious and considerate moral Agent in the World; how illiterate or otherwise
than by common Reason, unaccomplished he be notwithstanding.

VII. De Homine and Mundo. Of Man and the World, and Time.
THe World and Mankind commenced together, and therefore being so very near of
Kin, I choose to treat of them promiscuously; Man was made neither for the
World, nor for the Sabbath; but both for Him, and both he and it, for the
Celebration of their Creator.

Man is truly the Worlds Epitomy, and properly therefore called a Microcosm or
little World (for as David long before us observed) (he as it is) is fearfully
and wonderfully composed; insomuch, as the wisest Man that yet has ever lived
(I may boldly say) never competently to his Capacity, understood either the
one, or the other. But therefore doubtless was he planted here, that he might
know and admire both the Workmanship and the Worker. The World is but a little
elder than Man, and it is a Question whether it will last longer than Mankind;
for we may infallibly believe, that before (or upon) its Dissolution Mankind
will be translated from it. -- But while we are embodied, it is our Business to
know and practice so much of it, and of our Concerns within it, that we may (
cum toto valde, which few do) be thoroughly prepared and qualified to leave it
somewhat better than we found it. Our Pilgrimage or State of Probation and
Trial here, is only designed for an honorable Exit, or Departure out of it.
Our main Affair within it, is to be doing all the Good which the narrow
Confines of our Beings or Lives here will afford, in points of Justice and
Generosity, Compassion and Charity. Do but observe how, and what our Lord and
Master (that is our grand Exemplar) did, and behaved himself for thirty years
together, and we shall quickly understand what we are, and what to do, before
we go hence to be seen no more.

1. Contrive not to be Rich and great, if it happen to us, we have the bigger
Talent to account for.

2. Be contented with what overruling and good Providence allows you, and
manage that to the best Advantage. Envy not, nor covet Aliunde.

3. Be not slothful in your Calling, but vigorously contrive to be rich in good
Works, and exemplary in your Conversation, for Talking is not your principal
Concern here. Observe an excellent Notion of Seneca's, Sic loquere, sic vive;
sic vive cum Hominibus tanquam Deus videat; sic loquere cum Deo tanquam Homines
audiant. So converse with Men, as that you may be sure God is a Spectator; so
apply your self in Colloquies to God, as that you may suppose all Men to be
your Auditors.

Remember (and be sure to believe) that both Mankind and the World are speedily
to part, and therefore make use of it accordingly. The Veins and Blood in our
Bodies, do import the Rivers in the Sea* the Rocks and Stones imply the Bones*
the Nerves and Sinues intimate the Mines the Hairs the Grass and Trees, etc.
The Analogy whereof, expresses to us, that (...) the Rivers run into the Ocean,
the Stone and Rocks resolve to Earth, the Mines and Trees and other Herbage,
blend and moulder into Dust again; so must most quickly, Mankind be dissolved
into, Chicantee. Whilst therefore we converse with it,
Let us approve our selves, as fit
For our Dominion here; and
As useful as the Sea or Land,
By naturally serving the Ends
Of the Creation and our Friends.
That is in plainer English, to act in pursuance of your true and proper
Interest, which is to be conversant about, and palpitate after our Sovereign
Proprietor or Creator, for this peculiar Faculty implanted in Man, is his
peculiar Property and Reserve, that planted him here in the World, for God and
his good Pleasure, which is our Duty, is most knowable of any thing in Nature;
propter plenitudinem Entitatis (as the Schoolmen say) because of the fullness
of his Existence; whereas shallow Notions avoid our Understandings, not
Comprehensible, but Cognoscible, I say it is Demonstrable; thus because we are
sure we could never put our selves into (in as much as we cannot continue our
selves in our) being, wherefore somewhat bigger and better every way must do
it; and also because we cannot give any account of many fundamental parts of our
Constitutions, as of our Walking, Talking, and of the Variety and Adequatness
of one thing to another; but by resorting to an intelligent Agent, of infinite
and transcendent Perfections -- The peculiar Instinct of human Nature, is to
know that he has a God; upon the same ground that we disown him, we must deny
our selves, for he is not preceptible materially, but intellectually. Ignorance
of him, were not culpable, nor to live without Sense of him Criminal, if he
were not knowable, nor to be found out; for our Faith is founded upon natural
Knowledge, for its impossible that we could ever give credit to we know not
who, nor what; nor can there be any Obligation to that whereof we cannot be
sensible and intelligent; and in truth, we can never be at Hearts ease one hour
in the World, without a Sense of, and Regard to him, nor without that, is any
sublunary Object available, adequat or satisfactory; in sano Sensu, and our
very Faculties themselves will shrivel up, and dwindle away, if not exercised
on, and drawn out toward him; for to know him is Life eternal, in his Works as
well as Appointments and Institutions. This Argument every Man carries in his
own Breast, that his Mind was made to move toward, and to delight in, and be
conversant with him and his Workmanship in the World; but all this is not much
to purpose, without a Submission and Reconciliaton to him, from whom we have so
desperately apostacied; this is our Enjoyment of him in the World, which
Fruition consists not in Contemplation of, but in Motion and Action toward him
whom we hold all under.

Man discerns not that (Spiritus intus alens) Original Author of his Being and
Subsistence by any sensual Contract, but by the Virtues and Qualifications of
his Mind, and we are not locally distant from him, while in the World, but by
Disaffection and Disloyalty. It Is the last Form that makes and denominates any
Creature what it properly is, as the Induction of a Rational Soul upon the
Sensitive Faculties makes us intellectual and moral Agents: So the
Superinduction of Divine Graces makes Christians. It Is in vain therefore to
name or own him, and not to depart from Obliquity and Vice.

Now consider of the World, what it truly is, and what use it is off to Men, and
we shall find it generally mistaken; its an admirable Fabric, and contrivance
of infinite Wisdom and Power, erected and framed or an Instance of Divine
Omnipotence and Wisdom, that Man may receive from it all reasonable Helps and
Advantages, in order to his Adoration and Service of his Sovereign Lord and
Proprietor, and of reasonable Accommodations for his Relief, Support, and easy
Passage through his Pilgrimage here, unto an eternal Mansion of Happiness and
Glory, after his Dissolution; and whoever makes another use thereof, mistakes
and misunderstands both himself and it. Wherefore our blessed Creator has made
many more Creatures for Man's Delight and Recreation, than Necessity for his
absolute Subsistence, that we might be the easilier induced to Praise, Honor
and Adore such a Benefactor, and not to be swallowed up in sensitive
Enjoyments, but use them as Auxiliaries, to our main ends of Gods Honor, and
our Duty to preserve good Health and Serenity both of Mind and Body.

The World was made for Man, and so was the Sabbath, and not Man for them, or
their Sakes; wherefore, though it be every Man's Temptation, as well as his
Accommodation in Statu Viatoris; that is, so long as he sojounrs in it, yet was
it not designed to be any Man's whole Business, either to employ him about, or
divert him: but to point him out unto, and to assist him considerably in other
manner of subsequent and immortal Seize. We serve a kind of an
Apprenticeship here to learn the Trade that we are to follow, World without
End: And the youngest of all Mankind will be soon enough out of his Time, to be
well enough qualified for next Stage. He that thoroughly understands himself,
will be sure to understand the World to all Effects and Purposes, in pursuance
of an approaching Eternity.

VIII. De Coelibatu and Conjugio. Of a Single, and of a Married Life.
CRitical it concerns us to be in the right Understanding, which of these two
contrary Conditions of Life are most Eligible and Advantageous, especially
since we are bound to believe that it is not good for a Man to be alone, and
that it is good for a Man not to touch a Woman; for doubtless in some cases,
it is best for a Man to be alone; and in other cases, good enough to touch Women
in Sano Sensu, and not only lawful, but expedient and advisable to cleave unto
her Intus and in cute.

But a Sage Jurisprudent will narrowly look on the Mare before he leap into the
Saddle, for abundance of Enjoyments, Postures and Conditions of Life, that are
lawful enough, are woundily inconvenient, and bloodily inexpedient. And it was
the Opinion of our Lord and Savior, and likewise of the greatest of all the
Apostles in this point, that an Eunuch or Celibate Condition is most Eligible;
if a Man have Power over his own Will, having no necessity thereunto, better of
two Evils, to choose the lesser, says that great Apostle; that is, to Marry,
than to Burn; But I could never find a Necessity for either Conjugal and
Prolifical Cares and Pains are very rarely, if ever recompensed with the Sweets
of Expectation or Fruition; and that is St. Paul's chief Reason against
Matrimony. 1 Cor. 11. And another is given by him there too. ss. Restraint of
their Liberty, which next to Health, is the richest Enjoyment; the Hazard of a
Shipwreck in the Adventure of Wedlock, is so great, that very few Wise and
Jurisprudently Religious Persons will run the Risk, without extraordinary
Prospects of more than probable collateral Advantages; for as the wise Italians
say proverbially, there is more goes to Housekeeping than four bare Legs in a
Bed (Innumerable are the Instances of such aforesaid Wrecks and Ruins of
Families and Persons, by inadvertent Attempts of that nature.

Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautem.
Happy's the Son that takes warning from Brother,
And the Misfortunes of Father and Mother.
The common Inducements to that heavy though honorable Yoke, are,

1. To prevent Fornication, which often fails us, as Experience assures us.

2. An Establishment of Name and blood, which also seldomer hits than misses;
it commonly happens with such begotten Progenies, as the Poet Laureat of old
observed truly of ill gotten Fortunes. ss. De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius
haeres.
Estates that are not honestly
Got -- before the Grandchild die.


How perfunctory Inducements are such to a Jurisprudent, to make him fling a
Dye for his hap-hazard Felicity, whereof he is already seized in his Demesne (if
he think fit) and if it happen otherwise, let any wise Man dwell but a few
Minutes upon the Thoughts of the Insignificancy to himself of such piece of
Heraldry, and he will soon resolve the Point; and for an Authority or President
in this Point, I will quote the positive Opinion of the Sagest Jurisprudent,
and Religious Philosopher in the World; Ecclesiastes himself, who upon all
imaginable Scrutiny and fullest Experiments, made of all Matters sublunary, or
subsolary (to use his own Phrase) and more particularly, our Case in hand,
could not discover one among ten thousand fit for the the Purpose, to be
touched accordingly; and whether in our days they are more Numerous, or we more
Sagacious; Credat Judaeus Appella, non ego; and very good Reason have we to
think that St. Paul had the Spirit of God (as he did verily think himself) when
he declares 1 Cor. 7 that that Man that thus resolves in his own Mind, that he
will be Celibate, is the Wiser and Happier of the two. But to make that Yoke as
easy (when worn) as may be, the same authentic Author, does by particular
Command from Heaven, enjoin them not to part. -- Let not him, says he, put away
Her, but if She depart from him, let her be sure to continue unmarried, or be
reconciled to her Husband, whom it is, or ought to be her principal worldly
Care and Business to please, and to comply with, and to yield Homage and Fealty
to him, as her Lord, her Superior, her Crown; as it is his Part to Honor and
Cherish, and tenderly Protect and Regard her; until by her Separation,
Treachery, Defiance, or notorious and profligate Exorbitances, she do forfeit
that Allegiance, Countenance and Protection: which you plainly perceive by the
Premises, amounts unto a Dissolution of the Marriage Contract, pro tanto if not
pro toto, in part, if not wholly; for a Divorce a Mensa and Thoro, as our
Municipal Lawyers determine it, is not a Divorce a Vinculo, viz. a Bed and
Board separation, is not a Cancelling the Bond of Wedlock. Such Considerations
questionless as these, made the Disciples of our great Gamaliel to conclude,
that it is best for a Man not to Marry; which their Blessed Lord and Master
(not denying their Inference) replies unto, by waving a close Answer to that
Conclusion, that all Men have not Power over their own Wills in that Matter.
Several Expediencies confessedly, may induce a wise Man often (and oftener
Fools) to wear a Conjugal Yoke, which at best, ought in my Opinion, in one at
least, if not on both sides, to be very well lined, to prevent a bloody
Gawling. Wittily and appositly hereupon, said a Facetious Poet in the Days of
Yore.

Quid pluma Levius? Pulvis: quid pulvere? ventus.
Quid vento? Mulier: Quid Muliere? nihil.
Fons irae est Mulier; sed habes duo tempora laeta.
Cum jacet in Thalamo, cum jacet in Tumulo.
What Is lighter than a Feather? Dust
Lighter than that be Wind needs must,
Lighter than Wind, is a Woman,
But what is lighter than her, knows no Man,
Displeased and angry always,
Only you have two joyful Days;
The Day when she becomes your Bride;
The Day wherein this Wo-man died.
The best Antidotes against an Uxoriou^ Contagion, that my Genius and
Experience can at present suggest, are these six.

1. A full Employment, or vigorou^ Profession.

2. Constant and competent Exercises Athletick.

3. Physic and Phlebotomy, or Ascetique Discipline.

4. Frequent Fasting, and Nocturnal Vigilations.

5. Diversions by intellectual Recreations.

6. Frequent and fervent Ejaculations and Meditations, under Retirements, and
declining Feminine Conversations.

Which last Suggestion alone, well managed and pursued, will prove (you will
soon find) of it self a Panpharmacon against that triple Venom of Humanity, ss.
the Lust of the Flesh, of the Eyes, and Pride, or self-affectation, while you
impassionately and unprejudicately weigh in the Balance of your Reason, how
short of your Expectations, and how insignificant in their utmost Prospect,
such sensual Fruitions must infallibly prove in proportion to the Hazard and
Pains in acquiring and continuing them, and to those noble Satisfactions and
solid Titillations that intellectual and rarefied Enjoyments and Delights
render and afford to the Soul and Mind of an intelligent and voluntary Agent
(as Man is) who is contrived and framed on purpose for other manner of Delights
and Pleasures; even i^ this our short and present State of Probation and Trial
upon Earth; which Notion possibly might promp that facetious Virtuoso of our
Age, Sir Jo. Suckling thus uncouthly to express himself, ss.

That Monster Expectation feeds too high
For any Wo-man e're to satisfy.
Wherefore, in sober Sadness (Thom) I dye,
If once I hear my Mistress say but I,
Its Letchery for Her Me to deny.
It was a considerable Philosopher and Jurisprudent of mine Acquaintance, his
Motto, which to my knowledge, he, to astonishment, in the prime of his Years,
accordingly practiced with admirable Success. ss. Est virtus placidis
abstinuisse bonis.

Thus applied.

Hurt not your Head with Venus, or Adonis,
Knock not your Brains out against where no Bone is.
St. Hierom, in one of his Epistles to his Nephew, inserts a Facetious Apothegm
hereupon. ss.

Adam, Sampsonem, Davidem, Petrum, Salomonem,
Decepit Mulier: Quis modo tutus erit?
Woman deceived Adam, Peter, Sampson.
(Who can be safe) after great Solomon?
Another modern Author eximious enough, gravely glosses thus upon the same Text.

Good Wines are unadulterate,
Of Women the contrary State,
Most of which are Sophisticate.
With all our servile Pains, what do we win,
But (an ill-favored and uncleanly) sin?
A thing so fordid and short-lived,
(If all Mankind may be believed)
That Venus's Joys (as well as She)
May very well be said to be
From the neglected Foam derived.
Whom would (that painted Toy, called) Beauty move
Whom could it e're persuade to Court, and Love?
That once a Woman's Heart had seen
(Oh! but no Light does thither come)
And viewed her perfectly within,
When he lay shut up in her Womb.
Or I Am a very Dunce, or Womankind
Is a most unintelligible thing.
I can no Sense, nor no Contexture find;
Nor their loose Parts to any Method bring
I cannot tell what the Learneder may see,
For my Part, they are strange Hebrew things to me.
Howbeit, if it happen by Seduction, o^ Inadvertency, or otherwise, that a Man
be so indiscreetly overtaken and entangle let him look forward (like a
Water-ma^ though he row backward, as its mirac^lous if he do not, unless both
Interest, I^dustry and a Patrimony like stiff Sails be^ him up against the Tide
of unforeseen co^tingent Miscarriages and Crosses.

Let him resolve to make the best he c^ of a bad Bargain, but be very wary ^
prevent a common Contrivance now ^ days in Fashion, called separate Main^nance,
which if he live to see any of t^ Hostages, he perhaps has given to Fortu^ his
Legitimate Issue arrive at twenty years of age, he, ten to one, will find
violently attempting to wrest out that Staff out of his Hands, which often
proves the speedy Demolishment of the whole Family; especially where they
rashly and jurisimprudentially marry Parentibus inconsultis, without the
Privity or Consent of Parents; nor be not by any means Wife-ridden, to be
wheedled out of your Wealth and Wits at once, from such Experimental Treachery
and Baseness, Libera te Domine -- I pray God deliver thee.

IX. De Ratione and Opinione. Of Reason and Opinion.
ALL Persuasions and Opinions that are not founded in Reason, are but Chicanree
or Nugatory, and consequently all Actions performed in pursuance of them,
pernicious and morally unaccountable; and upon reflection on them, renders any
intellectual voluntary Agent very chagreen, disagreeable and uneasy; when As
the Bell clinks (as the Proverb says) so the Fool thinks; that is, one that
acts pro Imperio, and not pro Ratione Rei, out of Humor or Fancy, and not
according to his Judgment and Reason, as the Poet excellently expresses it,
Video meliora proboque, yet Deteriora sequor.

While I discern, and well approve
The better things, yet worse I love.
This often happens where willful Humor and fond Imaginations are predominant
and usurp (over Reason) the Government of our intellectual Faculties, the
(...), by which we are only to be controuled. The wisest Man of the World
assures us, that the Spirit (or Reason) of a Man, is the Candle of the Lord,
that is, the Super-intendent Luminary or Directory. One of the Fathers has
very well observed that Opinionum Varietas, and Opinantium Unitas non sunt'
(...). The Variety of Opinions, and the Unity of the Opiniators are not
inconsistent with good Will and accord, although it generally happens
otherwise; that is, that difference in Sentiments, begets a distance in
Affection, which comes to pass for want of good and rational Consideration of
our own Constitutions; for it is as natural, and as necessary and behoofful for
the common Interest of Mankind; that their Conceptions should be as various
almost as their Countenances, whereof you never are to expect to meet with any
two exactly alike in all Lineaments and Proportions: neither in Minds nor in
Faces. For an Opinion of Want breeds a greedy Desire in the midst of Plenty, he
that reckons more upon what he would have, or fancies he wants then what we
already have or enjoy, there is no end of that Reckoning, and even that which he
has (in possession) he actually wants, when he is of Opinion that its not
enough; the Opinion or Imagination, and the Appetite, help to cousen one
another.

2. Be therefore ruled by your rational Senses, their simple Report of what is
enough, allowing very little for Custom and Convenience, and for things within
your easy Reach, and then you will not be amused about things remote and hard to
come by. To be content with a little, is an unspeakable Treasure. He that
eagerly seeks for Satisfaction without himself, makes his Content to depend
upon things that are quite out of his Power. Bona si sua norit. Here Is your
Felicity that our Spirits need not tire themselves in, seeking for the full
Satisfaction of its reasonable Desire; if we have but so much Discretion and
Jurisprudence, as to desire only so much as is reasonable and fit for us to
enjoy.

Take a short Scheme of the complete and best Condition of a Jurisprudent, viz.
a Contemplative, Active and Fruitive, Life, Leisure enough to speculate things
that are Good, Great and Delightful; Business enough to render you Just,
Useful, and not fatigueing below the Souls Dignity. A Competency of
Accommodations, freedom from Contempt and Oppression, with Peace and Prudence,
Temperance and Innocence, tasting Human Life's Contentments, and not cleaving
to them; all this seasoned with a serene Mind, and healthy Body, and a good
Conscience, ever aspiring to a further Felicity, and possessing it in part
already by a lively Hope and Sense of Divine unintelligible Peace. A
Jurisprudent's Work's not to frame a Fanatical Felicity here below, but to take
Matters as he finds them, and to use them accordingly.

Its a moral Madness to be sharp set for any thing but what is really our own,
and which, when once we are possessed off, we cannot be disseis'd or divested off
against our Will. viz. the right and genuine Knowledge and Love of our Creator,
and Union to him, Friendship with him, which naturally breeds a Resemblance of
him, a Serenity and Satisfaction of Mind, and unwearied Constancy in well
doing. -- Here (if any where) we may let loose the Reins to Passion, Appetite
and Desire, and err in that Love, if you can, the quite contrary State,
whereunto is Diabolical and Hellish, to wit, ever uneasy, and in a Hurry of
Mind, fluctuating under a stinging Sense of Guilt and Pain of Conscience,
doubting, if not despairing of any Comfort or Ease, and thereby running on into
desperate Courses. This is truly Hell upon Earth. and such a Person may be
really said to be possessed, forlorn, and agitated by Devils, having let go his
Hold of God and a good Conscience, and made Shipwreck of rational Hopes and
well grounded Persuasions, which nothing upon Earth can restore him unto, till
he return to Duty, and sincerely defy all immortal Acts and Contrivances, and
thereby give check Mate unto Satan.

Reason is a wise Man's Rudder, that steers him in every Motion, and all
Affairs, Secular or Spiritual, but Opinion, Humor or Fancy, will run him upon
a thousand quick Sands before he is aware; common Experience every where
convinces every thinking Man of the Truth hereof. Nothing in or out of the
World is against Reason (though above it) but a Sot; as that Saying is very
remarkable and true; that Scientia nullum habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.

Knowledge (know thou this for once)
Never had a Foe, but what is a Dunce.
We commonly despise an Opiniator more than any body, and truly count him ^ Fop
in Effigy, because he consults not at all the Reason of the Thing, but acts ex
improviso, or extempore; that is, inconsiderately and rashly, whereas Reason
would conduct him to Modesty and Discretion, and at least, to act with a
Warrant and judicious Impress, so that then the Conclusion will correspond with
the Premises, which otherwise it cannot.

An Opiniator has nothing to say for himself, but an arbitrary Impetuosity,
that gives him an Enthusiastical Impulse, so that he cannot as a moral Agent,
expect any other Consequence, than hap at a Venture may produce; but a serious
rational Agent has other motives Ends and Expectations; whether he be mistaken
by his Measures or not, he may plausibly look the World of Mankind in the Face,
and expect to be further encouraged, which an Opiniator has no pretense unto at
all.

But on the other side, a Man of Sense (as we now phrase it) or rather a Man of
Reason and Jurisprudence, as we call it, scorns to comply with any fond
Imagination of his own (either Conception or Adoption) that is not founded upon
the Square of Reason and Jurisprudence, for we say, and will justify it that
Lex (or Reason which we call all one) plus Lauditur quando Ratione probatur.
He Is worse by half than a Madman, that explodes the Suggestions of Reason,
because they that are non compotes, or Mad, understand not Reason, if they did,
they would not deviate so much into fond Imagination and Opiniatorism, or
Fanaticism; which is bona fide, Madness (in sano sensu) in the proper Notion,
its proper for them to act pro imperio, Arbitrarily; but to Men in their Wits,
pro Ratione rei, Rationally. Not but that an Opinion grounded upon sollid
Reason, is the greatest Oracle extant in the visible World; but we treat of
Opinion, as a thing generally in statu separato from Reason; for no question
but an Exert, or an Opinion exhibited upon very fundamental and mature
Considerations; a Person of Jurisprudence, is (beyond the Popes Infallibility)
a Veracity at least, till it be controverted and laudably disapproved; for its
Nonsense to suppose that any thing in the World Moral which is not Radical, or
a fundamental Verity, may not be suspected till violently discussed; for all
Mankind are under the Laws of Reason, (think what you will) and whosoever he be
that swerves from that Rule, is a clear Apostate; not that herein we deny, but
profoundly assert the Concurrence of the Divine Superintendency all along, for
subintelligitur quod non deest, says the Jurisprudent, that is, it is to be
presupposed without whom, we can neither come into, nor continue in, nor go out
of being; but that Thought or Conceit that is founded in, or upon the Reason of
the Party, let it be what it will, is pardonable if amiss, and if not amiss,
it is right; so that Quacunque via data, (id est) take it which way you will, a
man of such a Temper, as is resolved to be ruled by Reason, that is, the best
thoughts he can acquire, is a man of Sense, and may appear upon the Theater
like a moral Entity boldly.

An Opiniator steers by no Compass at all, and therefore is but Ridiculus Mus,
a ridiculous Mouse, and not fit to keep a Man of Sense or Reason company. But
who ere gives himself and others a good account of his Management, is a
Companion for an Angel himself: God himself so deals with us; do but observe
how he parlys with Cain upon his Fratricide; What ail'st thou to look so
bloodily? have you not reason to think you should be acceptable as well as your
Brother if you do Reason, (or do well? and otherwise does not sin lie at your
door? And so appeals to the House of Israel, whether their Courses they took
were not unequal or irrational, and whether his ways and proceedings with them
were not fair and equal, Jer.

Wherefore for the easier rectification of false Opinions, and better
improvement of righter and rational Conceptions, please to entertain a few
Suggestions, to prevent your Dejection or Degeneration by adverse, as also
Transportation, or Corruption, or Prevarication, by prosperous Occurrences that
happen.

1. That the true and real Cause of every good or bad Case or Circumstance,
arises ab intra (from within us) except some few Casualties, where Prudence
takes no place to help or hinder. And therefore be provided with a firm temper
of Spirit, and stumble at no Stone; for it is truly said, that a wise man never
wonders, but makes the best of every thing. Et mihi Res, non me rebus
submittere conor.
said the sage Poet Horace of old. That is, To serve himself of each Affair,
And suffer none to be his Snare.


All Occurrences have two Handles, and some good is extractable out of the
worst; which is presupposed by St. Paul's Injunction, To Rejoice evermore; and
to count it all joy when we fall into many tribulations, to wit, when we
wittingly bring them not upon our own Heads, but they are the results of other
folks Contrivances. Things that depend not upon us, have no reason to make
violent Impressions in us, as Riches, Friends, Honor, Beauty, Life, etc. But
as Epictetus very well observes, All our Actions are in our own power, as
Opinion, Desire, Aversion, etc. So that if we look on all that depends not on
us, to be nothing to us, we can loose nothing, nor need be much afflicted by
any thing in this World without, or about us: but as to the World above and
within us, the Case is otherwise. Desires or Wishes are the Fontanels of our
Weal or Woe; and therefore we may be well assured, that besides Nature, there
can be no necessity at all of any thing.

So that (upon the whole Matter) though some, and that very considerably literate
in some Sciences, cannot tell how to allow Reason a considerable place of
Conduct in Religion, for want of their due Philosophical Consideration of the
(...), as Calvin and others perhaps are tardy in, without reflection upon them,
yet without all peradventure in the Judgment of our Jurisprudent, he that goes
on further in any sort of Knowledge or Practice, be it Law, Gospel, or Medicks,
than the reason of the thing will amount to, is not at all a man of Science, or
Sense, or Sanity, in our apprehension. Let the World or himself in due time
reprimand him, and set him to rights; for quoad nos he is not Rectus in Curio.
He Is by no means orthodox, till he resolves to be controuled in all Causes, and
among all Persons, Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical, by the Suggestions of,
not Opinion, but Reason. Prove. 24. Reason is that Spirit of a Man that Solomon
calls God's Candle in him, by the Light whereof every man is obliged by all
Laws Divine and Humane, to conduct and steer himself in all Cases. But Opinion
which abstracted from Reason, is but Humor or Fancy, which like an Ignis
fatuus will run a man into a thousand Bogs, and intoxicate him unawares.

In a wise man Voluntas semper sequitur ultimum dictamen Intellectus, as the
Schoolmen say: but rash and inconsiderate men's Wills run foremost, like to
Canis festinans, as the Proverb expresses it, which coecos parit Catulos; that
is, The Whelps of the heedless or overhasty Dogs are therefore born blind.
Such are the abortive or blind Issues of an hair-brained moral Entity, that
looks not with the Eyes of his intellectual Faculties, before he leaps into any
Enterprise, and is therefore generally blunder'd and baffled in his expectation
of Success, or a good End.

X. De Superbia and Humilitate, and Patientia. Of Pride, and Humility, and
Patience.
THE Logicians say well, That Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.
Contraries placed in opposition do best illustrate themselves: whence it is
that I make the Antithesis between Humility and Pride, viz. the best and worst
Adjuncts that belong to humane Nature. Of the first, we have the greatest
Pattern that ever was in the World, our Lord and Savior. Of the latter, the
Devil is the best Instance that I can think of, who lost eternal Happiness
(upon that account) irrecoverably. An humble man is too hard for the Devil. A
proud man is the Devil's Darling, and fit for any thing of monstrous
Immorality, and as easily tempted to prevaricate, as the other difficult. He
that is not a very humble Person, can neither be a wise man, nor a true
Christian. Even to a proud man himself is an humble man acceptable, but a proud
man to none but the Devil; for it is our Savior's Motto, ss. meek and lowly,
but it is Lucifer's Emblem, ss. proud and lofty: And though this be Communis
eruditio, that is, vulgar Learning, yet is it as hard to find a man of that
Character, as it was in Solomon's days to find a virtuous Woman, to wit, not
one of a thousand.

An humble man is tractable and docible, conversable and useful; but a proud is
Telluris inutile pondus; insignificant and troublesome; one that cannot tell what
he would be at; a nothing to purpose. A proud man is a moral Prodigy, and the
most unaccountable Excrescence in Nature; a thing senseless and irrational; an
high-minded Author; fears nor loves not God nor Man, but is his own Center, and
Eccentrick to the whole World besides.

The most High defies and scorns the proud, but has declared to espouse the
humble, and to teach and encourage the meek and lowly. A thinking serious man
might well wonder what any man can be proud of, if he considers but whence and
how he came into Being, and of what compounded, and how quickly he will be
reduced to Dust, and what that is which he can call his own, and what an
indigent Creature he is, and every way dependant, and a borrower. Pride is an
usurped Affectation, of somewhat or other that we have no property in at all;
but Humility is a due sense and opinion of our precarious and necessitous
Constitutions and Circumstances. Besides it is as well unnatural, as
unwarrantable and ridiculous, for any man under any Circumstances to be proud
and self-conceited, as if he were or had somewhat more than any of his
Fellow Creatures can pretend to; but Humility renders a man useful and
acceptable unto himself, and to all Mankind. It Is rarely to be found that a
proud man lives happily, or dies honorably; he is uneasy to himself, (upon
reflection) as well as to all that he converses with, for he is naturally
contentious; but an humble man is at peace and in safety with the whole World.
A proud man is impatient; an humble very patient under all kind of
Circumstances, which is next to Charity, the predominant Virtue of all:
wherefore it is truly said, Superanda omnis Fortuna ferendo est.
Ill Accidents are conquered by enduring.

And to this purpose Horace dictates excellently: Durum est; sed levius fit
patientia
Quicquid corrigere, est nefas.
Though it is a difficult Lesson, yet thereby are all Burdens made lighter
abundantly. An impatient or proudman is a moral mad man, Laesa patientia fit
furor: when his patience is worn out, he becomes furious or mad; hence they are
conjoined by our Savior, Be humble and bear my yoke. But a proud and impatient
Sinner grows of course fearless, desperate, and haughtier, indocible, and
troublesome both to himself, and the whole Family of God.

Pride is the first and worst Sin in the World, and older than the World it
self; Humility the last (though not the least) Virtue: we put it on to be clothed
with it; it is like a Girdle, that fortifies and preserves all the other, to
which a promise of Instruction is annexed; but the proud rejected, and sent away
empty. An humble man is fit Company for any man; a proud for none, because he
really (whatever he pretends) accounts himself to every man better: the humble
and patient is willing to converse with any man, Publican or Sinner, though he be
counted a Glutton, or a Wine-bibber, all is one.

It Is much to the purpose to suggest to you the Motto of my Lord Chief Justice
Cook, Patiens qui prudens, that is, He that is a patient man, is a right
Jurisprudent. Of the same Religion is (no doubt of it) our Author, that thus
exerts himself to his Son. Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia juris, here
seems very applicable. A man of Patience or Humility (which at this time of day
is all one) is one that has the advantage of the whole World; but a proud and
impatient Fellow is not fit Company for a Tailor, or an honest Cobbler. Let but
any man observe the Temper of a man greatly proud and impatient, (for he that
is one must be the other) and he will find that he neither steers an easy Course
to his own satisfaction, nor his Neighbors; so that the World may truly count
him a burden to them, and have a good riddance of him, whenever he is
departed: but a patient humble man is lamented and missed.

Patience, I confess, is a hard Chapter to read in some Cases; as when one's
exasperated and justly incensed by his own Flesh and Blood, especially
Dependants and Inferiors, after perhaps he has a long time exerted all the
Clemency, Indulgence, and hospitality imaginable, however the Lyrick Laureat
Heathen Poet has long before us observed it, that as I said before Durum est,
-- Sed Levius fit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere, est nefas.


To bear what we cannot justify our selves to correct, nor the Aggressors to
inflict, is very hard, but yet our Load becomes much the lighter, by enduring
it with humble Patience, and till an humble man's Patience be stretched upon
the Tenterhooks excessively, he will not be outrageous, notwithstanding the old
Maxim of Laesa Patientia fit furor.

When Patience has been long time hurt,
Mildness it self will have a flurt.
Humility and Patience is the greatest Possession in the World, to purchase a
Man Credit and Ease both within and without him. But an Impatient proud Fellow,
is scorned both by them that are his Rivals, and all Men else, and is really
telluris inutile pondus, the most insignificant Tool in Nature, and a Burden
to the Universe.

No Man can be Wise, nor at hearts Ease, no Happy, either in this nether
World, nor in the upper Regions hereafter, that is not Humble and Patient, both
in Prosperity, as well as Adversity. In all Circumstances, and there is less to
be said in Vindication of Pride, than any Vice and Obliquity; besides he is a
Tyrant, an Usurper, and every ways uncouth and unacceptable, who is Impatient
and Proud, and no good color of reason can be given for it; as for
Covetousness, and Wantonness, and Prodigality, and other Enormities there in
many cases may be some given.

So then, a right Jurisprudent is a Man of Sense and Reason; an intellectual
moral Agent, that is well acquainted with, and practices the Laws of God, of
Nature and of Reason, that acts not pro imperio, arbitrarily, but humbly,
honestly, and conscientiously converses with all sorts of Clients, whether in
forma Pauperis, or Divitis, Rich, or Poor, Publicans or Sinners, studies the
future and eternal, as well as the secular and present Cases and Concerns of
both himself and them, pro Ratione rei, according to the Reason of the Thing.
He is Just and Generous, Compassionate and Charitable, and well affected to all
Men, and Sometimes arrives to that Attainment of Jurisprudence, as to make him
an Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven; upon which Principles and Practice, is
founded that inward and outward Peace, Content and Satisfaction of Heart in all
his Possessions and Reversions, as well as Progress and Improvement in the
Municipal Laws of that Realm, where he Resides, Professes and Practices.

XI. De Pace and Contentatione. Of Peace and Content.
THE Crown of all Earthly Enjoyments, is Quiet and Satisfaction; Man was never
contrived for a Hurli-burly or Storm. This is the Corner (as well as Top) Stone
of all our Seize.

Content is all we aim at with our Store,
If that be had with little, what needs more?
This State or Temper of Mind does not consist in Quantity but Quality; for we
cannot but observe, that generally they that enjoy the least in quantity have
most Peace and Satisfaction.

Without Peace and Content, all that any Man is or has, is irksom and trouble
some; and if this be in conjunction with our Enjoyments, we cannot but be happy
enough to pity Caesar -- witness Alexander the Great his Distemper, Aestuat
infoelix augusto in limite mundi; his unsatiable Humor could not be (at ease
and) contented with the whole Universe. We need not tell you, that he who is
(...), the Prince of Peace, gave this Bequest unto his dearest Friends in the
World, whom he left at his Departure behind him, as the choicest Legacy he
could think fit to leave with, and give to them And the blessed Tidings thereof
unto Mankind, is called the Gospel of Peace, which Word in the Hebrew Tongue
imports all manner of good.

To acquire which Thing, bad and good Men do frequently, we know, run the
Risque of both their Lives and Fortunes for pax quaeritur Bello, it is the end
of War; Rest or Peace is the Center of all kind of Fluctuations and
Litigations, Military and Civil.

Whoever would obtain this invaluable Gem, must have the Command both over his
own Passions and Appetites also, and learn to divert (or cautelously extricate)
himself from all Provocations unto Feuds or Animosities of all sorts. Prove.
14.44. A Man that once has arrived to this Temper, will be satisfied from
himself, if you will believe the wisest Man in the World.

This is a Principle, will steer any Man that has it comfortably and
confidently through any danger, and enable him with a decent Equanimity to
entertain good and ill Successes and Events, that happen to him in his
Pilgrimage.

True Peace and Content, is Gods Kingdom within us. This was a principal
Lineament in the Portracture of Gods Image, impressed on Man in Paradise; till he
broke that Peace, he maintained an excellent Intelligence with his Lord and
Master. Its impossible to express this true Divine Peace and Content, because
it surpasses all Understanding, and all other counterfei^ Peaces are mere
Cheats. That Is only true Hearts-ease, Content and Peace tha^ we mean and talk
of, that is founded in a rational Sense of our Friendship with, o^
Reconciliation to our Creator, by the Passion and Intercession of our Redeemer
and of the Enjoyment of his Love an^ Kindness, and Reciprocality of Return to
him, by hearty Ejaculations toward, an^ Ruminations upon him; which Sentimen^
aforesaid, must be united to real sincerit^ of Mind, which makes us a good
Conscience, and gives us mighty Assurance i^ our Applications unto, or
Conversation with both God and Man.

Note, that true Peace with God, an^ Discord with our Neighbors are
incomp^tible, without Peace on Earth, and Goodwill unto all Mankind; I cannot
imagine any Man can be truly at peace with Go^nor consequently content in his
Min^ The former is an Argument rather of h^ latter; he that is not Friends with
his Br^ther, must needs be at Enmity with (...) Maker; but 1 Cor. 6. St. Paul's
Lesson h^ need of some Distinction to hold water (^ every general Rule has some
Exceptions) ^ that it is more advisable to be defraud^ than to go to Law.

A peaceable and a wise man his Character is, To hear all, to edify by most,
to reflect upon none, to determine nothing, nor be moved (except what we do our
selves) at any thing. Jam. 3. The fruits of Righteousness are sown in peace, by
all (that care for it.) It Is an old and authentic Apothegm, -- Pacem te
poscimus omnes!
Pax animi! quam cura fugit.
Content and Peace are Correlatives; so that no body can be contented, that is
not at quiet, and every body covets (or pretends) to be at peace; and whoever
is at rest and quiet in his own mind, (upon good grounds) is indisputably
contented and satisfied, for he cannot devise what further he rationally ought
to desire, or have a mind to.

Disquiet, Hurliburlies, and Discord, are the very Stings in humane Nature, and
no body were or would be able to endure them, but in pursuance of Peace, Rest,
and subsequent Harmony.

Peace and Content (which are synonymous) are truly Hieroglyphics of eternal
Happiness, and in the opinion of a Jurisprudent, are bona fide Heaven in
Effigy, because they include Love, Joy, and Satisfaction to the brim. All
which Ingredients do compound the Quintessence of this Creation, and as far as
we can yet apprehend, are the greatest Ingredients of the glorified State which
is approaching: for we well know, that Veracity it self has assured us, that a
wicked man can have no Peace or true Content at all, let him say or do what he
will. This topping Attainment, as all other considerable Felicities, are
founded in true Virtue and Religion, and is, as the Logicians say, Proprium
quarto modo, that is, Convenit omni pacifico soli and semper: only, and ever,
and to every such a person it is an inseparable Incident, or Essential, as it is
virtuous or religious, and to none other in the World; but always to all such,
and only to such does true Felicity appertain.

Grace and Peace was the Apostolical Benediction; that is, in other terms,
Godliness and Content; they are inseparable Adjuncts, so that he that is
destitute of either, wants both: Beati pacifici, said our blessed Savior in
his first Sermon that ere he preached. This is not only a wise man's Rav. but
Coll. to allude to Jacob and Esau's Complements: when Jacob would have made his
Brother Esau a Present, he replied he had enough, Rav. when Esau would have
presented Jacob, he replied, he had enough too, that is Coll. or All; so is
this Grace and Peace the Summum totale, the whole Matter, or all in all. It was
also a remarkable Valedictory of the Primitive Christians, Peace be with you,
Joy in Jerusalem, and Peace unto Sion; for Joy is a natural issue of Peace to
all Mankind: whoever is satisfied, or really contented, and at ease, must of
necessity be cheerful and pleased.

A wise man takes no inordinate care for future supplies of Subsistence or
Accommodation, but an ordinate, De diein diem only; day by day his Bread for
all his anxiety, cannot make him one cubit the taller: if divine Providence
tells the very hairs of his Head, much more does it ease him of the carking
thoughts of Events and Effects, that lie buried in the Causes in an higher
hand, where they are securely lodged. Our Concerns ought to be for present
Circumstances only, and that for Necessities, and not Superfluities of Life,
but to secure our main Chance in Heaven, and all the rest will be cast into the
Bargain; for he in whose hands are reserved the Issues of Life and Death, takes
the present care of us also, and if we seek principally our proper and true
Happiness, in our alliance to him, he will be sure to see us want for nothing
that is fit for us, of which he is the most competent Judge: for Piety has the
Promises both of this World and of the next; and on this Consideration dwells
the best Method of our present Peace and Contentment, as well as of our future
Happiness.

Time and Chance (or Providence rather) happening to all, and all our carking
Cares and inordinate Contrivances being utterly unavailable, to superadd what
we are absurdly apt to fancy we are short of. It Is our wisdom as to this World
to look but a very little way before us: if ever we'd be easy here, and happy
hereafter, we shall want neither Grace, Glory, nor any thing else good for us.

He that regards the Main, must be unconcerned for Matters that are but by the
By; that is, whosoe'r would be quiet and at peace within, and expects a better
Place and Posture, (and that quickly) ought in common prudence to be contented
with what he has, because he has more than reasonably he deserves.

Our religious Jurisprudent is of such a Constitution, as a Constable ought to
be, that is, to keep the Peace as far as he can, both in his own Breast, and
between Man and Man; to propagate good will in the World, as far as possible,
and to follow peace with all.

As the end and design of all Motion is to obtain Rest and Quiet at last, so is
the design and drift of all wholesome Laws and sound Sages of the Law, to
prosecute with all care and expedition Peace and Rest, as the ultimate end of
all Litigations and Commotions moral; and as well and soon as can be, to
comprimize Feuds and Differences between Party and Party, or prevent all fiery
Contests and froward Animosities: A peculiar Benediction being annexed unto men
of that Profession, that do practice accordingly, viz. Beati pacifici, Blessed
be all Advocates, or Lawyers, that is, Peacemakers, in the World. Patiens qui
Jurisprudens, was Sir Edw. Coke his Motto.

XII. De Ira, and Odio, and Acia. Of Anger and Hatred.
IRa Furor brevis est, That all Wrath is a degree of Madness, is an observation
of very ancient Date and Veracity, but must be understood with a distinction of
Excess or Immoderation: for I question not but it is a duty to be angry, (but
not upon trivial Occasions) but not with a continuando, or long duration, nor
with an exertion of furious Words or Actions. Once we read of our Savior's
looking about him on the Mobile, or Multitude, with Indignation, when he
wondered at their prodigious Infidelity, because the Honor of Omnipotence lay
at stake, by the mighty Miracles that he wrought to convince them. In this case
chiefly (if not only) is there room for Indignation; for it is an eternal Truth,
That man's wrath works not God's Righteousness. A very worthy and learned
Divine of this Age, not long since deceased, has often asserted, That upon any
other Accounts, it is generally unaccountable to give or to receive a
Provocation, and by Anger to rectify what he holds amiss, commonly proves a
Remedy worse than the Disease we'd cure.

It Is better to endure the greatest Affront^ and Indignities from abroad, than
by Displeasure and Anger to put our selves into their power, to dispossess us
of our Tranquillity, whereby we so much injure our selves. This Passion more
exposes and betrays a man than any other; and therefore a wise and generous
Soul much easier pardons an Aggressor than himself, for his Resentment and
Discomposure. If you would imitate our grand Exemplar, you must be slow to wrath,
full o^ compassion. Envy and Jealousy are (...) the same Extract with Anger
and Hatred, and one Greek word serves for them both.

To hate the Sin, and love and pity the Sinner for God's sake, is God-like; he
enjoins it. It Is a general and a true Observation, That he that cannot be angry,
cannot be pleased; but the most passionate, are not the worst Tempers, provided
they dwell not in wrath, or give way to the Devil, by which means many men
hurry themselves headlong into inextricable Dangers and Disasters.

To conceal, counterfeit, and restrain a Passion, is a high piece of Prudence,
and ^n Conversation gives any man a vast advantage over others. It Is mighty
remarkable, that Words do more usually prove greater provocatives than Actions,
because the surprizal by them, and time taken of deliberation on them, is more
sudden. Wherefore a Jurisprudent binds his Tongue as much as his Hands to its
good Behavior; though (we say) Actions speak louder ^han Words, and we say true;
as to many purposes they notoriously intimate the Dis^licence of the Aggressor.
But yet if you ^bserve it, Words make a greater noise and hurliburly, and are
the Prodromi or Harbingers of a succeeding Boutefeau or Quarrel, and are more
provocative in sensu ^iviso, that is, where nor accompanied with a Battery,
than Blows without Words, ^specially of Indignation; for that is Anger with a
vengeance, which is utterly Ju^isimprudential, and unwarrantable, out of the
course of Justice, either Military or Civil.

Hatred is the utmost degree of Anger and Malice, and belongs to none but
in^ernal Fiends and Devils, as to a personal Object.

A Jurisprudent hates nothing but Sin and Obliquity, Vice and Enormity, and not
the Persons either of the Plaintiffs or Defendants.

A Tort or Wrong is only odious in it self, and not the Malefactor. Our eternal
Sovereign hates none of his Creatures, nor is displeased with any thing in the
World, but a violation of his own indisputable Sanctions. When man does
voluntarily consent to Obliquity or Vice, which he knows he has full power to
choose or refuse, all the Reason imaginable there is for his Protector and
Coadjutor, as well as Creator and Conservator, to take it very ill, and be
highly disgusted, and to hol^ him to be an Hetroclite, till he has sincerely
revoked and renounced it. Wherefor^ much less Reason has any mortal man t^ be
wrath with, or hate any of his fellow infallible Creatures, especially if they
d^ not affront the Original of their Being, and that directly, and not by
Implication because himself by Surprizal, or Inadver^tency, often (and perhaps
sometimes o^ of Malice prepense) does disoblige, provoke, and affront others,
and is sensible ^ part post, (afterward) of his Fallibility an^ Miscarriage.
Solomon declares, Anger re^ in Fools bosoms: there is no room for so unclean
Fowl to roost in the Breast of a ge^nuine Jurisprudent, that understands
him^self. Besides, it is common Policy, and a man's own Interest, to inhibit
Anger, and to pass by a provocation to Wrath; for he commonly, if not
constantly, suffers the greatest Injury by it, in the discomposure of his Mind,
and confusion of his Faculties, and pain and perplexity of his Intellectuals;
and there is nothing in Nature big enough or worthy to put a wise man out of
order for an hour.

To dissemble a violent Passion of this sort, may be expedient, and often
advisable on some Occasions; but actually to exert it, very imprudent,
unprofitable, and at best injurious, (if not on both sides) on one. So we read,
as I said before, that once our Lord and Savior looked about him on the
unbelieving Jews with Indignation; but if ever we found him to exert this
Passion, it was upon their desecration of the Temple, when he whipped them out,
and over-turn'd the Money-mongers Tables, where the Honor of our heavenly
Father was more directly at stake. Not but that we hold it possible (but not so
probable) for a man to be angry, and not be a Delinquent, or peccant in so
being; because the great Gentile Apostle cautioneth us, that we sin not when we
become angry: but we conceive with submission to better Judgments, that that
Passion having more appearance of evil Consequences and Effects in it, than
perhaps any one of all the other have, that we are in prudence obliged to
inhibit and restrain as often as is possible, the Influences of it, as having
so notorious an appearance of Evil in it; whether we consult our own
Particular, or the public Peace and Quiet. Pleasant is the Notion to this
purpose of that Plagiary, or Schoolmaster, who often in his Corrections would
say to the chastised Person, Castigo te, non quod odiam, sed quod amem te.
Therefore must thou punished be,
Because I love (and not hate) thee.
The municipal Laws of our Realm have provided and allowed to every Subject,
that happens to be imprisoned by a false Conspiracy, and no Indictment against
him exhibited, Coke 2. Inst. p. 42.
a Writ called, De Odio and Acia, supposing his Commitment is out of Anger or
Malice, and by a Jury of twelve men he is to be discharged. Such is the
Antipathy or Aversion which our English Laws do bear unto all Hatred and Anger,
or its Consequences; which the old Philosophers called, Furor brevis, A Fit of
Frenzy, or Madness.

When any one is highly incensed, and allows the sudden Influences of that
indomitable Passion to prevail, he is transported beyond the Compass of his
Reason and serene Understanding, and is in jeopardy of making shipwreck of his
Posse Corporis and animi, too, ss. all the principal Essentials of his Nature,
inward Faculties, and outward; Life, Limbs and Fortunes. For Acts of Outrage
and Indignation, we may observe, are generally, if not always, perpetrated ex
improviso, on a Push; that is, a rash and sudden Attempt, which a short
Deliberation of Thoughts frequently prevents and Stifles, quod nota been!

XIII. De Amore and Amicitia. Of Love and Friendship.
TRue Friendship with God and Man, is our highest Privilege and Attainment.
John. 15.15. Our Savior calls his Disciples Friends, that is, such unto whom
he will communicate his Secrets; it is the end of all Gospel Dispensations, to
continue in his Love, and to comply with his Will and Commands, for amicorum
preces sunt imperio, a Friends Requests have the force of a Command. Friendship
is the most sacred and inviolable Bond in the World, and far more considerable
than any natural Tie whatever.

No greater evidence can be of our true Love to God and Religion, than our Love
to our Neighbor. All true Friendship is founded in Virtue or Religion; our
Friend Lazarus sleeps, said our Savior, and God calls Moses his Friend. Prove.
17. A Friend loves at all times, and is nearer than a Brother, said Solomon.
What greater Copy can we write after than our blessed Savior, who took our
Nature (and not Angels) on him; who dyed for us, while his Enemies; who helped
and healed both Soul and Body; who interceeds for us in our Absence, and who,
in his Absence, sends a Proxy to be our Comforter as well as Conductor in our
Journey toward those heavenly Mansions? So should we love one another, he has
given us, 1 Jo. 5.10. an Understanding that we may know him, and 1 J. 3. A
Power, (by entertaining of him) to become the Sons of God, and be Friends with
him and the whole Family of God below. Take we a very short view of his frank
and friendly Conversation in the World, for our Example and Imitation.

1. His Doctrine (all along) was to (undeceive Man, and) convince him of the
Truth, to free him from Errors, and Impostures, and vain Traditions, healing
Bodies, informing the Minds in the true Way to Life and Happiness, Temporal and
Eternal, by public Teaching, by private Conference, praying with and for them,
Sympathizing with them in Troubles, grieving at their Obstinacy and
Exorbitancys, enduring all Indignities that Malice could inflict. Here Is true
Love and Friendship to purpose, and after all, to lay down his Life to
reconcile Man to God and to one another. Well might St. John be amazed, and cry
out, Behold what manner of Love and Friendship? This Love and Good Will extends
to all Men; but Friendship must needs be restrained to fewer, and such as we
are very well acquainted with, for it is the Elixir, or the Quintessence of Love
and Kindness, and a topping Branch of the Tree of Charity.

Amicitia semper pares accipit aut facit, is an old and a true Axiom,
Friendship either finds or makes an Equaliiy between the Partys so engaged; no
Priority nor Litigation takes place in such a sort of Union of Affections as
this consists in; it was the Saying of a late incomparable Divine deceased,
That the Face of his Friend was (to him) the Sun in the Firmament; and surely,
but for the sake of Friendship, and the Satisfaction accruing by it, it were
not worth the while to be here for nothing on Earth, that has not an Eye of
that in its Contexture, can be grateful and agreeable to Man's Mind.

God is Love in the Abstract, and every thing that tastes not of it, is most
unsavory and insignificant. Magnes amoris Amor, we commonly find to be true;
that is, Love is the Loadstone of reciprocal Love; we can hardly choose but love
him, that first loves us; but that degree of Love that makes true Friendship,
has so many Ingredients requisite to make it right, that its very rare to fiind
a real Friend among a million of good Christians now a days; self Interest and
Jealousy is so prevalent and Epidemical, though in good earnest, it is the
truest and most warrantable Self-Love in the World, to love our Brother as our
selves, which is a mighty Indication of our Love to God, and to our selves (in
the best Sense) 4 Eccles. 9. Solomon assures us, that two are better than one,
plus vident Oculi, quam Oculus. Two Eyes discern better than one and a
By-stander, sees (often) more than a Gamster, and a Man being commonly the
worst Judge in his own Case, hence it follows, that a Friend is most Necessary
in point of Council and Direction, and in point of Regulation of Passions; for
with the Frenzy of Anger and Vexation, or the Ague of Hopes or Fears, or the
Fevor of Love, or the Consumption of Envy; a Mind (when he is alone) is seldom
undistemper'd; the sociable friendly Life, is also beneficial for our
Assistance in our Labors, which are promoted thereby with greater Safety,
Cheerfulness and Success, 27 Prove. As Perfumes cheer the Heart, so does the
Sweetness of a Friend; for as a learned Bishop well observes, the Communion of
Saints, is (next to the Favor of God, and the Comforts of a good Conscience)
the greatest Privilege and Happiness we can enjoy on this side Heaven. And
that conjugal Relation of Man and Wife (for which, all other Relations are to
be quitted) is only valuable upon this account, as they are Friends, and
without this, they are but empty Names, as Bishop Wilkins well observes; who
reckons four principal Qualifications of true Friendship.

1. True Love (which is the Bond of Perfection.)

2. A wise Freedom of imparting Thoughts.

3. Patience, for angry Men are neither good Counselors nor Comfortors, and
Solomon disswades the contracting of Friendship with such an one.

4. Constancy, to adhere in Adversity, as close or closer than in Prosperity;
the Witch of Endors Example to Saul, 1 Samuel 28. is a just Reproach to a
perfidious unconstant Friend.

Love by the Schoolmen is distinguished three ways.

Amor, Benevolentiae, that is good liking of.

Amor, Complacentiae, that is, better pleased with.

Amor Amicitiae, that is, firm Friendship, which is the Superlative Degree of
Love and Kindness.

Benevolence is due to all Mankind.

Complacence and Delight to Relations and Neighbors.

Friendship, only to such as are intimate with us, as our own Souls, and
tempered exactly to us in Disposition and Principles.

Ullus ad amissas ibit Amicus opes; though a real Friend will appear (to choose)
in greatest Exigencies and Indigencies. It Is so rare and different to find such
Friends (in this Age) that it is commonly supposed by the Vulgar, that it is but
a Chimera, and no such thing in rerum Natura. It Is the Advice and Opinion of a
learned Bishop of the Church of Ireland, lately deceased, that there is two
Faults only that are not Venial and Pardonable in true pretended Friendship
(for to real it belongs not)

1. The revealing of a Secret.

2. A Treacherous Blow, which ruins the Vitals, and dissolves the Union, and
is a Divorce a Vinculo; for true Friendship is the greatest practical Honesty,
and Ingenuity in the World.

It Is the Nerves and Sinues of Humane Conversation, insomuch that you find no
Body without a pretended Friend; but one that is a Frigate of the first Rate in
Friendship, is rarely to be met withal. However, herein I appeal to all
Mankind, the very Bruits have among themselves a considerable Semblance of true
Friendship, Saevus inter se Convenit Ursus, the very Bares and Bores have a
League of Amity between themselves, and therefore it would be miraculous (to
purpose) if moral and intellectual Agents should not inter se convenire in
aliquo tertio, as the Schoolmen say, that is, have a Confederacy of Friendship
with a third Party at least.

True Friendship is the very Vitals and Radicality of Commerce and
Correspondence; so that there can be no Dealings amonst Men without a violent
Presumption (which our Law calls a half-proof) of it every where; but for a Man
to dare to sacrifice both Life and Limb for another, is not (now a days) to be
found, perhaps out of Utopia. However, that such a Degree of Concord and Amity
is both proper and expedient (though not common) is a Veracity beyond all
dispute. It Is an old Trite, but not despicable Axiom, that Amicus certus in re
incerta cernitur. A true substantial Friend is experimentally found and tried,
when a Man's at a Nonplus, or at a Loss what to do next. Council and Conduct
are the two chief Particularities of Friendship, and that is chiefly requisite
when a Man is in Distress and Adversity; although in Prosperity there be
singular Use and Advantages of this kind of Love. But remember withal, that he
that is not his own Friend, cannot have another, for there are a sort of
degenerate Souls in the World, that will neither be their own Friends, nor any
bodies else. Such as are sunk into Sense, and hate to (or delight not in the)
exercise of their Homogeneal and intellectual Faculties, but center in
themselves and their own Humors; whereas (in sano Sensu) on a true account,
it is the rightest Self-Love in the World, to love God and your Neighbor, and
especially your Friend, your (next) Self.

XIV. De Solitudine and Carcere. Of Solitude and a Prison.
A Prisoner is a living Man's Grave, whilst he continues (in arcta Custodia)
under close Confinement: we may truly say of him, as we do of one entered into
Religion, that he is Civiliter Mortuus, Dead in Law. Howbeit, as to several
Intents and Purposes, such Restraints or voluntary Recesses are more eligible
and expedient than a Peripatetical Liberty, as for Secrecy, and for Security;
whence the best and biggest Philosophers of old cried (...), Qui been latuit,
been vixit, he that has lived retiredly, has lived well, for they accounted
such an one that delighted in Solitude or Retirement, to be aut Deus, aut
Demon, a God or a Devil, having so extraordinary Advantages of becoming the
best or worst of moral and intellectual Agents. Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris
and carcere Dignum; si vis esse aliquid. Says an ambitious and a valiant
Boanerges. If you to be Great, would not fail,
Dare to do what deserves a Gaol.
Others, for the Advantage of Divine Speculation, and Intellectual
Accomplishments, choose to devote themselves unto an Anchoretick Life, and
frequently prove thereby eximious. Unto some Latitudinarian Tempers; such
Restraints and Recesses often prove Antidotes and Restoratives. A well composed
Mind is free and easy under the closest Confinement, and may say bona Fide,
with Scipio (of old) that Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus.

He never can be less alone,
Than then, when there is with him none.
Hence did that sage Philosopher Pythagoras make a voluntary Recess into a
Cave, for a whole year round, and Scipio Africanus, and many others, withdrew
from the greatest of public Affairs. And Pinnacles of of Honor, and indeed he
must be profoundly fond of the Fatigue and Drudgery of public Employs, whom a
Confinement for any considerable time cannot wean and disingage.

Solitude and Durance will not appear to us in so uncouth and strange a
Posture, if we do but duly consider, how naturally our Maker inures us to it,
and is agreeable with it from first to last, for we cannot come into Being but
(per Limbum uterinum) by being strained through the Lymbeck or Grates of our
Mothers Womb, after forty Weeks Solitude and Imprisonment, and a great while
longer by the Law of Nature ('it is as natural for to dye as to be born) must we
lie incarcerated close Prisoners in the World's Womb (the Grave) before we come
to our selves, and obtain the Liberty of the Sons of God, and confined are we
all the while, that our Souls are embodied and subjugated to their numerical
Measures, Humors and Inclinations; yea, are we not habituated daily to a
thousand Ceremonies and Customs in formal and impertinent Addresses, Euphoniae
Gratia, more for Fashion-sake than the reason of the things? Are not these all
moral Captivities and Confinements? Are not Honors golden, and Trades and
Business iron Fetters or Manacles of Restraint, and political, and Oeconomical
Feuds, and factions, Silver Chains or Shackles to considerable Interests, when
probably often times, no better Expedient can be found to extricate us, than a
Counter, or a Fleet. Most apposite and Emphatical therefore I remember is that
Wish of excellent Abraham Cowly, ss.

Let gay and toilsom greatness others please,
Give me the homely Littleness of Ease.
If there be any one I Am bound to hate,
Dependence and Attendance be their fate;
Still let them busy be, and in a Crowd,
Both very much a Slave, and very proud:
I Will only safe from danger choose to dwell,
In a small Room, but a convenient Cell.
And what a Paradox is it, for a Man to love himself above all Mankind, and yet
not love to keep himself Company, so well as any body else in the World.
Doubtless to a thinking and a literate Man, the best and pleasantest condition
of Life is to dwell Incognito; for such as contract (and engage into) numerous
Acquaintances, open the Doors to the Invaders of the best (if not most) of
their precious Time: for Amici temporis Fures, Visitants are Time-stealers;
Cujus solius est honesta Avaritia, Whereof only (as a celebrated ancient
Philosopher says) Covetousness is warrantable. Whereas one in Solitude or
Recess, being but a By-stander and unconcerned Person, (for Totus mundus agit
Histrioniam, as one said well) has the Advantage of others, and discerns better
than the Gamesters, whether the Dog bites the Bear, or the Bear bites the Dog.

Numerous and great are the Prerogatives of Recess and Solitude, (which are not
to be met withal abroad) four of the principal whereof are, To be Sovereign of
his own Time, his own Company, his own Business, and to be out of Harms way:
And accordingly we find these four are the securest and innocentest Junctures
of our Lives: 1. The Womb. 2. The Cradle, or Swathling-bands. 3. The School. 4.
Our Apprenticeships, or Minorities; and who can be more safe, or serious, or
secret, than in a Closet, a Library, a Shop, or a Grotto, or (if not a
Criminal) in a Prison.

Whither tends the ultimate Ambition of the most industrious and indefatigable
wealthy Citizen, after many years Fatigues and Toyls, in the sweat of their
Brows and Brains, with hazard of Life and Limb, but to purchase a quiet, though
short Recess, (at the fag end of their Pilgrimage) in some obscure corner in
the Country, out of the Noise, and Crowd, and Hurliburly, of the unthinking
and envious Mobile, before they expect their Quietus est in the Grave.

It Is the matter or merit (not the manner) of any Confinement, that makes it
uneasy to a wise man, as when occasioned by either malicious Contrivance, or
mistake of the merits of the Cause, or designed by the Fraud and Treachery of
pretended Friends, etc. To make a Virtue of such Necessity, is a wise man's
Province; and to rejoice (and not be dejected) under such fiery Trials, as
generously as if it had been the matter of his own Choice, and no Coertion put
upon him.

Bonum agere, and Malum pati, is not only Regium, but Christianum and
Jurisprudentum. Observable also it is that generally most men's Disasters happen
to proceed from such, to whom he has been most beneficent. A wise man has less
cause to be concerned at such unwarrantable Usages, (by half) than at his own
Inadvertencies, Obliquities and Failings, in over-acting (as some do, or
under-acting, as most do) their duty of Benevolence unto any part of Mankind.
Nor is my Mischief or hard Usage from others, any warrant for me to retaliate,
misuse, or oppress my Oppressors: Lex Talionis in this sense is long since
antiquated; and rather render good for ill Usages of any sort, at least be
unconcerned with your worst Malefactors.

If a Sparrow flies not this or that way, without a particular Providence,
doubtless no sincere (though never so weak) Christian, can be supposed to suffer a
Seclusion from his Country, Kindred, or Family, and Friends, without a
remarkable Finger from Heaven, pointing out his solitary Mansion; and therefore
must that needs be his best Place and Posture, both in reference to this World
and the next: and he ought to take it for granted, as a fundamental Veracity,
That whatsoever happens in the regular use of any rational means, is the result
of infinite Jurisprudence, and ought to be embraced as that which is best, in
the opinion of him that is higher than the highest.

Our blessed Savior conversed as often in the Deserts, as with the Multitude:
whence we may naturally infer, That Solitude or Retirement is of as vast use
and advantage, (by turns at least) as universal Converse with the World, for
which purposes chiefly we came into Being. Every body becomes abundantly worse
or better by his Solitude and Retirement; the uninterrupted exercise of his
Mind, and inward Faculties, improve him strangely: but we are of such a Make
and Composition, as that a total Recess, or a total immersing our selves from,
or into the Stage of Humanity, renders us Sots or Fools, and insignificant to
the Community of Mankind.

Refuse not therefore, if you would be a Jurisprudent, any public Overtures,
that seem to (praebere ansam) give you any opportunity of public Service to
the World; but choose (if you have power over your Will) rather to dwell in the
Shade, than the Sun; but strive to be Versatilis ingenii, participant of both,
in utrumque paratus, well provided both ways, as your Genius and the Matter
prompts you to.

If you really consider of your own Constitution, and tendency to another
increated Habitation, you will easily perceive more need to covet, than decline
as much as possible a Solitude and Retirement, that you may be thoroughly
qualified both to serve the Ends and Purposes of your main Chance here and
hereafter. No Conferences are so considerable, as what a man maintains with
himself. Simplifie your self, said a wise Philosopher. Contract and
circumscribe your self, if you would make the best use and advantage of the
World: private and retired Thoughts edify most, provided that you follow the
Conduct of Reason and Religion, else you will be Demon instead of a Deus, A
Devil or a God, as Aristotle held every retired Man to be.

The greatest Advantage of Solitude, is to give a Man the best Accomplishment
and Advantage to converse in Society; for either one or the other, without an
interchanging or alternation of Postures, are very pernicious: for variety of
Places and Postures in the World is highly contributory, to both the World's
Good in general, and every Individual in particular; when all is done, quae non
prosunt singula juncta juvant: Company relieves Solitude, and vice versa, the
contrary.

XV. De Otio and Negotio. Of Employment and Idleness.
OTia dant vitia, is an old and true Saying, that Idleness occasions Illness;
wherefore learned Seneca was of Opinion, that praestat aliud agere quam nihil;
that any Man had better do that that is not to purpose, than to do nothing at
all; to say truth, its scarce possible (in that Sense) for an intellectual
Agent to be absolutely idle; for a Man awake, must needs talk, or move, or
think and contrive Good or Ill; but we mean by Idleness, to be out of a Course
of Employment one way or other, which is a dangerous Point of the Compass, and
the Bane of most Men. Innumerable are the Advantages of any sort of steady
Employment; it diverts a Man from mischievous and expensive Hazards; it
refreshes his Mind with reflection on Pains and Time laudably spent and
accounted for, besides the Profit Apprender, as our Sages call the getting of
Money.

An idle Fellow cannot tell what to be at next, which is a worse sort of Pain
than a Fatigue or Toil at an Oar of Business. He cannot properly be counted
Idle, that is (for want of present Action) vigorously contriving what to do
next, in the Province he has undertaken, the Italians say proverbially, Di me
guard, etc. God defend me from that Man that has but one Thing (or Business) to
do; but I say, from a Man that has nothing at all to do, Libera me Domine.
Absit, ut unquam mihi contingat vacare; said an excellent Divine of old, ss.
God forbid that I should Ere be at Leisure; to wit, have nothing to do. No
ingenuous Man in the World, in Health, and in the use of his Limbs, can pretend
to be downright Idle; every body in the World may find enough to do to good
purpose, and yet there are a sort of People that will pretend they have nothing
to do in the Earth, which to a Man of Sense (and Health) is Nonsense. But it is
a topping Point of Jurisprudence, to be very well employed, though it is every
ones Duty to follow some or other Employment, for we came not into the World to
be idle; that is both unnatural and immoral; every way unaccountable; and its a
topping Point of Jurisimprudence (to be so far at a Loss at any time, as) to
contrive how to drive away our Time impertinently. Precious Time, the best
Talent and Commodity we are entrusted withal. A Calling or Profession, be it
what it will, that is not vicious, is an Honor to any Man in the World; the
Grand Seignior himself, will pretend to make Arrows Heads, rather than not be
intitulled to an Occupation; for all the French Monsieurs account it a
mechanic and ungentile Business, to Trade, to Buy or sell by Retail, or to
Merchandise; Only the Sword or long Robe are their laudable Callings and
Non-pedantick. Our Britain Jurisprudents are quite of another Opinion, ss.
that it is Creditable or Reputable to be Uncharacterized by a Profession, that any
authentic Calling is better than to be a Gentleman at Large, without the Badge
or Distinction of a Profession; that it is an Obligation both natural and moral
upon all Mankind to pretend to Business and Employment one way or other, be
they never so Rich; that of Idleness comes no Goodness; that a Jurisprudent is
most honorable; that a Physician more profitable, and that Astronomers, Poets,
and Philosophers most commonly the most indigigent. Agreeable to the old
Apothegm, viz. Dat Gallenus opes; dat Justinianus Honores, Astronomus, Logicus
semper egenus erit. Physic gives Wealth, but the Law more Honor; Philosophy
makes Poor; that a plump Employment with a narrrow Fund is more eligible than a
plump Patrimony without a plausible Profession, which keeps a Man out of
Harms-way, and administers high Satisfaction of Mind, if not Increase of
Fortunes, the Want whereof, exposes Men to infinite Hazards and Temptations,
Frustra fit potentia, say Logitians, quae non traducitur in actum, that is, a
Qualification is frustrameous and insignificant, unless the principle or
accomplishment exert it self into Practice consonant to the old Adage; Scire
tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.

It is to no purpose to know,
Unless with it you somewhat do.
Adam the Protoplast was a Gardner or Husbandman, Abel a Shepherd, and King
David too, before inaugurated and espoused a greater Profession of Protection
and Government of Israel. Nor was it any real Reflection (though intended so by
the scornful Jews) upon Joseph of Arimathea that he was a Carpenter, and used a
Trade. So did the grand Apostle St. Paul himself, make Net-works, and makes
Manufacture, or a Trade, to be of Apostolical Injunction; and withal, declares
such a Man as accounts himself above such a Dispensation, not fit to Eat or
Live. Let la^y Lurdans think or say what they will to contrary. Not but that
some Occupations or Professions exercise the Heads, and others the Hands or
Feet, or both; but Negotiations, or a Method of Action, both Theoretical or
Speculative, as well as Practicable, are not only Laudable, but necessary and
expedient also, for the Benefit as well of the Universality, as for the
Individuality of Mankind. Drones are odious among sensitive and abominable (^
fortiori) much more among Rational and Intellectual Agents. An idle Person
becomes not only a Burden to the World, but to himself too at last; the very
Heathens themselves were Orthodox in this Point, while they assure us
unanimously, that, (...).
That is, The Gods have ordered Sweat and Pains,
To antecede Virtue and Gains.
Whilst a lazy Lentulus may starve,
Your busy men their Fortunes carve.
Non volat in buccas assa Columbatuas.
A roasted Pigeon never will fly
Into their Mouths that gaping lie.
No Man in Health, can justify himself to be totally out of all Employment or
Negotiation; for there is not any Man whatever that is good for nothing, nor any
thing in Nature, but is good for something; and may be useful and significant
one way o^ to the Community of Mankind, as well as helpful to himself. Every
Jurisprudent will betake himself to one or other Method of Action or
Negotiation, whether it turn to an expected Account or not, though its
confessedly a choice piece of Skill and Prudence, to make a proper Choice, and
most adequate to his Genius and Accomplishments, for ex quolibet Ligno, non fit
Mercurius. Mercury is not made of any Stick. Yet is it wholly unanswerable, and
utterly unaccountable for a Man to be destitute of any manner of Employment,
Trade or Profession; though he be the greatest Dunce in the World, he must in
Conscience, play one part or other, while he walks upon the Stage of mortality,
for Totus mundus agit Histrioniam; the whole World acts, as we may say, an
Interlude, and every numerical Person has a Part to act among his Fellow
Creatures. Non nobis nati sumus, said the Philosopher very judiciously, that no
body alive was born only to serve himself, for as he goes on pergetically, and
to purpose, Partem Patria, partem amici, partem parents sibi vendicant; our
Country, our Parents, our Friends do all very justly challenge a Share of us;
which an idle Person little considers, but stupidly and uselesly sacrifices the
whole Interest the World has in him, to his own Net.

Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcet.
Pride and Idleness commonly associate, and the best end commonly of them both,
is Discontent and Beggary.

XVI. De Avaritia and Liberalitate. Of Covetousness and Liberality.
THE most sordid, or the most splendid Characters a Jurisprudent can bear, for
the one is down right Idolatry, said St. Paul, the other is Delicium Humani
generis, or the Darling of Nature; every Man loves and honors a Liberal and
generous Man, though, he be never so Covetous himself. Whereby it is
demonstrable, that Generosity or Liberality (which is the same thing) is one of
the most commendable Accomplishments that belongs to any Man in the World; for
a Liberal Man is necessarily Charitable and Hospitable, which Sacrifices are
such as we are (jure Divino) assured God is well pleased with, wherefore did
St. Paul, who affirms the same, give us a great Caution to be sure not to
forget this Faculty of Communicating.

Prodigality and Nigardliness or Covetousness, are the two Extremes of
Liberality. If any one ask me a Character of that Man that I would choose to
make a Friend off, it would be one that is Just and Generous; tow short Words,
but very comprehensive; for the former Appellation implies one that is only
exact in commutative Justice, not to defraud or cheat you (as in common
parlance, and ex vi termini, it imports) but one that is universally Sober,
Righteous and Godly; and thus far a Publican, a Scribe, or a Pharise might
proceed in Jurisprudential Learning; and yet miscarry at last; but to be
Generous and Liberal, as well as Just and righteous, implies Hospitality and
Charity intensly; which Properties, he that wants, can never on good grounds
expect to be happy, because, whatever besides he is wanting in, if he be
defective here, he is a Nugatory Thing, a tinkling Cimbal, and a thing of no
ualue; nor in a sperate Condition. A generous Jurisprudent is a Person of
Honor and Conscience, Generosity and Charity, which is but one Branch of the
Tree of Liberality (but a great one) we cannot (scarce) in any quality, more
imitate our Sovereign Lawgiver than herein, that shines and rains on Good and
Bad; but a Man that is Covetous, is both profoundly injurious to himself, and to
all the World about him, for he hords up, and inhibits that Talent which is
none of his own, to that purpose. Every Man in the World has a surplus: the
generous Widow in the Gospel, that cast her Mite (her All) into the Bank of
Charity, was recorded justly for a Generous, as well as very Charitable Soul,
for our Example, nothing is more odious in Law, nor more heterogeneal in
Nature, than engrossing of what is communicable (pro re nata) in the nature of
the Thing, and that is Wealth, which is no farther useful to any Man, than
diffused by the Regrators and Ingrossors thereof. The speculative Letchery of a
Covetous Person, is an unintelligent thing to a Jurisprudent, or a Man of
considerate Sense and Reason; not but that it is absolutely advisable to
provide against the misadventurs and contingences of humane Affairs, but yet
with Jurisprudence, and due Consideration, and Mathematical Measures, our
Savior said it was next unto an Impossibility, for a Rich, that is (in his
Sense there) a Covetous Man, to go to Heaven, as it was for a Camel or (rather
to follow the Original) a Cable to be threaded in a Needles Eye. For in good
earnest, the liberal Man is only rich, that is, has enough for his present
Accommodation, and future Expectancies, and to spare for the universal Interest
of Mankind, with whom he corresponds; which, is doubting of God's Providence,
diffident of all Success, and jealous of every body about him. A Jurisprudent
of for its well known, who assured us, that Riches consisted not in abundance,
without a Heart to make a proper use of it, which most overgrown Wealthists
want.

The true Rich Man, is he that has enough to bound his Appetites and to spare,
that is a great Soul, and a right Jurisprudent. It Is Diffidence and Distrust,
and it is a pusillanimous Soul that is Hidebound, Penurious and Covetous, for its
Con-tranatural and Ignoble, Sordid, and unworthy of so Magnanimous a Creature
as Man (ab Origin) was made, and its observable, that the Remains of a
Covetous Man seldom or never prosper in their Successions; vix gaudet tertius
here is, scarce the third Generation enjoy them; but (vice versa) the contrary is
as remarkable of a Liberal Man's, because the former is gross Impiety, and the
latter true Piety; whereunto are annexed the Promises and Benefactions as well
of this World as the next.

A Liberal Man ( Solomon tells us) will be Fat, the other contrariwise, Lean as
a Rake; or (as the Cheshire Proverb is) as if he sucked his Dam through an
Hurdle. He dotes on, and pants after the Dust of the Earth upon the Head of the
Poor, and is Solomon's great Fool, and the most egregious Slave in the World;
the Ground of what Degree or Fortune soever he be, has a Surplus for
Liberality, both as Hospitable and Charitable (like the generous Widow in the
Gospel) if he has but (one Mite) any thing at all, he will have something to
spare. Yet is our Jurisprudent a thrifty Man, and by generously casting his
Bread upon the Waters, finds it turn to a better Account than the miserable
Covetous Man's Opus and Usus; who though redicul'd by every body, but such as
are as sordid as himself; yet hugs himself in his Hoards like a Hog in a Ditch,
as Horace lively portrays and describs him. -- Populus me sibilat; at mihi
plaudo,
Ipse Domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.
Though the poor Mobile do make a Jest,
And ridicule me, yet I Will hug my Chest.
Observe but the tenth Law of Moses, how very particularly he gives the Charge
against all sort of Covetousness imaginable, House, Wife, Man nor Maidservant,
Ox nor Ass, nor any thing else about him you can think on. The Rich Poor Man's
emphatically poor, as eximious Cowley tells us of the Miser; one thing only is
avarice allowable in, ss. of Time. Solius Temporis honesta avaritia, said the
old Jurisprudent Philosophers. Covetousness is not warrantable of any thing,
but only Time. The unjust Steward's Servant in the Gospel was applauded for
making himself Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, by a generous Act
(though Knavish) in bubling and cheating his Masters Creditor, and liberally
handling his Debtors.

A Covetous Man can be good for nothing, I Am positively of that Opinion,
because the Love of those his little Idols, is resolved by that great Gamaliel
(and competent Judge) St. Paul, to be the Root of all sorts of Evil. He is rude
and uncivil to himself, in not affording necessary Supplies, for supporting his
natural Contentment, and cruel and tyrannical to his better Part (if he have
e're a one) his Soul by distorting and perplexing and debasing it Night and Day
in sordid Anxieties, and unaccountable Drudgeries, and to all his Neighbors
and Conversants in the World Uneasy, Fraudulent, and Unsociable, and
Unintelligible, and worse. And remarkable (I take it to be) that splendid
Instance and President of Mary Magdalen, in bestowing a considerable sum of
most precious Ointment to wash our Saviors Feet withal; which no body but
covetous Judas (the Bag-bearer) grudged, and would have pretended himself to
have been so Charitable or Liberal, as to have wished it had been (ad Valorem)
to the Value rather given to the Poor. ss. The Cash-keeper that was so bloodily
Covetous, as for thirty (Shillings) or Pieces of Silver, to betray his Lord and
Master. A stingy narrow Soul cannot be a Jurisprudent to all Effects and
Purposes (if to any at all) for a Liberal Man considers of the Universe, and
and dispences accordingly, quoad hunc and nunc, as to time and Person properly;
but the other minds no body but himself, and in good earnest, therefore is most
his own Enemy, though a common Enemy too to the World about him. That a Man,
who is Deputy Lieutenant of the whole World, should not act like a Prince
within his Territories, is a thing to be counted more a Matter of Prodigy than
Proof. That Soul that confines it self to it self, and loves not to dilate, is
the greatest Heteroclite (in rerum Natura) (in the visible World) and such is
he that is profoundly Covetous; for a Man that is never so Covetous, is on some
occasions liberally affected; to wit, toward himself, but regards not the rest
of the Family of God, and is therefore a spurious and degenerate Monster
amongst Mankind, and not worthy to be owned by them as a rational or
intellectual Agent, but an Excresence of Humanity, or a Creature, not a Kin to
Generous Mankind.

XVII. De Vita and Morte. Of Life and Death.
MAnes suos quisque patimur, said the great Horace. Our Urns and Ends are as
certain as our Beginnings: Orimur, morimur, All of us that live must die; which
fatal word to the unthinking Vulgar is the most formidable in Nature, and by
the Heathen called so; (...). But some of the more thinking of them have had a
rarer Notion of it, viz. Dii celant homines, ut vivere durent,
Quam sit dulce mori.
That Men may endure to live's the Reason why,
The Gods conceal, how sweet it is to die.
And the divine Philosopher Seneca seemed to be much of that Mind, when he
says, that, Pompa Mortis magis terret quam mors ipsa, that the Circumstances
of our Departure, are more frightful than Death it self: and Dr. Brown wonders
any wise Man was afraid of it; he professes himself to be rather ashamed to see
so sudden and considerable a Change made in a Carcass: it is as natural to die
as to be born, says Sir Fra. Bacon, and therefore ought not to be so dreadful.
So that a Jurisprudent being well apprized of the Law of Mortality, so lives,
that he is neither afraid nor ashamed to die, whenever his great Sovereign,
that put him into Being, thinks fit to recall him out of it.

It Is true that Life is a mighty Blessing, and a living Dog is better than a
dead Lion; but in comparison with the Ends of Life, and Consequences of Death,
it is not worth the talking of. Quis propter Vitam vivendi perdere Causas
Velle potest?
could a Heathen say. Who for Life's sake, would ever quit the Cause
Of Living, by his fundamental Laws.
Especially believing, that a better Life, and infinitely more to purpose, will
be subsequent to every one that dies a Jurisprudent. Illi Mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
said the Tragedian Seneca excellently well, ss. Death cannot be really
formidable to any, but such as are too well (and notoriously) known to the
World, and understand not themselves. Cogi qui potest, nescit mori, (said he
too.) That Man cannot tell how to die, that can be compelled thereunto, (note
that!) For in many Cases Death is more eligible than Life to a Jurisprudent;
but a Jurisimprudent, or Ignoramus, is afraid of his own Shadow, and cannot tell
you why he does dread to die.

He that lives well, need not fear to die,
Because he knows good reason why,
He leaves Time for Eternity.
While a Jurisprudent is present in the Body, he is (all that while) absent
from the Lord; which I take to be the chief Reason, why that Chief Justice of
the Gentiles, St. Paul, desired rather to be dissolved than not, as to himself;
but as to the care of the Churches, and their edification by his Function (for
a season) which was the great Province he was charged withal, he was contented
to endure to live a while longer. The sager sort of the Heathen themselves had
arrived to this Metaphysical Point, That to be in Statu seperato, from the
cumbersom Body, was much more eligible, in it self singly considered, from the
benefit of Mankind, than their longer residence in the Body.

Wherefore duly considered, and jurisprudentially, what we are, and whither we
tend, we can show no cause why we should be at all dismayed at Death. Indeed if
we had no further Assurances of future Felicity, the Case were altered; but who
can be happy too soon? or who that prudentially considers all the Weal and Woes
of humane Life together, does not judge him the happiest man that is well
extricated out of the body? There Is more perhaps than we are aware on, prima
facie, in that Saying, ss.

Nemo ante obitum, supremaque funera faelix.
No Man is truly happy till he dies,
This is no Riddle unto him that is wise
Life indeed is all in all, (when all is said) but to exchange a worse for a
better Life, is more than all that can be said, e contra, against it. It Is
better not to be, than to be miserable all agree; but if we are morally certain
of an eternal Life, he must needs be (non Compos mentis) out of his Wits, that
is loath to die. As Death is an extinguishment of all our Faculties, and a
divorce of Soul and Body; indeed it is formidable; but if we as Jurisprudents
look on it but as an Emancipation, or Jail-deliver, and as a future State, to
which (ab initio) at first we were framed, it is rather what we should long for
and covet, than be shy of, or dread. A Jurisprudent argues thus: If I am here
but by the By;
If it is impossible (long) Death to fly;
If Life eternal be to me hard by;
If no man can against it show good Cause why;
Within a little while I must needs dye:
To be translated hence, wherefore should I
Be al a mort beforehand, or be shy.
If Solomon and Paul approved best
Of Dissolution, why should not the rest
Of the sage Jurisprudents, and men wise,
Resolve the Point? It is but a Demise,
No Prince or Jurisprudent ever dies.
Seneca said very true, that
Non est vivere, sed valere vita.
He that is in pain, and no health has,
His Life may properly be called Death.
The Life that now is (as much as we make of our selves) is not a thing worth
the taking up, were it not in pursuance of, and in order to something better,
as the vulgar Note well observes: Can Life be a Blessing,
And worth the possessing,
If Love were away? O no, etc.
The Practice of which principal part of Piety, or Jurisprudence, upon this
Stage of Philanthropy, and the full fruition of the beatifick Vision, who is
defined to be Love in the Abstract, is that which is our main Business here,
and which only makes Life considerable, and Death not so dreadful as desirable.

The very heathen Philosophers, that had not so clear a Prospect of the future
State, made no Bones (as we say Proverbially) of it, as Sir Fra. Bacon in his
learned Essays gives us many Instances: Fear induced some to court it; Love and
Friendship others; others in Complements and generous Bravado's, as Augustus
Caesar parting with his Wife Livia, at his Execution takes his leave of her and
the World together, thus: (Livia!) memor sis nostri Conjugii, vive, valeque
That is to say, Remember (Livia) our things Conjugal,
Live and prosper, fare thee well.


It Is the Consequences of it are so formidable and astonishing, and not it
self, which is nothing but a deprivation of something, which is as natural and
as necessary for us to part with as to enjoy. Whoever leads a Jurisprudent
Life, need never dread never so sudden Death. It Is for Fools (and guilty
Knaves) to be afraid of their own Shadows, and not for men of Temper and
Discretion. Life is here a thing only considerable in order to somewhat better
and future; Death is (if rightly considered on) at best but a transition to
another State (not Place) if applied to Intelligent or jurisprudent Agents.
Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
said an Elegant heathen Poet to purpose, viz. What you mean to do, do to day,
Dream not to live to morrow, pray.
Nec propter vitam, vivendi perdito causam.
said another appositely, and emphatically.

Dote not so much on this Life, as to make
The Reason why you live here, a mistake.
Life is a very pretty pleasant thing,
(If health attend it) to Beggar, or King.
But all the wealth and honor in the world,
If at once into your arms they were hurled,
Could never make you be so much in love
With Life below, if you are secure above
Of such a Posture as you are now beneath,
To which nothing can you conduct but Death,
By God's permission, when you'v lost your Breath.
We commonly wonder, (which is a vulgar Error) when we hear of any body's
Death; whenas we have much more reason to wonder, that any Individual is in
Life and Health, if we do but consider, how small a matter serves to turn the
strongest Constitution out of Being, and how many millions of those accidental
Matters we meet withal in a little time, besides the incurable Disease of old
Age.

We ar' no sooner born, than we begin to dye,
Take Time by the Forelock then, there is good reason why
For she behind is bald, and swiftly does she fly.
And eximious is that Saying of the heathen Philosopher, -- Vitae nimis avidus
quisquis,
Non vult mundo secum moriente, mori.
That Man's abominably covetous
Of Life, that is loath to die with us;
The rest of all the Universe about,
Will keep him quickly company no doubt.


I close this Essay, as Sir Wa. Rawley does his History of the World, p. 776.
who then had a close Prospect of his untimely End. O Eloquent, just and mighty
Death! whom none could advise, thou have persuaded; what none has dared, thou
have done; and whom all the World has flattered, thou only have cast out of the
world, and despised, thou have drawn together all the far-stretched Greatness,
all the Pride, Cruelty, and Ambition of Man, and covered it all with these two
narrow words, Hic jacet.

XVIII. De Societate and Conversatione. Of Society and Converse.
MAn is defined very properly to be Animal sociabile, a sociable, or
conversible Creature, more than any other inferior Animal whatever: the Tongue
and Discourse gives him that Pre-eminence, to make better guesses at another's
meaning and mind, and the complexion of their Thoughts, than other Animals
overt Actions indicate. Without Conversation (Society is nonsense, and) the
World would not be like it self.

Solomon, the grand Jurisprudent, has long ago remarked it, That infinite
Wisdom created one thing to correspond with another; and it was told us, ab
initio, first in Paradise, that it was not fit or good for Man to be without
Society, and thereupon his Maker did superadd Eve for his companion, or
associate, that nothing might pretend to be Independent but himself. Whence it
follows necessarily, That anchoretick Doctrine and Discipline is quite out of
doors, both heterodox and immoral, as well as unnatural and selfish. Hence said
the same sage and authentic Author, That two are better than one, for the sake
of reciprocal Aids, as well as Enjoyments; even Affliction is sweetn'd by
Society, much more Prosperity; according to the true old Saying, Solamen
miseris socios habuisse doloris.


And a Man is known and understood by his Company that he frequents, when he is
not by his own Deportment. So is the trite Saying, Noscitur ex comite, qui non
cognoscitur ex se.
By Company that Men do keep,
They Are known to such as wisely peep.
Hermitages, and Cells, and Solitudes, help much to qualify a Man (vicibus
alternis) by fits and turns for Conversation. So did our grand Exemplar
Emanuel, often withdraw into Deserts and other Recesses, but it was to
recollect himself, with more advantage to appear upon the Stage, and to
converse with the Multitude, Publicans and Sinners, with whom we know he was so
frequent and familiar, as well as with Magistrates, and Persons of better
Quality, otherwhiles that he was by the high-minded Scribes and Pharisees,
reproached with the Character of being a Friend of theirs of meaner Extract.

But wholly to sequester a man's self from all manner of Conversation abroad,
as those do that pretend to enter into Religion, (which indeed is more properly
taking their leaves of it) is altogether against the Principles of our
Jurisprudent, and his Practice too. Both Extremes are odious and dangerous,
Never to be out of a Crowd, and never to be out of a Cell, or Dormitory; and
it is as much to a man's own Edification and Improvement as others, that he
exert, impart, converse, and communicate. Qui docet, discit: Whoever teaches
others, learns himself; but he that hides himself in a Hole, or buries his
Talent in a Napkin, is a Sot, and does that which as a moral Agent is
unaccountable. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.
It Is to no purpose what you know,
Unless some good with it you do.


But we must be very cautelous and circumspect (on the other side) what sort of
Company we keep; for as Conversation generally is the quickest, most natural
and laudable way of Improvement, if well managed, so nothing is more pernicious
than ill Company; that is the Bane of most men, for want of Jurisprudence, or
Judgment; not but that a man by the help of (Lingua penna mentis muta) that
silent tongue of the Mind, as a Pen is called, may render himself sociable and
conversable, when he perhaps cannot personally appear among Company, as it is
many a Man's case besides my own, in such cases Mahomets will walk to the
Mountain, where the Mountain cannot come to them to converse. Abraham Cowly has
well observed, that an honest Jurisprudent Interest in the Campaign or crowded
Company, (which is worse of the two Extremes than perfect Solitude) must either
make himself sometimes appear like a Knave, or they will make him appear like a
Fool; besides he is in danger of Infection with them, or to be trodden down by
them, wherefore this Extreme of Conversation, is worse than a Seclusion. It Is a
critical point therefore of Jurisprudence, to avoid the two foresaid Extremes;
the Society of, and humane Converse with intellectual voluntary Agents (such as
Angels and Men are, if we take them in puris naturalibus, and not in a lapsed
or degenerate Notion, as both of them may be) is the greatest Dignity and Duty
of Mankind; the Jurisprudent Gamaliel of all the Apostles, intimates his
Opinion fully in the Point, where he exorts us strenuously to Hospitality, and
annexes that singular Motive to it, that some Folks have thereby accidentally
conversed withal, or given Entertainment to Angels; but says he, what e're you
do, do not forget to communicate, or converse liberally, for such are excellent
and highly acceptable to the most high, whereby appears plainly our Honor and
our Duty. Who was more Sociable, Affable, Hospitable and Generous than the Lamb
of God that takes away the Obliquities of Man? The first Miracle that he ever
wrought, was at a Wedding Feast, where it appears the Guests eat and drank
plentifully, which, together with his blessed Company, did much promote the
Freedom and Benefit of their Society and Conversation; a morose and cynical Man
no body minds or much regards, because he is of an Heterogeneal Temper and
Converse, self-affected and singular, and that Conversation which is most Frank
and Cheerful, is abundantly more Useful, most Healthy, most Innocent, and most
Jurisprudential; and the contrary, when a Person is Chagreen and Melancholy, or
(as we Phrase it now adays) out of Humor.

Much more Good or Harm is daily done by Conversation among Men, than by all
the Speculation or Information, otherwise in any thing in the World, for the
Impressions made by Discourse or Example, are very much stronger than what is
made by Precept, or Instructions any other way; and possibly that may be the
reason for the Institution of that great and standing Public Ordinance of
Preaching and Conference, and especially of the Fundamental Article of a
Jurisprudent's Faith, ss. Christian Communion, or Church Fellowship (as some
phrase it) for it is a very true Rule of the School-men's, Omne bonum, eo
melius, quo communicabilius, What-ere is good's communicable,
And therefore the more Venerable.


To which Rule possibly there is no exception but one, and that is of a
particular Secret, and it is hard to say, whether more Profit or more Pleasure
be perceived by every such Communicant, of whatever good Notion and Action is
imparted to another Body.

So radical a thing is Society and Conversation in all Sensitive as well as
Intellectual Agents, that the very Devils themselves, and the worst, and most
degenerous parts of the Creation, delight to practice, according to that
instinct -- Saevus inter se convenit ursus, The Beasts of Prey are together
Sociable as well as Men and Angels Naturally. The Savage Bears so far agree,
As to maintain Society.
Nay (which is most Prodigious of all) none generally are less Sociable and
Conversable than such as should be most exemplary herein, even the greatest and
nicest Professors of Religion and Virtue themselves.

Yet are we fully of Opinion, that there is no better way in the World to
propagate Jurisprudence, or any thing that is of kin to Virtue and Religion,
than a Sociable Conversation, and frank intercourse with one another; and we
peremptorily affirm it to be the Interest of States and Commonwealths in
general, as likewise of every Individual Person in particular, always in the
World to maintain and encourage Society and Converse among each other (pro
virili) to the utmost, in little matters, as well as greater; Cum socio mingas,
vel saltem mingere fingas (say the boni socii of the World) That is, With his
Companion one Sociable is,
That (either seems to do it or) does piss.
Longum iter est (says Seneca) per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla.
Example and Converse, the shorter way, and sweet;
Rules and Precepts tedious, all of us daily see it.


Without a reasonable proportion of Converse a Man rusts, and his
accomplishments shrivel up, and his Faculties grow feeble and insignificant,
Probatum est; it plainly appears in such as are mere Scholars (as we term them)
and Recluded Persons, who sensibly dis-improve for want of Negotiation and
exerting their Parts. Men might have propagated as Plants and Trees do (which
Naturalists observe are like a Man topsie turvy, or reverst) had not his
Creator contrived him to be Sociable as well as Propagable; and his Wife Eve
was Originally designed him for an help-meet Friend and Companion, as much as
to be prolifical, or more; and whoever renounces good and Sociable Converse
with his fellow Creatures, I declare him to be a Common Enemy both to himself
and all Mankind; and in the highest degree a Jurisimprudent, or Ignoramus at
the best.

Who was more Sociable than our Lord and Savior in the Flesh, Night and Day
going about to find Opportunities of doing good to Man, whose Copy in this very
particular all Divines, and other Jurispru^ents agree, we are all bound to
write after, ^o far as we are able to be useful to the whole World within our
reach; and when ^l's done, the best use and benefit of Re^rement, is to
qualify a Man or Woman ^or Public good.

No greater Sot in Nature than he that will put his Candle under a Bushel, and
^ot let it shine so as others may be behol^n to him; and be provoked the better
to ^rve and honor their Sovereign Proprie^r and Creator.

XIX. De Action and Varietate. Of Variety and Action.
ACtion, said Sir Rich. Baker (in his Preface to the History of England) is the
Life of a Prince, Speculation of a Scholar; but (under Correction) it ought to
be of both, for all Speculation that is not in order to Action is nugatory, (and
chicanree.) Frustra fit potentia quod non traducitur in actvm. That is but a
frustraneous, or impertinent Power (say the Schoolmen) which is not exerted
into Action: And whosoever is most capable of variety of laudable Action, is
indisputably the most eximious and useful Member of any Commonwealth, or
Kingdom.

One that is versatilis ingenii, (as we say) that is, can turn his Hand or Head
to variety of Services, is the most accomplished and valuable Person in the
World; which made Sir Francis Bacon (and some others) so Useful and Venerable
in their Times he being a topping Jurisprudent, a Learned a Divine, great
Physician; and, as hi^ Encomium that surrounds his Effigies has deservedly
Recorded him to be tertius ^ Platone, Philosophorum Princeps, the third Prince
of Philosophers since Plato lived.

Actions speak louder than words: Thi^ is agreed on all hands, and in all cases
good or bad. Hence is that Sage and Jurisprudent Counsel given by the Heathen
Poet. Hoc age, tutus eris,
Action better is by half
Than words: Be doing and you are safe.
And Horace plainly avers the same thing in his Advice to a Son, De Art
Poetica, etc. Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit.
The Lad that would obtain his ends,
His Mind to do and suffer bends;
He must be vigorous and bold
In business, bearing heat and cold.


Nor is any thing in Nature more pleasant (whatever happens to be profitable)
than Variety. Certa lectio prodest, said Learned Seneca, sed varietas delectat;
Though a steady Method of Study is profitable; yet, says he, it is Variety
which is delightsome or pleasant. Nothing is more irksome and uneasy to an
ingenious Agent, than one sort or series of Action, or expressions; it makes
the Intellectuals giddy and obtuse, like a Horse in a Mill, whom to prevent
that consequence, we blind. Besides the Pleasure which Variety affords, it
improves the Faculties that exercise themselves therein, as experience (on our
Reflections) will demonstrate plainly. Men's hominum novitatis avida, is an
undeniable Principle, That Man's Mind is Naturally greedy of Novelty; which in
plainer English, is Variety that Man's Constitution so eagerly and naturally
affects; and therefore of Necessity it is more eligible and advisable to
habituate our selves thereunto. All things in Nature delight in and are full of
Variety of Motion and Action; as well the Sun, Moon, and Planets above us, as
inferior Animals below; Winds, Weathers, and Tides of Water; all which may
plainly indicate to us Humane Agents, the Expediency, Use, and Necessity
thereof. Yea, the greatest part of the Creation is contrived for Variety and
Delight, more than Necessity, by that (...), or infinite Wisdom variegated, as
the great Apostle Phrases it.

Neither is there a livelier Emblem (perhaps in the whole World) of Eternity
and Immortality than variety of Actions here on Earth. No one single enjoyment
very often repeated, but cloys and surfeits Humanity; but a variety whets or
creates new Appetites.

So great a Darling of Nature is Variety, that she never exerts two Persons or
things exactly alike; no Man's Face, nor Mind, or inward Faculties are
Mathematically parallel to another. And as no Man lives to purpose that is not
active and vigorous, so none is to good purpose active, who is not addicted to
Variety of Motion or Action.

Among the Barbarian Naturalists, he that is least listless, and most active
and strenuous, is their Chieftain or King, to whom they render readily and
voluntarily all Homage and Allegiance imaginable.

A genuine Jurisprudent is (ad omnia quare) squared and cut out for all
laudible effects and purposes; and his Principles are to be vigorous and
active, and to be full of Variety and Action, as well as Speculation. Hic been
convenient, and in una sede morantur
Majestas and amor --
Here sagely do accord great Majesty
And Love together; and good Reason why:
Here Is (Wisdom) Action, and Variety.


I dare Challenge any Jurisprudent to give me a President of any Man that ever
was a Celebrated Author, or that earned a competent Fortune by doing (next to
nothing that is) only one thing, or dealing in only one Commodity, without
circuity, as we say, or variety of Action: And I further declare it to be my
Opinion, That no Man in the use of his Health, Limbs, and Wits, can be at a
loss utterly, for want of one or other Lawful Action; and (if it be not his own
fault) variety. So great a Latitude of Action does Humane Necessities afford
and crave, were the World much more Populous. And it is more Honorable and
Religious, and Rational to practice for pauper's without any Fee or Sallary at
all, than to be Idle in the Marketplace.

But if no more were in it of motive than the Health of the Body, and the
tranquillity and satisfaction of the Mind, and the prevention or diversion of a
thousand of Snares and Temptations, that else will be sure to put us at least
in exquisite Jeopardy; it is well worth the while for a Jurisprudent, or
Jurisimprudent to be concerned with variety of Action. It Is better far to play
at small Games here, than to stand out; and it is not a moot point, whether
Action will turn to account, for I am (against the common Proverb) fully of
Opinion, that such a rolling-stone will gather Moss; and that a regular and
prudent crusing about the Creation (when you cannot hoist your Top-sail) terra,
terra, from Coast to Coast, as the Phrase is of our Maritine Authors) will turn
to a good account. As Demosthenes the great Orator of Old and profoundly
Eloquent (ea ratione) for that reason must needs be presumed to be, being
asked, Quid primum? Quid deinde? Quid denique praecipuum in Oratore? What Is the
first and main point of an Orator? His Compass. And what is the next great
point, and what is the last, and most considerable part or point? Answered to
them all three, Action. So to the Case, if it were put to a true Jurisprudent,
what is the best Council to be given to any Man to live honestly, and thrive
heartily by; be would give it under his hand for a reasonable Fee Action.
Action, Action, against the World, and the more variety of them the better.
Always provided they are of that sort as enterfere not, or are inconsistent one
with another; which in truth was implied before in the Words prudent and
regular Motions and Actions, and such as are agreeable (more or less) to the
reason of the things aimed at; for a little Discord in Music helps frequently
the Harmony; and by the same reason, may a little casual eccentricality of
Accord, help more than hinder a prudent Enterprise, as a little Trip in a Race,
often quickens and helps a Man by his Recovery to mend his Pace, and more
vigilantly pursue the Cause and Concern of his main Chance, and win the Prize
at long run.

XX. De Voluptate and Paena. Of Pleasure and Pain, or Joy and Sorrow.
TO conceive in Sorrow or Pain, and to earn our Bread in the Sweat of our
Brows, is an original Curse notorious enough, and is intailed on Man and
Womankind; insomuch, that we may truly say to smart, is a thing connatural to
Humanity, and Excess whereof, withers and weakens the Flower and Vigor of both
Mind and Body; but a Tincture of it adjuvant, as an Eye of Melancholy or
Seriosity mends the Constitution, but a Redundancy marrs it, and renders it
chagreen or morose. It Is a pusillanimous Soul that is dejected and depraved by
Calamity, which spurs the Generous to Industry and Puissance; the over
Valuation of any thing which we loose, is the occasion of our Vexation and
Sorrow immoderate. Extirpate once these roots of Mistake, that we lay too great
a stress of Enjoyment on them, or apprehend them to be more considerable than
they prove upon experiment and trial, and then no Cross or Loss in the World
would be able to break our Hearts to pieces; immoderate Sadness is ingratitude
to God, Pleasure and Cheerfulness is the Opposite hereunto; if you will take
the wisest Man's Word in the World. Eccles. 5. It Is our Portion, it is a
peculiar Gift of God, than it there is nothing in the World better, ss. to eat
and drink your Bread and Wine with a merry Heart, and so enjoy the good Fruit
of your Pains and Labor.

We may and ought to sigh and groan, in many cases besides our own; but not be
tired nor overlong disquietted.

Our Duty and our Happiness never more apparently meet together, than in our
Rejoycings, which is the noblest and innnocentest Pleasure in the World; it is
an old saying, and much of Veracity in it, that iniquissima pax est justissimo
bello anteferenda, the most ilfavoured Peace more eligible than the most
beautiful War; so may we say the Pleasure of Joy on any good account, does far
surmount the Pain and Mischief of Sadness and Sorrow. Pleasure is the Varnish
of the Creation, it makes all Enjoyments illustrious and relishing, as Pain
renders them unsavory and irksome, even Life it self is a Burden under acute
pain; whereof poor Job is a signal Instance and Example. Yet are there some
sort of Pain that promotes and advances Pleasure; besides prolification Pangs,
which a Jurisprudent may have met withal in the Acquisition of a Profit
Apprender, or Emolliment, and to say true, the greatest of humane Pleasures are
generally the results of Smart and Pain, according to the Saying, Difficilia
quae pulcra. And that other, (...), etc. God has planted Sweat and Labor or
Pain in the Road to Virtue, so that pleasant seize cannot be enjoyed
without proportionable Pain and Difficulty, so that they are nearer of Kin than
we are commonly aware of; Hazard and Pains are usually antecedent to every
noble and pleasant Acquisition; Trahit sua quemque voluptas.

We all have a peculiar Pleasure,
Which we account our greatest Treasure.
To taste of Pain (however) is as proper and connatural to our present State
here, as to perceive Pleasure; if duly considered, for none that are beloved of
their Heavenly Father, must expect exemption from Punishment or Pain; the
heathen Poet was sensible of this Veracity, who tells us, Albus ut obscuro
detergit nubila coelo
Saepe notus; neque parturit imbres perpetuos,
Sic tu (Sapiens) finire memento.
Tristitiae, vitaeque labores.
The North Wind drives the Clouds away,
Which the South makes a rainy Day;
So Jurisprudents must remember,
To compare July with December.
Pains without Pleasure succeed's sad,
Pleasure, without some Pain's, as bad.


Joy and Pleasures without any mixture or alteration of Pain and Sorrow, is
only a peculiar Dainty reserved for the next worlds Felicity and Enjoyment, and
not to be expected to be met withal in this. But there is a Jurisprudential
Joy or Pleasure many times to be met with here, in suffering Pain, and loss of
Goods, as of old we read of many that did, and in Self-denial for Righteousness
sake; yea, to be overjoyed in such cases, for the prospect of the Reward.

A pleasant and cheerful person is most acceptable to God and Man, whether he
be the giver or receiver of a Benefaction; ever more rejoice, while you
maintain Men's inscia culpae; as the Poet said well, nil conscire sibi, nulla
pallescere culpa; a good Conscience is a constant Feast, and that is the
Foundation of all Pleasure; that is worth the Name of Pleasure. All pains in
such a case, will neither be long nor severe, but short and light, and not
worth further mentioning or taking notice of, in comparison of both the
present, as well as future intellectual Streams and Rivers of Pleasure, that a
true Jurisprudent can never miss of the Enjoyment of. Res est solliciti plena
timoris Amor.
Is as true, as old, a Saying, that Love it self is a very painful thing, and
fearful. To love, it is a grievous pain,
And not to love, a greater is again;
But of all Pains, there is no such Pain,
As for to love, and not be loved again.


This is properly verified of Effeminate Pleasure, but a Masculine
Jurisprudent's Genius and Complexion is of an other guest Mould; for his Love
renounces Fear and Pain; he loves any thing or Person according to the Merits
of the Cause only, a Wrong or Tort pains him more than a broken Shin, and a
righteous Sentence pleasanter to him than a Rose in June. Sensual Titillations
or Pleasures little affect him, but he is ravished with Intellectuals; his
tickling Motto therefore is Currat Lex, fiat Justitia; Ruat Caelum.
Let Right prevail, Reason take place,
What e're becoms of humane Race,
This Letchery has no Disgrace.


But to see Right run down in Forma Pauperis, makes him roar with Pain; for no
greater occasion can be given to a Jurisprudent of Uneasiness and Pain, than to
see Might overcome Right; which is common, or to perceive by Tricks and
Evasions, excentrick to all Rules of Prudence, any body to be morally massacred.

In fine, the greatest Pleasure, and the greatest Pain,
Is to love, and to hate the same again;
Both of which things are intellectual,
A Jurisprudent Minds not sensual.
He very rarely can afford the Leisure,
To taste them; or knows how to count them Pleasure.
If any man in nature feels Pain,
Jurisimprudence is first cause and main.
A Confession of the Jurisprudent's Faith.
I Firmly am persuaded (in my mind)
(The truth whereof upon Record I find)
That the true God eternal's only one,
Besides whom (save Son and Spirit) there is none.
That these (great Elohim!) the Worlds did make,
And still preserve them, for their own Namesake.
That in the highest Heavens ever are,
And of his Sacred Truth do Record bear.
And that for Man, God was Incarnated
In his Nature on Earth, and once was dead,
And buried (not in Hell) but now long since
Rose again up to Heaven (departing hence)
To reconcile lapsed Man to God again.
I hold one visible Church (in the main:)
And Saint's Communion's a true Position,
And will again rise to the beatifick Vision.
And verily believe that God has sent
Forgiveness of sins to each Penitent.
And that Man's Soul a thing Immortal is,
And Bodies to the next World after this
Will raised be; and that the Holy Ghost
To Man's Recov'ry now conduces most;
And does negotiate with him instead
Of Christ, who ever lives (though once was dead)
To intercede on High for poor Mankind,
Whom when he did ascend, he left behind.
The Jurisprudent's Common Prayer.
UNto thee (O Heavenly Father) who art the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, and
a God, hearing Prayer, shall all Flesh come, being promoted by thine
Assistance, and Encouraged by thine Acceptance, through Jesus Christ am I
emboldned to make my most humble Applications in all due and filial
acknowledgments of my Derivation from thee, Dependence upon thee, and
Submission to thee; who art both Original and Final, and more intimate to us,
than any thing else within us, or without; wherefore, I humbly own the
Continuance of thy Fatherly Care, Countenance, Conduct, and Protection every
moment, in, and through Jesus Christ; by whom we are encouraged to call thee
Father. I heartily recognize and own the to be my Sovereign Lord and
Proprietor, and adore thee for thine infinite Condescension, in sending of thy
Son to become a Ransom for the lost World, and for all the blessed Fruits and
Benefactions thereby redounding to me, I humbly commit, and surrender to thee
my Soul and Body so dearly purchased by the Blood of the Eternal and Incarnate
Word; and in the use of that Liberty thou have afforded me, do make a voluntary
Dedication and Resignation of this most reasonable Sacrifice to thine holy
Majesty. I confess and acknowledge, that I am less than the least of all thy
Mercies, and have grossly degenerated, and apostatized from the Law of thy
Creation. I have sinned and miscarried unaccountably, and am altogether
unworthy to be owned by thee; but thou have been graciously pleased to lay help
upon one that is mighty, and able, and willing to save unto the uttermost all
that come unto thee, in, and through his Name. O Lord, I do unfeignedly
therefore deprecate thy Displeasure against me for those innumerable Failings
and Obliquities all my Life long, whereby I am most justly become obnoxious to
thy divine Challenge and Rebuke; more especially those manifold Relapses and
Defections of mine, after renewed Purposes and Resolutions of better Obedience,
as into inordinate Anger, Impatience, Intemperance, Immodesty, and diverse other
exorbitant and vile Inclinations and Passions; and I heartily revoke, and
renounce all wherein I have done amiss; and humbly beseech thee for thy Son's
sake graciously to pardon both all mine own Delinquencies against thine Holy
Majesty, and all those that have any manner of ways disobliged (or dealt
injuriously with) me, especially my nearest Acquaintance. O Father forgive them
(as I sincerely do) for they know not what they have done; and vouchsafe, I
beseech thee, not only to divert thy further Judgments that have not already
taken hold of them and me, (for our Iniquities have found us out) but also to
Sanctify both to them and me, thy present Judgments, and severe (but Fatherly)
Corrections; that (since thy tender Mercies have not) those bitter
Dispensations may hereafter teach us all to learn Righteousness. I humbly pray
thee to root out of all of us all malignity of Mind, and lead none of us into
further Temptations that may be too hard for us; but deliver us from all evil
Consequencies, and the causes of them; and by thine Omnipotent Arm preserve us
from all Pollutions both of Flesh and Spirit, unto thine approaching and
everlasting Kingdom, which is our Salvation.

Be good to the whole World, please to recover thy lapsed Creation; control
all Atheism, Idolatry, and Malignity in the Sons of Violence, that daily make
havoc and disorder in the Family of God. And to the rest of those manifold
Favors which thou have afforded us in Life, be pleased to superadd this, that
I may not be hence removed, but with all advantages for Eternity, with a mind
freed from the Snares, and under a perfect Renunciation of all the sinful and
lewd Guises and Customs of this mad World, and under a sense of a through
Reconciliation with, and Resignation to thee, and fully qualified and
accomplished for an eternal Enjoyment of thee, that whensoe're thou call me
hence, I may be fully assured of a blessed Departure, in the Faith and Fear of
thine Elect.

Be propitious I entreat thee (in a particular manner) to thy Servant, and our
Sovereign Lord the King, whom thou have miraculously appointed in the Throne
over us, preserve him in Peace and Safety from all the Sons of Belial, and
indue him with Wisdom and all Graces requisite for the Discharge of so great a
Trust, and grant that we may lead quiet and prosperous Lives, in all Godliness
and Honesty under him. Bless all inferior Magistrates and dispensers of thy
Word and Sacraments, with suitable Accomplishments for so great Functions;
Mercifully compassionate all the Sons and Daughters of Affliction; every where
suppress and discountenance Antichrist and all Impostors, and let the Gospel be
propagated from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, and ^hen
hasten the coming of our Blessed Savior; and (O bountiful Father!) accept (I
humbly beseech thee) of my hearty Thanks and Praise for that Health and
Welfare, Liberty and Advantages thou daily art pleased to vouchsafe to me, of
doing or receiving any good Offices in the World, for the Enjoyment in Peace
and Safety of the Conversation of good Men, and for the Benefit received by
their Examples and Instructions; particularly, I sensibly and gratefully
acknowledge the innumerable and extraordinary Deliverances from Deaths and
Dangers all my Life long; and for the Mercies and good Providence thou have
remembered me withal, in the midst of so many Judgments and Calamities thou have
seen good to exercise me and mine withal; and for the remarkable Returns thou
have been pleased to make to my poor Prayers early and late, through the
Intercessions of mine only and most blessed Advocate and Mediator the Lord
Jesus; and for the additional Suplies of Comfort by the Holy Ghost, unto whom,
with thy self, be Praise, Homage, and Obedience, World without End, Amen.

A Jurisprudents Ejaculation before Meat.
O God be merciful unto, and bless me with the Pardon of all my Sins, and a
Sanctified Use of these thy good Creatures, of thine infinite Bounty provided
for me, through Jesus Christ my Savior.

His thankful Recognition after Meat.
PRaised be thy Name, O Heavenly Father, for the Supplies of this my present
Refreshment by thy good Creatures, and grant I beseech thee, that I may improve
the Advantages by them received, to thy Service, Praise, and Glory, through
Jesus Christ my Redeemer.

The Character, or Effigies of a downright Jurisprudent.
HE is a Man of sense, of profound Reason,
He Is Loyal, foyal, and he hates all Treason.
He Is not Mercurial, but a solid thing;
He loves and honors his Country and King.
He is not busied about Chicanrees,
He studies Men and Manners (and not Trees.)
He Courts not Women with his Cap or Knees,
He troubles not his Head about such Bees.
He teaches all Men, how to keep the Peace.
He likes his Client, and he loves his Books,
He values no Man on account of looks.
He Is punctual, and very diligent,
He practices true meaning and intent.
He well considers his Opinion;
He will not be bribed by any one.
He is a Man of tender Conscience,
He Is not a Man of very small Expense.
He never is penurious,
He Is ever just and generous.
He Is for the Reason of the Thing;
He Is Counsel for Subject, or King.
He scorns to plead a paltry Cause;
He sticks to Fundamental Laws,
He when he talks (first) makes a pause.
The Jurisprudent's Hymn.
To the Tune of the 148th. Psalm.
Let Us Praise
Our God the Lord,
Whose goodness far exceeds,
Both in thought, deed, and word,
Our praises, and our needs.
Let all things praise
His Name always:
Both Old and Young,
With Heart and Tongue.
For why
His Workman-ship
And care is all Mankind,
When e're our feet do slip,
Let Us then keep him in Mind.
None of us let
His Love forget,
But thankfully
To him reply.
Rejoice
Continually,
Before him Sing and Pray
Aloud unto him cry,
And to him Homage pay.
Whose Mercies sure
Do still endure;
He will not fail
Us Mortals frail.
Epiphonema ad Pythagoram Allegoricum Martiale.
RVmpitur Invidia quidam, (charissime Fili!)
Quod me Rura Legunt: Rumpitur Invidia.
Rumpitur Invidia, Quod sum Jucundus amicis,
Quod Conviva frequens; Rumpitur Invidia.
Rumpitur Invidia; Quod Rus mihi Dulce sub Vrbe est,
Parvaque in Vrbe Domus: Rumpitur Invidia,
Rumpitur Invidia Quod amamur, quodque probamur,
Rumpatur quisquis, Rumpitur Invidia.
Thus Translated.
I Am Ridiculed, or envied (dearest Son!)
For all that I have written, and have done,
That I Am so Frank and Complaisant; and that
I Juncket so much of I cannot tell what:
That I have so much leave to take the air,
And have a little House; I cannot tell where;
And that we are beloved, and approved,
Much good may do 'em, that yet never Loved.
Martial Epigram.
Non amo te Sabide, nec possum dicere quare:
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
Metamorphozed thus.
Valde amo Pythagoram, quia possum dicere quare.
( Hoc verum possum dicere Pythagorae)
I Love Pythagoras well (and can tell wherefore,
And hope to love him still much more and more)
Both as a Jurisprudent, Son and Friend, --
To love him all along unto
The END.

