THE INTEREST Of these United Provinces. BEING A Defense of the Zeelanders
Choice.

Wherein is shown, I. That we ought unanimously to defend our selves. II. That
if we cannot, it is better to be under England than France, in regard of
Religion, Liberty, Estates, and Trade. III. That we are not yet come to that
extremity, but we may remain a Republic. And that our Compliance with England
is the only means for this.


TOGETHER WITH Several Remarkes upon the present, and Conjectures on the
future State of Affairs in Europe, especially as relating to this Republic.

By a wellwisher to the Reformed Religion, and the welfare of these Countries.

MIDDELBURG,

Printed by Thomas Berry, according to the Dutch Copy Printed at Amsterdam.
ANNO 1673.

A Summary of the ensuing Treatise.
THe PREFACE. Wherein, the occasion and reason of this Work. The Authors
fears balanced with others hopes. The necessity of unanimity for, and duty of
self defense.

SECTION I. The rise and State of that great Question, (viz.) whether upon
supposal of inability to defend our selves, it is our INTREST to be under
England or France, and the Zeelanders choice of the former. 2. Arguments to
prove this choice to be agreeable to our true Intrest. The first whereof is from
our Religious concernements. Wherein is shown how great a support Religion is
to a State, and how greatly it concerns us to secure our Religion. 3. The plea
of France's granting us the liberty of our Religion, considered. 4. Objections
from the danger of losing our Religion under England; from the Kings being a
Papist, designing to set up Popery; the increase, countenance, and tolleration
of Papists, as also from his joining with France against us, and Church
Government by Bishops, all answered. 5. A 2d Argument taken from Liberty.
Wherein the different Kinds and degrees of Liberty, under all sorts of
Government, are declared; and the probability of enjoying greater freedom
under England than France, argued. 6. The 3d Argument is the preservation of
our Estates; in regard of Soldjers violence, Governors impositions, Public
Debts by obligation, and Revenues of the Romish Church. 7. The 4th Argument
from Trade. This (viz. Merchandise and Navigation) our chief secular Intrest.
And friendship with England to secure the same. England and we Competitors
herein, what employed thereby in point of Intrest, and Inference. The
probability of getting more, as also enjoying the same with greater Peace
under France, with other Arguments, largely debated; and the contrary evinced
under England. 8. Several other Arguments and enducements to incline us rather
for England, briefly mentioned. With an inference from the whole preceding
discourse, that the friendship of England is to be preferred before that of
France. 9. That we are not yet come to that extremity, but we may still remain
a Republic; in regard of our own strength, and our Neighbors Intrest,
Englands especially; that they had better lose Scotland or Ireland, then let
the French have these Provinces. This War a Game at Hazard. Being engaged will
go through, and Parliament probably assist therein. 10. Compliance with
England, the only means of the Commonwealths continuation. 11. Conjectures of
future affairs. The motions of the ensuing Summer likely to be quick and
great. As to this Republic, probably England may get a bridle to curb us,
France the sadle to ride us, Colen a Supernumerary girth, Munster a bos off the
crupper. Our condition deplored and consolated. A necessary caution for
England, another for the Orange Family. The Authors fears of what will at last
befall us. The Spanish Netherlands a dying. The friendship of England and
France sick at heart, and cannot live long. That of Spain and England sound at
heart, and will recover, etc. 12. France's Ambition. Growing greatness. The
causes thereof. We and England in the fault. The Common Intrest of Europe to
oppose France particularly declared of the Empire, Spain, England, Denmark,
and this Republic and Hans Towns. Yea of Sweden, Savoy, and Switzerland. The
balance of Europe to be held even, and by whom. 13. The Conclusion of the
whole Discourse.
To the Impartial Reader.
ALthough in so small a Tractate, it may be thought needless to give an account
of the occasion thereof; yet I think my self obliged for your further
satisfaction, to do it briefly. The Author having been lately in Holland, found
what the Zeelanders had done in the late Revolutions, misunderstood by some,
and variously censured by others; and therefore thought it worth his pains,
fairly and modestly to vindicate the same. And the rather, because he foresees
various pretexts will be deduced thence, and diverse interpretations be made
thereof, which the Author hopes by his declaring the true intent and meaning,
to free it from. That so all those, whose Curiosity or Interest leads them to
inquire, might be acquainted with the true Grounds and Reasons thereof; and
that neither the propensity of some to the French, nor the prejudice and
passion of others against the English, might make us run blindfold upon our
ruin; but that we may discern our true Interest, and pursue it as occasion
shall require. For as all affection to that which is not our real Interest, so
all aversation from that which is, is madness and folly; which clouds Reason,
precipitates Counsels, runs us upon extremes, and drives us into inevitable
destruction, many times before we are aware.

I know some will be apt to say, What need of this now? The Storm is over, and
the supposition of inability to defend our felves out of doors. If I thought
so, I assure you I should neither trouble my self, nor others any further. But
whether it be my love to the Country, and desire of the welfare thereof; or my
jealousy over the Factions of the Rulers, and tumultuousness of the people
therein; or my comparing and estimating our own strength, fidelity, and courage
with our Enemies; or my observing, that our former Military Discipline (which
made us renowned, and our Country accounted the School of War) is in a great
measure, if not utterly decayed and lost; or my hearing how old Officers, and
Foreign Forces have been slighted; and such preferred, as are unexperienced for
conduct, and untried for courage; or the difference I have observed in the
valor of a poor and rich people; Poverty always stirring up and whetting
Valor, out of hopes to better their condition; whereas riches makes men
fearful of losing what they have, and so falling into a worse. As may be
observed not only in different people, as between the Northern and Southern
Nations, but also in the same, yea in our selves. For when poor in our Wars
with Spain, De Mor. Gern.. 29.
we made good the old Character which Tacitus gives us, Omnium harum gentium
virtute pr^ecip^i Batavi, etc. Of all the German Nations, or People, the
Batavians, were chief for valor; but now that we are grown rich, we are
afraid to adventure either our Persons or Estates, and readier to open our
Gates, then shut them against our Enemies. Or, whether it be my Melancholy
temper only; or my fears and cowardice, if you please to call it so; or my
fancy from my observation, that the third War (as this is with England) has
ever proved fatal to the one side, as is apparent by many examples; or what
ever other cause it is, I must profess freely, that I am of another sentiment,
this War having so black a visage to mine appearance, that I fear we are rather
in the midst of a Tempestuous Sea of Troubles, then discovering of Land, much
less a safe Harbor of rest.

I am not ignorant upon how many pins men hang their hopes. Some upon the
advancement of his Highness the Prince of Orange, hope all will be redrest and
well at home; and that his relation to the Crown of England, and the Elector of
Brandenburgh, will capacitate him to remedy all abroad. Others upon conjectures
of his marrying with the Duke of Yorks Daughter, or some nearly related to the
Crown of England or France; which has been an usual way I confess, especially
among absolute Princes, of accomodating differences. Some upon our sufficient
numbers of Men and Moneys to defend our selves. Othersome upon the Assistance
of the Emperor, and the German Princes, Brandenburgh especially. And others
upon their opinion, that now the Pensionary de Wit and his party are broken, so
that England can confide more in our friendship, that the King will break with
France, and afford his Nephew and these Netherlands assistance; especially
because they judge, that it is the Interest of England and Germany, as well as
Spain, not to see us fall into the French hands, for fear they have only
Polyphemus his courtesy, to be last devoured. But yet all these grouds, and
diverse others, which are variously discoursed of, prevail not so far with me,
as that my hopes can balance my fears.

For although I grant the strength of the remaining Provinces to be
considerable both by Sea and Land; and the greatest foundation to build our
hopes upon, next under God Almighties Protection; yet if we duly consider the
state and condition we are in, there is not that just ground of confidence,
which may free us from fears; as many are apt to imagine. He is very short
sighted that observes not, 1. That there are two different parties amongst us,
and that a Commonwealth, muchless then a Kingdom divided, cannot stand. 2. That
we might do much more then we do, or (for any thing I yet see) will or shall do
for our own defense. 3. That we are destitute of succors from abroad for the
present, except from Spain; which we may happily pay dear enough for; if we
should be drawn into a League Offensive and Defensive with them in a long and
tedious War. And 4. that we are full of tumults and distractions at home, which
is to me a greater presage of approaching ruin, then all our Enemies weapons
of War; and makes me fear that as tumults was the occasion of our rising, so
they will be of our ruin. Hist. Gal. l. 2.
And that Priols observation of two only Nations that have stood firm by
defection; the Helvetians at the rise, and the Hollanders at the fall of the
Rhine; those founding and defending their Liberty by the Mountains, their
Poverty, and Equality; these by the Waters, their Riches, and the States with a
Captain General; may shortly be contradicted in the latter, if we be not more
unanimous, and perhaps ere long in the former also.


I grant likewise, That it is very considerable to have so wise a Conductor as
the Prince of Orange is for his years, and one of such near Relation to two
such great Potentates as his Uncles of England and Brandenburgh. But yet if we
rightly consider, we cannot but conclude. 1. That it must be Power, as well as
Policy, that can relieve us; and that in the Affairs of the World, Interest is
preferred above all Relations; the whole World turning upon the Hinge of
Self-interest; and all Princes, States, Families, and Persons eagerly pursuing
that which they apprehend their Interest, although often mistaking it, and
oftener the means to obtain it; no wonder if they miss thereof. 2. And that his
Civil Dignities come rather to him by Popular Tumults, than Regular
Proceedings: Which is found an easy way to rise by, but a hard way to stand
by, yea, Morally impossible, if not backed by power. For as it is with sick
Persons, so with sick States, if all things be not quickly redressed that is
grievous to them, they presently cry, Turn me again; and think they have power
to undo, that which they themselves have formerly done. It being a true
Character which Livy gives the Common People, Lib. 24.
Plebs aut humiliter servit, aut superbe dominatur. 3. And that though the de
Wits be dead, their party lives; and if things succeed not well under his
Highness, will have no small advantage, not only from the horrid murder of
those two Pillars of their party; but from the declining of Affairs, to cry him
down with the people, and make him an Insignificant Cipher of State. 4. And
lastly, There are so many Papists, and other Sects of Religion and
Malcontents, who watch for opportunities to Flieblow the Common People, and
set them upon Sedition; that I much question, whether that fresh gale of
Affection to the Prince, which has blown so briskly through all these
remaining Provinces, will last long. For if they see that his Highness cannot
make Peace, as they expected; and they feel more miserable effects of a
stubborn and cruel War, and be forced to greater Taxes (the Common People being
always covetous, what ever the cause or necessity be) and find their Trade
still obstructed, and Land drowned, to the impoverishing both of Cities and
Country; I fear we shall find the People so restless and unquiet, that they
will neither know what to do themselves, nor be willing to be guided by their
Governors that do; but when Extremities press upon us, bring all into
Confusion, and consequently Ruin.


For besides the Jealousies which many have of his Highness, which Bentivoglio
long since foresaw and foretold, That these Jealousies betwixt the State, and
their Stadtholder, would become the cause of our Ruin; the needy multitude,
(which are always enemies to good order and Government) when distressed; will
seek occasion to prey upon the richer, whom they constantly envy. And the
middle sort, which are the true Basis of a State, whose principal aim is
Liberty and Plenty, when they see these endangered; grow jealous of their
Governors (upon whom all misfortunes are constantly laid) and seek to pull
them down and set up themseves one after another, to the ruin of all. For the
pomp of Government so dasles the eyes of those that know not the Weight of it,
that when there is any seeming access thereto, all are apt to contend for it,
and every one to think himself as capable as his neighbor, and vy with one
another without end: till they that were formerly good passengers, now turning
Pilots in a Storm; through their continual contentions and unskilfulness,
shipwreck the Commonwealth, whilst they sincerely desire and endeavor to save
it. I shall therefore conclude, that although we have a good Head, yet except
the members be at unity, and unanimously resolved to give assistance to their
Head and Governors; it is in vain to think, we can be secured from such
potent enemies, (except any be so mad as to expect miracles) or that the
Princes name or waying of his Flag upon our Towers can defend us.

For his marrying his Highness the Duke of Yorks Daughter, we may speak of it
here, and those in England of the King of Sweden, and both be mistaken. I can
see little certainty thereof, and therefore can say less therein; but this I
can say, that if a Relation would effect our desires, there is that which is
very near already; yea which many perhaps will think too near, if it conduce
no more to the procuring our Peace.

For our assistance from the Emperor and Germain Princes, which is so much
talked of, the Brandenburgs especially; if I were assured they designed to serve
us, and not themselves of us; I should have more hopes then I have. I know the
Germains are a great and warlike Nation, and that none almost have warred with
them, that have not repented it. And when we see them war with France, though
they directly assist us not further, such a diversion to our enemy will be a
considerable advantage to us. But at present, we see no more of their
intentions, than to defend themselves. The Emperor is not only continually
kept waking by the Turk; but at present diverted also by the distractions of
Hungary. And the fears of Poland, will necessitate Brandenburg to have an eye
to Prussia. The Princes of the Empire are many, and divided, (several of them
declaring for France, others wavering and waiting opportunity to close with the
prevailing side) which makes their Counsels slow, and more subject to be
discovered, the raising men and bringing them together more difficult, the
commanding of them more liable to discord (which has often proved fatal in
their Armies) and the providing for them very uncertain. And I might ad
hereunto (for it is well known) that some of the Germain Princes have so run
out their revenues; that though they have men far more then their proportion,
yet have not money to pay the half of their rate. So that it is well, if what
was said of old of the Britains, prove not true of the Germans, Tacitus in vita
Agricolae.
Dum singuli pugnant, omnes vincuntur.

As for the Interest of England, which we think should incline them to hinder
rather than further Frances growing greatness, and consequently to Peace with
us: I shall only say this, That as we allow all men liberty to judge of their
own Interests, so must we much more to Kings and Rulers. And it is but
reasonable to think, that they understand their own Interest better then we,
that are strangers to their designs; except we think of our selves as the
Persians, who say that they have two eyes, and others but one. I may think,
that the same Reason of State should prevail now, that did formerly with the
English, in the first War, To humble us, but not ruin us; and shall make it
apparent, that they cannot rationally have a thought of our ruin, without
thinking to follow after, yet circumstances are so different, and the passions
of men so various, that I am not certain to what extent and degree of
Humiliation they measure their Interest, or how far England is engaged with
France for effecting of this. We may think, and the English Nation may be
jealous (as I know they are) that France will cousen them at last, and serve
them now as Comines tells us they have formerly, l. 3. c. 8. and l. 4. c. 9.
Bodin de Rep. l. 5. c. 1.
When usually they beat the French in their Wars; but then what they had got by
their Swords, they lost by their Treaties, (even as Bodin tells us the French
were served by the Spaniards;) but if they will adventure that, who can hinder
them?

Should I speak my private apprehension, it is briefly this, England has been
long jealous of the growing greatness of this State by Sea, and find it an
error of Policy in former Governors, to suffer us to arrive at this height of
contesting with them. From whence they have met with several inconveniences in
regard of Trade, and also been put to vast expenses to maintain constantly a
Fleet to cope with us. These things they would willingly ease themselves of,
which they know cannot be done, but by the Sword. The first War which was
occasionally begun, was no time to effect their designs, in regard the Kingdom
was harrast and exhausted by a long Civil War, and Oliver the Protectors chief
design was to settle himself, and therefore made Peace. The second War
advantaged them nothing; for the French countenancing us (though secretly in
League with them before the War was ended) they were not able to effect what
they designed, having lost their opportunity which they had after the first
battle in their hands: That being often verified of the English, which was said
of Hannibal, (by whom matters not, for the Learned Historians Livie and
Plutarch differ therein,) Vincere scis Hannibal; victoria uti nescis. A Peace
is concluded at Breda, but the War had a sting in the tale of it, the work at
Chattam, Ma^et alta mente repostum, and makes them more eagerly wait for an
opportunity, both to revenge themselves, and pursue their former designs. And
now France taking occasion to quarrel with us, they take the opportunity to
oppress us, and bring us under; that they may free themselves from those
present inconveniences in Trade and Expenses, and will see how they can make it
with France for the future. They know well, that if we be broken, there is no
Nation else is able to match them at Sea, and being in an Island, fear not
invasion by Land Forces. I might parallel this with the Peloponnesian War, the
cause whereof was the Athenians growing greatness, and particularly in Power at
Sea; Lib. 1.
upon whom therefore, the Lacedaemonians made War, as Thucydides tells us, who
has accurately writ the History thereof. And yet though Interest be the moving
cause of most Wars, Hist. lib. 3. c. 6.
what ever the pretext be, (for Polybius has long since taught us to
distinguish these two by sundry Examples) yet I am far from asserting it alone
a justifieable cause of any War. If any desire satisfaction what is, I refer
them to Grotius de Jure Belli and Pac. lib. 2. cap. 1. and 22. and seqq. for my
design permits me not such a digression. These thoughts of the present Interest
of England, leads me to conclude.

1. That in their League with France they have made provision for these; so
that if the French prevail, they shall have such Maritime places, as may be a
real security to them in these particulars. 2. That they will never suffer
France (if they can possibly hinder it) to have all these Maritime Provinces
entirely. For if our might alone be such an eyesore to them, how much more if
it should be joined with that of France. 3. That they will not desist, till
they have tried their utmost, to obtain these ends which they account their
Interest; having now the advantage of Alliance with France, their joint Power
and Prevalency, and our present Weakness and Distractions. So that I cannot
flatter my self so much as to hope, That either the Princes Relation to His
Majesty can procure, or Money purchase our Peace with them, so long as they see
any probability of effecting their designs.
But if any has more certain grounds of hope, which are not yet discovered to
the World, he needs not lose his time in perusing this Treatise. It is but my
losing a few spare hours in composing, and the Printer a small sum in
publishing this amongst those many Pamphlets, which daily fly abroad, through
all corners of the Country. For I profess this once for all, That I pretend
not to know (or if I did, should I discover) any Intrigues or Mysteries of
State; nor desire to pry into the Arcana Imperii, but let them silently rest in
the bosom of those who sit at the Helm of Government; or to make any unworthy
reflections upon any, Friends or Enemies, French or English. But only as one
standing upon lower ground, to take the height of the Tower of Interest, which
is gazed upon by all, but through passion and prejudice rightly measured by
few. Whether I have mistaken it with the multitude, time will discover, and let
others judge by the following Discourse; which I fore-fee will meet with as
many Censures, as I have Hairs on my Head, though I value them all less than
the least of them; my Conscience bearing me witness, that I have published the
same, with a sincere affection to the Reformed Religion, and welfare of these
Countries.

Nov. 30. 1672. J. H.

Sect. 1. The rise and state of the Question, viz. Whether upon supposal of
inability to defend our selves, it is our Interest to be under England or
France, and the Zeelanders choice of the former.
HE is a Stranger to us and our Affairs, who knows not; that the late
Revolutions among us, and particularly at Vtrechts betaking themselves to the
French for protection, were attended both with great consternation, and various
deliberations, as is usual in such disasters. When therefore misery and
destruction was approaching as a violent torrent, that bears down all before
it; Self-preservation being the Fundamental Law of Nature; every Province,
City, and almost Village, began to consider, what they should do to preserve
themselves, from being drowned in the overflowing deluge.

Some were of opinion, that the remaining Provinces were of sufficient strength
to defend themselves, and therefore looked no further. Others were of a contrary
judgment; and therefore thought it better, upon reasonable terms, to put our
selves under a Foreign Power, as Vtrecht had done, then to be conquered by the
Sword. And herein also men's judgments were divided, some thinking it better to
be under the French, others to be under the English. Those of Holland (as was
commonly reported) were more inclinable to the former, in regard of their near
approach to them in Vtrecht; and especially out of an opinion which many have
entertained, That the Interest of Holland, being principally that of Trade by
Sea, was more competible with that of France then England, Insomuch, that many
believe, if the advice of Monsieur Pompone of the Kings sending Charte Blanch
had been followed; the Cities of Holland had at that time several of them
imitated the example of Vtrecht; those of Zealand were generally inclined to
the English. But as opinions are usually both bred and brought up by Passions;
so here it was manifest, That the excessive hopes of the former, made them for
absolute defense; and the excessive fears of the latter, for absolute
resignation. In such cases there are two ways have always been found safest and
best for accommodation, viz. A due examination of the Grounds of those
Passions, and a just temperament or comprehension of the diversity of Opinions:
Which here so happily fell out, that it was resolved upon and declared by many
in Zeeland, first, That they would use their best endeavors to defend
themselves; and secondly, if they found themselves unable, they Would then
resign to the English. Hereby showing, that they neither did through vain
fears, wholly despond of their own strength; nor through flattering hopes were
wholly fearless of their Enemies. They would try and use the best means they
could, to stand of themselves according to their hopes; and yet also provide
against the worst of their fears, which was their fall by absolute conquest.

For the manner of doing this, I shall neither accuse, nor defend it; though
the Magistrate led not the Van of Consent, according to his place and dignity,
Plut. l. de fort.
yet he followed close in the Rear. And though it was done hastily, yet why may
not a hasty Pen, sometimes be as happy as Apelles his Pencil, which in Passion
being thrown on the Picture, better portrayed the Horses foaming, then all his
premeditated Counsel and Art.

It is enough to me, and to my purpose, that what was done is agreeable to the
true Interest of the Country; which I hope to make apparent in the following
Discourse. But before I do that, give me leave to premise a few things, which
tend to the clearing of the Matters in question.

1. That we only suppose this inability for the present, to satisfy the
curiosity of the World, which never think their teliscope long enough, to see
to the utmost end of Interest. For we shall afterward make it apparent, that
we neither are as yet come to that extremity (through Gods mercy) nor need to
fear we shall be reduced to it, if we be not awanting to our selves. 2. It is
above all to be understood, that this resolution is absolute for Self-defence,
and conditional only for Resignation. It is an approved maxim which every wise
man lives by, Alterius ne sis, si tuus esse possis, which holds good in
Societies, whether lesser of Families, or greater of Cities, and Provinces, as
well as private persons. If any can be free, it is folly to think, they will be
subject to another. 3. This resolution being conditional, upon the supposal of
evident inability to defend our selves, it is not to be imagined, that it
should take place upon every Danger or Alarm of War, especially so long as
Holland and Freesland are able to defend themselves: States as well as Persons,
may be dangerously sick, and yet recover. Differences may be accommodated with
our Enemies, or assistance may be afforded us from our Friends; the Scene of
War may change, the Water and Weather may be our Walls of Defense,
Difficulties, Dissentions, and Distractions, may befall our Enemies: One thing
or other may fall out so far to our advantage, that we may retrench our selves
in safety, though we should not recover our former Greatness. 4. Nor can it
reasonably be thought, that any will give themselves over to another, so as to
part with their Religious and Civil Interests, and be in no better a capacity
then a conquered people; who though they are not made absolute slaves, yet are
usually sore oppressed by the Conqueror. But only to part with their Supremacy,
and the Appendixes thereunto, under which they may live as free Protestant
Subjects.
If any object this is not practicable, in regard of the Treaty betwixt the two
Crowns of England and France.

I answer. 1. Who knows that, except a few of their Cabinet Counsel? 2. This
supposes that they have divided the Lions Skin before he be slain, which to me
is very doubtful. For although two such mighty Potentates, might upon rational
grounds, think themselves able to master this Commonwealth, before they began
the War; yet so many are the unexpected accidents, and the events of War so
doubtful, that few have been known to divide the spoil, before they had won
the battle, or the Country before they had triumphed in the War: lest they
being frustrated of their hoped succes, should become a scorn and contempt to
the world. We have sufficient reason to think, that neither England will
permit France, nor France England, to have these Countries entirely; and can we
then think that they should agree upon this before hand? if others will ghues,
I have the same liberty; whereby I think that when time (which is the revealer
of secrets) brings the Treaty to light; it will appear that the French should
hold us in by Land, and the English by Sea, till they had brought us to their
own terms; of France keeping such places above as may be thought most
conducible, to the enlarging his Conquests and keeping us under, and England by
Sea, as may secure his desired Trade, and Navall expenses; and that neither of
them should have these Maritime Provinces entirely (for that was for the one to
make the other his Master, and absolute Sovereign at Sea, by such an accession
of strength) nor yet divided; for that would be a continual bone of contention
betwixt them. 3. Those that suppose this repertition, generally say, that
Zeeland is to be English; and if so, the objection is answered. For if each
must conquer their part by their own Arms, as many imagine; who can think
that any will be at the expense of so much blood and treasure, besides the
hazard of succes, for that which they can have upon honorable terms?


Or if they proceed jointly with their Arms, to obtain their designs; we
cannot think the one will obstruct the other, in that which is agreed upon by
them both. And this way I suppose they take; because in a joint War the succes
is common to both, and the advantage redounds to each according to their former
accord; and was it otherwise here, England attacquing us only by Sea, might
get nothing by Land, and France all. Which I cannot imagine to be so agreed
upon, whatsoever the issue may be. For I cannot think the English such fools
to fight only for blows, and to set up the French to their own destruction.

But let their agreement be what it will for the places they conquer, yet it
cannot bind or determine us how to dispose of our selves before we are
conquered. All free States, and Cities, v. Grot. de Jare bell. and pac. l. 1. c.
3.. 8. l. 2. c. 6. and l. 3 c. 20.. 5.
may upon what conditions they please, yield the Soverainty over them, and
their own subjection to whom they please. And allthough such proffers have
sometimes been refused, in regard of Wars and other evil consequences which
might attend them; yet here the acceptance is not to be doubted of, seeing this
is the Helena for which they fight.

If any shall ask how this is to be effected.

I answer, Non est deliberandum de modo, priusquam constat de re. If any grant
that it is to be done, it is as much as I undertake. If God in his all-wise and
righteous Providence, suffer us to be brought so low, that we cannot longer
withstand our enemies: let those in supreme authority take care for the manner
of performance, as to the time in which, treating whereby, and conditions
whereupon they will yield their Supremacy and Government. It being my work only
to show, that it is our Interest in such a case, to make choice of England
rather then France, or any other Potentate whatsoever.

Sect. 2. Arguments to prove the Hypothesis, the first whereof is from our
Religious Concernments; wherein is shown how great a support Religion is to a
State, and how greatly it concern us to secure our Religion.
HAving now truly related Matter of Fact, and clearly stated the Question, I
shall proceed to prove the same, viz. That in case of inability to defend our
selves, it is our Interest to be under the English rather than the French.

First in regard of Religion. Which as it is of chiefest concernment, so
deserves to have the precedence of all other considerations. The very Heathens
accounted this their chief Interest, and therefore above all to be secured and
defended. The Romans saying was Pro aris and focis, therein giving Religion,
the preference of all their civil concernments. And if we Christians do not,
the more is our sin, and the greater our shame. It is so well known how the
Heathens of old, and Turks of later times have valued their several false
Religions; how their first Founders, Legislators, and Magistrates have made
Religion, both the Basis upon which they founded their Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, and the chief Pillars to support them; and how zealous the
common people have been for their Superstitions: That I cannot but wonder that
Christians should be such Gallices for the true Religion and Gospel of Christ,
and fear that Turks and Heathens will rise up in judgment against us, and
condemn us for our indifferency herein. But if examples would either sway us,
or shame us, I need not go so far for them, our own Ancestors are abundantly
sufficient. I am sure (if the History of former times deceive me not) Religion
was the chief inducement to them, to begin that hazardous War with Spain. And
had such an impression upon them, that they freely ventured their lives and
estates for this especially; although I know there were many other grievances
insisted on, to justify that War. Had they thought that their Posterity should
have made so light of Religion and Liberty, which cost them so dear (as many we
see in those places over, who have so lightly parted with both in a great
measure,) I persuade my self they would never have commenced such a War; but
the sincerer part of them would have fled with their Families abroad, rather
then have endured those miseries at home. Could they now stand up out of their
Graves, how would they condemn this unfaithful generation! And how will our
Children have occasion to curse us, for betraying the trust reposed in us by
our Ancestors, and selling the precious Truths of Religion at so cheap a rate,
which they bought so dear.

If the true Religion which we profes, be not the Polar Star, by which those
that sit at the Helm steer the Ship of the Commonwealth; what can we expect,
except we be Atheists, and shut out God and his safeguard, but to suffer
shipwreck? Nay if this be not the Pearl of price to us all, which we prefer
above all worldly pebles, it will be no wonder, if our enemies spoil us both
of this and them. If any be of another judgment, Serres. in Lewis 11.
Bussieres. Hist. Fra. l. 13.. 9. and 24. Comin. l. 6, c. 7. and 12.
Anti-Machiavel, etc.
and prefer the Reason of State above Religion (although in this case they are
conjoined, as I shall show hereafter) I wish such would oberve from Lewis the
11, who first opened the pack of fraudulent polices to the Princes of Europe;
what dismal ends have befallen him, and the Atheistical Politicians since,
those of Italy especially; and what disappoyntments their designs have met
withal, and see if they have any reason to tread in their steps. I am jealous
(I confess) that the atheism and irreligion of the present age is great,
which makes me larger herein then otherwise I should be: yet I hope not so
great amongst us, that we should prefer Popish superstition before the true
reformed Religion. Belial before Christ: If so, we are fitter to be our enemies
asses, to be laden with their trumperies, and lasht at their pleasure, than to
be dealt withal by arguments to convince our Consciences.

If we duly consider that true Religion is 1. The Fountain of all true Piety
and Virtue here, and of eternal Felicity hereafter. 2. That which rightly
teaches every one their duty, not only in reference to their particular
practice, but public concerns, Magistrates how to govern, and people how to
obey. 3. That which furnishes us with the strongest Arguments, for mutual
affection and assistance to one another, courage in dangers, hope in
extremities, patience in adversity, and perseverance in our duty. And 4. That
which only can assure a people of Gods favor and being propitious to them;
and the contempt thereof on the contrary, of his displeasure and malediction;
We must needs conclude, that the Magistrate in the first place as Gods
Vicegerent in Government, and all others in their several Stations, ought to
endeavor above all things by all lawful means to preserve, defend, and secure
the same; as they tender the honor of God, the welfare of his Church, the
prosperity of the Commonwealth, and their own and Posterities temporal and
eternal happiness. I shall not need to enlarge these things, in regard they are
so well known, and approvedly verified by so many examples, out of Sacred and
profane Histories: and none that I know have ever had the impudence to deny
them in Thesi, though they dispute in Hypothesi which is the true Religion.
Even Machiavel, as wicked as his writings are in many things; Disp. de Rep. l.
1. c. 12.
yet asserts (as a Politician) that true Religion must above all things be
regarded by those that desire to preserve themselves, and that there is no
certius indicium de reip. ruina than the contempt of Religion.


And for fuller conviction let me ad, that it is not only an acknowledged truth,
but that which all ages of the Word have experienced, that Religion is the
greatest bond and tie of humane society, and therefore must needs be the maine
pillar of support to a State, and the best walls of defense to a people. Hoping
therefore what is said in the general to be sufficient, I shall now descend to
particulars briefly.

And herein it is well known, that the English and we (I speak of the
generality of both Nations, Rulers and people) symbolise; being both of the
Reformed Religion. Whereas the French are for the greatest part Papists, to be
sure all in power whether civil or military: it being the practice now of
France, to employ none but such in the management of affairs; so that if we be
either Governed or Garrisoned by the French, we cannot exspect to be so by any,
but Papists and professed enemies of our Religion.

But something here will be pleaded for the French, and something also
objected against the English.

Sect. 3. The plea of France's granting us the liberty of our Religion
considered.
FIrst for the French it may be argued, that the King will grant us the liberty
of our Religion.

To which I reply by way of concession, that I verily believe he will; but
desire it may be further considered.

1. If he grants this liberty according to the custom of France, it will be
only to those of the reformed Religion. Now besides these, there are many
others amongst us, Jews, Lutherans, Anabaptists, etc. The commonwealth
consisting both of several sorts of people, and several sorts of Religions:
and what shall become of those, which the commonwealth tollerates, though not
of the professed Religion of the Land?

2. But let it be further supposed, that provision be made for the liberty of
those also that dissent from the reformed Religion, or for all, and that by
Articles, Edicts, or whatsoever way you please: yet we know how slightly these
are usually observed, by those that have the execution of them, and how little
Governors and Soldjers regard these. For they well know, that most cannot, many
dare not, others will not complain of them; and if any do, it will be a
wearisome work, and the remedy many times worse than the disease. So that a
patient suffering is the only solace to the sufferer and oppressed.

3. I might add, that it is a maxim with many Papists (allthough not all I
confess Molanus de fide haereticis servanda.
) that no faith is to be kept with heretics. Now all Papists accounting us
such, if those that Govern be of that persuasion; how little account will they
make of what conditions soever are made with us; but as occasion serves, if
they dare not openly break, yet will they secretly evade, all such as serve
for our support, and think they do God good service. As also their tenet of
the Popes power of dispensation with all oaths, Articles, Promises and
obligations though never so solemn and sacred: or if you please (for it is all
one) a power to abrogate Gods laws, null all the faith and bonds of mankind,
subvert all human Society, and in short ex injustitia facere Justitiam as the
Canonists tell us. De translat. Episcop. c. quanto in glossa.
Now suppose we have Governors that measures consciences by else rather than
inches; who matters no more engagements dispensed with by his Holiness, than we
do our Almanacks out of date. I should be glad to be informed what we could
do in the case, more then cry and complain to God Allmighty. For I doubt they
will seldom do that, which Maximilian the first did frequently, Deus aeterne,
nisi vigilares, quam male esse mundo, Morn. Myster. Iniquit,
quem regimus nos ego miser venator, and ebriosus ille ac sceleratus Julius!
Nay if Governors think themselves obliged in conscience and honor to keep
conditions; yet it is well known how generally they are influenced by their
Clergy: so that in all dubious cases, and the application of general rules to
particular practices, it cannot be exspected but judgment should be given on
the Papists side, and that the Grandees of the Church should bear them out in
it, and Jesuits and others Zelots applaude their practices.

4. The Papists must have public places for their Worship, not only in all
Cities but Villages, as we may see in the Articles propounded by the French.
Now there being by far too few Churches or places for public Worship, in most
of our populous and enlarged Cities already; it will not be possible for a
great part of our Religion, to enjoy the public Ordinances of God; but many
will run into profane courses, most grow ignorant and careless what Religion
they are of, and their posterity absolute Papists. By which means the number
of the Reformed decreasing, and Papists increasing; where at first there was
but only one Church for popery; they shall then take more, and so continue to
enlarge themselves and straten us. Nor let any judge these, as only jealousies
and fears. For if they begin already to incroach (as it is credibly reported
from several places they command) and break Articles herein, when not only
the commands of superiors, but common policy requires a most religious
observance thereof; what shall we think they will do hereafter? If they will
not now out of hopes to win those to them, which yet stand out: much les will
they, when there is no more hope of gaining thereby.

5. When popery is the Religion of our Governors, who have the disposal of
preferments and profits, to allure men to their Religion: We shall find by
woeful experience, what by education, converse, marriages, dignities and other
worthy advantages; many of the ignoranter and looser sort of Protestants, will
change their profession (I say not Religion for that such never had) and turn
Papists. Who is such a stranger in the world as knows not, that by such
artifices they have more weakened the Protestants in France, than by all their
wars and contests with them. In so much that of late years, some wise men of
the Reformed Religion there, have been so fear full of its being utterly
supplanted; that they have required their children by their last will and
Testament, to leave that Kingdom, and setle themselves in these Countries.

6. Let the best he supposed that any rational man can imagine, yet will it be
bad enough. For if the Papists have the Civil power to back them, allthough
the wiser and better sort, it is not to be doubted will be civil; yet the the
ruder sort will be intollerably insolent. And this begins to appear in some
places already, where the Popish Inhabitants are more insufferably insulting,
spightfull, and injurious than the French themselves. And if they do this so
early while things are doubifull, and the issue of the War dubious; what may we
expect when they are in their high Meridian of succes and glory?

7. And lastly, if any one thinks that these are only needles fears and
groundles surmises, I shall desire them to peruse the French Ambassadors Speech
to the Emperors Council, Gremonville.
where he will find this Argument of Religion insisted on to divert the Emperor
from our assistance (which is well retorted by the ingenious Answerer thereof.)
And inform themselves how fast the Jesuits and other Zealots for the Romish
Religion, fall off from the House of Austria and Spaint to France; in regard of
their inability to carry on their designs of the Universal Popish Monarchy,
and the hopes they have of France's potency to effect it. And then let them
judge, if there be not sufficient ground, for all that I have said, and much
more that might be said upon this Subject.

Sect. 4: Objections from the danger of losing our Religion under England; from
the Kings being a Papist, designing to set up Popery; the increase,
countenance, and tolleration of Papists, as also from his joining with France
against us, and Church Government by Bishops, all answered.
But now on the other hand it is by some objected against the English.

1. That the King is a Papist in heart, and designs to set up the Popish
Religion.

First what the King is in his heart, and what he designs, is only known to
God Almighty, who is the searcher of hearts. That he is a professed protestant,
is well known. And allthough I will not swear for him nor any man alive, that
he will not change his Religion; yet to me it seems very improbable, upon the
following grounds.

1. He that would not in his minority, when under his Mothers education in
France, K. Charles I. Letters.
but followed his Fathers instructions, of being obedient to her in all things,
excepting the matter of her Religion; I cannot think will now in his maturity.

2. His withstanding so many temptations wherewith he was environed so long a
time together, during those many years of his exile; wherein neither the
friendship of Papists, nor unkindness and hard measure he met withal from
Protestants could move him; Militiere's Victory of the Truth, and Bp. Bramhalls
Answer.
makes me think him much more immovable, now he is free from those. Who that
knows those times, knows not what designs the Papists had upon him? What
Persuasions and Arguments they used both by word and writing? What Promises
they made him of assistance to recover his Kingdoms? What Arguments of Interest
they pressed him with, which are usually more prevalent with Princes, than the
intrinsic Arguments of Religion? And if he stood unshaken in all those
boisterous blasts, shall we think he will fall in a calm?

3. His rescuing his youngest Brother the Duke of Gloucester out of his Mothers
hands, when her designs appeared for perverting him in his Religion; is an
evident proof of the realty of his Profession. If any one say it was his
Interest for regaining his Kingdoms. I say.

4. And is it not his Interest also for keeping them? Did he gain them so
quickly, or are his three Kingdoms so little worth, that he should easily
hazard them? Kings are wiser then to venture their Crowns upon every idle
Priests pratles. If there were any stronger Arguments now then formerly, either
for the Popish Religion, or from his Interest; we had some reason to be jealous
that he might change.

But 5. It is apparently against his Interest, not only in regard of the
danger he might incur of losing his Crowns, but the great loss which would
inevitably accrue to him by this change.

The danger we cannot imagine to be small, if we rightly consider those
Kingdoms. I have had an account (having been a little curious in those
enquiries) of 1100000 of his Subjects, that by Interest and Inclination were
carried counter to the Court. Under these five Heads. 1. The Purchasers of
Crown and Church Lands that are now restored, and they outed. 2. Soldiers and
Seamen, that had fought against him by Sea and Land. 3. Magistrates and
Ministers, that were removed and turned out of their places. 4. Commonwealths
Men that were Anti-monarchicall in their judgments. 5. Fanatics properly so
called, as Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy Men, Quakers, etc. And though I could
perhaps give as good a guess as another, at the rest of the Substantial
Protestants that are of the Episcopal persuasion, yet that needs not now.
These you must think, however divided in their Interests, Judgments, and
Affections; and many of them, no doubt very Loyal to his Majesty; yet without
all doubt would join against Popery, and never willingly submit themselves to
that yoke of bondage. Nay, some perhaps would be glad of such an Argument, and
Plea to the people, and the Demagogues gain thereby no small number of
Proselytes to their Party, if his Majesty was once a declared Papist.


And as his danger, you see is great, so his loss I am sure could not be small.
1. Of his Honor, not only in changing that Religion he has now so long
professed, and blurring the fair copy which his Father has set him; but in
admitting the Popes Supremacy: which has been so Injurious to the dignities
of Emperors, Kings, and Princes; that their complaints how they have been
plagued by the Popes are infinite. 2. Of his profit and revenues, Vid. Bodin de
Rep. l. 1: c. 9.
in regard that the Peter Pence or Tenths of Livings, and other Contributions
paid formerly to the Pope, are by Law annexed to the Crown, and paid
accordingly, to the King. 3. Of his Subjects affections, wherein his safety
especially consists. For a Prince that has the hearts of his people, has
their purses and persons at his service; and reigns more happily by their
love, then all his own power though never so great. If we therefore consider
his education in, and his long profession of the protestant Religion, his
honor and intrest engaging him to persevere therein: I should think no man
need fear his changing it for the Popish, the fopperies whereof he has so
fully both seen and known.


I might ad to these, that which further satisfies me, that having been at
Bruxels, Colen, and most of those places, where his Majesty during his exile
did reside; I can say bona fide that in all the variety of companies and
converse I was ever in, I never heard any probable grounds, from any one
intelligent person, that touched, much les stained his Majesty's reputation in
this particular. But I will not impose this upon others, though it moves me to
say the more, because I am not willing to annex my name to what I have written.
Not that I am ashamed to own what I conceive to be the real truth, which I
have published in this treatise to the world, and can make good much more
largely: but because I know who I am, and that my name can ad no estimation to
this political discourse; but rather perhaps prejudice some who knows me not,
and are used to judge of writings by their authors; whereas those that will
impartially search after truth, must have regard to things, not persons and to
what is written, and not the writers thereof.

As for his setting up popery, I neither think that he will, for the foregoing
reasons; nor if he would, that he can, for these following especially.

1. The Protestant Religion is settled in all his Kingdoms by their
fundamental laws, which the King cannot repeal. It is true he has the
executive power of the laws, and so can suspend the execution of penalties;
but cannot rescind any one law, much less make new ones, without the consent
of Parliament in his respective Kingdoms. And absolute Soveraingty is not
there in use. For power paramount to all laws, carries too great a top-saile
for an English bottom; wherein the Subjects liberties are shipped, as well as
Coesar and his fortunes. 2. The lands and revenues formerly supporting the
Romish Religion, which are many and great, are in the possession of the
nobility and gentry for the most part; and have been bought by them of the
Crown at the dissolution of Abbeys, Monasteries, etc. And the purchases
confirmed by law. And can we think that they will be ever induced to part with
them again? or enact any such laws as shall tend to their own ruin, and the
utter undoing of their families? If there was so much danger and difficulty to
wrest them out of the hands of the poor Votaries, (as the Histories of those
times tell us) What will there be to recover them from the powerful Nobility
and Gentry? who legally possessing them will doubtless defend them, so that
none shall deprive them thereof, that have not better courage and sharper
Swords then they. 3. The great disparity in the number of Protestants and
Papists. There being not one family of a hundred in England and Scotland
Popish, and in many and great Parishes not a Papist. Now what greater madness
can we imagine, than that his Majesty should adventure to rely upon the Papists
alone, against all the Protestants of the three Nations. Though their numbers
are greater then formerly, yet are they comparatively small (as we have said)
to those that profes the Reformed Religion. So that it can never enter into my
brain, that such folly should enter into any Princes breast, much les one who
has suffered so much, by the former divisions of his Kingdoms. 4. The vast
difference between a people enlightened by the Gospel, and well grounded in
their Religion, and an ignorant and unprincipled people. For the generality of
the common people brought up in ignorance, (as they usually are under Popery)
are more subject to receive impressions from their Teachers, and so by degrees
change their Profession. Whereas those who are assured from the Word of God,
that they are in the right; will by no means be induced to the same. And
usually the more force is used, the more obstinate they are. For a settled
Conscience despises dainger, and defies all the terrors and torments, that
their cruellest adversaries can invent. If in lesser differences of
Church Government, the King has found it so difficult, that after all the
coercive Laws, and other means he has used, he tells the world, it is evident
by the sad experience of twelve years, that there is very little fruit of all
those forceable courses; Declar. March 15. 1672.
what shall we think he is likely to gain in the greater and essential
differences of Religion should he attempt any change therein? Surely not much
from the Pious and sober party of Protestants; for I neither matter nor mention
the ruder sort, and ignorant rabble. Nay universal experience has taught the
World, that where any kind of Religion is powerful, all force against it is
weak and contemptible: and much more against the true Reformed Religion; as
that wise and excellent Historian Thuanus shows in the Preface to his History,
The other two are Calv. to his Instit. and Causa^^ to Polybius.
which is one of those three admirable Dedications, to the Crown of France,
that are worthy to be read by all the Kings and Princes of Europe.
I might add to these, the genious of the English Nation, which I know to be
zealous in what way of Religion soever they take, as has been observed by
several Authors. In times of Popery so addicted thereto, that they had given
most of their means to the Church, Anno 7 Edv. 1.18 Edv. 3.15 Rich. 2.
if the Statute of Mortmaine had not prohibited them. In the times of
Libertinisme when a Republic, the Fanatics were so intoxicated, that it was
not enough for them to push down the Pope, but they would break off all
Government, for being his horns, Polydor. Virgil. l. 17.
and make every thing Antichristian that was not to their humor. When the King
returned and Episcopacy with him, that Party would not abate the three
controverted Ceremonies (as a wise and moderate Bishop both foretold and
lamented) for the universal Peace of the three Kingdoms. Surplice, Cross, and
kneeling at St. Brownrig.
Nay the very common rabble would overflow both in drink and devotion; kneel at
a pillar, and reele at a Post. Though I know there are as pious, sober, and
serious Christians of several persuasions (Episcopal Presbyterial and
Independants) as any are in the Christian Worid: but I say this to show, that
what way soever they take, they are not easily diverted.

But as groundless jealousy, is both uncharitableness and folly; so where
there is just ground; not to be jealous is stupidity. It may therefore not be
amiss for our further satisfaction, to enquire into these Objectors grounds.
And they are these, 1. The increase of Papists, at Court especially. 2. The
Kings countenancing and intrusting them with power. 3. His tollerating their
Religion. 4. Joining with France against us.


For the 1 and 2d I can say little of my own knowledge, it being many years
since I saw either England or France. But I shall take reports upon the
public faith of England and Holland for this once, though it be none of the
best security. 1. Therefore that Papists increase, through the Queens Court,
the extraordinary correspondence with France, the dissentions of the
Protestants, the Atheism and irreligion of the Age, and other ways and means
which might be mentioned, is not to be wondered at; but rather that there are no
more. Allthough I am well assured, that their number is comparatively small,
and their Intrest in England and Scotland inconsiderable to effect any change.
And were they more, this will not infer the King is one.

2. And much les his countenancing and intrusting them. For who ever concluded
that the French Kings for their kindness to Protestants, (who have served them
most faithfully heretofore in their wars) were Protestants? Or the States
Papists, for employing the French and others in their Armies? A Papist may be a
loyal subject, a wise Statesman, a fit Ambassador, a good Soldjer, and merit
his Princes favor, though of a different Religion.

3. Nor will the Kings indulgence of liberty to those of that Religion conclude
more against our assertion, then for the States of Hollands being of all the
Religions they tolerate, or for Amsterdam's being Jews. There may be reasons
of State, sometimes to connive, and sometimes to tolerate that, which we
neither approve, nor would willingly allow; even as Moses did divorce to the
Jews. Or there may be Articles, promises and other engagements upon us,
whereby we are forced to do that, which we would not if free: as Joshua to the
Gibeonites; and our Ancestors to Papists, Anabaptists, etc. who assisted them
in the defense of the Country against Spain.

There are two things do wonders in the world, and are the ordinary pretexts
and best apologies for the greatest ^a^^bitances, viz: v. grot. An Jure bell.
and pac. l. 1. c. 4.. 7. l. 2. c. 2. 6.
danger and necessity. And yet where these are real and not feigned, they are
considered both by God and good men. Nature dictates, that we should hazard the
hand rather then the head, and lose a part, rather then venture the whole. I
have for above 20 years observed, both where I have lived, and where I have
traveled; that Moderation is rather a speculative notion, than matter of
practice: like a virtuous and beautiful poor Lady, that all will commend, but
none will marry. Parties that are under, call for it eagerly; but when they are
upmost, neglect it shamefully. Seeing then the passions of men, and iniquities
of the age are so great, that I exspect nothing in Religion, but either an
inquisition or tolleration; I am more for the latter, and would rather reside
at Amsterdam or Constantinople then at Rome or Madrid.

But to come closer to the particular case. If his Majesty therefore had no
obligation upon him to do this, or were it a liberty to Papists only, or a
liberty for their worship in public; I should grant the objection was very
weighty; but it is the quite contrary. For he tells the world he was obliged in
point of gratitude to the Papists for their service to his Father; and to the
Presbyterians (who had been so isntrumental in his restoration) in point of
promise also, several ways made to them both before and after his return to
his Crown; several times declaring that he would grant indulgence to them and
others of tender consciences And we know that if his Majesty had followed his
own inclinations, they had been better performed. And now that he gives a
concession of liberty, it is neither soly nor principally to those of the
Romish Religion, but to all others as well as they, and that with this manifest
difference, that it is to the Protestants publicly, and to Papists in their
private houses only, and this revocable at pleasure. Declar. March 15. 1672.
All though some wise men are of opinion, that the King and Rulers will not
only find such ease and safety therein; but such eminent advantages many
ways, and the people generally such content, that it will scarce be revoked.

4. His joining with France against us, is matter of Intrest, and not Religion.
And if we judge impartially, will no more conclude him a Papist, then the
Emperor and King of Spain Protestants because they join with us. Herein let
us eye and own the Providence of God, who changes times and seasons and makes
friends become enemies, and enim^es Friends. Would not this have been thought
incredible to our Ancestors, that France and England who raised us, should
endeavor our ruin? And that Spain and Austria who sought our destruction,
should ever seek our preservation? And all this out of Intrest, (as I shall
show hereafter) those formerly to balance Spaine's, and these now France's
greatness; and neither Religion or affection. For whosoever thinks that Spain
and Austria have any kindness for us more than themselves, has a faith far
larger than my fancy.

There is another Objection against our closing with England for
Religions-sake, from their Episcopal Church Government; which if it were not
mentioned by some to the prejudice of my assertion, I should have passed over
as inconsiderable. For.

1. This is only an accidental difference in the same Religion, and not a
different kind of Religion, as Popery is. And a difference in the external
form of Government only; not in the substantialls and vitalls of Religion.
For we both agree in the same Confession of Faith, and in all the essentialls
of the Reformed Religion.

2. A very great part of the King of England's Subjects are Presbyterians, as
is well known.

3. Although Episcopacy be the Church Government, settled by Law in the three
Kingdoms, yet his-Majesty indulges public liberty to Presbyterians, and other
Non-conformists. So that we need not doubt but he will much more to us, that
Church Government which is settled amongst us.

4. New England, and several other Plantations belonging to his Majesty of
great Britain, have always enjoyed, and still do their own
Church-Governement freely; and therefore we need not fear that ours should be
denied us.

5. Allthough the Church Government of these Provinces be Presbyterian, yet as
to its vital power and administration in several places, it has for sundry
years last past rather been Erastian. The Magistrates frequently assuming that
power here, which the Bishops do there. In so much that I question whether the
Presbyterians may not have more hopes, that their discipline should be raised;
then fears that it should be ruined under England. Gralloe, contra Apollodium
1646. Lucti Antistii de Jure Ecclesiasticor. l. 1665. Politic discoursen. l.
4. over Kerkelike Sacken.
What crying up the Magistrates power circa sacra, and what decrying the
Ministers, both by word and writing. Antistius tells us in the frontispece of
his book, that whatever right divine or humane is attributed to the Ministers
or they assume to themselves, is either falsely and impiously ascribed to them,
or is only from the Rulers of the Republique or city where they are settled.
What applauding of Hobs's Leviathan, now translated into Latin and Dutch. What
frequent interposing in Ecclesiastical affairs, and how miserably the honest
Minister in the Hague was handled, may be seen in Aitzma. Many were afraid of a
storm falling upon the. Ministers, if our enemies had not fallen upon us. What
crossing the Churches in the Election of their Pastors, and exercise of their
Government has been at Rotterdam, and other places, is too well known, and
being reformed, I wish what is past might be buried in oblivion. And thus I have
vindicated my first Argument from Religion, and shall endeavor to compensate
my prolixity herein, with more brevity in the rest. Concluding, that if we
cannot defend the true reformed Religion we profes, nor will not secure it the
best we can, we may call our Country Ichabod, for the glory is departed from
these Netherlands.

Sect. 5. The second Argument taken from Liberty. Wherein the different kinds,
and degrees of Liberty under all sorts of Government, are declared; and the
probability of our enjoying greater freedom under England than France, argued.
IT will further appear our interest, to be under England rather than France,
in regard of our Liberty. Which next to true Religion and life, is the greatest
blessing bestowed on mankind. Now for our clearer proceeding herein, we must
1. Show what kind of Liberty is here meant. 2. Wherein it consists, and the
measures thereof. 3. Accommodate these to the matter in hand.


For the first. We mean not here Personal Liberty: either morally considered
in opposition to coaction; or civilly; either in opposition to confinement, as
we usually take it; or to slavery, as the Civilians. 2. Nor Civil Liberty, as
opposed to Monarchy; Institut. l. 1. tit. 32
as the Greek and Latin Historians frequently: with which Tacitus begins his
Annals, Vrbem Romam a Principio Reges habuere, libertatem and consulatum L.
Brutus instituit. For I well know, that to whomsoever we submit, this liberty
is lost. Much less 3. For Licentiousness. For subjection to Laws and
Government, is so far from being inconsistent with liberty; that it is the
only means of its preservation. For without this; what are Kingdoms and
States, but great butcheries of men, and public robberies of propriety, where
the strongest arm and longest sword sweeps away all? So boundless is man's
villainy; and his lusts so ragingly restless: that we have no other choice left
us, but either be subject to Law, or slaves to licentiousness. As Tully says
well, Pro Cluent.
Legum ideirco omnes servi sumus, ut liberiesse possimus. But 4. That public
liberty which a people have under their Government, (of what kind soever it is)
as it is taken in opposition to public oppression. Which is of diverse sorts,
and different degrees, in regard of our persons, privileges, and proprieties.
When a people are neither oppressed by usurpation, without color of Law; nor
by extortion, under pretext thereof. Which is an invaluable mercy to those that
enjoy it: though rightly valued by few, except those that want it. And has
been so highly praised by all sorts of writers: hat it is better to be silent,
then brief in its commendations.

Now Secondly wherein this consists, and how to measure the same, is harder to
discover and determine; in regard we can meet with no guides, that have gone
this way. For the Civil Law, which is copious concerning all other Dominions,
is silent in this of Sovereignty; and being calculated for the Meridian of
Monarchs, leaves them free to make their Subjects so, more or less at their
pleasure: Historians only relate what freedom such and such people had under
such and such Rulers: and the Writers of Policy, and particular Republics,
compare the peoples liberty under the several forms of Government, and commend
this or that State for the same. And these are all the helps we have: which are
in the next degree to nothing We will therefore pass them all by, and freely
follow our own judgment; in showing jointly both the nature of liberty, and the
measures thereof. But we must necessarily here premise.

1. That though all ought to pay the homage of subjection, to that lawful
government under which they live; yet none ought so to be wedded to any form,
as to think the subjects of all others not free. Which Aristotle long since
observed, Politic. l. 6. c. 2. V. Arnisoeus de rep. l. 2. c. 7.. 2. n. 75.
to be the vulgar error in Democracy. For though it well becomes a virtuous
Wife, to esteem her own Husband, the best head she can have; and accordingly to
be guided by him: yet if she will censure all other Wives, for mere slaves; all
her neighbors round about her, will ring her a peale of indignation. 2. That
the best way to judge of peoples liberty is by considering it in reference to
Sovereignty. For all subjection and government being relatives; and Subject,
liberty consisting, in such a manner of subjection to the Supreme Powers, as is
free and not slavish; the one is easily known by the other. So that if we duly
consider Supremacy, we may discern, whether the Subjects be free or no by the
manner, and the degrees of their freedom, by the measure of their subjection.
3. That we must distinguish between actual liberty. or freedom from oppression;
and legal liberty by constitution. For freedom may be considered either in
regard of moral power, or government which is the exercise thereof; and that
both severally, and jointly. For a people free by Law, may be oppressed by
their Rulers; and a people not legally free, may be actually so by their
Governors grace. So that actual liberty alone, is only under absolute Powers,
legal under limited and mixed, and both under Governments which proceed
regularly, in the Sphere of Power wherein they are placed, and are not
planetary in their motions. Having premised these things; we shall now proceed
to lay down certain rules, whereby every vulgar capacity may judge, of the
nature of liberty and the degrees thereof, under any kind of Sovereignty
whatsoever. Whether it reside in a single person, or in a plurality; either
absolute, or limited in regard of its measure; or for the manner simple or
mixed; either of two or three estates, equally or unequally, and from whatever
priority or predominant part denominated, Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy,
according to the constitution of every Nation.
And the general rule is this. The greater power in the Sovereignty, the lesser
liberty in the Subjects; and the less power in the Sovereignty, the more
liberty in the Subjects. It is not my present work to determine, whether of
these is better for the whole. The Politicians pens have sufficiently
ventilated that question; usually ascribing more strength and stability to the
former, and more common prosperity to the latter; though often concluding,
either through favor or fear and fl^ttery, that that Government under which
they live, deserves above all to wear the garland I shall therefore only say
this, that seeing extremes are always dangerous; a golden mean is that,
which makes a golden age, both to Sovereigns and Subjects.

Now although I judge this rule alone, sufficient for our present purpose; yet
in regard some perhaps, may be pleased with so large a prospect, as the liberty
of all Nations in all ages of the world; we shall take a fuller view thereof;
and the rather, because it will be of use to us hereafter, not only in this
but the following Sections. And for this end will begin at the bottom, that so
ascending by degrees, we may behold both it and them the better.

1. A people under absolute power, are not truly and legally free, but only
permissively and precariously. Because their liberty is not from Law, but only
founded in their Governors favor. So that they are liable to all oppression,
although they are sometimes as actually free, and little oppressed, as those
that live under other Governments.

And this liberty, as to the certainty thereof, is more or les according to the
degrees of absolute power. Where the Rulers will, is the peoples Law; freedom
is an Embryo, rather than formed: when they make Laws, whereby Subjects are at
more certainty; it then becomes a foetus: and when they oblige themselves, to
rule by those Laws; the child is borne, and may cry out of violence and
oppression. This liberty, how small soever, and uncertain of life, has yet
many witnesses to avouch its name; which we find also registered in Antiquity.
So that whosoever denies the same; must call all those slaves, who lived under
the Eastern and Roman Empires of old, and the Turks and Persians at this day.

2. Under limited power, the people have a legal liberty, which is greater or
les, according to the Laws, constitutions, or contracts, whereby the power is
limited. Whether originally and antecedently; or by after condescent, betwixt
those in Supremacy and them in subjection; is not much material. This liberty
being supported by Law, not voluntarily made by the Governors themselves, and
alterable at their pleasure (as in absolute power) but necessarily condescended
to by them that will govern, makes the subjection of a people tolerable And if
the Fathers in power please to foster them, they want not for necessaries,
though they abound not in superfluities. But I confess, if this freedom meet
with a churlish stepfather, and has neither guardian not friends to maintain
its right; then its forced to keep private at home, and dare scarce appear in
public; which makes their present condition miserable. For liberty once lamed
by power, is not unlike to a laboring man, that has his leg broken; who till
it be sound, Is thereby confined to his own cottage, or cralls but abroad to
beg with his crutches.

3. Those that live under a mixed power, have more or les liberty according to
the temperament thereof.

If mixed of Monarchy and Acristocracy only, the common peoples liberty is
according to their Laws. And is more secured by this composition, than in a
simple government, though limited; because one is a check to the exorbitancy
of the other. For though every mixed power be limited, yet every limited power
is not mixed. In this Government, though the Nobility, should as Cedars shelter
the undershrubs, from the storms of the superior order; yet both History and
experience shows us, that often times (I say not always) the Peers care not
to be their Princes Vassalls, that so the rest of the people may be theirs.

If mixed so that the common people have a share in the Supreme Power, they are
absolutely free; and their liberty is more or les, according as their share is.
Whether it be mixed of all the three kinds of Government, viz. Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy; or only of the two latter; for I never read or
heard of a State compounded of the two extremes.

Now the Supreme Power consists especially (I say not only) 1. In enacting,
interpreting, and repealing of Laws. 2. In electing and appointing subordinate
Magistrates and Ministers of State for Government. 3. In judging and
determining all crimes and controversies amongst their Subjects, ultimately
without appeal. 4. In leavying of taxes to defray public expenses. 5. In the
power of Arms for defense of the whole. 6. In making War and Peace with
others. So then as a people partake in these, their freedom is accordingly to
be accounted of. And here liberty is come to maturity; and if she be modest,
and keep within her bounds, and fall not into wanton licentiousness; ravishes
the eyes of all spectators, filling their mouths with her praises, and their
minds with admiration.


But it is high time that we hasten unto the third particular proposed, which
is the accommodation of these, to the subject matter we have in hand.

First then, it is well known, that there is a very vast difference in the
liberty of the Subjects of these two Crowns. The common people under the King
of England have 1. A part in the legislative power, which is the chief
authority in all Governements. For the Commons make a third State in all the
three Kingdoms; and have their representatives freely chosen by themselves in
all Parliaments; which are the true Conservatories of public liberty and
particular propriety. Whereas the common people in France either never had this
privilege; or if they had, have long since lost it That they had it formerly,
Francogallioe. c. 10.11.15. Derepubl. l. 2. c. 6.. 6.
Hottoman endeavors to prove, which Arnisoeus denies, (and answers his
reasons,) nor that only, but all mixture in the French Monarchy either with
Princes of the Blood, Peers, or any other State whatsoever. But whatever was
the Government, under the two first lines of the Kings of France; it is
generally agreed, that in the beginning of the third under Hugh Capet, (who
cantond out France about the year 990) the peoples liberty was devoured by the
Dukes and Earls of the Provinces, and the Monarchy almost turned into a
Toparchie, by reason of their hereditary right. Which the after Kings soon
perceiving, to be too great a balance to the Crown, broke down by degrees;
and so became the only Atlas's that have ever since sustan'd that Government.
For the Assembly of the three Estates, which were the only bulwark of the
public liberty, that was left undemolished by despotical powers; if they ever
had any share in the legislative, lost it long before Capets time, (for from
Charles the great the Kings Edicts have past for Laws.) and being discontinued
in their Wars with England, and their remaining power (whatever it was) broke
down by the policy of Lewis the eleventh; they were finally laid aside by Lewis
the last. And although Philip the fourth fixed that Court of Judicature at
Paris, that was formerly ambulatory and usually accompanied the Kings Court,
which became a pattern to the rest of their Provincial Parliaments; yet both
that and these have only the name and shadow; not the nature and power of the
Parliaments under the Crown of England. The Members being neither chosen by the
people, nor representing them; but Lawjers, that usually either purchase these
places of the Crown, or pay an annual pension for the same; having no
legislative power, nor indeed any other but derivative from the King, and
alterable at his pleasure. They tell the Academy of Paris; Guagnin. in Ludovic.
12.
se a Rege jussos promulgare leges, quas ipsi visum fuerit far. Apud illum
authoritatem esse, etc. But these things are so well known, that I will not
stand to allege Authorities to prove them; although, if it were necessary, I
could bring as many as would fill the page even to ostentation. But let us
briesly run over the rest. Those 2. under the Crown of England have the
election of Magistrates generally in Corporations, and some under Officers in
the Country, which cannot be removed without due process of Law. 3. Have a
share in the Judicature, by the Juries (in England) for matter of fact,
together with the Kings Judges for matter of Law, and their last appeal to
Parliaments. 4. The original power of raising Taxes. For the proposal and grant
must come from the Commons, and the other two States only consent. 5. The
liberty of bearing Arms. Whereas in France, all Promotions, Governments,
Judicatures and Taxes, are in the Kings power; who permits not the vulgar use
of Arms, or a standing Militia in his Kingdom; but only such as are in his pay,
and thereby entirely at his devotion. So that there is no Communalty that lives
more happily than that of England, nor none more miserably than the poor
paisantry of France.

2. Hence we may infer a fair probability, of enjoying more liberty under the
Crown of England than France. I know our freedom will not necessarily follow
from the premises; for that which is legal, will depend upon such conditions,
as shall be either previously agreed upon, or after consented unto: yet I leave
every one to judge, which is likeliest to grant us the best; not only for our
Religion, but liberty in our Persons, Privileges and Estates; as also whose
Government is most likely to defend the same, and make us thereby also actually
free.

If it be argued, that the French King may give us more liberty than his other
Subjects; and the King of England less. The reply is easy; that we reason not
from the power of either, or what they can and may do; but what in all
appearance they will do. Although those that hold it for a fundamental in the
French Government, that whatever is conquered by them or acquired, must be
incorporated with the Kingdom of France; and that this is as indispensable for
the body politic, as the Salick Law is for the head; scruple much, whether the
King de jure, can make us freer than the rest of his Subjects. But we neither
desire to dispute the Prerogative of Princes, much less of such a mighty
Monarch; nor indeed are we of their opinion herein, and therefore take it for
granted, that he as well as the King of England, may grant us as full and ample
liberty, as He shall think fit in His Royal pleasure. We only profess our fears
what he will do, and such as are rational and becoming men; not groundless
fancies, or frivolous reports, which are the usual Bugbears, that affright only
fearful women and children.

1. We cannot flatter our selves into hopes, that our condition should be
better than either of those two Kings (which soever we submit unto) natural
Sujects. If it be equal, it is well; and all that we can rationally expect. And
therefore we judge, that England will easier be induced to this, which is
ordinary unto that Government; than France, to indulge us of extraordinary
favor, unless we had merited such a privilege, as to be made an exception
from the general rule. And that Governors under them will willingly and readily
maintain, that which they are accustomed unto; but very hardly such immunities,
as transcend the bounds which are set to others.

2. The many examples we have before us, of such Countries as France has
gained, keeps our fears continually waking. For by whatever Title they have
been acquired, we find them all generally in the same condition. Whether by
right of donation, as Daulphiny and Provence, or purchase as Berry Montpelier
etc. or marriage, as Bourbon, Champagne, Languedock, Bretaigny, etc. or by
conquest and powerful seizure, as Normandy, Aquitane, Poictou, Anjou, and
whatsoever held on England by Charles the seventh, and Burgundy with those that
depended thereon, by his son Lewis the eleventh; all these being incorporated
with France, (what ever their former immunities were, and whatever lesser they
still enjoy) are all equally subject to all Laws, Governments, and Impositions
from the Crown, without dispute and contradiction. And can we then be such
fools, as to think, that though we come under France, yet we shall be free? But
now on the contrary we know, that whatsoever accession has been made to the
Crown of England, either by mariiage as Scotland, or conquest as Ireland, that
they have all their Laws, Privileges, Governments, and Immunities remaining
entirely, as inviolable from the Crown, and unalterable without their own
consent. Nor do they only enjoy these, but make Laws for supporting them,
according to their particular interests; yea cross and opposite to the other,
which yet are ratified by his Majesty, or at least by his Royal authority and
pleasure.

3. If any have neither list nor leisure, to look into the Histories of former
times; the present age will furnish them sufficiently, with examples both
foreign and domestic. Let them enquire of Lorraign and Flanders, how they fare
with their new Masters. Or let them but pass into the adjacent Provinces, and
inform themselves of the French Government; and then they may see as in a
Glass, the face of their own future condition, And if any be resolvedly blind,
that they will not see, except they be deaf also, or stop their ears; they may
hear enough, (if the tenth part of reports be but true) to warn them
sufficiently to look to themselves. But if they remain so incredulous, that all
the Beacons that are fired about them, makes them not fear; and that they will
believe nothing, which they themselves do not feel: I wish that experience
(which wise men call the Mistress of Fools) convince them not of their folly,
when it is too late; and their condition become so miserable, that its fitter
to be drawn covered with a sorrowful veil, by some Timanthes's Pencil, than to
be lively set forth in its sad colors, or described by the Pen of an impartial
Historian. For my part I profess that none honors the worth and gallantry of
the French Nation more than my self, yet I would loath come under its power: for
the reason which the Fox gives the Lion in the Fable,

-- quia me vestigia terrent, Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.

Horat. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 1.
4. We think we have reason to be afraid not only for our persons, and purses;
but even for our lives, and all those things which may make us miserable; not
only in regard of the French, but our selves. For we know that a people
accustomed to liberty, who have had enough given them and taken much more, when
once they come to be restrained, and strictly held in by the rains of
Government; are very apt to break out into mutinies and mischiefs; and like
wild Colts in their first managing, rush desperately into ruin, that they may
throw their Riders. Yea when Conquerors think they have so harnassed the
multitude, that they dare not but draw their triumphant Chariots; and doubt not
but they themselves sit so fast, that they may drive them out of breath, and so
tame them at their pleasure: they usually Phaeton like, set all on fire; and if
they escape the popular fury by running away in the smoke, meet with his fate,
to be struck wit the Thunderbolt of their Sovereigns justice. Innumerable are
the examples for the confirmation of this; but we will confine our selves to
our own Country; and content ourselves with two only. When Philip the fourth
had beat the Flemmings, united Flanders to France, and set Governors over
them; who erected Citadels in their several Towns, Garrisoned their Citics to
keep them in aw, Serres in Phil. 4.
and arbitrarily charged them with great contributions; the people that were
used to Freedom, would not be brought into this yoke of bondage; but
desperately revolt, massacre the French, and involve all in confusion and
misery. Nor is this all; for, (though the baser sort begin, yet great men
usually end such quarrels) a War followed, which cost both France and Flanders
dear, in the vast expense both of blood and treasure. And when Duke d' Alva
attempted the like upon our Ancestors in these Provinces, who were a free
people and not used to such severity; how did the sparks of mutiny in the
beginning break out into great flames at last, which set the whole Country on
fire? No pen is able to express the miseries of those Times; nor Tragedy
represent the things that were perpetrated. How were most men's hearts filled
with fear, many with horror, and some with despair; to see their Country become
an Aceldama; and so many thousands forced through a Red Sea of blood, to find
their passage to the Land of Canaan! I conclude therefore, that if they who
enjoyed less liberty than we, could so little endure Servitude; we shall be
much less able to endure it, who have enjoyed far more freedom then they. So
that we may easily foresee, without any Prophetic Spirit, what a flood of
calamities is likely to break in upon us; when ever any shall break down the
banks of our liberty.

Sect. 6. The third Argument which preponderates for England, is the
preservation of our Estates: in regard of Soldiers violence, Governors
Impositions, Public Debts by Obligation, and Revenues of the Romish Church.
WE proceed now to show, that its better to be under England in regard of our
Estates. Both in respect of getting them, (as I shall show in the following
Section) and the keeping those we have gotten already, or by the blessing of
God may get hereafter. And to this I give the precedence, because the enjoyment
of Riches is the end for which, and Trade only the means by which, we labor to
obtain them. Now if it can be made apparent, that we can neither get, nor keep
such Estates under France, as we can under England: there are none so
regardless herein (whatever they are of Religion and Liberty) but will easily
grant the truth of our Conclusion.

1. Then let us consider that except we can keep that which is our own we are
never the better for it, but a great deal the worse. Had we a grant of Midas's
wish, that all we touched should be turned into gold; or were we insured that
all our adventures, should bring us returns as rich as the East India
Companies; what should it profit us, if we could notkeep them? Nay, were we not
a great deal worse than without them? What toil and anxiety is there in
getting! What fears and troubles are there in keeping! and what sorrow and
vexation in the parting with riches! Not that I think any civil Authority, will
ever take away our Estates, except we forfeit them through misdemeanors; but
when the Sword brings such a Commission, I would gladly know who dare deny it?
And whether the poor man then, that has all his money in his purse-pocket; be
not both fafer in his person, and more secure of his Estate; than the rich
Merchant, whose bags and warehouses are filled with his wealth? Craesus was
rich even to a Proverb, yet showing to Solon all his Treasures, Solon told him,
that if any came with better iron than he wore, they would be master of all
that Gold. Now in regard of plundring, depedrations, and all manner of violence
by Soldiers both to our persons and estates; I think we are far more secure
from the English, than French. And for this, I shall appeal to the Common
experience of all ages and places where their Armies have come; which bear
witness, to the great exorbitances of the latter, more than the other; in the
violation both of women's chastity and men's estates, and frequent desolations by
fire and sword. Yea I will make their own Historian Comines judge of the
controversy, who having shown, how unjustly great ones govern, and the
innocent people are oppressed, Lib. 5.6.18.
both by them and the Soldiers, whose flagitious lives, petulant carriage, and
violent rapines are intolerable; professes that he mentions these things for
France's sake, which of all the Principalities he had known, was most afflicted
with them. Whereas on the contrary, he says England excelled them all, in these
three particulars; respect to the common good, the peoples freedom from injury,
and the little spoil their Soldiers and Armies made in their Wars; the last
whereof he repeats, and enlarges a little after in the same Chapter.

2. But we will suppose the best in all uncertainties, and therefore hope we
shall escape all plundering, and violence from the Soldiers in a time of
confusion; and make no doubt thereof, in a settled condition. But yet we know we
shall not escape paying such Taxes, as indeed justly deter us, both in regard
of their greatness, and also the arbitrarines of their Imposition. In both
which we know no people in Europe more miserable than France, nor none happier
in the contrary, than the Subjects of the Crown of England. Which partly
occasioned that known saying of the Emperor Maximilian the first, that he was
Rex regum, the King of Spain Rex hominum, the King of France Rex asinorum, and
the King of England Rex diabolorum. For he could have nothing but what the
Germain Princess consented to, Spain only what the Laws allowed him; France all
that he pleased; and England nothing that pleased not the people.

As touching their greatness. 1. I willingly grant that Subjects must afford
their Sovereigns assistance; and in times of extremity, and utmost dangers, it
is hard to determine, how far their power may not lawfully be extended.
Secondly, I know that the grandeur of the French Court is great, Politiicke
Weegschaal. l. 3. c. 3.4. and 5.
which is lately shown us in our own Language. That their Armies are often
numerous; and some always necessary, both for defense of the Government from
their domestic enemies, and of the Frontiers from foreign, in the adjacent
Countries. And that these require vast sums to support them. Yet
notwithstanding, thirdly, Moderation ought to be used, so that the common
people may enjoy the fruit of their labors. But to show how far the Government
of France has been from this, would be an endless work. We should but tire our
selves to read, what their own Historians have related; and be weary with the
rehearsal, of the many tumults and rebellions that have arisen from their
gabels. It would fill any one with sorrow to hear of the great complaints and
out cries, that the people have made in former Ages; and fright us to hear
those of the present: which yet their Governors are so used to, that they count
them but the old fa fa of France, and oppression the sin of the old World. What
remorse of Conscience several of their Kings have had for their extortion, is
well known to those that have read their Histories. Some in their life time as
Charles the eighth; some at their death as Philip the fourth, who remitted the
Taxes he had unjustly required, and commanded his Sons to ease the people. But
above all Lewis the eleventh, who resolved to reform, but it was too late; and
therefore charged the Dauphin against that oppression he had practiced. And
indeed it was highly necessary; for he had reduced the common people to such
poverty, that many of the Farmers were forced, with halters about their necks
to draw their own Plows; except they would steal, and once for all, stretch
both themselves and ropes on the Gallows. But I should not once mention any of
these things, if I thought it not better for us, both to know and believe them
before hand, than experience them afterward to our cost. For I fear if we come
once under the French, there will be no end of paying contributions; until we
be brought into the condition of the Andrians of old, Plut. in vita Themistocl.
ex Herodoto.
who when Themistocles demanded money telling them he had brought two Goddesses
to require it, persuasion and power; answered that they had two great Goddesses
also who taught them to deny it, which were poverty and impossibility. And then
the Hollanders may do that living, Procopius decad. 6. lib. 6.
which Saladinus the Emperor of Asia did dying; show their winding sheets and
say, These are all the rich Hollanders have left.

But should we part with some of our Estates, though it were a good share; so
we were sure to enjoy the rest, it was less matter: but when we are always
obnoxious to an arbitrary power, still to be squeased like Spunges at the
pleasure of others; we can scarce call any thing our own, and are rather
procuratores than Domini divitiarum. I know well, that some of the French
Kings, Sueton. in vita Tib. Bussieres Hist. Franc. L. 15.
have like good Shepherds, fleeced not flead their flocks, (according to
Tiberius his saying, Boni pastoris est pecus tondere, non deglubere) especially
Lewis the twelfth: who therefore (as the Jesuit well observes) had no
rebellion in all his reign, which is a rare blessing (as he says) and
extraordinary in that Realm. And the great wisdom and generosity of his present
Majesty, puts me out of all doubt of his elemency; but a good, a great, a wise
Solomon may have a Reboboam to his son and successor, whose little singer may
be heavier than his Fathers loins. By which example in Sacred History, we are
shown, that what ever Prince will force his Subjects to open their purses to
his pleasure, shall quickly find their hearts shut; and though for the present
they may supplicate, and outwardly seem to adore him (as the Indians their
dieties ne noceant) yet they hate him worse than the Devil himself; and upon
the first occasion tumultuously cry, every man to your Tents; whence open
divisions, lawless rapines, bloody wars, and all the miserable effects that
follow them, break in upon a Nation beyond control. But let us be frank in
conceding (as it becomes us when we speak of Kings) that there shall never
arise a Rehoboam out of Lewis's race; yea that this is as impossible, as for a
Vulture to rise out of the Phoenix ashes: yet we know the best of Kings may
have bad Governors under them; and that they must often, both see with other
eyes, and hear with other ears than their own. Yea let us suppose, that we shall
never pay more Tribute to the fair Lillies of France, than we have done to the
Belgic Lion; except that of respect, which we acknowledge his due: yet there
still remains a vast difference, betwixt a legal and a permissive exemption,
and of the same payments made by public consent, and those that are commanded
by absolute power; though not in regard of the money, yet in regard both of the
authority that requires it, which if absolute and arbitrary is alterable,
although it should not be altered; and the different impressions which they
make, and effects that follow in the minds and affections of men. For when a
people know the necessities of State, and freely vote their own Contributions,
they account themselves free and uninjured though the Taxations be never so
great, (according to the rule, that volenti non fit injuria:) and look upon
them as a gift rather than a debt, and therefore pay them willingly, and
generously bear their parting with their share, Whereas on the contrary, when
they are ignorant of the grounds of such impositions, they are always jealous,
that they are not so great as is pretended; and when they have no suffrage
therein, look upon themselves as wronged and oppressed; and though they pay
them, yet it is with reluctance; and because they must and cannot withstand it,
their minds are dejected, and their spirit and courage strangely deprest, as I
could show by many examples. The difference of these two authorities, and their
various and different effects, is well observed by two Noble Lords, Bacon of
Verulam, and Comines of Argenton; both of them famous for their wisdom, one in
the Theory and the other in the Practice thereof; so that if the former had had
the latters Prudence, and the latter the formers Learning, no Age could have
paralel'd them. That of public consent the Learned Bacon observes, does not so
dispirit a people and diminish their Martial courage, and instances in these
very Provinces, Essay (or Sermofidelis) 29.
showing how cheerfully they have born the grean burden of Excise, because it
came from themselves and their own authority. And that of arbitrary power, is
shown of France, by that great Statesman Comines Counselor to Lewis the
eleventh; whose History is so much esteemed by the French, Hist. Franc. l. 13.
(as Bussieres the Jesuit tells us) that they neither envy the Greeks their
Thueydides, nor the Romans their Livy or Tacitus. Wherein he so frequently
inveys against these impositions, and complains of the peoples miseries
thereby; so freely expostulates with the Kings and Governors, and is so honest
an Advocate for their Subjects; that I wish all Princes, would make this
excellent Historian, as familiar to them, as did Charles the fifth, that great
and wise Emperor. Et Bodin de rep. l. 6. c. 2.
In the 18. Chapter l. 5. He says, that neither the King of France, nor any
other, has power to exact of their Subjects without their own consent; except
they will tyrannically use their power contrary to all right both divine and
humane. And chapter the seventh l. 6. that Charles the seventh, who in the
English wars had introduced, this imperious way of taxing the people, without
the consent of the States; had burdened both his own Conscience, and the
successive Kings with great guilt, and most cruelly wounded the Kingdom, of
which it was like a long time to bleed. Nor does he only thus declame against
the unlawfulness thereof, but also shows how ungrateful it is to the people, as
well as injurious. And on the contrary how readily and unanimously without
tumult or contradiction even in the Kingdoms greatest poverty, the States
consented and people paid to Charles the eighth. But if Princes will forget,
the good advise this Historian there gives them; yet I wish they would remember
at least old Pythagoras's Symbol, Sudorem ferro abstergere, tetrum facinus.
Which Plutarch (as a learned man tells us) expounds, That none should take away
that with the sword Gyrald. Symb. Pythagar.
which others have earned with the sweat of their brows. If they will only use
their own absolute power, yet let it be so attempered with equity and
moderation; that the cries of the poor, and the curses of the people, may never
bring Gods vengeance upon them. But if we should speak the sense of our Souls,
we must needs (alas!) say, that moderation is so rare a jewel in the Crown of
absolute Monarchs; and the Governors under them so used to hunt, and hawk at
all game to enrich themselves: that though we may all hope to escape, yet we
have more reason to fear: that if the fate of the other Provinces befall us, we
shall all (as the beasts) said in the fable) meet at last at the Furriers shop.
If any can flatter themselves with fancies, that our Commonwealth shall under
France, become like Plato's Republic, wherein violence and oppression shall
not be known; and that their Governors will be like those in Vtopia, Fathers to
our fortunes as much as their own: I must confess that I am not so Mercurially
made; and do no more expect to see the world so happy, than to see the great
Platonic year. But on the contrary, that great Impositions will be added, to
the great Excise that is upon us already; whereby the number of the Poor will
certainly increase, and the provisions for them daily decrease. Yea it is well,
if the maintaining of the land against the water, be not neglected; and so our
Eden be laid waste: and that our rich and pompous Cities, return not in time to
their old condition, of poor and despicable Fishers Villages. However, seeing
the blessing of Judah and Issachar, can never befall the same people, as Bacon
observes in the forementioned place, if we and our Estates shall come under
arbitrary power; then let us deface the Lion Rampant, that was the Arms of
generous Judah, which our Ancestors and we have hitherto born: and set up
luggish Issachar's of an Ass couchant between two burdens, that is to say the
Popes trumperies, and France's tribute.

3. There is another consideration, which is of great importance to the
Inhabitants of these Countries and that is concerning their Debts. For
mentioning Estates, we mean not only that in our own, but also that in other
men's hands. As for Private debts, we know they must needs be very many and
great in places of such Merchandise; seeing the greatest part of trade is all
over, and here especially, driven upon credit. Now how these will be gotten, if
bad time come on, so that many remove, and more be impoverished; I leave those
to consider, whose concernment it is. Concerning Public debts, (which are yet
more desperate, whatever change happens) they are such as are contracted,
either for Service to the Commonwealth, and Commodities delivered for public
uses; or for Moneys upon obligation; all which ways many thousands are greatly
concerned, especially the last. There being very many, who have lent, some a
good part, and others the greatest part of their Estates, upon the public
faith of the Land, Cities and Lombards of these Provinces. So that if this
public faith prove faithless like the Punick of old, a great number of
Families, and (which is most deplorable) Widows and Orphans, (who being
incapable to employ their Estates thus entrusted them) will be wholly ruined
and undone. Herein I think all that have any sense of justice and equity, will
conclude with me.

1. That it is very unreasonable and unjust, that if the present Government
cannot discharge these debts, or a change happens; that those who have credited
the Republic, should sit down with all the loss, and others not bear their
proportion.

2. That seeing they were lent to the Public, and Obligation accordingly
given; and that for public uses, and so employed, (or if other-ways converted,
yet without the Creditors fault:) it is all the reason in the world, that the
Public should faithfully pay the same.

3. That if the Republic stand, care ought to be taken to satistic these
Creditors: and that if a change of Government happen, the people remaining the
same, are both in Law and equity liable to pay these debts. For though it is a
great question how far Subjects are obliged to pay their Sovereigns; yet it was
never questioned by any, but that such as are made for the Public by the
peoples tacit, and much more express consent; must be paid by the people, what
ever change be made in the Government. Whether from a Monarchy to a Republic,
Demosthen adv. Leptin. V. Disquisit. politic. 53.
as the Communality of Athens paid the 100 Talents which their 30 Tyrants had
borrowed of the Lacedaemonians; and these very Provinces, that which the King of
Spain was indebted to the people: Or from a Republic to a Monarchy; Non
desinit debere pecuniam populus rege sibi imposito, quam liber debebat; est
enim idem populus, and dominium retinet eorum quae populi fuerant; imo and
imperium inse retinet, quanquam jam non exercendum a corpore sed a capite, etc.
Grotius de jure belli and pacis, l. 2. c. 9. Sect. 8. See also Arnisaeus de
rep. lib. 1. c. 5. Sect. 4. Quatenus acta Reip. obligent civitatem, and the
Civilians de rebus creditis, Digest. lib. 11. tit. 1. l. 27.

All the difficulty therefore will be if a change come, how the payment of
these just debts may be procured. And here we need no other Counselors advice,
than our own reason, which will inform us, that the freer any people are and
the more they participate of power; the more probable it is, and also the more
facile for them to obtain their rights. Now that we are likely to have more
freedom under England than France, I have shown sufficiently in the former
Section. Yea common experience as well as reason has learnt the world this
lesson; that when inferiors can only pray and petition, they may daily get fair
promises, and perhaps be sprinkled with some Court-holy-water; but performances
and payments are still the work of to morrow, and continually kept as reserves
in the rear. Nor can they biing more arguments for their expedition, than
Superiors have excuses for their delaying: and if at last their patience be
worn as threadbare, as their clothes with attendance; so that they become
importune in requesting; then Grandees grow deaf in hearing, and resolvedly
peremptory in denying: whence both sides frequently fall to irregular
proceedings; the one for recovering, and the other for defrauding them of their
rights. Whereas those that can, not only request, but also legally require,
that justice be done; have ground to hope, that when the touchines of times is
over, and the boisterous passions of great ones are laid; some happy
conjuncture of affairs may prove a prosperous gale to bring them at last, their
hazardous adventures home in safety.

4. and lastly, (that I may draw this arrow to the head) I shall desire that we
may consider a little of the Lands and Revenues, formerly belonging to the
Romish Church. Which to defend our selves in our Wars with Spain, were sold to
several, and are since parcelled out into many more hands. Now the very
mentioning of this I should think sufficient; the difference between France and
England herein, being so well known. Do we hear what the former has already
done, in all those places subject to him, and how they have set up all the
Romish rabble; and can we think that they will not in time recover (what ever
promises they pass for the present) that which not only they themselves, but
all of their Religion account their right? Can we imagine that their Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, and other Superior Orders, will live like Parochials or
Mendicant Friars? Who is so ignorant as knows not, that where ever the old
Gentleman of Rome comes to rule, he brings with him many attendants to bear up
his train; and that their pomp must be supported, though many Gentlemen thereby
be ruined? Whereas on the contrary, England is by them, in the same
condemnation with our selves; neither permitting his headship and dominion over
them, nor his members and followers any demains among them. So that we may
safely conclude, that all those that posses such Estates, as the Church of Rome
does challenge; can neither rationally hope to keep them under France, nor fear
to lose them under England.

Sect. 7. The fourth Argument from Trade. This ( viz. Merchandise and
Navigation) our chief secular interest: and friendship with England to secure
the same. England and we Corrivals herein, the probability of getting more, as
also enjoying the same with greater Peace under France, with other Arguments:
largely debated, and the contrary evinced under England.
WE are now come to the Acropolis of the cause; Trade being the great Tower of
strength, to which the Adversaries of our opinion, having deserted the former
outworks, usually sly unto our refuge. We shall therefore pursue them; but
orderly, first making our approaches by degrees; and them raising such
batteries, and planting such reasons, as are forcible, either to beat this
down, or at least make such breaches therein, as shall render it untenable for
their defense; and so compel the most pertinacious of our enemies, either to
submit, or to fall before us.

But before we begin this work, we must acquaint you, that when we mention
Trade, we mean not every particular kind of negotiation, wherein the several
sorts of Artificers and Shopkeepers are employed; to speak of which would be
both an endless, an a bootless work. Herein perhaps some might fare better with
the French, the Mercers and Tailers especially; for the a la mode Monsieurs
when they have money, affect to change their fashion as often as the Moon does
her face; and to wear as many ribbands on their breeches, as ordinary Pedlers
bear on their backs; as if all the fortunes of France hung at their ends, and
all their own happiness followed their heels. And happily Butchers and Cooks
would fare better with the English, for a piece of good Beef or a Shoulder of
Mutton. And we might instance in many others with merriment; but we have no
mind to be pleasant upon so serious a Subject. In short therefore, we mean
Maritime Trade (as our Adversaries do) this being the great Diana of the
Netherlands, which brings them in their Silver Shrines.

1. Then we shall lay down this as a fundamental and undoubted Maxim, (which
all I think will take for granted) that trade by Sea is the great secular
interest of these Provinces, the Maritime especially, by which they most
flourish, and without which they cannot subsist. Let Amsterdam and the other
Cities be as rich, or richer then they are imagined; yet will they in a few
years, if their Trade be obstructed, become as poor as their Neighbors at
Gant, or Antwerp. For who will build at such excessive charges (where the
foundation sometimes is half to the superstructure) or pay such rents for their
habitation, and live in such expensive places, if there be not freedom of
Trade? But those that can, will remove; some hither and some thither, as their
interest and affection shall incline them; Essay (or Sermo fidelis) 19.
rather then spend their Capitalls here. If ever Merchants were, or are in any
place of the world, the vena porta (as Bacon styles them) of any public body,
it is certainly the Belgic. If they freight not their Ships, whereby the
Mariners may be employed; if they furnish not the Tradesmen shops, whereby
they may follow their Vocations; if they lade not the poor men's backs, whereby
their Families may fill their bellies; finally, if they distribute not their
Merchandise through the various Seas and Rivers of the Universe: we may linger
a while, but it is as impossible we should live long, as for a body deprived of
food, whose parts languish for want of nourishment, which should be brought
them in the veins, by the bloods regular circulation.

2. Merchandise being our chief concernment, it will necessarily follow that
that Nation that can most obstruct the same, can do us most injury. Now that
England can do this more than France, or any other whatsoever, I think none
will deny; if any do, there is enough said hereafter, that will make it
sufficiently apparent.

3. Of all our neighboring Nations, England being most potent by Sea, and
France by Land, it will clearly follow, that a Peace with these two above all
others, is our great concernment, With the former for getting, and with the
latter for keeping and enjoying our Estates. But if we cannot have this from
them both, which of them is to be preferred comes next in consideration.

4. This Commonwealth consisting of Maritime and Inland Provinces, the former
being by far the most considerable, the friendship of England is more to be
valued than that of France. And this the wisest men that this Republic ever
had, formerly never doubted. of Prince William the First founder of this
Commonwealth, laid down these three principal maxims of State, which were
approved by all, as sound and rational beyond contradiction. 1. To do justice
to Strangers. For great Nations may be upheld by Power, but small Territories
must be maintained by Justice. 2. To hold a fair correspondence with France.
For Spain being then the grand Monarchy of Europe, and our dreadful enemy; the
assistance of France was greatly necessary for our supportation. 3. To preserve
an inviolable Peace with England, In regard that this is absolutely requisite
for our freedom of Commerceby Sea; and the English were our friends in
affection as well as Interest, whereas the French only upon the latter account.
For the greatest obstacle that stood in the way of France's greatness, was the
Spanish power in these Netherlands; which being once broke down, they well knew
they could dilate their Empire at their pleasure, as we see it now to our
sorrow. It is true of later times, the Lovesteiners to free themselves, from
the Headship of the Orange family; which sought (as they imagined) either an
absoluteness, or at least to infringe the liberty of the Commonwealth, have
been rather inclined to France and England: but they were not so blinded with
passion, but that having a Peace with Spain, and being sensible of France's
prevalency, and raising their Fortunes upon the Spanish ruins, it was their
Interest to comply with England rather than France. Which plainly appears, in
that no sooner was those unhappy differences between us and England composed at
Breda, but immediately the Tripple Alliance was designed and concluded upon by
that great Statesman de Wit the Head of their party, and Sr. William Temple,
on purpose to put boundaries to the boundless ambition of the French Nation.


5. To the reason of State already mentioned, together with the judgment of our
greatest Politicians both in former and later times, let me add; that
Terrestrial war has always been accounted more eligible than a Naval; yea by
some our absolute interest, as the Duke of Rhoan observes. In so much that
Zeeland never to this day consented unto, l' Intrest des Prine. and Est.
discour. 6.
but absolutely protested against, these Provinces making Peace with Spain. And
here it is observable, how our Adversaries prevaricate; in granting this
Assertion, and yet preferring France. I foresee their evasion, of conceding a
Land-war with a lesser Potentate, and denying it with France. But this is both
easily obviated and outed; for as I am well assured, that if England had not
assaulted us by Sea, France had never done it by Land; so I have reason to
believe, that if he had, we should have found him sufficient work. If we had
the Sea free for our inferior Provinces, the charges of a Land-war for the
superior were easily borne. And we should not want men enough for our money, to
fight for them with France, or any other whatsoever, so long as we should think
them worth the fighting for. Nor let any wonder that I insert such a
conditional; for I shall afterward make it appear, how the Commonwealth may
be well secured, though these Provinces should be let go or lost. And as for
the inferior, they are so situated in the water, and thereby so inaccessible;
that we need not fear, what all the force of France can do, if we be resolved
to defend them. It being therefore apparent that Traffic is our principal
concernment, and England of all others most able to obstruct it; we may
conclude in point of interest, as Prince Maurice (I have heard) used to say,
that were the English Devils, we must have peace with them.

These being the Approaches, (which I think) no sallies of our Adversaries can
prevent; we shall now, being got nearer them, take a better view of their
strength. Were we free and had our choice, whether we should war with France or
England, you see our interest should carry us against France. But the case
(alas!) is far otherwise with us, for they both make war upon us: by what error
of policy one of them, which could best, was not taken off and diverted, if it
had been possible, or whether it was impossible, and so no error or omission in
us, is not now our enquiry. But seeing they both threaten us with destruction,
upon supposition that we are unable any longer to resist them both, whether of
them we should choose to be under in regard of our Trade.

This then being the Question; our Adversaries give their suffrage for France;
and think themselves impregnable in this point of interest. Let us therefore
impartially represent the strength of their reasons, and weigh them duly in the
true balance of interest, and then we shall find them you shall see, not only
many grains but ounces too light.

1. It is better for us, say they, to be under France, because England and and
we are Competitors for Trade.

It is very true, England and these Countries by their situation, genious, and
interest are set for Trade: and this naturally begets an enmity between us, and
a vying with one another for the same. But this was always, and will be so
whilst men are men: and what will follow hence? Surely one of these things,
either that we must willingly yield to them, or they to us, which is madness to
imagine; or that we must fight with them for the whole, which if they mean of
our selves, is the next degree to dotage, seeing we are about matches, and
Peace in their trade is always the interest of a trading people; if they mean
jointly with France, we shall speak to that in the following Argument, and show
what a hazard even that will be, and much more singly: or that we must compound
with them for our share, that so each Nation may have, what Gods blessing may
give, and their own industry may procure them. And this in my opinion will have
the vote, not only of all the Cowards, but all the wise men of both Nations.
But because this Argument is much insisted on, both in former times and this
juncture of affairs; we will more particularly consider the same, in reference
to this Commonwealth as to England absolutely without respect to France. And
thereby we shall see what corrivals in Trade implies in point of Interest,
whether the power be about equal, (as we shall here suppose England and this
Commonwealths) or unequal, and in point of inference. Now in regard of
Interest, we shall find in my judgment, that it is clearly this for us as equal
in power.

1. That we must vigorously defend our Trade, as that on which our temporal
welfare depends.

2. That we must for this purpose, maintain a naval power, equal at least to
theirs. That so we may hold them up, to the just and due terms, and bounds, of
Commerce and Navigation.

3. That for this end the league of the Maritime Provinces be kept inviolable.
If the band of the bunch of arrows be either cut or broken, so that they fall
out of the Lions paw; he will soon have his skin pulled over his ears. So that
to make several Commonwealths of them, is but to make them so many morsels to
be the easilier devoured by their enemies. And therefore I wonder at the Author
of the Interest of Holland herein, who, c. 41.42. etc. asserts the power of
that Province sufficient by Sea, and jointly with Vtrecht by Land, to wage War
with all other Potentates. Seeing these Maritime Provinces entirely considered,
are but the match at Sea for England. And the reasons that he gives, c. 37. are
now refuted by experience. I acknowledge it also an error in policy, for
Zeeland to break this bond of Amity, if possibly they can help it. But if their
Enemies sword cuts this asunder, what shall they do? And this is the case only
that I defend.

4. That we should rather yield to them in Punctillioes of honor; that being a
Crown, this only a Commonwealth. Such I mean as the Flag; although I reckon
not that any dishonor to us, seeing they have not only always challenged it,
but our Ancestors also given it: and other Nations as well as we, pay the same
acknowledgment to that Crown. The first time that we have ever refused it, was
in the time of King James; the circumstances whereof Sr. Anthony Welden in his
Court relates, and the effects both their and our Historians. It is not my
design to speak of this particular, which would swell to a discourse larger
then this whole Treatise; but only instance therein, as a known example;
concluding that if they will War for it, it is our wisdom to yield it, and
except we were far stronger than they, folly to fight for it.

5. Rather to dissemble lesser injuries than seek to revenge them. Which holds
in all equalities of power whatsoever.

6. But if they will unjustly incroach upon us to ruin our Commerce, then to
War with them. For 1. Our traffic being our subsistence, who ever would spoil
us thereof, necessitates us to defend it, and gives us a just cause of contest,
2. We being a match for them in power, may in point of wisdom as well as
justice, try it out with them, and leave the issue to Gods Providence; Wars
being the last appeal to Heaven, when justice cannot be had on earth. 3. If
success attends our Armies, we secure our selves at least, if we better not our
condition; and if the contrary, we do but drown and die a little the sooner. A
destructive peace and unsuccessful War are both fatal in the issue; the former
being a Chronical, the later an acute disease of State. It is not so material,
whether by a lingering Consumption of Peace, or by the Hectic Fevor of War, the
gray hairs of Government, be brought with sorrow to the grave.


7. Yet if we can enjoy the freedom of Commerce, and fruit of our labors, upon
reasonable terms; it is better to sit down contented with our share, then to
War for the whole. For 1. What wise man ever doubted, but that Peace is the
interest of a rich and trading People; if it can be had upon tolerable
conditions. 2. Is not a competent certainty preferable to a greater good that
is wholly hazardous and uncertain? for how often does that happen to men, which
did to the greedy and covetous dog in the Fable; who let go that he had, to
catch at the shadow thereof in the water, and so lost all!


I know some that have more of Mars than Mercurie's temper, are all for
fighting, and therefore I shall desire them calmly to consider, these few
particulars following.

1. What either we or England have gotten by our former Wars, when matched in
power. I partly know what it has cost us both, in treasure and blood: and can
demonstrate that if either has gotten, it is England, though not to countervail
the cost. Let Us but reckon (as we must if we go rightly to work) the lucrum
cessens, and damnum emergens, or the profit that ceases, and loss that accrues,
and what we have got, we may put in our eye, and not see much the worse,
But if any one say who can reckon that, or how?

I shall freely acknowledge that to pounds and persons we cannot, nor no man
alive; yet in the general we may, so far as to make a judgment. I have done it
for my own satisfaction, and shall tell you how; that so those that are curious
may satisfy themselves therein, and not take it upon my credit. By the public
Customs; the Number of ships, the Capital wherewith Trade is driven; and by the
riches of the Merchants. Of these, the two former are more easy and certain,
wherein England has increased: the two latter more conjectural, wherein this
Republic has the superiority. But has not gotten it by the wars, but arises
from several other causes, (which I could mention) and especially from these
two following, which I think will satisfy any intelligent man. As to the
Capital, ours comes to be greater, in regard that as the Merchants grow rich in
England, they buy land, and breed up their sons to be Country gentlemen;
whereas we, especially in Holland, continue the stock and our children in the
Trade. Land being here at 35 and 40 years purchase, and in England at 15 or 20
ordinarily. And that the Merchants here should be richer than there, is no
wonder to me; who know so well the frugality of the one, and the prodigality of
the other.

2. Let it be considered how difficult and hazardous it is for equal powers, to
destroy one another; and therefore how little likelihood there is, of any thing
to be gotten by contesting. Nay there are several circumstances in our
situations, employments, and people, that render absolute conquest almost
impossible. We may like Cooks fight, and breath, and fight again, and crow over
one another for some victories, but far from a conquest. And this we might both
have seen long since in the glass of policy: which clearly shows, that such
equal powers fighting for profit, is but like Nero's fishing with a golden
hook, wherein more is adventured, than ever is likely to be gotten. We have had
a Comick-tragedy, and a tragic comedy of two wars, and England the contrary;
wherein our enemies indeed have been pleasant spectators, and satisfied their
envious eyes, but what have either of us got, but blows? Passion and prejudice
are so prevalent in the World, and so blind the eyes of men, that often they
will not see the truth, till dear-bought experience makes them even to feel it.
And this we now both see, and therefore England takes this opportunity of
breaking down the equality of power, and bringing us lower, that so we may
truckle under them, and they be at rest in the bed of security. 3. Those that
are so much for Mars, might do well to consider, the advantages and
disadvantages of both Nations, for carrying on, and subsisting under long wars.
In some things we may happily have the advantage, as in bearing the charges,
number of shipping, Caping by Letters of Marque etc. And in others England, for
they have a great and rich Inland Country, l'Intrestdes Princes. Discourse 7.
an Hand that cannot be easily diverted by a Land-war, so that as the Duke of
Rhoan says right, l' Angleterre est un grand animal, qui ne peut jamais
mourir, s'il ne se tue luimesme. We subsist wholly on Trade, and fetch all
things from abroad, they have sufficiency of necessaries from their own growth
at home. When Trade stands still, they have cloths for the back, and meat for
the belly, better cheap for the poorer people: here not only such
accommodations are far dearer than there, which can well be born when Trade
flourishes; but when that is stopped, and it can worst be endured, then are they
dearest of all. Our Seamen which come most from the Northern quarters about the
Baltic Sea, to serve us in Navigation; when they see no hopes of gain, but
only venturing their lives for the pay of the Wars, will remove and serve other
Nations: whereas the King of England has three Kingdoms to press out for his
assistance, according to the custom of the Crown there, which is not practiced
nor indeed practicable in this Free State. And although at the first such as
are pressed be averse to the Wars; yet we find and feel by experience, that what
through the Officers and Gentlemen's caressing and encouraging them, what
through company and conversing with others beforehand, this restiness is worn
off by degrees; and through the principles of self defense, and some sparks of
the honor of their Country, they fight well enough, whatever the cause or the
quarrel be. 4. I wish both Nations would well consider, whether whilst we two
are so eagerly contesting for Trade, others may not carry it away. I have
reasonably considered what Nation can bid the farest for this, in regard of
their Situation, Havens, Genious, etc. the ad vantages of the Mediterranean and
Baltic Seas, and let my thoughts stretch themselves as far as both the Indies:
have observed the French Fleet, the darling of the King and Kingdom, their
hopes with the grounds of them, and the probable success thereof, as also the
communication of Spain with America; and find no one Nation alone capacitated
to carry away our Commerce; but several to have greater shares than they have
at present. Yea, to speak my mind freely, I have had far further
contemplations, and of a far different kind from these upon this Subject, in
respect to future times. And indeed such as have often made me both very
sorrowful to see the Christian world so mad and quarelsom about their Commerce,
and very fearful that God would either blast it to us, by taking it away and
giving it to Turks and Heathens; or not bless us with it, giving us herein our
hearts desire in his wrath, and them the Gospel in exchange thereof. As I
clearly see he has done to the Jews, the generallest and greatest Merchants of
the World: and as I think he threatens us Christians in several places of holy
Scripture, if they be duly considered. But because I love not dogmatizing, or
to be positive in things I am not so fully satisfied in; I shall at present say
no more of this, but leave it to every good Christians consideration.
Having thus declared what corivalship implies as to equal powers, we shall now
see it in unequal. And here Interest shows us,

That if we decline and become inferior in strength, if they were so injurious
to us, that we had a just cause of War, yet must we not adventure it at
fighting, but use policy to procure a Peace. And in my opinion this Piety and
Wisdom is taught us by our Savior Christ in the Gospel; for where Soldiers are
alike, and no advantage of ground, etc. what is it but tempting of God and mere
folly, Luc. 14.31.
for ten thousand to encounter twenty thousand? Yea though the disparity was
not so great; Wars being always hazardous to the weaker side, though they often
be victorious: it being frequently sound (as Pyrrhus said of his warring with
the Romans) that their very Victories do undo them. In such cases, old men's
heads are better helps than young men's hands. To show the refuges of weaker
powers when threatened with Wars, would be a large discourse. I shall therefore
only hint some few generals, of many which I have observed. 1. To gain all time
possible. 2. Therein to break down the strongers designs, and weaken them at
home as much as may be. 3. To raise them up enemies abroad by making them
jealous of their power. 4. By alliance with others to balance their might. 5.
To prepare for a divertive rather than a direct War. 6. By proposal of
Marriages, etc. to make up the breach. 7. By procuring foreign Potentates
mediation, and appealing to their Arbitration. 8. To make the best Peace they
can, when best provided with power for War. For otherwise nothing is to be
expected, but either an unsafe or a short Peace, little better than a Truce or
Holy Day of War.
Best is that Peace, whose Articles are made
Under a Shield, and written with a blade.
Allen.
Now all these have many particulars contained in them. For example in the
first to gain time, by sending Ambassadors, and so still that as one is
returning another may be sent: whereby a fair pretense of ignorance of
transactions may be pleaded, and time spun out in further debates. By conceding
one thing after another by degrees, still reserving the principal point of
Interest entire, etc. And so of the rest within the bounds of honest Policy.
The reason of the case is so clear, that were it not for men's passions,
inferiors in power would not be so ready to fight. For let them either be
beaten or beat, it will redound at last to their own destruction. If the
former, why should they spend their blood and treasure to make themselves more
miserable? and if the latter, they do but enrage their enemies the more, who
being more powerful will not for two or three Battles end the War, and come to
a Peace to their great dishonor. So that we may lay down this as a general
rule for the weaker side, That self defense must be first for preparation, but
last for execution. Of all the Princes of Europe in our age, the Duke of
Lorraign has been the cunningest gamester, but the foulest player with
stronger powers. But oh, how is he catched in his own craftiness! Although I
confess I could not see him and his Court (as I have done since his disaster)
without great commiseration; to think that one of the ancientest Families and
greatliest allied of all Europe, should fall into that condition. Of the former
age the Verinians, who being oppressed by their Neighbors the Venetians, that
were more powerful, would notwithstanding needs War with them; wherein though
they were often victorious, yet it proved their ruin at last, for which they
are stigmatized for Fools to all succeeding Generations. And many other
examples might be produced, but I think them needless in so plain a case.

And thus you see what our being competitors for Trade implies as to Interest
in regard of War and Peace. Which I have been the larger upon, because I know
what work fools make wise men in both Nations. I have many times been put to it
for patience, and sometimes into a Paroxism of passion, to hear the senseless
clamors of men. We are Competitors for Trade! It is our Interest! Our Interest!
Down with the Dutch! Down with the English! Let us but consider who these are,
and we shall find them. Men that have a pound of passion, for one ounce of
reason. Men that never saw, or at lest not well observed both Nations. Men that
never bestowed one calm hour to balance their powers. For wise men that knew
both well, was but grieved to hear, or pleasantly merry with such madness. I
publicly decryed such folly in the first Wars, and had severely chastised such
fools in the second, if I had not been several ways hindered. Let me say it
freely (I think I have some reason, for I believe there are few men that have
better viewed both Nations with their eye, to that end which I have had, nor
balanced their power with greater accuracy) that if either the King of Great
Britain, or the States, or both require it: I am ready to demonstrate, that for
these 20 or 30 years last past, there was nothing of advantage rationally to be
expected on either side, that can countervail a War: nor as both might manage
their power, likely to be, so long as both continued in that condition, for in
powers about equal, all the difference is in the management thereof. And
because I see what work is made in the world, if I live to see the balance
come so even again, (though I think I never shall) I do here engage, for the
public peace of Protestants, and good of both Nations, to satisfy all
rational men herein, I hope even to curiosity. And shall, if God spares me life
and health, defend the same, against all the State-tinkers of both Nations;
although I well know, they have great store of small Tools, with which they
make a rattling in their Budgets.

Let us now proceed to such inferences as our Adversaries make from this
competition in Trade.

Some argue thus, the English minding Trade more than the French, they may come
and live among us and carry away our Commerce.

In my apprehension, there is more fear of their Soldiers coming hither than
their Merchants. But suppose more Merchants did come, would that be any worse
for us? I have heard several of the greatest Merchan^s of both Nations say, the
more in a place and better, though I confess it is not so for Shopkeepers. But
for this they may rest secure, those that know the cheapness of living in
England, in comparison of these Countries, will abundantly satisfy them that
fear this. Yea I shall show hereafter that the English would have more reason
to fear, that we should come thither, and deprive them of their Trades. Yet to
say the truth, I see not that either need fear, were we under the English, that
either Nation should suffer hereby; seeing all have had freedom that will to
remove formerly, and that has made so small an alteration as to the balance
of Trade, that it is inconsiderable. For if I make my calculation right, there
is not much difference, of the English here, and the Dutch in England.

Others argue we are Corrivals for Trade, that is the Mistress we both Court,
and therefore one must marry it.

But this is but a toyish Sophism, when men will compare Commerce to a
Mistress, that one only can marry. For 1. The world is wide enough, and the Sea
large enough for both Nations to exercise their skill and industry. 2. If we
think to betroth all Trade, and ingross it to our selves alone; other Nations
will come in and forbid the banes, as well as England, as I shall show
hereafter. 3. If we two could so happily agree, and so settle Commerce as it
might perhaps be settled; we might bid fair for carrying it, or at least for
retaining it betwixt us And so far as my short sight can reach, this seems to
me the mark aimed at on both sides, by those who have the direction of affairs,
which I do not despair to see effected.


Seeing then we are in as much danger, that I say not more, to lose that part
of Trade we have, as to gain more by our contesting; I hope all rational men
will grant it our Interest, that England and we so compound for it, that each
of us may have what Gods blessing, and justice, and equity gives to eithers
industry. And this I am sure was the wisdom of former times. I have shown it
already in part on our side, and could much more largely both for us and the
English. In Queen Elizabeth's time we were not grown up to our present
greatness. In King James's time, who all the world knows was no Martial man,
but in his temper as well as motto truly pacifick, the Cautionary Towns that
England possessed in these Countries, were A. 1616. ransomed, and we grew up to
that greatness of being an equal match for them in power at Sea. And this the
English account the great error of Political Interest; although they must needs
acknowledge it but fair and honest dealing. King Charles the First, that Prince
of blessed and immortal memory, seeing how he grew up, not only kept a fair
correspondency with us, but having experience how cross Parliaments were to the
Court, so that no War could be carried on, did by a fair correspondence keep
friendship with us; and not only so, but married his eldest Daughter to the
Prince of Orange for this reason of State amongst others. For being jealous of
this Commonwealth's favoring that party in his Kingdoms, which was then
called by the Court Puritans, and seeing the growing greatness of this State by
Sea, did for these two reasons of State, engage the Prince and this
Commonwealth by that Marriage. And this was also the reason of State in
Oliver's time when Peace was made, that we must accord for our mutal Trade. How
it has been since we all know, and therefore I need not mention it. And this
is the first weapon our enemies use, which you see if we measure rightly, is
too short to touch, much less mortally to wound, the truth of that cause that
we maintain.

Yet we must do our Adversaries right: the wiser sort of them upon the supposal
of equal powers, (as we have formerly been, and which is that I have hitherto
spoke of) are for peace, and judge it the Interest of both Nations; but they
think our coming under France will render England so unequal and inferior a
match for us, that we cannot in all humane appearance miss of marrying our
beloved Lady Trade, and clearly carrying her from our Corrival. And I confess
ingenously if there be any thing of moment to be said for France, it is this.

2. Therefore our Adversaries are for France, because thereby we should be able
to beat England out of their Trade, and so become masters of the whole, or the
greatest part at least of the Sea negotiation.

Now because they so much triumph in this, though before the victory; we will
examine it thoroughly, and see what probability there is of obtaining the greatest
part of Trade by this means.

1. We grant that England and this Republic being about an equal match at Sea;
the accession of France would clearly make us an overmatch for England, if all
was true which they suppose.

2. But therein is their mistake, that they take these two things for granted,
which are both false. First that these Maritime Provinces should entirely
become French. And secondly that all other Nations will stand neutral; so that
we shall have no more to do, but France and we entirely to deal with England
alone.

Now how far this is from truth, we shall make abundantly apparent, and by
ballancing of powers how little probability there is, of these their designs
becoming practicable, and such as will effect their desires.

1. Hereby they suppose a War, and such a long and tedious one, as perhaps we
may not live to see ended. For we cannot rationally imagine the English such
tame animals, that they will easily part with their Trade: but must suppose
they will set all at stake, before that jewel of the Land be lost. Now let us
but calmly consider, how destructive such a War will be to our Trade, and what
advantages they have above us of subsisting under a long War, some of which we
have before mentioned; and I do believe no wise man will think this our
Interest, except there was a greater likelihood of a sudden subduing them, then
is rationally to be exspected, as we shall presently make apparent. Now on the
contraty, if we come under England, there is no fear of a War with France at
Sea; that Kingdom being so much inferior in maritime power to either of us, and
much more to both. And should we have a Land-war with France, yet that is more
eligible for us than one by Sea, in the opinion of all wise men, as we have
formerly shown, and shall have occasion hereafter more fully.

2. A War with England being supposed, as it must, (for we must either say we
can and will have the Trade alone or the greatest part thereof invitis Anglis,
or we say nothing to the purpose) the readiest way to see what probability
there is for conquering them, and consequently carrying the Trade; will be
first by ballancing of powers, and then by some other Consideratitions. The
former of these we shall do with respect to Zeeland, and then with respect to
other Nations.

For the first it must be considered that Zeeland has expressly decare that
they will not come under France, but that if they cannot defend themselves,
they will then submit to England. It is true (as I have said) it is the
interest of these maritime Provinces to keep their League; but if their enemies
Sword cuts it assunder, and they will not venture the loss of their Religion
and Liberty under France, who shall hinder them? They are free surely to
dispose of themselves as well as Vtrecht, or the other Provinces. For in
coordinate Powers, when their confederacy is broken, either by themselves or
their enemies; each are at liberty, and in their former freedom, to dispose of
themselves, as they shall think fit. And though Freesland has not declared, so
that if they should come to the utmost extremity, we know not but they might
happily incline to England also; yet because that is uncertain, we will be
liberal in granting our Adversaries even that which they cannot prove, and take
to our selves only that we can, and so proceed upon infallible grounds.

Nor let any one here stop me, and say that in taking it for granted that
Zeeland will be English, I may be mistaken, for they may beat off their enemies
and defend themselves. I grant it, although by the way let me say it, I see but
little likelihood of that; for of above 100 Companies they pay, there is as yet
not one in their principallest Islands (though how it comes so, becomes not me
to enquire) but the thing is to me matter of admiration. But I will show you
how I reason; not from the War, that England will conquer Zeeland, nor from the
Agreement betwixt the two Crowns, which yet is generally said brings us under
that: but upon supposal that we are tired out with the War, and come to treat
with our enemies (for I hope no man is so mad, as to think these Provinces will
as Vtrecht, call them in, and after make what terms we can get, but treat with
them with our weapons in our hands) Zeelands not only Declaration, but
Inclination carries them for England. So that which way soever we take conquest
by our enemies, their disposing of us, or our own disposal of our selves,
Zeeland is still English. So that upon the supposition of inability to defend
our selves, we are morally certain, that Zeeland will fall to England: and our
Adversaries uncertain, that Holland and Friesland will choose France. But we
will grant them all they can reasonably desire, viz. that these two Provinces
make such a choice, and thereupon proceed to the ballancing of Powers.

Now in Naval strength, Zeeland has the proportion of a sixth part in this
Republic; there being 5 Admiralities, wherein Amsterdam has a double rate, we
will suppose any number for a Fleet greater or less to be set out by them. For
example, the States equip a Fleet of 72 Sail herein.

The Admirality of Rotterdam and the Mase is 12 The Admirality of Amsterdam 24
The Admirality of North Holland 12 The Admirality of Zeeland 12 The Admirality
of Friesland 12 72

Yea in the last War I find in the List A. 1666. (which by the way, I wonder
any Admiralities should publish, and perceive there is none now) that Zeeland,
was a greater share than Friesland both in Ships and Men.

Zeeland 15 Ships. 676 Canon. 2268 Seamen. 807 Soldiers. Friesland 11 -- 638
-- 2748 -- 260 --

Although I know in the quota or Tax to the Public, Friesland is more: but
that is because of their greater share in the Land, which is a certain revenue,
and Trade only a contingency. In strength then at Sea we see, that Zeeland, at
lest balances Friesland if not more, should that Province prove French, and
this is sufficient for my present purpose.

Now let us look abroad, and we shall as clearly find, that Spain comes into
the English seal. For which way soever France take, Spain must take the
contrary. Nay in this case, Spain is as much concerned as England. For if
France have these Provinces entirely, how shall they alone be able to bring
home their American Treasure? They know to their sorrow, what they have lost
formerly by the Dutch taking their Plate-fleets; and what an extraordinary
charge and hazard they had to defend them. And shall we not then think, that
they will rather venture to the utmost with the English; than let us intercept
their Treasure, and after some years be master of their Mines? It is true, if I
was led as the world is usually, to judge by news, which has been for some
months that Spain and England are breaking, all this was frivolous; but I make
my measures from reasons of State, which tells me, that they will not, because
they must not, and they must not, because it is their mutual Interest, and it
is their Interest, because otherwise they cannot balance France, but will both
in time be ruined. So then you see clearly, that upon supposition that Holland
be French, it will be England and Spain against France and Holland, and so we
are again balanced.

We are thus far upon sure grounds, we shall now proceed to that which is not
much less certain, if we rightly consider. And that is, that Denmark in all
probability will become also our Enemies, if we take France so far for our
Friends, as to make him our Master. Let us but well observe a few fundamental
Maxims of State, which every Nation according to their Interest frame for their
Government, and it will much help us to make a right judgment in all such
cases. Now this is one of that Kingdoms, Not to suffer any one to be absolute
Sovereign of Trade and Navigation if they can possibly prevent it. For the
revenues of that Crown mostly consisting of toll in the Sound; we cannot
imagine the Danes such dullards, but they know who ever is so, will soon open
that passage, and make it as free as the water it self between the North and
Baltic Seas. And then the King may sit in's house at Gluckstadt, and take toll
of Boats that pass in the Elve; instead of Copenhagen, and his Castle of
Croneberg, where now he takes toll of all ships in the Sound.

I foresee it will be said, that Sweden will balance Denmark, if that should
be so. But see then what work this Trade will make in the world. And this is
wholly uncertain: nay, Interest will rather incline to the contrary. For though
Sweden be none of the richest in Trade, yet have they their share to lose as
well as the rest. And the Revenues of that Crown consisting much in Copper,
(which has occasioned their Armies spoiling all the Mines of that Metal in
Germany, and wheresoever they could, on purpose to enhance their own) they know
very well that pains might have been spared, if Commerce should have an
absolute Monarch; and that with all the Chimistry that they can use, they shall
not be able to extract silver and gold out of that Metal, when one only
Chapman comes to the market. Besides their Bremish and other Territories on
this side the Baltic, will soon lie a bleeding, they know; if France's Sword
comes to wound the Roman Eagle, and his race. It may be some may say the Dane
dares not for fear of losing that we are indebted to him. But who knows not
that it is better to lose a part, than the whole. And if blows be a way of
paying of debts, we may happily have Portugal so to pay us.

3. Having thus balance the apparent strength of both sides, we shall proceed
to some other considerations, concerning the same. For it is not enough to
consider power absolutely, but also the management thereof; for less powers
well managed, are usually prevalent above greater. And herein are many things,
which in my judgment, were we an over-match for them, which you see is not so,
would render our ruining their Naval power, and consequently their Traffic
impracticable. As 1. Supposing we are under France, shall their whole Fleet
constantly be here, and leave the French Coast naked, or shall they from thence
come to join with us for our Sea expeditions? If the former, France is subject
continually to be molested and diverted from England; and if the latter to be
intercepted, by reason of their situation. 2. Who shall have the direction of
Naval Affairs, is to me very considerable. Whether the French alone, or
conjoyntly with the Dutch; for that the latter only should be entrusted, is not
to be imagined. The former way is liable to miscarry through unskilfulness, the
latter through jealousies and dissentions. 3. Where shall Mariners be had for
our Fleets? shall the French press here as in their own Kingdom? If so, I
foresee, we shall soon lose our Seamen. Or shall they only use Volunteers?
Then their number will be small, because the French pay is not great. I might
mention other particulars, as the French and Dutch Officers discord. The manner
of payments, and from whence, etc. But these are enough to show us, that which
way soever we look there is nothing but difficulty and danger stares us in the
face.

4. But we have yet that which is more momentous, and that is the situation of
Great Britain. For could we knock their men in the head, as easily as our
Borinne's their eggs; and sink their Ships, as if they were shells; yet we
cannot possibly remove the Island. Which is, 1. Not only nigh unto us, but over
against us, so that we cannot look out, but we are upon them. 2. So situated,
that should we bear them and their Associates, (which is not easy in equal
powers) they can still manage a War destructive to us. And what good will it do
any but the envious, to ruipe others, if they be ruined themselves? For with a
few Ships in the Chanel, wherein they have Harbors all along, to go in and out
at pleasure; they will force us continually to sail with great Convoys, or we
shall be forced to fall into their hands. And the like may be said of the
Northern passage by the Orcades, where a few Ships will obstruct our Trade. Now
how great a prejudice this is to Traffic, I leave all knowing men to judge.
For by this means. No single Ships, nor small numbers can sail. Restraint will
be laid upon going out but in great Fleets, and with sufficient Convoys. Many
will be necessitated to lie idle, and at great expenses to wait for their
Company, whilst they could sometimes have performed their voyage. And Merchants
lose particular designs, which are usually the greatest profit, to such as are
able rightly to manage them. 3. In storms and tempests we shall be frequently
forced into their Harbors, and so fall as a prey into their mouths.


5. Britain and Ireland being Islands, are not easily invaded, and so diverted
by a Land War, but that they may solely attend to a Maritime, when they are
once engaged therein. Whereas France being on the Continent, is subject to
invasion from Spain on several sides. Which was one reason, why our Ancestors
preferred the guardianship of England, before that of France.

6. Tangier in the mouth of the Streights, will be no small prejudice to our
Mediterranean Trade. Which if the mould or harbor can be made firm, will prove
of great concernment to the English Crown, and a strong curb to all their
enemies Traffic. And here I might add, Cadiz, and all the Coast of Spain; for
if we be French, no wise man (I think) will doubt, but we shall have Spain our
enemies again.

And these things I think are abundantly sufficient to dismount our Adversaries
confidence, of carrying away the Trade from England, if we should come under
the power of France.

3. Another grand Argument against us is, that we are more likely to enjoy
Peace under France than England.

Peace (I confess) is an invaluable blessing. How many and great miseries does
it free us from! Bloodshed, violence to our Persons and Estates, unquietness,
and almost all manner of troubles. How many and great mercies does Peace bring
along with it! It is both the mother that bears, and the nurse that brings up
all our temporal blessings. It gives us mercies, the freedom of enjoying them,
and sweetens their enjoyment. It contains liberty, plenty, equity, tranquillity,
pleasure, and safety. So that he was a mad man that should not choose Peace. But
I fear our coming under France, is neither the way to procure Peace, nor the
means to preserve it. And that we by so doing, shall but have Ixions fate in
the Fable, embrace a cloudy and tempestuous War, instead of the fair and
beloved Juno of Peace.

1. Let it be considered; that if we have Peace by Land, we have War by Sea:
which is to leap out of the drying pan into the fire. It is an old and a good
political axiom, Ex duobus malis minus est eligendum; Theological it was never,
for in Divinity, Nullum malum est eligendum. Now if we rightly measure our
Interest, we shall find a Land War much more eligible for us upon many
accounts, which I need not here to mention, they being easily imagined by all
wise men. For should it be granted, that for the present the two Crowns accord
and we have Peace: it will either be such a one as will ruin us, or cannot be
lasting to be sure; but in a very few years will necessarily come to the
balance I have mentioned of Spain and England against France and Holland.

2. Let us therefore examine their grounds; that so we may see before us, and
not run our selves blindfold into destruction. Which so far as I can discern
are these four. The power and prevalency of his Arms. His treasure to maintain
them. His nearness to us. And his Allies.

First for the power and prevalency of his Arms. 1. It is true his numbers are
great, both in Arms and in the Kingdom of France. The great advantages he has,
by the largeness, compactness, situation, and soil of his Dominions; the
infinite number of Nobility and Gentry for Cavalry, and the populousness of his
Cities and Provinces for Infantry, which capcitate him above all the Princes of
Europe, to enlarge his Empire; I well know, and willingly grant.

But what relates to the Kingdom of France concerns not us Netherlanders in
this case further than as to his Arms and power to defend us. Now in my reason
the greater power in the Sovereign, Sect. 5.
the less liberty in the Subject, as we have already shown. So that the more
numerous his Armies, and so much the worse. Does not France groan under this
burden, and shall we desire to do so, or help to ease them by bearing part
thereof on our backs? If we be so kind, I dare engage we may have it all, and a
thousand thanks from that Kingdom. Which is so wearied with it, that above one
half of them (if my intelligence greatly deceive me not) would rejoice to see
it lessened, though it were with some loss to the honor of the Nation. But
because I write not to be known, but to better the world, and with my bucket of
water to help to quench the Flames, that threaten destruction to the Protestant
Interest; I shall desire all intelligent persons to enquire of those that
understand France, or have come lately thence; and then let them consider if
their condition be desirable. If a numerous Army lies quartered upon us, shall
we not both be kept under by them, and eaten up of them? And although they be
paid in the Kings name, yet must not we find our share of the money? I never
yet read or heard of any wise people, that desired their Prince so potent, for
fear he should oppress them. A due Mediocrity has always been counted best.
Let any one read the Greek and Roman Historians, or any others that are wisely
writ: and he shall find, if he duly observe, that the Princes Potency has
always been the peoples jealousy.

2. It is also true, that he has been successful in his Arms against us,
beyond most men's imaginations, and perhaps even his own hopes and expectations.
But if all things be rightly considered, it is no such wonder as the world
makes it. Our Wars by Sea; our intestine Divisions; the cowardice of some; the
corruption of many; and our multiplicity of Garrisons, whereby our Forces were
so parcel'd, that fighting severally they were easily vanquished; together wi^^
several other causes which concurred under the hand of Divine Justice, makes it
no wonderment to wise and considerate men. Nor is it any new thing in the
world, but that which has befallen most of the Nations in Europe, as all their
Histories abundantly witness.

3. Nor will this evince our defense. For it has often been experimented, that
those that have won much in a little time, have lost it again in less. How did
the same French Nation under Charles the 8. overrun most part of Italy in a
little time, and quickly lost it, as the many Historians of both Nations
relate! And in our days, how did the Swede like lightning pass through Poland;
which was quickly extinct and came to nothing! And so may this (if it please
God, and we manage our work wisely) like a thunderclap and sudden flash of
lightning, afright and astonish us, more than hurt us, as I shall show
hereafter.

4. If France goes on, the world grows so jealous of their greatness, that they
may possible have work enough; when their hand is against every one, and every
one against them; and then where shall be our peace and defense? It is known by
all that know former times, how in the Roman Monarchy when they were distressed
at home, they still called their Forces from abroad, and left their conquered
Provinces to shift for themselves, as I might instance in Spain, France,
England, and many others both Eastern and Western. And indeed it always is
thus; so that should France be fallen into by Spain, or England, or the Empire,
or Italy, or other several of these jointly, or should they fall into Civil
Wars, which are more frequent there than any, yea I think I may say all the
Kingdoms in Europe; in what condition should we then be? Truly I will tell you,
I think fighting with the French, and more eager to be rid of them, then many
are now to receive them. If any one say, but would you have us entertain the
English? I say no, but preserve our own freedom by complying with them as I
shall show hereafter.

5. If we will espouse all the quarrels of France we may possibly have more
than enough; and such as may prove our ruin, rather than safety and security. Our
Mariners have their Wars by Sea, our citizens and Soldiers by Land. Our
Merchants Trade to pay their money, and all to raise France to the universal
Monarchy, to the ruin of the Reformed Religion, and also the greatest part of
Christendom. And though now his friends be many, yet if he once comes to
receive a check his enemies will be more.

6. I see no need we have to fear all his power and prevalency, if we will do
our duty, and quit our selves as men for our Country. And if we do, upon our
friendship with the Crown of England, we may have Soldiers enough out of those 3
Kingdoms, which are as good Infantry surely as French, by their own Historians
Confession, and it is Foot we want (if any) for the defense of our Garrisons.
And besides that they are not so likely to be remanded, as those of France;
those Kingdoms being Islands, less liable to invasion, and less likely to be
engaged in foreign, or to be involved in Domestic Wars.

Secondly, for his treasure, it cannot be denied to be very great. But this is
rather against, than for our Adversaries. For the richer the Sovereign the
poorer the subject. And I never knew any people yet, that desired to have their
Prince so rich, especially when it comes out of their own pockets. I will not
meddle with the dispute of the Greeks Ostracisme, nor that of Politicians,
whether poverty or riches in the Sovereign be better for the subject. A due
mean wise men have allways accounted best. When neither the Prince may be
jealous of his people for their Riches, nor they of him for his Treasures; but
that they may mutually depend on each other, for the good of the whole. For as
it is difficult to determine, what the Magistrate may not demand, in case of
necessity; so is it easy to conclude, that he ought not to impoverish his
people when there is none, and make himself rich by their ruins. That being
tolerable, but this intolerable oppression.

Nor is it imaginable, that he will make France poor, to make us rich. Nor is
it credible that if they remain poor, we shall remain rich. For in all Princes
there remain some jealousies of a conquered people, that they may, upon some
revolution of affairs or other, revolt. And therefore it is their usual
practice, by all ways possible to drain them, and draw their riches home; as
the Romans into Italy, and other Conquerors their own Kingdoms; either by
bringing it into their own Treasuries, or Native subjects purses, or rather
both, that so they may command it upon all occasions.

Thirdly, for their nearness unto us, we know it too well. And if the subdued
Provinces remain in their hands, shall find what it is to have such neighbors.
But otherwise England is nearer us than France, and can easilier come to our
assistance. For the French have not only a long march, but through part of the
Empire, which is their enemy, and so liable to obstruction. As to the Prince
of Liege (or Archbishop of Colen) Duke of Newburg and others that have
permitted this passage, they may pay dear enough for it hereafter; as their
subjects, are paying for it at present, even to the French themselves. Who are
so weary of their Company, that I persuade my self, they will be the first that
will endeavor, to drive them out, when they shall find an opportunity.

But we are not afraid of all our Adversaries weapons, and therefore will
enforce their Argument, by supposing all they can desire; That France will keep
these conquered Provinces, and in all probability make new acquests, by
subduing of the Spanish Netherlands. So that if we be not subject to him, we
shall never be at quiet, but they will continually be as Thorns in our sides.

1. And why may we not as well suppose, that if we be under him, we shall never
be at rest for others? For no Potentate in Christendom has more jealous eyes
upon him, nor likelier to be continually employed in Wars. Now what will
changing help us, if we better not our condition? For we may easily foresee,
that if we come under France, we shall have England and Spain against us by Sea
(as we have said) and the Germans and Spanish Provinces by Land, and so shall
be in the same condition, though not by the same enemies, that we are now;
ground like Corn betwixt the Mil-stones. Yea it is more than probable, that
knowing the ticklish condition and mutinous temper of the French Nation, he
will bring his Wars into these Countries and their consines, and so we shall
again become, the Cockpit of War for all Europe.

2. I doubt not but he will attacque the Spanish Provinces and seek to connect
them with his conquests, and then incorporate all with France. But it is
uncertain what time this may require before they be all under his power. We
know not the Articles between the two Crowns, nor are we sure that England and
Austria will see this work. Many things may fall out, which no man's eye can
foresee. The King of France is mortal and may die, and the Dauphin young and so
incapable to carry on such mighty designs. Or he may meet with a check in his
enterprises, and be stopped in his further progress of glory. France is harrast,
and weary of Wars, may fall to their former mutinies. The King of Spain may
grow more potent. England, Sweden and the Cantons of Switzerland may think
themselves concerned, as well as the Empire and Spain, to stop the growing
greatness of France. The Spanish may divert him in Catalonia and else where.
Sickness and mortallity may seize upon his Armies. Factions in his court,
discontents in the Country, tumults in his Kingdom, and many other Accidents
may happen, to call him off us, or at least necessitate him to give us
reasonable conditions, and confine him to his own Kingdom. So that it is madness
to avoid a present mischief, to run our selves upon certain ruin.

3. If we had the friendship of England, we might soon be in a capacity to
defend our selves against France, and need not fear the power of their Arms. I
do not say that we alone are able to recover at present what we have lost,
without the assistance of others: But that these remaining Provinces are able
to defend themselves, and either let go the other, or in time possibly regain
them, as we shall show hereafter.

Fourthly, For his Allies, they need not fright us. For all friendship of the
World, and especially public, proves often times like winter brooks, which run
freely when we have least need of them, but fail us in drought when we want
their Water. If the fortunes of France should once decline, we should see those
that now adore them, readily renounce this their idolatry, and not only confess
their former fault, but help to turn the Wheel about, and bring them under whom
they now exalt.

And thus we see what small grounds there are of enjoying such great Peace
under France, as our Adversaries flatter themselves withal, and would persuade
the World of; which will never find credit with wise men, who are used to judge
by Reasons of State, and not by the vain arguments of fancy.

4. The fourth argument for France is, their having the upper Provinces
already, which are of such concernment to the Nether, that they affirm we
cannot want them, and therefore we must call in France that he may have them
all, that so they may be joined under one Head.

We cannot want them say they. 1. For our Security, and 2. for our Commerce.


Let us therefore examine these things, and having so done, we shall give a
release to your patience in this great Argument of our Adversaries concerning
Trade.

First that we cannot want them for our Security, is apparently false. Nay upon
a Politic account we had better part with them, though not in point of Honor
and Religion.

1. They were a continual charge to those inferior Provinces, which yet was
willingly born, in regard of their being an out Sconse to us, which many
supposed sufficiently strong for our defense. Which yet others have always
doubted of, and now we find they had sufficient reason. Seeing then some of
them willingly deserted us, and others slightly defended themselves, and us
consequently, and thus laid us open to the invasion of our enemies: if we let
them go, and they suffer thereby, they may thank themselves, and we must
otherwise secure our Country.

2. I wonder men should think they can secure us, when we see the contrary by
our experience. Nay indeed this was the great mistake that had like to have
ruined us all. For we relying on them, was unprepared for our own defense,
whereby the whole was greatly endangered. Yea so greatly, that if the French
had fallen into Holland, when they came to Vtrecht, I tremble to think, what
work they might have made amongst us.

3. It was apparent that the boundaries of the Commonwealth, was too great,
and our Garrisons too many, to defend against such powerful Armies. Which at
the same time are not only Masters of the Field, but able to assault what
Places they please. This War being far different from our former with Spain (or
less Potentates) wherein we had an Army to balance theirs, for relief of such
Garrisons as were at any time attackt by them. And this the Author of the
Interest of Holland, has long since well observed, and experience now shows
us. Wherein I dare be his second, against any combatants that dare encounter
him.

4. Let any man but recount our Garrisons with their greatness, and compute
what number of men is requisite for their defense; and he will soon see,
whether I have not clear reason on my side. I shall not now stand to do that,
though if any be obstinate, I can do it sufficiently to convince him: that
though the States in times of Peace maintain 60000, and in this War above
100000 men by Land; yet were they not half enough to defend all our Garrisons,
and keep an Army in the Field to relieve them. And therefore I never expected
any better success of the War, than now we see; though my judgment was
entertained by many with merriment, and of others with fears it might prove
Prophetical. For we must either have dismantled most of the weakest, and
supplied a few of most consequence for a strong resistance; or it was never
likely it should be otherwise than it is; it being always found true by
experience, that multiplicity of weak powers prove none against strong, for dum
singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. And therefore we see our enemies, had the
wisdom to wave Maestricht, that was provided with men to give them work; and
fell upon such places, as they either knew their money had, or their Swords
could most easily conquer.

5. Many of our outmost Garrisons lying in a champaign Country, cannot be
relieved, without a powerful Army of Cavalry. And these Countries are very
incapable many ways both for keeping and marching great numbers of Horse. In
these lower Provinces Land being so dear, and more profitable for Cows than
Horses; and so many great Rivers, which cannot be past with Bridges, except we
make them of Boats continually, is sufficient demonstration that they cannot be
here. And in the upper Provinces there is not forage for such a body of Horse,
as we must have if we will relieve our outmost Garrisons. And this those that
know them knows. Let us from Bergen op Zoom pass along the coast of Brabant by
Breda and our other Garrisons even as far as Maestricht, and from thence back
to the Buss which is the greatest part of the open Country we have (for
Gelderland, Vtrecht and Overissel are full of Rivers) and we shall find that
which belongs to us, inconsiderable for this purpose; the greatest part of that
Country being heath, and barren ground.

I know well that most of the Cities lie upon Rivers, but I know also and so do
all of ordinary understanding, that a Fort on either side commands them, and so
bars our passage by water to them.

But let us instance in one for all. I wish mine adversaries would show us any
way to relieve Maestrecht if it should be assaulted and distressed by the
French. I mean that is practicable, for we are not now discoursing of
Mathematical powers, which demonstrate motions as swift as the Sun's, and the
plucking up Oaks with a single hair, and such like curiosities that can never
be done; but of Martial powers, which are not for speculative notions, but
practical performances.

6. Let us but consider who has paid those great Armies we have constantly
kept, and must pay many more both Foot, and Horse (which are much more
chargeable) that we must keep, if we will defend these out-Provinces against
powerful enemies; and we shall soon see that we must pay very dear for their
uncertain and weak defense of us. For this purpose I shall satisfy the curious
with inserting the proportion of Taxes which each Province pays to the Public
for the Armies and other expenses: whereby it will appear that the quota of
these superior Provinces, Gelderland, Over-Issel, and Vtrecht (which the French
now possess) is very inconsiderable, wherein also they have often been behind,
and will be much less able now to pay it, being so much impoverished.

Gelderland -- 5 -- 12 -- 3 Vtrecht -- 5 -- 16 -- 7 Over-Issel -- 3 -- 11 -- 5
Holland -- 58 -- 6 -- 2 Zeeland -- 9 -- 3 -- 8 Friesland -- 11 -- 13 -- 2
Groening -- 5 -- 16 -- 7

7. If they be regained, we must pay for it, they being now under our enemies.
And what an infinite of blood and treasure that will cost, if our enemy will
not quit them on reasonable terms in treaty, I leave any man to judge.

8. If we rightly consider, great Territories are for Kings, small only fit for
Commonwealths. This we may observe in the Histories of former times, in the
Grecian Republics and their neighbor Kingdoms. For the Roman was mixed of
Monarchy and Aristocracy, by the great power of their Consuls ruling as
Monarchs by their turns, and especially in dangers by Dictators. Yea our own
experience has shown us this in the neighboring Kingdoms. But what shall I
say, many men are like the Judges Statues at Thebes; have their eyes blinded
and hands lamed, though not for Justice but for judgment, they can neither see
nor feel before them. In 59 being then in England, in some Gentlemen's Company,
where there were some zealous Republicans, and I from History and observation
showing them, that in great Dominions, especially, where there are many
Nobility, a Commonwealth could never stand long, that if there, it must be
from the City of London managing it as Rome had done, and not as they went to
work, and several other things, showing the impracticableness of their notions,
(which I have reason to remember, for I was complained of to Lambert, and was
in danger of being called before the Council of State) In the year 60. some of
them took me for half a Prophet, and so perhaps may some hereafter, for what I
shall now say: That if we affect great Territories by Land we shall lose all.
It is our Sea affairs, that we are set for by our Country, made for by our
genious, and fit for especially, by our employment. And we may as well think to
turn our Rivers, as change these things, nay, indeed, if we could, it would
quickly turn to our destruction: Traffic by Sea, as I formerly have shown,
being our chief secular interest.

But I foresee what will here be said, that a weak defense is better than none,
and how all these Inferior Provinces be otherwise secured.

And it is very true indeed, better a weak wall, than none at all. And if we
could not build a stronger, and at less charges, and with far less cost for
reparation and defense against the violent storms of our Enemies, (for none can
secure us against Heaven) we should be ashamed to have thrown down the old,
which (in my judgment) is by the former Considerations levelled with the
ground. For as it is folly to pull down before we consider how to build better,
so we must take heed that therein we commit not those errors which many wise
men (though that was none of their wisdom) have frequently (as I have often
observed) fallen into in their building, To bestow as much in piecing and
patching an old house, as would build a new one far stronger and better: and
when they have built either old or new, to find several inconveniences
therein, which a provident foresight might have prevented. As the ingenious
Mathematician Dr. Wren has demonstrated (as I hear) in England, that they had
better build S. Paul's in London anew, than repair the old. So I think I am
able to demonstrate, that we had better make a new defense for these inferior
Provinces, than that of the superior. But it must be well considered of l^st we
find inconveniences therein afterward. And as in Architecture I pleasantly
play with dice and cards alone (which others do in company) making my walls of
the former, and floors and covering of the latter, to see the conven^ences and
inconveniences therein, better than in plain figures; and especially to
demonstrate the same to others that will advise with me therein, and are no
Mathematicians: so here I must confess I have seriously palled down and set up
several defenses for us, which are too long to relate. But I will briefly touch
of some things, which are sufficient (I think) to silence mine Adversaries.

There are 5 or six ways of Natural Fortification and defense of a Country.

Seas for Islands, which are the best. For though they are thereby
incapacitated to enlarge their Empire abroad, being by the Sea as it were
confined to home, yet have they great advantages thereby, not only of Maritime
Negotiation, but also security from Invasion. So that they are at small charges
for maintaining Armies; which those that live on Continents, must constantly do
for their defense: otherwise the door stands open for the first that comes, to
enter in and take possession.

Great Mountains that are unpassible for Armies, or such passes as the famous
Thermopyles, which are easily defended, and these are next to Seas the best
defense.

Vast Wildernesses where Armies can have no Provision to march, but what they
carry along with them, as in Africa.

Peninsular Countries, which are easily retrencht within lines of security, as
the famous Wall in the North of England, first made by Agricola, Nero's General
there, repaired by Hadrian, and after by Severus against the Picts, the ruins
whereof are still apparent. And Scotland often also against England has thus
retrencht themselves, even in our days with great safety against the English
Army; which if they had had the wisdom to have kept within, they had saved
themselves and the Kingdom: but their adventurous folly in forsaking them, was
dearly paid for by the loss of both.

Great Rivers which cannot easily be past. As Euphrates in the East, and the
Rhyne in the West, defended those Nations beyond them, from the great power of
the Romans.

And lastly inundations by Water, marish and boggy grounds, etc.

I might be large in examples of all these in several Kingdoms of the World;
and also in the wonderful Providence of God, who hereby sets bounds and limits
to the mighty Nimrod's of the World, saying unto them by the voice of Nature as
to the great Seas and Waters, hitherto shall ye go and no further: but I will
confine my self to our own Country.

Now these Provinces if we consider them aright, are naturally fortified most
of these ways. Not by Mountains, for we live in a level Country; nor by Deserts
and barren Wildernesses, for we have a fruitful Land, like Canaan flowing with
milk and honey. But all the other ways we are defensible; so that if we can but
defend our selves by Sea, and keep that for our Commerce; we need not fear all
our Enemies by Land. We have the Sea to guard us below, mighty Rivers not only
within, but on both sides these Provinces to defend us: we are either Islands
as Zeeland; or Peninsular as Friesland and Groeningen together, and Holland and
Vtrecht, by reason of the Sea and great Rivers that almost surround them. And
let it come to the utmost extremity, we can by Water drown our Enemies, and
save our selves in our Cities. So that they that talk of conquering us, must
either be fools, or ignorant of the Country: and those that fear to be
conquered, pusillanimous and frighted with vain bravadoes.

But we will be a little more particular, in running over briesly the several
Provinces.

Zeeland consisting wholly of Islands, is thereby well fortified, and the
Inhabitants so used to the Water, that they are not easily mastered therein.

Friesland and Groningen together, are almost surrounded with the North and
South Seas, together with the River Emes, and scarce accessible by Land in
regard of the marish or boggy grounds, if Coeverden and some other strong
places on the passes be kept.

Holland will prove the greatest difficulty, and of most consequence; that
Province being the Head and Heart of this Republic. For this end I must
suppose that we must have part of the Province of Vtrecht, which we must either
regain by Treaty, or by strength, let it cost what it will, both for our
communication, and future safety. And then we have these two again almost
environed with the North and South Seas and several branches of the Rhyme and
Maes. Only one neck of ground between the Leck and South Sea of 5 or 6 miles,
where a River might be cut to carry water from the former, as something higher,
into the latter: from between Viana and Twael, from whence downwards the River
is deep, and has the Tide flowing up, by Houten, Here, Melis waert, Melaeten,
and so along the low grounds to Pynenborch into the R^^^^ Eem to the South Sea.
Which will make the whole adjacent Country being low, stagnate with water, and
so defend these two Provinces from their enemies incursions. And the rest are
done to our hands, by the several foldings of the Arms of those two great
Rivers, the Rhyne and the Mase, whose several denominations I need not mention,
nor the places where, these being sufficiently known to those that know these
Countries.

But oh Vtrecht! Vtrecht! I foresee there will so much depend upon that one
City, that I fear the greatest Affairs of Europe will hang, and turn upon that
single hinge. I know we flatter our selves they will part with it, and I wish
we may not be deceived; but I fear far other things, not so much from what I
have said, as from other reasons of State. But if any will ask what those are:
I say Ho-la, I am so far from publishing them, that if the shirt on my back
knew the thoughts of my heart herein, it should be my first work to burn it.

But our Adversaries will fight it out to the stumps both of their strength and
weapons. They say the French in the Superior Provinces has the command of our
Rivers, and so will be able to ruin our Trade.

Truly I am tired with this long discourse of Trade, and therefore for a
divertisement I will tell you a short and pleasant story. Upon a time King
James of Great Britain, was angry with the City of London, and sent for some of
the Aldermen and Common Council, whom he first chid, and then threatened that he
would take away their Charters, spoil them of their Privileges, and ruin the
City, that he would. An old Fox that stood behind, perceiving the King in a
passion, and the rest of the Ruffs in a silent fright, pretended deafness; and
industriously that his Majesty might observe him, enquired first of one and
then of another; What says his Majesty? what? Does he say he will turn the
River of Thames? The King perceiving it, would needs know what he said, and
being told, burst out into laughter, and swore in his Scottish dialect he was a
fause loune, and packt them away. So let me merrily ask mine Adversaries one
after another, what? will the King of France turn the Rhyne? will he turn the
Maes? Will he cut off the arms of those mighty Rivers? Or will he riveletise
them into more hundred furrows than Historians tell us Cyrus did Gyndes when he
went to take Babylon? Will he chastise the South Sea, and fetter it, as Xerxes
did the Hellespont, making Harderwick and Hoorne as S^stus and Abydus of old,
now the strong Castles the Turks have made in the Dardanels? Let the old rich
Merchants that have more money to lose than I, fear that, I do not. And except
he can, so long as we keep the mouth of the Rivers where they exonorate
themselves into the Sea; let the French keep them above, and see what they can
make of them.

But to be serious. I had thought our Trading had been in Ships at Sea
especially, and not with Boats in Rivers. And that it is these inferior
Provinces, and our Sea Trassick that France aims at; though in regard of our
Naval strength, he comes do^^ upon us by Land; thinking that way to carry the
Country. For his ^^pping the Boats passing up and down the Rhine and Maes,
there is no fear if we rightly consider, that that will ruin the French
themselves more than us. In regard we can subsist without this, and they
cannot. We have Corn in abundance from Dantsick and other places, with which we
supply others in want: but they must have theirs from above, by these Rivers.
How can we think that he should stop the Commerce betwixt Germany and these
Countries by the Rhyne; and they not stop his Provisions at Colen and other
places? Or that he intercept the Traffic by the Maes; and Liege, or at least
Namurs under the Spanish, should not prohibit his supplies from France? There
are two ways of dealing with Enemies. If small to beat them, if great to pine
them. They dare not but leave a considerable Army in those Provinces, for fear
of the former; and they must be supplied from abroad, for fear of the latter.
Now if they be not from us beneath, they must be by these from above; for those
Provinces alone are not able to provide for them; and why then should we
trouble our selves with such fantastical fears? Were it not that I thought
these things sufficient, and that I have been already so prolix in this
Argument; I would show at large that those above depend on us for our Money and
Commodities, more than we on them for theirs. But to do this satisfactorily,
would be a large discourse, and therefore I dismiss it, at least for the
present.

Our Adversaries having thus spent their Cannon upon us ineffectually, will
needs try a Volly of small shot: That we must have these out-Provinces, for the
quartering our Army, that so our Cities may be free from their disturbance in
Trade.

But this reaches us not. For we have out-Garrisons enough upon the Consines of
these inferior Provinces, as Sluys, Bergen op Zoom, Breda, Buss, etc. well
known, that are of less Trade, and capable to quarter 100000 men if need was,
as I can easily make apparent. Nor do I imagine Soldiers prejudicial to any
trading City, if they be not too numerous; but rather helpful, by the Excise
they pay, the work when off the watch they cheaply perform, the spending their
money with the poorer sort, and several other ways which might be mentioned.

And thus you see in point of profit, or worldly Interest, that we can want the
superior Provinces, (excepting the City of Vtrecht, and a little of the
Circumjacent Country) yea had better quit them upon several accounts; and
though our boundaries be less, yet if we be more compact and stronger, that
will abundantly compensate our greatness: besides the vast expense which is
spared thereby, not only of blood, but treasure, in maintaining constantly so
great an Army as we must, if we will recover and defend them. The only
advantage that I can foresee by them is, to have bad neighbors further off:
but whether that will Countervail the cost, may be a question to others, but is
none to me.

But if we value our honor at so high a rate, and will pay so dear for it,
that if the French will not part with them upon fair terms, we will wage war
for them; I heartily wish we never repent it. For I have observed that
Commonwealths are fitter for self defense, and Kingdoms for conquests. Which
is shaddowed out by the Venetian Statue, holding a Shield in the right hand:
that some unskilful Travelers condemn, as an error in the Statuary. Whose yet
ambitious swerving from this Commonwealths maxim, cost them very dear: and
seeing it is the nearest parallel to our case I know, I shall briefly relate
it, because I think it may be useful for us. The Venetians having long warred
with the Genonese at Sea, afterward cast an ambitious eye on the Continent of
Italy, and by one means or other (too long to relate) became Masters of many
considerable places. This made them envied by their neighboring Monarchs, who
entered at Cambray A. 1508. into a league to war against them. Maximilian the
Emperor, first of that name, recovered Padua, Vineentia, Verona, etc. belonging
to the Empire: the Pope Ravenna, Cernia, Ariminum and Faventia: Lewis the 12.
then possessed of Millain in right thereof, Bergamum, Crema, Cremona and Brixia:
Ferdinand the King of Spain in right of Naples, Manfredonia, Trano, Barlet and
Manopoli, all of them Havens on the Adriatic: the Duke of Ferrara, Rovigo: and
the Duke of Mantua, Asula: in so much that the Venetians were forced to betake
themselves to the Islands and Marshes of their City. And yet in a short time
by compliance with the Pope, they broke the confederacy, and by one means or
other regained the rest, except those belonging to the Realm of Naples. The
question is debated in the Senate, whether they should war for these or no? And
wisely concluded in the negative, That although they were commodious Havens for
them, yet better to part with them, than war with such a potent Prince as
Spain. And let me say it freely of our selves, that had we served God, followed
our Trade, and kept our selves more off the Stage of Honor, as our Ancestors
did: We had less occasioned our neighbors envy, and not been reduced to those
Strates we are in.

But if our Senators be of Nasica's judgment, and would have this foil for our
Martial valor, and this exercise to rub of the rust, our Arms have contracted
by their long rest. If our Cavalry are ambitious to have the Trumpet of Fame
sound their praises, and the Infantry to have their marches beaten, through
succeeding Ages and Generations. I wish that the echo of Fame may follow them,
with a clearer sound than the hoarse clamor of the People; and hope that the
imbellick Bores that are ready to start at the report of a Gun, and stoop at
the whistling of a Bullet, may, by having dangers familiarized to them, become
(as the Fox did with the Lion) undaunted at last, and under their brave General
and Commanders regain our reputation; and shall heartily pray both for our
Senators prosperity, and Soldiers success.

The only consideration that sways with me for contesting for them, if we
cannot have them otherwise, is that of Religion. If therefore this policy, I
have pleaded should prove Apocryphal; and that our League and Alliance with
them, obliges us for them recovery; or that the rules of Christian Charity
require us, to adventure our own loss for their safety: God forbid that I, or a
any man else should be against it; and I hope there are none so degenerate, but
will contribute their best assistance both in purse and person to so good a
work. If the Turks will redeem the caged birds to set them at liberty, let us
much more willingly our Christian Brethren, and so committing our cause to God,
pass through the Temple of Virtue, that we may happily come to that of Honor.

Having thus shown the impregnableness of the truth of our cause, against the
assaults of its Adversaries; and fought it out with them, in their representing
the Advantages of being under France, and disadvantages of being under England,
and our Replying: It comes now to our turn to be Assailants, wherein we hope to
obtain an absolute conquest, by showing them the quite contrary.

Now herein we might be very large, if we would argue from all the suasory and
dissuasory topics; as the Honesty of being under England rather than France
for the common Interest of the Protestant Religion; the Honorableness thereof
for the common good of Christendom, whose Interest it is to oppose the
greatness of France, as we shall show hereafter: the Equity of this for
assisting our Allies against France: the possibility or practicableness of this
only, now that his Highness is both General and Stadt-holder: and also from the
contrary of these if we seek to come under France. But we shall only insist
upon that of Vtility, because that is most petswasive; and that with respect to
our selves only, the most part of men being so selfish, that they prefer their
particular before the public good.

The disadvantages of being under France, and advantages of being under England.
1. Our being under France brings us infallibly unto a War with England and
Spain, in some short time at least, if not presently, as we have already shown.
Now how destructive such a War is to our maritime Negotiation, I leave all wise
men to judge, and Merchants espcially who have the experience thereof.

Whereas on the contrary our being under England, gives us Peace and freedom of
Trade by Sea; at least inconsiderable disturbance in comparison; yea very
probably by Land also; in regard we can spoil France's Trade, disturb his
coasts, divert his designs, and ballacne his power. For France cannot fight
with all Europe. If we be under England, we have Spain, the Empire etc. with
us: and if France will fight, we need not fear him. But if that which is said
be not sufficient (as I suppose it is) I am ready to make it apparent, that a
Land War is more eligible for this Republic, then one by Sea with such potent
enemies, and take the utmost interruption France can make of our Sea-traffick
into the balance.

2. If we come under France we shall either do it entirely, or partially.

If the former we are ruined in a great measure in our Commerce, for supposing
that the Spanish Netherlands fall under France also, as in all probability they
will, and that speedily, as even our Adversaries themselves take it for
granted; the Scheld will be open and free, and so Antwerp, Bruxels, Mechlin,
Loven, Lier and the other Cities of Brabant, by this means recover part of
their former Commerce; which now we deprive them of by Vlissing and Rammekens
below, and Lillo above on that River: and Ghant, Cortrick, Riissel and other
Cities of Flanders a part, by the former River being free, and by opening the
other passage to them, which is now obstructed at the Sas van Ghant.

Now of how great consequence this is to us, especially in regard of Amsterdam,
which bears now a double proportion in the Admiralties, and almost the half of
the burden of the Taxes of Holland, which is almost the half of the whole
Republic, I leave any one to judge, and especially those that know the
principles of interest for that great and flourishing City. I could be very
large upon this, in showing how the fall of Antwerp was the rise of Amsterdam;
how this City prevailed that the other should not be taken by the Arms of this
Republic; as also what some say it cost them to prevent it; that this was a
great inducement to the States, not to enlarge the Republic on the side of
Flanders and Brabant; and what a great motive it was to make peace with Spain,
that so they might prevent so Potent a Prince as France, from coming so nigh
them upon that quarter, and doing it by power, and how Holland gave security
for maintaining the peace, when Zeeland protested against the same: But these
are so well known in Holland, and the objections against it so answered,
Schookius de Pace.
, that I need not lanch into this Ocean. Now who is so purblind but he may
foresee, that if we come under France, the Flemish Merchants, especially
Papists, will return and carry their Trade to Antwerp, and many French also
setle themselves there; the River being much better, the City fit for traffic
every way, and having the Popish Religion publicly professed, so that it will
soon contest with Amsterdam for Trade, and carry it ere long; and then
Amsterdam may say of Antwerp, as the Ice of the Water, Matter me genuit, matter
mox gigniture exme. For we must think those Cities, and particularly Antwerp,
are nearer the Confines of France than Holland; and will be more confided in,
being Papists; so that they will become both the care and Crown of that King
and Kingdom, for their Trade in these Northern parts of the World. Yea let me
say it, for I know it to be true, this is that the Trading Flamens long for,
seek for, and should above all things be glad to see: so that in stead of
hindering, they shall help, all they dare, Frances conquest for this their
Interest.

And if some of these Provinces only come under France, and othersome under
England; what a miserable condition shall we be in; by having two such potent
Princes continually contesting in the midst of us, so that by such strong fits
of Colic in our bowels, and Convulsions in the whole body, our disease must
needs become mortal, and our wounds incurable. Let us suppose that which is
likeliest, both by the best intelligence, inclination of the people (as we have
said formerly) and interest as we shall show hereaster, that Zeeland become
English, and Holland, should choose France; and consider the situation of
Zeeland, near the Sea, and almost right over the River of Thames, and both
between France and Holland, and betwixt Holland and the Chanel; the Harbors of
Vlissing and Ter Vere, into which, the latter especially, all Winter long, no
withstanding the Ice, is safe arrival; their genious as well as commodiousness
to Cape: and then judge in what a perilous condition the Trade of Holland will
be under France, and what miserable work will be made amongst us. Or let it be
supposed that there is friendship between France and England in the enjoying
their several shares (for we will grant all possibilities, and much more
probabilities, our Adversaries can reasonably desire) and how will our mutual
traffic be spoiled, by the impositions of both Crowns upon commodities; if we
should pay to the one in Holland and the other in Zeeland, as undoubtedly we
must. For it is a certain truth, that multiplicity of impositions, especially
when great, spoils merchandise. And will it not be in Englands power, to open
the River, and make it tree for Antwerp, etc. as we have said? and in that
case, where will the vast Commerce of Holland then be?

Whereas on the contrary were we either of these ways under England, we exclude
France and Flanders, and preserve our Trade to our selves.

If we be entirely under England; we may save the Spanish Netherlands, whose
Governors are contented with what Commerce they have, rather than lose all; we
may preserve our selves from the French neighborhood; and thereby also our
Trade from them both.

Or if we be but in part so; we preserve the friendship of these Provinces, the
Trade betwixt us, secure our interest both at home and abroad, and command the
Commerce of Europe at our pleasure.

3. If we come under France, we have not only Spain our Enemy by Sea and Land
(as we have shown) but the loss of our Spanish Trade, and the hazarding of our
whole Levant Traffic: And if we rightly calculate, that amounts to no small
part of our Commerce. The Spanish Netherlands, Spain, and their Dominions in
Italy, taking off much of our East India and Western-wares. For as Muscovy and
the other Nothern Nations consume much of our Pepper, and some hotter Spices,
so the Southern, and Eastern in the Mediterranean, much of our other
Commodities. Now with what security can we either carry them through the Sea,
or bring our Silks, Camels-hair, and other of the richest Commodities we have,
from Aleppo, Egypt, and our other Factories for the Turkey Trade, and maintain
our Traffic with Venice, Leghorne, and other places in Italy: Seeing the
Spaniards besides the ports of Spain, have so many Havens, and some Islands in
the Adriatic; Sicilia, Sardinia, Majorca and Minorea in the Midland Sea; and
Cadiz so commodiously situated at the mouth of the Straits; some of which have
been famous in all Ages for the Archest Pirates in the whole World. Betwixt
these therefore and the Turks, we are certain of nothing, but of bad Trading,
and they good Caping. So that I may conclude with the Poetical Proverb, that he
that desires to fly from England, and fall under France for Traffic, Incidit
in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim.

Whereas on the contrary, if we come under England; we certainly secure our
Commerce with Spain, and all the Territories belonging to that Crown. And not
only so, but against the Turkish Pirates which infest those Seas, which would
be of no small advantage to us. For besides that England is at peace with some
of those places on the African Coast, and is in friendship with the Turkish
Empire; how easy a thing was it for us jointly, to bring the rest to our own
terms? Yea, so to subdue them all, and keep them under, that they should never
be able to disturb us, no nor Christendom more by their Caping? And how
generous a design this is and how destructive to that great and common Enemy of
all Christians, I leave all wise men, and well-wishers to Christianity to
consider and judge.

4. Our East India Trade, the richest jewel of this Republic, which has
occasioned us so much envy, and caused so many quarrels and contests; if we
come under France, will run a great Risks to be ruined. Has not this been
their great design of late years? Have they not for this end erected a Company?
And now got footing there, and follow it further, even in this last year, as we
hear, with their greatest endeavors? Nay, is not this the principal motive,
which induces them to make this War? I know we need not fear them there, nor
all Europe if we have peace here, and can send them supplies; We are so far
advanced in that Negotiation; so strong in Forts, Shipping and Soldiers; our
men so accustomed to the heat of those Countries; our Mariners to those Coasts;
and Merchants to the Languages and Trade of those parts. But if we come under
France, will not England and Spain seek continually to intercep our supplies
thither, and our Returns from thence? Will not this put us to vast Charges of
Convoys to defend our Ships going and coming in security? Will not some through
storms and other accidents when separated, unavoidably fall into their hands,
as we have often experienced? And will they not always be in one hazard or
other from them for safety? Yea let us suppose that all stands well there, and
none of our Ships miscarry through our Enemies, but safely Arrive both there
and here; where shall we vent those Commodities from thence at the prices they
now yield us; when we have such Enemies at home, and such dangers in carrying
them abroad, as we have formerly shown? Nay, can we rationally think otherwise,
than that the Kingdom of France will have share with us there, and the Crown
the greatest profit here? So that our East India Actions, as high as they are
now may in a little time come as low as those of the West India Company; which
was once thought equal with the other, and are now next to nothing: and then
many of us, who have most of our estates adventured in the East Indies Trade,
may lose that we have lest, as we have formerly lost by the West Indies; and no
remedy but patience, for we must sit down in a sorrowful filence. Herein I have
reason to speak feelingly of my fears, being so concerned according to the
proportion of my small estate; how much, matters none but my self, but were it
ten times more, I must tell you; that though the Actions at this present are
considerably above three hundred, I shall the first day I see we come under
France, sell mine willingly for two, rather than keep them, and render many
thanks to the buyer into the bargain.

Whereas on the other hand if we come under England, they have formerly had,
and still have a considerable share in the East India Trade. Their Company and
ours accord well, and frequently accommodate each others correspondence. His
Majesty in the former War, in his Declaration, and the Papers past between the
States General, A.D. 1664, 1665
and his Envoy Sir George Dawning, infists upon Poleron one of the Banda
Islands, satisfaction for injuries past, with deduction of what we had
suffered, and regulation of Trade for the future; A.D. 1671/2
and his Majesty in his Declaration of this present War only mentions the last,
The Regulation of Trade in the East Indies. Now I persuade my self, that
neither the States, nor East India Company will stick upon these. For Polleron,
if they have it, it can now neither be any great profit to them, nor prejudice
us: For a just accompting with them, what just man can be against it? Or
against a due and equal Regulation of Trade? that so all occasions of contests
between the two Nations may be cut off, and wholly prevented for the future. It
is true, that reaches not the supposal of our being under them, but only
standing upon equal terms with them for Trade: and therefore we will come close
up to the supposition in hand.

And herein we shall proceed with such franckness, that we shall grant more
than our adversaries can reasonably be jealous of; and that is, that the
English should have half of that Trade with us; and yet show that it is better
for us then to take in France. For, 1. The English have a considerable part
already, and France but an inconsiderable: so that we must, in all probability,
part with much more to the latter, and need part with less to the former. Our
first capital of the East India Company, is 64 Tun of Gold, and the English 40.
It is true we have Traded both longer and more, and so have a greater
improvement: suppose 70 Tun of Gold there, which ordinarily is reckoned about
three times in the value when returned hither; and suppose as much or more here
in goods or money; which vastly exceeds the English: yet it must be considered
that we are at greater expenses there several ways than they; that we have
money at interest, though inconsiderable to what formerly, having paid off the
last year above 50, some say 60 Tun of Gold. I must here ingenuously confess,
that I have but the forementioned calculations from the cur^osity of discourse,
and the credit of others; not upon the authentic authority of the books of
both Companies; which I have not leisure now, nor indeed pleasure to enquire
into; and yet I think I am near the truth, having had these things from very
good hands. I will therefore proceed, and here we are certain, that besides a
great sum of money, our Company has lent the States to carry on this War,
which I reckon as an honorable gift, we are like to part with a far greater to
purchase our peace. And though our Actions be far more worth than theirs, for
example, a capital Action that gives right to a suffrage, in the election of
the Directors of that Trade being originally 100 l Vlamish, (or 1800 g) and in
times of peace 400 l Vl. (or 2400 g) and sometimes 500 l Vl. (or 3000 g) and
with them not worth two, or twelve: yet this arises not so much from the great
emolument, that the Participants here receive more than there, as from the
plenty of money here, which several have and know not how otherwise to improve,
the small Interest (usually under 4 per Cento to those of good credit) and the
dearness of Land; all which are contrary in England. So that I leave it to any
competent and impartial man to judge, (should it be so, which yet, I think,
none need to fear) whether it is better for us to supply the English with a
less part, or the French with a greater of that our Trade. For I dare say, that
if England has a fourth of ours, France has not an eighth part thereof.

2. How easy is it for us and England to beat France out of the East India
Trassek? if we have Wars, or if the French seek to incroach upon us.

3. Under England we keep our own Chambers of Trade; whereby thousands of
Families subsist in our Cities. All manner of Trades for Shipping and
navigation, Carpenters, Smithes, Sail-makers, etc. All manner of Tradesmen for
victuals, Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, etc. by their labors at least. All manner
of Shopkeepers for selling them Provisions that are sent, and buy commodities
that return. Besides the poorer sort, as Boatsfolk, Laborers, etc. which are
exceeding many that wholly depend on the Company for their livelihood. Whereas
if we come under France, and the Spanish Provinces also, as we may reasonably
suppose; a great share will be removed to Antwerp, there being so large and
magnificent an East India house, and that being nearer France by far. Whereby
our Trade being taken from us, our Cities will be impoverished beyond
imagination.

4. The impositions of the Crown of England is with consent of the people in
Parliament; the rates both inward and outward being set by law: and so would be
here with consent of the States. Those of France arbitrary, and inhansible at
pleasure. And how great an alteration Customs make in Commerce, I leave all
knowing Merchants to judge.

I foresee it will be said, that were we under France, we should beat England
out of the East India Trade, and so have it wholly to our selves.

If they would make either the ^ntecedent or Consequent good, the Argument
deserved consideration; bue I know they cannot; for they are both impracticable.

First, We cannot beat them out there, till we have conquered them here: for
how shall we in Wars with them, spare Ships, Soldiers, etc. to do that? Now
what probability there is of conquering them, is formerly declared. The English
are reasonably fortified and provided, and will doubtless be better, if they
see danger approaching. And not only so, but being in good amity (as I have
heard) with those Nations where they reside, they would never suffer our enmity
to prevail so far against them. Nor those Nations with whom we both Trade: for
knowing how low one chapman makes the market, they will assist the weaker,
rather than lose their advantage by them.

Nor if we should conquer them there, will all the spoils fall to our selves;
as some may possibly think, whose hopes are postilion to the Sun, and therefore
fancy things beyond the Moon; and bring such booties from East to West upon the
wings of their windy imaginations. For instead of hoping to have half, we have
reason to fear, should it be so, that France. will have all the parts of the
Prey.

5. If we be under France, what shall become of our Fishery upon the Coast of
England, and those multitudes of Families that depend thereon? I might be large
herein from my own Observations, having had the humor or curiosity (call it
what you please) to view all the Rivers, Harbors, and almost Creeks on both the
opposite Coasts, from Thames to Tinmouth, and from the Elve to Oostend. And
particularly Yarmouth and Flambroughhead, as the greatest Promontories of
England, and whereabouts there is the best fishing. But I will only speak to
those things which concern the present Argument. A diligent person calculated
in the Year 62 the dependants on the Fishing-trade (I mean not Fishers only,
but also all employed about their shipping, Nets, Cask, Salt, etc. with their
Attendants at Sea) and reckoned them above 400000. Yea some have made their
number far greater, particularly that learned, wise, and valiant Knight Sir
Walter Rawleigh (whom I parallel with Sir Philip Sidney) in his information of
King James, reckons our Vessels that fish on the Coasts of Great Britain 3000
and every 20 Busses to maintain 8000, which will amount to 1200000. But this is
incredible. He must either be mistaken in the number of Ships, or the
proportion he alots them, or both. For upon diligent enquiry I cannot find half
that number either of Ships or Men in some years last past. If he mean of the
three several seasons of fishing; in Autumn for Herrings, Spring for Cod-fish,
and Summer for Salmons; we shall not contest with him; nor concerning the
number he says attends them, viz. 9000 other Vessels, and 150000 Men. It is
sufficient for my present purpose, that I show, that our Fishery is very
considerable, and the friendship of England for the same, of far more
consequence to us than that of France.

Guicciardine, Descript. generalis Belgii.
a very diligent Writer, A. D. 1587 reckons the Herring-Busses, that fish on
the British Coasts at least 700, and some said many more: and though he include
Flanders, yet not the other Fisheries, as Rawleigh does, and doubtless of all
the Maritime Provinces of this Republic; which the Author of the Interest of
Holland c. 5. erroniously appropriates to that Province alone, through
inadvertency, that Foreigners frequently call all these United Provinces
Hollanders, that being the principal, and all the Spanish, yea formerly all the
17 by the name of Vlamens. And not only so, but tells us the Fishery is
increased since a third part, which I cannot credit, not only in regard that
the English, but French and Flemish whom we used to supply for the greatest
part, now fish themselves. Yea I rather think, that since our Merchandise has
so much increased, our Fishery has decreased.

And what considerable profit redounds to us thereby, appears by the
computation which Guieciardine makes very particularly, that those 700 Busses
take annually 49000 Last of Herring, which he reckons at 10 l. Vl. or 60.
Guldens the Last; which amounts yearly together with the other Fisheries to the
following sums.

l Vlam. Sterling. Herrings -- 490000 or -- 294000 Cod-fish -- 166666 or -- 100000
Salmon -- 66666 or -- 40000

The usual reckoning of salt Fish that is yearly taken, and either spent or
sold by Hollanders, if you will believe the Interest of Holland c. 5. is 300000
Last. So that the families that are maintained, the money that is gotten, and
food that is eaten from Fishing is almost incredible.

Now that it will be in Englands power and not in Frances to spoil us of this
Fishery, or at least the greatest part thereof, I think no rational man will
deny, that considers the only fishing for Herring in these parts or perhaps in
the whole World, is upon the British Coast; and most also for Cod-fish
northward of Scotland and on the Dogger-sands, and other places where they can
easily interrupt us. Those therefore that are so forward for France, might do
well to consider, what they will do with all these families, or how they shall
be maintained when they are deprived of their Trades.

Other Arguments which might here be added I shall not now bring into open
view, but keep them as a Reserve, in case our Adversaries should rally and make
head against us, having sufficiently rooted them (we think) by these five,
wherewith we have already fought them.

But yet there remain some advantages under England, which we cannot expect
under France, some of them more general for the Republic, and othersome more
particular for Provinces and Persons. In the handling whereof, we shall desire
to use, now that we are got within our enemy, the short and pungent dagger of
Demosthenes, rather than Cicero's long sworded eloquence.

Advantages under England, not to be expected under France.
1. By being under England, we retain and increase our friendship with the
Empire, German Princes, and free Cities: which are not jealous of Englands
affecting the Imperial Crown, as they are of France: and therefore will not
prejudice us under the former, as they will certainly in a little time under
the latter. Nay I doubt not, but were we under England, they would take
courage, and generally appear against France. So that we should hereby greatly
promote the common Interest of Europe.

2. Under England we might have the freedom of the West-Indie Trade, which
would be of great profit to us, many ways. Now how great a share England has
in the West Indies, and how small and inconsiderable France, is well known.
These having only the Island Terre Neuf, for fishing, and some of the most
Northerly Continent, unpeopled, not cultivated, and improfitable, as may be
seen in de Laet, Descript. Ind. occid. L. 2.
by those that know it not: part of St. Christophors, and some other places of
small concernment, in comparison to what the English profitably possess.

3. By being under England, we might share at least with the English those
Plantations we have in the W. Indies; Holland in their New Netherland, and
Zeeland in Surinam, etc. Which would be of eminent advantage for Colonies,
either there or to be sent thither; besides the profit we might have from those
Plantations; as Zeeland (or some at least therein) even in these first years
and beginning thereof, have pretty well experienced, and know how greatly it is
further improvable. Now what a singular benefit it is for a full and populous
Commonwealth, now and then like the sedulous Bees, to cast a swarm of their
poorest and most laborious people, is apparent from the Histories of all Ages.
And though I confess the Dutch are not so good Planters, as the English, being
more used to the Water, and the other to Land: yet in regard all those
Plantations are upon the Sea Coasts and Rivers, the Dutch might be used for
building of Ships or Boats, Houses etc. and especially for fishing, carrying
and recarrying goods by Water on the Rivers, and to and from the Ships, and in
navigation; and the English for planting and working in the ground; and so, in
mine opinion, would make an excellent temperament, and very profitable for both
Nations.

4. Expenses might be saved in several Conveys, and particularly of the East
India Companies. I know very well they will have them return round about, on
the back of Ireland, lest they should touch at any of these Northern places,
especially in the Chanel, and so Trade; and will send out Ships with fresh men,
and take out the Mariners that return, to prevent their trading for themselves:
but yet the extraordinary Charges of our men of War might be spared. Nay the
States General bring in these, to be diducted in the Account with England, as
the occasion thereof, in their List of damages Article the 5. before the last
War, A. D. 1664.

5. Such as are Rich, and weary of Trade, or love their ease, honor, or
pleasure; may if we were under England, more easily remove thither, and be made
liege subjects, and free Denizens of England by the Crown; or be naturalized by
the Parliament; and so buy possess, and inherit Lands and revenues at half the
price here; and live upon their Rents as Country Gentlemen, in a cheap and
pleasant Land, enjoying as great civil Liberty as any where in Christendom, and
also the freedom of their Religion. Or let out their money not only at far
greater interest, but also upon bypothece or real security. I have often
thought this 20 years, whether it might not be better for England, to give this
Liberty by Law to strangers, especially those of the Reformed Religion, and of
these Countries; and of which side the interest lay betwixt us for this: Now
that England has so many and great Plantations in the West Indies for their
poorer people, now that money is so plentiful, now that this Commonwealth was
so increased upon them, now that the Number of Merchants is every where so
multiplied, and now that Trade is beaten so low, almost in all the known parts
of the World. But this would be both a large, and unnecessary digression, and I
am very sensible that I have been already too long in this Argument. Yet
industriously I confess, because I foresee, that many will diligently peruse
this, who perhaps will negligently pass by the rest: and mine Opposites so much
glorying herein, I thought best to give them full measure, and rather abound to
curiosity, than be deficient in satisfying the least nicity; Trade being the
Crown of that Kingdom and this Common wealth.

Sect. 8. Several other Arguments and enducements to incline us rather for
England, briefly mentioned. With an inference from the whole preceding
discourse, that the friendship of England is to be prefered before that of
France.
ALthough what is said of Religion, Liberty, Estates, and Trade, be sufficient
to prove this hypothetical problem? yet I shall give as over measure some other
enducements for England briefly.

1. The different humor and genious of the French and Dutch: which is well
known to those that know them both, to be far greater than between us and the
English. Which makes not only a st^ang^ness, but alienation of affection;
begets a disgust and nauseating of each other; brings forth many contests and
quarrels; and nourishes a continual discontent, uneasiness, and unquietness of
life.

2. The affection which the generallity of the English and Dutch Nation have
for each other. So that if the Controversies of late years, and at this present
between us, had been or were refered to the body of the people in both Nations
(although I well know what both their Representatives have done) I dare say,
upon reasonable satisfaction for the mutual miscarriages, which cannot but some
times happen toward each other; there never had been, nor would be War betwixt
us more. And that his Majesty, and the Prince of Orange would have more
Volunteers in one day to fight the French, than they have in twenty to fight
each other.

3. The way of France is only Gentry and Paisantry, the former lording it over
the latter, which have allways lived more miserably, than any common people in
Europe. In Caesar's time there was nibil plebe contemptius, as he tells us, and
has continued so as Bodin acknowledges, and is so at this day we all know. C.
1. C. 10.
Whereas in England and these Countries, there is a middle sort of people, that
live freely and independently, on their own Lands and Farms, that will never
endure the insolency of such Lords much less to be their slaves, and least of
all to be ruined by them.

4. Now that the Prince of Orange is advanced, and his party upmost, so that
the Crown of England may confide more in our friendship; it is not to be
doubted but through his Highness interest in his Uncles, we shall better accord
hereafter, when these unhappy differences are once ended.

And thus I have done with this great Question of the times. Sufficiently, I
think, to satisfy any rational man; though nothing is sufficient, nor will
satisfy I know, such as are either so resolvedly prejudiced against the
English or Princes interest that if they can but ruin them, they matter not
though they ruin both themselves and the Nation; or so partially passionate for
the French, that they desire them, though it be to their own destruction. For
all the Arguments in the World, will never prevail against passion and
prejudice: It is only experience that can convince such of their error, and
make them with Damocles, when the drawn Sword is over them, desire to depart,
finding they were deceived in their opinion of Happiness.

I shall therefore conclude, with a brief reflection upon some of these
Arguments, and the Corollary which naturally flows from them.

That seeing England and We are of the same Religion; Both free people and
affectionated to each other; Both imbarqued in the same Interest of Trade,
though in different bottoms; It not only becomes us, but is our mutual
concernment, that we take heed, we dash not one another to pieces, but fairly
and Christianly comply with each other, for the safeguard of our Religion,
preservation of the Protestant Interest, our own and others also Liberties, and
the just and equitable course of Commerce; that so each Nation may happily
enjoy their Religion, Liberty, Estates, and Trade, with Gods blessing on them
all.

Sect. 9. That we are not yet come to that extremity, but we may still remain a
Republic: in regard of our own strength, and our neighbors interest, Englands
especially, that they had better lose Scotland or Ireland, than let the French
have these Provinces. This War a Game at Hazard. Being engaged will go through,
and Parliament probably assist therein.
WE have hitherto discoursed upon the supposal of inability to defend our
selves; because it becomes wise men always, to suppose the worst condition that
may probably befall them; with the consequences thereof; and accordingly to
make provision, and in regard of the endless curiosity of men's minds, which are
always restless under miseries, and still inquisitive after futurities. We
shall now proceed to show, that we are not yet (through Gods mercy toward us)
come to the extremity supposed, nor reduced to those straits, that we are
necessitated to take either French or English for our Masters; but that we may
still remain a Republic, if we be not awanting to our selves, or through
passion or precipitancy betray our own interest, and cast our selves into
irrecoverable destruction. And this we shall make apparent, by showing there is
no sufficient ground for us to despair, if we either Consider our own strength,
or our Neighbors Interest. Let us therefore observe the good rule in policy,
which the Poet gives, Senec. Thyest. Nemo confidat nimium secundis,
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis.


First lets take a view of our own strength, and see what grounds of
encouragement, that will yield us. Which though sufficiently known to many, yet
not so well to the multitude. Now the strength of a Nation consists especially
in these things following, which I shall briefly recite, and accommodate to our
own Country.

1. The great strength of a people consists in the situation of their Country.
Now concerning this both in the general, Sect. 7.
and this Land in particular, I have already spoken sufficiently for my
purpose; and shown that all these Maritime Provinces, are either Islands or
Peninsular, and very defensible thereby; and also upon extremity liable to
inundation, either from the Sea, or Rivers that surround them, or both.

2. In the Artificial Fortification of particular places; Cities, Castles,
Forts, Passes, etc. And herein these Countries may contend with any Nation
whatsoever, Kingdom, or Commonwealth that is of no greater circumference. For
the Number of their Cities, and their regular Fortification, Art herein vying
with Nature, is not to be paralleled in the world. I need not descend to
particulars, Those that desire satisfaction herein, may consult Guicciardine's
description of these Netherlands.

3. In means of defense. As shipping for those Nations or Cities that lie upon
the Sea, or great navigable Rivers, and Lakes, as these Provinces do, to defend
their Coasts from invasion. And herein we are rather redundant than defective;
the Number of shipping in Holland alone, being usually accounted 20000. And
warlike provision of Arms and Ammunition. Wherein also we abound: these
Countries ever since they were a Commonwealth, having been the greatest
Magazine of warlike provisions, as is well known, of any in the World.

4. In men; in regard of their Number, Courage, Skill, and Unanimity.

As to our Numbers, they are abundantly sufficient for our defense. The
Interest of Holland c. 8. from particulars, reckons the sum of that Province
alone 2400000. But if there be so many in them all, it is enough. Just how many
is impossible to say, or near how many in such a multitude is very difficult to
guess, and harder with us than any other people, I think, in the World; in
regard of the uncertainty of Seamen, the Number of Strangers and Travelers in
peaceable times, and the diversity of Religions, Jews, Papists, Anabaptists,
etc. which baptize not their Children with us. But I know the Number of our men
must needs be great; by the great Number of our Cities, these several Provinces
being as it were nothing but Nests of Cities, so many being no where to be
found in so small a circumference in any parts of the habitable World; by their
largeness and multitude of houses, which imply the Inhabitants to be many; by
the greatness of their Trade, which is the lure that draws multitudes to them;
and by the known Christnings and burials of those only of the Reformed Religion.

As to our courage, which at present suffers an eclipse, there is more to be
said then the World is aware of. And indeed I wonder none of our History
Professors, have given other Nations some satisfaction herein. I have not been
without some thoughts of doing it my self, having been a diligent observer how
things have gone, but I want Authentic materials for such a work. I could
produce very many and very honorable testimonies, both ancient and modern of
their valor, our of such Writers as give the Characters of Nations,
Republics, Geographers, and especially Historians Dion, Caesar, Tacitus,
Suetonius, Florus, Orosius, etc. of old, the famous Italians, Guicciardine,
Bentivoglio and Strada, with Spanish, French, English and the neighboring
Nations, even so many and such as are sufficient either to shame, or to inflame
the veriest cowards, one should think, of the world into courage. But this
would be too large to insert here, and may possibly de done in another dress
hereafter. Nor is the success of France against us such a wonder, as many make
it, as I have formerly shown. Sect. 7.
I will at present only add, that which is proper for this place, and that is
that the French Armies were not only so numerous, but also trained up in the
School of Mars, and ours for the most part raw and unexperienced in War. As the
Fox in the Fable, the first time he saw the Lion and heard him roar, trembled;
the second time, was less afraid, and the third grown wholly fearless of him:
So it is with men, by being accustomed to dangers either at Sea or Land, they
converse with them familiary, and account them nothing at last. And therefore
wise Commanders have always endeavored to unlearn their Soldiers fear, by
showing them their enemies at Walls, Trenches, Passes, Rivers or other places,
where they could not be come upon by them, and so harden and flesh them by
degrees, before they have adventured to fight them against old and experienced
enemies. And I doubt not, but through Gods blessing, in a little time if the
Wars continue, our Belgic Lion, will not be found such a tame Lamb, and so
easily torn in pieces, as our enemies may hope, and others possibly may imagine.

As for our skill superadded to courage, there is no want, for the manner of
defense we are to make. For besides our able Commanders and Soldiers to defend
the Posts, and Passes abroad, all our Cities abound with Seamen, and such as
are skilled to traverse their Ordnance, and desperate for sallies, if need
should require.

Our unanimity, I confess, is that I most fear: and that when our Cities are
threatened with danger, the Citizens should grow mutinous, and fall together by
the ears, and so let in their enemies to part the fray. And yet I have reason
to think they will grow wiser, by their hearing and knowing how their friends
are used by their enemies.

5. In money and food to maintain their men. And in neither of these, through
Gods mercy, is there any want amongst us: If we will lay out our selves, as we
ought, for the public. Aitsma's Liewe reckons the public incoms of Holland
alone A. 1643. at eleven Millions of our money, which is eleven hundred
thousand pounds Sterling: we calling every ten thousand pound Sterling a tun of
gold, and ever hundred thousand a million i. e. of gilders. And besides the
public incoms of every Province, every City has their peculiar, which in some
is very considerble. But if our Common Treasuries are exhausted in several
places, it is no wonder: Yet if we consider the Riches of particular persons,
we have enough to hold out the War, to weary our enemies out at the last, as
must as they do us at the present. I will not now stand to show the calculation
of this, though if necessary, I think I can do it satisfactorily, comprehending
the disadvantages our enemies are under. But the late Project printed so often,
of the Capitals of this Country, for raising and maintaining so numerous an
Army, though the manner prescribed prove not practicable, has in part spared
my pains herein.

And for food, our Cities are generally so well furnished, that if our enemies
steal not supplies from us, it is well; we need neither seek to them, nor fight
with them for supplying our selves. We have Bread Corn Fish and Oil, Butter and
Cheese in abundance. And if our liquorish Dames, want their delicacies a while,
no great matter: they will value peace, and pay their Soldiers the better.

Now what can be added for the sufficient defense of any Nation, to the
particulars mentioned, I cannot imagine; and if my enumeration be insufficient,
I wish any wise man would show wherein, and then I shall thank them. And
therefore let us take courage to our selves, and not be frighted with vain
fears; or scared with any vanting bravadoes; like that great Rhodomontadoe of
the grand Turk, who when he heard of the long War such a great Prince as Spain,
made about this small Country; said, that before he would have kept such a
pottering, about a few petty Provinces, he would have taken them, and hurled
them into the Sea at once: though his successor kept no small pottering about
the single City of Candia many years together; to which some of our Cities, all
things considered, seem not much inferior for strength: although I well know
what a difference there is, betwixt the defense of one City alone without a
Country, and many at once contained therein.

But though this internal strength be so considerable, and with us of greatest
consequence; yet this is not all; we have also an external and accidental
strength, by the Interest of our Neighbors. For this end it must be well
considered, that some Countries and Cities, of small strength comparatively in
themselves, are yet very strong by their situation among, and well secured by
the Interest of other circumjacent Princes and States: who will not suffer, if
they can possibly prevent it, accession of strength to one another, lest their
own scale in the balance of powers should become light and soon born down.
What is it but this under the shadow of the Almighties Protection, that secures
the smaller Republics in Italy and the Empire? What Geneva, Stratsburg, Colen,
Hamburg and the rest of the free Cities, and Hans Towns, but this? God
governing the World usually, as both Comines and Cardan well observe, by the
passions of men, in the ballancing of Powers; that when any one will break out
into rage and Wars, others will oppose them with the like fury, and so keep the
World a little quiet, otherwise the great Nimrods, and hunters after Dominion
would soon, if let alone, destroy and devour all before them.

Now if we look about us, and see amongst whom our Land lies, and well consider
their interest; this will be very apparent in our selves, notwithstanding this
War that is made against us, that we are not devoted by any to destruction, but
only the French, as I shall show hereafter.

For Spain our next Neighbors on one hand, in the rest of the Provinces, they
know this so well, and are so sensible of their interest herein; that they not
only assist us what they can; but I dare say were it not for England, would
rather break with France than see us endangered. But those two Crowns as I have
already hinted, and shall more fully show heareafter, must not, and therefore
will not break.

For the Empire above us, they also are frighted with our fears; and if the
Princes thereof had money to their might, would willingly, I doubt not, assist
the Emperor: lest the Lillies of France should mount above the Roman Eagle. In
the year 15^4. when the States upon the death of Prince William, were a looking
toward France for Protection, the Princes of the Empire sent Malroy to
admonish them, ut a consilio Gallici patrocinii implorandi desisterent, alioqui
fore, ut Germani Principes tantam domui Austriacae and origin and foedere
arctis adeo cum Imperio vinculis conjunctae factam injuriam non negligant, as
Thuanus tells us, l. 80. And if they were then jealous of France, what shall we
think they are now? And if then zealous for the concernments of Spain, shall we
think they will now be wholly negligent both of theirs and their own?

And France to be sure will never see us entirely English: for so he knows, he
should never be able, to balance Englands power at Sea; which he doubtless
both hopes and aims at, by the accession of strength from these Netherlands.

Nor England suffer us, if they can hinder it, to be wholly French; for this
they know would clearly tend, in a little time to their destruction. This very
Reason of State moved Q. Elizabeth at first to support us against Spain, rather
than to have us fall into the Arms of France, by their becoming our Protectors.
Which that wise Historian Thuanus faithfully relates in several places. A.
1575. she told Campaniach, -- ne moleste ferat Philippus, si ipsa securitatis
suae causa Hollandiae and Zelandiae patrocinium suscipiat, antequam Galli
perpetui Anglorum hosts cis potiantur. L. 60. A. 1576. Elisabeth a verita ne
aliorum open destituti Belgae, ex desperatione foedus nobiscum jecerent, sique
and res suas Francis committerent, eos pecunia adjuvit, etc. L. 26. A. 1577.
she excuses her defense of us to Philip the 2. with this very Reason, ne Belgae
ex desperatione pernicio sum non solum sibi, sid vicinis, consilium caperent,
externi Principis patrocinio salute commissa. Meaning the French L. 64. And A.
1584. shows the emulation between the French and English herein. Ipsi sibi
invicem suspecti erant. Nam Rex veterem hostem Belgii accessione Galliae
imminentem reformidabat, and Angli nostros Belgi-potentes minus aequos foederi,
quod Angliae cum Burgundica domo intercedit, atque adeo commercio futuros
verebantur. L. 80. And is angry with the Ministers of State in France, for
neglecting this singular occasion, of enlarging their Empire by taking these
Provinces into the French protection. And to say the truth, this was the
greatest error in Policy by way of omission, and that of Charles the 8.
concerning the Kingdom of Naples of commission, that I think the Crown of
France was ever guilty of. And indeed there were many of the English Nation,
that judged it one of the greatest oversights that that wise Princess ever
made, not to take into her hands, as she was offered, the absolut protection of
these Provinces. But that is not so clear to me, nor will be so I think to
others, who rightly consider the circumstances of those times; for we must not
judge by the following, wherein this Commonwealth grew up beyond all
expectation, under such Wars, as many feared would have been our destruction.
But yet though she refused for several reasons both of Conscience and State
(mentioned by Cambden in her Annals, A.D. 1575.) yet it plainly appears by the
forementioned places in Thuanus, that rather than the French should, she would
have done it. And could she have foreseen, what we have known, I am apt to
think she would have adventured it; although I must tell you it would have been
a great venture: Spain being both so potent at that time, and spightful against
her, as was quickly after perceived, by the Spanish Armado in 88. and besides
the enmity of Spain, she had thereby incurred the envy of France infallibly, and
was uncertain not only of success in the War, but of what support of men, and
money especially the Dutch should be able to contribute, for the carrying on
the War, which was easily foreseen would be long and bloody.

Nor can any one think, that England is not sensible, of the danger they are
in, if we be under France, that either considers the Reasons of State, or
obeserved that which was obvious to every eye: and that is how the English was
startled at the progress of France. What posting was made too and again? Was
not the Lord Vicount of Hallifax hasted over, when they feared their approach
to Vtrecht? And hearing it was over, was not his Grace the Duke of Buckingham,
the Lord Arlington, with several other Commissioners, posted after? At which
time having the honor to wait on my Lord of Hallifax, and telling him the Town
talk of the D. of Buckingham, etc. coming through the Fleet, and being gone to
the Hague; he could scarce credit it, having not had the least notice thereof,
they coming away in such haste, for fear the French should overrun all.

And no wonder, if we consider the Consequences thereof for England, which are
so great that they had better lose either Scotland, or Ireland. And if any
English think I overlash, I shall desire them first carefully to compute these
several particulars, and then censure.

1. The loss that the King will have in his Customs, and the Kingdom in their
Trade; which neither of those Nations can compensate. 2. The constant charges
of maintaining a Navy, which that Kingdom must be at to maintain their
traffic, far greater than will secure them against either of those Kingdoms.
3. The great injuries they are always liable unto, from such potent enemies by
Sea as the French and Dutch conjoined: more than from the other by Sea and
Land. 4. The Wars that are likely to fall upon them in a few years both by Sea
and perhaps Land also; which would prove far heavier, than either of those
Kingdoms can make with them. 5. The hazard they run of being baffled and beat
out of their Trade by such a War. It is true, this is not so easy as many of
the Dutch imagine, as I have already proved; nor yet so difficult, much less
impossible, as perhaps some of the English may fancy.
I shall not now stand to draw these out of their close order into an open, yet
if any of the English think me weak in this, I have a Reserve, which, I think,
will sufficiently secure me from being routed.

It will be said to me why then should England commence this War.

Truly let me say it freely, for I know it, that the scale of War very hardly
cast that of peace, and the difference was so small, that it came upon two or
three grains only. I have weighed this as exactly as I possibly could: first
distinguishing pretexts from real causes, and then distinctly considering these
one by one. There were these 5 variously discoursed of. His Majesty's designing
to introduce the Popish Religion; to alter the government of those Kingdoms; to
revenge himself upon us, to advance the Prince of Orange; and the Interest of
the Kingdom of England.

For the two first which made the loudest noise in some men's mouths, I soon
found them frivolous; and only calumnies cast out by his enemies at home and
abroad, to make the King odious, and his People jealous. As to that of changing
Religion I have formerly shown, and I think sufficiently, that he neither will,
nor can if he would effect it.

As for the 2d. I considered the Kings years, as being past any such youthful
and vain ambition; his being destitute of a Child that can challenge the Crown;
his former miseries and sufferings by War; and his wisdom too great, to set
upon a design, so wholly impracticable, especially in England and Scotland. For
by the constitution of his Kingdoms, though he have the Militis for the
execution of the Laws; authority without power, being a vain scare crow, and
insufficient to suppress the audacious exorbitances of the multitude: yet the
people have the purse to balance that power, and whence then would he pay his
Armies? Nor let any one stop me with saying, the Long Parliament contested with
his Father for the Militia; for that was only temporary, they challenging it
only for that time of the danger they apprehended in the Kingdom, and not as
their constant right, and not belonging to the Crown; as may be seen by those,
who will rightly read their Declarations, which they published to the world
concerning that War, collected and printed together by Husbands at London,
1642. And besides this, a Parliament in being though not sitting, which has
some kind of radical power; though not to be exerted, but when legally
congregated. But suppose them dissolved, it being in the Kings power, to do it
at his pleasure; yet has he not the City of London on his back, and both
Kingdoms about him to oppose him? especially considering that the jealousy of
Popery would be taken into the quarrel. And what Ministers of State durst
suggest such designs? they know well the maxim of the Commons and their
practice (as the great means of preserving their freedom) is to ruin such as
would infringe their Liberty. And that they are so jealous of, and zealous for
their rights herein, that some of them still have the courage, and resolution
to venture their own heads, to break the necks of such men and such defigns, as
would prejudice their Privileges. I have observed in the Histories of former
times, and in my own time also, that there were seldom any of the noblest Stags
of State, how much soever imparked in the Kings favor, and how strongly soever
impaled with power; but if the Commons of England singled him out and set upon
him, though he might hold them at an abay for some time, yet they still hunted
him down at last. And for the King to think of making himself absolute, and
govern only by an Army (like the French Kings) by an Army of French men; is so
ridiculous, that I thought it not worthy of consideration. Can any man in his
wits, imagine his Majesty of England so senseless, as to give his Crown and
Kingdoms to the French King? For that is all one with this in effect.

As for that of Revenge, either for Chattam, or the affronts mentioned in his
Declaration of this War, or both: I considered his Temper, which has so much
Clemency, that it rather inclines him to lenity than cruelty and revenge. As is
abundantly apparent, not only by passing, but even forcing (as I know he did,
against some adicted to the latter extreme) the Act of Indemnity or Oblivion,
for those many and great injuries, he had suffered from his Subjects. And his
government since, in conniving at the violation of such Laws, as are thought
severe in matters of Religion, and indulging liberty therein: which has made
some, that have sufficiently heretofore cried up Parliaments, now run into the
other extreme and cry them down as fast; and instead of the Parliaments
formerly, now magnify the Kings favor and Clemency. And yet Kings and Princes
are men, and men subject to like passions with others, liable to suggestions
from those about them, and tender of their honor as the apple of their eye.
And therefore I will grant this might come in consideration, but not so much, I
dare say, as alone to make a War.

For the Prince of Orange, there was not only near Relation and Affection, but
Interest also to be considered. For the Lovesteyns party having been so cross
to England upon his account, and the correspondent friendship between us so
uncertain, without his Headship; I verily believe, that if what is now done
therein, had been done timously, it had wholly prevented this unhappy War. Yea
besides the extraordinary affection which the people have for the Prince, our
very Bores had this Policy, and were more than ordinary zealous for his
promotion, as the best means to procure their peace.

As to the further interest of the Kingdom of England, in regard of their
Trade, and Naval expenses, I have expressed my thoughts before in the Preface.

It is true, this War was always intricate, and has proved a Game at Hazard
for England, beyond not only theirs, I believe, but all the worlds expectation.
But yet if it be still notwithstanding cautiously played, as they may, and so
far as I can possibly discern, mean to play it; they can many ways come to save
their stakes, at the least, if not to win more than we imagine by the War: and
was far fairer at first than France for winning by the game in all humane
appearance, as I could manifest by many Arguments. But because that concerns
them two only, and us not at all further than our sufferings, I shall wave them
(at least for the present) and proceed. For I will not hearken to the curious
enquiries of those who would here be asking, how I think England will play
their game? for that let them look to it whom it concerns on all sides, as
doubtless they will; for me to express my private thoughts, might do more hurt
than good, which is the only thing I aim at: and what I think the issue will
be, I shall declare hereafter in my Conjectures.

But here it will be asked, seeing it is Englands interest that we fall not
into the hands of France, and that the Prince is now promoted, will they not
make peace with us this Winter?

I must needs say, I fear they will not, except we should give them such terms,
as I see we shall not; we thinking our condition far better, and they thinking
it far worse, than really it is. For the cause of this, as of most Wars, is
complex, as I have shown; so that though two of those I assigned may be past,
yet the 3d of the Kingdoms interest, not. They are already too far engaged in
the War, and with France. The Kings Honor is at the stake, and the Kingdoms
expectation of another issae than the last War. And besides all these, how can
any wise man imagine, now that they are engaged with France, and have an
advantage against us, as well as a Hazard from France; that if they know how to
secure themselves against the latter (as I suppose they do) they will let go
the former? For we must needs think they will be at a certainty on one side or
the other; and not part with France's friendship, till they be sure of our
satisfaction. What it is they demand, or how rightly, is not now our design to
discourse, but only matter of Interest all along. And yet I can easily foresee
that the danger of our becoming French, will be a singular advantage to us, as
an inducement to them, for a more easy compliance with us. But at present I
see no probability of Peace, but that they will go through with the War: or
continue it so long, till they have tried their utmost to obtain their ends.

I know there are many wise men amongst us, that think the King cannot carry on
this War: as there was that thought he could not begin it. The former they find
themselves deceived in, and will be so in the latter also. I have discoursed
this with several in Government, who argue that the King has not money of
himself to go through with the War, and that he will not convene the
Parliament, or if he do they will not supply him. I grant the first, but deny
the others. For if we rightly consider their defign, the Parliament must meet,
and the representation that will be made thereof, and the constitution of the
Parliament, they will grant him supplies; though perhaps not with that
facility, that they did it with in the former War. And therefore let us neither
flatter nor deceive our selves with vain hopes herein; but rather seek timely
to accommodate differences, before their preparations in the Spring; for I fear
the longer we delay, and the worse it will be with us.

Sect. 10. Compliance with England the only means of the Commonwealths
continuation.
HAving thus declared the condition that we are in, and that there is no
probability of peace; we come now to show the consequences thereof; and what is
to be done by us, to preserve our selves from ruin and destruction. And here
to my understanding one of these three things must necessarily follow: That we
must either continue the War against them both; or comply with them both; or
with one of them alone if possibly we can. We shall first declare our thoughts
concerning these briefly, and then show with which we both may and must comply.

1. Then whether we should continue the War against them both. And herein would
we do, as we might and should; it may be this were better, than to comply with
either of them, especially if they will impose upon us unreasonable conditions,
and much better than to comply with them both. We have strength enough, through
Gods blessing, to withstand them (as I have already manifested) if we have but
courage, and unanimity; and the former of these will be got by degrees, as I
have said, and our own interest, and preservation should persuade us into the
latter. But truly let me say it freely, I see such a weariness in many of the
War; such an unwillingness to lay out our selves, as our Ancestors did
formerly, for the good of the public; such a selfish temper, every one seeking
to preserve his particular interest, and neglecting the good of the Community;
and such a lothness to adventure our lives and estates in a War; that I see
little probability of preserving our selves, and much less of prevalency
against our Enemies. So that if this War continue I fear these Provinces will
become a prey to them both. For though neither France will suffer England, nor
England France to have them all, as I have shown; yet they will part and share
them betwixt them, except we prevent it by a compliance. And what a miserable
condition we shall then be in, even worse than if we were under either of them,
I have formerly declared. Seeing then we are so degenerate, and become like
Issachar, which his Father styles a Strong Ass, and says of him, that He saw
that rest was good, Genesis 49.14, 15.
and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became
a servant unto tribute: we must either take courage and be unanimous, valiantly
fighting it out with our enemies; or for the present be contented with this
character and condition. Will we then fight for our Religion, Liberty, Country,
Families, Estates, Trade? or will we not? If the former, let me encourage all
in the words of Joab that great General and brave Soldier wherewith he
encouraged the Israelites, when he had his enemies before and behind him, Be of
good courage, and let us play the men for our people and for the Cities of our
God: and the Lord do that which seems him good. 2 Samuel 10.12.
But if the rest be so good, and the Land so pleasant to us, that we will
rather how our shoulders, and become servants, than show our faces in the field
to fight with our enemies, let us see what Master we should choose, and agree
with him upon the best terms we can.

2. Therefore, shall we comply with both our enemies? surely if reason, and
what we can give, will satisfy them; every wise man will say Yes, that we may
enjoy the many blessings God has given us in peace. But if they will have such
Cities, such vast sums of money, and such Conditions, as we cannot give them,
except we be ruined thereby; who will not say, No. We must therefore consider
if there be no other way practicable, to save our selves, from the devouring
Sword of our Enemies.

3. There is no way therefore left us, but to comply with one of our Enemies,
if we can possibly; that so we may balance the others power, and either compel
him to a peace, or be enabled to continue the War. If any one know any other
way, I heartily wish he would show it, as I think he is bound to do one way or
other; for every one ought to contribute his best assistance, even by the
principles of self-preservation. Eccles. 9.15, 16.
And Solomon tells us, There was a poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered
the City, though no man remembered him, and infers thence, that wisdom is better
than strength, though the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not
heard. Yet surely notwithstanding that poor man did but do his duty; though he
was but poorly requited for his pains.

But I believe most will grant the way is good, but impracticable, in regard of
the League betwixt the two Crowns, and that they will not treat asunder, etc.
Well then, let us proceed to consider these things a little, and see whether we
cannot level these mountains of difficulties that are before us, and make our
way become plain and passable.

1. With which of these our Enemies we should choose to comply, I think I have
made sufficiently apparent; in showing it our Interest rather to be under
England than France, and to have peace and correspondent friendship for our
Sea-traffick, with the former rather than with the latter, if we cannot have it
from them both. And I am sure this was the wisdom of our Ancestors, who in
their low condition A.D. 1575. deliberating into whose Protection they should
give themselves over, first declared the Empire, and the competition coming
between the Crowns of England and France preferred the former upon many and
weighty considerations, Cambden Annals Elisabethae A. 1575. Thuanus l. 60.
Casus 20.
relared by their Historians; and very many of our own, which are so well known
I need not mention them; and Boxhornius the Author of the Disquisitiones
Politicae. The civil Wars of France; the inveterate fend betwixt French and
Dutch, those especially that live upon the Confines of both Countries; the hard
yoke of the French Government; the levity of that Nation; its liablness to be
invaded by the Spanish; the incommodiousness of their Ports for our Ships and
Navigation; made them averse to France. And on the contrary, The reformed
Religion of the English, their greater likeness with us in genious and
language, the nearness of the Country; the multitude of their Ports; their
commodiousness for our Commerce; the multiplicity of the English Manifactures
and Commodities; the Country not easily invaded; strong and potent by Sea and
Land; not frequently imbroyled in civil Wars; a free People; the Government
temperate, and not burthensom with exactions; and the Interest of the English
Nation, which if these Countries were conquered, would searce be able to resist
the Conqueror; clearly inclined them for England. You see then that reasons of
State, direct us to the same choice, which our Ancestors heretofore wisely made.

2. Seeing then we must choose England, not only for the Common Interest of the
Protestant Religion, but for our own greatest both religious, and civil
concernments. We shall now remove those obstructions that seem to block up our
way to Compliance.

It is objected that the two Crowns are in a League, that neither will treat
without the other, and how can we then comply with England alone?

I confess if all Statesmen were Aristides's, Plutarch. in vita Aristid.
the Argument might be strong. For he having heard by command of the Athenian
Senate, Themistocles's design of burning their enemies Fleet, made report, that
it was very profitable, but no ways honest, upon which it was rejected. Or if
they were all Stoics, and held that honesty, equity, and utility were all one,
and with good old Socrates cursed those that first separated these, as learned
men tell us. But we see it is far otherwise now in the World; Plutarch. l. 4.
Sympos. Cicer. 3. Offic. and 1. de Leg.
and that the Peripateticks doctrine that honestum and utile are really
distinguished, is every where prevalent, and no where more, than amongst
Politicians; which has occasioned that known saying, that all States are
Atheists. I do not approve any, and much less so high uncharitableness; but
this I will say, that as the world goes now, all States must be considered as
Gamesters. And what if I should say, that neither of the Courts are so strait
laced in their Consciences, but were they assured from us of such conditions as
they require, they would let the other go and get theirs as they could? Nay
what if I should say, there may be none iniquity in this? If I should, I think
I can prove it, for if in mutual covenants, either side do that, which is a
breach; it is folly to think, that the innocent should be bound, and the
peccant party free, which they may know, though others do not, as it is clear
in the strongest covenant, that is in the World, I mean that of wedlock. I do
not say that this is so betwixt them, but I say it may be so though we do not
know it, so that either of them in such case, may conclude with us. And I am
sure it is no dishonesty on our part.

But it will here be said, they will not.

Do not tell me that, I know they either of them will. And if any one asks me,
how? and if I be of their Cabinet Council? I shall only smile, perceiving they
do not know me. I am far from that, or having ever to do with Kings or States
in that kind, or pragmatically trinketing with State affairs, it being a Rule
which I live by, never to ask great men mercy. Common favor and justice I
desire of men, but mercy only of my God. And yet I know this very well, and I
will tell you how, and that is from their Interest; which is the compass, by
which all Statesmen steer their course, and may be discerned by a skilful
passenger, although he sit not at the helm. If any man be so ignorant of the
affairs of the World, as to think that Statesmen trouble their heads with the
Scool-mens quiddities, and haeccieties, or their consciences with Casuisticall
nicities, as a late German Divine that puts the case, whether we should pray
Vader onse, or Onse Vader, and learnedly concludes that custom must carry it;
let him enjoy his opinion, it is very charitable, and can do no hurt. But yet I
may say, that for above 20 years I have observed, that the custom of the World
carries it with them, and have known few, I had almost said none, of the
strictest Sect of the Pharisees; though I have some, and my charity obliges me
to hope there are many, that seriously mind the weightier things of the Law,
justice, righteousness, temperance, and the World to come.

Now that this is the Interest of both the Kings, rather to deal with us apart,
than jointly, as well as ours, I could many ways make apparent. But seeing it
is our interest to choose England we shall prove only that it is theirs to
comply with us; omitting that of France, as superfluous to our purpose.

1. They know they cannot wholly conquer us themselves. Not only in regard of
our own strength, of which I haven spoken before, but the French, which are in
the Country already, and if they were not, would never permit it, as I have
formerly shown sufficiently. Nay I dare say, they never designed any such
thing, because they know it is impracticable: that being always true of the
Greeks, (...) or things impossible come not into consideration. I doubt not but
they both intend and hope to have their share, what ever it is that is agreed
upon between the two Crowns, in case of Conquest; but that they should have the
whole, could never so much as be dreamt of by them.

2. They know also that it is their interest, never to suffer France have all,
no nor any of these Maritime Provinces. If he have some of the superior, that
is the utmost their interest can permit. Nay indeed he is nearer these
inferior, than that will allow, if they could help it, but that is now past.
What vast disadvantage it will be to the English, to let France have footing
upon our Coasts, and so come to cope with them at Sea, I have formerly shown:
and I know they are very sensible of it; and therefore may well infer a
willingness on their parts to a compliance.

3. The Prince of Orange his interest being also theirs, cannot but sway
something with them. For if it had been Gods will, those Kingdoms had continued
in peace, and the succession of the Royal reign uninterrupted there, and the
Orange family continued alive and in power here, I persuade my self we should
never have warred with one another; so I doubt not, if it please God to
preserve his Highness, that they may confide more in our friendship, than they
could formerly, he will be a happy Instrument of a better understanding between
the Nations, when these unhappy quarrels come once to be composed; because this
is their interest as well as ours, and it is interest that rules and reigns in
the World.

And thus I have shown you that we may, I shall now show briefly that we must
comply with them, or without a miracle of mercy we are ruined.

1. Because if the War continues, and we be too weak to make strong resistance,
so that our enemies prevail; they will share the Country betwixt them, and then
we fall into the worst condition, that can possibly befall us. It is true, I
foresee that several particular Persons may save themselves and their estates,
by friends on the one side or the other; but I speak of the community; and it
is well if the hopes many have of that, make them not more negligent for this.
There are two famous Republics in Italy, Venice and Genoa; and what is the
cause of the formers flourishing so much more than the latter, which was
anciently both their better and their Master? but this, that the Venetians are
more intent upon the Public, and the Genoese upon their private concernments:
whereby they become obnoxious not only to many factions among themselves, but
also to oppressions from their Neighbors. I could say more herein of our
selves, than I shall at present, in regard it might create more jealousies
(which are already too many) of those that are, or at least have been, in
Government amongst us. But though I will accuse none, yet I must needs say,
that I ascribe a great part of our present miseries to this Genoan practice;
and heartily wish, this prove not fatal to us at last.

2. Because if we be not senseless we may clearly see, that France's design is
absolutely to conquer us: whereas England seeks only (to use their expression)
their own security. And therefore in my Logic the inference is plain, that we
had better part with something, than lose all, as we are like to do, if we come
not to a compliance with England. To make these apparent to any wise man, would
be the lighting a Torch to the Sun. Although I know the quite contrary is cast
out among us by the friends of France, who would persuade us, that the French
seek only to humble us, and the English to conquer us. But we know the minding
of men, is but shooting at random, and that he that means to come near the
truth, must have his eye upon the mark of interest, which cannot lie, as men do
frequently for it. If any be so foolish, as to be enchanted with such Sirens
songs, as are daily sung amongst us; and have more regard to public news, than
the interest of Nations; they may go on, I cannot hinder them: but let me tell
them, that I fear they will find at last, the Poets fiction a real truth; and
if they stear their own course, meet with the Seamens fate in the Fable, be
sung a sleep for a time, that so they may be afterward, with greater facility
drowned and devoured.

3. Because there is no other way or humane means lest us (so far as I can
discern) of the Commonwealths continuation. And this is the conclusion that
follows clearly from the premises. For if we be unable to withstand them both,
or satisfy them both, we must either break their confederacy, and have the
help of one of them, or the Republic will be ruined.

It will here be demanded, seeing it is both Englands interest and our own to
accord, why do we not then come to a compliance.

I will tell you why. Because we judge our Condition better, and they judge it
worse, than really it is; and therefore stand upon greater terms, than we will
give them. We think things will go better with us in time, and they think they
will grow worse. We flatter our selves with vain hopes, and rely upon
Brandenburgs Assistance, Spains breaking with our enemies, the Parliament of
Englands not supplying that King to carry on the War, and the like, when they
know the quite contrary in all humane appearance. ^or perhaps we are afraid to
irritate France, if we should make overtures to England; and England will not
give such an umbrage of jealousy to France, as to tamper with us, except they
be first assured from us of satisfaction. But cannot the effecting this be put
into the hands of his Highness and a few others as it was lately, to be
privately transacted by them? Here then it is that the shoe pinches, We are a
popular State, the people still think, till an enemy comes, they can defend
themselves, and therefore our Governors dare not adventure to tender England
such satisfaction, as (for ought I see) they will have; lest they either should
not be able to perform it, or if they do, should lose themselves with the
people. And therefore I foresee, the War will be continued, till we be reduced
to that condition, that we shall be necessitated to give them both their
demands, by public transaction, or at least that way break with one of them.
And on this foundation, I shall now proceed, to guess at that which I think is
most likely to befall us.

Sect 11 Conjectures of future affairs. The motions of the ensuing summer
likely to be quick and great. As to this Repulick, probably England may get a
Bridle to curb us, France the sadle to ride us, Colen a supernumerary girth,
Munster a boss of the Crupper. Our condition deplored and consolated. A caution
for England, and the Orange family. The Authors fears of what will at last
befall us. The Spanish Netherlands a dying. The friendship of England and France
sick at heart, and cannot live long. That of Spain and England sound at heart,
and will recover.
ALthough I have sometimes spent almost whole nights at gazing on the Stars,
and could perhaps erect an Astrological Scheme as well as another; yet I never
used that way, nor never shall for guessing at faturities; because I know it is
vain to think, we came spell Gods providence, by their mystical hieroglyphick.
Yet let me say it without vanity, I do believe I have made as many conjectures,
concerning Kingdoms, States and particular places, as any man of my quality in
Europe: not by any enthusiastic spirit of prophecy, or by Astrology from the
Stars; but reasons of State, their interest, and the fundamental maxims of
their Government; sometimes out of curiosity only, and sometimes for other
ends, but such as are honest I assure you, for none are either better or worse
by it, but only my brothers and my self. The reason why I adventure to do this
publicly now, is that I may awaken us out of our security, and that we may
look about us, and see if possibly we can prevent those things, which it is
very probable are coming upon us. Only I desire to do it modestly, as it
becomes every Christian; and neither on the one hand to pretend to that
certainty, as if we were of Gods Council; no on the other hand to fall under
Christ's rebuke for not discerning the signs of the times, Matthew. 16.
which are both theological and political, but I am now only treating of the
latter, and to that I shall confine my discourse.

Now that we may be quickened to defend our selves, comply with England, and
free the Spanish Netherlands from their fears, and our selves from the
neighborhood of the French there, (this being one Reason of State, why we
formerly made peace with Spain, lest we should be in continual danger of
annoyance from France) and also render their maintaining their Conquests among
us more difficult, by their being kept unconnected with that Kingdom: I shall
now proceed to the Conjectures I have made, not with an Astrological
confidence, but a Christian allowance of divine providence, which strangely
alters times and seasons, pulls down one and sets up another, confounds the
wisdom of the wise, brings to naught the counsels of Achitophels, and turns the
great designs and preparations for War, into a happy compliance, and peace as
he pleases; and all in infinite wisdom, though we cannot discern it, the
knowledge of Gods providence even when past or present, and much more when
future, being to David, and therefore far more to us. Too Wonderful for us,
Psalm. 139.
so high that we cannot attain unto it, and so deep in the great waters, that
the footsteps thereof are not to be traced and known. So that we may well say,
as of old, Psalm. 77.
Dei sapientia, and hominum stultitia regunt mundum. First then, if we awake
out of our security, and look up in the morning of the year, we must needs
conclude of foul weather the ensuing Summer, the sky is so red, that we may
easily perceive it portends blood, and the lowest region is so lowering, that we
may easily discern that a tempestuous storm is a gathering; except we be so
besotted, as the foolish Jews of old, with security, that we cannot discern,
as Christ tells them, the signs of the times. Can all Europe almost be
arming, and we a sleep in the Bed of Security, dreaming of Peace? Besides the
incredible preparations of France, is not England, Sweadland, and all our
Neighbors almost up and at work; and can we think they would be at that cost
for a Comedy of Peace? have we not all the reason in the World, to think it
will be to us, a Tragedy of War? Let others enjoy their opinion, and not take
the alarm, till they see Hanibal ad portas; for my part, I must needs profes,
I cannot, from what I observe, but conclude, that the affairs of the ensuing
Summer, are like to be great, and the motions thereof quick, and such as will
highly concern us in these Countries.

As to this Republic, which has at this time these four declared Enemies,
England, France, Colen, and Munster; I shall briefly speak my thoughts, with
reference to them all.

England probably will get, a bridle to curb us. I have shown in the Preface,
what they account the Intrest of the Kingdom: We see notwithstanding the
Prince of Orange his promotion, they still pursue the War; and must we not then
conclude, that they seek some thing further? Whether they will by Sea attacque
our Coasts, or by marching their Army about over Land, is not for me to
determine; much les what particular places below they may fall upon, or what
succes they may have. Yet I conclude they will have some hanke or other upon
our Navall power, one way or other, before they make Peace with us; otherwise
they will continue the War the following Summer, to try their utmost to get,
that which we will not give them.

France that is already got into the Sadle, will there sit and ride us; though
we flatter our selves, we shall by one means or other, shake him out of it, and
off our backs. Truly I cannot but wonder often times, to hear what vain hopes
men expres and there is no contradicting them; (allthough some times I cannot
contain my self from smiling, or shakeing my head) that France must be
content with one or two of our Cities which we can best spare, and with a
confidence almost as large, as if they was ready to run way, or resolved to
march out and quit those Cities they have, at our pleasure. As if the French
were such sooles, to be at that vast expense, great pains, even the King
himself personally, and have such advantage upon us, and quit the same for a
thing of nothing? For my part, I am afraid they will rather get more, then
lose that they have gotten already. And I know, their design is, to get all at
last. It is true, if we comply with England, and so strengthen our selves by
them and Spain, we may thereby hope either to obtain better conditions by
Treaty, or compel them thereunto by Force. But I am speaking of the state of
the War, as now it stands.

Colen, that pretends to some of those Cities which we held about the Rhyne,
that are now in the power and possession of the French, may possibly for his
pains, and permission of their passage, etc. get some supernumerary girth, one
place or other that may be of no great concernment to France, either for their
designs upon us or the Empire, and must be contented therewith. And perhaps
for some time his Counselors may have their Pensions continued from France.

Munster, that is mercinary and fights for Money, will get a bos off the
crupper; French Lewis's made and minted of Dutch Ducats. For elective Princes,
as Bishops, that are only for life, seek more to enrich themselves, then to
enlarge their Territories, as those do that are hereditary.

And this is likely, so far as I can see, to prove our condition; except (...)
appear in the Tragedy, or God Almighty by some wonderful providence, make a
change in the Scene of this War. Which, I confess, is very deplorable, which
way soever we look; and we are not so sensible of it now, as we shall be
hereafter. I had thought here to have sit down a little with a lamentation,
but I have been so large already, that I shall wholly wave it for the present.

And yet it is a had wind that blows no good, we may make this advantage of our
miseries, so long as we remain amidst our enemies, when a Peace is once
concluded; that we may hold them both fair to us, and so secure our selves a
little more in quiet, then we perhaps think, by being ready to close with
either, to the great prejudice of the other.

And therefore let me freely insert this important and necessary Caution for
England, That they take heed they do not overdo their work; and so far irritate
this Republic, that out of a present prejudice and passion, and also
desperation of their future quietness from them, they call in the French, to be
revenged of them, though it be to their own ruin.

I know many are jealous, that this whole War is only to make the Prince of
Orange a Monarch, and the two Crowns will have no more to do with the States;
although I profess, I am far from thinking, that those two Kings and Kingdoms
would be at all this expense of blood and treasure for that end only, and do
believe that if that would set us in our former condition, it would soon be
assented unto, not only by the multitude, but the wiseft men amongst us, who
know the extraordinary abilities and great capacities of his Highness.
Therefore let me say it freely without offense, either of Him or his Enemies,
that I perceive many lay this for a fundamental maxim, Better a Prince that
has power to defend us, then one whom we must only defend. And except my
eyesight fail me, some are fast at work in preparing materials to build
thereon. A word is enough to the wise, and therefore I will say no more.

Nay I will not dissemble my further fears, That if France keeps those places
on the South Sea, and should get others lower, either in Holland or Frieslands,
as may capacitate him to incommodate their Trade, though we should have a peace
for some time with him, we shall fall into his hands at last. For the French
are already so near us on every side, that they hover over us, as a Hawk over
the gray, watching only an opportunity, how they may grasp us in their talons.

If any shall here ask me, Why may we not then as well now become French?

I also shall ask such one Question, which when they satisfy me in, I also
shall them. You know certainly you must die at last, (whereas here is only
uncertain fears) and yet when you are sick, why do you take physic and use
means for recovery? Is it not because you desire to live as long as you can?
Do you not account him a mad man, that will cast away his life, although he
must lose it at the last? And rightly, because who knows what God may do, and
whether he may not recover him, though the disease be desperate?

Having spoke our thoughts concerning these united, we shall now speak of the
Spanish Provinces. I have as much smattering skill in Physic, I confess, as
would serve me to make Charon a freight of old Wives; yet am I far from being
arrived at the confidence, which I have observed in Vrinal-Doctors. And yet for
once, I will adventure to try the little skill I have, with those
State-Mountebanks, that are so secure concerning the Spanish Netherlands. For
my part, I have shook their Water again and again, and can find nothing but
symptoms of death. I shall only premise that I shall not with an Emperical
confidence tell you the time: Kingdoms and States, as well as private persons,
sometimes languish out rather then live their last. But that they are so sick,
that I see no hopes of their recovery if this War continues. And I will tell
you my fears for the ensuing Summer.

1. The incredible preparations that France makes this Winter, both of Men and
Money, as if they would set all at stake for carrying on the following Summers
Wars.

2. The Empire's Army is overmatcht with Turens. They know, that we are not in
a capacity to recover the Cities we have lost, and that they cannot conquer
those that remain; so that their Armies cannot be designed either for
strengthening their own Garrisons, or forcing of ours. Except they will spend a
Summers Expedition upon some inconsiderable out Garrisons, which I cannot
imagine.

3. I have looked round about in Europe, where this storm should fall, and can
see no place it hovers over, except those Provinces, and our selves.

4. I consider the eminent advantage France has at present by their friendship
with England; which I fear he will take.

5. Allthough I do not think France will prevail by all his endeavors with
England to break with Spain; yet I think England will either be employed in
doing their own work, or not so quickly break with France, to stop his
carriere in overrunning those Netherlands.

6 We shall either have the Wars continue, or a Peace. If the former as they
are, though England helps not therein, (for they profes in their Declaration to
maintain the Treaty at Aken) yea, though they would hinder it, yet I do not
see how they can practically, if they have not prevented it beforehand by their
Treaty; nor we to be sure the Wars continuing. If a Peace be concluded, we
shall be forced to forsake them; this being the main ground of the quarrel. For
if we would have helped France to have ruind them, we might have been quiet for
some time at least; but because we had rather quench, then set our neighbors
house on fire, lest ours follow in the flames: France has fallen upon us, and
shall we not then think that he will cudgel us into such conditions? It is
true indeed, if England and we come to understand one another, and our joint
intrest better; we may succor them for some time; but that is not my supposal,
of the Wars continuing as they are, which in that case implies a strange
complication of diseases, which to me, who knows not their Treaty, seems
incurable.

7. And where else they should have assistance to save them, if France will
fall upon them, I see not. For the Empire cannot, it is well if they can save
themselves. Spain is at a great distance. May make perhaps some diversion in
Catalonia, or some small from Millan, etc. But what is that to save those
Provinces?

8. We must therefore consider if they can stand on their own legs, so as to
withstand their enemies power, and not to be thrown down thereby. And here we
shall find the number of Spanish inconsiderable; the Dutch very wavering and
uncertain: Some Popish Zealots thinking France can best carry on their
designs; others betwixt hopes and fears, wishing they might see an issue; and
others plainly despairing of resistance, desiring they were over. Their Cities
great and untenable, several of them requiring almost as many to man them
well, as they have Spanish in the Country. If they can make good Bruxels,
Antwerp, Namur, and Oostend, for some time, to see if the affairs of Europe
may not alter, it is all I expect. But what shall become of the whole Country,
and the rest of the Cities, Descriptio Lovani.
Bruges, Mechlin, Gant, Lovaine, etc. Some of them as large as most Cities in
Europe. Three Noblemen An. 1427. (as Guicciardine tells us) with great charges,
had five of the greatest Cities on this side the Alps measured, and found but,
18 Rods or Perches difference. Of which Lovaine and Gant, the greatest; Paris
(within the Walls) and Liege alike; Colen the least. But neglecting to mention
the just measure, Guicciardine tells us they are 6 Italian miles within, and
above 8 without the walls. And though this be enough, yet I must needs think
them more. For having had the curiosity to measure one of them for all, I found
it upon a warm walking within the Walls, three full hours by my watch. And
besides this, Paris and Liege are most populous, Colen next, but these of the
Netherlands least, so that I leave any rational man to judge what number of
men they require to maintain them, for I will not now stand to make that
calculation. Now if he takes these two great Cities, he is in the heart of
Brabant and Flanders, so that all the rest will fall of themselves. I conclude
therefore, that except the treaty between France and England secure them, which
is unknown to me; or that God in his all-wise Providence, make some wonderful
chang in the scene of affairs in Europe, the Spanish Netherlands are lost.
Having therefore thus tolled their passing bell, we will leave them to Gods
mercy, and the King of France's clemency, and have us out of them to France and
England.

And here many perhaps will think me little better than madd, to cross the
current opinion of Christendom; when I say that the Friendship of France and
England is sick at heart, and cannot live long; and the contrary of that
between England and Spain. But I matter not that, other men have their way of
making their measures, and I have mine. And indeed I thought to have
communicated it, but this work having already exceeded my intentions, and
that would be a great digression, I would only tell you my grounds or reasons
for the present why I think so, and may happily make a particular discourse of
the other hereafter.

How France and England came to be so great friends as to agree to commence,
and carry on a War thus far against us, is not now mine enquiry; but to show
there is no such ground to despair of complianee with England, notwithstanding
their present league with France, is my design. And for this end I shall first
show that though this friendship is fair outwardly, each for their own ends;
yet that it is not so cordial and firm, as many amongst us fear it is. And
to say the truth, the consideration hereof, was the first dawning of hopes I
had, for the Protestant Intrest, and the good of these Countries. Now allthough
I could mention some more private expostulations, and perhaps some of their
Articles, allthough I could by no means, ever procure from either side, the
knowledge of them all: yet I think it not fit to mention these, but such
things only as are public, and others as well as my self may know, if they
use their eyesight, and observation.

Let us then omitting all secrets and mysteries of State, which yet are the
best grounds to make a judgment, when certainly known; we will only mention
such things as are publicly apparent, but being not considered in
subordination to Reasons of State, were unusefull to the most, for the end I
have observed them.

When all Europe stood in doubt what England would do, and all men on their
tiptoes with expectation; to see whether War or Peace, betwixt that Kingdom
and these Countries: upon the Smyrna's Fleet return, the doubts of many were
then decided. The Saturday morning early after the fight, the Fiscale sent his
footman to tell me they had fought, with some generals thereof, and that the
Fleet was before the Land: I must confess, I stood amazed at Holmes's furious
folly, who had orders only to bring them up, not to commence a War, the
Declaration thereof being not published; allthough to those that would not
submit to such orders, it was all one in effect, though not in formalities,
which are the greatest plea, that I know of, that the English have for that
Action. Upon this I began to consider the Reasons of State as to England, both
domestic and foreign; For I reasoned thus, if this friendship be so firm
that England will go through with France in all their great designs, I must
make other measures then I had formerly done. But still finding all Reasons of
State against this, and those jealousies of changing Religion and the
Government in those Kingdoms frivolous, (as I have demonstrated) I found also
thereby stronger grounds of hope for the Protestant Religion and the common
Intrest of Europe; and that it was only a temporary friendship, out of some
particular peake, or design against these Provinces, which would have an end
when satisfaction therein was given to that Crown. Whilst I am busy in
ballancing all the Reasons of State for those Kingdoms, and likewise for their
Intrest abroad as comprehensively as I could, the Protestants Intrest, the
Triple Alliance, the greatness of France, the danger of England etc. comes the
English Declaration of War to mine hands, but without a particular date,
contrary to practice, but wisely to color what Holmes had done. Which having
diligently perused, what I desired first to see, I found last to my great
satisfaction, and that is that they would support the peace made at Aix la
Chappelle, (or Aken) and notwithstanding the prosecution of this War, will
maintain the true intent and scope of the said Treaty, and that in all their
Alliances which they have or shall make in the progres of this War, they have
and will take care, to preserve the ends thereof inviolable unles provoked to
the contrary. Whereby I was fully confirmed in my former opinion, so that I
will now proceed to relate such things which have publicly past in the
management of this War, that are sufficient I think to enduce those that are
unprejudiced, though perhaps not to convince the obstinate, to be of the same
opinion with my self, and that the friendship of England and France is not so
firm as they have feared. Premising that though all States as Gamesters must
and will be cautious in their playing their parts, yet there appeared still
more then ordinary jealousies of each others friendship all along, in the
management of this War.

1. It is observeable that though France is the Principal in the War, yet they
were so diffident of England, that they would have them first to begin it, that
so they might see them certainly engaged against us.

2. When they are both engaged, they trust not one another, without great
Hostages as it were on both sides; the French Squadron of Ships with the
English and the Duke of Monmouth with the body of an Army with the French.

3. That body of the English, which doubtless should have remained together
under their own general Officers conjoined with the French Army; we know was
not trusted by the French so to do, but were mingled here and there, under the
principal command of the French Generals.

4. The Fleet wherein the English had the principal share of power and
command, only faced ours at first in point of Honor, yet attacqued them not,
though they had the wind, whereby they might easily have done it at their
pleasure, and also to their Advantage; but stood over again to the English
coast. Which fools thought was want of valor, but wise men will judge it
reason of State, that they might stay and observe what succes the French had by
Land. And had not we fallen upon them, for Reasons of State in those
circumstances and Government of these Provines, that are well known, I think
they would have done, as little as they could for France; to have fought us to
this day.

5. After that fight, though they knew several of our Ships were laid up, and
some thousands of men called out of the Fleet, yet notwithstanding all the
Summer after for many weeks, they attempted nothing against us with their
Fleet. Intending doubtless to do their own work, as they then saw France did
theirs.

6. How the English were startled, at the French's coming to Vtrecht was very
apparent, which we have formerly mentioned.

7. Why might not England, as well as the rest of the World, think that Wesel,
Rijnberg, Skenker-sconse, and the rest of our strong out Garrisons might give
the French sufficient work? and the French on the contrary, who had laid their
trains before hand, know that when they came to fire them, there was no fear
they would mis, and they should fail of having those places? Yea why may they
not design by this means to break both our powers so by Sea, that they may
rise up to contend with either of us? I am sure these things are very usual
with Princes and States, and examples of this kind are infinite. Why may we not
then think that England might hereby design to break France's power by Land;
and France Englands power and ours also by Sea? How often these two Crowns have
played such like games with one another formerly; when England had sooting in
France, is apparent from the Histories of both Nations. But we will speak of
that which more nearly concerns our selves, and within our own knowledge. In
our first War with England I observed, what influence Don Alonzo, the Resident
for Spain at London, had, to fomer those jealousies that that Commonwealth
had of this, that it was the Kings cause, which this Republic by means of the
Orange Family had espouses, and what assistance Spain, (which first publicly
acknowledged that Common-weath) would afford them, etc. And when we were both
engaged, how the Spanish drew their Forces toward our Frontiers, as if they
also would fall upon us; and when we declined, withdrew them again, to
encourage us both to continue the War. And in our second War, if France had not
a great hand both in contriving and continuing it, wisemen are much deceived,
and the French misrepresented to the World. By what inducements they persuaded
both sides to a willingness to that War, I list not mention, nor is there much
necessity thereof, they being so well known to several of both Nations. What
a hand they had in its continuation, we may easily perceive, if we recollect
but what passed therein. When the English in the first Battle had bearen us,
France being only a Spectator to balance England, becomes our Second; and
Monsieur, the Kings only Brother, and his Lady, Englands only Sister, were
not permitted to use any public expressions of joy by Bonefires, or otherwise
for their Brother the Duke of Yorks Victory over Opdam. Their Fleet under de
Duke of Bauford shall come to our assistance, which occasiond the dividing of
the Englishe's, by which means and Monks precipitancy (who would needs fight
contrary to the advice of the chief and best Commanders in the Fleet, as
Ascough told us in the Hague) the English are beaten by us. And to boy up
England again, a private League is made between the two Crowns, as I have
formerly declared from an honorable Author. So that these tricks of State are
usual, though not discerned by every eye; nor dare I censure them always for
sinful, except I see manifestly foul play, because I know not the Reasons of
State, which are the Grounds of their proceedings.

Having thus shown, and I think sufficiently, that the friendship of England
and France is sick at heart; I shall now proceed to show, that it cannot live
long; but if France goes on, will and must die quickly.

1. Englands intrest will persuade them to this, which they cannot but discern
clearly prompts them to put a stop to France's progres. If any think that they
are so blinded with Passion, That to be revenged of us, they will ruin
themselves: I am not of their opinion, for many Reasons, which I think I am
clear in; allthough I shall not mention them now, but only appeal to the
issue, whether they or I be in the dark and deceived.

2. The many tricks that France plays them, some whereof I have hinted, and
several others might be mentioned, That I know they have attempted, but been
disappointed in; cannot but alienate the English from them.

3. A Treaty being the game (as I have said) we shall play at, (which the
sooner and better for us) I foresee plainly, that such Cards will be played, as
will make it apparent, that the Pack was neither fairly shuffled nor dealt, and
that the French mean to play at la beat with us both; and if we continue to
play, shall come to los^ing loadam at last: So that though the French have more
of Clubs and Spades in their hands, by which they hope to win the Diamonds, we
shall have more of the Hearts between us; and so perhaps save some of our stock
at the stake.

4. If England come to receive satisfaction, the spirit of the Nation will
turn the scales. For suppose that should be now, Lib. 6. c. 2.
that Comines tells us was heretofore, (which yet is sooner said than proved)
yet we must needs think that if France deals unfairely with them; they will
not only have a fair occasion to desert them, but the King and his Court, the
Parliament and People will be more irritated against them, then they are now
against us, (as is usual in such cases) and be readier to join with us and
fall upon them, then they were to join with them against us, for the
conservation both of their Religious and Civil Concernements.

5. The Necessity of keeping up the balance between France and Spain, will
necessitate England to break with France, or at least hold them to keep more
within their bounds, as we shall more fully show hereafter.

6. Nay the very defense of these Countries, which we think they seek to
ruin, will cause them either to bring France to a peace with us, or themselves
to help to defend us against them. For they will never suffer France to have
them all, no nor the greatest part of these maritime Provinces, nor the
strongest as Holland, if they can possibly hinder it, though they may permit
them some part of the Superior, for having themselves a share of the Inferior,
as I have formerly shown. So that our intrest is so far Englands, and is the
greatest security we have, next to Gods protection, and our own strength, that
we shall not be wholly overrun and brought under the French. Yea, this is so
highly their concernement, that I persuade my self, if all the strength of the
3 Kingdoms under the Crown of England, and all the power of Spain with them,
can hinder it, France shall never gain them; or if he do, never quietly
posses them.

And these things I think are sufficient, to free us from our foolish fears
of England; and to persuade us to a compliance with them, seeing we are both so
greatly concerned to comply.

We shall now proceed to show the quite contrary of the friendship between
Spain and England, that it is sound at heart, and will recover. Wherein we
need not be so large, because that which shows that the friendship of France
and England must die, proves that of England and Spain will live.

That this friendship is sound on the side of Spain, none questions; this
being the great motive, (though not the only I confess) that has kept them
from breaking with France.

And that it is also so on the side of England, I think is as clear to those
that considers.

1. Their declared intention of maintaining the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle (or
Aken) in their Declaration of this War. 2. Allthough a provisionall clause,
unles provoked to the contrary, in the close thereof, gives them a latitude of
breaking with Spain; yet notwithstanding they have been provoked several
ways by them, as all know that have observed the War, yet they will not break
with them we see; which is a clear demonstration their friendship is firmer
then we imagine. 3. The importunities of France, which we know have been great,
that England would engage with them against Spain also, hitherto we see, have
prevailed nothing therein. 4. The assurance we know England has given the
Court of Spain, both there and at Bruxels, concerning the Spanish Netherlands,
makes us not doubt of their intentions; allthough we do of France's, by reason
both of their preparations and opportunities, as we have formerly shown. But
if France should fall upon them, as we have reason to fear; that will prove
both our Assertions the stronglier, making the friendship of England and France
die immediately, and that of Spain and England quickly recover. And if this
save not those Provinces for the present, there is nothing (so far as I see)
under Heaven that can, as I have formerly said.
We perceive then the pulse of this friendship beats both strong and orderly
enough, to secure us from all fears of its dying; lets visit the patient once
more, and we shall find no further need of such Physicians advise, as the
Author of la France Politic, in his Avis important a l'Angleterre, page 471.
and that the distemper was only a fit or two of an Ague the last Spring, and
therefore so far from being dangerous, that it may prove rather physical
according to the Proverb, An Ague in the Spring, is Physic for a King: And
that the Body Politic of Spain in their friendship with England is
recovering, as well as the King of Spain personally is recovered.

1. If we consider the Common intrest of Europe wherein the English not only
are, but also profes themselves concerned. And for this I need not any other
proof, but the Triple Alliance Jan. 23. 1668.
, and the Declaration of this War, both which whosoever reads, must needs
acknowledge this for truth.

2. The great Intrest of Trade which the English have in the Spanish Dominions.
The very effects the Merchants had standing out there, were computed at the
beginning of this War, at sixteen Millions. And can we think the King will
easily forgo his Customs, and the Kingdom their Commerce with those
Dominions? Which in my calculation, is equal with that they have with all
Europe besides.

3. We know that they have lately made a peace in the West Indies, and how
peremptory they are in the observance thereof; so that the Governor of Jamaica
upon complaints of him, was sent prisoner to London, clapped up in the Tower,
etc. And shall we think then, that they will break into War at home?

4. England cannot but be sensible of the greatness of France, and cannot be so
senseles, but they must needs think, that it is their concernement that he
grow not so great, that he become their Master also at last? And the whole
World knows that Spain not only has been now for many years the balance
for them; but still must be so upon the Continent, or none: The Princes of the
Empire being now so divided between the Imperial and French Crown. What wise
man therefore can think now that Spain declines, but that the Empire and
England are highly concernd to support them? And shall we think then that in
stead of this, either should help forwards their downfall? For my part, were
there no other reason of state, but this, I should not fear Englands breaking
with Spain; and especially now that they see what progres France has made
amongst us.

5. This has been a fundamental Maxim in the Government of England, to keep
the balance even betwixt the two Crowns of Spain and France, ever since
Lewis the Elevenths time, who seized on Burgundy, which was formerly the usual
Confederate with England against France. In place whereof Austria first, and
after Spain obteining the rest of the Provinces that were under Charles, last
Duke of Burgundy, by marriage of his daughter; England after still had an eye
to them in reference to France. And when the Civil Wars in these Provinces
broke out, and England was jealous of France's being our Protector: Q Elisabeth
would not permit it, still having respect to the House of Burgundy, as Thuanus
and Cambd^n in the forecited places show.

And thus you have my Conjectures, with such Reasons of State whereon they are
grounded as are public, and may therefore be publ^shed: I having industriously
declined, all reflections on private Transactions, Treaties, and Articles
whatsoever, that so no side may have any just occasion of being offended with
my writing.

Sect. 12. France's Ambition. Crowing greatness. The cause thereof. We and
England in the fault. The Common Intrest of Europe to oppose France
particularly declared of the Empire, Spain, England, Denmark, and this
Republic and Hans Towns. Yea of Sweden, Savoy, and Switzerland. The balance
of Europe to be kept even, and by whom.
To those that know the World, the ambition of France cannot be unknown. Lets
but look a little about us, and we shall see the French Intrest is every where
driven on. To set this forth in its right-colors, would require Volums rather
then Pages. We shall therefore do as the Painter, that instead of drawing the
Giant at length, drew only his Thumb; or as Geographers that set forth great
Countries in small Maps. And for this we shall not look far backwards to
former times, but only our own, since France recovered of those strong
Convulsions, by the Civil Wars and Dissentions in Mazarines time, in the
minority of his present Majesty. And we shall find sufficient, to awaken the
most part of Princes and States in Europe, to look to themselves. The Invasion
of the Spanish Netherlands; the taking the French Comte (though after restored
to the Spanish) and Lorreigne, which they still keep; the engageing a strong
party of the Electors, and Princes of the Empire for their Intrest; the work
they have made in Poland and Hungary, that that Crown might be at their
disposal, and this diverted; their taking the Swede off the Triple Alliance,
and obliging him to give the Emperor work in Germany, and Brandenburgh in
Prussia, with a great sum of Money; some say and Print also 60 Tun of Gold, or
600000 l sterling; the endeavors they have used with Portugal to give Spain a
diversion, though that Kingdom is not in a capacity to serve their designs;
the work also they have made in Italy; their intresting themselves in all
Treaties almost in Europe; the Pensions they allow to Ministers of State in
most Princes Courts, and many other ways they take to enlarge their Empire.
Those that are desirous to see their designs, may consult the late Author of
La France Politic ou ses desseins executez and a executer. And especially the
ingenious discourse of the Baron of Isola, in's Bouclier d'Estat and de Justice
Article 6. where he shows France's aspiring to the Universal Monarchy, and by
what maxims and means, they advance apace toward it; and as their ambition is
great, so their pretentions are boundles. Who knows not how they pretend, not
only to the Spanish Netherlands, but the whole Empire? Des justes pretentions
du Roy sur l'Empire, par le Sieur Aubery Advocat au Parliament, and aux
conseils du Roy. Printed at Paris 1667. And there are Aubery's, or at least
Advocates enough in Paris, to draw up pretensions to the Crown of England; and
so of one Kingdom and State after another, according as their Swords shall be
able to pursue them.

And indeed such is the growing greatness of that Kingdom, that it is become
formidable to all Europe. I need not insist on this the World is sufficiently
sensible of it; but it may be worth our pains to enquire into the causes
thereof.

France formerly had several boundaries to their Ambition, which by degrees
they have broken down. Several Dukes, on the one side that of Normandy,
Comines, 1, 6. c. 3.
and the English after who for 400 years together late dominati sunt in Gallia;
till Charles the 7. his time; and that of Bretagnie, till Charles the 8 gained
it to the Crown of France, by the marriage of Anne, Daughter of Francis the 2.
the last Duke thereof; and on the other side the Dukes of Bungundie, till Lewis
the 11. who after the death of Charles the last Duke slain at the Battle of
Nancey, seized thereon, and united it to the Crown of France. These three
Potentates kept the French Kings continually under, by their Confederations and
Wars against that Kingdom. Which Bands, they having once broke, they became at
liberty to get more elbow-room in the World; and become the largest,
compactest, and strongest Kingdom of Europe, were it not that their own
intestine Divisions, and frequent Civil Wars has often weakened them.

After France had arrived at this greatness, the following Kings Charles the 8.
Lewis the 12. and Francis the first, fruitlesly spent the Kingdoms strength in
their Wars in Italy; till Francis and Charles the 5. became competitors for the
Empire, and Spain and France a fit match for each other in power. Since which
time such mighty contests have been betwixt those two Kingdoms, as have filled
all Europe with terror and amazement, and all Historians with their Actions.
But how France has so far prevailed, as we see at present, is partly by our
own, and partly by the English fault; we by Commission, and they by Omission,
as we shall (with what brevity we can) make apparent, in regard it may be
useful to us both.

During the reign of Charles the 5. and Francis aforesaid, the Reformation of
Religion begun, which occasioned great alterations to the Kingdom of France,
and to the Kings of Spain in these Low Countries. Wherein the Crown of Spain
continued to prosecute their intrest, in breaking down the power of France by
all means possible, and especially by joining with the Guisian faction which
styled themselves the Holy-League, under pretense of opposing the Protestants.
Those great contests which the several factions in France clothed with the
glorious mantle of Religion, are well known to those that are conversant in
their Histories, and are particularly declared by many; but best in my
judgment, on the Protestants side by Beza, the Author (though not named) of
those 15 Books, he styles Commentariorum de Statu Religionis and Reip. in
Regno Galliae, sub Henrico. 2. Franciso 2. Carolo 9. and Henrico 3. And on the
Papists by Davila in his excellent History of the Civil Wars of France. In
which Contests, in the Reigns of the four forementioned Kings, the Successors
of Francis the 1, and in the times of Henry the 4. who succeeded them; the
Protestants (called there Hugonots) got into their Possession, above 300
Garrisons and Forts in that Kingdom.

On the otherhand France was not asleep, or awanting to prosecute their
intrest, in fomenting, promoting, and carrying on those divisions in these Low
Countries; to break down the power of Spain, into whose hands they had
fallen by marriage (as we have said) and to remove the obstacle, which these
Provinces constantly were, to their advancing their designs. For which end
they continually assisted us, and whilst they pretended to fight our Battles;
at our charges they really fought their own. And lest the House of Austria so
nearly allied to Spain, should afford them further assistance, they engage
Sweden to invade the Empire, and give the Emperor work at home, allowing A. D.
1631. Gustavus Adolphus 300000. Franks for levying an Army, and a Million
yearly for paying them, (every Frank being two Shillings sterling) as in the
years 1625. and 1635. they fathering all the Empire did on Spain, engaged us
also in more firm and constant Leagues against them. This being the true
State of those times between those two Crowns, we therein thus doubly
miscarried, and erred both in our Civil and Religious Intrest.

First in that we thought we could never bring Spain low enough, nor assist
France sufficiently against them. In this blind zeal we went a great deal too
far, though nothing the length that France desired: For had we listened to their
suggestions, we had to this day continued our Wars with Spain, and so have
done their work for them. What arts France used to dissuade us from peace with
Spain, may be seen in their Historian Priol, De Rebus Gallicis, L. 10.
as well as our own, concerning the Treaty of Munster. But the States seeing
the successes of France, of whose greatness they now at last, and indeed too
late, became jealous; to which they were the more awakened, by the French
approaches toward us in Flanders, and taking of Dunkirke, it being their own
proverb Aye le Francois pour ton Amy, non pas pour ton voisin: they resolve to
take the opportunity which was put into their hands by Spain; who despairing
of peace with France, sought nothing more then to take off their confederates,
the Swede, and these united Provinces especially, by concluding a peace with
us, and procuring one also between the Empire and Sweden. For knowing their
own weakness, and great work on their hands, by the revolt of Portugal,
Rebellion in Catalonia, the doubtful condition of Naples, the frequent losses
they had received, and their want of men and money to war every where; they
offered us equal conditiors; and we privately without the knowledge either of
the French Plenipotentiaries, or the Mediators ( Chigie from the Pope, and
Contaren from the State of Venice) except them at last, and a peace is made
betwixt us at Munster, January 30. 1648. and quickly after between the Empire
and Sueden at Osnaburg August the 6. in the same year. By which means Spain
was freed from our Wars, had opportunity of Prosecuting theirs against
Portugal, and of creating France trouble at home by joining with the Condean
fact on, in the greatness of Mazarine, and the minority of his present Majesty.
This peace so stuck on the Cardinals stomach, that neither He nor that Kingdom
have ever digested it: but because we would not war for them any longer,
resolved they would war against us at last: though if we had not done that too
long, they had never done this so succesfully.

Secondly we help forward France's greatness and our own destruction, by
helping to destroy the Protestant Intrest in that Kingdom. For as France had
the power of Spain to keep them in on every side; so they had also a curb of
the Protestants at home, to check them in their exorbitant designs. Who from
the beginning of the Reformation under Francis the first, Henry the 2d, and
Francis the 2d had grown to that strength and greatness, that they grew
formidable to the Crown of France. And notwithstanding the Massacre of
Merindel and Chabries A. D. 1545. and the 8 several civil Wars that was made
against them; (by Charles the 9, and 3 by Henry the 3) the great Massacre at
Paris 1572. yet God so blessed them and multiplied them, that in the year 1560
there was reckoned above 1250 Churches of them, and by their several
capitulations with the two forementioned Kings at the end of their civil Wars,
and the Connivance of Henry the 4 formerly Head of their party, they got 300 at
least Garrisons and forts for their defense, which he used to call, the
Commonwealth of Rochel, that and Montauban being their principal places of
strength. From whom they obtained several immunities, but especially that of
the liberty of their Religion; which he confirmed to them by the ratification
of the several concessions of his Predecessors in the Edict of Nantes, 1598,
passed in the Parliament of Paris February the 25 in the following year.
Allthough the promulgation thereof, out of respect to Cardinal Medices was
deferd, till March the 2. 1599. Which he then vehemently pressed, beginning his
speech with a strange prodigy that had fallen out betwixt Himself and the
Duke of Guise 26 years before, who being about to play at tables in the
presence of many Nobles, there appeard drops of blood, which though once and
again wiped off, yet new still were perceived, and none knew whence; there
being not any in the room that bled; which he then declared for a sad omen of
much blood, that should be shed betwixt them two, which having accordingly
happend to his great grief, he desired to take away all further occasions of
their civil Wars by publishing that edict etc. which may be seen in Thuanus.
Lib. 122.
This great King by name and merit, having fought 140 battles and skirmishes
with his own hands, beleagured 300 Cities and forts, was no sooner shine by
the dagger of that Rascally villane Ravillac, in the midst of his greatest
glory and designs; But his Son and Successor Lewis the 13. confirms the same,
May the 22. 1610 wherein he acknowledges that, Experience having taught the
Kings his Predecessors that the fury and violence of Arms had not only been
unprofitable to draw their subjects to the Roman Church, but was rather
hurtful: which made them have recourse by a more happy Counsel, to mildnes,
granting them the exercise of the Reformed Religion they professed: in whose
imitation his father (Henry the 4) had made the Edict of Nantes, to reconcile
all his loving subjects: the observation whereof, had settled and assured quiet
amongst them, which had ever since continued without interruption. And declares
that though that Edict be perpotual and irrevocable, and by that means has no
need to be confirmed by any new declarations; yet to the end his subjects may
be assured of his love and intention to have the said Edict inviolably kept
(being made for the good and quiet of his subjects) therefore it is ordained by
him with the advice of the Queen Regent, Princes of the blood etc. that the
same be kept inviolably; and those that shall infringe it, severely punished,
as troublers of the public peace of the Kingdom, etc. Yet notwithstanding all
this, the King being provoked by them, is induced, much against his
inclination, to War against them whom he declared Rebels 1621. and took many
of their cautionary Towns from them, yet this was at last composed. and they
reserved Rochel and several other places still for their defense. But
afterward, at the instigation of Cardinal Richelieu, (not out of any zeal for
his Religion being called the Hugonot Cardinal, but of Policy to free France
from their fears of the Protestant party at home) with much regret the King
makes War against them again 1625. and sent to the States for Twenty sail of
Men of War according to the late Treaty, which was assented unto, though with
great reluctance, and they was sent under Admiral Hauthain; which were
especially isntrumental of ruining the Protestants power at Sea, and of Rochel
aftewards, and consequently all the power that party had left under the Duke of
Rohan, with nere 50 places for their Protection: All their Cautionary Towns
being dismantled, and they having no other shelter, but the shadow of the
Almighty, and their Kings clemency left them to fly unto for their defense. So
that as I wish we had otherwise employed our power, so I pray (as Schookius
Imperium maritimum, c. 27.
in our first War with England, Deum rego, fillis and nepotibus non imputet,
quae a parentibus facta fuerunt) that God may not lay this sin to our charge.
The Protestants having thus made their last will and Testament, whereby the
Crown became sole heir and executor of all they had, Lewis the last thereby
became the greatest Monarch since Charles the Great; his predecessors having
reduced the many Provinces dismemberd from France by Hugh Capet into one entire
body, and he all the parts thereof to the entire subjection of the Crown; and
that Kingdom at liberty to look abroad, and carry on their designs where they
please, having for this end gained 3 keys to their neighbor Kingdoms, Pignerol
to enter Italy; Brisack Germany, and Perpignan Spain.

We have seen how we have gone against our intrest in overdoing our work; lets
now see how England have been no les guilty, in not doing their duty; wherein
they have not only been greatly awanting to themselves, but more to the
Protestant intrest in Europe.

The Protestants in France having by Arms, Treaties, Concessions, and
Confirmations of several Kings, obtained that strength which we have declared:
There could be nothing more clearly the intrest of all those of the Reformed
Religion, and especially their Neighbors then to support them in their just
rights; Which Queen Elizabeth and her Council so well understood, that though
she had assisted these Provinces both with money and men considerably, whereby
she had drawn upon her a War with Spain which was very costly to her, and
also occasioned the Rebellion in Ireland, which to reduce stood Her and her
Kingdom of England in 4 years time no les, if we take Morisons account, then
1198000 L. Sterling: yet she neglects not to supply Henry of Navar against the
Guisian league and faction for the support of the Protestants, with 101560
franks for the Baron of of Donna to raise an Army in Germany, A. D. 1587, for
his service: and 71165 besides 20000 she spent in sending 4000 men under the
conduct and command of the Lord Willoughby A. 1589. and 33333 to levy an Army
under the Prince of Anhalt, Camdeni Annals 1590.
for the service, and as much money she lent Navar himself, the following
year 1590 and continually upon all occasions supported him and the intrest of
the Reformed Religion in those Kingdoms, so that she was publicly prayed for
by the Hugonots as their Protectoresse.

No sooner was this great Princess dead, whose glory yet will never dye, Lib.
129.
(being accounted by her very enemies the Guisians, the most glorious that ever
swayed Scepter, gloriosissima, and omnium quoe unquam sceptrum gestarunt,
foelicissima famina, as Thuanus tells us, adding many great elogiums of her,
and conluding none ever was or will be like her of that sex:) and King James
called in, to succeed in that Crown: but the French, though they had underhand
opposed the conjunction of those two Kingdoms all they could, having still made
use of Scotland formerly in their Wars with England for a diversion to them, by
setting them upon entering that Kingdom at the back door betwixt them; and as
loath also that such an accession of power should accrue to their old enemies
the English; yet now they are the first that come with a splendid Embassage, to
welcome him to his new Crowns, This King, if he had had as much of the Lions
courage, as he had of the soxes cunning and Kingcraft as he called it; how
happy had it been both for his own family, and his Kingdoms! But as he was the
occasion of the sad disasters that happend to both, as is shown not only by
the Historians, but particular Authors in the English tongue, Rushworth Welden.
Osburne, etc.
so I shall now briefly show how he occasioned many and great irreparable
losses to the Protestant intrest abroad, especially by his pusillanimity.

How he persuaded this Republic to a 12 years Truce with Spain, and how
prejudicial it was to these Provinces, is well known. How earnestly he was
pressed to assist his son the Palsgrave, both by foreign Princes abroad, and
his Parliaments at home, I need not mention: nor how he spent more in
Embassies, their trains and Treaties, then would have done his work with men
of Arms and trains of Artillery. I shall only speak of that relating to the
French Protestants, as the proper subject of my discourse.

When Lewis the 13 set upon reducing the Cautionary Towns which the
Protestants had in his Kingdom, by the grants of several Kings (as we have
said) and the distressed sought to the Crown of England for Relief: K. James
according to his usual custom, only imployes Ambassadors, the Lord Herbert
once and again; whom the French delayed with words, till they had done their
work. For knowing King James's temper too well, Luynes the High Constable of
France, Howels Hist. of Lewis 13. A. 1621.
being appointed to give Herbert audience, first sets a Gentleman of the
Reformed Religion behind the hangings, that being an eare-witness of what past,
might relate to the Reformists, what small grounds of hope they had, of having
succors from the Crown of England; and then in stead of harkening to his
Embassage, in a most insolent manner affronted both his Master and himself with
menaces: which when he could not brook, but roundly replied, His Master then
knew what he had to do, and offered the Constable who was chollerick thereat,
the satisfaction of his Sword; the French Ambassador misrepresents what past to
K. James, and procures Herbert to be called home, and the Earl of Carlisle is
sent in his place, to as little purpose as before. Nor was this the worst, for
the Duke of Guise obtained 8 English sail of men of War to join with him
against the Rochellers and them of the Religion to distres them by Sea, as the
Count of Soissons did by Land (for which the Duke of Buckingham was after
questioned in Parliament) and thus the greatest part of the Protestants power
was broke down, and had been wholly, but that the French had not then time by
reason of the Spanish work in the Valtolin; so that a peace was skind over for
a small time, till they had leisure to open the wound again, and make the
poor Patients bleed their last. These things caused great complaints of
England every where amongst them of the Reformed Religion, and occasioned
Deodate's saying, that King James' sins of omission, were greater then all his
Predecessors sins of Commission.

Though the pacification was published at Montpellier, yet Richelieu being made
Minister of State and chief Director of affairs in France, A. 1624; he made it
his first work to go on with the design of destroying the Protestants power
in that Kingdom; and though the King was against it at first, yet the Cardinal
carried it on at last, so that afterward he said, He had taken Rochel in
spite of three Kings, meaning his own England and Spain. For the
accomplishing this work, the Eagle-eyed Richelieu foreseeing that England and
these States might stand in his way and obstruct him, he resolves to charm us
both to a compliance. For which end France makes a stricter league with these
United Provinces, affords us 1600000 franks yearly for the two next following,
to be repaid the two next years after our peace with Spain, agrees for ships
for their service, etc. And for England, though they knew K. James would not
disturb their designs, yet not knowing what the Prince of Wales might do,
there were means used to engage him, by a Match with Henriette the only
Daughter then unmarried of Henry the 4. K. James who was desirous to match his
only son Considerably, had for 9 or 10 year been. Courting of Spain to this
purpose, that so with one he might have the Palatinate restored to the
Palsgrave; and the Prince of Wales, having past through France incognito into
Spain, to make love personally to the Infanta, and see with his own eyes if
fame belied not her beauty; and being there still delayed, but not denied (the
Spanish desiring to see all the Daughters of France first matched, to prevent an
alliance betwixt England and that Kingdom) and the business of the Palatinate
still kept in suspense; he is commanded home by his Father K. James. But having
seen the Lady Henriette at a mask, in his passage through France, under the
notion of an English Gentleman, and being taken with her beauty, more then the
Infanta's; overtures are made of a Marriage with her, and though some in the
French Council, were rather for her matching to Lorraigne (that so those
Territories might be gained to France, which had been long troublesome to them)
yet this reason of State, of obliging him not to interrupt their design of
ruining the Protestants, and prevent his marrying with Spain prevailed, and in
9 months time a Match is concluded.

Richelieu thinking France secure of these two they most feared; falls to work
to reduce the Hugonots Cautionary Towns. Upon which Soubeze and Blankart go
for England to implore K. Charles (his Father K. James being then dead) his
assistance. This good King thinks himself obliged in conscience and honor,
notwithstanding his marriage with the King of France's sister, to support them.
And indeed so he was, for the Ambassadors and Agents of the Crown of England,
had become Caution to those of the Religion, for the King of France's
performance with them. He therefore sends 150 sail of ships and an Army of
10000 men; under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham, to take off that odium
which was upon him in England, for what was formerly done under K. James. Who
published a Manifesto in the K. of Englands name July the 21. 1627. declaring
that though there were other grounds sufficient for a War, as the abuse of the
English Merchants, their ships and goods seized on, and the extraordinary
equipping for Sea in France; yet that the sole cause of the War, was the Crown
of France's not performing of Articles with those of the Reformed Religion.
This expedition, and the causes of its miscarriage, is writ by a learned pen
Expeditio in Ream Insulam. authore Edovardo Herbert Baronc de Cherbury.
and well known from the modern Histories of both Kingdoms. The French and
English both proceed, the former in carrying on, the latter to prevent if
possible, their designs. For which end K. Charles sent the Earl of Denbigh
with another Fleet, which was able to effect nothing; and the Earl of Linzey
with the last ( Buckingham being assasinated by Felton the day before he was to
embarke) But before Linzey came, such stupendous works were raised (of which
Bertius has writ a particular book) and so pallisadoed, that the Cardinal
sent to the English Admiral, that he should have a pasport with 6 of his
ablest Commanders, to come a shore and view the works, and if they thought
Rochel relievable, he would raise lost Rochel, upon which followed the Duke of
Rohan and the rest of the Reformists compliance, the dismantling of their
remaining Garrisons (above 40 whereof Mantauban was the last) and a peace with
England, and those of the Reformed Religion in France.

Since which time what mighty dessignes have been contrived, and carried on by
the two Cardinals, Richelieu and Mazarine, for that Kingdom abroad, whose
plots they are still pursuing; is not unknown to those that are curiously
inquisitive. How the former wrought the revolt of Portugal, the Rebellion in
Catalonia, the carrying on the Wars in these Countries, to bring down Spain;
set on foot and fomented the distractions of Great Britaigne, first by the
Scots, and afterward by other means, to give England work at home: tamperd
with Wallesteyne for betraying the Imperial Army, for whose death he most
pastionately wept, failing thereby of his hopes, of France's speedy comeing to
the Empire: engaged Sweden to serve their ends in Germany; took Pignerol to
keep Italy in aw: Lorraigne is taken; the Dukes of Savoy, Mantua, and Modena
are wholly at France's service: and the Princes Electors, especially the
Ecclesiastical, rather courting the favor of that Crown, then the Imperial
This was the true State of France, at the death of Richelieu in 42 and the King
his Master, who quickly followed him, May 14. 1643. the same day of the year
his father died, and wherein he was Crowned. Which I have been the larger in,
first because it is for the most part the same now, and in several things
greater than then, especially by their alliance with England, and success
against these and the Spanish Netherlands: and 2. that it might appear, how
far they have overgrowne Spain in power, that so the world may be awakend, and
see to lop off their superfluous bows, lest they grow in time like
Nebuchadnezars tree, so great that they overshadow us all. For Mazarine
succeeding Richelieu as Minister of State, who was his only Scholar that
proved his parallel, to which two Clergymen let me say it, for it is a truth
(though I know the Laity may stomach it) France owes their present greatness;
the first 5 years after till 48 that tumultuous Nation was never wiselier
governed in the nonage of their Sovereign: and though in the next luster or
five years following till 53, they had some aguish fits that shaked them in
their civil wars, yet they soon recovered thereof, and have ever since grown
stronger and stronger. So that it was high time for the Neighbor Nations no
longer to dance after the fidle of France. And the States saw this, and
therefore made peace, as I have said; but England herein offended again, and
prevaricated in the common intrest of Europe. Let me show how briefly, because
it may satisfy perhaps the curiosity of some that have wondered at it, as much
as my self, in regard they have been ignorant of the true grounds thereof.

When Cromwell the Hanibal of the English Commonwealth, and immortal enemy and
Terror to Rome, came to have the power of those three Kingdoms in his hands; he
saw it necessary to engage those Nations and employ his Armies in a foreign
War; for without an Army he could not maintain the power he had got, and
without employing them he could not quietly enjoy it (Armies being like raised
them) and besides this necessity of intrest, his own inclination strongly
carried him, and perhaps some extravagant hopes, to pull down the Pope; for he
once said to Lambert, were I as young as you, I should not doubt to knock at
the gates of Rome before I died. Spain and France both courted him, knowing
what metal his sword was made of, and his Iron-sides wore; of which
competition he made his advantage, obteining such conditions of France, as were
a wonder to all, that understood the maxims of their Government. That which
most inclined him to the French, was that he judged Spain and Austria the two
strongest Horns of Antichrist, whose fall was come as one of his Prophets
(whom I could name) inspired him, and that France might be brought to renounce
Rome; intending withal to get such places in Flanders and over against the
coast of England, that he might keep the Dutch in aw, and with a few of his
Ships command a toll for the passage in the Channel, as the Dane did in the
Sound. A League thereofore is made with France, March 23. 1657 for a year, and
renewed the next, by Lockard his Ambassador, who for his parts and sagacity was
so acceptable to Mazarine, that he had more acces to him, and business with him,
then all the Ambassadors at Paris besides. These two Cromwell, and the Cardinal
the stronglier to carry on their designs, take in the King of Sweden for a
third into their confederacy ( Christina having resigned that Crown, and
wandering about like a blazing Comet) and these three Leagued together made the
Triumvirate of those times.

Sweden was to pluck the plumes of the Roman Eagle, when he had clipped the wings
of his Neighbors, that they might not fly upon the prey he left behind.
Wherein Oliver so concerned himself, that when the Dane had got the Dutch for
his second, he sent Montague to boy up Swedens sinking intrest in the Sound:
and they were so near an engagement, that they had certainly fought, had not
the English espied an Advice-Yacht coming toward them, which bringing them
news of the Protectors death, they hoyst up fails, and returned home.

France was to pull down Spain by Land, with his own forces, and such as the
Protector could spare. Which Lockard the Ambassador there commanded. Who having
been more used to fight in the field, then play the pioneers with their
spades, were not so much esteemed at first by the French: till the sight with
Don John of Austria's Army which came to relieve Dunkirke, wherein they behaved
themselves with that gallantry, that Don John cried out he was beat by raging
wild beasts rather then men; and that great Soldjer the Prince of Conde has
often said since, that he never saw the like action, as was that day performed
by the English Shortly after Dunkerke yielded, and was put into the English
hands.

The Protector was to bring down Spain by Sea, which he said he would do, or
he and his should live on bread and water. Intending also to carry on the
design, which Sidney, Rawleight and several of the wisest men of the Indies;
but as she had too many irons in the fire to carry on that work, so how he
miscarried in it, is sufficiently known. And indeed he had broke Spaines Naval
power much more then he did, allthough he did a great deal at Tenerif and
elsewhere, had it not been for a small accident that happend, which was this.
Admiral Blake, who still principled his seamen in those Confusions and
frequent Revolutions of Government, that the Fleet served no Parties nor
Persons, but the English Nation; having brought some of his great ships before
Tunis, batterd down the Castle and compeld them to his terms; for which
extraordinary service he expected the reward of gratitude at least: In stead
thereof, by his next Advice from England he has a pardon sent him, for
endangering, the Fleet in such an attempt without order, etc. Which so stuck on
the stomach of that stout and sturdy Stoic, that afterward the Spanish Fleet
coming on the maine Ocean off Cadiz; He reading his Commission, and finding it
only for fighting them in the Mediterranean, would not fall on them, though
the Commanders Solicited him, promised to answer it for him, etc. only was
willing to fight if the Spanjards begun; but though the English provoked them
to it, and affronted them all they could, yet the wary Spanjard was wiser then
to engage, and so saved themselves; at which Oliver stormed not a little, but
Blake cared not much, the Admiral hereby crying quits with the General.

Thus you see what great things a little blind zeal may do. And indeed it is
not so much to be admired at in him, he having had such an enthusiasticall
heat, as all know, that knew him well; nor can we wonder so much, if his head
sometimes run round, who was so continually wrapped up in such whirlepooles of
affairs, as he was perpetually plunged in: though to miscarry in so great a
concernment for the Protestant Intrest, was a capital crime in him above all
others; who designing to pull down the Pope, Grotius de jure bell. and pac. l. 2.
c. 22. voluntatem implondi vaticinia, sine Dei, mandato, non esse causam bellit
by bringing down Spain, set up France to ruin the Protestants throughout
Christendom. Thus Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus!

But these three lived not long to go on with these designs, and indeed it
was well for the world they did not. Oliver went first, at which Mazarine, was
secretly glad, saying when the news was brought him as he was at play, there is
then a fortunate fool gone. But this was but to trample upon a dead lion, whom
he so ridiculously feared before, that his greatest Confidents made themselves
privately merry therewith. Knowing how uncivily for this, he put the King of
England out of France; and the Duke of York also notwithstanding his service,
and the Cavalries acclamations of vive's to him, and curses of the Cardinal:
Yea how after his death he feared his shadow, for in the Isle of Fesant 59 at
the interview of the two Kings and their Courts, where the marriage was made,
and peace concluded betwixt them, (which Mazarine had reserved for his own
glory) and the King of great Britain being there received by Lewis de Haro at
first with the height of a Spanish complement in the depth of the mire, and
treated after with all civility: yet the Cardinal, though courted by the Duke
of Ormond, durst not speak with him, for fear of Lockard that was present at
the Treaty. But though the crafty Cardinal was no coward, yet thus fearful,
and timorously was he cautious for Him, whom I know he hated above all Mortals,
and that Commonwealth above all people in the world; as I can many ways make
apparent, if it was of any importance to the public.

But to be brief, Olivers other two Consorts followed after him quickly, and
these three Conquerors, being cut of by death, who kept all Christendom in aw
whilst they lived, the world had a little quiet, till France got a horseback
again in Flanders.

But betwixt and that time was that great change in England by the wonderful
providence of God in the restoration of his Majesty, by which means the French
got Dunkirke again into their hands, and were thereby capacitated, the better to
carry on their work against these Countries. Atwhich the French made
themselves merry, and some say abusively, by having Dunkirke drawn with a purse
hanging over it: The English stormed, and some swore Oliver would have sold his
great nose, rather then Dunkerke. Yea this still sticks on many of their
stomachs; I remember at my last being in England in 66, and seeing Clarenden
House; and wondering a little why it was situated so near the road, which made
it both unfree, and molested with dust; and critising upon some other things,
the Oratory especially, that the Chancellor that was the eldest Son of the
Church of England, should make his Chapel, as a wag writ of Emanuel
Colledge's, so awry: Just North and South, yea verily: when I came above on the
leads I was so pleased with the pleasantnes of the prospect, that I thought for
that it might compare with any House I had seen, knowing no place in England
except above Greenwich, that I thought comparable to it, upon which the
domestic had the confidence, perceiving me a stranger, to tell me I could not
thence see Dunkirke; for the Commonality had Christened it, and made Dunkirke
the Godfather, calling the House after its name. But though I confess it was
against the Common Intrest of Europe, that it should fall to the French again;
yet whether it was against the Intrest of the King of England, and that
Kingdom, is not so clear to me. I will only say this, that I know a person
has weighed that so well, that I shall carry this challenge for him, That if
any Gentleman, English or French, pleases fairly to state this Question in
hypothesi, according to the circumstances of those times, let him take which
side thereof he pleases, and use what weapons he will (and I think that's very
fair) and he shall not want an Antagonist, that shall fight him fairly,
whether he pleases to appear in Roman buf, or in his half shirt made of his
own mothers language, upon the public Theater of the World. And truly his
design is so honest, I dare be his Compurgator, and being a little acquainted
with it, I shall tell you briefly: It is to let men see, how hard it is
sometimes to discern on which side the true intrest of State lies, (there
being so many circumstances considerable, which often in the Scale of Policy,
weigh heavier then that which bystanders think the maine) and thereby also to
check the sawcines of every shopkeeper, who like the little Spanish Dons, will
be censuring Princes Counsels, and condemning Ministers of State, though they
are ignorant of the grounds of their Actions, and much more of that which is
true policy.

Having thus shown the true State of France, and its continual growing
greatness down to the times of his present Majesty, who has not only got
Dunkirke, regained Lorraigne, conquered a great part of Flanders from the
Spanish but three Provinces also entirely from the States: It will clearly
follow to be the Common Intrest of Europe to oppose France in their future
progress, except they mean to follow our fate.

I had thought to have been larger herein then I shall, in regard my pains is
herein in part prevented, by the Author of la France Politic from page 470
to 525, or the end: And having been so long already, I may happily hereafter,
discourse this more largely in another language. I shall therefore be bries in
that which remains.

The Empire, though greatly concerned, (the French being not only nigh them,
but among them, and having got such places of the Rhyne, capacitated to pas
over all at their pleasure) yet seem a sleep, and are therefore to be roused;
and if no words will do it, yet let the alarmes of War raise them, and the
strength of their enemies make them combine, lest fighting singly, they be all
foiled. I shall not stand to particularize, but surely the Duke of Newburgh and
Prince of Liege that have been most guilty in letting the French have passage
through, and quarter in their Countries; will have the first cause to repent,
except they mean to sell them to the Crown of France; which yet may happily
beat them down in price, now they are so impoverished by them. For though
Gulick belonging to Newburg be strong, the Castle especially (which was the
Pattern to that of Antwerp) yet it is on dry ground, easily approachable, and
in a champaigne Country and not relievable from a siege. And if that small City
once be taken, all that pleasant corn Country may cry out, Impius haec tam
culta novalia miles habebit,
Barbarus has segetes!


And though Liege (or Luyke) be great and populous, and the desperatest people
in all times, that I know in Europe; yet vana est sine viribus ira, the City
has such hills overhanging it, that it is neither strong by its situation, nor
can hope of relief if they should be distressed, except it be by a confederacy
from others; and if this single City be lost, all their Country will be so
quickly.

Yea not only those on this side the Rhijne, but even all the rest will
quickly find, that if the wings of the Roman Eagle be clipped, and prove too
short to shadow her young Ones; they will soon become a prey to the power of
France, and will be thrown out of their nests as spurious, if they cannot
steadfastly behold the rising sun, and will not receive their warmth from his
beams.

Spain is sensible enough of their concernments, knowing that not only their
Netherlands, but their Indies and Italy lie at the stake: for if France be
Master of all these Provinces, they will soon be so of the Indies also; and
the Dutch fetch thence, the Spanish Gold for the French Crown; and the Lilies
of France, be the Royal flower, in all their Gardens both in Italia and
Sicilia.

England, though now their Confederate, cannot but know what danger they are in
for their Trade; which is the best jewel in that Crown, and the greatest
darling of that Kingdom. And therefore it is high time surely, that the
Sovereign straiten not his interest at home, by espousing any particular
party; nor the subjects quarrel about Ceremonies, when the substance of
Religion is so endangered; that so they may timously look abroad, before it be
too late and all be lost; and his Majesty in due time retire from France, and
make himself and successors (as is much desired) the Head of all the Protestant
party in Europe.

Denmark surely knows, that if the Empire fall they cannot stand: but must lose
both their toll in the Sound, and what by Land the French pleases.

This Republic of all others is most immediately concerned, for he is blind
that sees not, whatever some may flatter themselves, that the French intend
nothing les then reducing of us to their obedience.

And when this is done, and they advance upwards in the Empire; what are
Stratsburg, Colen, Aken, Breme, Hamburg, and the rest of the Hanse Towns, and
free Cities, but as so many morsels, easily eaten up and devoured?

Yea their constant friends and Allies may look to themselves.

Sweden how they will save their Bishopric of Breme, Pomeren, and what lies on
this side the Baltic: and how they will sell their Copper, which is the Staple
commodity of their own Country. And in stead of the French Crowns, which is
now their usual money amongst them; when that Kingdom has no more need of
their service; they may carry their own Copper coin on their backs to pay a
collation, or laden a horse when they travel, to pay for 2 or 3 good nights
lodging.

Savoy knows he is at France's mercy, and therefore dances after their pipe,
endeavoring to save himself by his devotion. But they may remember the Lamb
in the Fable, who when the Wolf above quarreld him, because he troubled the
water; answered that could not be so, in regard it descended to him, not from
him; the Wolf then said, he had reviled him 6 months before, to which the Lamb
replying, he was not then borne. But thy Father then did says He, and that is
cause enough for the sons suffering.

For Switzerland, though their mountains and Poverty may secure perhaps their
Country: yet what shall secure their liberty, which consists in an equality
amongst them? or what shall secure the. Religion of the Protestant Cantons? or
the good pay which the Popish have long had, for their service in the Wars of
France? They must then be content with what they can get, or be turned to graze
on their own mountains.

And thus you see what necessity there is that the French be kept within
bounds: and consequently. that the balance of Europe, be both brought and held
in a greater equality. For intrests changing continually with the revolution of
times; and Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Cities and places, having their youth
strength and old age, as well as particular persons: If lesser Powers combine
not together, they singly become like the smaller fishes, easily swallowed up
and devoured by the greater. Thus the league between the King of Naples, Lib. 1.
Duke of Millain and Florence A. D. 1480. secured Italy against the power of
the Venctians; and the Confederacy of the Italians at Venice in 95, preserved
them from being all ruind by the French under Charles the 8, who had in a small
time conquered several, and got the Kingdom of Naples he came for: Lib. 2.
as that wise Historian Guicciardine shows, in his excellent History of the
Wars of Italy.

Nor let any think to obstruct my passage with saying, that Wars to bring
down the growing greatness of others are unlawful.

For though very many both Lawiers and Historians are of the opinion they are,
De jure belli l. 1. c. 14.
as may be seen in Gentilis, and some Divines also, yea the whole College of
Sorben gave their determination for this, and the Learned Bacon Essay (or sermo
fidelis) 19.
says plainly that the contrary opinion is not to be received, and many other
modern Authors concur herein, besides the many Precedents of States that have
made preventive Wars, as the Lacedaemonians against the Arhenians of old, and
many especially of later times; and the Arguments for it are not contemptible:
yet notwithstanding I am rather of Grotius's opinion, De jure belli and pac. l.
2. c. 1.. 17. etc. 22.. 5.
that neither our own fears and jealousies, nor the growing greatness of
others, are sufficient causes of warring against them.

But indeed neither of these is the cause we plead, but the following, which we
will maintain jure gentium or by the law of Nations to be just and equitable.

1. Let any Kingdom or Commonwealth grow as great, as they can by Gods
blessing; yet so long as they keep themselves, within the bounds of justice and
equity with others; there is no just cause of breaking down their power by
War. For jealousy that we may thereby suffer, is no sufficient ground for us
to fight them. It being with public as well as private safety, as Physicians
say it is with our health, tollerably well, but never absolute and perfect. And
therefore against such force as we may fear, we must trust the Providence of
God, and use lawful means cautiously to prevent dangers; our Savior having
taught all Christians to use the wisdom of the Serpent with the innocence of
the dove, and cursed be they that seperates, what Christ has joined together.

2. When Neighbor Nations see the growing power of any, whence they have just
cause of jealousy: they ought to combine together; that so they may prevent
the dangers they fear. And if any of the Confederates be unjustly invaded,
they have all a just cause of War against the Agressor. As the Italians being
jealous of the Venetians Power, Guicciardine's Hist. of Ital. l. 1.
leagued themselves for their own defense, so that though the Republic of
Venice was too strong for any of them singly, yet being far too weak for them
all, was kept within bounds, and they thereby wisely secured themselves.

3. When any Potentate that is stronger then his Neighbors aggresses any of
them, the rest ought to Confederate; and if his cause be just compel him to
accept of due satisfaction, and if he will not, his cause then becoming unjust,
and much more if it was so originally, to make War against him. As the Italians
did against the French, when they under Charles the 8 were invaded. And the
Triple Alliance of late, when the same nation had taken the County of
Burgundy, commonly called the French Comte and invaded Flanders, both which
belong to the Crown of Spain. Thus our Neighbors also should now allie with
us, in point of honest intrest; that so we may reduce France to keep within
bounds, lest we should all be ruind by them.

I shall make these things plain by familiar example. The ballancing of
Nations is like to that of boats: they that by an even poize, might all sit
safe in a boat on a rough Sea, by the rising up of some are all in danger to
be drowned. In such case therefore the company perceiving, a quarrel likely to
arise amongst some of them, must either agree before hand to keep them quiet;
or if the contest come suddenly, afterward resolve together, to compel those
that are injurious, to keep their place; and if they will not, throw them
overboard. And this ballancing of powers, I shall defend by the Fundamental
Law of Nature selfe-preservation, and from the Law of Nations, as well as from
the Word of God, and back the same by many approved examples; if any one has a
mind to contest with me herein.

Lets see a little how, and by whom, stronger powers must be balanced, and I
shall give a release to your patience.

1. By the Confederacy of weaker Nations that are their Neighbors, and are in
danger thereby of being overcome, as we have already shown.

2. Or by a Neutrall Nation that reserve themselves free, to league with the
weaker, when they see them injured by the stronger powers. And this was the
Ancient policy of England, Memoires de Ribier T. 1. l. 2. l. 347. Memoires de
du Plessis. Memoire du Duc de Sulli, T. 2. c. 4. p. 14. Ambassades du Cardinal
Ossat part. 1. p. 180. Annals Eliz. A. 1577.
since France and Spain became the two great balances in Europe. Which (as I
have said) begun to be so under Charles the 5, and Francis the first, whom
Henry the 8 of England still kept even, as the many Histories of those times
show, as well as other writers of State affairs, engraving this motto upon his
Gold, Cui adhaereo, praeest. From this maxim of State Q. Elizabeth, also his
Daughter, first assisted Henry the 4, which Mornay strongly pleaded to
Walsingham; and after when France was grown great, assisted these Provinces,
lest they should fall into the hands of France; as we have before shown out of
the best Historians of those times, Thuanus and Cambden, the latter whereof
after his declaring this reason of State in the place formentioned A. 1575,
afterward shows how this noble Heroine sat as the honorable Arbitratrix,
(holding the balance in her hands) between Spain, France, and these Low
Countries.

Sect. 13. The Conclusion of the whole Discourse.
I Have now done, and it is high time, having been much larger then I intended
at first; allthough not so large by far, as I found, being once entered upon the
Argument, I might be. And yet, I hope, it will not be tedious to the Reader.
Inregard of the novelty of the matter, which though daily discourst of by many
yet never writ of by any. And in regard of the usefulnes thereof. For though
old men are apt to dote upon the brats of their brain, as well as their body:
Yet, if I be not deceived, this Discourse, may through Gods blessing, prove
isntrumental in begetting a better understanding between both Nations, (for
which end I have published it in both Languages) by showing them their
concernments, it being the Chariot of Intrest which all Princes and States
Jehu-like furiously drive; and also serve to clear up some State
Controversies, that are not easily discerned by vulgar eyes, to discover the
former and present state of affairs amongst us, and most parts of Europe, and
give a prospect through this intricate, dark, and cloudy War, with what hopes
we may have concerning its issue: And besides these things, I think the
clearnes of style, which I have used to deliver my mind in, may make it bes
nautious to some, who are apt to mind the swaddling cloths more then the Child.

I know medation betwixt men in passion is a very thankles office; and that the
freedom I have used, will both please and displease many sorts of men on all
sides; but yet when men's passions are allayed, I do not doubt but they will
think better of the honest designs of the Author. And yet I have endeavored
to give as little offense as I could possibly to any; but if any
notwithstanding count me their enemy, because I tell them the truth, I cannot
help it: for I never accounted them worthy to write, that are by ast with
fear, or favor and flattery. Yea, I persuade my self, that there is not any
ingenuous man, or brave Gentleman even of the French Nation, whose designs I
chiefly oppose; but they will acknowledge it lawful for an enemy, to fight
them with a pen as well as a pike, and that I am a very civil Adversary, having
both fairly fought them, and with their own weapons, having made use of their
Authors, and not ours, throughout my discourse.

I shall not now throw down the gantlet and make a challenge, yet if any
undertake to refute me concerning the intrest of these Countries, which I
think worthy answering, I shall not fail to do it. As for my Conjectures, I
both account and call them probable, and therefore being not positive and
dogmaticall in them, I leave them with their Reasons to the Reader to judge.
But if some passionate person thinks with railing at the French, English, or
the Author hereof, and carping at some particulars to refute me; I shall tell
them before hand I was never bred, to give any one ill language, and shall
only answer them with silence and contempt. Or if any well meaning scholar
that has read perhaps honest Keckermans, or some others learned Systema
Politicum; I shall only smile in my sleeve, having always accounted Book
policy alone, mere pedantry; and allthough no man valew's learning more then my
self, yet he must know men as well as books, and the world well, that will
write of these things. Yet if any will bring Reasons of State, and clearly
delivered, as I think I have done, and fairly ventilate my opinion, I shall
promise him as fair an Answer, for truth never feared a fair trial.

POSTSCRIPT.
It is necessary that I tell you, this work bath been long in the birth. I had
drawn up my thoughts on this subject the last year, and sent my Papers into
Holland to print; but my honest friends unacquainted with the Artifice of
Government, to nourish hopes in the greatest dangers (Hope being the miserable
man's God, as well as the presumptuous man's Devil) sent me word, of nothing but
peace, yet kept my Papers through curiosity, till I was forced to send my
servant for them. And baring got them, and contracted with a Printer here, He
was called out for a Soldjer, and go he must, and therefore the work must
stand. In the mean time two sorts of Papers came to mine hands, The Appeal;
which, though his design, in reference to England, be different from mine, yet
in reference to France, being much the same, I let pas for the present; and the
Chancellor of Englands speech, with his Defenda est Carthago, which whilst my
Printer after his return home is printing off this, I examined, according to
the Rules of Christian Charity, Common Equity, and State Policy; but that being
too large, I reserve it for an Appendix. In the mean time, though it be late
before this comes forth (the Month of April 73.) yet I hope better late then
never; and though no Printer well undertake it, because it is Paradoxical to
the common opinion of Peace, yet I have put it into the public Treasury for
good, at my own charge in both Languages; and though it cost me 100 l and none
consider me, or to use Solomon's phrase, Remember that poor man, in any kind,
not so much as to enquire after him, or return him thanks; yet it shall not
repent me for the good of both Nations, for which I intend it, and to whom I
wish a happy peace, and all prosperity.

FINIS.

