Fair-Play on both sides: OR, The surest way to HEAVEN.

DISCOVERED IN A DISPUTE BETWEEN A Roman Catholic, AND A PROTESTANT.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Head, at the Heart and Bible in Little-Brittain,
1666.

To my much esteemed Friend, Mr. J. L.
YOU will wonder, I am sure (considering my profession) to see me become a
Poet. And indeed I do almost marvel at my self, knowing my self to want the two
principal furtherances of Poetry; the one is Natures instinct, They say, Poeta
noscitur If a man be not as it were a Poet born, he shall never prove excellent
in that faculty.
which God in his holy providence has denied me: the other is, A certain
retired freedom from all such businesses which may breed destraction; Carmina
secessum scribentis and otia quae unt. Ovid. de. Trist.
which my public calling, besides private encomberances, will not afford me.
Yet notwithstanding, upon this present occasion, I have even forced my self to
this strait^r course of verse-making; though I know, that for my own ease
(having to deal in such a distempered and unruly subject) that less limited,
and freer kind of discourse, which Prose allows, had been more convenient,
because the Rules of Cadence and number (to which our English Poetry specially
is confined) do many times so streighten an unaccustomed Practitioner, that he
is in hazard, either of obscuring the sense (which in a matter of this nature
were something dangerous) or of marring the Verse (which to the apprehension of
every common conceit, were very ridiculous.) But howsoever I have erred in the
carriage of this Verse, I hope, to you and to others, whose favor, either
because of their judgment, or their honesty, I desire, this shall excuse me;
that meeting with our common Adversary (who appears sometime in shape of a
Statesman, debating of Titles, and commonwealth affairs, Witness the
Quodlibets, etc.
sometime as a Petitioner to the King and Parliament, At the Kings first
coming, and now since the Parliament.
sometime as a plausible Perswader, B^istows Motives, and Books of that nature.
sometime as a restorer of the holy Text, to the native purity thereof Rhem.
Test. and Grego. Martin.
sometime as a man of a very tender conscience, giving reasons why he cannot
come to our Assemblies, Howlet.
sometime as a Raylor at our Government, and an approver of our open enemies
The ward-word. Quo teneam vultus mutantem, Proted nodo?
that I say, meeting with this time-serving Proteus, in the fashion of a Rimer
or Balladins, and crept in (as the manner of false Brethren 1 is) Galat. 2.4.
Similes habet labra lactucas.
into ^oth the ha^ and (...) simple seduced; I have endeavored to make (...)
like the Lips (as the Proverb is) (...)sing, to (...) I am sure (without wilful
forsaking the plain truth of God, (...) I shall (...)

The service it (...) here (...) by (...), He confeseth he (...) Protestant.
is (...) though (...) say the truth it (...) through (...) yet set forth after
any good or (...) but it is even (...) of certain (...)egations (as to there
the ^avings and scraps of (...) other (...) order or proof (...) word of (...)
than Or^. Belike, the (...)rough for those for whom it was provided, as (...)
it is for those which turn their ears from the Truth, and are given unto
fables: 2 Timothy 4.4
and by some, upon my knowledge (to whom (...) me, God has sent strong
delusions, that they should believe (...)) ^. The^. 2.11.
it is highly magnified, as a special preservative against supposed Heresy,
and as a well-framed Sconce, which none of us all is able to overthrow.

In regard whereof, knowing my self (...) others, to contend earnestly for the
maintenance (...); Jude. 3.^2 1^
I have undertaken this which you here see, For my desire and true intent
therein, it is best known to him which sees in (...), Man. ^
and in his due time will make the counsels of all hearts manifest. 1 Cor. 4.^


Touching the thing it self, how it is, and how well it is, I submit it to the
sensure of the godly-wise, praying them, that with their favorable (if not
allowance, yet at least) connivance, it may pass to the use of those, to whom
it is intended: And among others, I have directed it especially to you, in part
of recompense for a great deal of kindness entreating you to entertain (...)
with the like measure of Love; wherein it is offered. And so ^ching God to fill
you with the fruits of Righteousness Phil. 1.11.
, I command you to his grace in Christ Jesus.

Your loving Friend, SAM. HIERON.
Modbury, Aug. 20. 1604.
FAIR PLAY: Or a Dispute between a PROTESTANT and a ROMAN CATHOLIC. Wherein
the true Religion is made clear to the meanest capacity.
Roman Catholick's Preface.
I Pray thee, Protestant, bear with me, Indeed a man had need to be very
patient that means to hear thee.

To ask thee Questions two or three:
And if an answer thou can make,
More of thy counsel I will take. Yet I fear, that though thou were brayed in a
Mortar with a Pestel, among Wheat, thy foolishness will not depart from thee,
Prove. 27.22.

Many sundry Sects appear,
Now in the world far and near,
The Calvinist, the Protestant,
The Zwinglian, the Puritant,
The Brownest, and the Family of Love,
And many more which I can prove,
And the Roman Faith truly,
Which you call Papistry.
And every one confess Jesu,
Saying that their Faith is true:
But amongst these, tell me how
The Truth from feigned lies to know.
All these in very deed,
Rehearse all Articles in the Creed;
And every one of them says,
That theirs is the Catholic Faith:
But this it is that I do seek, I believe, thou art one of those, which are
ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. Take
the Lanthorn which David used, and thou shall soon find the true Church, Psalm.
119.105.

To know the Church Catholic,
The Communion or Company
Of holy men in Unity.
Protestants Answer.
His Preface.
I May not (Papist) suffer thee,
Because thy Questions idle be:
And if my Counsel thou will take,
Then hear the answer I will make.
Thou tell of Sects that do appear,
And seem the truth glad to inquire:
But even in this I malice smell,
And see thy spiteful meaning well.
When thou these diverse Sects do name,
Thou would thereby our Church defame I have reason so to think, because the
multitude of supposed Sects amongst us, is a common imputation. See Brist.
Motives, page 10.

And make fools think that we them loved,
When as with us the are not approved.
We do not hang on Clavins sleeve,
Nor yet on Zwinglius we believe:
And Puritans we do desie,
If right the name you do apply. Viz. If either by that name, are understood
those ancient Heretics, called Cathari, who dreamed of a state of perfection
in this life, (so as Papists also do) or else such factious ones among us,
which have sought the spoil and havoc of the Church.

All giddy Sects among us crept,
We wish out of our Church were swept:
No name do we delight in more,
Then that at Antioch given of yore. Christians. Acts 11.26.

But now what Sects you Papists have,
I do but thy own witness crave:
Some Capucines, some Franciscans,
And some be called Dominicans:
Some Jesuits, some Seculars, The emulation and difference betwixt these two
their Quodlibets do show.

Some gray, some black, some white Friars:
And that your store may not be spent,
New Locusts still from Hell are sent. Rev. 9.3. Those Locusts do well
represent the Popes Clergy: they were bred of the smoke of the pit, so are
these of Heresy, Ignorance and Superstition: they destroy the fruits of the
earth; so these spoil the Church.

Thou say, thou would the Church find out:
So that I see thou art in doubt:
And so indeed Uncertainty
Is still the fruit of Popery.
Popish Rhyme.
Catholic.
IN your Bible I have read,
The Church must through the world be spread:
For Christ he his Apostles sent,
With Power and Commandment,
That to all Nations they should go,
To Preach, and to Baptize also.
Who has done this? to know I wish:
For that is sure the Church of Christ. I hope thou will not say that Rome has
done this: the charge was given and undertaken before Rome was converted.

And for example, let me know,
And if thou can, I pray thee show,
What Church did take in hand
The first conversion of this Land. The Apostles Church, for ought you can
prove to the contrary.

And all other Countries every where,
Throughout the world far and near; Who but a Papist would dare to say this?

If this were not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon. You build your faith upon a very sure ground.

Saint Paul in his Epistle says, Did Paul say that Rome shall never deny the
Faith?

The Romans had the Catholic Faith,
Saying it was renowned,
Spoken of, or published,
Through the world over all,
Catholic, Universal:
And if your Churches were even so Our Church is a part of the Catholic
Church: disprove it if you can.

Then to your Churches I would go. You may come to our Churches; the Pope
gives you leave, so that you keep your hearts to him.

Protestants Answer.
Catholic.
IN our Bible thou have read:
It Is well in ours, for yours is fled,
And lurketh in a tongue unused,
Whereby poor people are abused.
The Church is Catholic, as you say,
And so say we: but why The reason why the Church is called Catholic.
I pray?
Because to it, it were disgrace,
To limit it to time or place.
It ever was, and so shall be,
Since Christ, excluding no degree: Col. 3.11. Acts 10.34, 35.

It once was tied unto the Jews,
But now no place Austine says it is Catholic, because spread over the world,
Ep. 170. and thereto agrees the Scripture, Acts 1.8.
it does refuse.
It is a very fond surmise,
Which you the Papist do devise,
To shut the Church within Romes wall,
And yet to call it general. Catholic and general are all one; and therefore
one of their own Councels says, The Roman Church is not the Universal Church,
but of the Universal Church, Basil. Con. sy. 3.

The very name which you pretend,
Whereby your Church you would defend,
To all which do the meaning know,
Does quite your fancy overthrow.
You say, the charge, which Christ once gave,
The Romists well performed have:
But mark how thou thy self do hurt,
And lay Romes honor in the dirt.
That charge Viz. of preaching through the world.
was given first to them,
Which lived at Jerusalem, The Apostles, Mat. 28. Acts 1.

And thence the Gospel issued out, Acts 8.1.

As Esaias told Isa. 2.3.
the world throughout.
By them the Nations turned were, We read in Histories, as in Eusebius and
others, how the Apostles divided themselves into all the quarters of the world.

And thence of Christ Rome first did hear:
Yet now the place Jerusalem.
which others called,
To Turkish Empire is enthralled.
So though it were true, which is not so,
And never shall be proved I know,
That Rome to Christ the Nations brought,
Yet this your reason were stark naught.
But now (perhaps) Rome does, you will say,
Bring home the wanderers to the way.
Indeed the Spaniards loving Gold,
Have brought the Indians to your fold.
The Frogs from Euphrates came out, Euphrates was a great river running near
the old Babylon in Chaldea, and was the defense of the City. Cyrus and Darius
could never take the City, until by policy they dried up the River. Now in a
spiritual sense, it does signify the honor, wealth and authority of Rome,
which has of latter years decayed excedingly, and does daily; and the frogs,
mentioned in Apoc. 16.13. do well resemble the Jesuits, who feeling Euphrates
to dry up, bestir themselves, and are croaking like Frogs in every corner,
laboring to maintain the Popes Authority.

I mean, the Jesuited Rout,
Do spread themselves in each country,
To draw men to disloyalty.
They counsel Subjects kill their Kings,
Stabbings they use, and poysonings. Our Country and times afford store of
examples to prove this.

Christ gave no such commandment,
When first he his Disciples sent.
Of this conversion if you boast,
Whereby poor souls, Hell has engrost,
I yield it you full willingly,
It well agrees with Popery.
To draw Disciples is no mark,
For so does many a feigned Clark. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Acts 20.30.

The Church to truth which does convert,
We do embrace with all our heart.
Thou say, Romes Faith once over all
The world was famous (so says Paul) Romans 1.8.

And Rome did first convert our Land,
And hereupon you greatly stand.
Romes faith indeed once bare the bell,
And so it did deserve it well:
But Rome's not now as heretofore;
That faithful Citie's made a Whore. Isa. 1.21. So it was said of Jerusalem,
which had more excellent particular promises, then Rome can allege any.

If new Rome now, were as the old,
Then we with Romanists would hold.
If Rome become Christ's enemy,
Then we from Babylon must fly. Apoc. 18.4.

To say that Rome is therefore sound,
Because of old it was renownd,
It may a Papist satisfy:
But men of judgment it deny.
Paul never Rome did magnify,
As he did those of Thessaly: See 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Yet now that Church is clean defaced,
And there the Turk himself has placed.
The Asian Churches, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia,
Laodicea, Apoc. 1.11.
famous once,
Are turned to a heap of stones.
The golden lights Those seven Churches were represented by seven golden
Candlesticks, Apoc. 1.20.
of Saint John's age,
Are now become even Satan's cage.
Prove thou, that Rome has not declind
From the ancient Church by Paul's resind:
And then I Will say, thou have done more
Then ever Papist did before.
But for first turning of our Nation,
I trow thou nam'st it but for fashion:
For they that look in History,
Thereof can find no certainty.
Simon Zelotes, as some say Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40.

Did first Christ's Gospel here display,
Even whilst that Emperor did reign,
By whom our Savior Christ was slain. Gildas Lib. de victoria Aurelii.
Ambrosii.

Some say, that he of Arimathy Joseph who buried Christ.

In the year of grace sixty three,
From France by Philip Philip the Apostle.
was sent over,
To us the faith for to discover. So says Gildas also.

Hereto agrees a learned man,
That ancient Clark Tertullian,
That by the Apostles, Britany
Was turned to Christianity. Tertul. in his book against the Jews, amongst
other places converted by the Apostles, reckons diverse parts of France and
Britain: So does Origin, Hom. 4. upon Ezechiel.

Pope Elutherius long ago About the year of Christ, 180.

As his Epistle plain did show This Epistle has been found, out of the ancient
Records of the Kings of England.

Unto King Lucius hither sent,
Ere Ethelbert was king of Kent. Which was about 600. years after Christ.

We hold the faith that then was taught,
But you the same do set at naught: Eleutherius referred King Lucius to the
Scriptures, clean against the Papists course now, and called him Gods Vicar in
his kingdom: which title the Pope alone does now challenge.

When Rome the Truth does once forsake,
Then we of Rome our leaves must take.
If that our Church were Catholic,
To come to Church thou would not stick.
If of the word thou knewst the sense,
Thou soon would leave that fond pretense.
Our Church that truth does firm embrace,
Which all those hold in every place,
Who leaving men's traditions clean,
Upon the Scriptures only lean. That is truly Catholic which every where,
always, and by all ( viz. true Christians) is believed, Vincen. cont. Haer. c.
3. Let Papists prove, that the word Catholic being taken in that sense, ours
is not a Catholic Church.

Popish Rhyme.
Prophets.
SO says the Prophet Malachy,
There should be offered far and nigh,
A clean Oblation or Sacrifice When you read Altar and Sacrifice, you think
straight that makes for Mass, not knowing, or not seeming to know the language
of the Scripture.

From place where now the Sun does rise,
To the going down of the same:
And what is that, I pray thee name?
If it be not the holy Mass,
I will be a Protestant as I was. If thou had been of us, thou would have
continued with us, 1 John 2.19.

In the eighteenth Psalm I found,
The whole world should hear their sound: Namely, of the Apostles, and their
Doctrine: prove our Doctrine to disagree with theirs.

And if this mark you do not want,
Presently I will recant.
Protestants Answer.
Prophets.
THou cit'st a text of Malachy, Mal. 1.11.

Hoping to prove thy Mass thereby,
Alas, the reason is but small,
And helps that Idol not at all.
In it God threatens the Jews, The opening of the place of Malachy.

Who their great privilege did abuse,
And thought the Lord was tied to them,
And unto their Jerusalem.
The Prophet tells, that God elsewhere
Will find out those, which shall him fear,
And in an order without blame,
Shall call upon his holy Name.
Speaking to their capacity,
The Legal terms he does apply: So Joel 2.28. The holy Ghost foretelling the
Spiritual enlightening which the people shall have under Christ, does deliver it
under the names of Visions and Dreams: which notwithstanding were not ordinary
in the times of the Gospel.

And calls our Gospel like Service,
A pure and spotless Pure in Christ, being accepted of God through him, 1 Pet.
2.5.
Sacrifice.
What ground is here then for the Mass?
It still remains, as it was,
A gross device, defaming Christ,
Who is our true and only Priest. See more of this hereafter, in speaking more
directly of the Mass.

The speech of David of the Skies, Psalm. 19.3. But according to their account,
Psalm. 18.

Into the Apostles, Paul applies, Romans 10.18.

And says, their sound went far and near,
As in the stories does appear.
Tell me, I pray, what good to you,
This place you have alleged can do?
It makes naught for Popery,
Or for your idle trumpery.
Indeed the infamous Fame is spread,
Of Antichrist your hideous head,
And all God's Children him do see,
The man of sin 2 These. 2.3.
alone to be.
The Apostles Faith was far dispersed,
And here in England was rehearst.
^ith then our Doctrine is the same,
^o it belongs part of their fame.
Popish Rhyme.
Continuance.
THis is another mark most sure,
The Faith of Christ must still endure, Christ's Faith must endure, therefore
Rome is the true Church. A hot argument; as though the Christian Faith could
endure no where but at Rome.

According as our Savior said,
When for Saint Peter he had prayed;
Simon, thy faith shall never fail,
The gates of Hell shall not prevail, True, the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church of Christ: but Christ in despite of the Devil will have a
Church upon earth: what makes this for Rome?

The holy Ghost your comforter,
Shall remain with you for ever.
And I my self, your surest friend,
Will be with you unto the end.
Saint Paul has the like speech,
There shall be always men to preach:
Apostles Some say they are Apostles, and are not, Rev. 2.2.
Doctors, and the like,
In the Church Catholic:
If this be not the Church of Rome Because you say it, we are bound to believe
it.

Then will I be converted soon.
Protestants Answer.
Continuance.
YOu say, Christ's faith must still endure,
I yield that nothing is more sure:
And always God a Church will have,
Though thereat Satan rage and rave, Mat. 16.18. And that is the uttermost
which can be collected out of that place.

It glads my heart, that Christ has praid;
Thereby I know my Faith is staid: Luke 22.32. Christ's prayer there belongs to
all believers as well as to Saint Peter, John 17.20.

The comfort of Gods holy Sp'rit,
Is each good Christians sole delight.
This proves, there still a Church shall be,
And herein thou and I agree:
To prove the Church tied to one Sea,
Requires yet a better Plea.
The Faith of Christ may still abide,
Though Rome should into Tibur slide:
Gods Spirit is free, and is not bound John 3.8.

Within the lists of Romish ground.
When thou can prove by holy writ,
Christ's Faith to Rome by charter knit,
Then shall thy tale some credit find,
Where now it turns all to wind.
But yet continuance is a Note
Of Gods true Church: and Paul has wro^
Ephesians. 4.11, etc.
That there should still some teachers be:
In some we this fulfilled see.
I say, continuance is no sign,
To prove a Church to be divine;
We may not think each Doctrine sure,
Which does for many years endure. It is true, that the truth shall continue;
but yet it holds not backward, that whatsoever continues is Truth. The Devil
is a liar from the beginning

Must not the tares be let to grow,
Till it be time the corn to mow? Mat. 13.10.

And Antichrist shall long time stay,
Even till the very Judgment day. 2 These. 2.8.

The Arrian heresy years did stand,
Two hundred more than one thousand: Yea, and it was so generally received,
that it was said, the whole world was become an Arrian. Hierom. dialog. contra
Luciferianos.

And so since Mahomet first was seen,
A thousand years have numbered been.
Romes name endures, but Rome is changed,
And has from Christ it self estranged:
Quit thou Rome from Apostasy,
Or name not Perpetuity.
Paul's words do prove, Ephesians. 4.11, etc.
that certainly
The Church shall have a Ministry:
And that there shall be some to feed
The Flock of Christ at every need:
But that these Pastors here or there,
Shall always fit in beauty clear,
This fond conceit, not one more word,
The holy Scripture does afford.
Indeed in Rome there diverse be,
That bear the name of Prelacie:
Better we Pilates may them call,
Seeking the Churches Funeral.
You call your Pope a Shepherd great;
But where is his Spiritual meat?
I do not hear that he does preach:
That would his greatness much impeach.
Such are his carnal Cardinals,
Or rather bloody Canibals. The People that live upon man's flesh.

They eat the fat, and skin the Flock,
And live upon the Churches stock.
An idle sign, a Shepherds Crook
In hand they bear The Pastoral staff, made in fashion of a Shepherds crook.
but cannot brook
To preach the Word (a Pastors grace)
That duty fits not their high place.
The key of knowledge they withdraw, Luke 11.52.

And from Gods people steal Jerem. 23.30.
Gods Law,
And men's devices They teach Traditions to be equally reverenced as the
Scriptures, Conc. Trid. ses. 4. dec. and Lidanus calls them the foundation of
Faith, Panopl. lib. 5. cap. 2.
on them thrust,
Making them unto fancies trust.
These are Romes Pastors: woeful sheep,
Which left are to the Wolves to keep.
Thou Shepherd great and Bishop chief, 1 Pet. 2.25. and 4.5.

Come quickly Rev. 22.20.
quell this Romish thief.
Papists Rhyme.
Visible.
ANother mark there is most clear,
The Church of God must still appear,
As a City on a hill, Some wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3.16. Take heed.

Seen and continue still,
As a light on a Candlestick,
So is the Church Catholic:
Our Savior says, if one offend,
And will not be ruled by his friend,
Tell all the Church without delay: Would you have us go to Rome with every
complaint? It seems so; for you tie the Church to that Sea.

And if he will not then obey,
Do thou esteem such a man,
An Heathen or a Publican.
Is not that the Church, wherein we see
Two hundred Bishops thirty three,
To have succeeded each other,
Since the time of Saint Peter. You must first prove that Saint Peter was
Bishop of Rome.

Show me this mark in you, Thou thy self say, there have been successively
63. Bishops in England since Peter: then either ours is the true Church, or
else succession of Bishops is no sure mark.

And I will say your faith is true:
If this be not in the faith of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Protestants Answer.
Visible.
THou tell a tale incredible,
How that God's Church is visible:
And by the Bishops Catalogue,
Would prove the Romish Synagogue.
The errors here together lapt,
By which the simple are entrapt,
All which your feigned Church does hold,
I mean in order to unfold.
The Catholic Church defined aright,
Cannot be subject to our sight:
It is the Elected company, 1 Pet. 2.9.

And Christ his chosen Family. Ephesians. 3.15.

Of this, one part in Heaven lives, Called the Church Triumphant.

The other here with Satan strives, Termed the Church Militant.

The part above (you will not deny)
With mortal eyes none can descry.
The same is true of that below,
It is unseen by us also:
How with mine eyes I might discern.
And see th Elect fain would I learn.
Upon their persons we may look,
Whose names are written in Gods Book: The Book of Life, Phil. 4.3.

But as for their Spiritual being,
It is a thing does pass our seeing.
Parts of Christ's Church, you Papists make
Even those whom God will quite forsake: So does Bellarmine, lib. 3. de Eccles.
cap. 7. and the Rhemists in their Annotations upon John 15.1.

Which if the matter be well scand,
Cannot with any Scripture stand.
Of the true Church Christ is the head, Ephesians. 1.22.

In him can be no member dead: They are called living stones, 1 Pet. 2.3.

His Church a Garden, Cant. 4.12.
closed well,
In which no Reprobates can dwell, So August. applies the place. Contra Cres.
Gram. lib. 2. cap. 26. and Gregory the great, who was a Bishop of Rome, in his
Commentary upon that place. Charitatis vallo circumquaque munitur, ne intra
numerum electorum reprobus aliquis ingreciatur.

So that, if fitly we will speak,
The ground you lay is very weak:
In calling it a mark most clear,
That Gods true Church must still appear.
Of Churches named in several,
In Cities, or else National,
We yield sometime they may be seen,
Though sometime they are darkened clean.
Sometime the Moon with cheerful light,
Shines in the height of Heaven bright: Aug. uses that similitude. Epist. 48
and Epist. 80. and Ambrose Hex. 4. C. 8. Ecclesia sicut luna defectus habet and
ortus frequentes.

Sometimes with clouds it is overspred,
And in the Wane clean vanished.
So is the Church in safety still,
Although not always visible:
Sometimes it sits in glory great,
Sometime it has no certain seat.
The Woman, which to Desert fled,
From Satan's rage to hide her head, Apoc. 12.6. So much also the Rhemists upon
that place do acknowledge.

By all the learned full consent,
The Church on earth does represent.
The famous Church of Israel,
Where God did promise still to dwell, Psalm. 132.14.

Was drowned so in Idolatry,
And superstitious slavery,
That all true worship being gone,
Elias thought himself alone: 1 Kings 19.10.

And when Christ comes to judge us all,
Then faith on earth shall be but small. Luke 18.8.

How is the Church a City then, Mat. 5.14.

Raised on a mount, and seen of men?
And how a light set up on high,
That all that will may it epsy?
How shall we to the Church complain, Mat. 18.17.

If of the Church no show remain?
This is thy Popish reasoning,
And Scriptures plain misconstruing.
The true meaning of those places.
Christ does the Apostles counsel give,
Soundly to preach, and well to live,
Because their places were in sight,
And 'twas their Office to give light.
They erring many might mislead,
Which in their steps might hap to tread:
If that their Doctrine were unsound,
In falsehood many might be drowned.
It was in vain for them to ween,
In doing ill not to be seen:
You are (says Christ) upon a Mount,
To be well marked make full account. Thus Chry. and Theophilact. expounded
this place, (...).

This shows wherein our duty stands,
And what God looks for at our hands,
Who called are to the Ministry,
To labor in God's Husbandry. 1 Cor. 3.9.

But from hence how may proved be
The Churches visibility?
This place affords a slender proof,
And little for the Popes behoof.
Yet you perhaps will urge it still,
The Pastors are set on a hill,
And called Light: even so say I,
But all men can them not descry.
For those which want spiritual eyes, Ephesians. 1.13.

Nor are by searching John 5.39.
Scripture-wise Ephesians. 5.15, 17.

This mounted City cannot see,
Nor where these lightsome Pastors be. This was the Answer of Aug. to the
Donatists. Tract. 1. in Epi. Johan.

Christ bids us we the Church should tell,
If things be not reformed well:
By Church, he means all such as be
Endued with Authority. The same which Paul calls Presbyterian, 1 Timothy 4.14.
The Eldership.

These Office-bearers all men see,
In times of settled Sovereignty:
Yea, and among themselves the are known, This answer the Papists cannot
mislike: for they make use of it for themselves. Rhem. in Apoc. 12.6. The error
of this Popish Argument.

When the outward state is overthrown.
When that was said in special,
You turn to Church in general:
Thereby you may deceive some fools;
But soon it will be seen in Schools.
This argument of outward state,
Which for a mark you intimate,
Against that thing does strongly make,
Which you to prove do undertake.
Romes state has sometimes been obscured,
And has disgraces foul endured:
Burnt By the Goths, 547.
sacked By Charles Duke of Burbon, in the days of Pope Clement the seventh,
whereupon was made t^ clause in the Letany, Sancta Maria, etc. O holy Mary,
pray for Pope Clement, etc.
some Popes imprisoned, John 14. Boniface 8. about the year 1304.

Some glad to fly John 17. fled to Hetruria.
some banished; Vigilius 18. and Gregory the ninth, about the year 1227.

Where did your glorious Church abide,
When Popes were glad themselves to hide?
Peace, peace, no more of this for shame:
Rome says you will her clean defame.
Succession.
Succession comes next in place,
Whereby thou seek'st thy Church to grace:
Your turn Succession cannot serve,
If from the Truth Succession swerve.
The Jewish Church from Aaron,
A just descent might stand upon,
Even when they crucified our Lord:
And hated all that loved his Word.
If we shall say, that Church was true,
Consisting of so vile a crew,
We cast Christ and the Apostles out,
Among the base and damned rout.
The Grecian Churches at this day,
For their defense as much can say: At Constantinople there has been a
perpetual succession from Saint Andrew. Nicep. At Alexandria from Saint Mark.

Yet you of them do give this doom,
That in Gods Church they have no room.
Yet if Succession were a sign,
Which your grand Captain Bellarmine
Dares not avouch, Bellarmine says, it follows negatively, that where there
is no succession, there is no Church: but not affirmatively, that where there
is succession, there is a Church. Lib. 4. de Eccl. cap. 8.
I fain would see,
How Rome can prove her pedigree.
You call your Church Saint Peter's Chair,
As though the Pope were Peter's Heir:
But if that ground we once deny,
What Papist can it verify?
You cannot prove by holy Writ,
Peter at Rome did Bishop sit:
The only place which you do name, 1 Pet. 4.13. The Rhemists say, that thereby
Babylon is meaned Rome, and so they confess Rome to be Babylon.

Returns to your greatest shame.
The things you fetch from History,
Touching this point, do not agree, Orosius says, Peter came to Rome in the
beginning of Claudius reign; Hierom in the 2d. year, others in the 4th. year,
other the 13. year. Damasus says, he came thither in Neroes reign; so that
there is no certainty in that which they make an undoubted principle.

And what our part has herein sed,
By Papists stands unanswered.
But if he Bishop were indeed,
Tell me who next did him succeed:
Some Clement The Popes decrees hold so.
and some, Linus hold. Dorotheus, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.

Thus your succession is controlled.
Once was a Pope supposed a man, John 8. Platina, The woman's name was
Gilbertia, a Dutch woman of Burguntium.

But proved in time a Curtezan.
Then either your Succession shrank,
Or you must put her in the rank.
When Popes there were, some 2. Two Popes together, Anno 1083. Anno 1058. and
1062.
or 3. Bened. 9. Silvest. 3. Greg. 6. all at one time; and at another time.
Ben. 1. a Spanish Pope. Greg. 12. a French Pope, and John 23. an Italian Pope.

Where then might your succession be?
One Schism held almost forty year, 39. years.

Pope against Pope, as does appear. Let their own Authors speak.

One Council The Council of Constance.
did these Popes put down,
And to another gave the Crown:
When these false Popes the place possessed,
I think you will say Succession ceast.
Popish Rhyme.
Unity.
ANother mark there is truly,
The Church must have Unity,
As our Savior has foretold,
One Shepherd and one fold:
One is my Spouse, one is my Love,
One is my Darling and my Dove.
This is his Spouse, and at some time,
He does resemble it to a Vine:
His Father is the Husbandman,
A Branch is every Christian.
This is his Body Mystical,
The which he does his Kingdom call:
Whereof Saint Peter had the Keys, What became of the Keys, when Pope Julius
the second threw them into Tyber?

And his Successors have always: As though no body did succeed Peter, but the
Pope, who is rather the successor of Romulus then Peter; as Pope Hadrian the
fourth said when he died.

And likewise Saint Paul says,
One Baptism, and one Faith.
And one Lord Jesu:
Have no dissension among you.
If this be not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Protestants Answer.
Unity.
It Is true, Christ's Church is always one,
Tied unto him as head alone:
The parts thereof do well agree, Acts 4.23.

Like Children of one Family.
But yet not every company,
Together linked in Unity,
Must by and by be called good,
If truth by them shall be withstood.
To make a Calf they all agreed, Exodus 32.1,

All cried, Let Christ be Crucified: Mat. 27.22.

Great is Diana, with a shout,
At once the people all cried out. Acts 19.34.

John said, they should yield to the Beast,
Even from the greatest to the least. Apoc. 13.16.

As Christ his City is but one,
So is the Devils Babylon, Ut est Dei una Ecclesia, sic est Diaboli una
Babylon. Aug. de Civit. Dei.

The best sometimes do disagree, Peter and Paul, Gal. 2.11. Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 15.39. Chrysostom. Theophilact, and Epiphanius, Augustine and Hierom, Cyril
and Theodoret.

Each man has his infirmity:
Better the discord bringing light,
Then is agreement without right. (...), Nazienz. Oratione prima de pace.

Yet by this mark, if Rome be tried,
It will fall hard upon your side:
Your joynt-consent, we cannot find,
Nor that you all are of one mind.
If we shall credit History,
You cannot brag of Unity:
Where twenty several Schisms have been Genebrardus in Chro.

What harmony may there be seen?
The laws which one determines,
The Pope that follows cancelleth: Stephen 6. abrogated all his predecessors
decrees. Formosius took up his body, cut two fingers of his right hand off, and
buried him again.

Yet things by him abolished,
By next Popes are established. The following Popes, Theodor. 2. Romanus, John
10. confirmed all Formosus his Acts.

And yet another After all, Pope Sergius disanulled their Acts, took up
Formosius his body, and cast it into Tyber, Ex Polychron.
comes behind,
Who with the former fault does find,
And all which they did quite displace,
Reduces to the former grace.
Thus one sage Council does decree,
Another says it may not be: The first Nicene Council allowed Priests
marriage, and the Communion in both kinds. The Councils of Constance and Basil,
forbad the Laity the use of the Cup. The Council of Trent forbids both the
Cup to the Laity, and marriage to the Clergy. The third Council of Cartharge
pronounced him accursed; and called him the forerunner of Antichrist,
whosoever should rearm himself Universal Bishop: but now the Council of Trent
curses him who shall deny the Pope of Rome to be the head Bishop of the world.
The general Council of Constantinople overthrew Images: The second Nicene
Council decreed them to be worshipped. Again, the Council of Frankfort, under
Charles the Great, determines it to be Idolatry, and accurseth the Nicene
Council. Many the like differences might be alleged.

That which one Sect In Anno 1476. there was a great controversy betwixt the
Franciscanes and Dominicanes, touching the conception of the Virgin Mary,
whether she were conceived in sin or not; the Dominicanes held she was, the
Franciscanes the contrary: but Pope Xystus the 4. joining with the
Franciscanes, four of the other were condemned and burned at Rome.
or Author likes, Alph. de Castro. lib. 1. cap. 6. holds the Pope inferior to
the Council. The opinion of all the Jesuits at this day is, that he is above
the Council. About the Eucharist, they have a world of differences amongst
themselves; as whether Christ did consecrate when he blessed the bread and
wine: or when he said, This is my Body, whether so much bread as is taken only
be consecrated: whether the substance of the bread be turned to nothing, or
changed into the substance of Christ: whether there be a bodily motion in the
Sacrament: whether the body of Christ in the Sacrament can be touched: how the
accidents in the Sacraments are without a subject: whether the accidents can be
broken: whether they can nourish: whether the water mingled with the wine, be
turned into Christ's blood: Whence come worms in the Host?

The same another clean out-strikes.
I know you Papists do agree
To work the Churches misery:
So Herod was made He that would know the differences betwixt the Thomists,
Scotists, and Occamists, let him read Eras. L contra Latomum, Luke 23.12.
Pilates friend,
To bring our Savior to his end.
Some yield, as fearing to resist,
(Such is the power of Antichrist)
You may not call this Unity,
But rather public Tyranny.
Some join, because they do not see
The very depth of Popery:
To build upon the Church Belief,
Of Lay Religion is the brief.
Some for their ease and Bellies sake,
Do to your Church themselves betake:
As Monks, and such as loytring love,
Whom none but Romists can approve.
This is your Romish Concordance,
Among your selves at variance:
Though all for some respects are led,
To meet together in one Head.
In one point more, I needs must stay,
Though named of you but by the way;
Lest with a phrase of Peter's Keys,
You dazzle should the Peoples eyes.
By Keys, is meant the power to preach,
And in Gods truth the Church to teach: Luke 11.52.

By it Viz. Preaching.
Heaven's opened to receive
All those which truly do believe.
It is the power to loose and tie,
Which Christ gave to the Ministry; Therefore Ministers are said both to have
the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.8. and the Ministry of Vengeance
against disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6.

It was intended unto all, Our Lord, in the person of one, gave the Keys to
all, to show the unity of all, Cyp. de simp. Prelatorum: and Leo a Bishop of
Rome, is of the same judgment, In Sermon de Nativitate.

Though spoke to one in several.
When to Believers we give Hope,
Then is the Gate of Heaven set open:
When Mercies Promise is repealed,
Then by the Keys that Gate is sealed. To bind and loose, is no other thing,
but to declare Gods sentence, Hieror. in Mat. 16.

When Peter did his Faith confess,
The Apostles (by) did mean no less:
And that which Christ to Peter spoke, Austin says, he answered for all, Hom.
in Joh. 66.9. and elsewhere often: unus pro multis respondit, one made answer
for all: and Lyranus, Confessio Petri, erat confessio aliorum.

We may not from the other take. Cuncti claves Regni, etc. All receive the Keys
of Heaven. Hier. lib. 1. adversus Jovi.

Each true and faithful Minister,
Is Peter's rightful Successor:
Then speak no more of Peter's Keys,
Except the art sworn the Pope to please.
Popish Rhyme.
Holy.
THis you say in very deed,
When you rehearse the Holy Creed, So you say in the Creed, that Christ sits
at the right hand of God: and yet you say also, he is in body present at the
Mass.

One Church Catholic,
Holy and Apostolic.
This is another mark truly,
The Church of God must be holy:
Holy Men, Holy Service,
Ceremonies, Sacrifice:
Sacraments and holy Days,
Are observed in her always:
As for the Saints and Martyrs all,
And Virgins, which you Saints do call,
I ask you when they lived, and where,
Whose names are in your Calendar?
In what Religion they died,
By whom they were Canonized? Who made the Pope a Saint-maker?

Prove that these agree with you;
And I will say your Faith is true:
If they were not your Company, You stand so much upon company, that you will
rather go to the Devil, then want company.

Then is your Faith an Heresy.
Protestants Answer.
Holy.
THou say the Church we Holy call,
And so we do acknowledge all:
What in the Creed our Mouths confess,
Our Hearts within believe no less.
The Purity, decayed before, By Adams fall.

Unto his Church Christ does restore.
That which is here in less degree,
The same in Heaven shall perfect be.
If thou knew'st Romes Impurity,
Thou would nor brag of Sanctity:
A sink of Sin, a Sea of Evil,
A place possessed of the Devil. Gallus Senonensis, wrote above 400. years
ago, that Satan was let loose at Rome to destroy the Church. Tho. Becket a
Romish Saint, acknowledged the common proverb to be true, That there is no
right at Rome. The Bishop of Worster, a Papist, told Philpot, That he thought,
the wickedness he saw in Rome made him an Heretic.

Your Popes bear Names of Holiness,
But none more full of Wickedness:
Let Stories speak, enquire of them,
What Popes have worn the Diadem:
Some Heretics, Marcellinus, Pope, sacrificed to the Idols of the Panims:
Platin. and Volater. Liberius Pope, an Arian. Plat. and Hiero. in Catal. scrip.
Eccl. and in Chro. Anact. 2. Pope, an Acatian. Plat. Vigilius an Eutychian.
Liber in breviatio: Honorius, a Monothelite, condemned by the Roman Council
under Adrian 2.
some Murderers, Pope Alexander 6. poisoned Gemes the Great Turks brother,
committed to his custody, Hiero. Maurius, Munst. lib. 4. Cosm. Pope Hildebrand
hired one to kill the Emperor: Benno Cardinalis.

Incestuous some, John 13. Pope committed incest with his two sisters:
Luithbrand, lib. 6 He was wounded in adultery, Platina. Alexander 6. lay with
his own daughter. Vol.
some Sorcerers: Hildebrand: so says Benno the Card. Pope Silvester 2. gave
himself to the Devil to be Pope. Pla. Joannes Stella: many others were
Magicians, as John 21. Benedict. 9. etc.

Some noted for their cruelty, Pope Alexander 6. cut off the hands and feet of
one Mancinellus, because he wrote against his filthiness: Joh. 13 cut off the
hands and noses of diverse Cardinals, Plat.

Some for their monstrous Blasphemy. Pope Hildebrand threw the Sacrament into
the fire. Benno. Card. Joh. 22. derided the Gospel; held the souls to be
mortal, and was therefore by the Council of Constance, 1. 2. ses. 11. called a
Devil Incarnate. Leo 10. writing to Cardinal Bembus, calls the story of
Christ, a Fable, Joh. 13. called the Devil to help him at Dice, and drank to
him, Luithp. lib 6.

One Pope Pope Sergius 3.
a famous Lemman kept,
Whose Bastard to the Popedom crept: Joh. 11. or as some count, Joh. 12. see
Plat. and Luithprand.

Another granted liberty
To practice beastly Sodomy. Sixtus 4. Granted liberty to the whole family of
the Cardinal of St. Lucy in the three hot months, June, July, August, to use
Sodomit^y. Wesellus Groningensis, in a Treatise, de Indulg. Papalibus, at the
foot of the License was written, Fiat ut petitur, Be it as it is requested.

Who but the Pope receives Rent,
Which from the Stews to him is sent? Every common Harlor in Rome paid a Fee to
Pope Sixtus 4. Agrippa in his declam. ad Lovan.

Let Rome and Venice make Report,
And all that thither do resort.
Who has in Meter vile expressed
The sin which Nature does detest?
Let Beneventum name the man: The Archbishop of Beneventum, Johannes a Casa,
Dean of the Popes Chamber, used Sodomy, and commended it in Italian Meter: the
book was printed in Venice, by Trojanus Nauus: see the writing of Paulus
Vergerius against this Archbishop.

Do thou disprove it, if thou can.
If this among your Heads be found,
How shall we think the Members sound?
Lord, bless us from such holy Popes;
And, Lord, make void all Popish Hopes. Marozia, Wife to Guido.

Like to your Popes your Service is, Holy Service.

Wanting no store of blasphemies:
Which, lest the People should espy,
You hide in Latin secrecy.
I need no better Witnesses
Then your allowed Portesses,
Your Missals, and your Letanies,
And all your forged Psalteries.
What we to God alone must give,
That to the Saints you do derive:
God will not from his Glory part, Isa 48.11.

Yet you to Creatures it convert:
Unto the Saints you prayers make, There is neither commandment in the
Scripture, that we should pray to Saint, nor promise that if we do pray to them
we shall be heard: upon which 2. every lawful prayer must be built.

And beg Salvation for their sake: In their prayers upon the Sts. days, still
those words come in, that by their merits we may have profit, by their requests
we may be delivered, etc. And Lombard says, the Saints do juvare nos merito,
lib. 4. did. 45. d. 10.

You do adore a piece of Bread, When it is carried in procession: for though it
were true, that the bread in the Sacrament is turned into the Body of Christ,
yet the Sacrament being ended, it must needs return to the former nature

And make fond They are fond, because touching the estate of the dead, there is
no certainty.
prayers for the dead.
You kneel down to a Cross of Wood, All hail, O Cross, our only hope, etc.
increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty, In
breviario infra, Heb. 4. Quad.

Thinking thereby to purchase good:
And for some things you would have done,
You pray the Virgin charge her Son. Roga patrem, jube natum; jure matris
impera, Pray the Father, charge thy Son, command by the right of a Mother; In
officio beatae Mariae.

With Christ you do Saint Francis join, They say, that St. Francis could save
all that shall live after him to the end of the world, through his merits, from
everlasting death Flos. beati Francis. Conformit, s. Fram Tho. lib. 4 did. 4.
art. 3.

And so his Glory do purloyn:
One Mediator we do know, 1 Timothy 2.5. That place proves, that there is but one
Mediator, as well as that there is but one God.

You have joined with him many mo: The form of Absolution to Penitentiaries
runs thus: The passion of Christ, and the merits of the blessed Virgin, of
Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, and of other he and she Saints, be unto thee in
remission of sins.

We do the Virgin Blessed call, Luke 1.48.

And say she passed Women all:
But when you call her Gate of Grace, Coeli fenestra: Regis alti janua, etc.

We say Christ's honor you deface.
The thing that made her Spirit glad,
Was, that she such a Savior had: Luke 1.47:

Can she on him commandment have,
Whose help she needed her to save?
What honor is due to the Saints.
This honor to the Saints we give,
We crave Gods grace like them to live: 1 Cor. 11.1.

We care to keep their memory, Heb. 13.7.

And God in them we glorify. Gal. 1.23.

Holy Ceremonies. Whosoever reads the Canon of the Mass, shall there see a world
of idle and ridiculous ceremonies.
Your Ceremonies idle be,
And favor most of vanity:
You stand so much on outward show,
That you the substance overthrow.
With Images and Pictures gay,
You steal the Peoples hearts away:
Well may you please the outward eye,
The spirit you do not edify.
A pretty play, to see a Priest
Tossing his God between his fist:
Such gestures, and such apish mowes,
Such warbling, and such antic shows;
Now bends, now ducks, now stands upright,
Then turns him to the Peoples sight:
Now sighs, now twenty Crosses makes,
And ore his head the Wafer shakes:
Then washes, then the Chalice licks,
And shuts his Idol in the Pix:
But still the man is much afeard,
Lest ought should hang upon his Beard.
Mean while the Vulgar in a maze,
Upon the Caky Idol gaze,
And knock and kneel, and think them well,
That they have heard the sacring Bell.
Tell me, I pray thee, does God will,
With such fond Rites his Church to fill?
They never came into his thought; Jerem. 19.5.

Tradition only has them brought. They say indeed, that they have the form of
the Mass, by the Tradition of the Apostles. Rhem. 1 Cor. 11. s. 22 but the
truth is, that it was now a piece and then a piece, patched up by their own
Popes. Sixtus 2. brought in the Sanctus. Innocentius 1. the Pax. Leo 1. added
this clause (A holy Sacrifice and unbloody Host:) Gelasius, the Prefaces,
Collects, Gradualls. Symmachus the Gloria in excelsis. Agapetus 1. Processions.
Pelagius 2. nine Prefaces before the Canon. Sergius 1. Agnus Dei: and Gregory
1. confesses, that one Scolasticus made most part of the Canon; Holy Mass or
Sacrifice.

Your Rites and Mass do well agree,
Both full of gross Idolatry:
Both are unholy and unsound,
Both wanting holy Scripture-ground.
You say that in the Eucharist,
To God is offered by the Priest,
A Sacrifice in Wine and Bread, Rhem. Heb. 7. sect. 8. Council. Trident. ses.
22. cap. 1.

Both for the living and the dead. Conc. Trid. ses. 22. cap. 2.

Look first what Christ did institute, Mat. 26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.24.

And that one place shall you refute:
What he did, we must do likewise; This do ye, 1 Cor. 11.25.

There Is no word of a Sacrifice.
By this (said Christ) Remember me:
That shows he would not present be: Bodily.

We keep such things in memory,
Which we behold not really.
The Priests of old did every day
Some Offering on the Altar lay. Heb. 10.11.

Christ's holy Offering is but one,
Performed by himself alone. Heb. 10.12.

If Christ shall often offered be,
We shall his sufferings multiply:
As on the Cross he died not twice,
So there is no second Sacrifice: Heb. 9.25. to 28.

There Is now no sacrificing, Priest,
That Office rested upon Christ: Heb. 7.23, 24

It comes to none successively,
It Is his for all Eternity. The office of a Priest, so far forth as we
understand thereby a Sacrificer, whom the Grecians call Hiereus, belongs only
to Christ, and cannot pass from him to another, neither the name of Priest in
that sense, but as the name of Priest comes from the Greek word Presbyteros,
which signifies an Elder, it cannot simply be misliked.

How can a Mass a pardon bring,
Since it is a bloodless Offering? Heb. 9.22.

Christ has procured Remission: Heb. 9.12.

What needs a new Oblation? Heb. 10.18.

See then your holy Sacrifice,
A thing without all warrantize:
Of Scriptures, or of Writers sage,
Which lived in the purest Age. The Mass, as it is now, was not in use in the
Church, 1200. years after Christ: It never came to the full perfection (though
it was in hatching before) until the Council of Lateran, under Inno. 3.

The Sacraments Holy Sacraments.
in number twain,
You eek't have with a longer train:
The seven-headed Romish Beast, Revel. 17.7.

The two to seven has increased.
Both Baptism, Mat. 28.19.
and that holy feast, 1 Col. 11.24. etc.

Commanded are by Christ's beheast:
Show me but one commandment
To prove another Sacrament. No Father within an 100. year after Christ,
acknowledged seven Sacraments of the New Testament: And Augustine says, The
Sacraments are, Numero paucissima, fewest in number, Ep. 118. Now, two is the
least number.

Two in the Old, Viz. Ordinary.
two in the New,
So shall we have proportion true:
Name what in the ancient Viz. The form of Gods worship under the Law.
Liturgy,
Your five false Symboles do supply. The Sacraments of the New Testament.
succeed the Sacraments of the Old: if then they can name no Sacraments of the
Old Testament, in the place whereof their five supposed Sacraments should come,
then they cannot justify them to be Sacraments.

Those Sacraments which holy be,
You stained have with your Pedlary:
In Baptism, Oil, Lights, Spittle, Cream,
Your Exorcism, and conjured Stream;
Were these invented by Gods Spirit?
Or found you them in holy Writ?
Whence had you all that rituous store
Used in the Mass, and named before?
You speak next of Holy days.
Festivities,
And holy day Solemnities:
Thou think by this, with easiness
To prove thy Churches holiness.
Truth is, men's Conscience you enthral, Bellarmine says, men are bound in
Conscience to keep the Festivities of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 10. prop: 3. and
so do the Rhemists, Gal. 4. s. 5.

To many an idle Festival: very near 200. if we put these together which were
determined of, Council Oxon. sub. Steph. and which we read in the marginal Notes
upon the Rhemists Testament.

You Will have them be as strictly kept,
As Gods own day by his precept.
Of feasts, some low, some higher be,
Some great, some lesser in degree:
Some double more, some double less,
A treble fault some to transgress.
So with your doubling and redoubling style,
The simple People you beguile:
The Lord is weary of your feasts, Isa. 1.14.

And likes not your devised rests:
All days are like in holiness,
None holy more, none holy less. The difference betwixt days, is in
observation and use, and not in the nature of the day; if one day had been in
nature holier then another, the Sabbath might not have been altered.

Paul thought his labor was in vain,
Where days distinctions did remain. Gal. 4.10, 11.

Thou hop'st to put us in some fear,
With speaking of the Calendar: Saints Canonized.

Thou ask'st what Faith all those did hold,
Whose Names are found therein enrolled?
I tell thee plain, it is naught to me
What many a one there named, might be:
My faith's not so set on the rack,
To seek strength from the Almanac.
Yet sure I am, what we profess,
Some that are there, believed no less: As Peter, Paul, Mary, etc. and some
there named which suffered persecution in the ten first Persecutions of the
Church.

Our Faith and theirs does well agree,
And you with them at variance be.
You Churches make, and holy days
Unto the Saints and Martyrs praise:
But us which do believe the same,
You seek to kill, and to defame.
Thou ask'st who them canonized,
Whose names are there enregistred?
You say the Pope: I ask again,
Will thou that sainting power maintain? The custom of Canonizing Saints, was
not heard of, till one thousand years after Christ, in the days of Alexander
3. and Gregory 7.

Can any mortal Creature tell,
Who goes to Heaven, and who to Hell?
All judgment Paul bids us forbear,
Until the Lord himself appear. 1 Cor. 4.5.

In Heaven to sit, or high or low,
Is it in man's power to bestow? Mat. 20.23.

What Bishops can, or Saints invest,
Or shut men from eternal rest?
Someone Pope does a Saint enstall,
His grant another does recall: Bonifance 8. caused Hermanus Ferrariens. who
had been Canonized for a Saint 30. years before, to be taken out of his Grave
and burned, ann. 1300.

It Is but a silly dignity,
That Is subject to uncertainty.
Among your Saints even those are seen,
Which to their Prince have Traitors been. As Thomas Becket, and Elizabeth
Barton, called the holy Maid of Kent, and others.

Though that our Church such Saints despise,
To it, it is no prejudice.
Popish Rhyme.
Heretics.
OUr Savior warns us to have care,
Of false Prophets to beware; That makes us take heed of you.

Which in his name shall come,
Not sent, yet they shall run: There be many of your Church come amongst us to
work mischief, before you be sent for.

Thieves; not entering by the Door, A lively description of the Popes Clergy.

That kill and steal, and keep a stoor;
Wolves in Shepherds clothing,
That kill the Soul, and steal the Tything.
Dogs, Foxes, and Masters of lies,
That new Sects will devise;
Bringing in dissension,
And heap thousands to perdition.
Where have you been this many a year,
That none of you durst once appear.
Ever since our Saviors time,
To whom did your light shine? To those which had eyes to see it.

Where did your principal Pastor sit? In Heaven.

Who kept your keys? who fed your sheep? You have butchered a good sort of them.

Show some Churches you have built:
I can show many you have spilt.
How might a man have found you out,
To have trial in a matter of doubt; You be too proud to learn: it is the first
lesson you teach your Disciples, to admit no conference.

Where for so many a year,
No such Company did appear?
Until Luther, a lying Friar, If Luther had continued a true Friar, he had
never been good.

Upon whom the Devil had desire,
Br^ke his Vow, Herod's vow is better broken then kept.
and married a Nun,
And there your Sect Our Sect is the same that Paul's was, Acts 28.22.
first begun. Either thou know this to be a lie, or thou know nothing.

And favored in Saxony,
By a Duke that loved liberty:
And in King Edwards time truly, There were English men in England who bare
witness to this truth, by suffering death for it long before King Edwards time.

It first infected our Country.
For a thousand years you say,
That Papistry did bear the sway:
And during all that space,
No Protestant durst show his face. The more they lay hid, the greater was your
tyranny; yet many then both showed their faces, and lost their lives.

Who kept Indeed you kep them so fast, that the people could have no comfort by
them.
the holy Scriptures then
From the hands of wicked men?
Who had authority to ordain
Our Priests and Bishops again?
For he that enters without Order,
As a Thief does kill and murder.
And one thing makes me to muse,
That no Priest you do refuse. A very tale.

Being ordered by the Church of Rome,
But he was accepted soon:
If he would say the New Service,
He should have a Benefice
Without any further Order,
And accounted for the better. He that has once been an eager Papist, and is
converted truly, is to be the better thought of; because having known the
abomination of Popery, he must needs detest it more.

How can she make a lawful Priest,
If she be not the Church of Christ?
Answer this, O Protestant;
If thou can, I will recant: I believe you will not be so good as your word.

But while an answer you devise, A man need not be long in making you an answer.

I counsel all men that are wise,
To hold the faith maintained here
The space of a thousand year,
Brought unto us English men,
By our Apostle Who made him an Apostle?
Saint Austen.
Who from Rome was hither sent,
When Ethelbert was King of Kent,
Who learned his Faith of Gregory: This Gregory accounts him the forerunner
of Antichrist, who so should seek to be called Universal Bishop; from this
Faith you are gone.

His Faith was kept successively,
By threescore Bishops and three,
Since Saint Peter's time truly,
Who learned his Faith of Christ Jesu,
Who is the Son of God most true.
Protestants Answer.
Heretics.
THe Caveat touching Heretics,
Does make against false Catholics:
We know full well that Popery
Is but a Mass of Heresy.
Those Errors which of old were hatched,
Your Church together has them patcht: It maintains free will, and merit of
works, with the Pelagians. Augustine. The Pelagians held Children to be without
sin. Aug. contra Jul. lib. 3. cap. 5. So the Church of Rome says,
Concupiscence is no sin. It holds Imagery with the Simonians, Basilidians, and
Carpocratians; and with the two latter they secret their Religion, Iren. lib.
1. cap. 23. Epiph. Haeres. 24. It allows praying in an unknown tongue with
the Osteni, Epiph. Haeres. 19. It accounts marriage unclean, with Tatianus,
Hae. 46. and condemns wedlock in their Priests, as the Manichees did in their
chosen ones, Aug. Ep. 74. With the same Heretics it uses bread only in the
Communion, Leo Ser. 4. de Quad. and places fasting in the destinction of
meats, Aug. de Morib. Eccl. and Manich. l. 2. cap. 23. It thinks that all
necessary doctrine is not contained in the Scripture, with Montanus, Ep. Haer.
48. It brageth of inherent righteousness, with the Cathari, Isid. Etym. lib. 8.
cap. de Haer. Christ: It worshipeth Angels with the Angelici, Aug. ad Quodvult.
cap. 39. It denies the preaching of the Word to be a note of the Church, with
the Donatists, Aug. in variis locis: and with them tyeth the Church to one set
place, Cass. in Psalm. 60. It worshippeth the Cross with the Armenians,
Euthimius in Panoplia. Thus in many other points it partaketh with the ancient
Heretics.

On them she puts a fairer Name,
But in effect they are the same.
You razed have the foundation
Of all Truth and Religion:
You changed have the sincerity
Of all the Grounds of Piety. As for example, first the Article of
Justification, the efficient cause of our Salvation and Righteousness, by the
Scripture, is Gods Love and Grace only, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.5.
John 3.16. The Papists say, God is moved by our preparing works. So held
Malvend in his Disputation with Bucer at Ratisbone: so Bonaventure lib. 1. sen.
did. 41. Quaest. 1. Touching the matter of our Justification, the Scripture
propounds nothing but Christ's obedience, Romans 5.19. and 10.4. The Papists
place our Righteousness before God, in our own works and merits, Con. Trid. s.
6. c. 7. For the form (as Scholars call it) of Justification, it is by the
Scriptures, the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Papists
place it in our merits, Rhemist, 2 Timothy 4. s. 4. Secondly, It is a ground of
Christian Religion, that the Law cannot be fulfilled by us, and that no man is
to expect Righteousness or Salvation by it, Romans 8.3. Acts 15.10. Gal. 2.15,
16. and 3.10. The Papists maintain, that men may keep the Law, Con. Trid. s. 6.
c. 11. Yea, and that they may perform more then the Law binds unto; whence are
sprung the works of Supererogation, and Indulgences, which that Council so
highly prizeth, Sess. 21. c. 9. A third ground of Religion overthrown by them,
is, that eternal death is due to every sin. This the Scripture avoucheth, Romans
5.12. and 6.23. Ezekiel. 18.14. The Papists teach, some sins to be in their own
nature pardonable, not deserving death, Con. Trid. ses. 6. c. 11. From which
opinion arose Purgatory. A fourth ground of Religion is, the certainty of
Salvation; that Believers may be certain of Salvation, is the Doctrine of the
Scripture, Romans 8.38. Heb. 11.1. Luke 10.20. The Papists deny and say, We can
but have hope only, Con. Trid. s. 6. c. 9. And yet therein they confound
themselves, for true hope cannot be deceived, Romans 5.5. It is the Anchor of the
Soul, Heb. 6.19. A fifth ground is, that we cannot satisfy God for our least
sins: The Scripture ascribes all satisfaction to Christ, Heb. 1.3. 1 Pet.
2.24. Rev. 1.5. The Papists maintain, that we may and must satisfy, making
satisfaction a part of Penance, Con. Trid. s. 14. c. 13. A sixth ground is,
That the Scripture contains al Doctrine necessary for our Salvation; so says
the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16. and the ancient Church, Aug. lib. 3. cont. lit.
Petil. c. 6. and others. The Papists equal Traditions to the Scripture, Con.
Trid. s. 4. A seventh ground is, that the knowledge of the Scripture is needful
to people unto Salvation, and ought to be read of them; thereto accords the
holy Text, John 5.39. Col. 3.16. The Ignorance therein is the cause of all
error, Mark 12.24. The Papists forbid the people the use of the Scripture,
Rhemists Preface; and do all in the Church Service in an unknown Tongue.
Eighthly, the Scripture teaches us to worship God alone, Mat. 4.10. The
Papists Worship Angels and Saints, yea their Images and Relics: their
distinction of Latria, and Dulia, will not serve them; for they pray to
Creatures, and that is Latria; and they acknowledge that which they call
Latria, to be due to the Cross, Tho. p. 3. sum. Quaest. 25. art. 4. and Andrad.
lib. 9. Orth. expl. Ninthly, It is the Doctrine of the Scripture, that Christ,
^ding to his humane Nature, is only in Heaven, Acts 3.21. Papists say, He is
bodily present in the Eucharist, Con. Trid. s. 13. c. 6. Tenthly, Christ
ordained the Communion in both kinds, commanding to do as he did, 1 Cor. 11.24.
Papists take the Cup from the Laity, Con. Trid. s. 21. c. 1. Thus, as in these
particulars, so in many other, it were easy to show how the Church of Rome
has overthrown the main points of Holy Droctrine, and have nothing left but
the name of the Church, and a title and show of Religion.

Thou fall'st now to a railing vain,
And would by this thy Pope maintain:
Leave idle terms, and show some reason,
Else all these words come out of season.
Show thou what Sects we do devise,
And wherein we deliver lies;
And prove it so, that all may see,
Lest thou thy self the Liar be.
Foxes, and Dogs, and Wolves thou nam'st,
And Thieves, wherein thy self thou sham'st:
Or prove all this in us is true,
Else we return it back to you.
They called Saint Paul an Heretic, Acts 24.14.

A Blabler, Acts 17.18.
and a Schismatic: Acts 24.5. and 28.22.

They said our Savior was possessed, John 8.24.

And of his preaching made a Jest. Luke 16.14.

Yet Paul no Heresy did teach,
Nor in the Church made any breach:
Nor yet our Savior had a Devil,
He never did or preached evil.
Let Scripture try wherein we err,
We crave no other Arbiter:
Convict us once by such a Judge,
We will not at your railings grudge:
Now that thy store is almost spent,
Thou come t'an old worn Argument:
Where was your Church some years ago,
Before the World did Luther know?
If briefly now I should deny
The Churches Visibility;
It were a word sufficient
To overthrow this prattlement;
Yet this I say, and will maintain,
That even when blindness most did reign,
Our Church a certain being had,
Though not with outward Beauty clad:
Like to that holy portion, 1 Kings 19.18.

In that great superstition,
Which over whelmed all Israel,
After the Tribes from David David's Line.
fell.
Or as some Ears of purer seed,
Amidst a field of noisome weed;
So God had some even at that time,
When Antichrist was in his prime.
And now and then oat brake the Light,
Even in that long and irksome night:
Like as the Sun in lowering days,
Sometime sends forth his glittering Rays.
Long time ere Luther yet was born,
Whom you our Founder name in scorn,
There were which showed their enmity
Against your vile Idolatry. Bertram wrote against Transubstantiation, ann.
812. a Bishop of Florence was condemned for teaching that Antichrist was come,
ann. 1114. Arnulph. was murdered in Rome, for preaching against the Pope and
his Clergy, anno 1128. Henry, a Monk, of Tolose, was against prayer for the
dead, Pilgrimage, Cream, Oil, etc. anno 1137. Jo. of Salisbury, called the
Clergy Pharisees, the Pope, Antichrist, and Rome, Babylon, 1151. Gerard and
Dulcimus, which taught the Pope to be Antichrist, were burnt, with 30. more,
about the years, 1164, 1165, 1166. The Waldenses, which held in many points
against the Pope, were in anno 1167. and after increasing in diverse places.
Almaris a Bishop burnt in Paris, for holding against Transubstantiation,
Images, Altars, and praying to Saints, 1206. Many in Suevia did preach the Pope
to be an Heretic in the years 1236, 1237, 38. Grosted, Bishop of Lincoln,
wrote against the Pope, anno 1246. Arnold de Nova Villa, against Masses and
Sacrifices for the dead taught, that the Popes belief was the Devils belief,
ann. 1259. All Histories are full of the like examples: these few may serve for
a taste, to satisfy an indifferent reader, and to stop their mouths, who say,
none were heard of, of our Religion and Church till Luther.

But now the Lord has let us see
Your Antichrists deformity:
That all men might him fully know,
Before his final Overthrow.
Our Pastor chief 1 Pet. 5.4.
in Heaven did sit,
And so does still, says holy Writ: Acts 4.21.

On earth, Universal Priest,
None dare be called but Antichrist. Gregory the Great, a Bishop of Rome, said,
that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called Universal Bishop, is the
forerunner of Antichrist, Epist. ad Eulogium. lib. 7.

He that our Church and Keys had sought,
By tokens in the Scripture taught,
Our Church and Keys he might have found,
Even when the World was most unsound.
Building of Churches nothing makes
For that which here thou undertakes:
For then commend Demetrius,
Who builded Shrines at Ephesus. Acts 19.24.

Well may the heathen People boast
Of Piramees and Churches cost:
In Houses made, God does not dwell,
As holy Scripture does us tell. Acts 7.48.

Yet neither all the Churches here,
Erected by the Papists were:
Nor are by us abolished
Places where God is worshipped.
If private men have evil done,
For it blame not Religion?
Those men that do Church-spoyling love,
Our Faith and Church does not approve.
Those Cells and Dens of Idleness,
And Nurseries of Wickedness,
Upon good causes were displaced,
As Baals Temples were defaced. 2 Kings 10.

Touching Luthers Marriage.
A lawless Vow It is well called a lawless Vow, because it is of a thing which
is not in man's power. If it be said that by fasting and prayer it may be
performed, and continency obtained; I answer, the gifts of God are twofold:
Some common to all Believers, as Faith, etc. Some peculiar to some only, as
this of Continency: Now, if by fasting and prayer we labor for the first sort,
we shall in some measure receive them: but we have not the like assurance for
the gifts of the latter sort, because (it may be) the Lord is pleased otherwise
to dispose. Now to make such a Vow, is a sin, but to persist in it, is a double
evil.
of single life,
Luther well brake, and took a wife.
Better the pure and spotless Bed, (...), Heb. 13.4.

Then by unclean lusts to be led. 1 Cor. 7.9.

Better the married Chastity, Papists do oppose marriage and chastity; but Paul
bids young women to be chaste, and subject to their Husbands, Tit. 2.4, 5.

Then violent Virginity:
They ought not single to remain,
Who are not gifted to contain. 1 Cor. 7.9.

Wedlock it self cannot defile,
It has an honorable style: Heb. 13.4.

God does it not to each man give,
Without the Marriage Bonds to live. Mat. 19.11. And it is allowed to a Bishop
to be the Husband of one Wife, 1 Timothy 3.2.

The forced vows of singleness,
Have brought forth beastly filthiness:
Thou may behold in History,
The fruits of Monkish Lechery. There were 6000. Infants heads found in Pope
Gregory's Mote, as appears by the letter of Volutianus, Bishop of Carthage, or
as some think, of Huldericus (Bishop of Augusta) to Pope Nicholas: against the
forbidding of Priests marriage.

Thy poisoned Tongue does further reach,
The noble Saxon to impeach:
Because to truth he did incline,
Thou call him a Libertine.
When God was pleased to let him see
How Christ his death has made us free,
Then did he deem it slavery
To bear the Romish Tyranny.
Though Antichrist did Rome possess,
Who kept the Scriptures.
You kept the Scriptures I confess:
And in that long Apostasy,
Those Books were in your custody.
So I a Pirate false have known,
To keep the Goods were not his own;
And in the Ship to rule and reign,
When the right Owner has been slain.
So did the Jewish Synagogue,
Safely keep Moses Decalogue,
And the other Books, Viz. The Prophets and Psalms, for so is the old Testament
divided, Moses the Prophets, and Psalms, Luke 24.44.
when cruelly
They did Christ Jesus crucify.
Touching the calling of Ministers.
The Pastors which did first restore
The truth which long lay hid before,
Thereto were called lawfully,
And even by your Authority:
You did them Priests and Doctors make,
And they from you this charge did take, In their admittance.

That they the Truth should soundly preach,
And in the same the People teach.
Hereto you caused them to swear,
That to the Faith they should adhere,
And never should Errors endure,
That were against the Doctrine pure.
That whereunto you did them call,
Full well they have performed all:
Truth they have sought to propagate,
And Heresies to ruinate.
As we account your Baptism true,
And never do the same renew: Yet it follows not hereupon that Rome is a true
Church: There is in the Papacy a certain hidden Church, and to it that
Sacrament appertains. Circumcision was used of old, even among the Samaritans.

So may you make a lawful Priest,
Yet be not the pure Church of Christ:
We know that now you wiser be,
And swear your Priests to Popery, In their Oaths and Admissions, they put in
this clause, (The Catholic and Apostolic Church of Rome) which in elder times
was not used.

And bind them to maintain the state
Of your three-crowned Potentate.
See now (O Papist) thou recant,
The art answered by a Protestant.
I counsel thee, if thou be wise,
No new evasions to devise.
Thy tale of Ethelbert of Kent,
Is but a slender Argument: It is also answered before.

It skills not whence the Faith was brought,
Or who it first amongst us taught.
Let us into the Scriptures look, Esaias 8.20.

And duly search John 5.39. Acts 17.11.
that holy Book:
Thence shall we know which Church to leave,
And unto which alone to cleave. We have found Christ in the Scriptures, there
we must also find the Church, Aug. de Pastoribus.

Those swelling words 2 Pet. 2.18.
of Unity,
Succession, and Antiquity,
Are but poor groundless fantasies,
To blind the simple peoples eyes,
Though that an Angel thou should see,
Let him (says Paul) accursed be, Gal. 1.8.

If from the Scripture he does err,
Account him not Gods Minister.
If one arise, and wonders show,
Seeking the truth to overthrow,
Though that might seem a motive strong,
Yet unto him death does belong. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 5.

If threescore Bishops here, and three,
Have been with us successively,
It either proves our Church is true,
Or else that mark makes naught for you.
That Faith for which Peter was slain,
Our English Church does still retain:
We hear the Voice of CHRIST JESU, John 10.27.

Who is the SON of GOD most true.
FINIS.

