HAYNES His Reformation PROLOGUE, Spoke in Black.
THUS Clothed with shame, which is one step to Grace,
Excuse the modest blush now spoils my Face;
For after Two Years Excommunnication,
For Heinous Sins against this Congregation
I Am now to plead my thorough Reformation.
Know then, that weary grown, of the thin fare
Of living by my Wits, that is by the Air;
Although kind Patrons
"Into your Bumpers I have often been plunging,
"And Top't, as I a Pattent had for Spunging;
"But to proceed in it still, my Conscience stains,
"(Conscience, the Darling Mistress of Jo. Haynes)
"Wherefore, though late, now finding like a Novice,
"Players (like Wits) are Fools, when out of Office:
And seeing Nocturnal Friends drop off so fast,
Like Limerick I Am compelled to yield at last.
But oh! the Terms of my Capitulation
Would make the hardest heart feel soft Compassion:
I must not Drink, not taste Life's common Joys,
For fear of spoiling my melodious Voice;
No more at Midnight visit dear James Long,
Who has the best Navarre e're tipped over Tongue;
T'has all good Qualities,
A Concealed Body, Fresh, Mellow, and Fine,
It Is all Sincerity, a Silken Wine;
It Charms the Taste, and Gratifies the Nose,
Weeping.
Adieu my Dear, Dear Paradise, the Rose
Where I the Music now must hear no more,
Spoke like a Drawer.
Of a Bottle OF Sebastian in the Sun, score.
Nor whilst God Bacchus is our Cheeks Adorning,
Like a Watchman's tone.
Past Three a Clock, and a Dark Cloudy Morning.
Nor make the last excuse for longer stay,
As Drunk
More Wine ye Dog, it is not break of Day.
Now now your new Regenerated Player
Morning and Evening will trudge to Prayer;
And fly all Playhouse Plots that are o'brewing,
That National Sin (Sedition) was my ruin.
Adieu Wills Coffee-House too, Beaus, Captains, Wits,
Who have been so very kind to me by sits.
Farewell, I now must herd with sober Cits.
Where I may speak my Mind, and fear no snub,
With Friends will lend, as well as pay a Club.
What though they never broke Jest, or Pate at Lockets,
They Have Sense enough for all that, in their Pockets;
I do but think leading this Virtuous Life,
What a Comfort I shall be to my poor Wife;
At Home by Ten a Clock, in Bed by Eleven,
Where I will make my former Scores all even.
"This being decreed, I Have nothing more to do
"But fix my self a rentcharge now on you,
Humbly beseeching
"That I, like Parish Brat; Forlorn, and Poor,
"That Is laid for want, at the next Rich Man's door;
"Swathed in ill luck, the Charity may get
"Of you the Great Churchwardens of the Pit.
Then tho'my Voice should fail, as that will happen,
I Am sure you will guess my meaning, by my gaping.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street in CoventGarden. 1692.


