HIEROCLES UPON THE Golden VERSES OF THE PYTHAGOREANS.

Translated immediately out of the GREEK into ENGLISH.

O vitae Philosophia dux! O virtutum indagatrix, expultrixque vitiorum! Vnus
dies been and ex praeceptis tuis actus peccanti immortalitati est anteponendus.

Cicero Tusc. Quaes. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Thomas Fickus
Bookseller in Oxford, 1682.

TO MY Most Worthy Friend, F. B. OF THE Middle Temple, Esquire
Dear Sir,
THough Virtue it self find but cold Entertainment in the World, yet it is to be
hoped that the Theory of it may be a more acceptable Guest. Men love to study
the Geography of those rough Countries, which they will not be at the trouble
to travail in. But whatever reception this Treatise of Morality meet with
elsewhere, I dare assure my self 'twill be highly welcome to you, whose Breast
is the Hospitable Retreat of all the Virtues. In you they shine as perfectly as
in their own Ideas; nay, Morality seems so far adopted into your very Nature,
and so much one with your Self, that to embrace it would be a kind of
Self-love. As you therefore have entirely Devoted your self to the Virtues, so
are they now as entirely Dedicated to you. And as when seated in your divine
Breast, like Jewels richly set, they invite Beholders; so now the Inscription
of your Name will procure them Value and Esteem among all men, and the precious
Metal will become a Coin.

And now I begin to fear lest what I intended as a Monument of my Gratitude,
should be interpreted as an Argument of my Ambition, and I should be thought
kind only to my self in choosing such a Patron.

But (Sir) the Devotional Addresses which the Pious Votary makes to Heaven, are
never the less accepted, though in so doing he persues his own greatest
interest and happiness. If the same Altar to which I bring my Oblation, prove
also a Sanctuary, it is my good Fortune rather than my principal Design. That is
purely to serve and pleasure you, as disinterested as Platonic Love, as
unmercenary as the Devotion of those Heroes who could be eminently Religious
without a Heaven.

I desire your Pardon for drawing you out of your beloved Privacy by making
your Name public, the peculiar Indearments of your Friendship called for some
grateful Acknowledgment; and I could not think of a more suitable Return, than
to present you with this excellent Moral Tract, since your exemplary
Conversation has been a living System of Ethics to me.

I find my self here under a great temptation of speaking high things of you,
but your incomparable Modesty will not give me leave, and your other Virtues
come so near to absolute Perfection, that they exceed all the Characters of
Panegyric, and like a Deity would be disparaged by a Representation.

It Is no more in my power to Commend you, than it is to Imitate you, I can only
love and admire you, and therein I dare challenge any one to out-doe him, who
is,

SIR, Your most Entirely Devoted Servant

THE PREFACE.
I Design no other Apology for the Translation of this Divine Book, than its
own great Excellency and Usefulness to the World. For since the principal end
of Translation is to Communicate something to more which is too Excellent to be
Engrossed by a few; and since its utmost Perfection lies in the attainment of
its End, my Apology is as great as the nature of the Work is capable of, and
Consequently nothing can be objected against this particular Undertaking, but
what will equally reflect upon Translation in general.

But perhaps it may be said, That although the Work it self need no Apology,
yet the Undertaker of it may. I grant it, and it is in short this. I was not so
ambitious of the performance, but I could willingly have resigned both the
Honor and the Trouble of it to a better Hand; but having long expected when
some good natured Genius would prompt some better qualified Person to do the
World so great a Kindness, and doubting whether a Work so long unattempted,
would ever be performed, I began to grow impatient, and like a restless Ghost,
could not content my self till the divine Treasure were discovered.

I know there are a sort of ill-natured Christians in the World who will think
this Epithet too honorable for the Writing of an Heathen. Those I mean, who
are so Eminent for their Censorious Invectives and Uncharitable Anathema's
against the Populus terrae (as they phrase it) the Gentile World, as if they
thought it the Characteristick note of a true Christian, zealously to run down
the Morality of the Heathen, as they do of a true Protestant, to rail stoutly
against Popery. I suppose the best title they would have afforded this divine
Writer, would be that of Profane Author. But they must excuse me, I know not
how to call such exalted Morality Profane, at least, as the word signifies in
their Dictionary. Much less dare I join with them in their bitter Invectives
and uncharitable Censures. All which I suppose may fall under these two
Considerations. Either they relate to the Morality of Heathens, or to their
Final state. Their Morality again may be doubly considered; either in the
Theory, or in the Practick. As to the first of these, they think they can never
be Hyperbolical enough in setting out their Ignorance and Blindness. As to the
second, their best actions can find no better name with them, than Splendida
peccata, when they speak most favorably of them, and sometimes without any
Premollition at all, they are downright sins. I need not give any Instances of
their Sanctified Railery, every Dutch System overflows with it. However I will
give you one single Instance, one of the most Emphatical I have ever met with,
which may serve as a Specimen whereby to guess at the rest. Du Moulin in the
288 page of his Anatomy of Arminianism, has these words. Truly in my judgment
the Heathen Judge, who in giving Sentence and dividing Possessions, does judge
equally and well; is no more just before the tribunal of God, than the Thieves
who equally and justly divide the Prey among themselves. So that you see
Justice is no Virtue in a Heathen. An Absurdity which I cannot match with a
parallel one, unless it be this, That Injustice is no sin in one of the Elect.
Their last Censure respects the final state of Heathens. And here they doom
them all to Hell as peremptorily as they do the Devils themselves.

It Is neither my Design nor present Concern to engage in the Controversy about
the final state of Heathens. All that I think fit to say of that, is only this,
That I wish those who are so forward to condemn them here, would so live, and
so improve those privileges which they enjoy above them, that they be not
condemned by them hereafter. But though I wave this last Censure, yet I think
my self obliged in Vindication of my present Undertaking, to insist a little on
the former. For if the wisest of the Heathen were so blind and ignorant as some
make them, and their most Heroical Virtues but splendid Sins, certainly the
best of their Morality would not be worth reading, much less translating.

I shall therefore consider the Morality of the Heathen both in the Theory and
in the Practick. Concerning the Theory I shall endeavor to make good this
Proposition. That it is possible by due Advertency to the light of Nature, or
the dictates of natural Reason, sufficiently to discern between Good and Evil.
Concerning the Practick this, That the actions of the Heathen which were
conformable to this light of Nature, were not Splendida peccata, but truly and
properly Virtues.

I begin with the first of these. That there is such a thing as (...), or law
of Nature, is here supposed in the Proposition. The thing affirmed is the
possibility of sufficiently discerning between Good and Evil by it. This I will
make Evident three ways.

1. By the Authority of express Scripture. 2. By one demonstrative Reason. 3.
By an Appeal to the writings of the Heathen.
First, I urge that known place in the 2d. of the Romans. For when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law are a Law unto themselves; Which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing them witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another. This Scripture
proves my second Proposition as well as my first. For if they perform the
things contained in the Law, they do good works, and avoid sin. For herein
consists the whole Law. The next place is in the 14th. of the Acts. Where Saint
Paul speaking to the men of Lystra concerning the ignorance of the Heathen
World, yet says, Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, (...) in
that he did good from Heaven, etc. which words can bear no other tolerable
sense but this. That the ordinary works of Nature give sufficient testimony of
the divine Omnipotence, Goodness and Wisdom. Which though few did consider and
improve as they ought and might, yet nevertheless they who have this Testimony
have means in themselves absolutely sufficient, whereby they may know, believe
in, and worship God.

I shall allege but one place more which is in the 1st. of the Romans, where
St. Paul, speaking of the abominations practiced among the Heathen, says, that
they hold the truth in unrighteousness. And in the following Verse he gives
this reason for it, (...), Because that which may be known and ought to be
known of God (For the word signifies both) is manifest in them, for God has
showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal power and Godhead: So that they are without excuse. (...). In which
Phrase is not meant (as some blasphemously and absurdly assert) the end which
God aimed at in manifesting himself to the Gentiles, but only the Event of that
manifestation, as Curcellaeus well distinguishes in his excellent Dissertation
De necessitate Cognitionis Christi. I insist chiefly on the last words of the
Text. From which I form this Argument which I take to be as clear a
Demonstration as any in Euclid.

That manifestation of God which is sufficient to leave any void of excuse, is
also sufficient to direct them in their duty.

But the manifestation which the Heathen had of God, was sufficient to leave
them void of excuse.

Therefore the manifestation which the Heathen had of God, was sufficient to
direct them in their duty.

The Assumption is in the Text. The Proposition is almost Self-evident. For if
that manifestation of God, which is sufficient to leave any void of excuse, be
not sufficient to direct them in their duty (which is the contradictory
Proposition) then they have Insufficiency to plead, which is the greatest
excuse. And so the Proposition will contradict it self. A Man is then only said
to be left without excuse when he is sufficiently capacitated both to know and
perform his duty, and when the only reason why he does neither is his own
avoidable negligence. There can be no greater excuse than unavoidable Impotence
or Ignorance.

Thus it appears from express Scripture, that it is possible by due advertency
to the light of Nature, sufficiently to discern between Good and Evil. I
proceed now to demonstrate the same by reason. And here among a multitude of
Arguments which offer themselves to my Consideration, I shall content my self
with one, because I will not be over-tedious. It is taken from the nature of
God's gifts, which as they are always designed for the good of Men, so are they
always adapted and proportionated to the good for which they are designed. The
first cannot be denied without manifest injury to the divine Goodness; nor the
second without disparagement to his Wisdom. Since therefore the light of
Nature is one of God's gifts, whosoever denies the possibility of discerning
sufficiently between Good and Evil by due advertency to it, must necessarily
gravel himself upon one of these Absurdities. Either he must say that God did
not design this light for Man's direction, and then why did he give it him? it
having not the least aptness to any other end. Or if he did, yet that it is not
sufficient; and then why did God design it for such an end? I need not apply my
self to the first part of the Dilemma, for that the light of Nature was
designed by God for Man's direction, is plain even by the light of Nature.
(...). says Heirocles. The latter part I perceive, lies open to this Exception.
That what God designs for the attainment of any end, is then only of necessity
sufficient, when taken adequately and entirely. But now the whole which God
designed for Man's direction, is not the light of Nature alone, but the light
of Nature in Conjunction with that of Revelation. Were these two lights always
inseparably united, I confess there would be some color in the Evasion: But to
this I oppose God's Dispensation with our forefathers from the beginning of
the World till the promulgation of the Law by Moses, which was about 2450
years. It is plain that the whole which God designed for their direction, was
only the law of Nature, and consequently by the very supposition of the
Objection it was sufficient.

I come now to appeal to the writings of the Heathen, wherein they give
undeniable Evidence of what I have been hitherto proving for them, (viz.) That
it is possible by due advertency to the light of Nature sufficiently to discern
between Good and Evil. I say possible: For I did not undertake to prove,
neither is it my opinion that the law of Nature was engraven upon the hearts of
Men in as fair Characters as upon the two tables of Stone. For then there would
have been little or no use of Revelation: I have what I contend for, if it was
so legible, that by diligence and advertency they might read their duty. That
this is possible, is evident beyond all contradiction, because many of them did
do it. And that many of them did so, appears from their Writings, in which is
contained the whole Moral Law, and that not only in its integral parts, but in
its utmost intention. There is not one precept of Christianity so exalted and
Heroical but may be paralleled in a Heathen. No man can deny this who has ever
read the Morals of Plutarch, Seneca, Epictetus, Cicero, and the rest. They
teach not only outward Conformity, but also inward Purity. -- Scelus intra se
tacitum qui cogitat ullum
Facti crimen habet --
says Iuvenal. Compositum jus fasque animi, Sanctosquerecessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto:
Haec cedo, ut admoveam templis, and far litabo,
says Persius.

(...), says Hierocles; And again (...), etc.

They recommend and enjoin the love of Enemies (which of all Doctrines is
thought the most peculiarly Christian) and conclude that a wise and good man
ought to have no Enemy. (...). What Father of the Church could have spoken more
Divinely? It is exactly parallel to that of our Blessed Savior, Love your
enemies, etc. that ye may be the Children of your Father which is in heaven,
etc. Much of this kind is to be seen in Plutarch. What high-raised notions of
Virtue, what Angelical Precepts, what abstractions from Sense, what immaterial
transportations are to be found in Heathen Writers! One would think that with
St. Paul they had been wrapped up into the third Heaven, and learnt their
Divinity from the immediate intuition of God. They discourse so much like
Seraphims and the most ecstasied Order of Intelligences. What can be more
divine than that Character which Seneca gives of a good man in his Book de Vita
Beata? He that can look upon death, and see his face with the same countenance
with which he hears its story; that can endure all the labors of his life with
his soul supporting his body; that can equally despise riches when he has them,
and when he has them not; that is not sadder if they lie in his Neighbor's
trunks, nor more haughty if they shine round about his own walls; he that is
neither moved with good fortune coming to him, nor going from him; that can
look upon another man's Lands evenly and pleasingly as if they were his own,
and yet look upon his own and use them too, just as if they were another man's;
that neither spends his Goods prodigally and like a fool, nor yet keeps them
avariciously and like a wretch; that weighs not benefits by weight and number,
but by the mind and circumstances of him who gives them; that never thinks his
Charity expensive if a worthy person be the receiver; he that does nothing for
Opinion's sake, but every thing for Conscience, being as curious of his
thoughts as of his actings in Markets and Threatres, and is as much in awe of
himself as of a whole Assembly; he that knows God looks on, and contrives his
secret affairs as in his presence; that eats and drinks because he needs it,
not to serve a lust or load his belly; he that is bountiful and cheerful to
his Friends, and charitable and apt to forgive his Enemies; that loves his
Country, and obeys his Prince, and desires and endeavors nothing more than
that he may do honor to God. What exalted thoughts of Virtue had Aristotle
when he made the very formality of Happiness consist in the exercise of it!
(...). I take this to be the most noble and sublime conception of Virtue that
ever was or can be framed by the mind of man. It Is true the Wise man tells us
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; that is, they
are attended with pleasure and peace. And the Psalmist says, Keep innocence and
take heed to the thing that is right, for that will bring a man peace at the
last. But that the exercise of Virtue should not only be attended with, but be
all one with Happiness it self, is such a superlative Encomium of it, that
neither the love nor the contemplation of a Seraphim can suggest a greater.
Hierocles also soars mighty high, when he says that the pleasure of a virtuous
man resembles the complacency which God takes in himself, (...). And when he
says that Virtue is the Image of God in the rational Soul, (...). (...). For
this reason he calls our deviation from Virtue an Apostasy from God, and the
moulting of the plumes of the Soul, (...).

These few Instances which I have given, not to mention any more, may suffice
to show what excellent Idea's of Virtue the Heathen had, and how far it is
possible for a man to arrive in the knowledge of what is good by the due
improvement of this least talent, the light of Nature. That wherein they were
generally most defective was the notion of God. And yet even here the wiser
Pagans were accurate enough in their conceptions, and (except only the
inconceivable Mystery of the Trinity) thought as well of God as any Christian
whatsoever; nay, and better than a great many of them do. They acknowledged
God in all his glorious attributes, that of his unity or oneliness not
excepted. Neither does the Pagan Polytheism at all contradict this assertion,
if rightly understood. For they did not (as some take for granted) universally
assert Many Unmade, Self-existent, independent Deities, as so many partial
Causes of the World. But only a plurality of Inferior Deities subordinate to
one Supreme, who was called the King and Father of All. This is clear from
Aristotle's Exposition and Confutation of (...), from Hesiod's (...), from the
Pagan's Creed in Maximus Tyrius, and many other Instances of Antiquity which
might be produced. The Egyptians themselves who were the most Polytheistical of
all Nations, did not suppose a multitude of unmade self-existent Deities, but
acknowledged one Supreme universal and All-comprehending Numen, as is Evident
from that Memorable Inscription upon the Temple at Sais, which Plutarch
records. (...). I am all that has been, is, and shall be, and my Veil, no
mortal has ever yet uncovered. That also of Sophocles is very express to this
purpose. (...)
(...)
(...)
And to go no further than my own Author, he acknowledges but one supreme God,
whom he calls (...), and the like. But I insist no longer on this.

I proceed to my last Proposition, that the actions of the Heathen which were
conformable to the light of Nature, were not Splendida peccata, but truly and
properly Virtues. And why not, since by Virtue we neither do nor can mean any
thing else but what is done agreeably to right reason? But to address my self a
little closer to the business, if the actions of the Heathen, conformable to
the light of Nature, were not truly and properly Virtues, the defect must be
either in the matter of them, or in the manner of performance. Not in the
matter, for then they would not be conformable to the law of Nature, which is
contrary to the Supposition. For the law of Nature is the self-same with that
delivered upon Mount Sinai, nay, the written Law was but a Transcript of the
natural, as the natural was but a Transcript of God's essential holiness. This
I cannot better express than in the words of Hierocles, (...), etc. To act
according to the dictates of right reason, is the same as to obey God. For the
rational Nature being once raised to the possession of its native brightness,
wills and acts according to the determinations of the Divine Law and Pleasure:
And the holy Soul that thus participates of the Deity, becomes in every thing
conformable to the mind of God, and frames the whole system and comprehension
of its actions by the conduct and guidance of that Eternal Splendour. Since then
the law of Nature is all one with the law of God, that action which is
conformable to the one, is so to the other, and consequently there is no defect
in the matter.

Neither in the manner of performance. For the requisites to the manner of
performing a virtuous action are, that it be done knowingly, freely, and for
Virtue's sake. All which may easily be supposed to concur in a Heathen. Some I
know will have a 4th. Requisite added, an intention of doing what is good out
of love to God, and to his glory. In answer to this I suppose two things as
certain and unquestionable. 1. That the law of Nature contains a special
precept of loving God who is the Author of Nature. 2. That every action whereby
any other natural precept is fulfilled, does of its own nature tend to the
glory of God, in as much as the Divine Will is fulfilled by it, though this be
not formally intended by the Agent. This premised, I say first that it is
agreeable highly agreeable to the law of Nature and right reason, that a man
should refer all that he does to God as to the last end, because this relation
is included in the love of God above all. 2. Yet right reason does not
precisely require that this intention should be conjoined either formally or
virtually with every Moral action, but it suffices if there be no contrary
intention. So that if a man does what is agreeable to right reason because it
is agreeable, he does well, though he does not think of God at that present,
neither before, so that the past love of God should influence his action. The
reasons are 1. because it is hardly possible to have such a constant intention;
2. because to constitute the nature of Sin which is contrary, it is not required
that there be an intention of transgressing the dictates of natural reason,
much less an intention of offending God. Whence I gather that those Heathens
who squared their actions to the law of natural reason, and yet had not that
intention of referring all to God, although they did not act according to the
highest perfection, yet did not sin, but do well, and in a great measure
please God. Though I confess I see no reason why a Heathen may not have this
intention as well as a Christian. And if he has, as he will equal him in that
respect, so certainly the disadvantages which are on his side will give a
peculiar luster to his Virtues, which the other will want, who has clearer
discoveries to direct him, and greater hopes to encourage him in the ways of
Virtue.

I have detained the Reader too long in the outer Court, but I have only two
things more to premise and then I shall let him into the Sanctum Sanctorum. One
is concerning the Book translated, and the other concerning the Translation. I
design not any formal Panegyric on the first of these, both because such
Harangues look as suspicious, and are commonly as little credited as the set
Encomiums of a Funeral Sermon; and because the greatest commendation which I
can give it, is to think that it does not stand in need of any. I shall
therefore only give a short Account of the scope and order of the whole, which
is this. In the first place he treats of the offices due to God, our Parents,
Friends and Neighbors, and next of the manners and institution of our private
life. Whereof he makes two degrees, Action and Contemplation. Proportionably to
these two degrees of life he distinguishes Virtue into Civil and Divine, or
which is all one Purgative and Perfective. The one consists in mortifying and
subduing our sensitive Passions, etc. the other in unions and adherences to
God. Hence I suppose Divines took occasion of distinguishing the degrees of
Religion into the Purgative, Illuminative and Unitive way. This last is better
conceived than expressed, the Idea of it being so fine and Spiritual, that no
Tongue nor Pen can ever pourtray a lively representation of it. That which
comes nearest to it, is that admirable description which that Angelical Writer
Dr. Tailor gives of it in these words. It is a Prayer of quietness and silence,
and a Meditation extraordinary, a Discourse without variety, a Vision and
Intuition of Divine excellencies, an immediate entry into an Orb of light, and
a resolution of all our faculties into sweetnesses, affections and starings
upon the Divine beauty; and is carried on to Ecstasies, raptures, suspensions,
elevations, abstractions, and apprehensions beatifical. I know those who are
unacquainted with the inexpressible exaltations of Contemplation and Seraphick
love, will think this downright raving Nonsense, but without question there is
such a thing as is here described, though I confess withal it is a kind of
Divine madness. Hence Plato in his Phaed. makes this a Species of madness,
where he says, (...). Meaning that persons eminently Religious are Divina
Patientes, suffer a ravishment of sense, and turn Pathicks in Devotion.

Now concerning my Translation I have this to say. 1. That I have drawn this
Piece immediately from the Prototype and not at second hand. And indeed I found
a necessity of doing so; For Curterius the Latin Interpreter is often mistaken
in the true sense of the Author, and would have proved an Ignis fatuus to me if
I had followed him. For instance, in the 164 page, you have this expression,
(...), which he renders quod effugium nullum sit, which interpretation neither
the Context nor the Greek will bear. Many more such mistakes there are which I
leave to the Critical Reader. 2. That I have followed the Platonic Air and
Mode of speaking, which as all know who are conversant in those Writings) was
something Mystical and Enthysiastick. This I mention to prevent the Objection
of some, who might be apt to charge me with obscurity of Style. I grant many
things might have been delivered more openly and clearly, but then I must have
deserted the peculiar Genius of my Author, which ought always to be Sacred and
Inviolable.

THE Golden VERSES OF THE PYTHAGOREANS.
FIrst the Immortal Gods as ranked by Law
Honor, and use an Oath with holy awe.
Then honor Heroes which Mankind excel,
And Demons of the Earth, by living well.
Your Parents next, and those of nearest blood,
Then other Friends regard, as they are good.
Yield to mild words and offices of love,
Do not for little faults your Friend remove.
This is no more than what in you does lie,
For Power dwells hard by necessity.
Do these things so; but these restrain you must,
Your Appetite, your Sleep, Anger and Lust.
From filthy actions at all times forbear,
Whether with others, or alone you are,
And of all things your self learn to revere.
In Deed and Word to Justice have an eye,
Do not the least thing unadvisedly.
But know that all must to the Shades below,
That Riches sometimes ebb, and sometimes flow.
Bear patiently what Ill by Heaven is sent,
And add not to your Griefs by discontent.
Yet rid them if you can, but know withal,
Few of those Thunder-storms on good men fall.
Often good and ill do in discourse unite,
Be not too apt to admire, nor yet to slight.
But if through error any speak amiss,
Endure't with mildness, but be sure of this,
That none by word or action you entice
To do, or speak to your own prejudice.
Think before action, Folly to prevent,
Rash words and acts are their own punishment.
That do, which done, after you will never repent.
That which you know not do not undertake,
But learn what is fit, if Life you will pleasant make.
Health is a thing you ought not to despise,
In Diet use a mean and exercise;
And that is a mean, whence does no damage rise.
Be neat, but not luxurious in your fare,
How you incur Men's Censure have a care.
Let not thy 'state in ill timed treats be spent,
Like one that knows not what is magnificent.
Nor by a thrift untimely rake too clean,
It Is best in every thing to use a mean.
Be not mischievous to your self; advise
Before you act, and never let your eyes
The sweet refreshings of soft slumber taste,
Till you have thrice severe reflections past
On the actions of the day from first to last.
Wherein have I transgressed? what done have I?
What duty unperform'd have I past by?
And if your actions ill on search you find,
Let Grief; if good, let Joy possess your mind.
This do, this think, to this your heart incline,
This way will lead you to the life Divine.
Believed, I swear by him who did us show
The mystery of Four, whence all things flow.
Then to your work, having prayed Heaven to send
On what you undertake, an happy end.
This Course if you observe, you shall know then
The constitution both of Gods and Men.
The due extent of all things you shall see.
And Nature in her Uniformitie.
That so your Ignorance may not suggest
Vain hopes of what you cannot be possessed.
You Will see how poor unfortunate Mankind
To hurt themselves are studiously inclined,
To all approaching good, both deaf and blind.
The way to cure their Ills is known to few,
Such a besotting fate does men pursue.
They Are on Cylinders still rolled up and down,
And with full tides of Evil overflown.
A cursed inbred Strife does lurk within,
The cause of all this Misery and Sin.
Which must not be provoked to open field,
The way to Conquer here is, to fly, and yield.
And now from Ill, great Father, set us free,
Or teach us all to know our Selves and Thee.
Courage my Soul; Great Jove is their Allie,
Their duty who by Nature's light descry.
These Rules if to that Number you retain,
You Will keep, and purge your Soul from every stain.
Abstain from Meats which you forbidden find
In our Traditions, wherein are defined
The Purgings and Solution of the Mind.
Consider this; then in the highest Sphere
Enthrone your Reason, the best Charioteer.
So when unbody'd you shall freely rove
In the unbounded Regions above,
You an Immortal God shall then Commence,
Advanced beyond Mortality and Sense.
The INTRODUCTION.
PHilosophy is both the Purification and Perfection of humane Life. The
Purification as it frees it from the material and brute tendencies of the
mortal Body. The Perfection as it restores it to its own primitive excellency,
and the participation of the divine Image. Both these are best effected by
Virtue and Truth.

The former calms all disorders of the Passions, the latter (if it meet with a
well disposed mind) introduces the divine form. It Is necessary therefore in
order to that Science which must both Purify and Perfect us, that we have some
short sententious Rules or artificial Aphorisms, by whose direction we may in
an orderly and easy progress arrive to the end of an happy life. Now amongst
all those rules which have a general aspect upon all Philosophy, I think the
Pythagorick Verses, deservedly called Golden, may justly claim the precedence.
For they contain the principal Maxims of all Philosophy whether Speculative or
Practical. Whereby a man may possess himself of Truth and Virtue, enjoy himself
in Purity, live happy in the likeness of God, and (as Plato's Timaeus says, a
Critical Professor of the Pythagorical Institutions) being made sound and
entire, may attain to the form of the primitive habit.

As for his Method he begins with the precepts of Practical Virtue. For we must
first subdue the brute within us, and shake off all sluggishness from our
minds, and then addict our selves to the knowledge of more divine things. For
as a blear Eye cannot behold a very bright object till it be purged, so a Soul
not yet clarifi'd and refined by Virtue, is not qualified to gaze on the beauty
of Truth.

There Is too much disproportion between pure and impure, than that one should
reach the other. And whereas Practical Philosophy is the parent of Virtue, and
Speculative of Truth, thence we find in his Verses where he had ended his
Instructions about Civil Virtue, he calls the former Humane, but the latter he
honors with the title of Divine, in these words, This do, this think, to this
your heart incline,
This way will lead you to the life Divine.
The first step therefore to the Divine Nature, is to rise up to the dignity of
the Humane. Now that which makes a man good is Civil Virtue, but that which
deifies him, are those Sciences which advance him to the Divine. And since the
order of Ascent requires that small things be passed over before greater,
therefore in the Pythagorick precepts Moral institutions have the first place,
that so from what is of greatest use in common life, we may learn to ascend to
the likeness of God. And this is the scope and order of the Verses, to stamp
the Auditors with the character of a Philosopher, before they proceed to any
other exhortations. They are called Golden because they are the best of all
Verses, and altogether Divine. So among the ages of the World we call that
Golden which was the best, differencing the manners of men according to the
Analogy of Metals. Besides, Gold is a thing that is free from dross, and
without mixture of earth, at least not so much allai'd with it as those other
Metals which are nearer of kin to it, and consequently of meaner extract,
(viz.) Silver, Brass and Iron. Among which on this account also, Gold has by
Nature, the pre-eminence, because it never contracts rust. Whereas every one of
the other is so far liable to it, as it partakes of earth. There being
therefore a resemblance between rust which partakes of the earth, and Vice
which arises from material Concretions, the age which is holy and pure, and
manners void of all wickedness, are properly styled Golden. And in like manner
these Verses being good and excellent all throughout, are entitled Golden and
Divine. For there is not in them as in some other things, a mixture of good and
not good. But they all in like manner set forth Purity of life, lead us on to
the participation of the Divine Likeness, and inform us of the most perfect end
of the Pythagorean Philosophy. As will appear from the particular exposition of
them, which follows.

HIEROCLES Upon the Golden VERSES Of the PYTHAGOREANS.
First, HONOR THE IMMORTAL GODS AS THEY ARE DISPOSED BY THE LAW.
First, The Immortal Gods as ranked by Law Honor.
SInce Piety is the great leading virtue as having the most immediate relation
to God, it is deservedly made the matter of the first exhortation in these
Verses, that we may know how we ought to HONOR the GODS which are in the
world, according to that intimate order which the LAW of Creation has
interwoven with their Essences, having assigned the first Sphere to some, the
second to others, and so on, till all the Celestial circles be filled up. For
to acknowledge and HONOR them sutably to the several stations wherein their
Maker and Parent has set them, is to obey the divine LAW and to give them true
HONOR. Not to extol their dignity above measure, nor to entertain diminishing
thoughts concerning them; but to think them to be, what indeed they are, and
that they retain their allotted station, and to refer this HONOR to the only
maker of them, whom you may properly call the God of gods, the Supreme and best
God. But the only way to find out the true dignity of that God who was the most
artificial framer of the Universe is, to assert him the Author of those
Intelligent beings which are immutable. For to those the Verses give the title
of IMMORTAL GODS, who always and in equal manner Contemplate the great God
their Maker, and are constantly intent upon his goodness; so that they are
secure from either Change or Separation, being as it were the images of the
All-productive Cause, neither disturbed with Passion, nor tainted with Evil.
For it is fit God should produce some such images of himself, and not that all
should be mutable and obnoxious to Passions which would incline them to evil.
Of the latter sort are the Souls of men, the meanest of Intelligent beings. Of
the former those IMMORTAL GODS which are the highest. Neither is the title of
IMMORTAL GODS intended to distinguish them from humane Souls, but only to show
that they incessantly enjoy the divine felicity, and never forget either their
own Nature or their Father's goodness. Whereas, the souls of men are subject to
passions, whence it comes to pass that they sometimes attend to God and their
own excellency, and sometimes are diverted from both.

Upon this account the Souls of men may with parity be called Mortal gods,
because they dye sometimes when they quit the happiness and sanctity of the
divine life by aversion from God, and sometimes revive by returning to him. So
that they are said to live when they enjoy the divine life, and also to die (as
far as an immortal nature may be capable of death) not because they cease to
be, but because they degenerate from the excellency of life. For the death of
an Intelligent being, is to be without God and reason, which privation is
attended with a disorder and mutiny of the passions. For when better things are
unknown, there is a necessity of being enslaved to worse. From which there is
no other way to be redeemed than by recollection to return to ones self and God.

Moreover, it is necessary that between those which we call IMMORTAL and those
we call Mortal gods there intercede another sort, of greater excellency than
Man, and yet short of a God, which as a middle link may so couple the two
extremes, that the whole Intelligent nature may be in a right union with it
self. Wherefore this middle Nature is not at any time wholly ignorant of God,
nor yet has an altogether unchangeable and equal knowledge of him, but always
actually considers him; yet more or less at diverse seasons. Now in regard it
has always an actual knowledge of God, it excells the humane Nature; but yet as
it is mutable and unequal, it falls short of the Divine. And this middle
Station it holds by the law of its Constitution, neither for its proficiency
advanced above and humane, nor for its negligence degraded below the divine
Nature. For all the Intelligent part of the Creation bears the image of their
Maker, God. But those of the first rank are the pure image, those of the
middle, the middle image, those of the third, the last image of the divinity.
And of these three sorts of beings, the first takes in those which the Verse
calls IMMORTAL GODS, the middle the ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES, and the last the DEMONS
of the EARTH; as we shall see by and by.

But now let us return to the first thing in hand; Namely, to consider what is
meant by the LAW and the ORDER of it; and also what is that HONOR which is
given according to that order.

By LAW here, is to be understood the All-producing mind, and the divine Will,
to which every thing continually owes its production and conservation. The
ORDER of this LAW, is that whereby the Parent of all things has disposed the
IMMORTAL GODS in several degrees. For although with respect to the whole
Intelligent kind of the Creation they have all supremacy of Station, yet if
compared to one another, they differ according as they partake more or less of
the divine image. The difference of these natures is attested to by the very
order of the Celestial Orbs, which are so disposed according to their Essence
and Vigor, that the LAW is to be seen in their Essence, and the ORDER is
coeval with their admirable distinction. For they were not produced
fortuitously and then ranged into Order afterward, but received their Order
and Being together; as if Heaven were an Animal, and these the several members
which so retain their Connection in their specifical distinction and
conjunction, that it is impossible to imagine they should alter their Situation
without the dissolution of the Universe. Which can never happen since the first
cause of them is altogether immutable both as to his Essence and as to his
Power; and since his goodness is not adventitious but essential to him, whereby
he promotes the welfare of all things. For there can be no other reasonable
cause alleged of the worlds Production, besides the essential goodness of God.
For God is naturally good, and consequently cannot possibly conceive any envy
or hatred against the condition of any Creature. Besides, whatever other causes
are assigned for the production of things besides the divine goodness, would
rather become the necessities of men than the majesty of God. Now, God being
thus naturally good, first produced those beings which most resemble himself,
next those of a middle likeness, and last of all those which are at the
greatest remove from the divine likeness of all them that bear his image. Such
equal pace did the order of things keep with their Essences, that what was
more excellent took place of what was less; and that not only in the whole
kinds, but in the Individuals of each species. For the ORDER of things was not
owing to Chance, nor to an after-resolution, but 'twas the LAW of the Creation
which variously ordered things according to the dignity of their natures.

Hence it is that the Precept of honoring according to the LAW, does not only
refer to the IMMORTAL GODS, but is to be understood in Common, both of the
ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES, and the SOULS of Men. For there is a multitude of Species
under every Genus, ranked according to greater or less dignity. And this is the
nature and ORDER of Intelligent Beings.

But you will ask what is the LAW and the HONOR appendant to it? We answer again,
that by LAW is meant, the unalterable and productive power of God, which gave
being to the divine Offspring, and set them in an eternal and unchangeable
order. By HONOR agreeable to the LAW, is meant, the knowledge of their
essences which are honored, and an imitation of all their practicable
excellencies. For whom we love we endeavor what we can to resemble, and the
only way we have of giving HONOR to one that is above all want, is to receive
that good which he reaches out to us. For you must not think you HONOR God by
giving him any thing, but by qualifying your self to receive from him. For as
the Pythagoreans say, the best way of Honoring God, is by conforming your mind
to him. Whosoever HONORS God as if he needed it, does by consequence make
himself greater than God. Besides, God is not at all Honored by the most
costly oblations, unless they proceed from a divinely disposed mind. The gifts
and sacrifices of Fools are only fuel for the flames, and the Offerings which
they hang up in the Temple, serve only to enrich the Sacrilegious. But a divine
disposition of mind lays a sure foundation, since it unites a Man to God. For
it is necessary that every thing have a tendency to its like.

Hence the Priest only is counted the Wise man, the Friend of God, and one
peculiarly qualified to make addresses to Heaven. For he only knows how to
HONOR, who does not confound the excellencies of them to whom HONOR is due,
who in the first place makes an Oblation of himself, works his Soul into a
sacred Statue, and prepares his mind as a Temple for the reception of the
divine light. What such acceptable Present can you make from the things which
are without, such as may become an Image ingrafted (as it were) into the
Divinity, or a gift that may be made one with God? All which is necessarily
verified in an intelligent and purified nature. For as the same Pythagoreans
use to say, God has not on earth a place more properly his own, than a pure
Soul. Agreeable hereto are the words of the Oracle, In pious hearts I love, as
well
As in my heaven it self, to dwell.


Now the Pious man is he who having right conceptions of God, offers his own
perfections as the best HONOR to the Author of all good, and with a design to
beautify and enrich his Soul, applies himself to him whose nature is to
communicate. So that by being qualified to receive good, he HONORS the giver
of it. Whoever thinks to HONOR God any other way than by himself, makes honor
consist in the profusion of his riches, since he does not make an Oblation of
his own virtue, but of things without. But alas, what is this? A Sacrifice
without a Heart; such a gift as a good man would not accept of. Hear the words
of the Oracle again to him, who with an ill disposition of mind sacrificed an
whole Hecatomb, and then asked how acceptable his oblation was.

But I in noble Hermion's Cakes delight.
So that the little frugal Offering was preferred before the other's magnificent
one, only because 'twas adorned with Piety of mind. With this all things find
acceptance with God, without it nothing. And so much for Piety and Sanctity.

But whereas the LAW is preserved by the constant observation of the ORDER of
the Universe, and since the Keeper of this observation was usually called among
the Ancients by the mystical Name OATH, he deservedly subjoins the precept
concerning Swearing, as consequent to what went before.

AND HONOR AN OATH.
And use an Oath with holy awe.
We have shown in the preceding discourse, that by LAW is understood the power
of God as it always acts uniformly, and produces all things in an eternal and
unchangeable manner. Next to this LAW we come to discourse of an OATH, which is
the cause that keeps all things in the same state, and so establishes them,
that the things which are confirmed by the faith of this OATH, and which
preserve the order of the LAW, do exist as the sure effect of the All-producing
Law not in the least transgressing the ORDER of the Creation. For that all
things remain in the same LAW whereby they were disposed, must be primarily
ascribed to this divine OATH, which among those natures which always
contemplate God, is wholly and continually observed. But among those which
sometimes retain and sometimes lose the divine knowledge, the OATH in like
manner is transgressed by those which apostatize from, and observed again by
those which return to God.

For the observation of the divine Laws is called here an OATH, which unites
and knits all those things to God the Author of their beings, which were made
to know him. Some of which by constant adherence to him do always honor this
OATH, others by Apostasy sometimes profane it, transgressing the order not only
of the divine LAW, but of the divine OATH. Such therefore is this OATH which is
interwoven with the natures of Intelligent beings, that they constantly adhere
to their Parent and Maker, and never transgress in the least the laws which he
has prescribed. As for that OATH which is used in the occurrences of common
life, it is but the transcript of this, and serves to direct all those to truth
who use it as they should do. For it reduces the uncertainty of humane
counsels to a fixed standard and determinate measure, whether in words or
actions. Partly by clearing matters of fact, and partly by securing us in
things future. For which cause that OATH which is first in nature, is chiefly
to be honored as the firmest guard of perpetuity; and that which is of use in
the affairs of life, as the image of the other, and that which next to the
former secures constancy and truth, and which imbues them with the best manners
who have learnt to HONOR it. Now the honor of an OATH consists only in a free
observation what in us lies of the things sworn, whereby those which honor an
OATH by a voluntary necessity, are made conformable to the fixed and unalterable
standard of the divine habit. And this first and mystical Sanctity of an OATH,
is to be repaired by returning to God, and the breach of it is to be healed by
purifying virtues. But the sanctity of an humane OATH is upheld by civil
virtues. For none but those who are endowed with them, can swear as they ought
in matters of common life, since Wickedness the mother of Perjury affords no
foundation for an OATH through the levity and instability of its manners. For
how can the Covetous man either in giving or receiving, preserve the sanctity
of an OATH? How can an incontinent or timorous man persevere in his
resolutions? Will not each of these rather to advantage themselves, throw off
the reverence of an OATH, and exchange divine goods for mortal and frail? But
those who are thoroughly confirmed in the habit of virtue, can easily preserve
the honor of an OATH. Now the best way to do this is not to use OATHS
frequently, nor inconsiderately, nor upon any ordinary accident, nor as an
accomplishment of speech, nor to confirm the truth of a story, but only in
things necessary and of good credit, and at such a time too when there appears
no other remedy.

We shall find credit with those that hear us, if we use an OATH in such a
decent manner, as to put it out of question, that nothing is of greater value
to us than truth, whether we swear or not. Neither does this precept of
honoring an OATH forbid us Perjury only, but also frequency of Swearing; for
if we would be free from Perjury, we must be ware how we abuse OATHS. Since
it is an easy matter from a common to become a false swearer. On the contrary,
the less we use swearing, the more punctual shall we be in the observation of
an OATH. For either we shall not swear at all, or when we do, we shall swear
well. So that neither our tongue will run before our wit through custom, nor
our mind be trepan'd through intemperance of passion. The latter will be
governed by virtue, and the former by an habitual abstinence from swearing.

Moreover this reverence of an OATH is highly suitable to the honor of the Gods
before treated of, being the constant attendant and concomitant of Piety. For
the OATH was the preserver of the divine Law in the composure of the Universe.
Honor therefore the Law by obeying its commands, and honor an OATH by
declining the frequent use of it. The way to learn to swear with due reverence,
is to bring your self to a habit of not swearing. Which is of the greater
importance, because to swear as we ought, is no small part of Piety.

And so much of the first kind of Excellencies and the divine Law, which is the
Author of Order; together with the OATH consequent to this Law.

The next Nature which claims our honor is the Angelical, of which he says

THEN THE ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES, Then honor Heroes which Mankind excel.
These are the middle sort of Intelligent beings, which are seated next to the
Immortal Gods and above the humane nature, and so as a common term couple the
first and last together. These as they are next in station, so ought they to be
honored in the second place. And of these also is the precept of honoring as
ranked by Law to be understood. For the whole nature of honor consists in a
right conception of the person honored, whereby we may find out what is most
suitable to be said or done. For how can a man rightly address himself to a
person whom he knows not? And how can he offer them a suitable present of whose
worth he is ignorant? The first therefore and true honor of the ILLUSTRIOUS
HEROES consists in the knowledge of their essence, order, action and
perfection. We are to honor no nature which is inferior to our own, but only
those beings which have a natural pre-eminence, and are adorned with a constant
sublimity of virtue. Now the first and best of all those which naturally
excel, is God the great Creator, who is to be honored incomparably beyond
all. Those of the first rank in the world are they which have a steady and
invariable knowledge of him, and represent the divine goodness without the
least soil or blemish of passion. These in the Verse are called Immortal Gods
because they never dye, and never put off the divine likeness. Those are of the
middle degree both in nature and honor, which are called here ILLUSTRIOUS
HEROES, having a constant knowledge of their Maker, and shining with him in a
happy life, but not uniformly and unchangeably. Whence they are deservedly
called ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES. ILLUSTRIOUS because they are always good and full of
light, and never obnoxious to evil or oblivion. And HEROES from (...) (Loves)
or (...) (listing up) because they are Seraphic lovers of God, and because they
sublimate and raise up our minds from the animal to the divine life. Sometimes
they are called good Demons, because of their great knowledge and expertness in
the laws of God. Sometimes Angels, because they declare and make known to us
the rules of a good and happy life. Sometimes we make a threefold division of
this middle kind, calling those which constantly inhabit the heavens, Angels;
those of the earth, Heroes; and those which are at equal distance from both,
Demons; a division frequently used by Plato. And some again distinguish this
whole middle sort by one of these three names, Angels, Demons or Heroes, for
the reasons above mentioned. Here this middle sort is distinguished by the Name
ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES, having the same respect to the first as the light has to
the fire, and as the child has to the parent. Hence HEROES are styled the Sons
of the Gods, not of a mortal extract, but originated from their uniform cause,
as light which is concomitant with the substance of a lucid body. I mean the
pure serene Ethereal light, after which we consider that which participates of
shades and obscurity. The third and humane kind bears proportion with this, in
as much as it is liable to evil and oblivion (for by these Man apostatises from
a perpetual contemplation of God, and in that respect comes short of those
beings which always contemplate him) and is again restored to the knowledge of
God, when disengaging it self from material corruption, and shaking off the
mortal passions, it joins with the divine quire. Then therefore Man deserves to
be honored by us when he is thought worthy to partake of the Divinity, that
what is defective in nature might be made up by the participation of something
more noble. For it becomes him that loves God, to honor whatever any way
resembles him, whether the likeness be from Eternity, or acquired in time.

And such are those men which excel others in virtue, concerning whom is the
next precept.

HONOR ALSO THE DEMONS OF THE EARTH DOING RIGHT THINGS.
And Demons of the earth by living well.
By DEMONS here, which signifies Knowing and Learned, he means the souls of Men
adorned with truth and virtue. And to distinguish them from the DEMONS by
nature, such whereof the middle rank consists, he calls them EARTHLY, as apt to
dwell and converse upon the Earth, and inform earthy bodies. So that the word
DEMON distinguishes them from wicked and unknowing men, and the Epithet
EARTHLY, from those which constantly contemplate God, and are unapt to converse
on earth, or inform mortal bodies. For the appellation of EARTHLY DEMON is
applicable to none, but to one that is a Man by nature and a DEMON by habit.
The Men therefore whom in the Verse we are commanded to honor, are they which
are ranked among the divine beings, such as resemble Demons, Angels and
Illustrious Heroes. For we may not suppose that any thing of a vile and ignoble
nature is proposed to us as an object of our honor, as the Word may seem to
imply. For to give honor to any thing inferior to humane Nature, does by no
means become him who either loves God, or is conscious of his own excellence.
Nay, we are not to honor Man himself next to the more excellent beings, unless
he resemble their perfections, and so make himself one of the divine Quire. But
what is the HONOR due to such? TO DO RIGHT THINGS, he says; that is, to obey
the Precepts which they have left us, to esteem their Sentences as authentic
as Laws, and to follow the same course of life, the participation of which they
were so far from envying us, that they carefully made it their endeavor to
preserve the elements of Virtue and rules of Truth in lasting Monuments, as an
immortal and fatherly Legacy for the common good of Posterity. To obey these
Precepts and live comformably to them, is a more true way of HONORING them,
than to make them sumptuous Oblations and celebrate their obsequies with
Magnificence. And thus are we to HONOR excellent beings, beginning with God
the Author of all, leaving the middle place for the Celestial and Ethereal
beings, and ending with Man.

And since much respect is due to some relations of life, such as that of
Parents and Kindred (who although they be not always good, yet have a right to
receive honor from us because beneficial to us) therefore he adds

HONOR ALSO YOUR PARENTS AND THOSE WHO ARE NEXT OF KIN TO YOU.
Your Parents next and those of nearest blood.
He had in the foregoing Precept commanded us to honor good men as happy and
divine beings, and here he commands us to HONOR our PARENTS and those that are
NEXT OF KIN to us, whatever they are, upon the same necessity of Relation. For
our PARENTS and NEXT OF KIN are the same to us in respect of this mortal life,
as the Celestial-beings our eternal and spiritual Parents, and the Heroes our
honorable Kindred. But how are we to HONOR them? Shall we so order our
Conversation to their mind as neither to do nor design any thing but what will
please them? But that is the way to become industriously evil, if it be our
fortune to have ill PARENTS. Or shall we show them disrespect in all things as
a condemnation of their wickedness? But how then do we satisfy the present
command? Or how shall we avoid being impious against God, and the Heroes, if we
deny honor to our PARENTS and RELATIVES, who by our own confession resemble
them? So that by this means the denial of HONOR to our Parents wherein we
think we do virtuously, would lead us into a greater evil than what we study
to decline, that of Impiety. On the other side, if we conform to our PARENTS in
all things, how shall we secure our Piety and other virtues, if they for want
of it themselves do not direct us to what is good? For if that were altogether
true and good which to our PARENTS seems so, then the HONOR which we give them
would be agreeable to that which we give the more excellent beings. But if at
any time the will of our PARENTS thwart the divine Laws, what shall those do
who are under this unhappy contradiction of Law, but what is our duty to
observe in many offices whose circumstances engage us upon contradictory
Commands? For this is a practical Maxim, that when two honest things offer
themselves to our choice, we ought to prefer the greater before the less if we
cannot embrace both. For instance, it is a good thing to obey God, and it is also
a good thing to obey our PARENTS. Now if it happen that both these agree in
their commands, it is without doubt a most happy thing. But if the divine Law
enjoins one thing and your PARENTS another, in this dissension of wills you
must embrace what is best, and in those things only disobey your PARENTS,
wherein they disobey the Law of God. For it is impossible to resolve obedience
to the laws of Virtue, and yet to comply with them who transgress them. But as
to all other things we ought to show our PARENTS all imaginable HONOR, by
submissive and reverent carriage of body, and by ministering to their
necessities with all readiness and liberality. For it is but reason they should
use the service of them, to whom they gave both being and education. But that
which no way had any dependence from them, is exempted from their dominion by
the Law, to which every one that would truly be a Father, should with all care
and industry be conformable. And then 'twill be possible to observe both divine
and humane laws together. And then we need not neglect obedience to our PARENTS
upon a pretense of virtue, nor by a foolish compliance make our selves guilty
of the greatest of evils, Impiety. For if they threaten to kill or disinherit
us for refusing to obey their unjust commands, we must not be affrighted out of
our virtue by such Menaces, but remember what part of us that is which is to
suffer these things, and that they threaten only that which they begot. As for
that part which is incapable of their threats or inflictions, we must be sure
to keep that free, and subject only to God. Wherefore we then truly HONOR our
PARENTS, when we keep within the verge of virtue, when we spare neither our
bodies nor our purse, but freely devote all to their service. For even our own
concerns ought not to call us off from the care of our PARENTS, which we should
discharge with the more cheerfulness and delight the fuller it is of labor and
slavery. Neither ought we to bethink what we spend upon them, but supply their
occasions with all cheerfulness and willingness, and think it matter of joy to
undergo labor and expense for their sakes. He that does this freely and
heartily, at once expresses his duty to the laws of virtue, and his gratitude
to nature. And this is the HONOR due to our PARENTS. As for that which is due
to our NEXT OF KIN, it must be proportioned according to the various degrees of
Alliance.

THEN AMONG OTHERS MAKE HIM A FRIEND WHOEVER IS MOST VIRTUOUS.
Then other friends regard as they are good.
After he had stated the honor due to Parents and those of nearest Kin, he
proceeds to prescribe a rule of contracting FRIENDSHIP, which is to prefer the
most VIRTUOUS though no way related to us, and to join with him in the
communication of Virtues, that so we may take a good man to be our friend, and
upon a good account. So that this Precept is much like that which was given
concerning excellent men departed this life. For as there we were commanded to
honor Wise men only, so here he exhorts us to contract FRIENDSHIP with none
but GOOD men; and though as to our Parents and Kindred he had confined us to
discharge the obligations of Nature, yet in dispensing our affections to
others, he allows us the liberty of choice. For a Father or a Brother
challenges our esteem on a bare personal account, whereas among others it is
virtue only which recommends and makes honorable, as it does those which are
deceased.

And thus far of the method of contracting FRIENDSHIPS.

But how we are to keep those FRIENDS which are communicative of Good, and to
divorce them who degenerate and grow deaf to all good Counsel, comes next to be
considered.

YIELD TO MILD WORDS AND PROFITABLE DEEDS, NEITHER HATE YOUR FRIEND FOR A SMALL
OFFENSE, AS MUCH AS YOU CAN, FOR POWER DWELLS NEAR NECESSITY.
Yield to mild words and offices of love,
Do not for little faults your Friend remove.
This is no more than what in you does lie,
For Power dwells hardby Necessity.

We are informed here how we ought to stand affected toward our FRIENDS. The
first duty is willingly to give way to them when they give us good Admonitions,
and intend what they do for our good. For the law of FRIENDSHIP obliges us to
this common good, that we mutually promote each other in the advantanges of
virtue. It becomes those who are fellow-travellers in the ways of Virtue, to be
assistant to each other, and if one has a better foresight than the other, to
use it for the common interest, and not only to YIELD MILDLY to the good advice
of Friends, but to be content that they should share with them in their good
things, and never to differ with them about Profit, Honor, or any such
temporal interests. For this is for a SMALL OFFENSE to incur the hatred of them
who are our friends in matters of greatest concern. We ought therefore upon the
account of the strict league of Friendship, to bear with any thing in a friend,
except one. For we are not to GIVE WAY to them when they begin to grow worse,
neither should we follow them when they quit the road of Virtue, and revolt
from the study of Wisdom, to another course of life; but rather ought to use
our utmost endeavor by all the arts of persuasion to reclaim them. But if all
wont do, we ought to rest satisfied, and not provoke them to indignation for
the sake of former intimacy, nor as yet court their friendship by reason of
their Apostasy. So that then only the rejection of a friend is warrantable,
when we can no longer join with him in the communication of Virtue, for whose
sake alone we chose him at first. But we should take heed lest our rejection
occasion a hatred. For it is our duty, if any one render himself unworthy of our
friendship, nevertheless to make it our chiefest care to reduce him into the
right way, not to triumph at the fall of our friend, nor to scoff at the
meanness of his understanding, but rather to lament and be troubled on his
behalf, to further him with our Prayers, and leave no means untried to procure
his repentance and welfare. And those are, not to contend with him about
Profit, or Honor, not injuriously to debar him our Society; and lastly, not to
triumph at his misfortunes. But because to the security of our friendship, to a
just desertion and a reconciliation upon repentance, it is highly conducible
that we bear Injuries with ease, and deal not too strictly and exactly with our
friends in any concern, but endure as much inconvenience as is possible,
therefore he adds, AS MUCH AS YOU CAN.

And then lest any should measure the power by the proportion of Will, but by
the effort of Nature which the present necessity occasions, he adds that POWER
DWELLS NEAR NECESSITY. For we find by experience that men are able to outdoe
themselves upon a push of necessity. We ought therefore so long to dispense
with the faults of a friend, as NECESSITY shows it possible, and to make those
inconveniences tolerable by the NECESSITY of friendship, which at first sight
seemed not to be endured. For we should not bear those things only generously
which we are compelled to undergo, but endure with greater patience whatever
conduces to the keeping or recalling of our friends, as the injunctions of a
divine NECESSITY. Now the NECESSITY of reason is more prevalent with those of
right judgments, than that which is extrinsecall. Whether therefore you
respect that NECESSITY which arises from the circumstance of your affairs, or
that which is the voluntary result of reason, and agreeable to the divine Laws,
you will find the bounds of your power which you are now exhorted to, put forth
toward your friends, when you are forbidden to incur their hatred for small
offenses, setting no value on any thing without the Soul, lest through
Covetousness you make an enemy of a friend. But that rather being indifferently
affected to such things, you recall your falling friend, and be always
conscious of this to your self, that you have done what was in your power, not
only to keep those who were your friends, but to reclaim those who degenerated;
and that you never gave any occasion of hatred, nor returned like for like to
him that did. For this is the divine law of Friendship, which truly is the most
excellent of virtues, and out-shines all the rest in perfection. Friendship is
the utmost boundary of Virtue, as Piety is the beginning. Piety is the seed of
all good, but the habit of Friendship is the mature fruit of Virtue.

As therefore we must deal justly, not only with them who do so with us, but
with them also who endeavor on injure and defraud us, lest by retaliation of
injury we become alike criminal, so must we have friendship, that is,
Philanthropy and good will toward all who partake of the same nature.

Now the way to observe the measures of Friendship in due order, is principally
to embrace good men, who besides the community of nature retain the perfection
of humanity by a good mind; and to love bad men merely for their common nature,
since they bring nothing of mind with them to recommend their friendship.
Wherefore it is rightly said, that a good man has no enemy, and that a good man
only is a friend to himself. Who as he loves the good, so neither does he hate
the bad. But when he seeks out for a friend, he chooses only the good man.
Imitating God as in other things, so in the measures of friendship, who hates
no man, but yet embraces the good with a special and distinguishing favor. For
holding forth his good will in common to all mankind, he gives every one his
proper share, culling out the good for himself, and reclaiming the revolters
from Virtue by the laws of his justice. For this is a suitable and useful
dispensation to both. In like manner 'twill become us to be friendly and kind
to all, yet with respect to the merits of each. We should also demean our
selves soberly and justly toward all, and not only toward them who are sober
and just. Neither should we be good with the good, and wicked with the wicked.
For if we so easily change upon occasion, we shall at last have no virtue in
firm possession. But when once we have acquired an habit of virtue, 'twill not
be in the power of him that wills to deprive us of it; neither shall we change
our resolutions upon any occurrence, which as we should observe in other
virtues, so especially in friendship, that being as was said, the greatest of
virtues. Friendship ought to be exercised toward all, but especially toward
good men, because it is the love of men, and none deserve the name of Man
properly, but those that are good. But to proceed.

LET THESE THINGS BE SO, BUT ACCUSTOM YOUR SELF TO RESTRAIN THESE. YOUR BELLY
FIRST, AND SLEEP, THEN LUST AND ANGER.
Do these things so; but these restrain you must,
Your Appetite, your Sleep, Anger and Lust.

All these must be curbed and managed lest they disturb the Reason. Come on
then, let us rule all our brutish passions with the bridle of severe
discipline, since they minister occasion of Vice to one another. For instance,
an over-charg'd BELLY causes immoderate SLEEP, both of these produce abundance
of Sperm, which exceedingly provokes to VENERY, and pushes on the sensitive
Soul to intemperance. Again, ANGER added to this, makes a man ready for any
outrage, such as rendesvouzing in Eating and Drinking, duelling for a Miss, and
the pursuit of other pleasures to quarrels and brawls. ACCUSTOM YOUR SELF
therefore to RESTRAIN THESE, beginning with your BELLY, that the brute inferior
part of the Soul may become obedient to the rational, and that you may be able
constantly to observe reverence toward your self, honor toward your Parents,
and all the other duties you were just now exhorted to. The possibility of
performing the former duties, depends upon the performance of this. All those
must needs be transgressed, if the sensitive Faculties be not subjected to the
empire of Reason. For either your ANGER will move you against your Parents, or
your LUST will make you headstrong against their counsels. Again, either your
ANGER will prompt you to Blasphemy, or your desire of gain, to Perjury.

In a word, There is no wickedness which these passions will not betray you
into, if Reason does not determine them to what is good. Hence come wars among
Relations, treacheries among Friends, and what not? This made a certain person
cry out, I know what I Am about to do, is ill,
But Lust and Fury, do o'r power my will.
For the rational nature being rightly disposed to the sense of what is good,
does easily remember its own dignity, and is easily stirred up to the
discipline of right reason, unless it be born down to Vice by the force of the
passions, as with so many leaden weights or plummets. We should know therefore
what is becoming, and then so accustom ourselves to rule our brutish faculties,
that they may quietly and tamely follow the Reason that is within us. The
passions being thus ordered, the rational part will be able to observe the
foregoing precepts without distraction, concerning which, it is said, LET THESE
THINGS BE SO. But concerning that which follows, he uses these words, ACCUSTOM
YOUR SELF TO RESTRAIN; thereby intimating to us, that the rational part is
ordered by discipline and knowledge, but the irrational by custom and bodily
formation, which is the method men take to tame and familiarize wild beasts.
The BELLY therefore which is brought to a moderate appetite, will not only
retrench the other bodily passions, but will make that of anger more calm and
sedate, that we may quietly reason about our duty, not violently agitated by
our domestic passions. So may we learn to know what we our selves truly are,
and to reverence our selves on that knowledge.

Now this knowledge and this reverence appendent to it, begets an abhorrence of
filthy things, for evil things are called filthy as being indecent, and
unworthy of an Intelligent-being. Concerning which are the following Verses.

COMMIT NO FILTHY THING, NEITHER IN ANOTHER'S PRESENCE, NOR IN PRIVATE, BUT
REVERENCE YOUR SELF ABOVE ALL THINGS.
From filthy actions at all times forbear,
Whether with others, or alone you are,
And of all things, your self learn to revere.

For either when we commit any FILTHY THING alone, we think that indifferent
which we would never have done in the presence of another for the very shame of
communication. Or on the contrary, we do some things with others which we had
abstained from had we not been emboldened by the communion of Accomplices. For
which reason he has cut off both pretenses for the commission of evil. For if
what is FILTHY be really to be avoided, it can never become eligible from any
circumstances. Therefore he joined these two together, NEITHER IN ANOTHER'S
PRESENCE, NOR IN PRIVATE. So that neither solitude might invite you to any
indecency, nor Companions in sin countenance and abet you in the practice of
it. Then he adds the reason which is the only preservative against vice, when
he says, REVERENCE YOUR SELF ABOVE ALL THINGS. For if you have once an habitual
reverence of your self, you will have every where a most intimate Guardian whom
you will stand in awe of, and from whom you can never withdraw your self. For
many when retired from their friends and domestics, have taken liberty to act
such things, which in their presence they would have blushed to commit. But had
they no witness? I omit God (for he is thought to be far off) but had they not
themselves, and the testimony of Conscience? They had truly, but they did not
consider it, being immersed wholly in their passions. But such men as these
dishonor their reason, and degrade it below a Slave.

Be then an intimate Guardian to your self, and from the consideration of your
own privity, begin your abhorrence of evil. For self-reverence does necessarily
beget an avoidance of filthy things, and whatsoever is unworthy of an
Intelligent nature.

But now how he that thus abhors Evil should familiarize himself to Virtue, he
proceeds to show.

THEN EXERCISE JUSTICE IN DEED AND WORD, NEITHER USE YOUR SELF IN ANY MATTER TO
ACT WITHOUT REASON, BUT KNOW THAT IT IS APPOINTED FOR ALL MEN ONCE TO DYE, AND
THAT RICHES ARE SOMETIMES POSSESSED, AND SOMETIMES LOST.
In deed and word, to Justice have an eye,
Do not the least thing unadvisedly,
But know that all must to the Shades below,
That Riches sometimes ebb, and sometimes flow.

He that truly reveres himself, will guard himself from falling into any Vice.
But of Vices there are several kinds. In the rational part Imprudence, in the
irascible Timorousness, in the concupiscible Luxury and Covetousness, and
throughout all the faculties Injustice.

To the avoidance therefore of these evils, four sorts of Virtues are
necessary. Prudence in the rational part, Courage in the irascible, Temperance
in the concupiscible, and lastly Justice, which is conversant about all the
faculties, as being the most perfect, and comprising all the other virtues in
it self, as parts. For which reason it is first of all mentioned in the Verses.
And next Prudence, together with the best designs and undertakings which take
their Rise from it, and end in complete and perfect Justice. For he that uses
right reason, has Courage for his fellow-souldier in hardships, Temperance in
things pleasant, and in all things Justice. So that in the sum, Prudence will
be found to be the beginning of all virtues, Justice the end, and Courage and
Temperance the middle. For that faculty which weighs and considers all things,
and seeks out that which is right in every action, that all may be rationally
disposed, is the habit of Prudence, which is the best disposition of our
rational nature, and derives ornament upon the other faculties. So that anger
commences Courage, lust Temperance, and Justice swerves nothing from Reason,
and with this our mortal Man is adorned, but it is through the surplusage of
Virtue which is in the immortal Man. For the virtues first shine out from the
mind upon the rational Soul, of which they are the proper form, perfection and
happiness. But upon the brute part and mortal body there shines a reflected ray
of Virtue, that what is united to the rational nature, may be replenished with
beauty and measure. But the chief of all divine good, is Prudence, which when
well radicated in the Soul, helps us to advise well in all matters, to bear
Death with courage, and the loss of our Goods with mildness and decency. For
Prudence is able to bear all the changes of this mortal life and of fortune
which is appendent to it soberly and undauntedly. For she considers the nature
of things, and knows that what is compounded of Water and Earth, must of
necessity be resolved into them again. Neither is she exasperated against
necessity, or surprised at what befalls us, as if 'twere strange and
unexpected, or wonders if what is mortal dye. She knows IT IS APPOINTED FOR ALL
MEN ONCE TO DYE, and that there is a certain definite time for the duration of
these mortal bodies. Which when come, we should not fret at it, but willingly
submit to it as to the law of God. For the office of Prudence is to follow the
best counsels, not to seek to escape dying, but to dye well. In like manner she
is not ignorant of the nature of Riches, that they sometimes EBB and sometimes
FLOW for certain determined causes, which to oppose were indiscretion. For we
are not the arbitrary possessors of what is not in our power, but neither our
bodies nor our riches are in our power, nor in short, whatsoever is without our
own rational nature. Neither is it in our power to get or retain when and how
long we please. But to acquire and part with them virtuously, this is in our
power, and the proper work of the rational nature, if we ACCUSTOM IT TO ACT
ACCORDING TO REASON in all contingencies, and to follow the divine limits which
determine all our concerns. And here lies the greatest commendation of our
power, that we can use well what is not in our power, and not suffer the
vehemence of desire to impeach the freedom of our will. What then is the
dictate of a prudent judgment? To make good use of our bodies and estates when
we have them, as the instruments of virtue, and when they are taken from us, to
know what becomes us, and add patience to our other virtues. So will our piety
toward God, and the measures of Justice be kept inviolable, if the rational
faculty learn to use things necessary well, and to oppose the bounds of
Prudence to events seemingly fortuitous and without order. Otherwise there can
be no observation of Virtue if there be not a right judging faculty in the
rational nature. For neither will it follow after better things as such, but
will act as under compulsion. Neither will it treat the body honorably or
manage the estate rightly. Those who are over-carefull to avoid death, and
desirous to keep their riches, do necessarily much injustice, and often
blaspheme by wicked execrations against God, and denying his providence as
often as they fall into that which they imprudently declined. By sticking to
do no injury to others, and by endeavoring to scrape together all they can to
their own profit. And so the damage of a wrong persuasion is evident in them,
whence spring the greatest evils, Injustice against equals, and Impiety
against superiors, from which he will be altogether free who being persuaded by
the foregoing Verses, bears death generously and with a good judgment, and
thinks the loss of riches not intolerable. From this he draws an argument of
embracing Justice, when he considers how becoming it is to abstain from what is
another's, to hurt no body, nor to raise his fortunes upon another's losses.
None of all these can he observe who thinks his Soul is mortal, and who never
considers what part that is of us which dies, what that is which stands in need
of riches, and what that is which exercises Virtue and is advantaged by it. For
it is the distinguishing of these things which alone prompts us to the exercise
of Virtue, and excites us to the pursuit of these excellent things. To which
these two Precepts are a most divine motive, KNOW THY SELF, AND REVERENCE THY
SELF. For the dignity of our nature makes it our duty to consider and ponder
the offices of others both IN DEED AND WORD. Now Justice is the way to secure
the observation of offices, and therefore is set before the other virtues, that
it may be the measure of them. For he says EXERCISE JUSTICE IN DEED AND WORD;
you will never then blaspheme upon the loss of riches, or in the pains of a
disease, lest you should violate Justice in your words. Neither will you invade
the goods of your neighbor, or contrive mischief against his person lest you
commit Injustice in deed. For if Justice has once the guard of our Souls, we
shall discharge our offices to God, to our Neighbor, and to our selves.

Now the best measure of Justice is Prudence, for which reason he joined these
two Precepts together, EXERCISE JUSTICE, AND USE NOT YOUR SELF IN ANY MATTER TO
ACT WITHOUT REASON, as if Justice could not subsist without Prudence. For that
is truly just which perfect Prudence defines. And that is, TO DO NOTHING
WITHOUT REASON, but diligently to consider the mortal body and whatsoever
conduces to its use and accommodation, and taking all things to be inferior to
Virtue, to think that the greatest profit consists in the best disposition of
the rational soul, which gives ornament to all other things according to their
Capacity. And this is the Scope of the verses before us, to set forth and
deliver to the Auditors the four Cardinal virtues, with the watchful
observation and care wherewith they are to be exercised both in deed and word.
For he exhorts to Prudence, Fortitude and Temperance, but above all he
recommends Justice to our practice, as a transcendent virtue which runs
throughout all the rest. And whereas he adds that RICHES SOMETIMES ARE POSSESSED
AND SOMETIMES LOST, he signifies, that after the disposition of Temperance,
comes that of Liberality, which is a virtue conversant about giving and
receiving money. For then only to possess or quit possession when reason
requires, takes away all occasion of sordidness and prodigality. But all this
flows as from a fountain or principle from that one precept, of reverencing
ones self. Nay and this very precept was anticipated too in that other, know
your self, which must be the groundwork of all gallant actions and speculative
notices of things. For how do we come to know that it is our duty to moderate
our passions and to know the things that are? For there is much doubt
concerning these things; First, whether they be within the verge of humane
attaintment? and secondly, whether they will profit those who have them? Again,
a good man may be so low in the World that he cannot receive unjustly when he
ought not, or spend justly when he ought. And as to his body he lies most open
to all assaults, since he neither affects Empire himself nor knows how
servilely to flatter those who have it. So that unless there were some other
nature in us advantaged by Virtue, we should scarce ever refuse riches or
power. Wherefore those who think the Soul mortal, and yet dispute about the
love of virtues, cavil rather than offer any thing of truth. For if something
of us did not subsist after death, whose nature is capable to be adorned with
truth and virtue (such as we affirm the rational soul to be) we should never
have a pure desire of excellent things. For the very suspicion of the Souls
mortality extinguishes all desires of virtue, and turns them all to bodily
enjoyments, whatever they are or however obtained. For how upon their
principles can it seem the part of a prudent or moderate man not to indulge and
gratify the Body altogether, for whose sake the Soul is preserved in its
subsistence, since according to them it has no self-existence, but is the
result of a certain conformation of the body? How again shall he be content to
put off the body for the sake of Virtue if at the same time he shall destroy
his soul too, so that Virtue it self will have no where to exist, for whose
sake he underwent death? But as to this, divine Men have abundantly
demonstrated that the Soul is immortal, and naturally apt to be adorned with
Virtue.

But now putting an end to the present disputation, we will proceed to what
follows, adding this only to what has been said, That as from the ignorance of
our nature all manner of wickedness flows in upon us, so if we know our selves
and disdain whatever does not become our rational nature, we shall truly and
constantly perform all our offices. And this is the measure of every particular
virtue. For if we attend to our nature as to a rule, we shall find that which
is decent in all things, living according to right reason and agreeably to
nature. For whatsoever makes the soul better, that is truly Virtue, and the
law of Philosophy. But those things which tend only to humane decency and show,
are servile fallacies and mere umbrages of virtue, which hunt after popular
applause, and whose utmost care is to appear virtuous to the World. And so much
of this.

Moreover from this right consideration of things, it follows necessarily that
we DEMEAN OUR SELVES NOT WITHOUT REASON in those concerns of life which seem to
come to pass without order, but that upon examination of their causes we bear
them generously, never finding fault with those who have the charge of us, who
distributing to every one according to merit, did not reward all alike whose
proficiency was unequal. For how, since the World is ruled by Providence, and
the Soul is by nature incorruptible, but by the will is carried forth to virtue
and vice, can those whose office is to defend the Law and consider Merit,
distribute equally to those who are unequal? and not rather distribute to every
one his convenient lot, which a man is said to draw when he comes into the
World? If therefore the being of Providence distributing to every one what is
fit, and the immortality of the Soul be no Fable, it is plain that the cause of
our grievances ought to be transferred from our Governor upon our selves, from
which consideration the Verse will show us a way to remedy our disasters. For
when we find that the cause of all this inequality is in our selves, we first
alleviate the grievousness of Events by right reasoning, and then exciting our
Souls by holy methods and right persuasions to what is more excellent, we shall
wholly free our selves from trouble. But when the afflicted man neither
perceives the cause, nor conjectures at a like event he will ACCUSTOM HIMSELF
TO ACT WITHOUT REASON, which is the thing here forbidden. For it is necessary
that he who seeks not into the true causes, should transfer the fault upon the
Superior nature, and either say there is no Providence, or that our affairs are
not well administered by it. But such opinions as these do not only aggravate
the crimes of our life past, but excite the mind to all wickedness and deprive
it of liberty of will, in that they make it ignorant of the causes of the
present evils. But that you may know how we ought to think of these things,
hear the Verses.

MOREOVER WHATSOEVER EVILS MEN UNDERGO BY DIVINE FORTUNE, BEAR YOUR PART
MILDLY, NEITHER FRET AT IT. BUT YOU SHOULD CURE IT WHAT YOU CAN, YET CONSIDER
THIS, THAT FATE DOES NOT DISTRIBUTE MUCH OF THIS TO GOOD MEN.
Bear patiently what ill by Heaven is sent,
And add not to your Griefs by discontent.
Yet rid them if you can; But know withal,
Few of these: Thunder-storms on good men fall.

Before we begin our Explication we must premise, that by EVILS here, is meant,
whatsoever makes the way of life laborious and troublesome, as Sickness,
Poverty, loss of Friends, Reproach, and the like. For these are grievances not
easy to be born in life, but not really EVIL or pernicious to the Soul, unless
from them we take occasion to sin, which we may do also in good things if we
don't use them rightly, as Health, Riches and Power. For we may do ill with
these, and obtain Virtue with the contrary. But real EVILS are voluntary
offenses, such as are inconsistent with Virtue; and these are Injustice,
Intemperance, and whatever else is contrary to that which is excellent. For
none of all these can be said to be done well; as thus, such a man does
Injustice well, or Riots well; as we may say of external Evils, that a man
labors under Sickness or Poverty well as often as he bears such things
according to right reason. But the word well is not used in the diseases of the
Soul, because they are deviations from and detriments to right reason, whose
dictates the soul of Man disregards, though engraven and implanted naturally on
it, when blinded with passion. That right reason is implanted in Men this is a
sure sign, that an unjust man gives a right judgment in those things wherein
his interest is not concerned, and so an intemperate man reads lectures of
Temperance to others: In a word, every wicked man uses right counsels in those
things wherein he is not biased aside by his passions. So that a wicked man
may turn virtuous by a retracting his former wickedness. Neither to this end is
it necessary that wrong reason should be in us that this might be the principle
of Vice as the other is of Virtue. For right reason alone, like the Law of the
land, is a sufficient standard whereby to define what is done according to it
and what against it, and to approve of the one and restrain the other. Neither
is there any need of any principle of Evil whether internal or external. But
there is great need of a principle of Good, and of that only; and that again is
either separate from the rational nature, which is God, or lodged and enthroned
within us, which is right reason. And after this manner are EVILS
distinguished. Among which he does not say that those which are voluntary are
distributed to men by the DIVINE FORTUNE, but only those which are necessary,
and are not now in our power, but which follow our heretofore voluntary and
avoidable offenses, which are grievous as we said, but capable of receiving
ornament from Virtue. For Poverty is adorned by a moderate diet, and meanness
of extract is raised by prudence. So the loss of Children commends the good
man's patience and meekness, who is able to say, My Son is dead, is he not then
rendered back again? and I knew I begat a Mortal. And in like manner all other
things varnished over with the beauty of Virtue, become more graceful.

Now we come to enquire what are those DIVINE FORTUNES whereby men undergo
outward calamities. If by the divine sentence Riches were allotted to one, and
Poverty to another antecedently and absolutely, this should be called the
divine Will, and not the DIVINE FORTUNE. If again nothing presiding be
signified by this Phrase, but it happen by chance that one man is happy and
another unhappy, then it should be called only FORTUNE without the Epithet
DIVINE. But if God the supreme Arbiter distribute to every one according to his
deserts, and is not the cause of our being such or such, but for this end only
is armed with Justice, that he might make equal retributions according to its
laws, then the manifestations of his judgments are deservedly called DIVINE
FORTUNES, thereby intimating to us, that God has no absolute antecedent purpose
to punish one and honor another, but only as he behaves himself, so or so, and
that the cause of this is not to be sought for out of our selves. So that the
connection of our Election and his judgment, makes a DIVINE FORTUNE.

All therefore that is meant by DIVINE FORTUNE, is nothing else but the
judgment of God against Sin. And so the artificial contrivance of this Phrase
salves God's providence, and the Soul's liberty and immortality. So that the
matters of our life come not to pass altogether by fate, nor yet at random and
fortuitously, nor is our whole life to be resolved one way. But whenever we
offend in things within our power, it is to be referred to our own choice, but
whatsoever follows our sins according to the laws of Justice, that is our FATE;
and whatever good proceeds primarily from God, is to be referred to Providence.
But we should ascribe nothing of the things that are to a fortuitous and
temerarious cause, no nor any thing that is done, unless from the event and
connection of those things which Providence, Fate and humane Will work
antecedently, something follow the first efficient causes which may be called
fortuitous.

For example, It Is the will of the Judge to punish a Murderer, and not this
particular man as such; and yet he punishes this man whom he would not, because
he has assumed to himself the place and condition of a Murderer. Now the
antecedent and absolute will of the Judge is to punish a Murderer, but it is
through accident that he wills the punishment of this man, because he
voluntarily assumed the person of a Murderer.

Again, 'twas the will of a wicked man to commit Murder, but not to suffer
punishment on that account. This antecedent purpose of committing Murder, was
dependent upon the liberty of his will, but then torments and punishment follow
by accident.

Now of these the Law is the cause, which suggests to the Judge a will of
punishing evil men in general, and this Murderer in particular. The same I
consider in the divine Nature, when the will of Man determines to do evil, and
when the will of the Judge who is the defender of the Law, is wholly bent to
animadvert upon the violations of it, from this concourse arises a DIVINE
FORTUNE, through which he that does such things is accounted worthy of such
punishments. The first refers the cause of judgment to the liberty of the will,
which preferred evil, the last to the reason of legal discipline, which follows
the quality of the offense.

Now the Law reconciles both these, which takes care that all may be well as
far as it can, and nothing amiss. For that pre-existing in the divine goodness
will not suffer the evil to go unpunished lest a continued and Chronical
wickedness induce an oblivion of all good, whose necessary remembrance is kept
alive by the justice of those who have the charge of the Laws.

The Law therefore joins together (as 'twas said) those whose part is to judge,
and those who are to be punished, that it may work out a peculiar good from
both. For if it be more advantageous to suffer punishment than not, and if
Justice inflicts some hurt, to correct and retrench the luxuriancy of evil, it
is plain that the Law, that it may both help and be helped, does set the Judge
over the Offender to preserve it self, and deliver the Offender to the Judge to
animadvert upon him according to his desert, that by his sufferings he may be
brought to the remembrance and consideration of the Law. For that very law
which men deny in doing ill, they desire when they suffer ill.

For example, he that does an injury wishes there were no God, that he might
not suffer the punishment which hangs over his head, but when the same man is
injured himself, he wishes there were one to redress his injury. It Is fit
therefore that they who do injury should feel the evil of it themselves, so
that what they did not see in the commission, being besotted and blinded with
Covetousness, they may learn by the discipline of Suffering, provided they
suffer well. But if they stubbornly persist still in their wickedness, perhaps
they themselves reap less advantage, yet without doubt their example will be a
lesson of Instruction to the wise, who consider the cause of their sufferings.
Now the most proper principles of judgment we take to be these, the goodness of
God, the Law proceeding from it, and the inherent law of right-reason which is
transgressed, and though a domestic God, impiously affronted. But the event of
this judgment are those grievances which render our life unpleasant through
bodily pains. These we are commanded by the Verse to BEAR MEEKLY by looking
into their causes, to prevent them what we can, and to turn to our advantage
what seems hurtful. And above all by the most exalted virtue to render our
selves worthy to partake of the divine good. But if any one be not yet ripe for
that, yet let him at least attain to civil good by the help of middle virtue.
For this is that whereby he exhorted us to BEAR AFFLICTIONS MILDLY and
generously, and to CURE our selves of them.

What other remedy can there be besides what has been said, by which the grief
of Sufferings may appear consonant to Reason, and a method of Cure be found
out? The sum of all is this, God the Lawgiver and Judge, countenances what is
good, and takes away what is evil; so that he is wholly free from the
imputation of Sin. But those who are voluntarily wicked and forget right reason
which is implanted in them, he punishes as evil, according to the purport of
the Law, which forbids all evil, and as men, by reason of the connection of
their wills and the laws which we call FORTUNE. For the Law does not punish Man
simply, as Man, but as Evil. Now the primary cause of his being Evil was his
own will. But since his being Evil (the cause of which was in himself, and not
in God) he suffers punishment, (which is in the divine will, and not in his
own.) The only scope of the Law is that which is worthy of God and profitable
to Men, to extirpate and purge away wickedness by the various discipline of
Justice, and to pluck back the Soul just rushing into debauchery to the
remembrance of right reason.

Since therefore this is the settled constitution of the Law, the same
retribution cannot be made to all. For that would neither be equitable in it
self, nor profitable to us. The difference of the matter under judgment, should
give a difference in sentence. For how can he be thought worthy of the same
with another, who is not like him? The DIVINE FORTUNE is therefore to be BORN
MEEKLY, neither ought he to take it hainously, who suffers punishment, and is
purged as much as God thinks fit from those things which seem to clog the
pleasure of life. Such reasoning as this would cure us of our former offenses,
and convert us to our right reason for the future. For how can it be, but that
he, who knows misery to be the fruit of Vice, avoid the path which leads
thither? Besides, if it be at all convenient to be angry under afflictions, he
will think it more reasonable to be angry with himself, that with God, who puts
a stop to his wickedness by the instruments of Justice, whereby he may be
brought to the knowledge and remembrance of the divine Laws; so that 'twill be
his own fault if he fall into calamity. For afflictions are not distributed to
men by chance if there be a God over us, and bounds of Justice proportioning
every man's lot to his merit. Wherefore it is a true saying, that CALAMITIES
FALL NOT MUCH UPON GOOD MEN. For first will bear them patiently, as the good
pleasure of Heaven, and then through the help of their virtues which alleviate
the most poignant calamities. Besides, there is good hopes that the residue of
our life shall not be troubled with such accidents, since divine good is laid
up for those who rise up to the highest degree of Virtue, and humane good for
those of the middle order. Besides, our afflictions will be healed if by
patience we learn the method of Cure. For how can they supplicate God in a
manner becoming his Majesty, who deny his Providence and Justice to be
exercised about humane affairs, and that our immortal Soul has a share in those
outward things, as by her own voluntary motions she renders her self worthy?
For whence he will find occasion to bear this present fortune patiently, that
does not refer it to these things, is not be imagined? much less how he should
cure it. For he cannot rest contented in afflictions as things indifferent, or
better than the contrary, for in themselves considered they are to be avoided
as full of grief and trouble. Our nature does not affect such things as
desirable for themselves, unless some good be expected to accrue to us from the
suffering of evil. There is a necessity therefore of Impatience and Uneasiness,
and that our misery be augmented from the ignorance of our selves, and yet that
we suffer punishment nevertheless; but our greatest wickedness will be to think
the world destitute of, or ill administered by Providence. For this comes all
to one, to think there is no God, or if there be, that he exercises no
Providence; or if he does, yet that it is such a one as removes from him all
goodness and justice. Which is an opinion full of all manner of Impiety, and
which drives into all wickedness those who suffer themselves to be led by such
doctrines. For as Piety is the mother of all Virtue, so a defection from that
is the highway to all Wickedness. He only therefore will find out a cure for
his Calamities, who has learnt to BEAR THEM PATIENTLY. And this is to be done
only by Philosophy, which exactly knows the natures of things, and their
consequent operations, whose series and order is the administration of all
things, from which necessarily arises the DIVINE FORTUNE or FATE. Which (as we
have said) is nothing else but the retribution given to every one according to
his deserts, which depends upon God's providence, the good order of the World,
and the will of Man. For if there were no divine Providence, there would not be
that order in the World which one may call FATE, and if none of the other,
there would be no mulct or judgment against the wicked, no nor any reward or
commendation for the good. But upon the supposition of Providence and Order, it
was fit that all men should be born to the same good, provided they had done
nothing to discriminate themselves. But it is plain they are not equally dealt
withal, it is therefore as plain that the inequality of our will, which is
subjected to the judgment of Providence, was the cause of the unequal
distribution, since it is necessary that the lot fall according to desert. But
let us not be troubled that we see the same inequality in Brutes, Plants, and
inanimate things, as in Men; for it does not follow that no Providence presides
over our concerns, because things happen fortuitously with them, or if in them
also there is punishment and judgment, and the consideration of Virtue and
Vice, since there is so much exactness in our concerns.

For first, inanimate things are as common matter to Plants, Animals and Men,
and then some Animals are common food for others, and for Men. So that they do
the same to one another, not with any regard to the merit of them that suffer,
but either to satisfy their own hunger, or to cure a disease; in a word, to
relieve their necessities which way soever they can. So that the infelicity of
Brutes is occasioned by the supply of our needs, and their seeming happiness
depends upon our favor. If it be therefore urged by any that there may be some
beings more excellent than our selves, which may abuse us to supply their
wants, as we seem to use Brutes to supply ours, it must be confessed that they
are mortal, and made appear that the bodies of Men are spent upon their use.
But if nothing superior to Man be mortal (since he himself is the lowest of
all Intelligent-beings, and for this reason came of necessity into a mortal
body, though immortal, and taking an organ of affinity with Brutes, converses
here upon earth) there can be no being which may abuse our miseries to its own
luxury; nay, nothing which may use us to gratify an inordinate humor.

Justice therefore and Order prescribe rules of administration to that God
which presides over us. So that he can do nothing concerning us, but what
tends to the lessening of our wickedness, and the bringing us back to himself.
For he is concerned for us as often as we fall, as for those which are near of
Kin to him. So that it is rightly said that men only are apt to be reclaimed by
modesty, punishment and disgrace. For a rational Creature only has a sense of
Justice. We therefore who are at so great a remove from the nature of brutes,
should have a far distant way of administration. For the law of Providence
agreeable to the nature of the Universe, and in the same order as every thing
had its subsistence from God, so it partakes of his providence.

Now all the Souls of men seem to be produced by God himself particularly,
whereas of Brutes he produced only the kinds, committing them over to the
Plastic virtue of Nature, according to Plato and Timoeus the Pythagorean, who
will have nothing mortal to be the immediate production of God, and that the
souls of Men are made of the same temperament with the Mundane gods, Demons and
Illustrious Heroes; and therefore that Providence is conspicuous in every man
after what manner he is distant from them there, after what manner he aspires
to them, after what manner he lives here, and after what manner he departs
hence thither. None of all which is to be done concerning an irrational nature.
For neither can that come to God which is not to be wrought on by moral
persuasions; neither can that converse upon earth which is naturally an
heavenly plant, neither is it apt to be translated into its proper Orb.

And so much by way of Apology to Malcontents, who endeavor to undermine the
being of Providence; to whom this is fit to be said over and above, that the
greatest argument of a rational and considering frame of mind, is to ENDURE
AFFLICTIONS PATIENTLY, which not only alleviates the present misery, but
prevents future trouble. But what do you by Impatience but add Impiety, the
greatest of evils, to your other labors, and render your grief more pungent by
thinking, that you suffer undeservedly? Will not he that is sick be much more
so if he vexes and pines at his sickness? We should not therefore fret at the
recompense of our deserts, lest by our ill deportment under the present
Calamity we contract a habit of a worse.

And this also is worth considering, that if any one who is fallen into
Poverty, BEAR IT MEEKLY, besides the abatement of his grief by it, he shall
find some other solace and relief. Partly because his own discretion being not
disturbed with grief, will be the more able and expedite to procure him
convenient maintenance, and partly because his neighbors admiring his prudence
and courage, will supply him as far as they can, with things necessary to life;
whereas the impatient and womanly peevish man in the first place contributes to
his own misery, and then being bound up, and as it were benumbed with grief for
his poverty, he becomes altogether unapt either to help himself, or to be
relieved by the contributions of his neighbors; and if any throw him something
by way of alms, that aggravates his discontent as an exprobration of his
poverty.

From what has been said it appears, that it is our interest as well as duty, to
BEAR all ill events PATIENTLY, ascribing the cause of them to the perverseness
and obliquity of our own minds, and considering withal, that since there is a
Providence, he that is now good cannot be neglected, whatever old marks he
bears of the divine displeasure. For the very acquist of virtue carries with it
an abatement of affliction, but by the care of Providence an utter riddance and
delivery from it. For 'twas our own wickedness and the divine judgment
consequent upon it, which brought upon us our Calamities, which again in like
manner are removed by our amendment and the law of Providence, which frees them
from evil, who give themselves up to what is good. Such weighty Precepts do
these Verses afford us, which conduce to ground us in the first rudiments of
Virtue. For they seem to contain the most true measures of Providence, Fate,
and liberty of Will, whereby this discourse has rectified the trouble arising
from the seeming inequality of things, and has demonstrated throughout, that
God is no way the cause of Evil. Which if you join with what went before, the
result of the whole discourse will be one entire confirmation of the Eternity
of the Soul. For his exhorting to the exercise of Justice, to courage in Death,
and to a liberal use of Riches, serves to show that the Soul does not dye with
the Body, But it seems also requisite to our enduring the DIVINE FORTUNE, and
our being able to cure our selves, that the Soul be not generated with the
Body; as to that, it is apparent from both that the Soul is above generation and
corruption, of a distinct nature from the body, and in its own nature Eternal.
For it is as impossible that should last for ever whose production was dated
from some time, as that that should be capable of Corruption which subsisted
from Eternity. If therefore after the dissolution of the body, the surviving
Soul of man is obnoxious to punishment and judgment, and receives just
retributions according to the things done in the body; and if lastly that
cannot always remain which began in some time, it is evident that the Soul did
exist before all time. And thus the Soul of man is found among the eternal
Works of God, and in this respect also partakes of the divine likeness.

But because we have insisted sufficiently on this, it is high time to consider
what follows.

MANY GOOD AND BAD DISCOURSES PROCEED FROM MEN, WHICH NEITHER ADMIRE OVERMUCH,
NOR YET UTTERLY DISDAIN. BUT IF ANY SPEAK UNTRUTH GIVE WAY WITH MILDNESS.
Often good and ill do in discourse unite,
Be not too apt t'admire, nor yet to slight.
But if through error any speak amiss,
Endure't with mildness --

The will of man not being always set either upon good or evil begets discourse
savouring of both in conformity to its contrary affections, whence it comes to
pass that some discourses are true, some good, some bad and some false. Which
variety requires descretion of judgment; that we may choose the good and refuse
the bad, so that we be neither prejudiced against all discourse by condemning
the bad, nor swallow down any thing without distinction out of greediness after
what is good. For by prejudice we often deprive our selves of the benefit of
good, and by too great eagerness of hearing, we suck in the hidden poison of
evil discourses. We must therefore use our appetite of hearing with the best
discretion, that so our desire may bring us to hear all, but our discretion may
refuse what is not good. So shall we keep the Pythagorick Precept, neither too
vehemently moved at bad discourses, nor taking in all without distinction,
because discourses. Nor on the same account abstaining from good ones. For we
do not embrace the good because discourses, but because true, nor condemn the
bad for any other reason than because false. Nay, I may confidently affirm that
none are to be reckoned among discourses but what are true. For they only
retain the dignity of the rational nature, being the offspring of a mind
disposed to what is best, and in possession of its proper ornament. But false
discourses are indeed no discourses at all. For since they lead into Vice and
Error, they not only degenerate from the ingenuousness of discourse, but are
the voice of a Soul divested of Reason and immerc'd in Passion. You're advised
therefore, not to take in all, lest you swallow that which is false, nor to
reject all, lest you reject the good too. For it is absurd both ways, to hate
the good with the evil, and to embrace falsehood for the sake of truth. But we
ought to commend the good, and upon admission to reduce it into practice, and
to examine where and how far it is consonant to truth. But against the false, to
contend with force of argument, which is supplied from the rules delivered in
Logic for the discerning of truth; and when we can overthrow what is false,
not to do it with violence and rudeness, but to follow the truth with
mildness, with decent reprehensions to confute falsehood and in the words of the
Verse, to GIVE WAY WITH MILDNESS; by which we are not commanded to yield the
Cause (as they say) but to hear without Passion. For when he bids us GIVE WAY
TO FALSEHOOD WITH MILDNESS, he does not mean that we should embrace it, but only
give it a patient hearing, and not to count it such a strange thing if men fall
off sometimes from truth. For humane nature lies open to a multitude of
erroneous opinions when it does not closely adhere to its common Notices. It Is
no wonder therefore (says the Verse) if a man never imbued with the principles
of truth, nor of any experience, assert opinions contrary to truth. Nay on the
contrary, 'twou'd be a wonder if a man who is both untaught and unpracticed in
dispute; should stumble on truth by chance, we should therefore hear those that
err with allowance, and learn by their defects what evils we our selves are
free from, who being by the community of nature subject to the same passions,
are yet privileged from them by the Preservative of knowledge. Besides, the
very courage and confidingness of knowledge, conduces much to mildness. For the
mind which comes sufficiently provided to engage in the defense of truth, can
calmly stand the shock of false opinions, having preconceiv'd in the
consideration of truth whatever might be alleged against it. What can disturb
such a man as unanswerable? His very confidence will suggest thoughts to him
for the confutation of error. The knowing man therefore, will learn quietness
and sedateness, not only from his morality, but from his very confidence.

And so much for that Prudence which is to be used in distinguishing Discourses.

Next comes the habit of declining Deceit (necessary to a wise man) to be
treated of.

BUT OBSERVE WHAT I TELL YOU IN EVERY THING; LET NO MAN ENTICE YOU EITHER BY
WORDS OR DEEDS, TO DO OR SAY ANY THING WHICH IS NOT PROFITABLE TO YOU.
-- But be sure of this
That none by word or action you entice
To do, or speak to your own prejudice.

This Precept is of general extent, and is equivalent with another before
mentioned, in these words.

From filthy actions at all times forbear,
Whether with others, or alone you are;
And of all things, your self learn to revere.
For he who has learnt to stand in awe of himself, and dares not commit any
filthy action either in solitude, or in company; nay, and affords not the least
entertainment to any such thing even in his very imagination, out of reverence
to the guardian reason which is within, this man is he, who is able to hear
this, LET NONE DECEIVE YOU EITHER BY WORD OR ACTION. For he only is above all
Imposture and Fallacy, who knowing that he has the dignity of a man, suffers
himself neither to be wheedled with flattery, nor dejected with threats,
whether he has to deal with friends or enemies.

Now the ways of DECEPTION are either by words or actions. The former consists
in Flatteries and Threatenings, the latter in setting before us Bribes and
Punishments.

Against all these we should have our minds fortified with right reason, that
we be neither charmed nor inslaved either by Pleasure or Pain, which on all
sides assault our Constancy. For when right reason, which is within, has set on
both sides those two invincible keepers, Temperance and Fortitude, to guard the
Soul, it will secure us from being DECEIVED either by the smooth insinuations
of things pleasing, or the dread of things terrible, which even temper of mind
is accompanied with that exact justice which we were above exhorted to exercise
in Deed and Word. By this means, none will be ever able to persuade us to let
fall a word, or commit an action that is not consonant to right reason. For
it is manifest that if we stand most in awe of our selves, none will appear to
us more venerable or more dreadful than our selves, that we should be induced
to speak or do any thing besides our duty. For both are prejudicial to the
mind, and what is hurtful to that, can never be for our advantage, since our
minds are properly we our selves. This therefore is to be diligently heeded,
WHICH IS NOT PROFITABLE TO YOU. Where the first word is to be referred to what
you properly are. If then this be the thing enjoined, that none deceive you by
Word or Deed, to do or speak what will not be for your Profit, and if by YOU,
is understood the reasonable Soul, you will not let any one (if you're wise)
injure your rational nature, which is your self. For it is your Soul which is
YOU, this which you see is but your body. Thus distinguishing, you will prevent
confusion of natures, and find out wherein humane nature truly consists, if you
take neither your body nor the things without for your own, and if you never
contend on their account as for your self, lest you be drawn to the love of
your body or of riches. For when we know not what we our selves are, we shall
be also ignorant of that which we care for, and shall be apt to be concerned
for any thing rather than our selves, whom we should make our chiefest care.
For if that which uses the body is the Soul, and the body serves only as an
instrument for that, and if other things are invented to help the frail nature
of this instrument, it is apparent that what is first and principal should be
first and principally cared for, and the second only in subordination to the
first. For this reason a wise man will not be negligent of his health, not out
of a principal regard to his body, but that he may accommodate it to the use of
his mind, and render it apt to obey its operations with all readiness and
expediteness. And in the last place, he will take care of the last, ordering
the things that are without to the welfare of the instrument. It Is the Soul
therefore which is his chief, and perhaps only care, since the care of things
subordinate to it tends to its advantage.

Now every thing which is contrary to virtue comes under the notion of WHAT IS
NOT PROFITABLE TO YOU. For to whom Virtue is profitable, to him what is
contrary to Virtue will be unprofitable. He counsels you therefore to summon
together all the aids of Virtue, when he enjoins you not to give ear to him
that endeavors to seduce you from your integrity by whatever methods he tries
to do it.

For example, not if a Tyrant allure you with promises, or confirm them in
reality, not if he terrifies you with threats, or offers violence by tortures;
not if he hide his fraud under the mask of Courtesy, let him seduce your Soul
from WHAT IS PROFITABLE.

Now the only things that are profitable to it, are Truth and Virtue. You shall
therefore be out of the reach of all FRAUD, if knowing your own essence, both
what it is, and what it naturally resembles, you have always a special care of
the image which it bears: and if you look upon whatsoever perverts you from
this likeness, as the greatest damage you are capable of. For this is the very
thing WHICH IS NOT PROFITABLE TO YOU, which seduces you from the likeness of
God. And since that is most for our interest whatsoever promotes this likeness,
I would fain know what any one can offer to us of such moment or value, that we
should quit our desire of being like God for its sake? Is it the giving of
riches? or is it the taking them away? But alas, these we have learnt to desire
or refuse as right reason shall dictate to us. Neither are we ignorant of the
uncertainty of their possession. What if they escape the hands of the Thief,
how many other ways are there of losing them? To which we will add one more,
which is, to exchange riches for a voluntary poverty joined with honesty,
quitting them for a good cause, and redeeming our Virtue at as great a rate, as
he would do us harm who endeavors to spoil us of it. But he will set before
us torments and death. This is easily answered. It Is not we which shall suffer
these things, if we preserve what is our own; but it is the Body only which
suffers all the injury. The Body, which by dying, suffers nothing contrary to
its nature. For it is by nature subject to death, section, and infinite other
injuries, which every disease can inflict more than a Tyrant.

Why therefore do we so much bestir our selves, to fly those things which we
cannot avoid? why rather don't we preserve that which is in our power, to keep
inviolable? what by nature is mortal, can by no art be exempted from appointed
death, but what we have immortal (which is our Soul, our selves) we can adorn
with Virtue, if we faint not at the threats of death, which when we undergo on
a just account, we may make a Virtue of the necessity of Nature by a right
election. These are the great things which one man can inflict upon another.
But the inner recesses of the Soul are subject to none, but free, if we our
selves will, if we do not out of an inordinate passion for the body and things
without, enslave our liberty, selling the good of our souls for a Momentary
life and riches.

These are the things which the Precept under consideration commands us always
to observe, by which the stability and constancy of Virtue is sealed up and
confirmed.

Let us now proceed to other Precepts of the same import.

ADVISE BEFORE ACTION THAT NO FOLLY ENSUE; HE IS A MISERABLE MAN THAT DOES OR
SPEAKS WHAT IS INCONSIDERATE. THAT DO WHICH WILL NOT TROUBLE YOU AFTERWARD.
Think before action, Folly to prevent,
Rash words and acts, are their own punishment,
That do, which done, after you will repent.

Prudence of Counsel brings forth Virtues, perfects them and preserves them,
being at once their Parent, Nurse and Guardian. For when we calmly deliberate
after what manner we should live, then we choose the beauty of Virtue. And when
upon deliberation we resolve generously to encounter all Agonies on the account
of Virtue, and accustom our selves to the possession of it, we keep our minds
incorrupt in all the storms of Calamity, not at all startled or dismayed by
tumults from without, so as to change our purpose, or think any course of life
happy besides that which we once concluded best for its self. So that there are
three offices of good counsel. 1. The election of the best life. 2. The
exercise of that which we have chosen. 3. A constant observation of what is
once well resolved.

The first of these is that reason which goes before action, and is the
principle of acting.

The middle is the reason with the action, which accommodates every thing that
is done to the preceding principles.

The third is the reason in the action, which examines all that is done, and
judges of its right performance.

But the excellency of good Counsel shines throughout, partly by bringing forth
virtues, partly by nourishing, and partly by preserving and guarding them.

So that in this consists the beginning, middle and end of our Virtues, by this
alone our ills are removed and our virtues perfected. For our nature being
rational, and consequently capable of deliberation, when by its own will it is
led either to good or bad Counsels, then the life which is according to nature
preserves its essence, but an election of Evil corrupts it as far as it is
possible. The corruption of an immortal being is Vice, the Parent of which is
want of Counsel, which the Verse exhorts you to avoid, THAT so FOLLY MAY NOT
ENSUE. Now FOLLY is all one with Misery and Vice. For HE IS A MISERABLE MAN
THAT SPEAKS OR DOES INCONSIDERATELY. But if you deliberate before you act, you
will never be guilty of any foolish word or action, which they must needs be
involved in who are guilty of unadvisedness. For Repentance argues the weakness
of Election, when Experience only convinces of the damage, as good Counsel
produces a firm election, showing the profitableness of the action.

The profitableness, I say, not in relation to the Body or any thing without,
but to our selves, to whom it is commanded to ADVISE BEFORE ACTION, and to do
such things as will occasion us (that is our Souls) no after trouble. For what
advantage will it be by Perjuries, Murders, or any other evil actions, to
increase our store of outward things, and in the mean time to be poor within,
to want the good of the Soul? and then either to be insensible of this, and so
to aggravate the evil, or if our Conscience be awakened to a sense of what we
have done, to be tortured in our spirit, to dread the punishment of Hell, and
to find no other remedy to cure our misery, but by taking Sanctuary at
Annihilation.

So apt is he to cure one Evil by another, who solaces himself in his
wickedness, with the utter destruction of his Soul, and thinks himself worthy
that nothing of him should remain after death, that he may escape Judgment. For
if a wicked man might have his will his Soul would not be immortal, to avoid
punishment. He therefore endeavors to prevent the Judge of Hell, by adjudging
himself to death, as if a wicked Soul were not fit so much as to be. And this
sentence which he gives on himself becomes his inconsiderateness well enough,
whereby he was at first betrayed into sin. But the Judge of Hell who does
Justice according to the rule of Truth, will not sentence his Soul not to be,
but not to be wicked, and will endeavor to abate his wickedness by applying
Castigations for the cure of Nature, as Physicians heal Malign Ulcers by
Scarifyings and Searings. Then he will take vengeance of the faults,
endeavoring to blot out the wickedness of the Soul by Repentance. Not
annihilating its substance, but rather by purging away the passions whereby it
was corrupted, reducing it to its primitive state. For the Soul of Man is in
danger of losing its being, when diverted to that which is contrary to its
nature. But when recalled to that which is according to its nature, it renews
as it were the lease of its very nature, and re-assumes that purity of being
which was corrupted by the mixture and dross of the Passions.

It should therefore be our greatest endeavor not to sin at all, but if we
fall into sin, suddenly to betake our selves to Justice as to a sovereign
Medicine, rectifying our ill Counsel by the help of better. For when we fall
from our integrity we are re-instated into it by a just Repentance, when we
admit the divine Correction.

Now Repentance is the very beginning of Philosophy, the avoidance of all
FOOLISH WORDS AND ACTIONS, and the first preparation to a life not to be
repented of. For he that advises well before he enters upon action, does not
fall into surprising troubles, neither is he ignorant that many of his
enterprises may have an unwelcom issue, but yet he still consents to his
present lot, and examines fortuitous events. So that he does not overlook real
good out of a greedy expectation of that which is so called, or commit any evil
through fear of the contrary, but having his mind always intent upon the Law of
God, squares his life accordingly.

But that you may know he is a miserable man that speaks and acts
inconsiderately, see how Medea in the Tragedy laments her self, who when
through excess of love, she had unadvisedly betrayed her Country, surrendered
up her self to a Stranger, but afterward slighted by him, she thought her
burden insupportable, and breaks out into this Imprecation, Thunder and
Lightning on this head descend.
Then she unravels all the wicked actions of her life; then she INCONSIDERATELY
wishes what is done were undone, and at last madly endeavors to cure one evil
with another.

And if you have a mind to see Homer's Agamemnon, you have him crying out under
the penance of his inordinate anger, I am disturbed, my Heart is from me torn.


And then he quenched the fire of his eyes, which was at first kindled with
passion, with a shower of tears.

Such is the whole life of an INCONSIDERATE man, who by reason of contrary
passions is liable to various changes. He is odious in prosperity, pitiful in
adversity, headlong in hope, and dejected in fear. In a word, he that is void
of good Counsel changes his mind with every blast of fortune.

Lest therefore our life should prove such a sad Tragedy by acting and speaking
inconsiderately, let us use right reason as our guide in all things, imitating
that of Socrates, I can hearken to none of mine but my reason. Now all that may
come under the notion of ours, though not of our selves, which serves to the
use of reason, (viz.) Anger, Desire, Sense, and the Body it self, which is
given as an instrument to these faculties; none of which (as he says) should be
followed but right reason, that is, the rational part of us when disposed
according to nature. For this is able to discern what is to be SAID and DONE.
Now to act according to the dictates of right reason, is the same as to obey
God. For the rational nature being once raised to the possession of its native
brightness, wills and acts according to the determinations of the divine law
and pleasure, and the holy Soul that thus participates of the Deity, becomes in
every thing conformable to the mind of God, and frames the whole system and
comprehension of its actions, by the conduct and guidance of that eternal
Splendour. But it is not so with the Soul contrariwise disposed, which knows not
God, walks in the dark and as it were at a venture, being destitute of the only
rule of good, God and Reason. So many and so great are the advantages of good
Counsel.

Add to the other advantages of Preconsultation, that it cuts off the causes of
uncertain opinions, recovers us to knowledge, and procures us the most pleasant
and best life, as appears from what ensues.

DO NOTHING WHICH YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND, BUT LEARN WHAT IS DECENT, AND SO YOU
WILL LIVE THE MOST PLEASANT LIFE.
That which you know not, do not undertake,
But learn what is fit, if Life you will pleasant make.

Not to attempt any thing which we are ignorant of, is the only way to keep us
from sinning. But to learn the things which conduce to the best life, does not
only secure us from sin, but serves to rectify our actions. For Intelligence
removes all precipitancy of opinion, and the possession of Science gives
expediteness of action. Now both these are excellent things, not to be ignorant
that we are ignorant, and to know what we do not, which is attended with the
BEST and MOST PLEASANT LIFE. Such is that which is freed from Opinion, and
replenished with Science, when we are not puffed up with a conceit of what we
do not know, but are willing to learn what is worth learning. And those things
alone are so, which lead us to the likeness of God, which make us deliberate
before action, that folly be not committed, which will not suffer us to be
seduced by any, either by word or deed, which qualify us to distinguish
occasional discourses, which persuade us to bear mildly and to heal the divine
fortune, which instruct us how to undergo Death and Poverty, to exercise
Justice, Temperance and Continence, which declare to us the laws of Friendship
and the honor due to Parents; lastly, which inform us in the true way of
honoring the Superior beings.

These and such like are the things which the present discourse recommends to
us as FIT to be learnt, which are attended with the MOST PLEASANT LIFE. For the
virtuous man has also his pleasures, but they are such as are not to be
repented of, and which imitate the solidity and permanency of Virtue. For all
pleasure is the Companion of action. For it has to subsistence of its self, but
accompanies us in our doing such and such things.

Hence it is that the worser actions are accompanied with the worser pleasures,
and virtuous actions with good pleasures. So that the good man does not only
excel the wicked man in what is good, but has also the advantage of him even in
pleasure, for whose sake alone he is wicked. For as much as one disposition is
more excellent than another, so much is one pleasure more eligible than another.

Since then a life ordered according to the rules of Virtue, and adhering to
the divine likeness, is truly divine, but that which is spent in wickedness, is
brutish and without God; it is plain, that the pleasure of a good man imitates
that divine Complacency which waits on God and heavenly minds, but the pleasure
of a wicked man (to give them a common name for once) amounts to no more than
the gratification of a Sottish Appetite, the entertainment of a Beast.

Pleasures and Sorrows are put in our reach, from whose fountains whosoever
draws both whence, when, and as much as he ought is an happy man, but he that
knows not the measures of these, is emphatically miserable.

Thus therefore the life which is freed from Opinion, is only void of sin, but
that which is well fraught with Science is happy and perfect, the MOST PLEASANT
AND BEST LIFE. Let us never therefore do what we KNOW NOT, nor what we know,
when we ought not. For Ignorance leads into wickedness, but Knowledge seeks out
a convenient season. For there are many good things which by change of time
become evil.

Let us therefore mind the order of the Precept, which by restraining us from
action keeps us sinless, and by exhorting us to learn not all things
promiscuously, but only what is FIT, leads us to the most excellent actions. For
goodness of action does not consist barely in not sinning, but in KNOWING
WHAT IS FIT; the former is effected by the purgation of Opinion, the latter by
the presence of Knowledge. But if not sinning be accounted well doing, see what
will accrue to you, SO SHALL YOU LIVE THE MOST PLEASANT LIFE. But what is that?
which derives its pleasure from Virtue. In which both honesty and pleasure
concur. If therefore what is good and what is pleasant be singly desirable, what
will they be when united? He tells you, THE MOST PLEASANT LIFE. For he that
chooses pleasure with filthiness, although for a while he be sweetly
entertained; yet at last through the filthiness annexed to his enjoyment, he is
brought to a painful repentance. But he that prefers Virtue with all her
labors and difficulties, though at first for want of use it sits heavy upon
him, yet by the conjunction of good, he alleviates the labor, and at last
enjoys pure and unallai'd pleasure with his virtue. For if any filthy thing be
done with pleasure, the pleasure is gone, but the stain remains. So that of
necessity that life is most unhappy which is most wicked, and that most
pleasant which is most virtuous.

And so much may suffice for this. But since the discipline and good usage of
the Body conduces to the perfection of the Soul, observe what he subjoins.

NEITHER OUGHT HEALTH OF BODY TO BE NEGLECTED, BUT A MEASURE IS TO BE OBSERVED
IN DRINK, MEAT, AND EXERCISE. AND I CALL THAT A MEASURE WHICH DOES YOU NO
PREJUDICE.
Health is a thing you ought not to despise,
In Diet use a Mean, and Exercise;
And that is a mean, whence does no damage rise.

Since our mortal Body is given to us as an instrument whereby to lead a life
here upon earth, we should neither pamper it with immoderate delicacy, nor yet
pinch it by substraction of necessaries. For both are equal impediments, and
alike take away its usefulness. So that we are exhorted by the Verse to treat
our bodies moderately, and not to neglect them when either they grow insolent
and rebellious, or when discomposed with sickness, that being kept in a good
natural temper, they may yield obedience to our Souls which preside over them
without impediment. That which uses is the Soul, and the thing used is the
Body. The Artist therefore should take care of the Instrument. For it is not
enough that we will to use it, but we must take care that it be in a capacity
of being serviceable to us. And since its nature is under continual generation
and corruption, and is nourished by repletion and evacuation, sometimes aliment
supplying what is wasted, and sometimes exercise retrenching superfluities,
there must be a MEASURE applied to repletion and evacuation. Now this MEASURE
is that proportion which adapts the habit of the body to the thinking
operations of the Soul, and consequently has regard to that degreed of HEALTH
which becomes a Philosopher. He will therefore choose such exercise and
nourishment as shall neither pamper the body, nor too much divert it from the
motions of the mind. For he does not care for his body simply and absolutely,
but for his body serving his mind. Wherefore he refuses an Athletick fare which
consults the body without the soul, and declines all that luxury which is
called (...), as opposite to the rational light of the soul. But as far as a
good habit of body will serve to discharge the labors of study and brave
undertakings, he will endeavor to get it to himself, whoever intends to live
prudently. For to him these words are directed, I CALL THAT A MEAN WHICH DOES
THEE NO HARM; as if he had said, let not the MEASURE of bodily care hurt THEE
who art all rational Soul. It becomes THEE who art an observer of the former
precepts, to use such Meat, Drink and Exercise which will render the body docil
and manageable to the works of Virtue, and which will not provoke the
irrational part to throw off the rains of presiding reason.

Now we must state the measure of caring for the body with the greater
attention, because it contains the cause of all the motions which arise from
it. For if the Horse stumbles it is through the ill management of the Rider.

Now in assigning the MEASURE concerning the body he puts DRINK before MEAT,
because it is hardest to be temperate in that, and because it more disorders the
good habit of the body. And in the third place he puts EXERCISE, as that which
corrects the fullness of diet, and makes way for wholesome Nourishment. For these
run in a Circle, Nourishment and Exercise, Exercise and Nourishment. For good
nourishment makes us able for exercise, and exercise moderately used conduces
to nourishment, which begets a firm Constitution of body. But the MEASURE of
these varies in several persons, according to the peculiar design which they
propose to themselves in caring for the body. For every one endeavors to make
his body a serviceable instrument for what he engages in. The Wrestler for the
motions of the Ring, the Husbandman for the labors of the Plough. One employs
his body to one service, another to another. But what does the Philosopher?
what does he aim at in the discipline of his body? For what will he make it
instrumental rather than for Philosophy and the labors of the Brain? He will
therefore so nourish and discipline his body, that it may become the instrument
of Prudence, caring for his Soul in the first place, and for his Body only in
subordination to that. For neither will he prefer it before that which uses it,
nor altogether neglect it for the users sake. But will take care of it in its
proper place, as of an instrument, referring the HEALTH of the Body to the
perfection of the Soul which uses it; wherefore he will not nourish it with any
thing indifferently, but only with things fitting. For there are some things
which we ought not to feed on, because they dull the Senses and weigh down the
Spirit which is kin to the Soul, to material and gross affections. Of which he
speaks afterward, when he bids us abstain with judgment from those meats which
were mentioned in the book concerning the Lustrations and Expiations of the
Soul.

Such as these he will altogether refuse. And of those things which he may eat,
he will consider the quantity and the season, and as Hippocrates advises, will
diligently attend to the season of the year, the Country, Age, and such like.
Neither will he inconsiderately fill himself with lawful meats, neither will
he indiscreetly prescribe the same course of diet to Young and Old, Healthy and
Sick, to a Novice in Philosophy and a great Proficient in it.

All these are contained in the Pythagorick MEASURE, when he adds, LET IT NOT
HURT THEE. For all things that tend to the happy life of a wise man, he
referred in that short saying to the care of the Body, and to what he had said
before concerning the health of the Soul, he adds, that THE HEALTH OF THE BODY
IS BY NO MEANS TO BE NEGLECTED. So that there he recommends the perfection of
the User, here the preservation of the Instrument; join therefore this with the
other, and you shall find, whoever you are to whom the Precept is given, that
to be the MEASURE of caring for the Body, WHICH DOES NOT HURT YOU, which does
not hinder your Philosophical purpose, but help and further the progress of the
Soul in the ways of Virtue. He calls it the MEASURE of drinking and eating,
because he forbids all excess and defect, and recommends what is middle and
temperate. Whence it is easy to restrain our Appetite, Sleep, Lust and Anger.
For that which is here called MEASURE, corrects all inordinateness in them, and
removes whatever grieves and presses down the Soul aspiring to God, who is all
mind. For it becomes the Soul in her addresses to the Eternal Mind, to be all
calm and serene, and not to be disturbed with passionate Motions, but to have
all well composed below, that she may attend quietly upon the Contemplation of
things above. This is that MEASURE WHICH DOES YOU NO HURT; this is that which
at once curbs the Appetite, and yet consults the good of the Instrument; this
is that which discovers the virtue of the Soul, and yet dissolves not the good
temperament of the Body. For it is a part of Virtue to know how to preserve the
Instrument, and fit it for the use of a Philosopher.

But since the care of the Body consists not only in ALIMENT and EXERCISE, but
there is need of many other things, such as Cloths, Household Stuff, and a House
to contain all, and since there is need also of a MEASURE in these, which may
remove luxury and sordidness from the whole course of our life, he with good
reason subjoins,

ACCUSTOM YOUR SELF TO A CLEAN WAY OF LIVING WITHOUT LUXURY, AND BEWARE HOW
YOU DO THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE OPEN TO CENSURE. DON'T SPEND HIGH OUT OF SEASON,
LIKE ONE THAT KNOWS NOT WHAT IS MAGNIFICENCE. NEITHER BE SORDID AND NIGGARDLY;
MEDIOCRITY IS BEST IN ALL THINGS.
Be Neat, but not Luxurious in your Fare,
How you incur men's Censure, have a care.
Let not thy' state in ill timed Treats be spent,
Like one that knows not what is Magnificent.
Nor by a thrift untimely, rake too clean,
It Is best in every thing to use a Mean.

A MEASURE (says he) is good, not only in eating and drinking, but in all other
things, as freeing us from the sins of Excess and Desect. For there may be much
immoderateness in all those things now mentioned. Partly by LUXURY, partly by
SORDIDNESS. Both of these are to be blamed as disagreeable to the manners of a
Philosopher, and deviating from the right temperament of the body. For too much
NEATNESS will slide into LUXURY and softness, and too much Sparingness into
SORDIDNESS and Slovenliness.

That we may not therefore incur that by our NEATNESS, nor this by OVER
SPARINGNESS, let us take to the middle path, declining the Vices on both hands,
and making one a remedy for the other. So using a SPARE DIET as not to be
SORDID, and so again a NEAT way of living as not to be LUXURIOUS. Let us
therefore prefer a MEDIOCRITY in all things which concern the body, choosing
that kind of Apparel which is NEAT and yet not DELICATE, and so every thing
else. For it is fit since the rational Soul presides over the Body, that all
things belonging to the body should also be governed by Reason, which will
neither approve LUXURY nor SORDIDNESS, dictating that all things should be
agreeable to its dignity. Lest therefore it should be seduced into LUXURY, it
chooses what is remote from DELICACY; and lest it should be accustomed to
SORDIDNESS and deformity, it chooses NEATNESS.

For example, Apparel not vile and beggarly, but clean and decent.
Household Stuff not of Gold and Silver, but of ordinary materials, an House not
adorned with costly Stones, nor of excessive beauty and grandeur, but
answerable to the needs of the body.

In a word, NEATNESS throughout the whole life, excludes LUXURY as superfluous,
and admits what is without LUXURY as chiefly subservient to Necessity. For both
Cloths, House and household stuff are then most useful when competent and
clean. For what need of a great dish when there is but little meat? And to what
purpose is a sordid one but to disadvantage it? What need of an extraordinary
great House have they, who will live in one corner of it? and what is a sordid
house good for that is not fit to dwell in? And so in all other things you will
find these two extremes utterly unusefull. For both transgress the MEDIOCRITY
of use, and pass into the boundlessness of desire.

Wherefore let all things in your life be tempered with such a MEAN as declines
the bordering vices. ACCUSTOM YOUR SELF (says he) TO A CLEAN WAY OF LIVING.

Afterward observing how prone we are to Luxury, he adds, WHICH IS WITHOUT
DELICACY. Which if he had said at first, because he foresaw an easy descent
into Sordidness, he would have added CLEAN, always restraining the proclivity
of Intemperance by opposing one to the other, that from the mixture of both may
proceed a Masculine way of life, and such as becomes a rational Creature.

If we thus order our life, we shall obtain another great advantage. We shall
decline CENSURE and ENVY, the constant adherents to Greatness; if always eyeing
the golden MEAN, we never provoke our neighbors either to hate us for our
LUXURY, or blame us for our SORDIDNESS, to reprehend us as sometimes profuse
and lavish, and sometimes inquiring into little things, which are beneath our
notice. For all these things will make us be taxed with immoderation among
those we live with. For this is meant by the word ENVY, as if he had said,
beware of doing any thing which justly exposes you to the common blame.

Now LUXURY and SORDIDNESS in life, are to be reckoned among those things which
are deservedly blamable by the Vulgar, and in expense of Money, Profusion and
Stinginess. In the management therefore of all outward and secular concerns,
MEDIOCRITY and Liberality should show a prudent habit of mind, and a MEAN WHICH
IS BEST IN ALL THINGS. For it becomes him who is a lover of tranquillity, to
shun all occasions of ENVY as much as he can, and to be as much afraid of
provoking it, as of rouzing a sleeping Lion, that he may make a proficiency in
excellent things without disturbance.

Now the way to live an unenvied and inobnoxious life, is to choose that which
is slender and without Sordidness, and to decline that Pride which arises from
the ignorance of what is excellent, which is the mother of two evils, PROFUSION
and UNSEASONABLE THRIFT. The former of which argues a dissolute, the latter, a
narrow Spirit. But Liberality avoids both, finding out what is becoming in
Incomes and Expenses, and ordering the whole Scheme of outward things according
to right reason.

And these are the directions given in the Verses concerning the best use of
the Body and the things without, that so the beauty of Virtue may be seen even
in these.

Now the following Precept sums up all.

DO THOSE THINGS WHICH WILL NOT HURT YOU, AND CONSIDER BEFORE YOU ACT.
Be not Mischievous to your self, advise
Before you act --

He has already used many expressions of this nature, and here he gives a
Summary of them all, advising to abstain from HURTFUL things, and to do what
is profitable, and that these may be distinguished to REASON BEFORE ACTION,
what is to be done and what not. For then is the time for good Counsel when
matters are yet entire. And when he says, WHICH WILL NOT HURT YOU, by YOU is to
be understood that which is the true Man, or rational Nature, and he that
embraces the study of Wisdom and aspires to the divine Likeness, who knows
whatsoever is contrary to right reason and the divine Law, and which hinders us
from being like God. Now these are wont to be increased upon us by the
Conversation of those among whom we live, by the administration of the Body
joined to us, and by our Goods which are for our use. He therefore that is
enamored with divine good, should take care how he is enticed to do any thing
which is not for his advantage, and how he indulges his body those enjoyments
which will cost him a dear Repentance.

Lastly, how he embraces any thing which may take off his mind from the study
of Wisdom, and of which he will shortly after repent.

The consideration of all this should put us forward in the course of virtuous
living, that when we come to confess what we have done, we may make up our
Accounts with pleasure.

To which in the next place he exhorts us.

NEITHER ADMIT SLEEP INTO YOUR EYES TILL YOU HAVE THRICE RECOLLECTED EVERY
SINGLE ACTION OF THE DAY. WHEREIN HAVE I TRANSGRESSED? WHAT HAVE I DONE? WHAT
DUTY HAVE I OMITTED? RUN OVER THESE THINGS BEGINNING FROM THE FIRST, AND THEN
IF YOU HAVE DONE EVIL, BE TROUBLED; IF GOOD, REJOICE.
-- And never let your eyes
The sweet refreshings of soft slumber taste,
Till you have thrice severe reflections past
On th'actions of the day, from first to last.
Wherein have I transgressed? what done have I?
What duty unperform'd have I passed by?
And if your actions ill on search you find,
Let Grief; if good, let Joy possess your mind.

In this place you should collect together the sense of all the foregoing
Precepts, that so giving heed to them as to the laws of God in the inward
judicature of the Soul, you may make a just examination of what you have done
well or ill. For how will our remembrance reprehend us for doing ill, or praise
us for doing well, unless the preceding Meditation receive some laws, according
to which the whole tenor of our life should be ordered, and to which we should
conform the very private recesses of Conscience all our lives long? He requires
also that this examination be daily repeated, that by continual returns of
recollection, we may not be deceived in our judgment.

The time which he recommends for this work, is about Even or Bedtime, that we
may conclude the action of the day with the judgment of Conscience, making the
examination of our Conversation an Evening Song to God. WHEREIN HAVE I
TRANSGRESSED? WHAT HAVE I DONE? WHAT DUTY HAVE I OMITTED? So shall we measure
our lives by the rules above mentioned, if to the law of the mind, we join the
judgment of reason.

What then does the law of the Mind say? That we should honor the more
excellent Natures according to their Essential order, that we should have our
Parents and Relations in high esteem, love and embrace good men, raise our
selves above corporeal affections, every where stand in awe of our selves,
carefully observe justice, consider the frailty of riches and momentary life,
embrace the lot which falls to us by divine judgment, delight in a divine
frame of spirit, convert our mind to what is most excellent, love good
discourses, not lie open to impostures, not be servilely affected in the
possession of Virtue, advise before action to prevent repentance, free our
selves from uncertain opinions, live with knowledge, and lastly, that we should
adapt our bodies and the things without to the exercise of Virtue. These are
the things which the Law giving mind has implanted in the Souls of men, which
when reason admits, it becomes a most vigilant Judge of it self, in this
manner, WHEREIN HAVE I TRANSGRESSED? WHAT HAVE I DONE; And if afterward she
finds her self to have spent the whole day agreeably to the foregoing rules,
she is rewarded with a divine Complacency. And if she find any thing done
amiss, she corrects her self by the restorative of an after admonition.

Wherefore he would have us keep off Sleep by the readiness and alacrity of
Reason. And this the body will easily endure, if temperately dieted it has not
contracted a necessity of sleeping. By which means even our most natural
appetites are subjected to the empire of Reason.

DO NOT ADMIT SLEEP (says he) TILL YOU HAVE EXAMINED EVERY ACTION OF THE DAY.
And what is the form of examination? WHEREIN HAVE I TRANSGRESSED? WHAT HAVE I
DONE? WHAT DUTY HAVE I OMITTED? For we sin two ways. By doing what we should
not, and by not doing what we should. For it is one thing not to do well, and
another thing to commit Evil. One is a sin of Omission, and the other of
Commission.

For instance, It Is our duty to Pray, but not to Blaspheme, to nourish our
Parents but not to revile them. He that does the former of these does what he
ought, he that does the latter what he ought not. Though there is as much guilt
in a sin of omission, as in a sin of commission.

He exhorts also that we proceed methodically in our examination from the
beginning to the end, leaving nothing out in the middle, which is implied by
the word, RUN OVER. For oftentimes change of order deceives the judgment, and
makes us favorable to our ill actions through disorder of memory. Besides, a
daily recollection of our actions, begets care and studiousness of
Conversation, and a sense of our immortality. And this is worth our admiration,
that when he bid us recollect every thing, yet he added not, wherein have I
done well? or what duty have I performed? But he turned the memory to what was
a less occasion of pride, requiring a scrutiny only of our sins. And as for the
Judge, he has constituted that which is most just and impartial, and most
intimate and domestic, the Conscience, Right-reason, or a Man's self, which he
had before cautioned us to stand in awe of above all things. For who can so
admonish another as every man can himself? For he that is at his own liberty
will use the freedom of nature, and shake off the admonitions of others, when
he is not minded to follow them. But Reason which is within us, cannot choose
but hear it self. God has set this over us as a Guardian, Instructor and
Schoolmaster. And this the Verse makes the Judge of the days action, acquiesces
in its determination whether it condemns or approves it self. For when it reads
over what is done in the Register of Memory, then looking to the exemplar of
the Law, it pronounces it self worthy of honor or dishonor. This course if
daily followed perfects the divine image in them that use it, leading them by
additions and subtractions to the beauty of Virtue, and all attainable
perfection. For here end the instructions about civil Virtue.

He now proceeds to the precepts which make us more particularly resemble God.

LABOR IN THESE THINGS, MEDITATE ON THESE THINGS, LOVE THESE THINGS. THESE
WILL LEAD YOU INTO THE WAY OF THE DIVINE VIRTUE. I SWEAR BY HIM WHO DELIVERED
TO US THE QUATERNARY, THE FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL NATURE.
This do, this think, to this your heart incline;
This way will lead you to the life divine.
Believed, I swear by him who did us show
The mystery of Four, whence all things flow.

What is said here is the same with that in the Introduction, that practick
Philosophy makes a man perfect in civil Virtue, but the speculative makes him
like God by the illumination of the mind through truth, and that in reference
to us lesser things should always go before greater. For it is easier to use
humane life with moderation, than to put it quite off, which may be done by
wholly converting ones self to Contemplation. And besides, it is impossible to
have a secure and undisturbed possession of truth, if the brutish faculties be
not subjected to us by moral Virtue. For since the rational Soul is of a middle
nature between the pure mind and a privation of reason, then only can it
inseparably adhere to the mind above it, when being freed from the contagion of
the inferior passions, it touches them purely. And that it does when it does
not comply with the brutish part or mortal body, but as another cares for
things of another nature, bestowing as much care on the body as the divine Law
requires, which does not permit us to throw it off, but commands us to stay
till God shall set us at liberty.

Such a Soul therefore will stand in need of a twofold Virtue. Civil, which
subdues the brutish Appetite to inferior things, and Contemplative, which
unites us to the divine excellency.

Now of these two Virtues these Verses are the middle term. This do, this
think, to this your heart incline;
is the conclusion of civil Virtue, and this other This way will lead you to
the life divine.
is the beginning of Speculative knowledge. For it is declared by what follows,
that he who has put off the brutish life, and as far as it is possible, has
purified himself from inordinate affections, and so from a Brute is become a
Man, will from a Man commence a God, as far as humane Nature is capable. And
that this is the end of Contemplative Truth, appears from the high and noble
conclusion of all in these Verses.

So when unbody'd you shall freely rove
In the unbounded regions above,
You an Immortal God shall then commence,
Advanced beyond Mortality and Sense.
The holy Book shows us as we shall see anon, that we shall obtain a
restitution to our former state, that is, be Canonized by the practice of the
Civil Virtues, and the knowledge of Truth ensuing upon it.

But now to return to the Verses before us, we will consider whether by LABOR,
MEDITATION and LOVE, any other thing be meant, than that we apply our selves to
the exercise of Virtue with the whole Soul. The Soul as rational has a
threefold faculty. One whereby we learn, which he commands here to MEDITATE on
these things. Another whereby we retain what we learn, which he exhorts to
LABOR in these things. And lastly, another whereby we embrace what we know and
retain, which he commands to LOVE these things.

That therefore we might have all the faculties of the rational nature intent
upon the precepts of Virtue, from that which is apt to MEDITATE, he requires
MEDITATION, from that which is apt to retain, LABOR, and from that which is
apt to embrace what is excellent, LOVE; that by the right application of all
these, we may arrive to a possession and firm retention of Virtue, together
with an adhering love toward it, which is attended with a divine hope that
introduces the splendour of Truth, as he promises, when he says, THESE WILL LEAD
YOU INTO THE WAY OF THE DIVINE VIRTUE. That is, these things will make you like
God by the certain knowledge of things. For by rightly considering the causes
of things which are originally in God, we ascend to the top of divine
knowledge, which is the very thing wherein our likeness to God does consist.
And this similitude he calls the DIVINE VIRTUE as justly excelling the humane
premised.

Let the end of the first Verses be the love of Wisdom and Honesty, and upon
that foundation let the knowledge of Truth be superstructed, which leads us to
likeness of the divine Virtue, as is shown in the ensuing discourse.

Furthermore, he confirms the necessity of their connection by an Oath. For he
swears very appositely, that the thorough possession of humane virtue makes way
for the divine likeness. And whereas in the beginning he commanded us to dread
an oath, his meaning was, that we should forbear it in things contingent and of
uncertain issue. For those things are of small moment and casual. So that it is
neither just nor safe to swear in them, because it is not in our power to bring
them to pass. But in those things that are present, of necessary connection and
of great moment, it is both safe and decent to swear. For neither will the issue
of the matter deceive us (the things whereof we now swear being connected by
the laws of Necessity) neither will the low grovelling nature of the matter
refuse the divine Testimony. For Truth and Virtue are not in men only, but
principally in the Gods.

Moreover an Oath is used in the Precept, because so much honor is due to the
Master of Truth, as to swear by him if confirmation of Doctrine require it. He
thought it therefore not enough to use that solemn form, He has said it, unless
he also swore by him that it is so.

Now by swearing he at once speaks divinely of the connection of the best
habits, and shows that the QUATERNARY is all one with God the Fountain of the
Eternal order of things. But in what manner this QUATERNARY is God, you may
easily find in the holy Book of Pythagoras, in which God is celebrated with
this title, The Number of Numbers. For if all things that are subsist by his
eternal Counsel, it is plain that Number in each species of Beings depends on
the cause of them, and that the first Number is with him, and thence derives to
us.

Now the finite interval of Number is 10. For he that will number farther, must
go back again to 1, 2, and 3, till by adding the second Decad he makes 20, by
adding the third 30, and so on, till the tenth Decad being up, he comes to an
100. In the same manner he numbers an 100, and so by repeating the interval of
10, he may proceed to infinity.

Now all the virtue of 10 lies in 4, for before you come to the perfection of
10, there is the same united perfection in 4. For in the composition of 1 to 4,
the whole collection will amount to 10. For 1, 2, 3, 4, make up 10. Besides 4
is the Arithmetic middle between 1 and 7. For it exceeds and is exceeded
equally, falling short of 7 by 3, and by 3 exceeding 1. For the properties of
an Unite and a Septenary are the most excellent of all.

An Unite, as the beginning of all number, has the force of all virtually in it
self, and a Septenary being Motherless and a Virgin, has secondarily the
dignity of an Unite. For it is neither begotten of any number within 10, as 4
is from twice 2, 6 from twice 3, 8 from twice 4, 9 from thrice 3, and 10 from
twice 5. Neither does it beget any within 10, as 2 does 4, as 3 does 9, and as
5 does 10.

The QUATERNARY therefore being seated in the middle between unbegotten 1 and
motherless 7, it partakes of the virtue of the begotten and the begetting,
being the only number within 10, which is begotten of, and begets some number.
For 2 if doubled begets 4, and 4 doubled begets 8. Add to this that the first
solid figure is in a QUATERNARY. For a Point answers to an Unite, a Line to a
Binary, in that it proceeds from something to something, and a Superficies to a
Ternary. For the most simple of all figures that consist of right lines, is a
Triangle. But solidity is proper to the QUATERNARY. For in that is the first
Cone whose trianangular Basis is made by a Ternary, but the top by an Unite.
Besides, the faculties of judging are 4, Mind, Science, Opinion and Sense. All
things that are judged fall under one of these; in a word, all things are
comprised in the QUATERNARY, Elements, Numbers, seasons of the Year, and ages
of Life. Neither can you name any thing which does not depend upon the
QUATERNARY as its root and foundation. For as we said before, the QUATERNARY is
the Producer and Cause of the Universe, the intelligible God, the Author of the
heavenly and sensible Gods.

Now the knowledge of these things was handed down to the Pythagoreans from
Pythagoras himself, whom the Author of these Verses closely following gives us
to know, that the perfection of Virtue will bring us to the splendour of Truth.
So that for this reason it may be said, that as the Precept of honoring the
Oath is peculiarly observed among the gods, who always exist after the same
manner, so does he peculiarly swear in this place by the Master that delivered
to us the QUATERNARY. Who ('it is confessed) was not of the number of the
Immortal Gods, nor of the Heroes by nature, but a man adorned with the likeness
of God, and one that preserved the divine Image entire in his followers. So
that he swears by him in such great matters as these, tacitly insinuating in
what reverence Pythagoras was with his followers, and what dignity he procured
himself by the Precepts which he delivered. The greatest of which was the
knowledge of the All-productive QUATERNARY.

But since the first part is briefly explained, and the second relies on a firm
promise; since the sacred Interpreter of the QUATERNARY is made known, and also
what this QUATERNARY is as far as is conducing to the present purpose, come on,
let us proceed to what the Verse leads us, showing in the first place with what
endeavor and preparation, and with what assistance of the more excellent
beings we may aspire to them.

THEN PROCEED TO YOUR WORK, HAVING PRAYED TO THE GODS THAT YOU MAY FINISH IT.
Then to your work, having prayed Heaven to send
On what you undertake, an happy end.

These Verses briefly comprize all that conduces to the attainment of good
(viz.) the voluntary motion of the Soul and the assistance of God. For although
the election of good be in our own power, yet since we have even this our power
from God, we stand in need of his cooperation and perfective influence. For our
own endeavor is like a hand held forth to receive good, but the perfective
influence which comes from God, is the fountain which supplies us with it. Our
part is to seek out after that which is good, and God's part to show it to him
that seeks aright.

Now PRAYER is the middle term between our seeking and God's giving, whereby we
adhere to our Maker, who as he first gave us our being, so can alone perfect
our being.

Besides, how can any one receive good unless God bestow it? Again, how can
God, though of his own nature never so liberally disposed, give to him who has
liberty of asking, and yet does not? That we might not therefore pray only in
words, but confirm our Prayers by action, nor confide in our own single
strength, but implore the assistance of God, joining Prayer to action, as Form
to matter, and all this that we should pray for what we endeavor, and
endeavor for what we pray, he joins these together, SET TO YOUR WORK, HAVING
PRAYED TO THE GODS THAT YOU MAY FINISH IT. For we must not so undertake what is
excellent, as if we could go through with it on our own single strength,
without the assistance of God; nor on the other side so satisfy our selves
with bare praying, as not to join any endeavor of our own toward the
attainment of what we pray for. For so either our virtue will be without God
(if it be possible to suppose such a thing) or our Prayers will be without
action. The first of which takes away the nature of Virtue, the latter the
efficacy of Prayer. For how can that be good which is not done according to the
divine Law? And how can that which is so done not stand in need of the
assistance of God, whereby it may subsist? For Virtue is nothing else but the
image of God upon the rational Soul. Now every image wants the Prototype to
support its subsistence, and in vain do you endeavor to possess your self of
Virtue, if you refer it not to him for the sake of whose likeness you endeavor
to acquire it. They therefore that aspire to active virtue should use Prayer,
and they that pray for its attainment should also do their endeavor.

This is that which makes men look up to what is divine and excellent, to apply
themselves to the study of Wisdom and the first cause of all good. For that
Quaternary, the fountain of eternal Nature, is the constant cause not of the
being only, but of the well-being of all things, diffusing its innate good
throughout the Universe, as a pure and intelligible light; which when the Soul
adheres to, and wipes her eyes as it were to clear her sight, by the ardent
desire of good she is stirred up to Prayer; and then again, by the grant of her
Prayer she heightens her desire, joining actions to words, and confirming her
good actions by divine intercourses. And when she has found out the one and is
illuminated by the other, she does what she prays for, and prays for what she
does. And this is the union of diligent ENDEAVOR and PRAYER. What are the
effects of both we come now to consider.

THIS IF YOU OBSERVE, YOU SHALL KNOW THE CONSTITUTION OF THE IMMORTAL GODS AND
OF MORTAL MEN, HOW FAR EVERY THING PROCEEDS, AND WHERE IT CONSISTS.
This Course if you observe, you shall know then
The Constitution both of Gods and Men,
The due extent of all things you shall see.

In the first place he promises that those who so demean themselves shall
obtain the knowledge of God, and of all things which subsist by the sacred
Quaternary, together with the distinction of them according to their kinds, and
their union in making up one World. For the word CONSTITUTION here signifies
their Conjunction, the Phrase AS FAR AS THEY PROCEED, shows their specific
difference, and the Phrase, WHERE THEY CONSIST, their generical community. For
the otherwise distinct kinds of rational beings by this distinction enter into
one society. For in that some are first, some middle, and some last, they are
at once distinguished and united. For neither can the first be middle or last,
neither can the last be middle or first, but they remain eternally distinct by
the limits of their Creation. And so we understand HOW FAR THEY PROCEED. But
WHERE THEY CONSIST we shall again consider. Nothing of this kind can be perfect
which has not the first, middle and last parts in it self, as the beginning,
middle, and end of the whole System. And the first would not be first, if the
middle and last did not follow, neither would the middle be what it is called,
if it wanted extremes on each side, neither would the last be last, if the
first and middle did not go before. They conduce therefore mutually to the
perfection of the Universe. And this is the meaning of CONSISTING among
themselves. For although they are distinct as to variety of kinds, yet they
fall in together as the parts of one World, filling by their distance and union
the whole constitution and frame of the divine Ornament, which you shall know
(says he) if you faithfully RETAIN the forementioned good.

Moreover under the name of extreme kinds is contained also the middle, which
he intimated when he said, the CONSTITUTION both of Immortal Gods and of mortal
Men, for the first are linked to the last by the interposal of the middle, and
the last proceed to the first by the interposition of Illustrious Heroes.

Now these and the order of Intelligent Beings has been already delivered by us
in the beginning, where 'twas said that the Immortal Gods had the first station
in the World, the Illustrious Heroes the second, and the Demons of the Earth
the last, which are called mortal Men. And it has been already set forth how
each of these is to be conceived, which we shall rightly do if we get a
certain knowledge, of those things, in the delivery of which we have already
touched upon the honor due to them who adorned practick Virtue by speculative
Truth, and passed from the goodness of the humane Habit to the divine Virtue.
For so to know the things that are as they received their subsistence from God,
is to obtain the divine likeness.

But because after the eternal Ornament, follows corporeal Nature which fills
this visible world, and is intended and accomdated for the dominion of rational
beings, he shows further that they shall obtain the good of Philosophical
Science, who proceed orderly to their knowledge.

MOREOVER YOU SHALL KNOW, AS FAR AS IS FIT, NATURE IN ALL RESPECTS LIKE HER
SELF, THAT SO YOU MAY NOT HOPE WHAT IS NOT TO BE HOPED, AND THAT YOU MAY NOT BE
IGNORANT OF ANY THING.
And Nature in her uniformity.
That so your ignorance may not suggest
Vain hopes of what you cannot be possessed.

When Nature had molded this visible World to the divine proportion, she made
it every where variously CONFORMABLE to its self by Analogy, and Imaged the
divine beauty upon all the Mundane forms in a different manner, assigning
perpetuity of motion to the Heavens, and to the Earth permanency, so that each
of these should bear a footstep of the divine Likeness. She assigned also to
the Celestial body the Circumference of all, but to the Terrestrial the Center.

Now in an Orb the Center is one way the beginning, and another way the end of
the Circumambient; whence the upper part is enammel'd with Stars and filled
with Intelligent Animals, and the Earth is adorned with Vegetables and Animals
endued only with Sense. Now Man seems the middle of these two extremes,
partaking of each life, the last of those above, and the first of those below.
So that he is first of all compared with the Immortal Gods, and recovers his
proper state when he converts himself to the mind; and sometimes he is herded
among the mortal forms, when by transgression of the law of God he falls from
his own dignity. For being the lowest of Intelligent beings, he is not disposed
to contemplate God constantly and uniformly, otherwise he would not be a Man
but a God, neither can he contemplate him constantly though not uniformly, for
that would insert him into the order of Angels; whereas now he is a man he is
capable of being raised by resemblance to that which is more excellent, but
still by nature is inferior to the Immortal Gods and Illustrious Heroes. But
as he is inferior to them, in as much as he does not always consider, but is
sometimes ignorant and unmindfull of his own nature, and of the light which
descends from God upon him; so does he excel brute Animals, Vegetables, and
his Terrestrial and mortal Nature by his essence, in as much as he is capable
of returning again to God, of abolishing his forgetfulness by remembrance, of
recovering what he has lost by discipline, and of curing the flight of things
above by a contrary tendency.

It becomes therefore us Mortals to know the CONSTITUTION of the Immortal Gods
and of mortal Men; that is, the order of Intelligent beings. And to know NATURE
IN ALL RESPECTS LIKE HER SELF; that is, the Corporeal substance in which from
the beginning to the end the divine Likeness shines forth. But so know all
these AS FAR AS IS FIT, so as they are ordered by Law, so as they were produced
by God, and so as they are disposed by his laws, whether they are Corporeal or
Incorporeal. For this knowing as far as is FIT is to be understood of both in
common. For we ought not out of a fond indulgence to our own unreasonable
humor, to wrest the dignity of things as we please, but following the limits
of truth to know all things as far as is FIT, and as the law of Creation has
distinguished them.

Now from this twofold knowledge of the divine Workmanship, (things Corporeal
and Incorporeal) springs a most excellent advantage, that we neither HOPE FOR
WHAT IS NOT TO BE HOPED, NOR BE IGNORANT OF ANY THING. For it is from our
ignorance of the nature of things, that we hope for what we should not, and
project impossibilities. As if a man should hope to become one of the Immortal
Gods or Illustrious Heroes. Such a one knows not the bounds of nature, nor has
learnt to distinguish the first, middle and last.

Again, If any one think his Soul dies with his mortal body, out of ignorance
of the immortality of the Soul, he looks for that which neither should nor can
be. In like manner, he that hopes to put on the body of a brute beast, and to
become an irrational creature by his wickedness, or a Vegetable by inactivity
of sense, the same in opposition to those who transform the humane nature into
that of superior beings, IGNORANTLY degrades it to the inferior, not
considering that the essential form of humane nature is unchangeable. For the
same man by the alternate possession of Virtue and Vice, is said to become a
God or a beast. Not that he is either by nature, but by habitual similitude.
And indeed he that knows not the dignity of the things that are, but either
exceeds it or comes short of it, makes his ignorance an occasion either of a
vain opinion or false hope. But he that judges of all according to the measures
of the Creation, that knows the things that are in the same manner as they were
made, and that lastly measures God from the knowledge of himself, he best
observes the precept of following God, knows the best measure, and is above all
Fraud and Imposture.

AND YOU SHALL KNOW MEN EMBRACING EVILS OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, MISERABLE, AND WHO
NEITHER SEE NOR HEAR NEIGHBORING GOOD, AND THAT THERE ARE FEW WHO KNOW HOW TO
DISINTANGLE THEMSELVES FROM EVIL, SUCH A FATE HURTS THE MINDS OF MORTALS, WHO
ARE ROLLED HERE AND THERE UPON CYLINDERS BEARING INFINITE MISERIES, FOR A
PERNICIOUS CONTENTION IS THEIR INBRED COMPANION WHICH TREACHEROUSLY HURTS THEM,
WHICH WE SHOULD BY NO MEANS PROVOKE, BUT YIELDING, AVOID.
You Will see how poor unfortunate Mankind
To hurt themselves are studiously inclined,
To all approaching good, both deaf and blind.
The way to cure their ills is known to few,
Such a besotting fate does men pursue.
They Are on Cylinders still rol'd up and down,
And with full tides of Evil overflown.
A cursed inbred Strife does lurk within,
The cause of all this Misery and Sin.
Which must not be provoked to open field,
The way to conquer here is, to fly, and yield.

The order of the Incorporeal and Corporeal Natures, being well understood, it
remains that we exactly know the nature of Man, both what it is and what
passions it is liable to. How it stands in the middle confines between those
beings which never fall into Vice, and those which are not capable of Virtue.
Hence it is that he acts both parts in his manners, sometimes embracing the
felicity of the Intellectual life, and sometimes the affections of Sense.

So that 'twas well said by Heraclitus, that we live their death, and dye their
life. For Man descends and falls from the happy Region, as Empedocles the
Pythagorean says, Man yields unto the rage of Appetite,
Heaven's Exile, straying from the Orb of light.


But he returns and resumes his first habit, if as he says, He fly the confines
of this dismal Cell,
Where Murders, Anger, and all mischiefs dwell.
In which whosoever fall They wander in dark regions of Death.


But the desire of him that flies these regions of Death, will speedily conduct
him to the regions of Truth, which if he once leaves by the force of the
moulting of the Wings, he comes down into an earthy body -- Losing the life of
bliss.

Agreeable to this is that which Plato says of the descent. When the impotent
Soul can no longer enjoy the vision of God, and having suffered a deflux of her
wings, falls down to the earth, then she ought by the Law to inhabit a mortal
body.

And concerning the Ascent, he says this, when a Man has overcome by his reason
that tumultuous brute Commotion which accrues to him from Earth, Water, Air and
Fire, he shall return to the form of the first and best habit, and being made
sound and whole, shall recover his proportionate Orb. Sound, because free from
the diseases of Passion, which is done by Civil Virtue. And whole, by the
recovery of Knowledge as of his proper parts, which is to be done by
Speculative Truth.

He shows moreover, that by Aversion from the things below, we should retrieve
those excellencies which we lost by Apostasy.

Since he defines Philosophy to be the flight of Evil. For he declares that men
only are obnoxious to Passions, that evil cannot be utterly lost nor exist in
the gods, but is necessarily conversant about this place and humane nature. For
it is consequent to the nature of things generable and corruptible to be
sometimes preternaturally affected, which is the beginning of evil. But by what
means we should avoid these, he subjoins when he says we must fly from hence
thither; that this flight is as much a resemblance of God as Man is capable of,
but the Similitude it self is to become Just, Holy and Prudent. For he that
would fly from Evil must first be averse from humane nature, since they who are
immersed in that cannot but be filled with the concomitant evils.

As therefore our departure from God, and the moulting of our plumes whereby we
soared aloft, caused our descent into the region of Mortality and Wretchedness;
So it is the rejection of our bodily Passions, and the growth and springing of
Virtue as of new wings, which will carry us to the pure habitations of holiness
and divine felicity. For the nature of Man being in the middle between those
beings which always contemplate the face of God, and those whose nature is
never capable of such contemplation, it ascends to them, and descends to these
by the possession and rejection of the mind, and alternately puts on the divine
and brutish Similitude by reason of its natural propension to both.

He therefore that knows these things of the humane nature, knows also how men
are said TO EMBRACE EVILS OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, and how they become unhappy and
MISERABLE by their own election. For when they could have remained longer in
that station, they are drawn down to be born by the rashness of desire, and
when they could with more speed have loosed from hence, they entangle
themselves in the security of their passions. And this is that he means when he
says, that they neither SEE NOR HEAR NEIGHBORING GOOD; so that by good he
understands Virtue and Truth. And by their not seeing neighboring good is
meant, that they are not moved of themselves to the search of excellent things;
and by their not hearing is meant, their unattentiveness to the Instructions of
others. For there is a twofold way of recovering knowledge, either by
discipline as by hearing, or by invention as by sight.

They therefore are said to embrace evils of their own accord, who neither
willing to learn of others, nor to find out of themselves, remain destitute of
the sense of all good, and consequently altogether unprofitable. For he that
neither considers himself, nor gives attention to the Instructions of others,
is an unprofitable man. But they who employ their endeavors in the learning
and finding out things excellent, these are they who know how to DISINTANGLE
themselves from evil, and who by the flight of all worldly labors, are
translated into the free Ether. But of these there are but few. For the major
part of Mankind are evil and in subjection to their passions; nay, and of
unsound minds by reason of their propension to earthly things. And this evil
they have brought upon themselves, because they would depart from God, and
excommunicate themselves from all converse with him, which they once happily
enjoyed living in pure light. For their propension to the Earth argues their
departure from God, by which their minds are disturbed. It being equally
impossible either that he should not be mad who is without God, or that he
should not be without God who is mad. Both these finding no relish in the love
of excellent things, suffer infinite evils ROLED up and down by their ponderous
wickedness, as on so many CYLINDERS. They never have an entire command of
themselves, demeaning themselves ungovernably in all fortunes. Sometimes
insolent in abundance, sometimes doing ill in poverty. Sometimes abusing their
strength of body to the commission of robberies, sometimes through weakness and
disease, prompted to blasphemy. Sometimes pining for the want of Children,
sometimes making their number a pretense of Contention and filthy Avarice.

To speak once for all, there is not one thing in all life which will not turn
to the damage of imprudent men, who are at all hands pressed in the straits of
voluntary wickedness; who will neither look up to the divine light, nor give
ear to the things that are good, but so rush into mortal affections, that they
are tossed in life as in a storm.

Now the only freedom from this is a return to God, which they only find out
who stir up the eye and the ear of the Soul to the recovery of good, healing
the evil which accompanies our nature by that virtue which leads to the things
above. Now there is an evil born with us, and an evil acquired by us, which is
the preternatural motion of the will, by which we endeavor to contend with and
run counter to the divine laws; not at all considering how much we hurt our
selves while we think to oppose God, blindly seeing this only, that we were
able to throw off the rains of his laws. And herein the will plays the
Libertine and abuses her freedom, in that she dares to depart from God and to
side with the PERNICIOUS CONTENTION against him, by which we in a manner
proclaim open hostility against God. For when he says thou shall not do this,
we do that to choose. Again, when he says do this, that we do not. So that
they lade themselves with misery on both sides who transgress the divine Law by
not doing what is commanded, and by doing what is forbidden.

What therefore shall we find out against this pernicious inbred Companion
called CONTENTION, which arises from some preternatural disposition within us,
and therefore is the more apt to hurt us covertly as a bosom evil? What shall
we oppose against it? what remedy shall we apply to the mad CONTENTION? what
counterpoise shall we oppose to this downweighing propension, but the
meditation and love of those things which will put us into the track of the
divine Virtue? For these are those remedies of evil KNOWN TO FEW, this is the
INSTITUTION and HEARING of NEIGHBORING good, this is the freedom from
SPONTANEOUS evils, this is the Excision of infinite Passions, the avoidance of
the impious CONTENTION, the health of the Soul, the purgation of the raging
Strife, and the revocation of our Exile from God. For the only way we have to
cure our propension to things below, is by the virtue which raises us upwards,
if we do not suffer it to run out any further, nor add evil to evil; but being
become obedient to right reason avoid the PERNICIOUS CONTENTION, and embrace
that which is good, not striving to disobey God, but to obey him, which we
should not call Strife, but a divinely affected Obedience, a conversion to the
law of God, and a voluntary subjection, which cuts off the occasions of
unreasonable disobedience. For this I take to be the sum of what is contained
in the Verses now before us.

First he points at the wickedness of our free will, when he says, YOU SHALL
KNOW MEN EMBRACING EVILS OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, whom we ought to call miserable
and unfortunate, because the Authors of their own evil.

Then he declares their utter obstinacy against all good things, when he says
that THEY NEITHER SEE NOR HEAR NEIGHBORING GOOD.

Then he implies the impossibility of disintangling our selves from voluntary
evils, when he says that FEW KNOW HOW TO DO IT; which is therefore inserted,
that when he had shown 'twas in our own power to free our selves, it might
appear that we were voluntary slaves.

Then he subjoins the cause of the blindness and deafness of those Souls which
fall into Vice. SUCH A FATE HURTS THE MINDS OF MORTALS. For our Apostasy from
the more excellent things leads us into madness and rash election, which he
means by the pernicious FATE, which by inclining us to the corruptible and
mortal life, excludes us from the divine Quire.

Then he shows the consequences of Temerity, and how our offenses are at once
voluntary and involuntary, while he compares the life of imprudent men to a
CYLINDER roled on a Plain, which sometimes has a direct and circular motion at
once, Circular of it self, and Direct by falling downwards. For as a CYLINDER
does not retain its circular motion about the Axis when it deviates from
rectitude, so neither does the Soul obtain the things that are truly good, when
it falls off from right reason and its station with God; but hovers about
apparent good, deviates from what is right, and is roled up and down by sensual
passions, which was intimated in these words, WHO ARE ROLED HERE AND THERE ON
CYLINDERS BEARING INFINITE EVILS. But because the free motion of the will
preternaturally affected was the cause of the FATE WHICH HURTS OUR MINDS, and
of our separation from God, in the two following Verses he shows us how we
ought to compose it and turn it toward God; Partly by discovering the
voluntary hurt, in these words, A PERNICIOUS CONTENTION IS THEIR INBRED
COMPANION WHICH TREACHEROUSLY HURTS THEM. Partly by implying the liberty of
healing in these words, WHICH WE SHOULD BY NO MEANS PROVOKE, BUT YIELDING AVOID.

But perceiving withal that we want in the first place the assistance of God
to enable us to depart from evil and embrace good, he addresses himself to
Jupiter in a Prayer for help.

O FATHER JUPITER, EITHER FREE US ALL FROM SO GREAT EVILS, OR DISCOVER TO ALL
WHAT DEMON THEY USE. BUT BE THOU OF GOOD CHEER, BECAUSE THOSE MORTALS ARE KIN
TO GOD, TO WHOM SACRED NATURE DISCOVERS EVERY THING. AMONG WHICH IF YOU ARE AT
ALL INTERESTED, YOU WILL OBSERVE WHAT I COMMAND YOU, AND HAVING HEALED YOUR
SOUL, YOU WILL PRESERVE IT FROM THESE EVILS.
And now from ill great Father set us free,
Or teach us all to know our selves and thee.
Courage my Soul, great Jove is their Allie,
Their duty who by Nature's light descry.
These rules if to that number you retain,
You Will keep and purge your Soul from every stain.

'Twas the manner of the Pythagoreans to adore the Maker and Parent of the
Universe, under the Name of IVPITER. For it is a just thing that he should be
named from his power, from whom all things receive both being and life. For the
truly proper name of God is that which is suitable to his power and works. But
as for those names which seem to us proper, they are rather casual and
arbitrary, than accommodated to the propriety of essences, as is to be seen in
many names which are quite remote from the nature of the things; as when a man
of an ill life is called good, or one of Atheistical principles Pious. Such as
these have not the true nature of Names, because they do not at all carry in
them the Essence or Operation of those things which they are intended to
signify. We should therefore seek the true reason of Names in things Eternal,
and of these in things Divine, and of things divine in the best of them. Whence
it comes to pass that the Name IVPITER carries in the very word a Symbol and
Image of the All-producing nature, since the first Imposers of Names by their
exceeding great wisdom, as so many expert Statuaries, expressed the virtues of
things by their names as by Images. For they made Names the symbols of their
conceptions, and their conceptions declarative of what they conceived. For when
dwelling upon intelligible Objects they abounded with Contemplation, and
growing pregnant, were delivered of their thoughts by the Midwifery of words,
they gave such names to things which by the very sound and the letters used in
the pronunciation, should express the forms of the things named, and convert
the attentive Hearers to their essences. So that what was the end of their
contemplation, is to us the beginning of obtaining the knowledge of things.

Thus before, the Maker of the Universe was called the Quaternary, and now
FATHER IVPITER, for the reasons already mentioned. But that which this present
Prayer desires of him, he is ready to bestow on all by his goodness, but it is
our part to receive what he is always ready to give. For 'twas said before,
Then to your Work, having prayed to heaven to send
On what you undertake, an happy end.
Implying, that God is always disposed to give what is good, but that we then
only receive it when we attend upon the divine Bounty. For it is inconsistent
with the liberty of our wills, that good should be obtruded upon us whether we
will or no. Now all good is either Truth or Virtue, both which constantly and
uniformly shine forth upon all from the All-producing nature.

The Prayer also desires, in order to the necessary freedom from evil, that we
may see the dignity of our own essence, for this he means by the Phrase WHAT
DEMON THEY USE, which is the Soul. By this conversion to our selves we are
assured of these two necessary consequences, a freedom from evil, and a
discovery of those things which God holds forth to us as means whereby we may
obtain happiness.

The Prayer therefore proceeds on a supposition, That if all did but know who
they are, and WHAT DEMON THEY USE, they would all be freed from evil. But this
will never be. For it is impossible that all should at once embrace the study of
wisdom, and lay hold on those good things which God always offers toward the
perfection of an happy life. What therefore remains but that they only be of
GOOD CHEER, who advance to that knowledge which shows our own proper good? For
it is certain that they only shall be freed from the evils, which are rivetted
into the mortal nature, since they only applied themselves to the contemplation
of things truly good. And these are worthy to be inserted among the DIVINE
KINDRED as persons taught by SACRED NATURE, that is Philosophy, and well
exercised in their duty.

Now if we are at all interested in the society of divine men, we shall show it
by applying our selves to honest actions and intellectual disciplines, by which
alone the Soul of Man is healed, freed from terrestrial labors, and translated
into the divine order.

In short therefore, this is the sense of the Verses in hand. They that know
themselves are freed from mortal passions. Why then are not all freed since all
are sufficiently assisted with the opportunities of knowing themselves from
their inbred Notices? Because the greatest part of men (as he says) embrace
evils of their own accord, since they neither see nor hear neighboring good.
But there are some few who for this reason know how to free themselves from
evil, because they know what DEMON THEY USE. And they are such as have purged
themselves from brutish passions by the help of Philosophy, and delivered
themselves from the bodily Mansion as from a Prison. How therefore does he say
to IVPITER, either FREE US ALL FROM SO GREAT EVILS, OR DISCOVER TO ALL WHAT
DEMON THEY USE? Does he thereby imply that though it is in his power to turn all
men to the truth even against their wills, yet he does it not, either through
neglect or out of design, that they may still be held fast by their chains? No,
it is Impious to think so.

This is rather the import of the Prayer, That we ought to turn our selves to
God as to our Father, who furthers us in the way to happiness. For God indeed
is the Creator of all men, but of good men he is also a Father.

He therefore that knows how to free himself from evil, and not only so, but
has actually done it, and by a voluntary flight has avoided the pernicious
Contention, he it is that imploring a competent measure of the divine
assistance, cries out O FATHER IVPITER. For he calls God Father on this only
ground, because he has already performed the part of a Son.

Then he concludes from his own case, that if all did the same, all would be
likewise freed from evil as well as himself.

Afterward observing that the contrary happened not through any fault of God,
but through the perverseness of the most who embrace evils of their own accord,
he says to himself, BUT BE THOU OF GOOD CHEER who have found out the way to
free thy self from evil. And that was by applying himself to those things which
God had shown to him by the help of sacred Philosophy. Which things pass
unobserved by many, because they do not rightly improve those common notions
which our Maker has imprinted upon rational beings, as a mark to lead us to the
knowledge of himself.

Since therefore that any thing be SHOWN to any one, it is necessary that the
actions of two persons concur (for how can you show what you have a mind to to
a blind man, although you offer it to him a thousand times, or how can you show
to one that sees, if you offer nothing to his sight) both these must be
present, some good proposed by him that shows, and an eye capable of seeing in
him to whom it is to be shown, so that from a visible object and a faculty of
seeing, may be made up a manifestation.

This being so, let us suppose that all would be freed from evil if their Maker
did SHOW to all the knowledge of his own nature, and WHAT DEMON THEY themselves
USE. But we find that all are not at once delivered from evil, it follows
therefore that he does not make this discovery to all, but to those only who of
their own accord endeavor to free themselves from evil, and voluntarily fix
their eye upon what is SHOWN by the intention of Contemplation. God therefore
is not the cause why he is not SHOWN unto all, but they themselves who neither
see nor hear Neighboring good; whence they are said to embrace evil of their
own accord. The will therefore of him that chooses, is in the fault, but God is
no way the Author of evil, who does what is required on his part, that all men
may see what is good; but he does not actually SHOW it to all, because at the
time when he holds it forth, the eye of Contemplation in most men is shut, or
fixed downward upon worser objects. This exposition of the Verses before us, is
both agreeable to the truth and the context. For if it be the part of God to
drag men to the truth whether they will or no, why do we blame them as
suffering voluntary evils? Why again do we advise them not to provoke the
Pernicious contention, but yielding to avoid? Why also do we exhort them to
bear events patiently, and to endeavor to heal them? For the way to Virtue by
moral discipline is quite block't up to them, if liberty of Will be once taken
away. For my part I would neither do, think, nor love any of those things that
are excellent, if I thought 'twas God's part to keep us from Sin and replenish
us with Virtue, without any concurrence of our own, which if true, then all our
sins also must be fathered upon God. But if God (as it has been said) be no way
the Author of sin, we may thank our selves if we depart from good, since when
'twas near to us, nay by the common notices of the Soul lodged within us, yet
we neither see nor hear it. But the cause of this blindness and deafness is
this pernicious Contention and voluntary Evil, which we must not provoke any
farther, but by yielding, fly from it; so shall we know how to free our selves
from evil, and find out the way of returning to God. And thus every
illumination of God by the concurrence of our vision, becomes a DISCOVERY.

Now the fruits of this discovery are calmness of mind, freedom from earthly
labors, a taste of divine good, and a participation of the fatherly
conversation.

Having premised these things of Virtue and Truth, and having closed up the
precepts of Virtue in the nightly account, and carried on the hopes of Truth as
far as the quiet and safety of the Soul, he proceeds now to those things which
belong to the splendour of winged Purity, in joining a third kind of Philosophy
to what has been already said.

ABSTAIN MOREOVER WITH JUDGMENT FROM THOSE MEATS WHICH WE HAVE SPOKEN OF IN THE
LUSTRATIONS AND SOLUTION OF THE SOUL. AND CONSIDER ALL THINGS, SETTING REASON
THE BEST CHARIOTEER IN THE UPPERMOST PLACE.
Abstain from Meats which you forbidden find
In our Traditions, wherein are defined
The Purgings and Solution of the mind.
Consider this, then in the highest sphere
Enthrone your reason the best Charioteer.

The rational Nature was produced by the great Creator with a body adhering to
it, and so though incorporeal it self, yet its whole species is consummated in
the body. Just as it is in the Stars, that which is Superior in them, is an
Incorporeal substance, that which is Inferior a Corporeal. And so the Sun is
all a Compound of somewhat Incorporeal and somewhat Corporeal, which were never
once separate and then coupled together (for so they would be separate again)
but produced both at once in such order that one should rule and preside and
the other obey. And so it is in all the Intelligent-beings, Heroes and Men. For
every Hero is an Intelligent Soul joined to a lucid Body, and a Man in like
manner is a rational Soul with an immortal body congenial to it.

And this was the doctrine of the Pythagoreans, which Plato afterward
published to the World, when he compared every divine and humane Soul to the
congenial force of a winged Chariot and Charioteer.

We have need therefore in order to the perfection of the Soul, of Truth and
Virtue, but to the purgation of our lucid body it is required that we be scoured
from material pollutions, and use sacred purgations, and receive strength from
God, whereby we may fly hence upwards. And this is taught in the Verses before
us, when they prescribe us the way of removing the luxuriant pollutions of
matter, in these words, ABSTAIN WITH JUDGMENT FROM THE MEATS WHICH WE HAVE
SPOKEN OF. And when they recommend to us the sacred purgation and the
concurring aid of God, in these words, IN THE LUSTRATIONS AND SOLUTION OF THE
SOUL; and when they give us a description of humane Nature in its integrity and
perfection, in these words, SETTING REASON THE BEST CHARIOTEER IN THE UPPERMOST
PLACE. For here is an entire draught of humane Nature, with an orderly
distinction of the parts. Whereof one is to Judge, which resembles the
CHARIOTEER, the other to obey, which holds proportion with the Chariot.

He therefore that believes the Symbols of Pythagoras, may now from these
Verses that he ought by the exercise of Virtue, and by the recovery of Truth
and Purity, to take care of those things which concern our lucid body, which by
the Oracles is called the subtle Vehicle of the Soul.

Now this PURGATION reaches as far as our Meat and Drink and the whole
management and usage of our mortal body, in which our lucid one is lodged,
which inspires life into the inanimate body, and preserves its harmony. For
life is a body void of matter, which generates that life which is inherent in
matter, by which our mortal body is perfected, which is compounded of
irrational life and matter, being the image of that man who is constituted of a
rational substance and an immaterial body.

Since therefore we are Men, and since this is the constitution of humane
Nature, there is a necessity that all of us should be purged and perfected. But
we must observe the peculiar manner of each nature. For different natures
require different purgations.

For example, the purgation of the rational Soul as to its rational faculty, is
Scientifical Truth. But as to its Opinionative part, the virtue of
Deliberation. For since we are of such a make by nature, that we should
contemplate the things above, and rule the things below, for the first work we
shall want Truth, for the second Civil Virtue, that so we may be wholly taken
up in the contemplation of things Eternal, and in the action of things
becoming. But in both we shall escape the impetuous flood of the irrational
Nature, if we contain our selves within the divine bounds. For we ought to
purge the rational nature from that, because it was in being before the
generation of the other. But since our lucid body has also a mortal one joined
to it, we must also purge that, and free it from its own contagion.

There remains therefore the purgation of the Animal body, which must be done
by observing sacred laws, and by using holy arts. This way of purgation is in a
peculiar manner Corporeal, so that it heals the material part wheresoever it is
applied, and presently prevails with this animal body to strip it self of
matter, and to wing away to the Ethereal mansion, wherein was the primitive
station of Bliss.

Whatsoever is done in order to this, (if done in a manner worthy of God and
not deceitfully) will be found to agree with the rules of Virtue and Truth. For
the purgations of the rational Soul provide also for the lucid Vehicle, which
now by their help being winged, soars aloft without any encumbrance. Now that
which most conduces to the growth of its plumes, is by degrees to wean it self
from earthly things, to accustom it self to immaterial abstractions, and to
shake off those pollutions which it has contracted from its union with the
material body. For by this means it revives as it were, is firmly knit, is
filled with divine vigor, and is joined to the intellectual perfection of the
Soul. What therefore if some Meats conduce to this? Without doubt 'twou'd be a
preparative to Purgation for them who accustom themselves to abstain from all
mortal things, immediately and wholly to abstain from some, and especially
those which please the mind, and provoke the mortal body to Venery. And for
this reason the Symbolical precepts enjoin abstinence from some, whose first
sense indeed is more general and large, but which consequently takes in at this
particular thing, which is almost every where mentioned. This Precept for
example, Eat not of the Matrix. The literal sense of which forbids but one
single thing, and that a very small one too. But if you consider the various
sense of the Pythagorick Mystery, you will find that abstinence from all manner
of Venery, is couched in the precept of abstaining from one certain sensible
thing.

In like manner, in order to the Purgation of the Lucid body, he forbids us to
eat the Heart; whereby he principally intends that we should abstain from
Anger, but by consequence also from that part.

So when he commands us to abstain from that which dies of its own accord, his
principal meaning is, that we reject the mortal Nature, but withal, that we
should not participate of that flesh which is unfit for Sacrifice, and unholy.
For it is fit that in Symbolical precepts we observe both the express Letter,
and the retired meaning. For a continual observation of what is most obvious,
will beget in us a care of observing things of greater weight. So therefore let
us understand his mind at present, as if he designed to give us in few words
the Principles of the greatest actions. ABSTAIN FROM MEATS he says, which is
all one with this, Abstain from Corruptible bodies. But since it is impossible
to abstain from all meats, he adds, THOSE WHICH WE HAVE SPOKEN OF. And he tells
you where, IN THE LUSTRATIONS AND SOLUTION OF THE SOUL. That by abstinence from
Meats such care may be taken of the splendour of the Corporeal Vehicle, as
becomes a Soul that is purged and loosed from material impediments.

He adds moreover to this performance, the JUDGMENT of Reason, which is able to
bestow such care upon the Lucid Body as is suitable to the purity of the Soul,
wherefore he calls it REASON the CHARIOTEER, as that which was naturally framed
for the regular guidance of the Vehicle. But the Amorous eye is placed above
the CHARIOTEER. For although the Soul be one, yet with its eye it contemplates
the field of Truth, and by its force as with an hand, restrains its Congenial
body, and turns it toward it self, that it may wholly gaze upon God, and be
filled with the divine likeness. And this is the general form of abstinence,
and these are the excellencies which it aims at.

As for those things which are severally delivered in the sacred and mysterious
Apothegms, although each of them insinuate a peculiar kind of abstinence, as of
Beans among Seeds, those that dye of their own accord among Animals; and of
these in their whole kinds, Rotchets among Fish, and so of many among Beasts
and Birds; and lastly, of several parts of Animals, as the Head and Heart, yet
all the Purgative perfection that is in each of these singly, is summarily
expressed in the Verse, in that it culls out this or that for abstinence
according to their natural properties, insinuating by each a purgation from
mortal affection, and intending throughout to bring Man home to himself, that
so bidding farewell to the place of his nativity and death, he may be
translated into the Elysian field and FREE ETHER. But because the Pythagoreans
observed an orderly progress in their abstinences, for which reason some
Precepts seem to contradict others (for that of abstaining from Animals is
contrary to that of abstaining from the Heart, unless you will say that this was
delivered to Novices, and that to mature Proficients, it being superfluous to
enjoin a partial abstinence when the whole animal is forbidden) we should
therefore diligently attend to the order of ascent, which appears in the Verses.

ABSTAIN (he says) FROM MEATS; and then as if some body had asked, what Meats?
he answers, WHICH WE HAVE SPOKEN OF. And again, as if he had been asked where
and in what traditions of discipline the Pythagoreans had spoken of abstaining
from Meats, he added, IN THE PURGATIONS AND SOLUTION OF THE SOUL. Implying that
Purgations must go before, and Solution follow.

Now the Purgations of the rational Soul are Mathematical disciplines, but the
Solution which carries it upwards, is the Logical inspection into the things
that are. Wherefore he uses the singular number, IN THE SOLUTION OF THE SOUL,
whereas Mathematics comprehends many disciplines.

It Is fit therefore that to what has been peculiarly said of the Soul, in
reference to Purgation and Solution, we join what is of affinity with it, and
what relates to the Lucid body. Wherefore it is necessary that to Mathematical
Purgations be added those which are Mystical, and that the Logical Solution
should be attended with the Sacerdotal discipline which carries us upwards. For
these properly Purge, and perfect the Spiritual Vehicle of the rational Soul.
Besides, they refine us from the dross of the brute Nature, and fit us for the
conversation of pure Spirits. For what is impure can have no fellowship with
what is pure. The Soul therefore should be adorned with Knowledge and Virtue,
that it may be able to converse with those who are always so qualified, and so
the Lucid body should be refined and spiritualized, that it may endure the
society of the Ethereal ones. For likeness reconciles all things, whereas by
unlikeness things that are never so near in respect of place, are yet separate
from one another.

This is the measure of the most perfect Philosophy delivered by the
Pythagoreans, which is peculiarly adapted to the perfection of the whole man.
For he that takes care only for his Soul and neglects his body, does not purge
the whole Man.

Again, he that thinks it his duty to care for the body without the Soul, and
that the care of the body will any thing advantage the Soul, though it be not
purged in particular, does ill in that. But he that follows both these courses,
does excellently well, and so joins Philosophy with the Sacred art, whose
business is to purge the Lucid body, which if you separate from the
Philosophical mind, you will find it has no longer the same virtue. For of
those things which consummate our perfection, some are first invented by the
Philosophical mind, some are added by the mystical operation which follows the
Philosophical mind.

Now by the Mystical Operation, I understand the faculty of purging the Lucid
body. So that the Contemplative part presides over all Philosophy as a mind,
and the Practick follows as a faculty.

Now of the Practick we lay down two kinds, Civil and Mystical. The former
purges us from the brute Nature by the help of Virtue, the latter by holy
Methods cuts off material Imaginations.

Moreover, the public Laws are a sufficient manifestation of Civil Philosophy,
but of the Mystical, the sacred Rites of Cities. Besides, the top of all
Philosophy is the Contemplative mind, in the middle place is the Civil, in the
last is the Mystical. The first (if compared with the other two) holds the
proportion of an Eye, the other two compared with the first, of an Hand and a
Foot. All which have such connection with and dependence on one another, that
any one of them would be defective, yea, almost useless, if destitute of the
others concurrence. Wherefore these must unite together in one constellation,
that knowledge which finds out Truth, that faculty which brings forth Virtue,
and that which works Purity, that civil action may be made perfectly
conformable to the presiding mind, and that good may shine forth answerable to
both.

And this is the end of the Pythagorick discipline, that we may be all over
Wing for the perception of divine good, that so when the time of death is at
hand, leaving our mortal body behind us on the earth, and putting off its very
Nature, we who were stout Champions in the warfare of Philosophy, may be ready
and expedite for our flight toward heaven. For then we shall be restored to
our primitive station, and become Gods as far as humane nature is capable, as
it is assured us in the next Verses.

BUT IF HAVING LEFT YOUR BODY YOU COME INTO THE FREE ETHER, YOU SHALL BE AN
IMMORTAL GOD, INCORRUPTIBLE, NEVER MORE LIABLE TO DEATH.
So when unbody'd you shall freely rove
In the unbounded Regions above,
You an Immortal God shall then commence,
Advanced beyond Mortality and Sense.

This is the most excellent end of all our labors. This (says Plato) is the
great Prize, the great Hope. This is the most perfect fruit and reward of
Philosophy. This is the greatest work of the Amorous and Mystical art (viz.) to
familiarize us and lead us up to the things that are truly excellent, to rescue
us from the labors we drudge under here below, as from the deep dungeon of
this gross material life, to mount us up to the ETHEREAL Splendors, and to
place us in the Mansions of the blessed, if we have walked according to the
foregoing rules. For such only have a title to the Crown of divine Immortality.

Since no man is capable of being adopted into the number of the Gods, but he
that has possessed his Soul of Truth and Virtue, and its spiritual Vehicle of
Purity. For so being sound and entire he is restored to the form of the
primitive habit, having returned home to himself by the collection of right
reasonings, having considered the frame of the divine Ornament, and so found
out the Maker of the Universe. And when he is become that (as far as it is
possible after Purgation) which those beings are always, who are not in a
capacity to be born, he is carried up to a God by his knowledge, but withal
having a body Congenial to him, he wants place wherein he may seat himself as a
Star. Now for such a body that place is most proper which is immediately under
the Moon, as being above the Corruptible, and yet inferior to the Celestial
bodies, which the Pythagoreans call the FREE ETHER. Ether, because immaterial
and Eternal. Free, because void of all material passions, and terrestrial
hurries. What therefore shall he be when he arrives thither but that which he
says, YOU SHALL BE AN IMMORTAL GOD, that is, like the Immortal Gods spoken of
in the beginning of the Verses, not really so. For how is it possible that he
who is Deifi'd for a gradual proficiency in Virtue begun at some certain time,
should ever be really the same with them who were so from Eternity? And this
appears from the sequel. For to these words YOU SHALL BE AN IMMORTAL GOD, he
adds, INCORRUPTIBLE AND NEVER MORE LIABLE TO DEATH. Intimating that our
Deifying consists in the removal of what is Mortal, and that we are not Gods by
nature or essence, but by proficiency and improvement. So that this makes
another sort of Gods, Immortal by ascent, but by descent Mortal; and such as
are necessarily subordinate to the Illustrious Heroes, since these always
behold the face of God, whereas the other sometimes do not attend to his
perfections. For it will not be properly a third kind when perfected, nor will
it be third in respect of the middle, but it will be made like to the first
kind, yet subordinate to the middle. For that habitual resemblance of the
Celestial which is seen in men, does preexist in the Heroical kind after a more
perfect and native manner. And thus the common and only perfection of all
rational beings, consists in their resemblance of God that made them. Now this
resemblance is constant and uniform in the Celestial beings, constant only and
not uniform in those Ethereal ones which persevere, but neither constant nor
uniform in those Ethereal beings which fall down, and are apt to converse here
upon earth. This first and best resemblance of God may be well enough called
the Pattern of the second and third, or else the second of the third. For it is
not intended only that we should propose God immediately to our imitation, but
resemble him also by the best rule, or middle likeness. But if we cannot attain
so far, yet at least we reap this most excellent fruit of Virtue, that we know
the measure of our own nature, and that we are not dissatisfied at it. And this
is the highest Virtue to contain ones self within the limits of the Creation,
whereby all things are specifically distinguished, and to comply with the laws
of Providence whereby all things according to their several capacities are
directed to that good which is agreeable and convenient for them.

And thus have we finished our Exposition of the GOLDEN Verses, wherein we have
given you an indifferent Summary of the Pythagorick Institutions. For 'twas
fit, that we should neither confine our Paraphrase to the shortness of the
Verses, (For so the reason of many excellent Precepts would have lain hid) nor
yet launch out into the Ocean of his whole Philosophy (for that were to exceed
the limits of our present undertaking) but proportion our Comment to the sense
of the Text, and deliver only those things which serve to a general Explication
of the doctrines contained in the Verses. Which are nothing else but the most
perfect transcript of Philosophy, a Compendium of its most principal doctrines
and an Elementary Institution, left to Posterity by those who following the law
of God were received up into Heaven. You may truly call these Verses the best
discovery of humane generosity, and with reason suppose that they were not the
memorable Sayings of any one Pythagorean, but the common Resolve of the whole
Sacred Assembly. Whence 'twas a law among them that these Verses like so many
Pythagorick Oracles, should be repeated in the hearing of all every Morning,
and also at Evening just before Bedtime, that so by a continual Meditation of
these sentences, their Doctrines might shine forth in their lives. Which 'twere
well if we did do too, that we might see what profit we might at length reap
from them.

FINIS.

