A CONTINUATION of the DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Christian and a Quaker: WHEREIN The
truth of those things objected against them in the first part, are fully
confirmed: TOGETHER With a further account of their perilous and pernicious
Errors CONCERNING. The Person of Christ, His Satisfaction: Justification,
Sanctification: The ministry, and Immediate Motions Are in this Second PART
Clearly and plainly represented out of the Writings of some of their Principal,
and most Approved Leaders.

Published for the Common Information of such as either really are, or may be,
in danger of being Ensnared and entangled by them.

By Thomas Hicks.

Tit. 1.10, 11. For there are many unruly, and vaintalkers, and deceivers,
whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy lucre sake.

2 Timothy 3.9. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made
manifest to all men --

LONDON, Printed, for Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange, 1673.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
SAtan's great design against Religion is managed, and carried on, partly by
error, and partly by persecution: by that, he instills such notions into the
minds of men as may teach them to deny it; by this, he would affright and
terrify them from it. The mischeifs he has wrought by the former; the age
where into our lot is fallen, gives us, but too many instances.

The people with whom I have to deal, though they are least concerned with, yet
pretend to the greatest interest in the truth: who being not satisfied with
those ways, and methods, God has revealed, and prescribed in the holy
Scriptures, have broken all bounds, cast off the yoke, the known rule; and
follow only such impulses, and motions, as has been given in from him, who
designs nothing short of their ruin, by such strategems: which are so much the
more malignant, and effectual toward his intended end, by how much they are
more grateful to that proud opinion they have of themselves.

Some account of their perilous opinions in, and about several important
points of the Christian Faith, has heretofore been given unto you: unto which,
I have long been threatened with a solid Answer, though as yet I have not seen
any: that piece of impertinency, which G. Whitehead has sent abroad inno the
World, I suppose (though not so called, yet) intended for an answer, wherein, I
am rather vindicated, then answered; most or all the material things in
difference he passes by in silence.

I have, in this second part, presented you with a more full relation of their
dangerous Tenets, wherein the truth of my former Allegations against them, are
(from their own mouths) fully established, and all Objections that hitherto
have occurred to my knowledge, are taken notice of: all which, I shall leave to
thy serious Judgment.

Many of the things objected against them, are so Horrid, that it is probable
some will not believe them culpable; God forbid, that I should be guilty of
such vile injustice, as to charge them with false things: examine the
quotations, and then judge. As for those instances that are not in print, I
have such undoubted evidences of their truth, as may satisfy any man.

From the whole thou may be informed that the Quakers Christ, and way of
Salvation, is Foreign to what is revealed in the Scriptures. The Doctrines
delivered by them are such, as neither themselves, nor any for them, can give
us a distinct and intelligible account of. The tendency of all their writings,
and declarings, does but lead people into the thickets of absurd, inexplicable,
and unintelligible Dotages.

They amuze us with the great words of Life and Power, pretend as if they lived
under the immediate Influences, though alas, such is their unhappiness, they
embrace a cloud, feed on ashes, and know not that a lie is in their right hand,
and (which is the more astonishing) many people (not distinguishing between
words and things, pretenses and real enjoyments) are so easily entrapped and
deceived by them: but what shall, we say, If God for the wantonness of persons,
under the means of Light, should give them up to a reprobate sense, to strong
delusions to believe lies, (to follow and admire, such monsters in Religion)
that they may be damned, because they received not the Truth in the love of it,
hence when I consider, that God, to glorify his Justice in punishing the
wickedness of men, does permit the Enemy to distract their minds, and to set
them on madding after they know not what, on purpose to divert them from those
things, which are of immediate concernment to them, I say, the consideration
hereof lessens my wonder, when I see such delusions, and impostures prevail.
Though to see a people under the Immediate Judgment of God, fancying themselves
to be the non-such of the World, for privileges, and enjoyments, is (I
confess) matter of deep Lamentation, and Pity.

'Twill be therefore our interest, and Wisdom, to consider (before it be too
late) both what we do, and who, and what we believe We are hastening toward
Eternity. To miscarry about our last end will not only be unhappy, but it will
prove the utmost complement of our unhappiness. By nature we are all sinners,
and stand guilty before God; if we be unprovided of a meet Righteousness
wherewith to appear before the great Tribunal, it will be of perilous
consequence. That a complete Righteousness should be spun out of our own
bowels (our lapsed condition considered) is impossible.

That Jesus Christ in his Mediatory undertakings for sinners should be improved
by us, is apparently denied by these Quakers; so that all mankind are left
(according to their principles) under a fatal necessity of perishing. For, if
the way and means, which God's infinite Wisdom, and Will, has constituted, in
order to man's eternal welfare, be rejected; in(...)in will it be for us to
think of another. That thus it is, with these People, the ensuing Dialogue will
give you sufficient grounds to conclude.

The person of Christ they plainly deny, and positively affirm That the
Doctrine of rejoicing, and acceptance from the works of another is utterly
excluded, W. Pen, Sa. Foun. p. 27. And that God accepts not any, in whom there
is any failing, who do not fulfill the Law and answer every demand of Justice.
And when they talk of the blood of Christ, they delude their hearers or
readers. For, by that blood they mean nothing but the Life and Light within. At
the same instant they are pleading for Perfection, they will discharge you from
duty, except you be Immediately moved thereunto, as if their perfection
consisted in being stocks and stones, or, which is worse, in being rebels
against the Law of God. Their discourse (for the most part) is about the Light
within, yet the Light is not more contrary to Darkness, than their Dictates are
about this thing. What one of them says, another of their own will contradict.
What one man at one time affirms, he himself will deny at another. One while
it is the Divine essence, it is Christ, it is increated; another while, it is not
Christ himself, but only his gift, or appearance, a seed, a measure of Light, a
witness for God. Now, it is the only Savior, and rule; anon we hear of another
that both saves it, and rules it. Their sayings hereabouts are so cross and
thwarting, that it is almost impossible for a man to know when they speak as
they think, or think as they speak.

That every man has a Light in him, is not denied: for, had the not a Liggt,
he were not capable of being governed by a rule: But, that this, which renders
him capable of walking by rule, should be it self the rule, is not intelligible.

The holy Scriptures are esteemed (by them) inferior to their own pamphlets;
yea they render them to be of no more Authority than the Fables of Esop.

Hence they substitute in its room, their own motions, and impulses, and yet
(if you will believe them, when they dissemble) they will tell you, they own
the Scriptures. Their own people know not their intrigues nor the designs they
have upon them, they do not use to trust (as some of them have said) such,
(that is their ordinary followers) with their opinions, and yet to secure their
people to them, they will possess them with greatest prejudices imaginable
against any that seriously endeavor to recover them, out of their snare, still
persuading them to the highest veneration of the Quakers Ministry, and that
whatever is suggested against them, (though never so true) must be looked upon as
the greatest lie. They hate the Light, whilst they pretend to it: if you
discourse with them, it is not the argument but the man, they will chiefly be
concerned with; upon whom, can they but fix any thing that is odious, it shall
pass both for an answer, and a confutation, and to fill up their wickedness,
they will, (in their solemn way, and manner of profaness and blasphemy) bless
God, that they have thus answered.

Observe them in their families, the irreligious education of their Children,
the ordinary neglect of all Christian duties, and also their common converse,
and what can we see in them, to represent them to be what they pretend? They
will boast of mortification, yet love their backs and bellies to excess, that
what will please their betters, will not content them, and yet so infatuated
are they, as to conclude themselves, to be a perfect and self-denying people.

The Lord in mercy vouchsafe to us in this hour of trial, wherein the Spirit of
error does so fearfully prevail) that his holy truth may shine out, to preserve
us from these paths of the Destroyer, and if it may please him, to manifest,
and magnify his Sovereign mercy and Grace in the pardon, and recovery of these
deluding, and deluded creatures, and grant unto us such an understanding of his
holy will revealed to us, that we may discern truth from error; that though
Errors and Heresies do appear and show themselves, yet we may approve our
selves sincere, in a serious contending for, and adhering to, the Truth once
delivered to the Saints.

Thomas Hicks.

A FARTHER ACCOUNT OF THE Dangerous Opinions OF THE QUAKERS: COLLECTED Out of
the Writings of several of their Principal Leaders, faithfully represented in
the ensuing Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker.
Chr. I Have formerly detected you of several Pernicious Opinions concerning
the Scriptures, the Light within, the Person of Christ, and the Resurrection of
the Dead, etc. which, I presume, by this time you have considered; What say you
thereunto?


Quak. I say the Plagues and Judgments of God will follow thee, G. Whitehead.


Chr. Though your Conscience might be touched with the evidence of the things
alleged against you, yet it would have been your prudence rather to have
dissembled your Pain, then thus to vent your Passion in such furious Replies:
But you must not think to baffle me with such Sarcasms, either confess the
truth of what you are charged with, or else disprove it.


Quak. I have in print told thee, That thy Dialogue is an unchristian forgery,
G. Whitehead, D. Plungd. Title Page.


Chr. Wherein have thou proved it so to be?


Quak. Thou have presented the World with a Quaker of thy own forming, making
them to speak those impertinencies and falsehoods that were never uttered by any
real Quaker; therefore it is a forgery, G. W. Epistle to D. Pl.


Chr. You had done well, if you had produced some instances wherein I made them
speak what was never uttered by a real Quaker. But if I can prove that what is
spoken under that name, is the language of a real Quaker, then thou have
confessed that such may be guilty of Impertinencies and Falsehoods.


Quak. That thou can never prove, for I affirm, That the Quaker there
represented to the World is of thy own making.


Chr. I wonder that you who pretend so much to circumspection in your Words,
should yet be so extravagant in Print; It Is notorious, the Dialogue mentions
several that are, and were, approved Quakers, (viz.) G. Whitehead, G. Fox,
James Naylor, Crisp, Richard Hubberthrone, and Ben. Furley, etc. If these be
not, or were not real Quakers, then do you publicly deny it; or if those
things quoted of them be not true, disprove them: But if that cannot be denied,
nor this disproved, how dare you say, I have presented the World with a Quaker
of my own making?


Quak. I say thy Dialogue is no other then unchristian forgery.


Chr. That obliges thee to prove it, which as yet thou have not done.


Quak. Have I not instanced in several particulars wherein thou have wronged
us, Dip. Pl. p. 16, 17.


Chr. Are those the only things wherein the forgery consists?


Quak. What say thou to them?


Chr. I taxed G. Whitehead, For affirming the light within to be God; And for
saying, That the speaking of the Spirit in any is of greater authority then the
Scriptures; and also for denying the resurrection of this Body, etc. Crisp, for
saying, He knew the beginning and date of that Christ I believed in; G. Fox,
for asserting, The Soul to be part of God's Being, to be without beginning, and
infinite: Ben. Furly, for saying, It Is the greatest error in the World that
ever was invented, and the ground of all error, To say the Scriptures are a
Rule to Christians: G. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorne for affirming, That it is
dangerous for ignorant people to read the Scriptures, etc. G. Whitehead's
silence herein, is in my judgment a plain concession touching the verity of
these Quotations, which is a manifest giving away your Cause; nevertheless, if
there be any thing wherein you judge your selves wronged, let me hear it.


Quak. Thou say we account the blood of Christ no more then a common thing;
yea, no more then the blood of a common Thief, this is forgery.


Chr. If the mere light within, and obedience to it, be every way sufficient to
bring every man to eternal life, as you constantly affirm, then the shedding of
Christ's blood upon the Cross was needless, and to no purpose. Isaac Pennington
(who I suppose is an approved Quaker) asks this question, Can outward blood
cleanse? Therefore, says he, We must enquire whether it was the blood of the
Vail, that is of the humane nature, or the blood within the Vail, (viz.) of
that spiritual man, consisting of Flesh, Blood, and Bones, which took on him
the Vail, or humane Nature? It Is not the blood of the Vail, that is but
outward; and can outward blood cleanse? if not, then that blood which Christ
shed upon the Cross, which was the blood of the Humane Nature, is no more then
a common thing.

Secondly, If the sufferings of Christ were only exemplary, as you likewise
affirm, then what more do you attribute to the blood of Christ, then to the
blood and sufferings of other holy persons?

Thirdly, If the mystery of Iniquity lies in the blood of Christ, as Edw.
Billing most wickedly said it did, then is the blood of Christ, in your esteem,
worse then the blood of a common Thief: Farther, what signifies these words
which frequently drop from your mouths, Do thou look at Christ's Death afar
off? what will that Blood avail? Did ever see any of it? That carnal blood,
can outward blood cleanse? If thou had a great deal of it, would it do thee
any good? Do not these Interrogatories carry with them an open scorn and
contempt of that blood which was shed upon the Cross? consequently that which
is charged upon you is no forgery.


Quak. Thou say we make use of Scripture only to stop their mouths who call
for Scripture proof; this is a Slander.


Chr. If the Scriptures be no Rule; yea, if it be Idolatry to call the Bible a
means, as Whitehead expressly says it is, D. P. page 13. Who also affirms, That
faith grounded on the Scriptures is but an empty Implicit Faith, and be-speaks
such persons void of the Knowledge of God, Christ, Salvation, and to be yet in
their Sins, and that such men walk by their own Fancies and Imaginations.
Christ ascended, p. 11. Solo Eccles. (a great admirer of George Fox)
discoursing with a Friend of mine in London, told him, The Scriptures were a
lie; To whom 'twas replied, Why then do thou mention them? The Quaker
answered, To silence thee.

Nicolas Lucas, a real Quaker, was moved to declare his mind thus, (to one I
know very well) Thou may burn thy Bible, and when that is done, thou may
serve God as well without it; and if thou have a mind to have a Scripture, thou
may write as good a one thy self. Many more instances might be produced,
these may suffice to acquit me from forgery in this particular; what more have
thou to say?


Quak. Thou say that Fox, Dewsberry, Crisp, Whitehead, and Pen, are
exceedingly corrupt in their Morals, herein thou have spoken falsely.


Chr. Have thou bid adieu to common honesty? art thou endeavoring to prove me
a Forgerer, and yet at the same time be guilty of it thy self? See the
Dialogue, p. 43. which says, Some of them are exceedingly corrupt in their
Morals. If you think it your interest to put me on the proof hereof, you may
when you please, and I doubt not (if well) but to give you full satisfaction
herein, provided that wilful lying fornication, and adultery may be accounted
Immoralities; what further have thou to allege against me?


Quak. Thou reports that the Quakers deny the resurrection of the Body, which
is false.


Chr. George Whitehead, in my hearing, before near a hundred Witnesses, did
deny it, in these words, This Body of flesh and bones shall not rise again; who
also says enough in his Pamphlet to acquit me from forgery herein.


Quak. Thou insinuates, as if our sufferings were only to satisfy our Wills
and Lusts; herein thou do greatly wrong us.


Chr. In this I only queried what it should be that does influence you to
suffer, forasmuch as you deny that this Body shall rise from the dead, and
consequently can be never the better for what you do or suffer. And G. Fox
maintains, That the Soul is part of Gods Being, etc. and therefore not capable
either of prejudice or advantage, whether you suffer or not. Again, is there
any people that ever boasted so vainly of their Sufferings as you do, that
scarce a Pamphlet can come out from you, but the World must hear of your brags
in this kind; which can have no other meaning, then to feed that Principle of
Pride that reigns in you, and to gain Proselites to your errors, etc.


Quak. Thou also say, We deny any eternal advantage to be reaped by persons
after death; In this thou do abuse us.


Chr. This is no other then the genuine and direct consequence of denying the
resurrection of this Body. See 1 Cor. 15.13, 14. If no resurrection, then is
not Christ risen: If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your
faith vain, and ye are yet in your Sins, ver. 17. Why stand I in jeopardy every
hour? ver. 30. What advantageth me that I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus?
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye, ver. 32.

If we ask you whether a further happiness (then now) shall be enjoyed by the
Saints at the last day, you will answer by another question. When thinks thou
that will be? must all the Saints have their hope and faith unanswered till
then, Whitehead Christ ascended, p. 34. If we inquire whether you do not wait
for any thing further? you will tell us, That Death and Darkness has power
over our Minds, else we would never show our selves such ignorant Papists, in
putting Salvation so far off, till we know not when, according to our carnal
conceits, Whitehead, ibid. If hereupon we ask you, Whether you enjoy eternal
life and felicity now? This is your answer, The recompense of reward, (viz.)
eternal life and felicity is inwardly and spiritually received by those that
now suffer for Christ, Whitehead, ibid. p. 37.

I suppose by this time thou art, at least may be satisfied, that in these
instances I was not guilty of forgery, and consequently Geo. Whitehead's
pretended answer to me carries a manifest lie in the front of it, as any may
perceive, who compares it with the Dialogue.


Quak. I say thy Dialogue is proved an unchristian forgery.


Chr. It was inconsiderately and imprudently done by thee to put such words in
thy very Title Page, since there is nothing in all thy Pamphlet that proves any
such thing, but the contrary.


Quak. Thy Dialogue is not only a forgery, but it abounds with contradictions.


Chr. This thou say, though the particulars thou have taken notice of evince
no such thing: However so it has happened (though I think not designedly by
thee) thou have fully justified that Answer in the Catechism, p. 72. You will
make your Friends believe, we do nothing but contradict our selves: Wast thou
advised and discreet herein thus to vindicate me, even whilst thou art
endeavoring to prove me guilty of forgery. But wherein do I contradict my self?

Will any man (except a Quaker) say, That to deny the light within, to be a
sufficient rule to Salvation, and yet in some cases appeal to it; and grant it
ought to be obeyed, is a contradiction: I verily believe G. Whitehead knows not
all things, and yet I believe he does know some things, may I not appeal to him
concerning that he knows, without being censured for contradicting my self;
surely G. W. the contradiction is not in my words, but in thy dark mind.


Quak. Do thou not affirm what any of us have said concerning the light
within, is no more then what the Apostle speaks of the man of sin; and may as
well prove Mahomet to be the true Christ, as the light within, Dip. Pl. page 5.


Chr. Herein thou do only confute a thing forged by thy self, and not
uttered by me: Is this the way to quit thy self from deceit and falsehood, which
thou know I have openly accused thee of? The comparison is not between the
light within, and the man of Sin or Mahomet; but only betwixt those Signs and
Wonders you boast of. And those that Mahomet, or the man of Sin, may and do
likewise pretend unto, see the Dialogue, p. 11, 12.


Quak. Thou also say, That our obeying the commands of the living Word in
us, is no other then a mystical Romance; Herein thou have acted the profane
Romancer, and art a most irreligious, Miscreant, Dip. Pl. p. 5, 6.


Chr. If thou art not condemned in thy own Conscience for these wilful
untruths, it will signify very ill of thee: The Dialogue speaks on this wise,
p. 10. you say, You own Jesus Christ, but then it is with such a mental and
mystical reservation, which is no other then a mystical Romance. Can thou
think that any ingenious and impartial Reader should conceive otherwise of
thee, then a deceitful and impertinent Scribler. That the Christ you own is no
other then a mystical Romance, shall be fully proved in this Discourse
following.

As for those other things they are so frivolous, that I think them not worthy
of any reply, believing that not any man who has not lost his reason, can
conclude as thou do. It Is one thing to say, another thing to prove a man
contradicts himself; such an Antagonist as G. Whitehead, certainly was never
yet met with, who instead of attending to the matters in Controversy, contends
only with his own Imaginations.


Quak. Why speaks thou so slightly of George Whitehead, he is no such
impertinent person as thou wouldst-represent him, we know his worth, etc.


Chr. No doubt you have too high a value for him, because you indeed know him
not; what ever his errors, deceit, and hypocrisy be, your affection to his
Person blinds your eyes, that you cannot, or will not see it: I must tell you,
that had I been at his elbow when he was writing the Dip. Pl. I could not well
have desired him to write more for my Vindication then he has done.


Quak. Why say thou so?


Chr. Because the chief things objected against you he touches not, but
manifestly falls under the whole charge, as before is hinted.


Quak. This is but thy own imagination.


Chr. I charged him for affirming the light within to be the Divine Essence;
and he blames me for saying, It Is but a mere Creature, Dip. Pl. 13. In this
then he clears me from any wrong done to him; I accuse you for denying the
Person of Christ without you, And does not he say, Christ Jesus a person
without us is not Scripture language, but the Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonians, Ibid. Why then should it be believed that herein I have wronged
either you or him, since he himself does so fully acquit me: Was not that
Answer in the Catechism, p. 73. very pertinent, and truly given in your name.
Though we believe not that you have answered us, yet you will give it out, you
have both answered and confuted us; and your Friends will believe what you say,
which is enough to you. Is not the Dip. Pl. calculated only for the humor of
your own Friends; but are you so void of reason as to think it to be a solid
answer to the Dialogue?


Quak. Thou art a Liar, and do thou think that thy particular Election will
secure thee from the reward of liars, G. W. Dip. Pl. Epistle.


Chr. Thou have not proved one lie, neither do I hold such an Election as
secures persons guilty of lying, from the reward of liars. I see thou art
driven to a strait, that since thou can not rationally quarrel with the
Dialogue, thou sets up a shadow, a figment of thy own Brain to contend with.


Quak. Do thou not hold a particular election of thy own Party, and but of
very few (if any others) besides, etc. G. Whitehead.


Chr. I perceive thy Dictates are not infallible, for as thou have not declared
thy own, so neither have thou written (nor indeed do thou know) my belief in
this matter: But what is all this to the Dialogue, why art thou concerned so
much about Election, who believes no such thing of persons, either absolute or
conditionals; that Election you generally hold, is only of the Seed, which is
Christ himself; therefore thou do but trifle, and fill up paper to no
purpose; might it not therefore have been of more advantage to your Cause, if
William Penn had concerned himself in the examination of the Dialogue (as I
expected he would). That what G. Whitehead could not do in his dull method and
manner of reasoning, it is probable William Penn, with his Confidence and
Rhetorique, might have done.


Quak. What real Quaker ever spoke thus, that they who will not believe our
sayings, we will not spare to condemn, and stigmatize them, and it concerns us
to render them as ridiculous as we can.


Chr. If you would have nothing charged upon you but what is indeed uttered by
approved Quakers, whether it might not be necessary to give us a Catalogue of
the Names of such; or if you think not meet to do this, then to give us some
certain intelligible Character how a real Quaker may be known; may that pass
for a Character which Tho. Ruddyer gave in my hearing, viz. One that is come to
the pure Language, to speak thee and and thou; then your Objection will be
easily answered: Does not one of your own tell us, that it is your manner to
render such odious, and the more effectually to weaken their Testimonies, you
will fix upon them scurrilous and contemptible Appellations: And do not all men
that know you, know this is true. But that I may fully satisfy you in this
point, I ask whether Edward Buroughs was not an approved Quaker?


Quak. Yea, he was endued with the Almighty Power of God, which lived and
reigned in him: This his own Works will in a large measure testify the truth
of, a man able to stop the mouths of all Gainsayers; This is my testimony to
this man of God, who has been a blessing to the Lord in his Generation, Josiah
Coal, his Epistle before Edw. Buroughs his Works in Folio.


Chr. Was this Josiah Coal a real Quaker?


Quak. He was so.


Chr. In what respect did the Almighty Power of God live and reign in him; and
how was he a blessing to the Lord, for I must confess I do not well understand
the meaning of this testimony.


Quak. It Is no matter for answering such cavilling Questions.


Chr. Who else gives their Testimony to Edw. Buroughs and his Works.


Quak. These memorable Works of Edw. Buroughs (printed for the good of
Generations to come, 1672.) is brought forth for us, and our Children, and such
as are moderate, and well affected; greater desires hereof could not be in any,
then in my own particular, I having traveled both to answer and serve the
truth, and the desires of Friends herein; Let none condemn the honest plainness
and harmless simplicity of any of his first Works here inserted, for many are
living Witnesses that the Power and Wisdom of God did then appear and show it
self through such plainness and simplicity, to the confounding of the wisdom of
many that seemed high and lofty. And thus, dear Friends, as the Salvation of
our dear Brother Edw. Buroughs, according to his desire, whilst in the Body, I
recommend this Volume of his Books, being therein the Truths, and your Servant
Ellis Hooks. See the Epistle Dedicatory to the Quakers.


Chr. Of what use and service do you judge these Works may be to you, and to
your Children?


Quak. It may not be unnecessary for Friends and Children to read and peruse
these Testimonies, Informations, and Vindications of Truth, where they are in a
way of Controversy given forth; the reading whereof may be of service to them,
they being in the light and inspiration of the Almighty, from which all
Scriptures, or Writings, that are given forth, are profitable to the man of God
for his accommodation; for though many of you are come to a particular
satisfaction in the true Light, and know so much of Christ, so as to dye for
him, yet cannot so well dispute for him: Though that be necessary, and few
given up and accomplished for that Service; therefore there may be need for
more to apply their hearts to wisdom, Ellis Hooks, ibid.


Chr. If written Testimonies and Vindications be profitable to the Man of God,
for his accommodation, to help him to Dispute, as you plainly intimate: Does
not this interfere with that grand Notion of yours, which says, You must do
all by the immediate motion of the power within. But if the Light and Power
which you and your Children have be not sufficient of it self to accomplish you
for this Service of Disputation for, and vindicating of that you call the
Truth, why then do you contend so much for its All Sufficiency? methinks you
who pretend to infallibility, should be very careful to make one story agree
with another, and not thus to be taken in different tales, to the manifest
disparagement both of your selves and Opinions. But is this Ellis Hooks a true
Quaker?


Quak. Thou needst not doubt that, forasmuch as be was employed in that
Service, for the collecting and printing these Works of Edw. Buroughs, and
also allowed to prefix his Epistle before it. And there are others, who were
and are in the Ministry, that has given their Testimony to this Servant and
Prophet of the Lord, as thou may see in their Epistles before his Works.

Shall Days, Months, and Years, wear out thy Name? Shall not thy noble and
valiant Acts which thou have wrought through the Power of him that separated
thee from the Womb, live in Generations to come? The Children yet unborn shall
have thee in their mouths, and thy Works shall testify of thee in Generations
that yet have no Being, and shall account thee blessed: When I think of thee, I
am melted into tears of sorrow, because of the want that the Inheritance of the
Lord has of thee. Francis Howgill.

As for Edw. Buroughs our dear Brother and Companion in travel, suffering, and
consolation for the everlasting Gospels sake, his Testimony lives with us; He
was a Preacher of Righteousness, one who traveled for the Redemption of the
Creature from under the bondage of Corruption. The name of this Minister of
Righteousness is written in the Lambs Book of Life, George Whitehead; His name
is chronicled in the Lambs Book of Life, a righteous Plant, a valiant Warrier,
more then a Conqueror; who is dead, but yet lives amongst us, and amongst us
is alive, George Fox.


Chr. Being well assured from these Testimonies that Edw. Buroughs was an
approved Quaker; then for the satisfaction of you and others in this Point,
whether I have feigned a Quaker, as Whitehead suggests, or made them speak
otherwise then in their own proper Dialect. I shall transcribe twenty
questions, which I find printed in the memorable Works of Edw. Buroughs,
together with the force and import of his Answers to each Question, as you will
find, if you consult his Works in Folio, printed 1672. wherein the Spirit and
Principles of the Quakers is not a little laid open. The questions were
propounded (as that Book informs me) by one Philip Bennet.

1. Q. Whether the Word was made Flesh more or oftener then once?


Quak. In this Quere thou are manifested what thou art, where thou art, and
what spirit thou art of, a Reprobate, a Child of Darkness: In this Quere thy
spirit is seen and known in the eternal light; thou know not what thou
ask, thy Quere comes from thy dark polluted mind: Thou art a stranger to the
Life, without God in the World; the Light condemns thee, and all thy generation
eternally. The Word made Flesh we witness, which dwells amongst us, and we
behold his Glory, whereby we witness thee and all thy generation to be in the
sorcery and witchcraft; the light in thee will tell thee so, to which thou must
be obedient before thou can witness the Word made Flesh onc't, for thou art
darkness it self; when thou can witness the Word made Flesh onc't, then thou will know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman more or oftener then onc't:
But thou Dragon that would devour the Man-Child, thou the Dragon with thy
Angels art cast into the Earth. For thy other nineteen Queres thou have
conjured them up in the Black Art, out of the bottomless Pit, Edw. Burrough's
Works in Folio, p. 29, 30.


Chr. Was ever Querist so rudely and uncivilly treated? or was ever question
thus ridiculously answered? was this the honest plainness and harmles.
simplicity of this man? and was this his silencing all Opposers? Is there any
thing in the question to provoke to such Bedlam Rhetoric? to call a man
Reprobate, Child of Darkness, a stranger to the Life, without God in the World;
yea, and to damn him eternally, only for a modest and sober enquiry; was this
his valor for the Lamb? what means he by witnessing the Word made Flesh? Is it
any thing more then the Seed, Light, or Power within? But is this to the
question? Does the Scripture by the Word being made Flesh, intend only the
Light within? many thousands (that in all things walk not up to the light in
them) do believe that the Word was made Flesh onc't, contrary to the bold
assertion of this man, That they must be obedient to the Light within, before
they can witness (or believe) this thing. It Is easy to guess what your notions
are concerning the Word made Flesh; Buroughs says, the Querist is darness it
self; if so, then surely he had no light in him to tell him he was in the
sorcery and witchcraft; If no light, how is your opinion true, That every man
has Christ, or his light in him; is it possible for that man (in whom Christ
or his Light is) to be darkness it self? And how could he be obedient to the
light within, if he had none to obey.

Again, is a serious proposal about the Word being made Flesh onc't, an
argument of one being in the sorcery and witchcraft? O stupendous madness and
folly! And if the Querist be the Dragon, and has his Angels, I would willingly
know (of some of them who have commended his memorable Works to the Ages to
come) who or what these Angels are?

And since he has already doomed and passed sentence upon the rest of the
Queres, as being conjured in the Black Art out of the bottomless Pit; we may
plainly foresee what Answers they are like to be attended with, nevertheless I
shall proceed.

(2. Q.) Whether did the man Christ, slain (in respect of God's Decree and
efficacy) from the foundation of the World, really and indeed, suffer death as
upon the Cross at Jerusalem more or oftener then once?


Quak. In this Quere thou Diviner art found adding to the Scriptures the
Divination of thy own Brain, whereupon the Plagues of God are to be added to
thee: Oh thou liar, where does the Scriptures speak as thou speaks here? But in
the light thou art seen, and art for the condemnation: The man Christ we own,
and witness, and the Lambs Book of life, which was slain from the foundation of
the World; we witness the Lamb of God, and thee to be the Beast that makes war
with the Lamb, and thou Antichrist, which looks at Christ's death at Jerusalem
alone; so let all thy Congregation see what they hold up that follows thee,
Edw. Buroughs, ibid. p. 30.


Chr. Can any man be the wiser for this Answer? Is it Antichristian to look at
Christ's death at Jerusalem? Does the man Christ die in you? and must he be
only looked at as so dying? The question is plain, whether the man Christ did
really suffer death as upon the Cross more then onc't? though Edw. Buroughs
says, 'Twas conjured up in the Black Art, and accordingly in his canting way
answers, We witness the Lamb of God: But what is this witnessing to the point?
or is Diviner, Liar, and Beast, a fit reply to so harmless an enquiry; I see,
though you cannot, or will not answer a question in plain and intelligigible
terms; yet you can and will freely curse and damn the Querist. And whilst you
pretend to own and witness the Man Christ, etc. you sufficiently intimate your
erroneous thoughts concerning the Sufferings of Christ upon the Cross, though
you are ashamed or afraid to speak them out.

(3. Q.) Whether did the Man Christ really and indeed suffer in his own Person
for that end, and after the same manner which he did upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, before that time or since that time?


Quak. Here thou full of all subtilty, have manifested thy poison and enmity;
but thou art seen with the Light, and with it condemned for ever: Christ Jesus
in his own Person does, and ever did suffer by thee, and such as thou art,
after the same manner: Thou blind Pharisee and Blasphemer, would thou have
Christ have more ends in suffering then one, Ibid. p. 30.


Chr. Whether there be more poison and enmity manifested in the Question, or in
the Answer, I leave others to judge: Was Christ indeed actually crucified upon
the Cross by the Querist? and does Christ always suffer after the same manner,
and for the same end, as he did when crucified at Jerusalem? If so, How is the
Body of Jesus Christ said to be offered once for all? And why is it called an
offering of one Sacrifice, Heb. 10.10, 12, 14. Be free and plain, let us know
whether you do believe that Christ did, and does suffer in his own person for
the same end, and after the same manner as he did upon the Cross, both before
that time, and since that time, or deny it; else say, you cannot, or that it is
not convenient to give a positive answer.

(4. Q.) Was not that death which the Man Christ suffered once, and but once,
upon the Cross at Jerusalem, so satisfactory for all the Sins of the Elect, as
that the justice of God, did not, does not require any suffering or working
upon that account, either from Sinner or Saint?


Quak. Here thou Jesuit art pleading for a Christ afar off thee, that Christ
which died at Jerusalem did not satisfy for thee, who art an enemy to him, and
art under the woe, and from that woe thou shall never flee. The death of the
Man Christ we own, and witness; The same Christ that suffered, we witness made
manifest. And here thou liar, art made manifest to be a liar, who said, We deny
that Christ which died at Jerusalem; so let thy mouth be stopped thou liar, who
art for the lake: And whereas thou queries, whether the justice of God be not
satisfied for the Sins of the Elect; let shame strike thee in the face, that
thou should take upon thee to speak to any people, and know not the
Scripture: where reads thou, that God requires satisfaction for the Sins of the
Elect, or laid any thing to their Charge; Let all people see whether thou be
not a blind ignorant sot, Ibid. p. 30, 31.


Chr. It seems by this Answer, it is Jesuitical to plead for that Christ which
died at Jerusalem, which Buroughs calls a Christ afar off: Then in what sense
must you be understood, when you say, You own the same Christ that suffered? If
the death of the same man you do truly (and without reserved meanings)
acknowledge, why do you stigmatize the Querist for pleading for that Christ?
The Querist is accused for a liar, for saying, You deny that Christ which died
at Jerusalem, and yet Edw. Buroughs calls him Jesuit, for pleading for a
Christ afar off; Is not this to acquit his Accuser, and plainly to condemn
himself for a rash and peevishman. That Buroughs did really lie and dissemble
in his pretenses to own the same Christ, does in part appear in his Answer, and
will more fully in the sequel of this Dialogue.

How did this Quaker know, that Christ did not satisfy for the Querist, and
that he was under that woe, from which he should not escape? What means he by
the Elect, for whom no satisfaction is required? and to whose charge nothing is
laid? was not Christ's death for Sin? then either for the sins of the Elect, or
for the sins of others; not for the Elect, nor for the Querist; for whose sins
then? It Is evident enough, he intended 'twas only for the Seed, which Seed is
Christ; so that Sinners are no ways concerned in the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, unless you will say, That Christ in man is a Sinner: O the patience and
forbearance of God, that should bear with such Blasphemies as these are; that
ever men pretending to infallible Teachings, should so render the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, and his Sufferings, as to expose them to the greatest scorn and
contempt.

(5. Q.) Whether you be reconciled to God by any other Obedience, then that
very Obedience which Christ performed in his own Person, or by any suffering or
death then that which Christ suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem?


Quak. Silence Flesh, would thou who art an enemy to God, know how we are
reconciled to God, and by what Obedience; own the light in thy Conscience, and
be obedient to that, then thou shall know by what Obedience we are reconciled
to God: For yet thou know no Obedience, but art an enemy to the Cross of
Christ, and in the mystery of Iniquity, and in the dark power of the Man of
Sin: What have thou to do to talk of Obedience, thou art blind; and in the
broad way that leads to Death, Ibid. p. 31.


Chr. Is this to give a reason of your Hope with meekness and fear? Suppose the
Querist as ignorant as his Answerer would represent him, ought he not to have
endeavored his Information; the question does deserve a better reply then here
is given to it; what inconvenience can there be in giving a serious and solid
account, how we are reconciled to God? Was not Edw. Buroughs either ashamed or
afraid to speak out what that Obedience is by which you are reconciled. William
Penn, I must confess, herein is more free and ingenious with us, He confidently
affirms, Justification by that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled in his own
Person without us, is a Doctrine of Devils, Apolog. p. 148. I doubt not but
Buroughs was of the same mind, though he kept it secret from the Querist as
much as in him lay: Hitherto you see we have not one direct Answer to any
Question.

(6. Q.) Whether did not the Man Christ suffer as a public Person in the
Elects stead, or in their behalf, and for that end, That none who believed in
him might die eternally?


Quak. Thou blind Guide makes it manifest, that thou know not the Man Christ
at all, nor his Sufferings; A public Person he is, not to thee, but a mystery
thou knows nothing of; and for the redeeming of the Elect from under such
mouths as thine, Christ did and does suffer, and those that believe, deny such
dumb idol Shepherds as thee, Ibid. p. 31.


Chr. Still nothing but Impertinent Ravings, instead of a direct Answer? What
does the Quaker intend by the Man Christ, and his Sufferings, which he says
the Querist knows not at all? Is Christ a public Person or not? did he die for
this end, That all who believe in him might not die eternally, or did he not?
who, or what is the Elect that is under the mouths of such as the Querist? for
the redeeming of whom Christ did and does suffer: And what is that which Christ
does now suffer for the Redemption of the Elect? and what that Bondage is from
which he redeems? And what is meant by believing? and in whom? Is it in that
Person who suffered upon the Cross? or the Light within? Do not equivocate, but
2speak to the Point directly, whether that Person that is distinct from all
other persons; He that was in the World, and died upon the Cross, rose again,
and is now at the right hand of God, be that very Christ we are to believe in?
or that it is not our Duty and Interest so to do, but merely to believe in, and
obey the light within, as the only Mediator between God and Sinners. Let us
know your minds herein in downright terms, and do not put us off with your
witnessings, which to us signify nothing.

(7. Q.) Whether the Sufferings of Christ, now in his Saints, be all the
satisfaction that is made to, or which the justice of God looks for, for sins
pasts, present, and to come?


Quak. Thou Blasphemer ask thou knows not what, Is not Christ the same as
ever? and is not the Sufferings of Christ satisfactory where ever? what will
satisfy, if the Sufferings of Christ will not satisfy? Let all people take
notice what a Blasphemer thou art, or what can they learn from such as thee,
who knows neither the Justice of God, nor the Sufferings of Christ in his
Saints, Ibid. p. 31.


Chr. In answer to the fourth Question, this Quaker denied the Sufferings of
Christ to be satisfactory either for the Elect or others, and here he grants
his Sufferings are satisfactory wherever, but tells us not to whom, nor for
whom they are so: And whereas he talks of Christ's Sufferings in his Saints, I
would quere, whether his Sufferings in that sense be all the satisfaction that
is made to, or which the Justice of God requires? Again, it may not be amiss to
observe a little the policy of this man, who, that he might the better hide,
and prevent any suspicion of himself being a Blasphemer, he indites and
arraigns the Querist as such, perfectly in this, imitating the Devil, who will
charge upon another his own fault; that thus it is, consider the Quakers
Opinion of Christ in his Saints, which is, it is God, and his eternal Power; but
does God and his Power Suffer and die in his Saints? Is this to exalt the Deity
of the Son of God (which sometimes you pretend to do) to make him subject to
death, and to death in you; but pray, how can an immortal, immutable Spirit
die, and in what sense is such a death satisfactory? But the misery is, ask
what question we will, in the plainest terms we can, the Quakers will answer
equivocally, and not let us know their minds (as one of them said, We do not
use to trust such with our Opinions) as if they were ashamed to own the things
themselves believe.

(8. Q.) Whether was not that Body of Jesus which was offered upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, the one and only Sacrifice for Sin God accepted, to which all the
Saints did, and do look to be justified without any other Works?


Quak. Here thou replies thy sottish Queries, which rises out of thy dark mind,
concerning the Body of Jesus, as the Devil did about the body of Moses; let thy
mouth be stopped, for the Body of Jesus thou know not, nor what it consists on;
and the offering of it up, thou know nothing of; Thou art none of the Saints,
but without in the World, for thee the Body of Christ is no satisfaction: And
thou Reprobate, what have thou to do to talk of believing, that is the
condition of the Saints, whose Works thou know not; Thou disobedient one,
upon whom God. will render Vengeance in flaming fire, Ibid. p. 32.


Chr. Oh the rudeness and unworthiness of this Answerer, who took no farther
notice of the Question, then to vent his rancour and spleen against the
Querist: Surely the venom of Asps was under this man's tongue. It Is to be
bewailed, that a serious question concerning that one and only Sacrifice,
Christ offered, should be paralleled with the Devils contending about the body
of Moses; and that such who will be disputing about the Body of Jesus, must be
branded for Reprobates ( Naylors Love to the lost, p. 57. Printed 1656.) Had it
not been better to have condemned such Dictates as these to perpetual Oblivion,
then to print them for the Generations to come? And forasmuch as he says, what
the Body of Jesus consists of, and the offering of it up, the Querist knew
nothing of, it is evident he intends another body then that which he took of the
Virgin, but what that is, he acquaints us not.

(9. Q.) Whether there be any other Righteousness, by which Christ the Saints
are justified in the sight of God, then that which Works in them and by them?


Quak. Thou art accursed, and made manifest, who preaches another Gospel, and
would have another Righteousness then that of Christ: Thou Beast, to whom the
Plagues of God are due, upon whom the Wrath of God must be accomplished, who
would have another Righteousness then that which Christ works in the Saints,
and by them; Thou would be justified, and live in thy sin, but thou art shut
out from God for ever; we witness Justification by Faith, Ibid. p. 32.


Chr. There is nothing in the question importing another Righteousness, then
that of Christ's; was it not then more then enough for him to censure and damn
the Querist, but must he needs insinuate a wilful lie to complete his
wickedness, that the Quakers, and their Children may be accomplished for
dispute, and know how to answer their Opposers, as Ellis Hooks intimates in his
Epistle. Buroughs says, We witness Justification by Faith, which is no other
then your usual canting, neither does it in any wise conclude the question:
Indeed, when he calls the Querist Beast, upon whom the wrath of God must be
accomplished, because he would (as the Quaker imagines) have another
Righteousness, then that which Christ works in the Saints, and by them. Herein,
I must confess, he plainly denies that there is any other Righteousness, and
consequently all that Christ did and suffered without us, is utterly
unconcerned in this business of Justification, directly repugnant to Romans 5.18,
19. Isa. 53.5, 11.

(10. Q.) Whether does Sanctification or Justification in order antecede
holiness of life, or Justification by Faith go before; or whether does not God
love man, ere man loved God?


Quak. Here thou dark blind Hypocrite have shut out thy self from the knowledge
of God in any measure: Oh that people should be so blind, as to look to learn
any thing of such as thee but Sin and Filthyness; what have: thou been
teaching, that neither knows Justification nor Sanctification, but art quering
which goes before: Let all people Judge whether thou be not a Teacher of
lasciviousness, sin, and uncleanness. How dare thou mention a holy life? thou
man which art Cain, God does not love nor accept thee, nor thy Sacrifice; and
for Justification by Faith, thou know nothing of it, which we own and
witness, Ibid. p. 32.


Chr. Was this the plainness and simplicity through which (you say) he did
confound the wisdom of the high and lofty? was this your dear Brother in the
Lord? as George Whitehead calls him. It Is too apparent he was under the
Dominion, rule, and government of a most wicked, lying, and reviling Spirit.
Can any man or men conclude the Querist to be a Teacher of Lasciviousness,
merely for asking, whether Sanctification or Justification do not in order go
before holiness of life? Certainly the Children yet unborn, if they should see
these his Works, will have him in their mouths as a most ridiculous,
impertinent, and railing person.

(11. Q.) Whether the Justice of God be fully satisfied for all the sins of the
Elect, ere Christ appear to their Souls, or holiness appear in their Lives?


Quak. Here thou full of all subtilty art comprehended, and with the light of
Christ thou art seen, and with the life thou art judged and condemned: Who
would lay Sin to the charge of the Elect, thou Sorcerer, does the Elect of God
sin? shall the Elect die? To that in thy Conscience I speak, Ibid. p. 32.


Chr. If the Elect of God neither do, nor never did sin; it is meet we should
know who or what is meant by the Elect: who shall lay any thing to the charge
of the Elect? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that
died, Romans 8.33, 34. If by the Elect be intended persons, then either they are
or were Sinners; but if by the Elect you mean a mere Principle, Spirit, or seed
in man: Then I ask you, How God is said to justify that? and in what sense did
Christ die for this Seed? If Justification do suppose a guilt, I quere in what
respect this spirit or seed in man may be said to be guilty? If you say, It
never did, nor does Sin, how then does God justify it? and what necessity was
there of Christ's dying for that which was perfectly sinless? To that (as thy
phrase is) in thy Conscience do I now speak.

(12. Q.) Whether the holy Lives and Works of the Saints be not excluded from
the act of Justification from the guilt of Sin?


Quak. Thou dead Beast, thou art a stranger from the life of God, and is
excluded from the holy life of the Saints, and their works, Thou art unredeemed
from thy vain Conversation, and so art not justified, nor never shall be: And
by the same that the Saints are justified, thou art condemned into the lake for
ever, Ibid. p. 32, 33.


Chr. This answer (like the rest) is full of pride, rage, and folly; who will
believe that Testimony which you most unadvisedly have given of this man, That
he was a faithful Servant and Prophet of the Lord: Did ever any foame out their
own shame more then this your pretended Prophet, who impudently assumes to
himself the authority of determining the eternal condition of the Querist;
tells him, He neither is, nor never shall be justified; may it not be with
respect to this cursing and railing humor, which was predominant in him, That
you call him a Son of Thunder. But whether Edw. Buroughs has spoken any thing
pertinently, and properly to the question, I shall leave it to others, yea to
that in thy Conscience to judge.

(13. Q.) Whether that Righteousness which is wrought by the Saints be every
way answerable to the Justice of God?


Quak. There again thy blindness is made manifest; Is there any Righteousness
but that of Christ Jesus? and is not that every way answerable to the justice
of God? But such polluted filthy Beasts as thou would have another
Righteousness; but thy Righteousness we deny, and the Righteousness of Christ
we witness, which shall be revealed on thee in flames of fire, Ibid. p. 33.


Chr. Did ever man pretending (I will not say to perfection or infallibility,
but) to reason or modesty, reply at this rate? Did every question affright him,
and put him into such a consternation, as that he could express himself no
otherwise then like one perfectly mad. There is not the least intimation in any
of the foregoing questions asserting any other Righteousness but that of
Christ's, and yet this wretched man had the confidence to say, Such filthy
Beasts (as he was pleased to account the Querist) would have another
Righteousness. Art not thou ashamed of this injustice and lying, which thy dear
Brother Edw. Buroughs was guilty of? to talk of your witnessing the
Righteousness of Christ, is no more but your common and idle prating, and
nothing to the point in question: Must we be concluded only by what you
ignorantly and impudently say you witness?

(14. Q.) Whether none be accounted righteous in the sight of God, in whom is
any corruption or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of Justice?


Quak. Here thou polluted Beast makes it manifest what thou have been driving
at all this while, which is, that thou would have thy corruption and
filthiness to be accounted righteous in God's sight, that so thou may wallow
in thy filthiness: But John says, He that commits sin is of the Devil; The Son
of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, and thou
man of Sin would have it stand; God does not accept any where there is any
failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice,
Ibid. p. 33.


Chr. This question (I do confess) has the favor of a direct and positive
answer, though it be introduced with his wonted railing, together with a wilful
lie; certainly had not Edw. Buroughs been desperate, and utterly destitute of
any serious respect either to God or man, or his own credit, he durst not have
attempted to fix so notorious an untruth upon the Querist, as that he would
have corruption and filthiness to be accounted righteous in God's sight: There
is not any thing of such an import in the question, which is not whether
failing and corruption may be accounted righteous, but whether none in whom is
any failing or corruption may be so; corruption and failing is one thing, the
person in whom it may be is another.

But to his answer, God accepts not any who do not fulfill the Law, and answer
every demand of Justice; If so, woe be to you Quakers, as well as to any
others, for certainly you cannot be saved according to this Principle; you are
far (however you flatter your selves) from fulfilling the Law, and answering
every demand of Justice; with Edw. Buroughs agrees another of your Ministry,
namely William Penn, Sandy Foundation, p. 29, 30.

Obedience to Justification (says he) ought to be as personally extensive, as
was man's Disobedience to Condemnation; in which real (not imputative) sense
those various terms of Sanctification, Righteousness, Resurrection, Life,
Redemption, Justification, etc. are most infallibly understood; for impute or
imputing signifies no more in Scriptures, but to express men really and
personally to be that which is imputed to them, whether as guilty, or remitted.
For (says he) any to be justified from the imputation of another
Righteousness, is both rediculous and dangerous; whence came that usual saying
amongst many Professors of Religion, That God looks not upon them as they are
in themselves, but as they are in Christ. According to the drift and scope of
Penns Discourse, this usual saying must come from the conceivings of the dark
imputarians of this Age: But I must tell Mr. Penn whatever his deluded fancy
may be concerning himself, miserable will be his condition, if God do look upon
him only, as he is in himself: The time will come he may curse the day that
ever he entertained such an opinion, or that it was his sad lot to fall amongst
such a people, who render Jesus Christ in all his undertakings for Sinners, no
more then a mere cipher. For says Edw. Buroughs, God will not accept of any
who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice. O ye wretched
men, that should in such a day and Nation, have the face to utter such a
Doctrine as this is, which casheers the whole Gospel, and turns it out of doors.

(15. Q.) Whether a Soul be justified before God by the non-imputation of Sin,
and the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ's Person to his Faith, or by
a Righteousness wrought by Christ in the person justified, or to be justified.


Quak. Stop thy mouth thou Sorcerer, which art gathering up a heap of
confusion, fit for nothing but to be turned into the bottomless pit; wherein
thou talks of imputation and non-imputation, and of a person justified and to
be justified. Thy language is the language of Egypt, and in the mystery of
Iniquity, which is condemned into the lake of Perdition by the light of Christ:
I own no Righteousness but what is of Christ, and is wrought by him; which
Righteousness shall confound thee, and all thy unrighteousness and
conjurations, the same that justifies us, shall condemn thee eternally, Ibid.
p. 33.


Chr. If this was a man of God, who may we account a man of --. The memorable
Works of this Edw. Buroughs may serve as Memorials to all men, to dread the
Spirit and Principles of the Quakers, these instances being such Monuments of
their folly and madness: He says, That imputation and non-imputation, and to
talk of a person justified and to be justified, is the language of Egypt, and
is condemned to the lake of Perdition by the Light. But what kind of Light
should this be, that should thus fatally doom such a question? and brand the
person asking it for a Sorcerer? He says, He owns no other Righteousness but
what is wrought by Christ; But not one word, whether this Righteousness is
wrought without us, or within us, or both, which is the thing the question aims
at. If the Querist was, or if any person else be ignorant herein, so they may
remain, for any thing that Buroughs has here contributed toward their
information.

(16. Q.) Whether Christ be in the Saints in respect of that Nature wherein he
suffered at Jerusalem?


Quak. Here thou enemy of Christ would know how the Saints enjoy Christ; the
Scripture is fulfilled on thee the light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not; when thou comes to own thy Condemnation the light in thy
Conscience, then thou will know that Nature that Christ suffered in: But now
thou art in the nature that Judas was in that betrayed him and that they were
in that crucified him, Ibid. p. 33.


Chr. Is there in this reply one word to the question? could he not have
answered yea or nay, else where he grants that he who was slain upon the Cross
is the very Christ of God, and that the very Christ of God was in him, Ibid. p.
149. From whence we may infer, That the light within was crucified at
Jerusalem: Must this pass for an infallible dictate? surely not with any who
are not under the influence of the Quakers delusions. But wherefore did
Buroughs remain under such a Paroxism of fury, was it not because each
question did strike too closely at your vile Opinions?

(17 Q.) How and in what manner Christ, who in respect of his Divine Nature, is
in all places, may be said to be in a Saint, and not in a Reprobate?


Quak. What have thou to do to quere after the Divine Nature, who art the
natural man, who knows nothing of God, but what thou know naturally as a
bruit beast: The manner of Christ's Divine Nature is bid from thy eyes; with
that eye thou should see, with that thou art blind: And the manner of his
being in the Saints thou know not, who art a Reprobate, and shall find him to
thy eternal condemnation, Ibid. p. 33, 34.


Chr. It is a lamentable thing, that a man for asking, How and in what respect
Christ may be said to be in a Christian? must be put off with such a taunting
reply as this, What have thou to do to quere, thou know nothing but as a
bruit beast, thou Reprobate. Is this to instruct with meekness and fear? we
see, that if we do not believe your sayings without farther enquiry what will
come on it, namely, to be cursed and damned eternally. 'Twas pity this question
did not fall into the hands of a more judicious person then Edw. Buroughs, who
neither treats the Querist, nor his question, like a Christian, or a sober man.

(18 Q) Whether does Christ now in these days assume, or take upon him, the
form of a Servant, and the seed of Abraham, that is our flesh, and whether does
not this assumption cause such a perfection of the Godhead and the Manhood, as
that both of them together are united into one Person.


Quak. O thou dark Beast and Conjurer, quering with thy conjured words, that
which thou know nothing of, and is out of thy reach and comprehension: Thou
Blasphemer, do thou limit Christ to days, in taking upon him the form of a
Servant, and the seed of Abraham; Is not he the same now as ever he was? for
the union of the Godhead with the Manhood, as thou calls it: Let thy mouth be
stopped, for with thee God nor none of his Children has any union; God has put
an utter enmity betwixt thy seed, thou Serpent, and the seed of the woman. And
the perfect union with Christ we witness, therefore are we separate from thee
and thy Generation, Ibid. p. 34.


Chr. I perceive he that sat him on, carried him through; otherwise, by this
time, we might reasonably conclude he should have been drawn dry of his
virulent and undecent expressions: Be the question what it will, he was at no
loss for words to stigmatize and vilify the Querist; yet was at a real and
mavelous loss to give a direct answer to the purpose, almost all the
questions has a fair, or rather (if you will) a foul go-by: Let me seriously
ask thee, whether thou do indeed believe that Edw. Buroughs was in the
meekness, plainness and simplicity? when he did represent the person that
asked, whether Christ does now take upon him the form of a Servant, to be a
dark Beast and Conjurer? Do thou believe that Christ now in these days takes
on him the form of a Servant? our Flesh, as once he did? Do not reply in
equivocal terms, but speak honestly and plainly to the question; we ask you
not, what you witness, we will not be determined by your vain boasts, or
deluded fancies.

(19. Q.) Whether Christ is now conversant with men upon Earth, since his
Ascension, as he was before, and in those times wherein the Apostles lived?


Quak. Thy quere bewrayes thee, thy language is the language of Egypt; thou
make it clearly manifest, thou know not Christ in any measure, where the
first principle of truth is made manifest; it is the same that ever was: Thou
ask whether Christ be not now conversant upon Earth amongst men, since his
Ascension, as he was in the Apostles times; do thou know what thou ask?
Did not Christ appear to his Apostles since his ascension in the most glorious
manner that ever was? and is he not the same now as he was then? what? would
thou make of Christ, thou dark sottish beast, such a one as thy self, Ibid. p.
34.


Chr. This man took a liberty to say any thing, but what was to the purpose;
it is amazing to think that a person under his Character, being under no
surprise or provocation, should deliberately write such gross Errors and
Untruths, together with such a heap of scurrilous and filthy Railings, and
cause these to be printed for the view of future Generations. Buroughs asks,
whether Christ did not appear to the Apostles since his Ascension? who denies
he did: But what is this to the question, whether Christ be now conversant with
men upon Earth since his Ascension, as he was before? To this the Quaker
Replies, What would thou make of Christ, thou dark sottish beast? But whether
this be a solution of the question, I submit it to others.

(20. Q.) Whether Christ did not dwell amongst the Saints after another manner,
and more visible then now he dwells in them?


Quak. Here thou shows thy ignorance, and for thy word visible he is not, nor
never visible to thee, nor thy Generation; for those that did profess the
Scriptures as thou, and thy Generation does, crucified him: Thou Blasphemer,
where says the Scripture that Christ would dwell after another manner in his
Saints? Ibid. p. 34.


Chr. In this Answer, the Quaker denies that Christ was ever visible to wicked
men (such as he esteems the Querist to be) and consequently denies that person
called in the Scriptures by this name, who conversed here in the World, and
suffered death openly and visibly at Jerusalem to be the Christ; for that
Christ was visible to wicked men: But this bold man says, Christ was never
visible to such as the Querist is: Are not these things justly offensive to
Christian ears? It Is too evident in your acknowledgments of Jesus Christ, you
do but abuse your Readers, in owning that in words which in truth you really
deny, and do steal away the truth from the less wary reader or hearer, even
then when in words you seem to confess it. It is blasphemy (says Edw.
Buroughs) To say Christ dwells in another manner in the Saints, then once he
did amongst them; which is as much as to say, Christ is not a person without
them. Did Edw. Buroughs believe that these replies of his were proper answers
to the questions.


Quak. Blessed be the Lord that has discovered thee; so thy queries are
answered in the eternal life and light of God, and Judgment is given upon thee
and them, which thou shall eternally witness: Thy queries are answered lovingly
and plainly, and in the Scripture language and terms, and with the eternal
light and life of God set thee in thy own place, which thou shall eternally
witness, Ibid. p. 34.


Chr. What horrid blasphemy, arrogance, and wilful lying, are these few
concluding words guilty of? to say these queries are answered in the eternal
life and light of God, is a most blasphemous intituling the Divine Majesty to
all Edw. Buroughs his multiplied Railings, Lies, and Impertinencies; Could the
Devil himself have been more vile? and was it not prodigious arrogance in this
man to take upon him to determine a man's endless condition? Is it not also a
most odious lie, to say these queries are answered lovingly and plainly, in
Scripture language and terms? Is railing, cursing, and damning a person, loving
and plain answers? Is sot and sottish Beast, etc. Scripture language and terms?
The Lord in mercy deliver us from such Prophets, who are justly worthy of the
abhorrence of all men.

Thus I have given you some account of the memorable works (of this eminent
Quaker) printed 1672. with the Epistles of Ellis Hooks, Josiah Coal, George
Whitehead, Francis Howgill, and George Fox, that the Ages to come may see what
monsters this Age produced: O my Soul come not thou into their Secrets, unto
their Assembly, Genesis 49.6. I presume by this time thou may be satisfied, that
I have not wronged you in the Dialogue, but did therein represent you, and your
manner of speaking, in more favorable terms then you see I could, or might
have done, what farther have you to object?


Quak. We say they are lies and slanders, and thou art a most irreligious
miscreant.


Chr. Several of you (that were moved thus to express your minds) being asked,
whether you had read the Dialogue? answered No; How then do you know they are
all lies? Is it not a most disingenious thing to pass sentence on you know not
what? I see it is as easy to wash the Blackmoor white, as it is to reclaim you
from this accustomed evil. Those of you who have read the Dialogue, may know
(if you will) that I have not only quoted your Books, but have done it truly
and honestly; can this then be of any Service to you, when any person that
examines the quotations, may see your error: As for that term miscreant, George
Whitehead is pleased to impose upon me; I think it unworthy of any farther
notice then this, that for want of argument, he takes up dirt, which was no
ways becoming him, having told us in print, That he never found any man
convinced by ill language, Divinity of Christ, p. 89. What more have thou to
say?


Quak. Thou say, We hold the Soul to be God, whereas we distinguish between
the Power that saves, and that which is saved, G. W. Dip. Pl. p. 15.


Chr. Did I not cite your metropolitan G. Fox? direct you to his Book and Page,
where you may read these words, That the Soul is part of Gods Being, without
beginning; and infinite; Dare thou say, I have not quoted him truly? But
says George Whitehead, We distinguish between the Soul and its Savior; So
does G. Fox seem to distinguish, When he calls God the Bishop of the Soul,
notwithstanding which, he says, The Soul is a part of Gods Being; If then
there be any thing in his distinction, it is only this, That one part of God is
Bishop over another. George Whitehead also pretends to distinguish between
Christ, and his light or gift, Apolog. 35. And yet in his Dip. Pl. p. 13.
says, The life is the light of men, and this life and light is divine and
increated; so that the meaning of his distinction must be, That Christ is not
divine and increated, but his Light is: If both be increated, what signifies
his distinction? James Naylor likewise distinguishes between the light and the
seed within; and yet tells us, The light is Christ, and the seed is Christ; so
that your distinguishing is but a collusion to baffle and amuse simple and
ignorant people: Hence, as one of your own Friends has said of you, we find
but too true; though your years have been but few, yet you have been exceeding
expert in learning the subtilties (that is, the equivocations) of the Papists.
Who of you ever writ against this position of George Fox concerning the Soul?
Or which of you dare give it under your hands, That herein your Superintendent
was deceived?


Quak. Whereas thou have said, we deny the Person of Christ, herein thou art a
liar; the person of Christ we own and witness.


Chr. But do you acknowledge him to be a distinct person without you?


Quak. Jesus Christ a Person without us, is not Scripture language, but the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians, Whitehead, Dip. Pl. p. 13.


Chr. If Jesus Christ be not a Person distinct from you, who or what is Jesus
Christ?


Quak. It Is God himself; if God be the Light, and that Light be Christ, then
God is Christ, Penns Innocence with open face, p. 8. Again, it is the light in
us, we own no other Redeemer but that Person, the Son of God, who died at
Jerusalem, who is the light in us, Naylor and Hubborthorns answer to the
Phanatique History, p. 13.


Chr. You say you own the Person of Christ, is the light in you a person? and
is it the very Son of God? and did it indeed die at Jerusalem?


Quak. We say, He that was slain upon the Cross is the very Christ of God, and
the very Christ of God is in us, Buroughs Works, p. 9. 149.


Chr. If God be Christ, as Penn says; or if the Light within you be the
Christ, as Naylor and Hubberthorne affirm? Is it proper or safe to say, God was
slain, or that the Light in you was crucified?


Quak. Ye have condemned and killed the Just, James 5. 5, 6. that is, Christ
Jesus in their hearts, him they crucified, G. Keith. Immediate. Revelation, p.
77.


Chr. Is Christ really and indeed crucified in the hearts of men only.


Quak. As Christ is and lives in himself, he cannot be crucified, but his
appearance may, Keith. Ibid.


Chr. You distinguish between Christ, and his appearance; and say, He himself
cannot, but his appearance may be crucified; Is not this as much as to say, His
appearance is but a Creature? But how will this agree with the Dictates of
others of your Ministry, who say, The Light within is divine and increated: I
perceive if we examine you distinct, your tales will not agree. And when G.
Keith. says, Ye killed the Just, that is Christ Jesus: Must we believe that
this Just is not indeed Christ Jesus, but only his appearance; consequently
when the Scripture says, Christ was crucified, we must not understand it was
Christ himself, but only an Image, appearance, or some representation of him
was crucified, and all this too within our Hearts. But is this one of those
things which you say are necessary to be revealed to you, which are not to be
found in the Scriptures, no not so much as by consequence, Ibid. p. 3, 4.


Quak. Now thy perverse and cavilling mind discovers it self.


Chr. Do you believe that Christ is now in Person at the right hand of God?


Quak. He is at the right hand of God, but I cannot believe he has a personal
being at the right hand of God without all men, G. Whitehead, Christ ascended,
p. 18. Christ in Person remote in a body of flesh, and not in men is not
Scripture, but added, Ibid. p. 69.


Chr. What then do you intend by the right hand of God, and of Christ's being
there?


Quak. Christ, nor Gods right hand, is not to be limited to a remoteness from
the Saints, Ibid. p. 18. What do you mean by Gods right hand, and Christ's being
at Gods right hand, that would seem to confine them out of all men, Ibid. p.
20, 21.


Chr. Is Christ no otherwise at Gods right hand, then as he is in you?


Quak. It Is a false and lying Imagination to imagine either Christ or God, and
his right hand, to be so remote as not to dwell in any man, Whitehead, Ibid. p.
69.


Chr. Is the heavens, that must retain him till the times of the restitution of
all things, only the hearts of men?


Quak. I have told thee plainly, that neither Christ, nor Gods right hand are
so remote, as not to dwell in men, and that Christ has not a personal being at
Gods right hand.


Chr. Does not the Scripture say, That the same Jesus that went away, shall in
like manner come again? Acts 1.10, 11.


Quak. I deny he shall ccome visibly; and though it be said in like manner, yet
every like is not the same, Whitehead, Ibid. p. 22.


Chr. Is not this a plain denial of the second personal coming of Christ?


Quak. They are like to be deceived, who are expecting that Christ's second
coming will be a personal coming; which word person you add to the Scriptures,
not minding the penalty, Revel. 22. G. Whitehead, Ibid. p. 23.


Chr. It Is said, When he comes, that every eye shall see him, they that peirced
him, etc.


Quak. To say, They that pierced that Body, shall see that Body, are not
Scripture words, but added; you do herein show your carnal expectations, mean
thoughts, unscriptural conceptions of Christ; where does the Scripture say,
That Christ shall come in Person? G. Whitehead, Ibid. p. 21, 22.


Chr. In one breath you confess, That Christ rose with the same Body that was
crucified, and that he ascended into Glory, Ibid. p. 17. And in another you
speak thus, To say Christ ascended with the same body which rose from the dead,
and is at Gods right hand with that body; and that he has a personal being at
Gods right hand you cannot believe, Ibid. p. 17, 18. Who is able to reconcile
these Contradictions? In which of your sayings shall we believe you, it is
evident, you did but dissemble in the first, that you might entrap and deceive
your unwary Reader.

But if Christ's second coming will not be personal, pray tell us what you mean
by his second coming?


Quak. Be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that shall be brought to
you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, when he shall appear in you glorified,
who before was crucified in weakness, but now is raised in Power, G. Keith. Im.
Re. p. 77.


Chr. If this be the second appearance and coming of Christ, as in your Book
it is called, pray what is the first coming?


Quak. Till that time the day dawn, and the daystar arise in our hearts; he
directs them to a light that shines in a dark place, which is the same Jesus
Christ in his first appearance, as the seed sown, a seed of light, but not come
forth to the perfect day; this is the most sure and firm word of Prophecy,
whereunto we do well to take heed for the time, Keith. Ibid.


Chr. Then Christ's coming in the form of a Servant to suffer and die, was no
coming at all; for his first appearance, you say, is the light that shines in
a dark place; and the second is, when he (that is in his appearance) shall in
you be glorified, so that a personal coming in any respect is manifestly denied
by you. And since you deny Christ in his personal Being and Existence, pray
tell me, Has he no Body?


Quak. Yea, the Church is his Body, Edw. Buroughs.


Chr. What do you mean by the Church, is it Persons, or only a Seed, or Spirit
in Men?


Quak. It Is the Seed.


Chr. Where is such a Seed called the Body of Christ, do you believe Christ
has no other Body but this?


Quak. It is not our wonted course to say Christ has no Body but his Church,
but we say the Church is his Body, Buroughs Works, p. 150.


Chr. Why do you not speak directly, Has Christ no other Body but his Church?


Quak. This is an ensnaring question, I shall not answer to satisfy thee, nor
may I feed thy Serpents Wisdom, Buroughs, Ibid.


Chr. What snare can be in this question, if you do indeed believe that Christ
has another Body.


Quak. To say Christ has two Bodies, one out of the sight of the Saints; there
is so much wickedness and ignorance in the Broachers of such a particular, that
it needs no answer, Buroughs, Ibid. 151, 152.


Chr. Then Buroughs and G. Whitehead both agree in denying Christ to have a
Body distinct from his Church.


Quak. Them that accuse us for saying Christ has but one Body, should produce
Scripture that says he has two; and where does the Scripture say, That
Christ's glorified Body in heaven is of a humane nature, G. Whiteheads Apolog.
p. 33.


Chr. It Is apparent then, you acknowledge no other Christ but the light in you;
this, and this only is the very person of Christ in your judgment.


Quak. They who deny Christ to be the light in every man are Antichrists,
Buroughs, Ibid. p. 127.


Chr. But is the very Person of Christ in every man?


Quak. The Gospel is preached in every Creature under heaven, Whitehead, Christ
ascended, p. 63.


Chr. I know by Gospel you mean Christ himself, but is Christ himself preached
in Devils, Beasts, Trees, and in every flagitious and wicked person; yea, is
Christ himself in every Reprobate?


Quak. When we say Christ is in Reprobates, you must understand the light or
gift of Christ; for we do not express the light in every man to be Christ,
George Whiteheads Apol. p. 35. It Is not our Principle to say Christ is in every
man; it is falsehood to accuse us with affirming, that Christ is in every man,
Whitehead, Christ ascended, p. 66.


Chr. What vile hypocrisy and deceit is this Whitehead guilty of, he himself
says, The Scriptures direct to the Rule, that is, the light within that gave
them forth, Christ ascended, p. 42. Buroughs affirms, That they who deny
Christ to be the light in every man are Antichrists. But I would ask Whitehead,
whether this light or gift be created or increated: If the former, then it is
but a mere creature: If the latter, as he affirms in his Dip. Pl. p. 13. To say
the light within every man is a mere creature, is (says he) contrary to plain
Scripture, which says, In him was life, and the life was the light of men;
this life and light is divine and increated. Is Whitehead then to be believed
in saying, It Is not your Principle to say Christ is in every man, whilst he
openly denies the light within to be a creature, and says, It Is divine and
increated: This kind of saying and denying is so common with him, that I
profess it is a very hard and difficult point with me to know when he speaks as
he thinks; from the whole, you see I had just reason to accuse you for denying
the person of Christ: But since you own the name Christ, and do make use of it,
pray what does it signify?


Quak. Christ signifies anointed.


Chr. If God himself be Christ, as Penn says, I would quere whether God
himself was anointed: If you will dare to affirm this, then tell me by whom,
with what, and to what end he was anointed.


Quak. This we say, that Christ as the Son of God before the world, before he
took Flesh, was the anointed of God, which anointing was spiritual, and
spiritually received by the heavenly Birth, the anointed, the holy seed,
Whitehead, Christ ascended, p. 68.


Chr. This is still as much as to say, that God himself was anointed: If so,
what was the unction, by whom powered upon him, and wherefore?


Quak. Now thou obtrudes questions.


Chr. Will you not speak intelligibly? Is it not necessary to understand who is
the Christ, and wherefore he was anointed; what signifies your saying, The
anointing was spiritual, and spiritually received by the heavenly birth, the
holy seed? Is God himself a heavenly Birth, did he receive the anointing? pray
be plain, and do not lurk in ambiguous terms, neither let us be put off with
your blasphemous absurdities, but speak home to the point.


Quak. Alas for thee, these are mysteries thy dark mind cannot conceive or
understand.


Chr. Is it not your duty (who pretend to be under infallible teachings) to
endeavor my information in such important and weighty matters.


Quak. Will thou deny that the Son of God, before the world, before he took
flesh, was the anointed of God.


Chr. I do not deny, but really believe the eternal Deity of the Son of God;
yet I do deny, that the mere Godhead of the Son was the anointed Savior: And
thou must prove, that the Son of God, merely as God, is the Christ; for what
thou have yet said is no proof.


Quak. Is not what I have said sufficient.


Chr. In no wise; however thou may take time to consider on it, mean while
let me ask thee, whether Christ was not Gods gift?


Quak. Yea, he was so.


Chr. To what end, and in what respect is he the gift of God?


Quak. His Doctrine, Life, Miracles, Death and Sufferings to God, is the gift
and expression of Gods eternal love for the salvation of men, Penns Sand. Foun.
p. 19.


Chr. Thou have affirmed, That God is Christ; if so, did God himself die, and
suffer to God? and therein express his love for the salvation of men; or if the
Son of God the heavenly Birth, which was before the world, and before he took
flesh, as Whitehead talks, be only the anointed Savior; was this simply of it
self given to die, and suffer to God? or if the mere light within be the
Christ, will you say, This was given to die and suffer to God, and therein to
express Gods eternal love for the salvation of men? who can understand these
things? Are not such dictates apparent indications of your distracted minds?


Quak. We say Christ is the gift of Gods eternal love for the salvation of men,
and will thou deny this?


Chr. Though I do grant it, yet I see you will take a liberty to say that at
one time, and in one place, which can never be reconciled with, your sayings in
another, and that you run your selves into such a labyrinth of confusion and
contradiction, that all the light you have cannot extricate you out of, and
consequently that your pretenses to infallibility is a mere lying delusion: For
you neither consist with the truth, nor your selves; yet give me leave to ask
you, whether one great end wherefore Christ was given, and came into the world,
was not to seek and to save such that were lost.


Quak. Yea, he came to seek and to save the lost.


Chr. But who, or what is this that was lost.


Quak. That which was lost, is still in man's heart, and there it must be
sought; for it remains still in the house (that is) man's heart: This is the
thing to be sought for. This Christ came to seek and save, and all his
Ministers preached people to this; the lost in man, that it might be found; a
lost God, a lost Christ, this was the sum and substance of their Doctrine, G.
Keith. Im. Re. p. 75, 76.


Chr. Blush O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth, was ever such a thing as this
heard of before? that Jesus Christ came to seek and save a lost God, a lost
Christ; was ever God and Christ in a lost condition? If you had said, That
Jesus Christ came to seek and save Sinners who were in a lost condition, and to
stir them up to seek after God, whom they had lost, you had spoken safely: But
to say this, Christ came to seek and save, and all his Ministers preached
people to this, the lost in man, a lost God, a lost Christ; Is not capable of
any construction less then blasphemy. To this agrees James Naylor, who said,
Christ came to redeem the seed within, which he often calls Christ. Is this
another of those things you say are necessary to be revealed to you, which are
not to be found in Scripture, not so much as by consequence; And are these your
instances to prove you under immediate Inspirations? If they be, they will
prove no more, nor no less then this, that you are immediately inspired and
influenced by that grand Impostor the Devil. Pray what is your Opinion
concerning Justification by that Righteousness of Christ, which he in his own
Person fulfilled for us, wholly without us.


Quak. Justification by the Righteousness which Christ fulfilled for us in his
own Person, wholly without us; we boldly affirm it to be a doctrine of Devils,
and an arm of the Sea of corruption, which does now deluge the World, William
Penn, Apol. p. 148.


Chr. Is there no other Righteousness by which the Saints are justified then
what Christ works only in them?


Quak. Thou Beast, to whom the Plagues of God are due, and upon whom the wrath
of God must be accomplished, who would have another Righteousness then that
which Christ works in the Saints, Edw. Buroughs Works, p. 32.


Chr. Is not this to disclaim the Doctrine of Justification by an imputed
Righteousness.


Quak. Thou wrongst us, and our Principle, for imputative Righteousness, as
truly considered in the Scriptures, we do not disclaim, G. Whitehead Apol. p.
37.


Chr. I have great reason to believe that G. W. dissembles in these words, for
in the same page he disclaims them that deny the Righteousness of Christ within
for Justification; and also says, That justification by the Righteousness of
Christ without us is not Scripture language; who will believe his complaint of
wrong, whilst he so apparently confesses the truth of what is objected against
you, as will abundantly appear from what follows, what righteousness is that
upon the account of which we are justified?


Quak. Justification is not from the imputation of another Righteousness, but
from the actual performing and keeping of Gods righteous Statutes, Pen. Sand.
Found. p. 25.


Chr. Is it not written, Romans 5.19. By the Obedience of One, many were made
righteous?


Quak. It is a great abomination to say, God should condemn and punish his
innocent Son, that he having satisfied for our Sins, we might be justified by
the imputation of his perfect Righteousness. O why should this horrible thing
be contended for by Christians? Penn, Ibid. p. 25. 30.


Chr. How now Mr. Penn, is the Doctrine of Christ's Sufferings for Sinners to
make satisfaction to Divine Justice an horrible thing, and an abomination to
you; do you consider what you say?


Quak. This I do say, That the consequences of such a Doctrine is both
irreligious and irrational, Pen. Ibid. p. 16.


Chr. What then does the Scripture intend, in saying Christ died for the
ungodly, Romans 5. And he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. And on him was laid the
Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.


Quak. I caution and warn men, by no means to entertain this principle (of
Christ's dying to make satisfaction to Divine Justice) by whomsoever
recommended, Pen. Ibid.


Chr. Be free and plain with me, How and in what respect is Christ said to
fulfill the Law, and to die for Sinners?


Quak. He fulfilled the Law only as our pattern or example, Pen. Ibid. p. 26.
Christ is so far from telling us of such a way of being justified, as that be
informs us the reason why he abode in his Fathers love, was his Obedience; he
is so far from telling as of being justified by virtue of his Obedience
imputed, that unless we keep the Commands, and obey for our selves; In all
which Christ is but our example, Pen Ibid.


Chr. But are men indeed justified by their own works?


Quak. Was not Abraham justified by works; n^ must not conceive, as the dark
imputations of the Age, that Abraham's personal offering was not a justifying
Righteousness, Pen. Ibid. p. 30.


Chr. Was not Abraham justified before he did personally offer up Isaac? ye^,
does not the Scripture intimate, that Abraham was not justified by works, see
Romans 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And do not you (Mr. Penn) elsewhere tell us, That such
are run into a narrow strait, who venture to reconcile Merit and Grace. See
your caveat against Popery. p. 12. where you also say, That Grace is a free
gift, requiring nothing; and now ask, Was not Abraham justified by works, and
that good works may be said to procure, deserve, or obtain, Apolog. 198. Is
this to write like an infalible Dictator? But do you really believe that
Abraham's offering personally was his justifying Righteousness?


Quak. I do say Abraham had not the imputation of another Righteousness to
him, his personal Obedience was the ground of that just imputation, Pen. Sand.
Found. p. 30.


Chr. If Abraham was justified by works, as you argue, why did the Apostle
only take notice of his offering up of Isaac, and not of the whole course of
his Obedience? If a man be justified by works before God, surely it cannot be
by one single action (such as Abraham's offering was) but by a continued holy
and innocent life. But is our personal Obedience the very ground and reason of
Gods reckoning and accounting us righteous.


Quak. I do maintain, that good works may be said to procure, doserve, or
obtain; in which sense, without good works, there is no acceptance with God;
and Abraham's personal offering was the ground of that just imputation, Penn.

God accepts not any where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law,
and answer every demand of Justice, Edw. Buroughs, supra.


Chr. Then the ground of our rejoicing, and acceptance, is not in and from the
Righteousness of another, viz. of Christ imputed to us by Faith, but only in a
righteousness inherent in us, and done by us.


Quak. The Doctrine of rejoicing and acceptance from the works of another is
utterly excluded, Pen. Sandy Found. p. 27.


Chr. Does not this render the undertakings of Jesus Christ, as a Mediator and
Surety, a mere fancy? If the ground of a man's rejoicing be in himself, why does
the Apostle give it as the Character and property of a true Christian, to
rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. And what signify those words, Christ is made
unto us Righteousness; wherefore let him that glories, glory in the Lord, 1
Cor. 1.30, 31. And what did the Prophet Isaiah intend, cap. 45, 24, 25. Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I Righteousness, in the Lord shall all the seed
of Israel be justified, and shall glory. Are we no farther concerned in the
Obedience and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus without us, then only as our
example or pattern?


Quak. What more would thou have? I have told thee, That Christ fulfilled the
Law but only as our example.


Chr. Do you not then notoriously equivocate and dissemble, when you say, That
Christ's Birth, Blood, Offering, Death, Mediatourship, Covenant, his being
Priest, Prophet, and King, is owned according to the Scriptures, and all the
Prophesies of him, Innocence with open face, p. 38. Is the owning of Christ
only as our example all that the Scriptures and Prophesies of him signify;
Can you imitate him in his Mediatourship? can you lay down your lives, and take
them up again? Have you the same fullness of the Godhead in you he had, that you
can follow him in the same Obedience? Can you execute the Office of Priest,
Prophet, and King, in the same manner and perfection, which Christ did and
does? We know very well, how ever you palliate, you believe no such thing that
your words seem to import: For when you talk of Christ's Birth, Blood, Death,
etc. you intend no more but the light in you, in its variety of manifestations;
therefore if possibly thou can, answer directly what that Righteousness is,
which is reckoned or accounted to us for our Justification.


Quak. Art thou of them, that imagine a Justification without Sanctification,
who because the Scriptures faith, God justifies the ungodly through Faith, they
therefore conclude themselves justified in their ungodliness, by a fancy which
they call Faith, Naylors Love to the Lost, 50, 51. I farther tell thee, That
Justification by an imputed Righteousness is both irrational, irreligious,
ridiculous and dangerous, Pen. Sand. Fo. p. 30, 31.


Chr. I know of none that hold Justification of persons in their ungodliness;
this therefore is a wicked slander, and not at all to the question: We plead
not for a Righteousness imputed, to overthrow a Righteousness inherent, or the
exercise of Christian virtues; it is you would separate and divide them, not we:
The question intends this, whether the person justified was not at that instant
before he was justified guilty in himself?


Quak. Justification goes not before, but is consequential to the mortifying of
Lusts, and the sanctification of the Soul: Again, impute or imputing signifies
no more in Scripture, but to express men really and personally to be what is
imputed to them, Pen. Sand. Fo. p. 27, 29, 30.


Chr. Does not this import, that a man must be formally just before he be
justified, for nothing is imputed or reckoned to us (according to your
reasoning) but what is inherent in us: I would ask you, whether remission of
sins be not one part of Justification?


Quak. I suppose it may.


Chr. Can one be forgiven that is not guilty; it looks like a contradiction, to
pardon one that is innocent, to forgive one that owes nothing; certainly he
that is pardoned must be a Sinner, Romans 4.5. that is, such that were so till
justified, not such that remain so being justified.


Qu. God justifies the living, and not the dead, whilst the Just being dead in
trespasses and sins: There is no justification where the Just lives not, for by
that which the Just lives, is that by which the creature is justified, Naylors
Love to the lost, 52. Printed 1656.


Chr. To talk of the Just being dead in trespasses and sins, is no other then
your absurd blasphemous and ridiculous canting. For by Just, we know you mean
the seed of God in man, which sometimes you call Christ, or his appearance,
gift or measure: But is Christ, or his Seed or Power in man, dead in sins and
trespasses? what unworthy and vile Creatures are you to suggest such perilous
conceits as these, and yet pretend to infallibility and perfection; by what
has been said, I am (and presume others may be) fully satisfied what kind of
Justification you hold: Pray let us understand your Opinion of Sanctification,
what it is:


Quak. It Is Christ himself; hence we conclude, To say Sanctification is
imperfect in this life, is as much as to say, Christ is imperfect; but Christ
is perfect, therefore Sanctification is perfect: See then the error and
wickedness of this principle, that Sanctification is imperfect, Edw. Burrough's
Works 488.


Chr. It Is true, Jesus Christ by his Spirit is the Author and Worker of
Sanctification; but will it therefore follow, that the work of Sanctification
in us is Christ himself, or that this work is now perfect in all its degrees.


Quak. Jesus Christ is both the seeds man, the seed, and also the fruit, G.
Keith. Im. R. p. 77. The Law in the mind is the Spirit of God: To say the Law
in the mind is imperfect, is error in the highest degree; this is an abominable
corrupt principle of error, the new man is perfect peace, and perfect
sanctification, Buroughs, Ibid. 488.


Chr. How will thou prove that Christ is both the Author, and the work, the
seeds-man, and the seed, and fruit? That the Law in the mind is the Spirit it
self, and Christ himself; and that the new man is perfect sanctification, that
there remains not the least sin either for kind or degree in the person
sanctified; we will not be imposed upon, therefore, if you can, demonstrate
this thing unto us.


Quak. If the old man, the body of sin, remain in sanctified persons, then none
are sanctified at all; and such as have the body of sin in them, have no part
in the Kingdom of God, Edw. Buroughs, Ibid. 488.


Chr. Why then does the Apostle exhort sanctified persons to put off the old
man, Col. 3.5. Romans 13.12, 13.

And how will you prove your selves to have any part in the Kingdom of God,
since it is notorious, the body of sin yet remains in the best of you, of which
your intolerable pride, error, envy, malice, railing cursing, hypocrisy, and
wilful lying are sufficient evidences.


Quak. We deny the old man, we are in the meekness, truth, and simplicity;
therefore thou suggests nothing but thy own imaginations.


Chr. You are (as we say) far from your Neighbors, who else will say so of you
besides your selves, your own Testimony is not sufficient in this ease;
especially since your Writings, Converse, and Practice gives the lie to this
your pretense, and sufficient instances has in this Discourse been suggested
to prove you guilty; therefore your denial is an aggravation of your sin and
wickedness. But to the question, does Sanctification consist in our conformity
to the will of God or not?


Quak. Now thou runs into the many words, thy fleshly and imaginary
distinctions.


Chr. When will thou forbear these trifling Impertinencies, Speak to the point.


Quak. I have told thee, That the Law in the mind is the Spirit of God, and
that Christ is Sanctification, can I speak more plain?


Chr. If the Law in the mind be the Spirit it self, and if Sanctification be
Christ himself, what must we call obedience to Christ, his Law or Spirit? If
our habitual and actual conformity to the divine Law or Rule be our holiness,
how can the Spirit it self and Christ himself merely be it?


Quak. We deny not, but declare, That all men ought to be obedient to the
light, Christ in them.


Chr. But may this obedience be called our holiness? you seem to deny it, in
saying Christ himself is Sanctification, and the Law in the mind is the Spirit
of God: Do Christ obey himself, does he repent and believe, and is his
obeying himself in us our holiness? If so, then whilst you deny an imputed
Righteousness in a Scripture sense, you maintain a righteousness imputed in an
enthusiastical and ridiculous sense. But if you will say, That obedience to the
divine Rule is our holiness, then you will contradict your selves. And to apply
it to you, I would ask, How it is possible for you to prove your selves
sanctified persons, that so wilfully and wickedly oppose the rule of duty: Did
ever any holy man deliberately affirm, That is no command to me which is a
command to another, neither did any of the Saints act by the command which was
given to another; they every one obeyed his own command, Buroughs, Ibid. p.
47. Then that Law which forbids Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, Theft, and hearing
false witness, etc. is no Law to you, forasmuch as it was given to others, and
you say, We are not to act by the command which was to another; no wonder you
pay so little; respect to Parents, Magistrates, Masters, etc. for that you will
say was a command to others, therefore no command to you; so that neither the
affirmative, nor the negative Precepts have any obligation upon you; for you
have a peculiar dispensation, only to obey your own command? Are you not, oh
ye Quakers, ashamed of this Doctrine?


Quak. By order and authority given me by the Spirit of the living God, on the
31 day of the 10th month, 1655. about four a Clock in the morning, The word of
the Lord came to me, saying, Write my controversy with all the Inhabitants of
the Earth Hence I do say, That to take up a command from the Letter, and say
Christ commands it, that thus you are in the witchcraft, Edw. Buroughs works,
p. 96. comp. with p. 105.


Chr. Is it witchcraft to stand in awe of Christ's commands, to reverence their
authority, to endeavor to our utmost an observance thereof? Did ever such
ungodly and irreverent Speeches drop from the mouth or pen of any truly
Christian man? And is it not impiously horrid, to make God himself to patronize
such blasphemies; why do you countenance such Novices? Are you not yet ashamed
of those Testimonies you have given to this most profane Scribler? And whereas
you say, That nothing is a command to me which is a command to another; will
you stand by it, that nothing is a duty to me but what I am immediately moved
unto by the power within me:


Quak. It Is an error to say, we are not to wait for an inward call, motion,
impulse, or inspiration; to preach, pray, or to give thanks, so as to forbear
till it be given, G. Keith. Im. Rev. Preface.


Chr. Am I not then sinless, if Lomit the doing of any thing that may be good
in it self, and commanded in the Scriptures, if I be not immediately moved
thereunto?


Quak. Is it of good report, for unregenerate and uninspired men to pray, Pen.
Apol. p. 111. Spiritual obedience is not that wherein men and women read the
Scriptures, and from that set themselves on work, and so make an imitation of
obedience, Naylors Love to the lost, p. 27.

People cry out of their best duties, as having sin in them, had they not
better let them alone: All these holy duties, as they call them, must down; had
they not better let them alone, and see the salvation of God, and come to the
gift, etc.


Chr. These last words, One of our Ministry was moved to declare very lately in
a public meeting in London. But is not this to teach men to be irreligious and
profane; no marvel Nicholas Lucas said, We may burn the Bible, and serve God as
well without it: But the question returns upon you, whether this be not to lay
all our neglects of doing that which is meet; yea, ought to be done, upon the
power or spirit, for not immediately moving us thereunto? And what is your
meaning, when you say these holy duties must down, and we had better let them
alone, as having sin in them: Is it not this? That there is no duty incumbent
upon imperfect creatures? and that none must be performed, except it be perfect
in the matter, manner, principle, and end: If so, are not all men discharged by
you, from acknowledging the Sovereignty of God in those Laws he has given unto
them.


Quak. You are not dead with Christ, who are yet subject unto Ordinances,
Buroughs p. 105. Your Obedience is but the conformity in your own wills to
that which was the will of God to another, Ibid.


Chr. The Spirit of God in the Scriptures assures us, that they who are subject
to, and keep the Commandments of God, are the Children of God, and they who do
not are liars, see the first Epistle of Joh. 2, 3, 4. cap. 5.2, 3. Yet this
wicked man says, That they who are subject to Ordinances are not dead with
Christ, if you flee for refuge to Col. 2.20. It will not relieve you, for it is
no ways applicable to the persons to whom Edw. Buroughs did write; nor is his
Speech limited to Jewish Ordinances (now abolished) but was more general,
respecting the Ordinances of Christ still in force and being; and will you say
these are not to be owned nor subjected unto, but only so far as we are
immediately moved and prompted by the power within.


Quak. To go without the movings of the Spirit in your own wills, God hates,
and his wrath is upon, if the movings of the Spirit do not carry forth to act
them, they are accursed of God. And all who go before the movings of it to
carry forth, All their Prayers, Preachings, and Ordinances I deny, and declare
against, by the eternal Spirit of God, that they are odious, and abomination
unto God, whether they be done in private, or in the Church, Edw. Buroughs
Works, p. 47, 48.


Chr. Then we are really acquitted from any fault in omitting to do that which
is good, and all the blame why it is not done, must be laid upon the Spirit:
But is not this horrid? will this plea be of any service to us (think you) in
the day of acconut to say Lord, though I knew such a thing ought to have been
done, and such an evil omitted; and that thou in the holy Scriptures did
command the one, and forbid the other, yet that was nothing to me, I had no
immediate motion or impulse to do that, or forbear this. But what if one be
moved to do those things which are not commanded in the Scriptures, must that
motition be followed?


Quak. We affirm, That a great many particular things, both by way of precept,
prohibition, permission, approbation and counsel from the Lord, are both
revealed, and necessary to be revealed to us, which are not essentials of the
Christian Religion, nor principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but things
relating to our conversation in the world, and walking with God, with faith and
comfort, according to his will, with the knowledge of which we are to be filled
with in all things.

For there is a necessity for those under the New Covenant dispensation of
living in, and walking after the Spirit, to have things revealed to them from
the Lord, which are not to be found in the Scriptures particularly, not so much
as by consequence, G. K. Im. Rev. p. 3. 4.


Chr. If I may be so bold as to ask you, what are some of those things which by
way of precept or counsel from the Lord, which, you say, are necessary to be
revealed to you, which yet are not to be found in the Scriptures, not so much
as by consequence: And how are you assured you have them from the Lord? and
what evidence (more then your own pretenses) can you give thereof to other men?
Is your Friends, being moved to go naked, both men and women, openly in the
Streets one of those things? And is the casting off the duties of Relations
each to other, yea the relation itself, another? As I knew one of your Friends
was moved to ramble about the Country, and neglect her Family at home; and
once when she returned, it was upon her heart to signify to her Husband (an
honest, sober, and religious man, but no Quaker). That if he were free, he
might take him another woman: I confess these things are not to be found in the
Scriptures, not so much as by consequence: Do you call this a living in, and
walking after the Spirit? Is it not rather a following the conduct of the
Prince of the power of the air? Again, what if one of you be moved to door
speak any thing which others of you are not satisfied in, must they obey that
motion?


Quak. That single person must deny his motion, wherein it differs from the
judgment of the Body (that is to say, the Court) which has a true sense,
feeling, and understanding of motions, visions, revelations and doctrines;
therefore it is safest to make her the touchstone in all things relating unto
God, Spir of the Hat, p. 21.


Chr. Is not this as much as to say, that the power or spirit in and with the
body is the only infallible and unerring rule, and not the power or measure (as
you sometimes call it) in any individual person? are you now after all your
clamours about the sufficiency of the light or power in every man to be the
rule, come to set up the light and spirit in the body above it?


Quak. Either there is such a thing as a Christian-society, sometimes called a
visible body, or there is not: If there be, then this Church either has power
or not; if no power, then no Church: If a Body or Church, then there must be a
power within it self to determine, Penns Spirit of Alexander, p. 9.


Chr. For Christians to plead this, who own the Scriptures for their rule, and
not the mere light within, the argument may safely be allowed: But for you who
tell us, That is no command to me which is a command to another, and every one
must act from their own command, and the light in every man is his only
unerring rule: I see not how you can urge this, and yet consist with your
selves. But in case one should forbear what the Body would have done, or do
what they forbid, what then?


Quak. We abhor, renounce, and rebuke with severity that rude imagination of
the Hat on in public Prayer: In this case the Body may admonish, and if the
Party remain tenacious, disown him as a Disputer about needless questions, and
one that is gone out of the complete union of the Body, and exercised by
another Spirit, Penns Spirit of Alex. p. 4. 9.


Chr. Though others may, yet you cannot (if you will agree with your selves)
stand by this: For will you say, What a man does without an inward motion is
accursed, and yet will you disown that man for not doing what he is not moved
unto; will you say, There continually attends you that spirit that immediately
informs you of your words, thoughts, and deeds, and gives you true directions
what to do, and what to leave undone, Penns Apol. p. 138. And now talk of a
Body that has power in it self to determine, do you not herein render your
selves justly ridiculous and contemptible in opposing that in others which yet
you contend for amongst your selves? And do you think this is the way to gain
credit with any, whilst you play fast and loose, affirm and deny at pleasure?
how can you impose that on another as his duty, which the light in him
discovers not so to be? And how dare you deny such, and call them unruly
Beasts, and Ranting spirits, who merely for the want of an inward motion
forbear such a practice? How you can do this, (your opinion that the light
within is the only rule being considered) I cannot understand; If you will say
that there is a known rule, and standard to walk by, and this is not the mere
light in every man, but another thing, to which that light must yield, and also
tell us what that rule is, whether the Scriptures, or, the Power in the body.
If you say either of these, you deny your first principle: If you affirm the
latter only, then you do but run from one extreme to another, yea hopp out of
the Drying Pan into the fire; If to take up a Command from the Scriptures, be
(by you) accounted witchcraft? pray, what shall we call a taking up a command
from the Body?

But since you seem to be so zealous for the Ministry, will you be pleased to
acquaint us what is the true Ministry?


Qu. In the new Covenant, God is the teacher of his people himself Immediately
by his Immediate Spirit, power, and unction within, G. Whit. Christ ascend. 64.


Chr. If so; wherefore were Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers
given and set in the Church, for the work of the Ministry? And why do you set
up a ministry amongst your selves? Is it because you are not under the new
Covenant? If God by his Immediate power and Spirit within, be the teacher, why
do you appoint your Ministers before hand to speak in such a place, at such a
time? And how know you, Such a one shall be Immediately moved then, and not
another instead of him? And when you invite others to your silent meetings,
telling us, they will be such, How are you assured that those you invite may
not be moved to speak in that meeting? In a word, wherefore do you meet at all?
will not the power move you, unless you be at such a meeting? None of these
things will agree with your position, therefore one of your friends, was (in
this) so far ingenuous as to acknowledge that your meetings were only, and
principally to encourage (that is, to Decoy, Trappan, and Inveagle) others. But
before leave this question, give me leave to ask you, Who, or What it is that
is taught?


Qu. I am a witness of the most high God, a Minister of the word of life,
commanded by the eternal Spirit into this work, for the seeds sake, which is
not of the world, And to the gathering of it into the fold of everlasting
peace. Edw. Buroughs works p. 106.


Chr. Is nothing else taught, and to be taught, but only this seed?


Qu. To the mind which is carnal, which rules in you, the commands of Christ
are not given, nor can be received, Buroughs ibid. 106. The great work of the
Ministry is to point hearers to this (that is the seed) in them, G. Keith. Im.
R. p. 77. 78.


Chr. What must we understand by this Seed?


Qu. That of God in thee, and in every man, the witness of God in thy
Conscience it is that we speak unto.


Chr. Is not this seed witness, or measure, Christ the light in man?


Qu. It is so; The Apostles preached Christ crucified every where, and pointed
them to him, Crucified in them, Keith ibid. 75, 76.


Chr. Is the command of God only given to, and obeyed by this Seed?


Qu. The Spirit, both as a rule manifests the promise, exercises faith in, and
fulfills the promises. G. Whitehead, Christ ascend. p. 10.


Chr. Is the Spirit of promise both the Rule, and the Subject?


Qu. I have told thee, To the mind which is carnal the commands of Christ are
not given; And that the Spirit, not only as a Rule manifests the promises, but
exercises faith.


Chr. Then your Ministry is only God preaching to himself, giving rules to
himself, and obeyed only by himself. Will you prate of your Infallibility, and
yet talk like madmen? Had you not lost your common reason, and were absolutely
infatuated, you would not dictate after this manner: is it not high time for
you to renounce these follies that are so apparently manifest? or will you
choose (rather than to take shame to your selves) to persist in your errors to
your utter undoing? Be advised, before it be too late: think not, that because
you are under the bewitching influence of your own self-flattery, that
therefore all is well: you must pass under another Judgment than your own:
though you will wickedly take upon you to adjudg others to their eternal state,
yet you will find, that neither them, nor your selves, shall be determined by
your judgments.

If any of you are offended with me, for opposing the Christian to the Quaker;
let them know, I cannot, I dare not, write contrary to my own light and
Judgment: I do not believe a true Quaker (such as these before quoted) is a
Christian; but on the contrary, do look upon them as the most implacable
enemies to the Christian religion, that these days have brought forth. How can
I think otherwise, since you deny the Person of Christ, And all your talk of
redemption by him, issues only in this; He redeems himself. Your Idle
nonsensical, and blasphemous prating, of God teaching the seed, that is to say,
himself in man, renders you to me, to be men Inspired by Satan. That you do but
mock and delude men, when you talk of the Covenant of grace, is evident; for
you understand it not, But openly maintain a Covenant of works. For you affirm
that God accepts not any who do not fulfill the law, and answer every demand of
Justice. And render all that Jesus Christ did for us, without us, no more but a
mere example; If we ask you concerning your opinions; Presently we are called
Reprobates and judged to be in the sorcery and witchcraft; let us urge you to
be plain, you put us off with your witnessings; if in one place you seem to own
the truth, in another, you will in downright terms deny it: let this be
signified to you, Then Immediately you curse us, so that no man knows when, nor
how to believe you, If we speak you, to a single person, you reprove us for not
using the pure language. If we say thou to an Individua^ Quaker; you will
upbraid us with Jeering or hypocrisy: you bid us follow the light within us;
And if we do so, you will load us, with most bitter revilings, you will
Appropriate to your selves the privilege of Infallibility, and at as if you
were unaccountable either to God, or man, for what you say, or do. Though your
sentiments, neither agree with the Scriptures, you^ selves, nor the common
reason of mankind; yet will you Impose upon us, and that under the severest
censures, the belief of your unknown, and unintelligible doctrines. You are as
vile Impostors as ever were; for you will insinuate your lying doctrines, with
lies, persuade many credulous, and ignorant (yet welmeaning) people, that you
indeed believe, what in truth you do not: And accuse your Adversaries of that,
wherein they are innocent: your manner is not, to convince us of error, but to
conclude us so, right or wrong. If any miscarriage be, that must be improved to
make the truth it self odious: neither do you only undermine religion, but your
principles Improved are destructive to all humane society: you tell us, it is
witchcraft to take up a command from the Scriptures, And that is no command to
me, which is a command to another. If then a father command his child, The
child may reply Thou must wait for my obedience till I be moved. The like may
every subject and servant plead. If a merchant fell you his goods, He must stay
for his money, till you be moved to pay it, til which time, you are under no
obligation in point of duty: you say it is necessary to have things revealed to
you with respect to your conversation in the world, which are not to be found
in the Scriptures, no not by consequence; How then may your creditors be
assured, it will be revealed to you, to pay what you owe them. Scripture, and
reason would, and do, teach you herein, but these you must be dead unto; who
knows then what may, or may not be revealed to you? It Is not unknown, that a
Revelation has been pretended, to excuse the payment of a just debt. And why
may not that which has been (even amongst you) be again? But is it reasonable
that men should be baffled out of their just rights, by such unjust and wicked
pretenses, go on, yet assuredly know that God will bring you to judgment. Then
you shall know (though now you will not) by whom such doctrines as these (that
are and have been the pest, and plague of the world, and the scandal and
reproach of religion,) were Inspired. These things being considered, whether
you be not either distracted or worse, I shall leave with others to think on;
in the mean while, I judge my self sufficiently warranted in opposing the
Christian to the Quaker.


T. H.

The Substance of the Quakers Belief in the Points before discoursed, comprised
in this ensuing Catechism, for the more easy remembrance of such, who are of
weaker capacities.
Quest. WHat is your opinion of the Scriptures?

A. That they are neither a rule to us, nor a means to know God, nor how to
worship him. G. Whitehead.

Thou may burn thy Bible, and serve God as well without. N. Lucas.

Qu. Is there any thing more made known to you, than what is revealed in the
Scriptures?

A. There is a necessity for those under the new Covenant, to have things
revealed to them which are not to be found in the Scriptures particularly, not
so much as by consequence. G. Keith.

Q. Are we not to obey the commands in the Scriptures?

A. They who take up a command from the letter, and say Christ commands it, are
in the witchcraft. Ed. Buroughs.

Q. May we not pray for those mercies we want, and give thanks for mercies
received, except we have an Immediate motion, and Impulse to do it?

A. It Is an error to say, We are not to wait for an inward call, motion,
Impulse or Inspiration; to pray or give thanks, so, as to forbear till it be
given. Geo. Keith.

Q. If I never be moved to pray, etc. am I not excused?

A. Is it of good report for un-inspired men to pray? W. Pen.

Q. Will you say, it is of evil report if they do?

A. What thou do without an inward motion is accursed. Edw. Buroughs.

All those duties that have sin in them, had better be let alone.

Q. If the want of an Inward and Immediate motion will excuse us from duty,
what signifies the Law, which God has given to man to oblige him thereunto?

A. That is no command, (or Law) to me, which is given to another man, Edw.
Burrows.

Q. Are not all men sinless, except, when they obey not an inward motion?

A. I have told thee, that they who take up a command from the letter are in
the witchcraft. Ed. Bur.

Q. God rules the Stars by his Immediate power, they being not capable of being
governed by any other rule; and if God do only govern, and rule man by
immediate motions, wherein does a Man differ from a Star?

A. Now thou runs into the imaginations.

Q. Either God has given a rule to man or not, and this rule is known, or it is
not? If there be a known rule, then either it obliges at all times, or but at
some; if the former, man always sins if he obeys not; if the latter, assign
those times when he is under no rule.

A. I think not meet to satisfy thy busy mind.

Q. If inward motions, impulses, or inspirations be the only rule, to every
Individual; why do you set up a court amongst your selves, to give rules to
others?

A. We being a religious Body have a power within our selves, W. Pen Sp. Alex.
p. 6.

Q. By what rule shall I be assured of that?

A. We as a believing body, have the holy Spirit, we know we are of God, and
the world that withstand our testimony are in the Gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity, W. P. ibid. 13.

Q. Is not this to justify what is said of you? they that will not believe
your sayings, you will not spare to censure them: but do not you herein
apparently set up the Judgment of the Body above the Light within?

A. We deny that to be Light which opposes the the Judgment of the body W. P.
ibid. 14. The body will have a true sense, feeling and understanding, of
motions, visions, revelations, and doctrines; therefore it is safest to make her
the touchstone in all things relating to God, Sp. of the Hat, p. 21.

Q. What safty can there be in relying on such a body, that act by no known
rule or law?

A. We have the power: And will not such that are in the power do right? ibid.

Q. By what known rule, do you exert your power, that so the peccant person may
be convinced you do him no wrong?

A. We, as a Body, have power to determine, therefore we abhor, renounce,
rebuke, with all severity, that rude imagination of the Hat on in public
Prayer. W. Pen Sp. of Alex. p. 4, 5. 9.

Q. You take that for granted which is denied, how do you make it appear you
have such a power?

A. Thou art angry, not that there is a rule, but that thou have no share in
it, W. Pen. Sp. of Alex. p. 4.

Q. Is not this as much as to say, that the will and pleasure of the Elders is
the rule, and not the light within: if so, what signifies all your contests,
about the sufficiency of the light in every man?

A. I have told thee that we know we are of God, and they who withstand our
Testimony are in the gall of bitterness, W. Pen.

Q. If your pretenses be sufficient to determine other persons, why may not the
like pretense in them determine you? If you urge the Scriptures or primitive
practice for your rule, you will entangle your selves. If you say, The body (or
court) is the rule; then, you set up the Body both above the Scriptures, and
the light within. Will not a little measure of light discover your folly herein?

I shall proceed to another question: Who or what is Jesus Christ?

A. It Is God himself W. Pen. It Is the light in us Nayler and Hubberthorn.

Q. It is said that Jesus Christ was crucified: but is it safe to say, God
himself or the Light within was crucified?

A. Ye have condemned, and killed the just, that is, Christ Jesus in their
hearts; him they crucified in his appearance, G. Keith.

Q. Is Christ one thing, and his Appearance another?

A. Yea For Christ as he is and lives, in himself cannot be crucified, but his
appearance may, G. Keith.

Q. When the Scriptures speak of Christ crucified, do they mean only his
Appearance, and not Himself? and is this meaning solid?

A. Yea.

Q. Why do you speak, and write so darkly and doubtfully of the person of
Christ?

A. You are not able to bear what we have to hold forth concerning Him: should
we deliver what we hold concerning Jesus Christ, we should be stoned in the
streets, Rob. Wastfield.

Q. What think you of that-Christ, who was born at Bethlem, and dyed at
Jerusalem?

A. Jesus Christ at Jerusalem, a type, figure, a shadow, that is past away. Do
you, when you rise in the morning, think on God; do you see God in every
creature and in your self: think on these things and trouble not your self
about Jesus at Jerusalem. [This was uttered before many credible witnesses, by
an eminent Quaker.]

Q. Is not Jesus Christ a distinct person without you?

A. Jesus Christ a person without us, is not Scripture Language, but the
Anthropomorphits, and Muggletonians: G. Whitehead.

Q. Is not Christ in person at Gods right hand?

A. Jesus Christ is at Gods right hand, but I cannot believe he has a personal
Being at the right hand of God, G. W.

Q. What do you intend by Gods right hand?

A. Christ, nor Gods right hand, is not to be limited to a remoteness from the
Saints, G.W.

Q. What is the meaning of that text, The same Jesus that went away, shall in
like manner come again, Acts 1.10, 11.

A. I deny he shall come visibly, and though it be said [in like manner,] yet
every like is not the same, G. Whitehead.

Q. Do not you believe that Christ will come the second time without sin to
Salvation?

A. He is come the second time.

Q. It Is true: Christ is come by his Spirit but is there not another Coming?

A. What other Coming would thou have?

Q. The Scriptures speak of his Coming to judge both the quick and the dead: do
you believe this?

A. Why do thou trouble thy self about such foolish and silly things;

Q. Pray, answer directly, whether you believe Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead?

A. I perceive that which troubles thee is the puzling thy self so much in that
book (the Bible) thou will never be settled till thou throw away that Book.

Q. Do you deny the second personal Coming of Christ?

A. They are like to be deceived who are expecting that Christ's second Coming
will be personal G. Whitehead.

Q. What signifies those words, When he comes every eye shall see him, they
that peirced him etc?

A. To say, they, that peirced that body, shall see that body, are not
Scripture-words. G. Whitehead.

Q. Has Christ no body?

A. Yea, the Church is his body, Ed. Buroughs.

Q. Has Christ no other body but his Church?

A. This is an ensnaring question, Ed. Bur.

Q. What snare can be in it, if you believe he has another Body?

A. To say, Christ has two bod^es, one out of the sight of the Saints, there
is so much wickedness, and ignorance in the broachers hereof, that it needs no
answer, Edw. Buroughs.

Q. Is not this as much as to say, Christ has no other Body but his Church?

A. They that accuse us for saying, Christ has but one body, should produce
plain Scripture that says, he has two, G. W.

Q. Is there no other Christ but the Light within?

A. I have already said that they who deny Christ to be the light in every man,
are Antichrists, Ed. Bur.

Q. What does the word Christ signify?

A. Anointed;

Q. If the light be Christ, what is its Unction? and to what end is it
anointed? and how may we conceive it capable to execute the office of a Priest,
Prophet, and King?

A. Now thou runs into thy fleshly Conceivings;

Q. Is Christ in you, in respect of that nature in which he suffered at
Jerusalem?

A. Here thou Enemy of Christ would know how the Saints enjoy Christ. Thou
art in the nature that Judas was in, who betrayed him, Ed. Buroughs.

Q. Does Christ, really in these days, take upon him, the form of a Servant.

A. Thou dark beast, and conjurer, querying with thy conjured words: Is Christ
to be limited to days, in taking upon him the form of a servant? Ed. Bur.

Q. Is this answer serious and to the question?

A. Yea, blessed be the Lord; it is an answer in the eternal life and light. Ed.
Buroughs.

Q. Is it not Impious, to entitle God to such railing and impertinent Answers?

A. Thou shall eternally witness them. Ed. Bur.

Q. Was Jesus Christ the gift of God?

A. He was so.

Q. Wherein does that appear?

A. His doctrine, life, miracles, death and sufferings to God, is the gift and
expression of God's eternal love for the salvation of men. W. Pen.

Q. Thou have affirmed, that God is Christ, did then God himself dye, and
suffer to God? etc.

A. Will thou deny that Christ is God's gift?

Q. Will thou prove that God gave himself to dye and suffer to God, therein to
express his eternal love for the salvation of men?

A. This a captious and ensnaring question.

Q. I perceive thou art entangled, and it will be to little purpose to press
thee to reconcile one dictate with another: however, pray show, wherein Christ
was given for the salvation of men?

A. 1. In abolishing the other Covenant which consisted of shaddowy Ordinances.

2. In promulgating his message of a most free, and universal tender of Life to
all that believe, and follow him the Light, in all his righteousness.

3. In seconding his Doctrine with signs and miracle, and a most innocent and a
holy life.

4. In ratifying and confirming all with great love, and a holy resignation, by
offering up his body to be crucified by wicked hands; and is thereby become a
most complete Captain and perfect Example. W. Pen, Sad. Found.

Q. Of what were those Ordinances shaddows?

A. Of the Light and Life.

Q. Was not the light and life, at that time in the Jews?

A. Yea, but not in that measure and degree, as afterward should be.

Q. Were they then shaddows only of such a measure or degree as in future
times should be vouchsafed?

A. Figures and shaddows are only in force till the substance comes. W. Pen.

Q. Is not the light and life the substance?

A. The light, is the same Jesus, in his first appearance, as the seed of
light, not come forth to the perfect day. G. Keith.

Q. If then Jesus Christ in his first Appearance was at that time in the Jews,
then those ordinances could not be shaddows of that: Of what then were they so?

A. As Christ apprehending the weakness of his disciples, did think fit to
leave them some figurative token, and mark of his remembrance for them to be in
the practice of, till he was better known to them, mystically, and in the
spirit, therefore he said, Do this till I come. W. Pen. Apol. 134.

Q. But were the Jewish ordinances figures only of Christ mystically, and in
the Spirit?

A. They were so;

Q. Was not Christ known mystically and in the Spirit, at that time?

A. Not as afterward he would be;

Q. If they were shaddows of something farther to be revealed, Whether that
degree of light they then had, was not insufficient?

A. There is a sufficiency in the least degree of light, to help, and save him
that takes heed to it. S. Fisher.

Q. Is not that which is able to save, the substance?

A. It is so;

Q. Are types, figures, shaddows, of force and to be observed when the
substance is come?

A. When the substance is come, the shadow cease in point of Institution. W.
Pen. Apol, 134.

Q. Were not those shaddows Instituted by God?

A They were so.

Q. Were the Jews obliged to observe them?

A. Yea,

Q. Then Either the substance was not come, or they were no shaddows, or else
they were ordained for some other end, and purpose: thus are you in a maze, and
run your selves into Irreconcilable absurdities, and contradictions, pray, what
was that doctrine which Christ seconded by Miracles.

A. That all men should take heed to him, the Light of them.

Q. Forasmuch as all men acknowledge a light to be in every man, and that it
ought to be heeded, what need was there of miracles to confirm this?

A. But all men do not acknowledge the light in every man, to be the Christ of
God.

Q. Very true, were the Miracles then to prove this?

A. Yea.

Q. Where was such a doctrine delivered by Christ, and seconded by Miracles?

A. Does not Christ say, He is the light of men.

Q. Where does he say, The light in every man is the Christ of God?

A. They who deny the light in every man to be the Christ, are Antichrists. Ed.
Bur.

Q. What farther did Christ deliver as his doctrine, which he seconded by
Miracles?

A. A message of a most free, universal tender of life to all that believe, and
follow him the light in all his righteousness. W. Pen.

Q. Was this all he seconded by miracles?

A. Yea.

Q. Do thou do well to say so, since the Scriptures teach us otherwise?

A. What other Doctrine did he confirm by miracles?

Q. Was it not this, That he himself was the Messiah promised, and was sent
into the world to dye for sinners? and is not this that doctrine you so
Strenuously oppugn?

A. Now thou insinuates a slander against us.

Q. What further did Christ do for the Salvation of men?

A. He did ratify and confirm all with great love, and a holy resignation by
offering up his body to be crucified by wicked hands, and thereby became a most
complete captain, and perfect example. W. Pen.

Q. Was Christ in his sufferings no more but an Example?

A. What more, would have him to be?

Q. Was not the love of God, herein manifest, in sending his Son to dye for
sinners? Romans 5.8.

A. There may be something of that in it.

Q. How, and in what respect did Christ dye for sinners?

A. Not to make satisfaction for their sins: the consequence of such a doctrine
is both Irreligious, and Irrational W. Pen. Sandy Found. p. 16.

Q. What does the Scripture mean in saying, He was made sin for us?

A. I caution and warn men, by no means to entertain this principle (viz.) of
Christ's Satisfaction by whomsoever recommended. O why should this Horrible
thing be contended for by Christians? W. Pen. ibid. p. 16. 25. 30.

Q. How was sin, laid on Christ, and how was he made a curse for us?

A. God was satisfied in his Son Christ the anointed, the Lamb offered without
spot a sacrifice for Sin. G. W. Div. of Christ. p. 19.

Q. In what respect was Christ a sacrifice for Sin?

A. Your abuse of Christ, confusion, and darkness in stating your matter we
cannot own, as proceeding from any sense or savor of Christ either as
Sacrifice, or a Savior, G. W. ibid. 79. 80.

Q. Was that body of Jesus which was offered upon the cross the one, and only,
Sacrifice for Sin?

A. Thy sottish queries rises out of thy dark mind concerning the body of
Jesus, as the Devil did about the body of Moses, Edward Buroughs.

Q. Was Christ's death a satisfactory Sacrifice, or not?

A. God satisfied himself in his own gift, and without performing his own will
he could not be satisfied, G. W. ibid. 79.

Q. If thou had said, that God made man and gave him a reasonable Soul, etc.
and without performing his own will he could not be satisfied, would it not
have been, as much to the question, as what thou have said: answer me, Was
Christ's death on the Cross satisfactory for the sins of the world? or only for
the Elect?

A. Thou Jesuit art pleading for a Christ a far off, that Christ did not
satisfy for thee, thou art under the woe. The death of Christ we witness, Edw.
Bur. Where reads thou that God requires satisfaction for the sins of the Elect,
or laid any thing to their charge, thou blind ignorant Sot? Edward Buroughs.

Q. What was Christ's end, in giving himself a ransom, in being a propitiation
for the sins of the whole world?

A. To show forth, and give testimony of Gods love, and grace toward all
mankind, G. W.

Q. Wherein was that Love and Grace manifested in Christ being a sacrifice for
all men?

A. He gave Him a ransom, to redeem, and purchase man out of the
Transgression, G. W.

Q. Was it the will of God that Christ should dye to redeem man out of the
Transgression?

A. It was so.

Q. Was there a necessity hereof?

A. God would not be satisfied without performing his own will, G. W.

Q. If it was Gods will, to give his Son to be a propitiation for the sins of
the whole world; And if there was a necessity that thus it should be, because
(as you say) God cannot be satisfied without doing his own will, How then can
the mere Light within be sufficient to save? if it were, what necessity could
there be of Christ being a sacrifice? but if this were necessary, then why do
you maintain the former?

A. Now thou multiplies questions to ensnare.

Q. Pray be serious, and acquaint me what that obedience or suffering is by
which you are reconciled to God?

A. Silence, flesh! Would thou who art an Enemy of God know how the Saints are
reconciled to God? Edw. Bur.

Q. Will you not inform me in this matter?

A. Own the Light in thy conscience, and then thou shall know. Edwards
Buroughs.

Q. What think you of Justification by that Righteousness which Christ in his
own person fulfilled for us, wholly without us?

A. I boldly affirm it to be a Doctrine of Devils. W. Pen.

Q. Is there no other Righteousness by which and for the sake of which the
Saints are justified, than what Christ works in them?

A. Thou art accursed, thou Beast, upon whom the wrath of God must be
accomplished, who would have another Righteousness, than what Christ works in
the Saints, Edw. Buroughs.

Q. Is there no such thing as an imputed righteousness?

A. Justification is not from the imputation of another righteousness, W. Pen.

Q. Does God justify men upon the account of their own works?

A. Was not Abraham justified by works? and was not his personal offering up of
Isaac the ground of that just imputation? W. Pen.

Q. Are good works meritorious?

A. They may be said to procure, deserve, or obtain, W. Pen.

Q. Does then the holy lives, and works, of the Saints justify them in the
sight of God, from the guilt of sin?

A. Thou dead beast, by the same that the Saints are justified, thou art
condemned into the lake for ever, Edw. Bur.

Q. Are none justified or Righteous in the sight of God in whom is any
corruption or failing?

A. Thou polluted Beast, God accepts not any, where there is any failing, or
who do not fulfill the law, and answer every demand of justice, Edw. Buroughs.

Q. Who, what, is the true ministry?

A. God himself by his immediate power, Spirit, and unction within, is the
teacher of his people, G. Whitehead.

Q. Who, or what does he teach?

A. The Seed;

Q. Is the seed the only object of this teaching?

A. To the mind which is carnal the commands of God are not given, nor can they
be received, Edw. Bur.

Q. What is this seed?

A. It Is that of God in thee, the witness of God in thy conscience;

Q. Do not you sometimes call this seed Christ, and his Spirit?

A. We do.

Q. Is the command given only to, and obeyed by this Seed?

A. The Spirit both as a rul manifests the promises, and exercises Faith, G. W.

Q. Is not this as much us to say, that God preaches to, and is obeyed only by
himself? Are you not ashamed to prate thus?

A. Is not the great work of the ministry to point to this ( viz. the Seed) in
them, G. K?

Q. Is it credible that God should teach only himself?

A. Thy dark mind cannot conceive these things.

Q. Do thou thy self understand them?

A. Yea.

Q. Why will thou not endeavor to inform me?

A. What have thou to do to talk of these things, thot know nothing of God
and Christ.

Q. Do you not say, I have a light in me?

A. I do.

Quoth. What is this Light?

A. Thou art an Idle fellow, thus one of their Ministers answered this question.

Q. Must I obey this Light?

A. Yea.

Q. If I do obey it, will it certainly save me?

A. There is no doubt of that;

Q. What assurance may I have thereof?

A. If it do not, I dare be hang^d, R. W.

Q. Of what advantage will thy hanging be to me, if I should miscarry!

A. Now thou taunts.

Q. Do thou not administer the occasion?

A. I see thou art still in the envious mind.

Q. Do you believe a state of Immmortality and eternal felicity?

A. We own, and witness to an Immortal state, Geo. W.

Q. Do you believe a farther happiness shall be enjoyed by the Saints, at the
last day, than now?

A. When thinks thou that will be? must all the Saints have their hopes, and
faith of Salvation, unanswered till then? G. W. Chr. Asc. p. 34.

Q. Do not you wait for any thing farther?

A. Surely, death, and darkness has power over thy mind, else thou would
never show thy self such an ignorant Papist, in putting Salvation so far off,
till thou know not when, according to thy carnal conceits, G. W. ibid.

Q. Is eternal life, and felicity enjoyed now?

A. Is not the recompense of reward, Eternal life, and felicity, inwardly, and
Spiritually received, by those that Now suffer for Christ, G. W. ibid. p. 37.

Q. Is your belief in these points consonant to the Doctrine delivered in the
holy Scripture?

A. I have told thee that it is necessary for us to have things, revealed to us
that are not to be found in the Scriptures, particularly not so much as by
consequence, G. Keith.

Q. Must we be concluded merely by your sayings and Imaginations?

A. We are of God, and they who withstand our testimony are in the gall of
bitterness. W. Pen. Such that interrogate us, we will tell them, they are
Reprobates, and in the Sorcery and Witchcraft, Enemies to the life, that they
are filthy polluted Beasts; Serpents, querying with conjured words, and that
they are blind, and ignorant Sots, Edw. Bur.

Q. Is what you say concerning such, certainly true?

A. The Judgment we pass upon them, they shall eternally Witness, Edw.
Buroughs.

Q. If such as Edw. Buroughs, George Whitehead, and W. Pen. may be accounted
true Ministers, whom shall we esteem false?

A. They who say the Scriptures are the rule, that deny Christ to be the Light
in every man.

Q. Does not your Ministry, deny Christ's Person, maintain justification by
works, and that not according to the tenor of the second, but of the first
covenant? cursing people for doing what they bid them; Impose on us the
grossest falsehoods, and most irreconcilable contradictions, under the pretense
of immediate Inspirations, as if it were not enough for them to be wicked
alone, unless they could make God himself (O Horrid villainy!) an accessory
with them? A sort of men, that will affirm, and deny at pleasure: One while
say, they own the Person of Christ; Another while, deny he has any personal
being without men: Now they will confess the very Christ who dyed at
Jerusalem; anon they tell us, that Christ was but a figure, a shadow passed
away, and why should we trouble our selves with that Jesus, and, To concern our
selves about his second personal Coming is but puzling about silly and foolish
things. When they say Christ came to redeem man; If we sift their meaning, it is
nothing but the Seed, the principle of God in man that wants redemption.

If we tell them of their faults they aggravate them, by persisting therein,
and whilst they rail at their accusers, justify the Accusation it self, as is
the manner of your Dictator: Will. Pen. who of late has been so extravagant in
his writings, that scarce a man that reads him but thinks him to be either
distracted or worse, and yet must we believe such as these are true Ministers?

A. Why speak thou so severely against W. Pen?

Q. Have I not sufficient reason?

I profess, were I, as he, I would sue thee at the Common Law, thus an eminent
Quaker spoke to a friend of mine.

Q. Why so?

A. Because thou have disparaged him.

Q. Has W. Pen a dispensation to write or speak without control, Is he a
Universal Dictator?

A. I would have him seek his remedy against thee at the Common Law;

Q. Would such a practice, agree with your principle of Liberty of Conscience?

A. Liberty to reflect on such as W. Pen, is not to be allowed: no Liberty but
in the Power, G. Fox.

Q. You take a Liberty to curse, and revile others, who give you no just cause.
And may not we take notice when, or wherein you err, and soberly put you in
mind thereof?

A. What we do is nothing to thee, we are in the Power; we know we are of God,
therefore all that withstand our testimony are in the gall of bitterness, W.
Pen.

Q. If now under your present circumstances, you manifest such a mind; what
might we expect from you, were your Power answerable to your Wills?

A. Alas for thee! we are an innocent people.

Q. We have nothing but your own words for it; your envenomed malice against
others, your Tyrannical actings amongst your selves, gives us sufficient
intimations, that 'twill be dangerous trusting the Old man in you.

A farther account of you, and your Tenets, you may expect as opportunity and
occasion is offered: as yet I have mostly been concerned about your opinions,
and have been sparing touching your practices, which is not for want of
Instances, for I do give you to understand, That as Horrid enormities are
reigning under the vizor and garb of a Quaker, as amongst any other sort of
men; only with this difference, Yours are more Aggravated, by your pretenses to
perfection, which pretense is no more than a mere fraud, whereby you deceive
many simple people. If therefore you will provoke me to speak all I can, either
respecting your opinions, or practices, blame not me, but thank your selves if
the event answer not your expectation.

The End.
Errata.
Page 13. lin. 16. for salvation, r. salutation, p. 26. l. 6. dele Christ, l.
7. r. Christ, p. 68. l. 32. for at r. act, p. 79. l. 18. for sufficient, r. in
sufficient.


