THE GRAND APOSTASY OF The Church of Rome, From her Primitive Purity and
Integrity.

WITH A VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, In her SEPARATION from Her, AND
The hazard of Salvation in Communion with Her.

Discoursed in a SERMON Preached at St. Mary le Bow, London, On Sunday the 28th
of December, 1679.

By JOHN HILL, Rector of St. Mabyn in the County of Cornwall.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Heyrick, at Greys-Inne-gate in Holborn. 1680.

Rev. 18. verse. 4. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, etc.


I Am not ignorant how much revelation is necessary to understand this book of
the Revelation, and that Interpreters themselves need interpretation. It was
the modest and ingenuous Confession of the learned In Praefatione in
Apocalypsin.
Arias Montanus, That after thirty years studying the Scriptures, with the help
of the most Judicious Expositors, yet he understood only two or three Chapters
of this Book; and hence was wont to say; That the Expositors were as difficult
to be understood as the Text, there being many Comments that may be more
properly termed Obscurities, than Expositions, on the Revelation. Yet though
some things are laid down mystically in abstruse terms, to exercise the
Judgment of the wisest; yet others are more familiarly expressed, to succor
the infirmity of the weakest. Some indeed are such Depths, wherein Elephants
may swim; but there are others such Shallows, wherein Lambs may wade. My Text
is one of those through which an ordinary Ingenuity may wade; neither are the
words clothed with those difficulties which are originally incident to other
places of this book.

The preceding Chapter gives you a description of that Mother of Fornications,
the Whore of Babylon, as she was represented to the Apostle in a Vision. In the
16th verse, he foretells her ruin, and propounds the method of Gods severity
therein, in the certainty, suddenness, and inevitability of her destruction:
And in my Text, cautions all Gods people to avoid her sins, lest they smart by
her punishment; to come out of her idolatries, lest they be wrapped up in her
destruction.

In the words, you have two things considerable.

1. A Command, Come out of her (i. e.) out of Babylon. 2. The ground and reason
thereof, and that is twofold, (1.) lest ye be partakers of her sins, (2.) of
her plagues.

The words need not much explication; and I love not to make Truths, plain in
themselves, difficult by my obscure handling of them. It was the unhappiness of
the Schoolmen, to ravel and ensnarl the plainest truths of the Gospel, with
their nice distinctions, and perplexed abstruse notions; (wherein, as
Quintilian Orators, Multa loquuntur, sed nihil dicunt;) which otherwise might
be wound off by an ordinary Understanding. But what Explication they need, you
shall have in this short Paraphrase.

Come out of her,] Exite ex illa, mi popule. It Is not to be so much understood
of a bodily departure, in regard of a cohabitation and Presence, as of a
spiritual separation, in respect of Faith and Religion. Come out of her
Judgment and Doctrine, her Faith and Worship. The words seem to be taken out of
Jer. 51.6. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be
not cut off in her iniquity. And, Jer. 50.8. Remove out of the midst of
Babylon, and go forth. And, Isai. 48.20. Go forth of Babylon: flee from her,
(i. e.) depart from her Communion: In locum.
Recedite, recedite, as Junius and Tremellius read the words; depart quickly;
come not near this Pesthouse, as you would avoid Infection.

My people] i.e. By singular care, respect, and affection; my people, by
special favor and covenant; you that have owned my Name, professed Religion in
the power and purity of it, O go out of her; defile not your garments by
Babylon's Idolatries; for if you touch her, you will pollute your selves.

Out of her] (i. e.) Babylon. We find particular mention of three Babylons in
History.

1. Babylon of Assyria, standing on the River Euphrates, where was the
confusion of Languages, and where the Jews were in Captivity; which place is
taxed in Scripture for Idolatry, and other Heaven-daring Iniquities. 2. Babylon
in Egypt, standing on the River Nilus, and for distinction called Babylon
Aegyptiorum; thought to be aimed at by St. Peter, 1 Epist. 5.13. verse. Out of
the ruins of this, arose that great City Cayr. 3. Babylon mystical, whereof
Babylon of Assyria was a type; and this is Rome, which (though the great
Favorers of that corrupt Church have endeavored to cast all obscurities
imaginable on this Interpretation, yet) without the least shadow of scruple, is
here to be understood; and the Whore of Babylon is (by all circumstances) that
State or Regiment of a People that were then the Inhabitants of Rome, or did
belong thereto. But of this, more anon.
That ye be not partakers of her sins.] Contract not her guilt; which you may
do by contriving for her, complying with, or conniving at her Idolatries:
Though you act not with them, yet if you like, love, and approve of her
Villainies, it is enough to make you partakers with her.

That you receive not of her plagues,] Ne in eadem involvemini ruina, lest you
be involved in the same destruction. For there are three things in every sin:
(1.) There is actus, qui transit. (2.) Macula, quae manet. And, (3.) Poena,
quae debetur. The act is transient, but yet reflects guilt, and guilt binds
over to punishment. And hence, in the Original, sin and punishment have one and
the same name; to note to us, that where sin is in the Premises, there
destruction will be in the Conclusion.


From the words thus explained, there result these four Doctrinal Conclusions.

1. That Christians must be very careful lest they communicate with idolatrous
persons. 2. That those persons, of all others, who have owned and professed the
Name of God, asserted his Cause, and born testimony to his Truth, should be
most careful of defiling themselves with idolatrous practices. 3. That the
Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, is a sufficient ground for our
separation from her. 4. That to partake of a peoples fin, is to be involved in
that peoples ruin.
I shall wrap up all these in this one Proposition:

That it must be the great care of all Christians, who would not run the hazard
of their Eternal Salvation, to come out of Babylon, to separate themselves from
the Faith and Religion of the present Church of Rome.

In the prosecution whereof, I shall do these three things.

1. I shall show that Babylon here is meant of Rome. 2. What defection this
mystical Babylon has made from her Primitive Purity and Integrity. 3. The
Grounds of our Separation, together with the impossibility of a Reconciliation.
For the first, that Babylon here is meant of Rome, is most excellently done to
my hand, both by Ancient and Modern Writers: So that to say any thing after
them, were but to light a Candle to the Sun when she appears in her Meridian
glory. If you do but cast your eye on the former Chapter, you will find
enough, and I shall need no more to prove it. Then,

1. The Woman, that is, the Whore of Babylon, is said to be a City which
reigns over the Kings of the Earth; and this was only the Roman Monarchy at
that time, there being no other City in the world but this, that had such a
Jurisdiction.

And so it is expounded not only by some Greek Authors, but by most Latin
Writers; as Iraeneus, Tertullian, St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Augustine,
Prosper de prem. and praed. cap. 7.
and others. Prosper, also a Latin Writer, says, Who cannot understand what
City it is that carries a cup full of Abominations, of Uncleanness, and
fornication of the whole Earth, when that is called Eternal which is but
Temporal? Verily, it is a name of Blasphemy, when mortal men are called Divi,
Gods, and their Suppliants say unto them, To your divine Power, to your Altars,
and to your Eternity. This the Learned know to be the City of Rome, which was
called Vrbs AEterna, and wherein the Emperors were called Gods; and the People
flattered them with Altars, and Titles of divine Power and Eternity, as now
they do their Popes with the like Antichristian terms of The most Holy, and
Your Holiness: Who have also as blasphemous tokens of Divinity, as any of the
heathen Emperors had in their Triple-Crowns, riding on men's shoulders, their
being attended on by Kings and Emperors; their Thrones in Churches, higher
than Altars; and suchlike magnificent Pomps of Heathenish and Antichristian
pride.

Ambrosius Ansbertus, a Latin Writer also, Comment. in Apocalypsin, cap. 14.
v. 8. and in cap. 17, etc.
850 years since, calls Rome the second Babylon, who sitting aloft on her seven
Hills, rules the Scepter of the whole world: and in the name of that City, is
figured the power of the whole earthly Dominions. Hence,

II. In the seventh verse, she is said to sit on a beast having seven heads and
ten horns; which seven heads be Coelius Aventinus, Exquilinus, Tarpeius,
Capitolinus, Viminalis, Palatinus, Quirinalis.
seven hills whereon the woman sits. Now it is well known not only to
learned Christians, but to Heathens themselves, that Rome alone is a City
builton seven hills.

This is thought to be a very silly Argument by that Renegado Sanders and
others, by the seven hills to prove the Sea of Antichrist to be at Rome,
because the City is now gone from the Hills, and stands in the Plain of
Campus Martius; and the Pope sits on the other side of the River. To which
it is well answered, That though the greatest part of the City be not now on
the seven Hills, and his Unholiness his Palace of Pleasure be on the other side
the River, yet on these hills stand Churches, D. F. in Rhem. Test. p. 892.
Abbeys, and Monasteries, where the Papal Authority is put in execution; and
there is never an one of those hills whereon the present Religion of Rome is
not practiced. Being galled with this, they make two Romes; Rome Pagan, and
Rome Christian. The Whore spoken of, is, they say, Heathenish Rome, which was
ruled by those Monsters of mankind, Nero, Domitian, Calignla, etc. who writ
their Laws, and rouled their Garments in the blood of Christians: but the
Christian Rome is not here meant. Whereas it is obvious to every one that has
but common rational notions alive within him, whose Conscience is not quite
vitiated, and Mind putrified with noisome Lusts, but must see, that the
present Rome, in respect of State, Princely Dominion, and Cruelty in
persecuting the Saints of God, is all one with the Heathenish Empire; the Sea
of the Bishop being turned into the Court of the Emperor, and Shambles of the
Butcher.

To avoid this, Chap. 17.6.11.8.
they farther say, That Babylon is drunk with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs, shed not in Rome, but in Jerusalem, where the Lord was crucified; and
the two Prophets being slain, lie there in the streets.

This is excellently answered by St. Hierome, who says, That it is not meant
of Jerusalem, but of Rome; and Christ is said to be crucified there, either, 1.
Because the Authority whereby he was crucified was from the Roman Empire; or,
2. Because Christ in his Members was, and is daily there crucified, though
locally in his own person he was crucified at Jerusalem. But besides the
Authority of Scripture in this case, it were easy to add, (in the third
place,) 3. The favor and defense which this Exposition has received from a
multitude of Ancient and Modern learned men. Hence St. Bernard says, That the
Beast spoken of in the Apocalypse, to which a mouth is given to speak
blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints, is now gotten into St. Peter's
Chair, as a Lion prepared for his Prey. And in another place, speaking of the
Romish Priesthood, They are called (says he) the Ministers of Christ; yet
serve Antichrist. And Petrarch says, Once Rome, but now Babylon. And Joachim
Abbas, Antichrist was long since born in Rome, and now strives every moment to
get higher and higher. 4. And lastly, I answer, That it was such a Babylon,
that for a while Gods people were lawfully in her; but when her Corruptions did
increase, they were commanded to depart; which cannot be affirmed of Rome
Pagan, but of Rome Papal: and therefore, Come out of her, my people.


This brings me to the second thing, viz. the great defection this Church has
made from her Primitive Purity and Integrity.

The Spouse is now become an Harlot, and the chaste Virgin a Mother of
Fornications: her Apostasy is now as infamous as ever her Faith was glorious.
Some things she is confessed to hold right; as, a true God in three Persons;
true Scripture, though with additions; a true Christ, though mangled with foul
and erroneous consequences; true Baptism, though shamefully deformed with
rotten Traditions: and if you compare Rome Christian with Rome Roman, you will
see her defection in these five grand instances thereof.

1. In the unlimited Jurisdiction of the Triple-Crown. The Councils of Basil
and Constance decreed, that a general Council was of greater Authority than the
Pope, and that he ought to be subject to it.

The Council of Nice appointed him his bounds and limits; and the Council of
Chalcedon made the Bishop of Constantinople equal with him in Authority and
Jurisdiction. And Gregory himself, who sat in the Papal Chair, writes, That
whoever styles himself Universal Bishop, or desires to be called so, is the
forerunner of Antichrist; and many learned Papists believed this to be true.
But since that time the case is much altered: for the Councils of Lateran and
Trent have determined the contrary; insomuch that he whose Primitive style was
Servant of servants, does now exalt himself above all that is called God. The
beginning of this Supremacy over other Bishops, was in Boniface the third's
time; who, with great ado, obtained of Phocas (a fit Master to prefer such a
Servant) to be made Ecumenical Bishop: Which Authority his Successors have
enlarged; and now his Janissaries, the Jesuits, tell us he is that Statue in
Daniel, which shall crush in pieces all the Kings and Kingdoms of the Earth. He
may, as Bosius says, depose Kings for just causes, and without any cause also.
It belongs to him (says Sunders) to pronounce Kings Heretics, to declare
their Subjects exempt from Allegiance, and that they ought to be deposed, if
they will not Blade it for Christ; that is, for the Popes Tyranny and Lust. And
this is not only matter of their Faith, but Fact.

2. Not only in the Supremacy, but also in the Holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for at first the people received it under both kinds, for the space of
a thousand years. And (says Myraldus) The Roman Order commanded the Wine to be
conserated, that the People might fully communicate. And the ancient Liturgies
of their own Church do tell us, that the People received the Wine as well as
the Bread. Nay, Cajetan (as eminent a Member as ever their Church boasted of)
confesses, that the Custom endured a long time in the Church, even until their
so-much-admired Council of Constance forbad it; and then the Romanists altered
their mind.

3. Her defection has been most notorious in that monstrous Tenet of
Transubstantiation; a Doctrine lately brought in, and made matter of Faith by
Innocent the third, in the Lateran Council, within these four hundred years:
before which time no man was obliged to believe it, but all men were left to
their own liberties; whereas now it is accounted Heresy to deny it, and worthy
of Bonds, the Inquisition, a Stake, and Hell.

4. In the Worship of Images; for at first that Church admitted of no Image at
all, either painted or carved; no not the Image of Christ himself (says
Erasmus) to be set up in Churches: And when they began to be used, the Church
of Rome her self forbad any Worship to be given to them, as appears by
Gregory's Epistles to Severus. And Polydore (a great admirer of the Romish
Church) confesses, that all the Fathers condemned the Worship of Images, for
fear of Idolatry: And when the Nicene Council brought them in for ornament,
even then they denied them Worship.

5. In the great Article of Justification, the most eminent Pillars of their
Church having denied Justification by Works, (as Thomas Aquinas, and others)
yet the Council of Trent varied from them, and thrust in man's inherent
Righteousness as the formal cause of his Justification.

Now a Church that has made these Defections, and has introduced such horrid
Errors, should be separated from; Come out of her, my people: which leads me
to the consideration of the various Causes of this Apostasy; which may be
referred either to,

1. Her Pride and Ambition. It Is well known what arrogance that Church became
guilty of, when Tertullian in his time complained de Insolentia Cleri Romani.
And Luther calls them Silk and Satin Divines, to whose proud Spirits the poor
and contemptible way of Christ could not comport. In that Assertion of theirs,
how do they extol their Priesthood! Creatura paruit Joshuae, at Presbyteris
Creator; Sol illi, at his Deus quotiescunque verba sacra pronuntiat: The
Creature obeyed Joshua, but the Creator does the Priests; the Sun yielded to
him, but to these as often as they pronounce the words of Consecration, does
God yield. On this conceit it is, that they degrade all Temporal Princes (those
Vmbratiles Dii) making them stand barefoot at their great Bishops gate, hold
his Stirrup, yea their own Crowns at his courtesy; exempting all their
Ecclesiastical Subjects from their Jurisdiction, and all the rest from their
Allegiance.

2. Fraud and Perfidiousness the Romanists had fully learned, that Regnandi
Causa, all Oaths were to be violated. How grossly were the Pope and his
Adherents taken in forging some Canons of the Council of Nice for their
preheminent Dignity. And being conscious of their own falsehood, still continue
to deprave all Authors that might give in Evidence against them; outfacing all
ancient Truths, and foisting in Gibeonish witnesses of their own forging; and
leave nothing unattempted against Heaven or Earth, that might advance their
Faction. Take a view of her carriage to those that diffent from her. How has
she abused all that opposed her! charging. Wickliffe with Blasphemy, Luther to
have had his Advice from the Devil. Queen Elizabeth's Episcopal Jurisdiction,
and secret Fruitfulness; our Bishops to have been consecrated in Taverns; oun
casting the Crust of the Sacramental Bread to Dogs: With a thousand more of
this nature, maliciously raised and defended against Knowledge and Conscience,
for the disgrace of those that diffent from them.

3. Covetousness: For if you look on all their Opinions about Indulgences,
Private Masses, Auricular Confession, you will find love to Money the cause of
them all. Hence the humor of that Church was well hinted to us, in the answer
of a M. P. Nar.
Priest to his Friend, who asking him why he would not Absolve a Penitent
without a great sum of Money, replied, They get Heaven by us, and we must get
Money by them.

4. Neglect of Scripture: And this has see open a flood-gate, whereby all the
world was drowned in Errors: For take the Eyes out of the Body, the Sun out of
the Firmament, the Compass from the Ship, and what can follow but darkness,
blackness, and confusion? Therefore they wish that there had never been
Scripture; and say, That the Church could have done well enough with Traditions
only. They call the Bible that Book which has made all the stirs in the
world; and say, That all the Faith a man can have by it, is merely humane, and
no more. O! the great patience of God, that bears such Blasphemies from these
Monsters of Men!

5. Nourishing of sin: Of which this Church has been guilty two several ways.
(1.) By her common practice of encouraging those who had been censured in the
Eastern Churches for foul Miscarriages, to appeal to her, and she would Absolve
them; and whenever she did inflict Ecclesiastical Censures, they were in a
great part Pecuniary, and merely to the macerating of the Body, no ways to the
saving of the Soul: which occasioned us to tell them, that peccata raduntur,
non eradicantur, and Heathen-like they did vitia abscondere, non abscindere: by
this Penance there was something done about sin, nothing done against sin; it
being like Sampsons Hair, cut off, yet because the Roots remained, they sprung
up to their full strength again. 2. By the suitableness of her Doctrine to the
carnal and sensual part of man.
Particularly,

1. That Doctrine of extenuating original sin, making motions to sin
unconsented to, no sin at all: That a man has power to keep the Commandments:
That to love God, binds only at some times: That actual inadvertency in holy
Duties, does not hinder the Fruit of them: That Prayers said in Latin, though
we do not understand them, are very acceptable unto God, etc. 2. That Doctrine
of advancing the pride of Nature; which tells her, that she can merit her own
Glory, without being much beholding to Gods Mercy; that she can fulfill the
Royal Law, and so brave God in the face, as if she needed no pardon from his
hands. O how sweet a Lesson is this to flesh and blood, even enough to make her
run mad of Self-conceit! 3. That of commending Ignorance as the Mother of
Devotion: And thus when they had taken away the Scriptures, they set up
Pictures in their room. All their Religion is no other than a pack of
Complements, merely outward and sensible, adapted to the humor of their
ignorant and sensual Votaries: for, homo est magis sensus quam intellectus; to
worship God in Spirit and Truth, can no more be understood by them, than an Eye
can see Spirit. How ridiculous are their superstitious Cu^toms. Yet not to do
what Fathers and Grandfathers have done, is to profane their Canonized dust:
And indeed, had not the Scripture foretold what an Eclipse would be upon the
whole Church we should think it impossible that such ridiculous things should
be taken up. Because Christ is the Light, therefore they have Light at Noonday:
and because Christ said, We must be like little Children, therefore the Monks
wear Cowls like childrens Swadling-clouts: And one Pope made a serious Motion
in the Conclave, That he and his Cardinals might ride in a solemn day on Asses,
in imitation of Christ's humility; but the Conclave thought that the As too much
rode the Pope already. And thus you have had the several Instances and Causes
of Rome Defection from her Primitive Purity and Integrity. I now proceed to the
third thing proposed to be shown, viz.
III. The grounds of our Separation from, and the impossibility of
Reconciliation to that Church.

This I will consider, 1. More generally, 2. More particularly.
More generally, and that by asserting these three things.

1. The lawfulness of the Church of England's Separation from the Church of
Rome. 2. That this Separation the Romanists themselves cannot justly charge as
Schismatical. 3. That our Compliance with that Church is dangerous, and borders
on Ruin and Destruction.
I. The lawfulness of the Church of England's Separation from the Church of
Rome.

The Church of Rome is confessed to be ancient, but not her Errors; neither do
we in any thing differ from her, wherein she has not departed from her self.
Here consider these two things.

1. That the Church of Rome was never a Mother to our Church; and we never had
such dependence on her, as the Romanists pretend we had. Our Christian Faith
came not from the seven Hills, neither was it derived from Austin the Monk, or
Pope Gregory. Britain had a worthy Church, Nicephorus. Eusebius. Ecclesiast.
Hist. Isaacs. Chron.
before either of them looked into the world built on the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles: And the account that Historians give of it, is thus;
viz. That Christianity was propagated here immediately after the death of that
Proto-Martyr St. Steven. Which appears by diverse passages out of Origin and
Tertullian. Gildas the Historian of our own Nation (called Sapiens) affimeth,
That in the time of Tiberius (who died thirty seven years after Christ was
crucified) this Island of Britain received the Faith. Theodoret. Sophronius.
Some there are (and not improbably) who conjecture, that St. Paul himself
preached the Gospel here after his first Imprisonment at Rome; which was quinto
Neronis. This is confirmed by a Passage of Venantius Honorius, viz.

Transit and oceanum, vel qua fuit Insula pontum, Quasque Britannus habet
Terras, atque ultima Thule.

Beronius himself (one of their own Authors) cells us, That he found it in a
Manuscript in the Vatican Library, that the Gospel was first preached in this
Nation by Simon Zelotes, and Joseph of Arimathea.

In what state Christianity stood afterward, appears not in any footstep of
History, till King Luoius time, Anno 177.
who is said to send to Eleutherius the then Bishop of Rome for some Pastors to
instruct his People in the Christian Religion. Fugatius and Damianus were the
persons sent over with his Letters to the King; which acquainted him, That as
Christ's Vicar, he might settle matters for Religion (a thing which his
Successors will not now allow) within his own Dominions And thus Christianity
flourished for several hundred years here: And notwithstanding all the
affrightments of Pensecution that was then on the Church, and the Heathen
Princes spilt the blood of the Christians like water, yet those sanguine
showers have ever since made the Church the more fruitful. And in the Borders
of this Island the Primitive Christian Religion had public encouragement and
profession, even to the time of Austin the Monk, who found here at his entrance
one Archbishop seven Bishops, and a Monastery at Bangor with twenty one hundred
Monks in it: So that several hundred years did intervene between the first
planting of Christianity, and Austin's coming hither. I should not be so large
in (...) Historical Narrative, but that I know it is objected to us by the
Romanists, That we had our Religion from them, and the Conversion of the
English Nation was by Rome and her Agents. We own that the Ancient Roman Church
was Sister to ours, but no Mother; there was near Kindred, but no Dependence.
But,

2. Though we should grant them such a Dependence, yet still we assert our
Separation lawful, because they have separated and departed from their first
Purity. We hold with the Ancients, from whom they are departed; and we hold
with them, as far as they hold with Christ. This will evidence it self, if you
consider these four things.

1. That the Modern Papists maintain sundry Articles opposite to that which
has been formerly believed by the most eminent Doctors of the Roman Church; as
that of the merit of Condignity, opposed by St. Bernard and Anselme, and now
defended by the Modern Jesuits. Images at first were only motivum objectum, an
inducing means to move people to adore the Samplar; and no material Object of
adoration; which now is opposed by their present Church. 2. Sundry Popish
Assertions, now obtruded, are manifestly repugnant to the Teners of the
Primitive Church; as, That the Popes Judgment is infallible: That he is Lord
over the whole World: That public Service does bost edify in an unknown
Language: That Laymen must not read Scriptures, etc. 3. Many of their Opinions
are improbable, unreasonable, and absurd; as, That the Scripture has no
greater authority to bind or loose the Faithful, than the Church will: That
the definition of the Pope is as authemtiek as the facred Scripture: That
Fornication in the Clergy, is a smaller offense than Marriage: That to worship
Images, is meritorions. With innumerable other suchlike Absurdities. 4. Some
of our Adversaries, more ingenuous than their fellows, confess, That we believe
and hold the fundamental Truths of the Gospel, the main and vital matter of
Religion: And if we do thus, who is to be faulted, the Church of Rome, or the
Church of England? But herein she discovers her self to be that body of which
Antichrist is the Head, Rev. 17.8.
and that Whore and Mother of Abominations. Thus in these two things you see
our Separation lawful.
II. Now secondly, I assert this Separation to be so lawful, that the Romanists
themselves cannot justly charge it as Schismatical.

I say justly (though Stapleton, Sanders, Bellarmine, and other Romanists,
brand our Separation from them, with the odious name of Donatism and Schism)
because it is evident out of St. Augustine, that as the Donatists never
objected any thing against, nor could blame any thing in the Church from which
they separated, either for Faith or Worship: So they of the Church of Rome
cannot justly blamo us for departing from them, if we consider these two things.

1. The manner how we separated. 2. The ground for which we separated.
1. The manner: This was not uncharitable, rash, heady, and ^advised, not
before all means were used for the cure of the Romanists, by the discovery of
their errors, notwithstanding which, they still persist in them. Our famous
and learned Reformers would have healed Babylon, but she would not be healed.
Many skilful Physicians have had her in hand, but she grew so much the worse;
and instead of being reclaimed by them, has anathematized them with the most
dreadful Curses, excommunicated, murdered, and destroyed multitudes of them:
Nay more, they were denied civil and religious Communion with her, unless they
received the beasts mark in their hands or foreheads. All which considered, we
might safely forsake her; nay, could not safely do otherwise: therefore, Come
out of her, my people.

2. Consider the ground and cause, as well as the manner of the Separation;
which was not for some slight and tolerable Errors, but damnable Heresies, and
gross Idolatries: the Heresies fundamental, and the Idolatries such, as those
who hold Communion with her, cannot but partake of her sins. If then to thrust
Jesus Christ out of the Chair, and place the Pope as infallible Doctor of the
Church, in it; if to reject the Scriptures, and set up Traditions; if to take
off Jesus Christ from being sole Mediator, and thrust in Saints and Angels; if
to raze the second Commandment, and introduce Image Worship, be damnable
Heresies, and gross Idolatries; then the Church of Rome is gullty of them; and
our Communion, on this very account, is expressly forbidden: See 2 Cor. 6.14.17.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? etc. verse. 17. Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate. Our Adversaries themselves grant, That in whatever Church
any of these depravations are found, Communion with it is to be broken off, as
dangerous and damnable; which brings me to the third thing asserted, viz.

III. That our Compliance with this Church is dangerous, and borders upon
eternal Ruin.

This will appear, if you consider this Church under these destructive
circumstances.

1. In her gross Idolatry; and no 1 Cor. 6.9.
Idolater shall ever enter into the kingdom of heaven: look on her
Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, Adoration of the Host! what is all this
but plain Idolatry? The second Commandment not only prohibits this sin, but
threatens a severe punishment to such sinners. The wiser sort of the Heathens
condemned the Worship of God by Images, as incongruous to the divine nature,
and an horrid reflection on the Deity. The old Romans (as Varro tells us) had
no Images for a hundred and seventy years, in their Divine Worship. The
Primitive Christians would rather die, Clem. Alex. Strom.
than defile themselves with Images. Antisthenes condemns the use of them for
Instruction, because there is so great dissimilitude between God and any
visible representation of him, that no man can learn any thing of God from an
Image. And as for their common distinction of not worshipping them ^erminative,
but relative, it is vain and ridiculous. And pray observe this, viz. that their
worshipping of Images, came in with the decay of their Piety.

2. In that Enmity and Opposition the Romanists have to the sacred Scriptures,
(those lively Oracles of the living God:) and so consider, 1. How they complain
against them, as not containing all things needful for Salvation; that the best
part of Religion is left out of them, and only made known to us by their
unwritten Traditions. 2. They forbid the people to read them, and will not have
them translated in the Mother Tongue of any Nation: And if once (as some of
them boast) they could get us out of Scriptures into Councils and Fathers, they
should do well enough with us. 3. They make the Pope Judge over the sense of
Scripture, and forbid all other Interpretations but what agree with the Church
and Pope of Rome. 4. Their Mouths have been open against, them, and have
belched forth bitter and blasphemous Invectives against them: How often do they
call the Scripture, dead Ink and a dumb Judge; that it is not Regula regulans,
but Regula regulata, not made to rule our Faith, but our Faith to rule it; that
it is not simply necessary, and it receives all the Authority it has from the
Church and from Tradition, without which it is of no credit at all?


What horrid Blasphemy is this? Does not God command us to consult his Oracles?
to apply our selves unto the Law, and to the Testimony? Isa. 8.19, 20. and
makes it a renunciation of our Allegiance to him, to go any where else for
Counsel or Direction, than to the written Word. But we know wherein the
insufficiency of the Scripture lies; they are sufficient enough for God's ends,
but not for the Pope's ends; they are able to furnish every Christian in the
world with Wisdom enough how he should save his Soul, but they are not so
useful to the Pope's triple Crown; this Armory furnishes him with no Artillery
to defend the Lordly Power and God-like Infallibility that he claims; and this
is the only defect he charges them with. To supply which, the rabble-rout of
Traditions is brought into the Church; this way their fine Wits, with the
Devils help, have taken, that the Scripture may be declared as insufficient,
and uncertain, minima particula revelatae veritatis, (as one of them impudently
writes;) and so it needs the patchery of their Traditions to make it perfect.
Just as Andronicus served the Emperor Alexius, who gave out that he was weak,
and insufficient to govern alone, and so first got a joint power with him, and
at last an absolute power over him to dethrone him. And whether their
Traditions have dealt better with the Scriptures, let the world judge; when
These go up, the Scriptures go down. That we may say to them as Christ said to
the Pharisees, Mat. 15.6. You have made void the Commandments of God by your
Traditions; you have unlorded (as the Septuagint renders it) and supplanted its
authority in the minds of men, who leave Gods Word to hearken to your
Traditions.

3. Consider farther, that most parts of Popery are directly absurd, and offer
violence to common Sense, and the very light of Nature: For who can rationally
conceive, That it should be the Popes right to Lord it over Scriptures,
Fathers, Councils, Church, and all the World? What possibility is there, that
the Kingdoms of the world should be subject unto him? What probability, that
Images should be worshipped? Our Works merit Heaven? That the body of Christ
should be in a thousand places at one time? That the Priest has Judicial Power
to forgive sins? That the Saints in Heaven should be Mediators for us to God?
He that will but indifferently compare these, shall find them manifestly
repugnant not only to the Principles of Religion, but offer violence to the
Law of Nature.

4. Consider farther, that in this Church the most horrid Cruelties are not
only tolerated and approved, but rewarded, and accounted meritorious. It
teaches Equivocation, to murder Kings, to undermine States, and to blow up
Parliaments; it dispenses with Murder, Incest, Sodomy, and all this accounted
Licitum and Solenne. From hence proceeds such Conspiracies against our King,
such Plots. against our Church and State; it is not Religion they strive for,
but Sovereignty, and this they will have, or they will make all Protestant
Nations their Shambles, and swim to it through Oceans of Blood; and they will
this way (if others fail) reduce the Consciences of Subjects, and the Crowns
and Scepters of Princes, to their Devotion. This brands them with the Indelible
Characters of the Ministers of Antichrist, who being but Priests, and confined
to their Books, having no other Commission than to go and preach the Gospel,
should thus creep into Thrones, filling the world with Anarchy and Confusion;
and those whose Souls they should win to God, by ministering the Word and
Sacraments, their Blood they sacrifice to the Devil, by stirring them up to
Treason and Rebellion; persuading them, that they shall be Canonized at Rome,
though they be hanged at Tyburn; and be glorious Saints in Heaven, though they
died great Rogues and Rebels on Earth.

These things duly considered in general, will tell you that there is hazard,
not only of Temporal Safety, but of Eternal Salvation, in our Communion with
such a Church: and therefore, Come out of her, etc.

This will the better appear, if you consider, secondly, and more particularly,
this one Argument, drawn from the Religion it self practiced in that Church;
And this I will consider two ways.

1. As the Jesuits have painted and adorned it. 2. As it is stripped naked of all
those adventitious Ornaments.
First, As they have painted it, and thereby recommended it to the view of
their ignorant admirers. We read of strange things of certain Painters, how
admirably they cast and shadowed their works; but the skilfullest Painters that
ever were, are the Jesuits and Schoolmen, the workmen of the Church of Rome;
not the famous Zeuxis, or ancient Polignotus, or Phidias, did ever bestow such
pains on their Images, as these have done on their Idol the Papacy: They have
made choice of the most exquisite devices that all the Heresies in the world
could afford, to put the same into their Religion. No Policy in Machiavel, no
Sophistry in Aristotle, or Eloquence in Tully, but they have contrived it into
their Image: and, save Truth and Sincerity, there is nothing wanting.

The Evangelical Prophet, Isai. 44.11, etc. sets down a lively description of
this matter; whereby (deriding the folly of the Gentiles) he fitly shows us the
Idolatry of Rome, and the manner how the Idol-Religion thereof was framed and
set on foot: For at the first (you see) it was but a rude Block, rough-hewn by
bungling Workmen that were not their Crafts-masters, till the Smith, Carpenter,
and Painter came, every one in his place, and showed his skill. This is
ingeniously applied by a very learned man of our own, Dr. W. in his Preface to
the way of the true Church.
to the Church of Rome.

1. The Canonists, like Black-smiths, blew with the Bellows of their Decrees,
and heated and hammered it in the Coals of the Popes Constitutions. These were
Gratian, Pope John, Gregory, and Boniface, with their Apprentices that served
them; Hostiensis, Innocent, Panormitane, and others of that black and smutty
Profession.

Secondly, The Carpenters that took it in hand, were the Friars and Schoolmen:
These stretched their line of Method over it, planed it with Distinctions where
it was rough; and by their Logic and Philosophy, brought it into better shape
and form: These were T. Aquinas, Scotus, Bonaventure, Alexander Hales, and
others.

Having thus gotten an handsome shape and fashion, the Council of Lateran
polished it over again, gave it Joints to stand upon: The Councils of Constance
and Basil altered the fashion of it in some particular parts; for Senensis and
Cusanus thought the head stood too high above the shoulders, and would have it
bowed down a little lower. At last they brought it to Trent, to the hands of
their best Workmen, who molded it a capite ad calcem, and set it up again,
when the worms had well-nigh consumed it: Since which, came in the third sort
of Workmen, viz.

Thirdly, The Painters (i. e.) the Jesuits; and there is no color which they
have not tried, to render it beautiful. Some with Varnish and Plaster, stop up
the cracks; and Bellarmine was happily born to do them this service. Others, as
Baronius and Surius, cast a shadow over it with other colors. Sextus Senensis,
and Possevine, brag of the Workmanship, flatter the Workmen, and extol the
Idol. And thus at last they have polished their Idol, and set it before the
Lord's Ark: And by this means they have attracted the eyes and hearts of their
deluded followers, insomuch that all that worship not this Image, must into the
fiery Furnace, and be offered as a Sacrifice to the fury of their Romish
Moloch. Now that which they are so fond of in this Religion, is its
suitableness to their sensual interests and affections; the greatest part of
which, eases them from taking any pains in spiritual things. As for Example:
They must serve God, but there be ways to dispense and turn the Spiritual
Service into a Corporal, which is much easier. Sinners must have Gods pardon,
or they cannot be saved, but the dispensation hereof is committed, with the
Keys, to Christ's Vicar, who has power to release them by the Sacraments of the
Altar and Penance. Hence the Pope has men's Consciences at his devotion; into
which he slides, under the pretense of being St. Peter's Successor; then
blindes their eyes, by taking away the Scriptures; and stops their ears, by
persuading them to hear none but himself: And hereby thousands are betrayed
into the hands of Eternal Ruin. This is the first thing shown, viz. that part
of their Religion as set forth with Romish Glosses and Varnishes.

I am next to show it you in its native Complexion, as stripped naked of all
adventitious Ornaments; and then you will easily perceive it to be the most
monstrous and ridiculous, the most bloody and blasphemous Religion in the whole
world.

1. Ridiculous in it self. 2. Blasphemous toward God and Christ. 3. Bloody to
all that have and do oppose her.
I. The most ridiculous Religion, as it is in it self. I need go no farther than
their Book of holy Ceremonies for this; which tells us not only what their
rude Ignorants do, but what their holy Fathers have done. This teaches them to
put confidence in Beads, Medals, and Roses, hallowed Swords, and Spells of the
Gospel, Agnus Dei's, and suchlike idle Bables; ascribing to them divine Virtue,
yea, so much as is due to the Son of God himself, and his precious Blood. Pope
Urban the fifth sent three Agnus Dei's to the Emperor, with these Verses:
Balsamus and munda Cera, cum Chrismatis unda,
Conficiunt Agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum,
-- Fulgura de Coelo, etc.
Balsam, pure Wax, and Chrysms liquor clear, Make up this precious Lamb I send
thee here. All Lightning it expels, and each ill Spright, Remedies Sin, and
makes the Heart contrite. And so he goes on in his Blasphemy, Even as the Blood
of Christ for us shed, etc. And lest you may imagine this to be the Conceit of
some fantastical Pope, hear out of the same Book of holy Ceremonies, the very
words that every Pope does use to pray, in their blessing the water which
serves for that Agnus Dei, viz.

That thou would vouchsafe, O Lord, to bless these things, which we are now
about to pour into this vessel of water, prepared to thy glory; so as by the
worship and honor of them, we may have our sins done away our blemishes wiped
off, and thereby may obtain pardon, and receive grace, so that with thy Saints
and elect children, we may merit everlasting life. Amen.

Can there be greater Superstition, Magic, or Blasphemy? and all this
practiced by the very Heads of that Church. Hence the poor Laity are hoodwinkt
in a forced Ignorance; who live no less without Scripture, than if there were
none at all. They forbid Spiritual food as Poison, fetch God Book into the
Inquisition, and thereby cheat the Vulgar with nothing but shows of Holiness;
in Pilgrimages, Processions. Offerings, Holy Water, Latin Service, Images,
Tapers, Vestments, Altars, Crosses, and a thousand such like, fit only for
children and fools; robbing them in the mean time of the sound and plain helps
of Piety and Devotion. More particularly, confider it under these Circumstances.

1. That it has made wicked men Saints, and Saints Gods; nay, the modern
Canonization has made those saints, that were scarce men: And we have their
own Confessions, That the most notorious sinners have leapt into their
Calendar: and once Sainted, they have the honor of Altars, Temples,
Invocations, and some of them in a style fit only for their Maker.

2. A Religion that professes to be a Bawd to Sin, whilst in practice it
tolerates open Stews, and prefers Fornication, in some ^ise^, before honorable
Matrimony; and gently blancheth over the breaches of the Commandments with the
name of Venials, and favorable titles of Dimmution, daring to affirm, That
venial sins are no hindrance to a man's Integrity and Perfection.

3. A Religion that indeed deserves not the name of Religion; the Ape and
Mimick of it; a very outside of Christianity; at best, a mere formality of
Devotion: all whose Prayers, Fastings, Pilgrimages, etc. are no other than a
going to Hell in more pomp and state. For look into their Churches, there you
will see idle Apishness in the most solemn works. The poor Laity in the mean
while returning empty of all sound Edification, and only full of confused
intentions; yet are they taught to think this Sacrifice of Fools to be
meritorious. From thence look into their houses and closets, there you will see
such a trade of careless and lazy Holiness, that there is but little
difference between the Image and the Suppliant; Piety it self being lulled
asleep with their heartless and sleepy Vespers. And if you step a little
farther, and cast your eyes into the melancholy Cells of some austere,
Recluses, there you may find, perhaps, an Hair-cloath, a Whip, an Hurdle, or
the Rope about the waste; But where in all this is true Mortification? A pious
Protestant takes more pains with his Heart in a day than a superstitious Papist
does with his Skin in a year: the one indeed whips himself, but the other
denies himself; the draws Blood from his Flesh, the other from his Lusts. And
therefore if you look into the whole Course of the Roman Catholic life, you
shall find the Commandments of God professedly broken, besides the ordinary
practice of Idolatry, and frequencie of Oaths: Men whose sinful rebellions are
ever and anon smoking against Heaven, dare meet God in his loudest Thunder,
and venture on Damnation in its most terrible form; so that God can no where
display the Ensigns of his Power, but these audacious wretches hang out their
Flags of defiance.

And this brings me to the second thing, how blasphemous a Religion this is, in
respect of God and Christ.

Of God: and that as (1.) it teaches men to worship Stocks and Stones with the
same honor that is due to their Creator. Hence they worship God under the
Image of an Old man, Christ under the Image of a Lamb, the Holy Ghost under the
resemblance of a Dove. And Cajeran does confess, That they draw the Images by
the Trinity not only to show, but to adore and worship them. Now lest this
should appear to her simple Clients how palpably opposite it is to the second
Commandment, they have cunningly left it out, as a needless Illustration, in
all their Catechisms, and Prayer-books of the Vulgar

2. As it asserts the Priests Judicial Power in pardoning sins, and absolving
sinners, and openly allows and tolerates the buying of Pardons and Indulgences
from them. So that now Purgatory can have no rich men in it, but fools and
friendless: Devils are tormented here, yet men can command Devils, and Money
can command men.

3. As it advandeth Nature to a co-partnership with God in our Justification
and Salvation, and idly puffs her up into a conceit of her ability to keep more
Laws than ever God made. And for this, requires no other Faith than may be
sound in the Devils themselves, who besides a confused apprehension, can assent
unto the truth of God revealed: And Popery requires no more.

4. As it relies on the Infallibility of those whom they grant to have been,
and may be, monstrous in their lives and dispositions; most of their Popes
having been the most monstrous notorious wretches that ever the Earth groaned
under; (O that it were rid of the burdend) How many of these Heirs of St. Peter
(if their own Records deceive us not) have by Bribes Whores, and Devils, dimb'd
into that Chair yet for any to say, that those men (who are confessed to have
given their Souls to the Devil that they might be Popes) can err, whilst they
are such, is Heresy worthy a Stake and Hell. Thus of its Blasphemy, in respect
of God.

II. In respect of Christ; and that these four ways.

1. In overthrowing the Perfection of Christ's Humanity, while they give unto it
so many Places at one time, and yet no Place, Flesh, and no Flesh, several
Members without distinction, a substance without quantity, and other accidents
or substance and accidents, that cannot be seen, felt, or perceived: So that
they make their savior either a Monster, or Nothing. 2. In overthrowing the
Perfection of Christ's Satisfaction; for if all be not paid, how has Christ
satisfied. If temporal punishments in Hell be yet due, how is all paid? And if
these be paid by us, how are they satisfied by Christ? 3. In presumptuously
mangling Christ's sacred Institution; by which they sacrilegiously rob his
people of one half of that heavenly Provision, which he left as his last and
dearest Legacy to his Church: As if Christ's Ordinance were superfluous, or any
shaveling Priest could be wiser than his Redeemer. 4. In imposing heavier
burdens than ever Christ designed. Hence the conscience of their Proselytes are
overladen with infinite unnecessary Traditions, far more than ever Moses,
commented on by the Jewish Rabbis; they imposing them with no less Authority,
and exacting them with far more Rigor, than any of the Royal Laws of their
Maker. And this brings me to the third thing considerable, viz. As,
III. It is a bloody and cruel Religion to all that have, and do oppose her.
Even since Cain set the Knife to Abet's throat, the Churches Veins have bled.
Rome, was first of all founded in Blood and still endeavors to erect its self
by the same method of Serpentine Designs, and Dragon-like Rage and Gruelty.
This will clearly appear unto you, by taking a view of her, either in her
Principles or Practices. First, her Principles, in these seven things.

1. In asserting the Power of the Pope over all Temporal Princes and Kingdoms;
for he (like his Father the Devil) will show all the glory of a Kingdom, and
give it to some Creature of his own, if he will fall down and worship him, They
account it not only lawful, but meritorlous, to murder a Protestant Prince
(whom they call heretical) hereby to introduce a Popish Successor, and advance
the interest of their own Cause throughout the world.

2. That an Heretic, (for Heresies sake, and in point of Conscience, though he
troubles not the State) ought to be put to death. This also causes the
effusion of much Blood; and when the Pope has anathematized a Nation or Person
(ne brut a essent fulmine) they inflame Kings, and provoke them to destroy all
with Fire and Faggot. And these we have sadly found to be their Arguments both
to enlighten our Understandings and inform our Judgments in the Popish
Religion. For, as one ingeniously observed, They convince by a Dagger, and
enlighten by a Faggot. Hence they call an utter Desolation a Restoration and
the subversion of three Kingdoms, no other than the conversion of them. How
much Protestant Blood this Doctrine has shed in France and Germany, and how
many English throats have bled by this Knife, is not easy to judge.

3. That no public Faith is to be kept with Heretics; as if Christiana Fides
and Punica, were all one. The Heathens, by the Rush-candle of Nature, could
perceive, that Truth in men's words and promises, is the best Ligament in a body
politic; and the very joints and nerves of all Civil Constitutions. How much
admired is that Roman, who kept his Faith with Carthage, though he knew it
would be his very ruin! But Johannes a Roman Priest could say, That in the
destruction of the Lutherans, Judges were not bound to follow either Law,
Promise, or Reason. How sad is it, that Romana Fides might be depended on when
Rome was Heathenish, but not now it is become Christian and that the moral
Honesty of the poor blind Heathens, should so much exceed the Piety of these
Catholic Pretenders!

4. That mental Reservations and Equivocations, are lawful. This must needs
overthrow Civil Constitutions, were they almost Adamantine: For what delusions
of Magistrates, what evasions of righteous Judgments, what ensnaring of
innocent men, what doubting in Oaths will there be by this means? How can an
Oath be the end of Strife and Controversy, if this be allowed? O ye holy
Martyrs! lay aside your glorious Robes of Immortality! You died like fools, and
were guilty of your own Blood; whenas you might have denied and forsworn all,
by mental Reservations and Equivocations.

5. A fifth bloody Position of theirs, is, An absolute necessity of concealing
all things revealed in Auricular Confession. This Doctrine has been a private
back-way to let in the most horrible Conspiracies and Murders. Hence it is a
received Maxim amongst them, That, Nullum lantum malum esse potest, cujus
vitandi causa Confessionem prodere liceat: That Confession is not to be
revealed, whatever punishment be endured. Bellarmine praises Garnet the
Jesuit, that would not reveal the Gunpowder-Treason, because (as he says)
Confession is Jure Divino; and Temporal Authority, Jure Humano. And Casanbon
tells us, That it was a Jesuits Speech to him, De Jure humano, leviori damno
Reges omnes quot-quot sunt occiderentur, quam vel una Confessio revelaretur:
That it was a far less Offense to destroy many Princes, than to reveal one
Confession.

I wonder whether they would hide it, if there were a Conspiracy against the
life of their Triple-crowned Monarch. But there was one that escaped well in
this matter of Confession, viz. Father Aubigney; who in the bloody fact of
Ravilliack being called in question, and demanded what was revealed to him in
Confession, he replied, That God had given him this grace: That whatsoever was
revealed to him in Confession, he presently by a miracle forgot it, and for all
the world, could not remember it again. I think if this Answer saved him, it
was the best Grace that ever God bestowed on him.

6. That the Clergy are exempted from subjection, and so cannot be guilty of
treasonable practices. Clerici rebellio in Regem non est Crimen b^^sae
Majestatis, quia non est Subditus Regi; The rebellion of a Priest against his
Prince is not Treason, because he is not his Subject: for they are by her
affirmed to be so the Inheritance and Portion of God, that they are exampt from
all Temporal Jurisdiction to Civil Princes and States. If so, what wickedness
may not be committed by such men? How does the Pope herein oppose the Apostle;
Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. And it is a known
Explication of Chrysostom's, Every Soul, though he be a Monk, a Priest, though
he be never so Spiritual (as they call it) is here understood, and cannot draw
his shoulder from the yoke of Allegiance.

7. That blind obedience unto Governors, is necessary. And let in this once
upon a People, and you let in the Trojan Horse, full of armed Enemies in his
bowels: For whatever the Pope and his Officers shall command to be done (be it
to destroy a whole Kingdom, nay, subvert three Kingdoms at one time) must not
be disputed, but obeyed. Thus what Seneca complained of as a great weakness
among the Vulgar, (that homines malunt credere quam judicare; and that they do
receive all worship of their Gods, tanquam legihus jussum, rather than Diis
gratum,) will be made a Virtue in their Votaries; yea, that they merit
gloriously, by believing thus stupidly: and when once these Philistims have put
out men's eyes, they will make them drudge in what Mills they please.

8. That (that Monster of men, and Heir of all Mischief) the Pope, may dispense
with all Vows, Promises, and Obligations. It Is this that would lately have made
England like Egypt, all the Waters thereof to be turned into Blood: For the
Papists being absolved from all Oaths, etc. to their Prince, were thereby the
more encouraged to Treason and Rebellion against him. And how can we trust
their Oaths and Protestations, when the Pope absolves them from them? Well
therefore is that Antichrist set forth by the Rev. 12.
Dragon in the Revelation, who is both subtle and bloody; and his Jesuits like
those heathen Priests, that have Snakes in one hand, and Firebrands in the
other. That whch St. Bern. said of the Devil in tempting men's Souls, the same
may we say of the Pope, in reference to Body and Soul, Estate and all: Vereor
magis Serpentem gliscentent, quam Leonem rugientem: That we fear him more, as
he is a shining glittering Serpent, than as a roaring raging Lion.

9. That to slay their Enemies, it is lawful to kill their Friends, if as much
good will come by the one, as hurt by the other. This was proposed as a Case of
Conscience to Garnet in the Gunpowder-Plot, (that Contrivance worthy only of
Hell and a Jesuit) Whether it were lawful at that time to blow up the Innocent
with the Nocent; who answered it in the Affirmative, That it was lawful to kill
Friends in the destruction of Enemies, if so much good would arise as might
recompense the slaughter of the Innocent. Somewhat like this, is that story of
a Popish Duke, who when he was asked by his Soldiers, Whether they should kill
their Friends in the destruction of their Enemies, returned them this answer,
Yes: Deus enim novit qui ejus sunt: God will know well enough at the day of
Judgment who are bis. How cruel and bloody then must they needs be, who will
kill their own, to destroy others lives, and at last will praise and defend
those who have dyed their bands in Blood; voting inhumane Conspirators, to have
been glorious Martyrs? And thus, by what has been said, you see how all these
Assertions are written in Blood.

But if from the Root of those Principles I should acquaint you with the
Branches of its several bloody practices, you would find no corner of the
world wherein the Pope and his Agents have had to do, but all has ended in
Blood. Among many thousand particular Instances, take these few.

1. Concerning the Waldenses and poor Albingenses. Although we have no
certainty of their Opinions, (they being for the most part delivered us by
Popish Authors) yet of the Cruelty used against them, we have many sad
Witnesses. It would make your hair stand upright with horror, to consider how
many thousands of them have been murdered in a day; and not content with their
innocent blood, they did wafte all the Trees and Forests, as if they had run
into the wild conceit of the Manichees, who thought the Trees to have a
rational life, and that to cut down a Tree, had been Homicidium, as they
fancied.

2. In the American Islands, as Hispaniola, Jamaica, and others, what barbarous
usages had the poor Savages from those Catholic Christians? such actions (if
Historians do not deceive us) as were not fit for Men or Christians, but Bruits
and Devils. For it had been better (as they observe) that those Islands had
been given to the Devils, than to the Spaniards, who spared neither Sex nor
Age, Women with Child, or such as lay in Childbed; insomuch that that one
Island of Jamaica, with that of Portico Rico, lost in few years Sixty thousand
Souls by Popish Cruelties; and they were such as not only raged upon the Men,
but destroyed Posterity. The Women here and elsewhere, so abominating their sad
conditions, that they strangled their Children in the birth, to the end that
they might not live to serve such a cruel People.

3. In France. What an ocean of Blood has been shed there, sometimes by open
and hostile ways, otherwhiles by private Plots, Conspiracies, and Massacres!
wherein Brother butchered Brother, Sons their Fathers, and Daughters their
Mothers? As in the Parisian Massacre, wherein one would think it impossible (as
one observes) That a Race of People adoring one God, fellow subjects to one
Prince, born in one Country, breathing the same Air; nay, a Christian People,
trusiing in the same God, redeemed by the same Blood, governed by the same holy
Laws, should prove such Monsters each to other. Thuanus, President of the
Parliament at Paris, abhors the very memory of it, applying most appositely
those Verses of the Poet to it, and crying out, Excidat illa dies, aevo nec
Postera credant
Saecula, nos certe taceamus, and obruta multa
Nocte legi propriae, Patiamur crimine gentis.
Let that black day be razed out of our Calendar for ever, that it may die with
us, and never come to the knowledge of our Posterity.

4. In Ireland. Whose heart has not been affected with the doleful Tragedies
acted on that Stage? How have they cruelly devoured, and spared no more than
Tigers and Wolves? O what a loud Cry has gone to Heaven from the Blood spilt
there! Every drop has a voice, which cries aloud in the ears of God for
Vengeance on them.

5. In their Attempts on England ever since the Reformation. That at this very
day, King and Kingdom, Liberty and Estate, Life and Religion, are designed for
Sacrifices to Popish Cruelty. Think, O Lucifer, and imagine, O Prince of
Darkness, a more hellish design, if thou can! What darkness would cover our
Land, when our Sun and Moon (the great Ones of the State) should be turned into
Blood? What would become of us, if these Philistims had taken our Ark? How soon
would our Ministers be turned into corners, or sent to Heaven in fiery
Chariots? Our Bibles turned into Pictures, our Tables to Altars, and our Heaven
immediately into a Hell? O innocent Cataline and Verres, to these men! Livie
tells us of a design to dispatch the whole Senate of Rome in an hour; And at
Carthage there was a Project set on foot to cut off at once the Noblest and
Loyalest Families in the State. But had not this been abortive (which God grant
it may ever be) it would have proved the Funeral of all our Sanctuaries, the
Grave of all our Religion, the Doomsday of all our Liberties, the Ruin of
King and Kingdom; a Treason made up of such monstrous complicated
Circumstances, that all others seemed to be drowned and lose their name in
this. Thus much as to the Doctrinal part.

From what has been said, may naturally be inferred,

I. The impossibility of Reconciliation to such an Apostatized Church. I know
there are some who think that there is little difference between the two
Churches of England and Rome, and undertake to show us the several Advances the
one has made toward the other; and these are either, 1. Some Politic
Romanists, who hereby would extenuate the foulness of Popery; or, 2. Some
ignorant and loose Protestants, who live void of the knowledge and conscience
of all Religion; men who live tanquam poeniterent non pecudes natos, as if they
repented they were not made Beasts; whose Reason is their burden, and light of
mind their offense; who are so given up to their sensual Appetites, as if they
were all flesh, and had no Spirit; who rake up (those heavenly Sparks) their
Souls in ashes, never considering their original capacity and end, or that
Viaticum Aeternitatis, provision that is to be made for them unto Eternity.
These men are molded for Heathenish as well as Popish Impressions.


But if we rightly consider the Purity of our own Church, and the Apostasy and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, you will find an impossibility of
Reconciliation: For (rebus sic stantibus) as the case is, that Church must put
off it self, and cease to be what it is, ere it can begin to be once again what
it was; for Substance, Credit, Fame, Virtue, and Honor have at once forsaken
her, and by long disuse have left her worse than naught. Neither can we see how
these houses can be repaired, but they must be pulled down to the very
foundations, and then built from the ground: But if there be any possibility,
it must come either from her self or others; not from her self, because she
obstinately defends her Errors not only with Tongue and Pen, but with Fire
and Sword, and will not yield so much as that she can err; refusing to amend
those notorious Abuses which by the moderate Verdict of her elect Cardinals are
condemned, and by the palpable Flatteries of her last and worst Parasites (the
Jesuits) is grown not only secure, but more proud and arrogant than ever she
was. Can it be then from others? How often has this been endeavored to no
purpose? Rome may be sacked and battered (as it has often been) by Military
Forces, but purged by Admonitions, Convictions, and Censures, it will never be.
Now the impossibility of our Reconciliation (besides these things I have
already named) arises from the pride and usurpation of the Head of their
Church, being armed with that Position, That he cannot Err. This, without hope
of Reconciliation, divides Christendom; and many other Doctrinal Controversies
are subtly kept on foot, to be a Stalking-horse for this.

Add to this, their hatred against our Religion above all others: Jews and
Grecians are tolerated in Rome it self; their Ceremonies, Synagogues, Services,
yea, and Circumcision it self administered to the dead as well as to the living;
by which the Romanists declare themselves to be better friends to the Turks and
Jews than to the Protestants: not to insist on that detestable Virulence of
their Tongues, and Gall in their Ink, against our first Reformers; which has
not stayed there, but broken out into their most barbarous Butcheries and cruel
Bloud-sheddings.

They oblige the Consciences of Catholics to a Separation from all our
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, are afraid that any of our Books (especially our
Translations of the Bible) should be read in any of their Dominions; and where
they cannot turn, will be sure to burn Protestants. O the many miserable
Massacres, Canibal-like Conspiracies, and tragical Murders, that they have been
guilty of! Who are ignorant what Fierceness, Fears, and Fires were raised to
consume the innocent bodies of the Saints living and dead; and that in such
sort, as every corner of the Land seemed as hot as Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace,
even seven times hotter than it used to be; wherein were to be cast whosoever
would not fall down and worship the Image which that Romish Nebuchadnezzar had
erected.

Now what Arguments can be used to persuade us of their Reconciliation to us,
either in the whole or in part of our Religion, since they deem it no other
than a peccant humor necessary to be purged out every few years, either by
Murder, if it prevail in the Head, or by Massacre, if in the Body of any
Nation? And rather than it should not, they will not stick with Blassius (at
the Commandment of their great Gracchus) to set on fire the Capitol it self, to
lay hands on sacred Majesty, and to imbrue them in his Royal blood; to subvert
Religion, to sacrifice our Lives, Liberties, and all, to their ambitious Lusts
and Revenge. When then you are willing that your Souls shall be damned, and
Bodies destroyed, then think of Reconciliation.

II. Let us now see our duty; which is, first, to hate and oppose the Popish,
and to embrace and keep close to the Protestant Religion.

First, Hate and oppose the Popish Religion. Let the high praises of God be in
our mouths, and a two-edged sword in our hands, to be avenged on that Scarlet
Whore, that Mother of Fornications, that has made her self drunk with the
blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. They must be punished by us, or we
shall be so by them. Let Us make no friendship with angry men, much less with
bloody men: It Is the greatest honor that can be put upon us, to be Instruments
of their destruction. This duty respects us in whatever relations we are, be we
either Magistrates, Ministers, or private Christians.

The Magistrates, by repressing those Perverters of our Faith, and encouraging
Protestant Principles and Practices. It Is not Reason of State, but Ruin of
State, to gratify those men who would rejoice to see our Glory in the dust.

Ministers, by preaching up the excellency of this way, preserving the pattern
of wholesome words, and speaking the things which become sound Doctrine; to
take heed of their own mixtures, and not adulterate the Doctrine of Faith to
please men. The beauty of heavenly Truths wants not the paint either of Humane
or Heretical Additions. The Babes of Christ must be fed with sincere Milk; and
the soreness of men's eyes must not hinder the Lights of the Church from
shining. And next by confuting Gainsayers, not only have a voice to call
their Sheep, but to drive away Wolves; one to establish Truth, and another to
oppose Error; one of their hands must work, the other hold the weapon. Their
breasts should be Storehouses of Spiritual Armor, be furnished with skill in
Scripture, in which they should be mighty; and in the writings of men, even of
Heretics themselves, to beat them with their own weapons, to kill Goliath with
his own sword. Are we in the lower Orb of private Christians? We must oppose
this many-headed Monster, and that, 1. By confuting the debauched Romanists
with the Language of our heavenly lives. 2. By an holy and stout confession of
the Faith: a dumb Faith is not a divine Faith, but the Faith of Devils; it is
not enough to confess Christ in times of encouragement, but in times of
contradiction. This is the only boldness, and cursed be that modesty which
makes us ashamed of our Master. 3. By suffering for it: if God calls us to it
follow our Captain, who was made perfect by suffering; and seal Protestant
Truths with our dearest Bloods. He that saves his Life, and forsakes his
Faith, never lives comfortably; yet thousands that have lost their Lives, and
kept their Faith, have died joyfully; they could welcome the Cross of Christ,
and Everlasting Life.


Now in this opposition we are to act resolutely and valiantly: Dangers must be
despised, Difficulties adventured on, Terrors contemned, vigorously and
fervently, Zeal being the beauty of Christian Undertakings, unanimously, and
with one consent: For how easily will Error prevail, when the Protestant
Champions are divided among themselves? And how can they venture their lives
one for another in War, who will not do so much as love one another in Peace?
Let Us observe the Apostles counsel, and stand fast in one spirit, with one
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Can there be
greater encouragements to this, than our present Fears and Dangers? And O that
now we did all appear as one Man against this common Enemy! O that Babyton's
Towers were humbled, her Pillars and Foundations razed, her Vaults dug up,
her Monuments defaced, and her Altars sacrificed to Desolation! In a word, That
all her Buildings were demolished, and not a Stone left upon a Stone, but in
rude and ruinous heaps, to tell us, that here once Babylon stood.

Secondly, Embrace and keep close to the Principles and Practices of the
Protestant Religion. It Is observed by an eminent Prelate of our own, B.N. in
his Epistles.
that (among many others that go under that name) there are five Religions on
Earth which stand in competition for Truth, viz. Jewish, Turkish, Greekish,
Popish, and Reformed; whereof each pleads for it self, with disgrace of each
other.

1. The Jewish Religion. These men have very little to say for themselves, but
impudent denials of Jesus Christ; whose very refusal of him, proves him
strongly to be the Messiah. And were there no other Arguments, yet God himself
has so strongly confuted them by the voice of his Judgments, that the whole
world does hiss at their Conviction, their fin being written in capital Letters
in their desolation and contempt.

2. The Turkish Religion (if it deserves that name amongst Christians) and this
stands upon barbarous Ignorance, and palpable Imposture; yet lo here a subtle
Devil in a gross Religion: for when he saw that he could not by single twists
of Heresy, put down the well built Walls of the Church, he winds them all up
into one Cable, to try if his Cord of so many folds might prevail. As with
Sabellius, to deny the distinction of persons in the Trinity; with Arius,
Christ's Divinity; with Macedonius, the Deity of the Holy Ghost; with Sergius,
two Wills in Christ; with Marcion, Christ's Sufferings: And these Policies
seconded with Violence and Cruelty. O damnable mixture (as one observes)
miserably successful! Their Alchoran, a Fardle of foolish Impossibilities;
their whole Religion, a mongrel Issue of an Arian, Jew, Nestorian, and Arabian;
a Monster of many Seeds, and all accursed: Nature has light enough to condemn
a Turk as the worst of Pagans.

3. The Greekish Church puts in the next claim, but with little better success;
who are become the basest Drogs of all Christians, being little superior to
the Turks in knowledge; more idolatrous than Heathens, and superstitious than
Papists: the very Name of them is Confutation enough. From thence I descend to
the main Rival of Truth, viz.

4. The Religion (or rather Faction) of the Papacy. Now whereto tends this,
but to make Nature vainly proud, or carelessly wanton? (1) Vainly proud, by
telling her, She has free will to do good, can go of her self, morit Heaven,
and pay God satisfaction. (2) Carelessly wanton, in that it teaches, That
Christ died effectually for all: That men may save the labor of trying and
examining themselves, and believe only as the Church believes: That the
sacrifice of the Mass, in the very work wrought, avails to obtain pardon, not
in this life only, but when they lie frying in Purgatory: That Alms given,
merit Heaven: That abstinence from some Meats and Drinks, is meritorious: That
one man may deliver another Soul out of purging Torments; so that he that
wants not both Money and Friends, need not fear the smart of his sins. O
Religion! sweet to the Wealthy, but sad to the Poor! Who will now care how lazy
his Devotions, or how lewd his Life be, that knows these Refuges to fly to?


5. Next comes in the Religion I persuade you to stick close to viz. the
Reformed Protestant Religion; which you may see in opposition to all these.

To the Jewish, in acknowledging Jesus Christ come into the world, and
depending on him alone for Life and Salvation.

To the Mohammedan, in casting aside all her Blasphemies and ridiculous
Fopperies.

To the Greekish, in pitying her Ignorance, and lamenting her Ruin.

To the Popish, first, in depretiating Nature; secondly, in advancing Grace.

1. She depretiates Nature, kneads her in the Dust, spoils her of her proud
Rags, loads her with Reproaches, and gives Glory to him who says he will not
give his Glory to another; acknowledging her best Actions to be faulty, her
Satisfactions Debts, and her Deserts Damnation.

2. In advancing Grace: Ephesians. 2.8.
By this we are saved, not of our selves, it is the gift of God. Every step in
our ascent to Mount Zion, is Freestone; and the golden Chain of man's
Salvation, is richly enamelled with free Grace. This lays the foundation and
top-stone of Glory; this is the Religion we must stick to in its Principles and
Practices. We must not be Protestants in the Bark, and Papists in the Core;
Lambs and Doves without, and Lions and Bears within. This is the Religion we
must be saved by, and in this of all others is the surest Path to Everlasting
Happiness. Let me persuade you then, in the words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.13.
to hold fast the form of sound words, which you have heard in faith and love.

In faith toward God, and Love toward man; or Faith in Christ, and Love to
Christ; or Faith, as comprehending the Credenda, and Love the Facienda of every
Christian. These are the two hands with which you must hold fast the Protestant
Religion.

First, Paith; and that three ways.

1. As it secures our standing; this is an hold-fast Grace. Unbelief is the
root of Apostasy, but Faith is the spring of Perseverance. This will keep us
close to Protestant Principles. 2. As it does realize all the truths of the
Gospel: So that though the petty notions and fooleries in Popery may gratify
your fancies, yet can they have no influence on your Consciences. By this we
can both live upon the Truth, and (when God calls) die for it. 3. As it helps
to fetch strength from Christ, to do and suffer, to live and die for him. This
invests the Soul with a kind of Omnipotency, insomuch that other men's
Impossibilities are Faiths Triumphs.
Secondly, Love: Your love will hold fast the Truth, when (happily) your
learning may let it go. Fox Acts and Monum.
You may not (with the Martyr) be able to dispute for the Truth; but if you
love it, you will die for it, Learning lies in the head, but Love lies in the
heart. This will make you say to the Protestant Interest, as she to her
Mother-in-law, Ruth 1.16, 17. Whither thou go. I will go; and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: Where
thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and
more also, if ought but death part me and thee. It Is for want of this, that God
gives men over to believe a lie, 2 Timothy 3.6.
to be led captive by diverse lusts and pleasures, 2 Pet. 1.16.
to follow cunningly devised fables, and to hold the truth in unrighteousness.

Let us now love the Protestant Truth both in the Purity and in the Professors
of it: And truly if ever there were a time for our Union, this is it. May we
not fear that the neglect of Protestant, Unity will make way for Popish Unity?
That Party cannot be strong, but by our weakness; nor armed, but by our
nakedness, or come in amongst us, but by that lane of our own divisions. O that
we might consider these things; that by so much the greater her subtilties are
to divide us, we may the more firmly be united in our Prayers to God, and in
concord between our selves; that we may not expose our Persons, Estates, Lives,
Posterities, Religion and all, to the crasty and Bloody advantages of these
Enemies of the Protestant Church! Shall Joseph and Benjamin, Moses and Aaron;
Abrahani and Lot fall out, especially, when the Canaanites are in the land?
Shall Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck, and the Philistims at Tire, agree; And shall
Lambs and Doves rend, tear, and scratch one another? O let it not be spoken in
Gath, nor published in the streets of Askelon? Let us now endeavor to keep the
nuity of the spirit in the bond of peace. It will be our Duty and Honor, as
well as Happiness and Safety, to love one another, and appear as one man
against the common Enemy. O that now we might beging, Go on, and prosper! it is
not the Contention, but Constancy, that sets the Grown on the Christians head.
It will be an unanswerable Dilemma, If the Protestant Religion were had, why
did you profess it? if good, why did you desert it? To consirm you the more in
the constant Profession of it, consider that, 1. We have the Scriptures on our
side, in most places free from ambiguiry: we live under the cleareft
dispensations of the Gospelcovenant, and the Light thereof is not yet eclipsed
(and we hope never, will) with lewish Mifts, or Popish Fogs. 2. We have the
Principles of Religion, which directly lead to every point of our Faith, and
instructs us in our way to Salvation. 3. We have the ancient Fathers, the
Majesty of elden times, and reverend countenanor of the first Antiquity; so
that all their glory therein, has (by our Reformers) been turned into their
shame. 4. And lastly, which may persuade any man (not drunk with prejudice) we
have had the mercies of God to plead for us, whereby our Church has been
miraculously upheld. When Rome and Hell threatened us, then God defended us;
when our Neck has even been on the block, and the instruments of death
prepared to cut off our lives and hopes together, then God disappointed them,
and rescued us. What remains now? but that we break off our Iniquities by
Repentance, put a Bill of Divorce into the hands of our dearest Lusts, run them
thorough with the sacrificing Knife of Mortification; that we no longer turn
Grace into Wantonness, nor these miraculous Preservations into ungrateful
Apostacies.


By this way only it is, that we can be true to our own happiness, be lasting
Monuments of Mercy unto Posterity, and erect Trophies of Victory over all
Antichristianism amongst us. Then would the several Foundations of the Kingdom
be settled in a sound and flourishing Constitution: For then Piety would be the
Pillar to every Profession; Learning adorned with Piety, Law administered with
Piety, and Councils managed with Piety; then would Religion flourish, Peace
settle, and the Gospel ring in the Ears of the Generations unborn. How quickly
would our Darkness be dispelled, our Shades flee away, our Distractions be
removed, and an happy Calinness and Serenity cover the face of the whole
Nation? Which that it may, the Lord of his infinite mercy grant: To whom with
the Father, etc.

FINIS.

