THE CANTICLES, OR Song of Solomon PARAPHRASED; AND Explained by diverse others
Texts of Scriptures, very useful.

By the Learned, Reverend, and Faithful Minister of Christ Mr. Arthur
Hildersham, of Ashby-Delazouch.

As also the same, together with the two Songs of Moses, and the Song of
Deborah, Collected into Meeter.

LONDON.

Printed by T. Milbourn, for Robert Clavel in Cross-key Court in Little
Britain. 1672.

READER,
THose Scriptures, 1 Cor. 14, 15. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing
with the understanding also. Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing and
making Melody in your hearts to the Lord. Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to
the Lord. James 5. 13. Is any merry, let him sing Psalms; do not only direct
and teach us the true manner, and end of singing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs; but do also, I think, prove the singing of them to be a duty; and
warrant the collecting of them into such Meeter and Tunes as is most suitable
to us for that purpose. Those which are here presented upon this account, are
the Song of Moses, Exodus 15. The Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. The Song of Deborah,
Judge. 5. And the Song of Songs which was Solomon's, to which (because the Song
of Solomon is very mystical, and the Meeter here presented is not intended for
a Paraphrase, but a Translation; and that it will be hard, at least for
ordinary capacites, in singing, especially the Song of Solomon, to sing with
understanding, without some plain exposition of it,) I have made bold to annex
a Paraphrase, being one that was composed by that Reverend and Learned Minister
of Christ, Mr. Arthur Hildersham, (as I had it transcribed out of his own, by a
faithful hand) which is the rather to be recommended, because it is short,
plain, exemplified with several quotations of Scripture and accommodated to the
present Translation of the Bible.

This excellent Author left also a Paraphrase upon the whole Bible, out of
which this was taken: if the publishing of this might provoke, or be an
occasion of the publishing of the rest, I should be glad; however, I have
commuicated what I had, which hoping it may be much to thy satisfaction and
advantage, I leave with thee, and rest.

A PARAPHRASE UPON THE Canticles, or Song of Solomon, Illustrated with several
Cotations of very many other Scriptures very Useful, etc.
CHAP. I.
VER. 1. THe Song] So is this Book called, in respect both of the Matter of it
(which is a declamation of the holy Espousals, and Sweet communion between
Christ and his Church, and of the mutual love and affection they bear each to
other) and the Poetical Manner of penning it. [Of Songs] i. e. The most sweet
and excellent Song, as in the like phrase, Canaan is called a servant of
servants, the vilest and basest, Genesis 9. 25.

Ver. 2. The Church, after the manner of Lovers, begins abruptly and
passionately, [Let him] i. e. Let Christ my beloved [Kiss me with the Kisses of
his Mouth] manifest and confirm to me his Love; To this end (among others)
kisses were given, 1 Cor. 16. 20. [For, thy] She changes the person after the
pathetical and passionate manner of vehement lovers; [Loves] so the Heb.
reads: whereby she intimates the abundance and intimateness of his love
(Ephesians. 3. 19.) for so in the Heb. phrase is the plural number used [are better
than Wine] are more comfortable, and glad the heart more than Wine, which of
all creatures is most effectual to make the heart merry, Iud. 9. 13. Psalm. 104.
15. Ier. 31. 5, 6.

Ver. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Oyntments] Because of the Oil of
Gladness, that fullness of Grace, and of the Spirit, wherewith thou art
anointed, Psalm. 45. 7. which is the fountain from whence all Grace is derived
to the Church, Io. 1. 16. Psalm. 133. 2. [Thy Name] thy holy Word and Gospel,
whereby thou make thy self known, Psalm 138. 2. Mat 19. 29. compared with
Mar. 10. 29. Act. 9. 15. [is as an Ointment poured forth] i. e. as the sweet
and precious Ointments (which were much used in those Countries) did then cast
forth their sweetest savor when they were poured out, (Mar. 14. 3. compared
with Io. 12. 3.) So the excellency that is in thee, being published by the
Gospel, does make thee most sweet and amiable, [The Virgins] such as keep
themselves pure and undefiled from Idolatry, and all wordly Pollutions [love
thee].

Ver. 4. [Draw me] O pull me more and more out of the bondage of Satan, and of
my own corruption, Mat. 6. 13. Give me both a will and a power to come unto
thee Io. 6. 44. Phil. 2. 13. [Wee] I and the children which thou have given me,
then [will run after thee] will cheerfully and readily obey and follow thee,
Psa. 119. 32. Mat. 4. 20, 22. [The King] Jesus Christ my Husband who is also my
Lord and King, Psalm. 45. 11. Yea the King of kings and Lord of lords, Rev. 17.
14. and 19. 16. [hath brought me into his Chambers] has already brought me
into those places where his Jewels and chief treasures are laid up, and where
he uses most inwardly and familiarly to converse with, and communicate
him-self to his beloved, viz, the places of his public and solemn Woship,
Psalm. 26. 8. and 27. 4, 5. and 36. 8. and 63. 2. and 65. 4. [We will be glad
and rejoice in thee] thus will we be affected while we are in thy Chambers,
Psalm. 29. 9. Is. 56. 7. [we will remember] we will meditate and speak of [thy
loves more than Wine] thy favor and the comfort to be found therein, as of
that which is more sweet and comforttable than any Wine, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. [The
upright love thee] All whose hearts are sound and free from hypocrisy, having
tasted of, and been satisfied with the pleasures of thine house, cannot choose
but love thee.

Ver. 5. I am black but comely] I confess that in respect of my outward estate
and condition I am nothing amiable, nor have any thing to allure a carnal eye
to affect or love me; yet have I an inward beauty and excellency (Psalm. 45.
13.) to be discerned by such as are spiritual. [(O ye Daughters of Jerusalem)]
O ye which being members of the visible Church, and apt to take offense at this
my outward estate, which is [as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon]
as those tents and curtains that being on the outside weather-beaten, had
within, great Treasures and Riches.

Ver. 6. Look not upon me because I am black] Do not too much eye or observe
and despise me for the deformity of my outward estate and condition; but
consider the true cause thereof [because the Sun hat looked upon me] The heat
of persecution (whereunto I have always been much subject) as the Sun in his
strength shining full upon my face, has scortched and tanned me, Mat. 13. 6,
21. [The Sons of my Mother were angry with me] such as by outward profession
were Children of the true Church, yea, that did bear chief sway in it, were the
chief authors of this my persecution, being angry with me for this my
sincerity, Gal. 4. 29. [They made me the keeper of the Vineyards] they
compelled me through their violence and mine own weakness, to observe their
fancies, and to fashion my self to the customs and manners of others [but mine
own Vineyard have I not kept] The duties God assigned me for the gathering and
ordering of his People, and making of them fruitful to Him, I have neglected.

Ver. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou
make thy Flocks to rest at Noon] Show me these assemblies where thy saving
Ordinances are to be found, wherein Thou (the chief Shephard, Psalm. 23. 1. Io.
10. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 4.) performest all the offices of a careful and faithful
Pastor, both feeding them with knowledge and understanding, Ier. 3. 15. and
giving them comfort and repose in all their afflictions, Ezekiel. 34. 12, 16. [For
why should I be as one that turns aside] As I fear nothing more than the
falling away or declining from thee, and the purity of thy Worship; So, unless
I join my self to those assemblies where thine Ordinances are to be had, I
shall not be able to keep my self from declining, Heb. 10, 25. compared with
ver. 23. [by the flocks of thy companions] My danger to turn aside and decline
from thee, is the greater, because I live where thy companions are such as
pretend to be the friends of thee the Bridegroom, and to mourn for thee; but do
indeed nothing less, being Idolaters and false Teachers, Iud. 14. 20. 2 Cor.
11, 13.

Ver. 8. If thou know not] If (which is strange) thou be, through thy
confidence, and the prevailing of false teachers, ignorant or brought to doubt
hereof [O thou the fairest among women] Thou (who though thou be black in thine
own eyes, and in the eyes of carnal men; yet art in mine, through the
imputation of my Righteousness, and the Sanctification, that is begun in thee,
far more beautiful then any other Woman) must, [Go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flocks] observe, and mark well the footsteps, and way, that
the Ancient People, and flock of God, (the holy Patriarks and Prophets) have
trodden, and walk in it, Ier. 6. 16. [And feed thy kids] feed the faithful
flock, (who are often compared to young and little ones, not only for that they
are so in their own sense, and in the opinion of the world; but for that,
indeed, they are not come to their full growth, but growing daily, Mat. 18. 10.
Gal. 4. 19. 1 Io. 2. 18. and 5. 21.) [besides the Shepherds - tents] in those
Pastures wherein those Ancient Pastors were wont to pitch their Tents, and
feed their Flocks.

Ver. 9. I have compared thee] I who best know thee, and can best judge of thee,
and in whose judgment thou may quiet and comfort thy self, have esteemed
thee to be like, ([O my Love] or O my fellow and companion, so is the Wife
called, Mat. 2. 14.) [To a company of Horses in Pharoas* Chariots] for that
honorable service thou do unto me, in my spiritual warfare, unto the horses
that Pharaoh used in his Chariots, which of all other horses, for their
stateliness and courage, did most excel for that purpose, 1 Kings 10. ver. 28,
29.

Ver. 10. Thy cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, thy neck with chains of
Gold] Though thy chief beauty be inward, yet even those thy outward parts,
which are most conspicuous, and the principal seals of beauty, want not that
goodly ornament, but the graces of my Spirit, where withal, as with most
precious jewels, I have adorned thee, do shine evidently in thy whole
conversation, and make thee gracious even unto Men, Prove. 4. 9.

Ver. 11. We] All the three Persons in the Trinity (unto whom only, and to all
whom any work of our Sanctification, and Salvation must be ascribed) [will make
thee borders of Gold, with studs of Silver] will increase the Graces of the
Spirit in thee, and cause thee to grow in holiness; so making thee more and
more glorious in the sight of God and men, Mat. 25. 29. 2 Cor. 3. 10.

Ver. 12. While the King sits at his Table] whilst Christ my Lord and King
shows himself present in his Ordinances, according to his promise, Mat. 18.
20. and 28. 20. wherein he spreads and furnishes his Table, feasteth his
People, and admits them to dine and sup with him, Mat. 22. 4. Rev. 3. 20.
[my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof,] the graces of his Spirit which
he had bestowed upon me, and which are more sweet and comfortable to my Soul,
than any Spikenard to my sense, were stirred up, revived and quickened in me,
Luke 24. 22.

Ver. 13. A bundle of myrrh is [my well-beloved unto me] Christ my Husband is
to me for the sweetness and comfort my Soul finds in Him, as a bundle of
myrrh (which was one of the sweetest things those Eastern-Countries did
afford, and whereof the sweetest Ointments and Perfumes were wont to be made,
Exodus 30. 23. Psalm. 45. 8. [He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts]:
according to the manner of women, who wear their Nose-gays there; so shall my
well-beloved still dwell in my heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. So is the phrase there taken.

Ver. 14. My beloved is to me as a cluster of Camphire] Howsoever others esteem
of my beloved, and feel no sweetness in him; he is, in my estimation and
feeling, as delectable as a cluster of the sweetest Camphire or Cyprus [in the
Vineyards of Engedi] even of that Camphire or Cyprus that grows in the
Vineyards of Engedi, which was a very fruitful place, being both near the Sea,
and full of pleasant springs. See Plin. l. 12. c. 24.

Ver. 15. Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair,] Thou, O my
Church whom I dearly love, art indeed (however thou seem to thy self or
others,) amiable, beautiful, without all spot or wrinckle; My beauty, even my
perfect holiness, and righteousness, being put upon thee, and made thine, Ephesians.
5. 27. [Thou have Doves eyes] Thou art, for thy Chastity, (which chiefly
shows it self in the eye, as uncleanness also does, Job. 30. 1. 2 Pet. 2.
14.) like unto the Dove, which is a most chaste Creature, and true to her Mate,
not so much as casting thine eye, in spiritual fornication, upon any Idol, or
false worship, Ezekiel. 18. 6.

Ver. 16. Behold thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant,] q. d. Do thou
commend My beauty? nay, thou art beautiful indeed, Psa. 27. 4. through the
abundance and perfection of grace and goodness that dwells in thee (in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, Col. 2 9. every way pleasant and
delectable; from thee only have I all that little beauty that is in me, and in
thy beauty only do I rejoice, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. [Also our Bed] The place
wherein we enjoy one another, to the procreation and begetting of children to
God, viz. the holy Assemblies, where thou plantest thine Ordinances, Psa. 87.
5, 6. Ia. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 2. [is green] is fruitful, growing and flourishing:
though our Children dye, wither, and fall away, yet such spring up in their
room, Isa. 49. 20. and 54. 1, 2. Ier. 30. 19, 20.

Ver. 17. The beams of our houses are Cedar, and our rafters of Fur,] The
Catholic Church which thou have chosen to be thy House, 1 Timothy 3. 16. wherein
by thy Grace, I also do dwell, and shall ever continue, Ps. 23. 6. is dureable
and everlasting, and consists of such parts and members, as shall never
perish nor decay, Ps. 24. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Chap. II.
Ver. 1. I Am the Rose of Sharon] This is the speech of Christ, who praises
himself, which were unseemly for the Church, or any man to do, Prove. 27. 2. 2
Cor. 10. 18. and 11. 16, 17. as Io. 6. 35. I am a pleasant and delectable
sweetness, I am like the Rose of Sharon; which was a very fruitful soil near
unto Bashan, 1 Chronicles. 5. 16. and 27. 29. and therefore bore the sweetest Roses,
[and the Lilly of the Valleys,] for beauty and glory, like the goodliest
Lilly, which for its beauty and glorious gloss did excel, Mat. 6. 29.

Ver. 2. As the Lilly among the Thorns] As the Lilly excels greatly the
Thorns, and appears so much the more beautiful, by growing among them, and
being compared with them, [so is my love among the Daughters] so my dear
Spouse, my faithful people living among other people in the World, (who are noe
better then Briers and Thorns, Mic. 7. 4. (do not only excel them much, Prove.
12. 16. but the beauty and glory of my graces in them do shine so much more, by
how much the more corrupt the times and places are wherein they live, Genesis 6.
9. Phil. 4. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 8.

Ver. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the wood, so is my beloved] As
the Apple Tree excels all other the Trees that grow in the Wood, because it
is not only shady, but bears comfortable fruit, so is my beloved Husband
[among the Sons,] among all Angels and Men, in both these respects most
excellent, Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 1. 4. [I sat down under his shadow with great
delight,] as he that travelleth in hot weather, is much refreshed by resting
himself under the shadow of a broad Tree, and full of leaves, (in which
respect this Comparison is much used.) so have I, in the heat of all my
afflictions and temptations, found my self much refreshed and comforted, by
resting and reposing my self by faith under my Beloved, Mat. 11. 28. [and his
fruit was sweet to my taste,] yea, I have also tasted more sweetness in him,
then in the most delicate fruit, that ever Tree bore.

Ver. 4. He brought me to the Banqueting house] He of his free love, and by his
mighty power, (2 Timothy 1. 9. Io. 6. 44. brought me to his house, even to the
place where I might enjoy the comfort of his Ordinances, where he feasteth his
Saints, and satisfyeth them with the comforts of his word and Spirit, Ps. 65.
4. Isa. 25. 6. [and his banner over me was love,] Heb. his love over me a
banner, that whereby he draws me, and all my company, as his spiritual
Soldiers together unto himself, as to our Captain and Head, and whereby also he
keeps us close unto him, (which is the chief use of Banners, Ier. 4. 5, 6. Isa.
11. 12.) was his love, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 1 Io. 4. 19.

Ver. 5. Stay me with Flagons, and comfort me with Apples,] Comfort and keep me
from fainting (O ye my faithful Servants and Ministers) by applying to me the
sweet and comfortable promises of the Gospel, which are as the purest to me,
Psa. 104. 15. effectual to cheer and make glad the heart, Isa. 25. 6. and 55.
1. And as the Apples that yield the delicatest scent or taste to refresh the
spirits: [for I am sick of Love,] for the love I bear to my Lord and Savior,
troubles and disquieteth me, that I do no more fully enjoy him. 2 Cor. 5. 2.
4. 8.

Ver. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.]
He, (my beloved Lord and Savior,) and he only supporteth me, in these my
spiritual faintings, putting his hand under me, Ps. 37. 24. and by his peace
which passes all understanding, keeps and upholds my heart and mind, Phil. 4.
7.

Ver. 7. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem,] I do in most earnest
manner require you, that profess your selves members of the Visible Church, [by
the Roes, and by the Hindes of the field,] by whatsoever you take most delight
and pleasure in, [that you stir not up, nor awake my Love till he please.] That
you do no way by the least provocation disquiet, or interrupt the sweet peace I
enjoy in my sweet Savior, so long as he shall be pleased in his mercy to
continue it to me.

Ver. 8. The voice of my Beloved] I do evidently discern in the Ministry of his
word, the voice of my Lord and Savior calling upon me, and speaking to my
heart, Io. 10. 4, 5, 27. and 6. 45. [He comes leaping upon, or over the
Mountains, skipping upon, or over the Hills, or Hillocks.] He also comes
toward me, and draws near unto me, to comfort me, with the sense of his
gracious presence, Ia. 4. 8. Rev. 3. 20. Yea, he comes speedily, and will not
be let, either by my grosser sins, (like Mountains) which I in times past
have committed, and have now repented of, or by my daily slips and infirmities,
like Hillocks, Psa. 32. 5. Isa. 1. 18. Romans 8. 35, 39.

Ver. 9. My Beloved is like a Roe, or young Heart.] Yea, in this his readiness
and swiftness to come to me, and show himself present with me, for my comfort
in all my distresses, he is like unto the Roe or young Heart, Heb. 10. 37.
[Behold he stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the Windows, showing
himself through the Lettice.] Yet does he not in this life fully and clearly
manifest himself to me, but by degrees so far as he shall see fit and
expedient, more darkly and obscurely under the Law, and more evidently and
comfortably under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Ver. 10. My Beloved spoke and said unto me,] I heard him speaking unto me in
the Ministry of his Word, and calling upon me, [Rise up my Love, my fair one,
and come away:] awake and rowze up thy self, O thou who notwithstanding all thy
weakness art dear unto me, and beautiful in mine eyes,) out of thy carnal
security, and resting too much in outward things, and set thine affections more
upon Heaven; things that are above, Ephesians. 5. 14. Col. 3. 1, 2.

Ver 11. For lo the Winter is past, and the Rain is over and gone.] For,
consider well the change, which the Lord has wrought in the estate, wherein
thou were before; thy calling which was like the Winter, uncomfortable, nnd
unfruitful, is now past and gone: thou art not under the Law, but under grace,
Ephesians. 2. 11, 13. and 5. 8. To. 6. 15, 17.

Ver. 12. The Flowers appear in the Earth, the time of the singing of Birds is
come, the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.] Being now in the state of
Grace, fruitful unto God, bearing such fruits, as are most pleasant and
delightsom unto him through me, Phil. 1. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Yea, art able to
rejoice in the Lord, and to sing praises unto him, Ephesians. 5. 19. Yea, thy voice
(which art as a chaste Turtle, true and Constant in in thy love to me) is heard
in prayers and supplications unto God, and by his spirit thou cryest Abba
Father, unto him, Romans 8. 15.

Ver. 13. The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines, with the
tender grapes, give a good smell.] As when the Fig Tree puts forth, not her
leaves only, but her green Figs, and the Vine her young grapes, its an evident
sign that winter is gone, and that Summer is at hand, and even begun, Mat. 24.
32. So is this a good evidence, that the Winter of thy Natural estate is past
with thee, and that thou art now in the state of Grace, that thou begins to be
fruitful to God, Io. 15. 4. And though these fruits of the Spirit which thou
bring forth, be yet but small, tender, and young (even the first fruits of
the Spirit,) in comparison of what they shall be in Heaven, when thy
Sanctification shall be perfected, Romans 8. 22. 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10, 12. yet is it
such Fruit that thou bear, as my Father counts himself greatly delighted in,
and benefited by, (as men do by the Fruit of the Vine and Fig Tree) and as may
give thee assurance that he will bring thee to full ripeness and perfection in
his Kingdom, Io. 15. 2. Phil. 1. 16. and therefore seeing the Summer is so
near, when thy Fruit shall be fully ripe, seeing thy Salvation is nearer, then
when first thou believedst, Romans 13. 11. 12. [arise my love, my fair one, and
come away] shake of all carnal security, and love to earthly things, (O thou
that art so dear unto me, and so beautiful in mine eyes) and set thy affections
upon Heaven, where I am, and where thou shall fully enjoy my presence.

Ver. 14. O my Dove,] O my beloved Spouse, who among all others, thy virtues
excellest in this, that thou art true and faithful in thy love to me, and will
not in any false worship bestow thy love upon any other, Ex. 20. 6. [that art
in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the Stairs,] that (as the
timorous Dove in such places, as no Kite or Hawke can have access unto,) art
safely hidden with God, in the unchangeableness of his secret Council,
concerning thy Election, and under the protection of his Almighty power, Col.
3. 3. Psa. 27. 5. and 31. 20. and 91. 1. [Let me see thy Countenance, let me
hear thy voice,] Come and resort often to me in mine house, in the use of my
Ordinances, and ply me with thy Prayers, Heb. 4. 16. and 10. 22. [for sweet is
thy voice,] I take great delight in thy prayers, Pro. 15. 8. [And thy
Countenance is comely,] thou art amiable unto me, and I delight to behold thee.

Ver. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes,] q. d. Rouse up thy self out of
thy security, and come away, (as ver. 10. 13.) exercise thy self, in my
spiritual Hunting, and even in the Hunting and taking the Foxes, such as either
by false or unsound doctrine, and bringing in corruption of manners, do
subtly and closely, (the one by great shows of Truth and Holiness, the other
by urging or pleading the liberty of Christians, may take in indifferent
things,) [that spoil the Vines,] that seduce and corrupt the People of God, 12.
15: [for our Vines have tender Grapes,] for the Gospel begins to prosper and
become fruitful, which will provoke Satan's malice, and move him to use his
uttermost endeavors to hinder the growth of it, Mat. 13. 24, 25. Yet is the
Fruit but young and tender, my people are yet but weak in the faith, and
therefore in great danger to take hurt.

Ver. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his,] q. d. these gracious invitations
of my Lord and Savior, do quicken and revive my Faith; wherefore I am
feelingly and comfortably assured, that he himself, and all that he shall do,
and suffered for his Elect, with all the merit thereof, is wholly mine, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Io. 20. 28. Gal. 2. 20. and I am wholly his, given to him in the eternal
Election of his Father, redeemed by him; wholly at his command, guidance and
governance, Psa. 116. 16. and 119. 94. [he feeds among the Lillies,] he who
is the true, careful, and painful Shepherd of Israel, (Psalm. 23. 1. and 80. 1.
Io. 10.) Feeds his flock not in a barren Wilderness, but in a most fruitful
and pleasant place; for so is the House of God, (the place where his People
feed upon his holy Ordinances) called, Psa 36. 8. and 81. 1.

Ver. 17. Until the day break, and the shaddows fly away, turn my Beloved,] O
my dear Lord and Savior, leave me not while I remain in this Vale of misery,
which is so full of the darkness and shaddows of sin, ignorance, temptation and
affliction; but be ever graciously present with me to assist and comfort me,
even till the day come, when our marriage shall be consummate, and I shall
fully enjoy thee, and see thee as thou art, 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 Io. 3. 2. which is
called the Morning, Psa. 49. ver. 14. [And be thou like a Roe, or young Heart by
the Mountains of Bether,] yea come thou unto me in all my necessities speedily,
and without delay, Psa. 70. 1, 5.

Chap. III.
Ver. 1. BY night on my Bed, I sought him whom my Soul loved,] q. d. My Lord
and Savior (whom I do love unfainedly, and above all other things) having (in
my sense and feeling,) withdrawn himself from me, I sought earnestly, and
labored to recover my comfort in, by serious meditations and trial of mine own
heart, and crying unto him upon my bed in the night, when I was most free from
all other distractions, Psalm: 4. 4. and 77. 2, 3. but could not find him.

Ver. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City in the streets; and in the
broad ways, I will seek him whom my Soul loves,] I then resolved with my self
to spare no pains, or endeavor, whereby I might recover my comfort, and
therefore to go abroad, and use the help of others, whose knowledge and
experience might be better then mine own. And that which moved me to take this
pains, to seek my Lord and Savior, and to recover the comfort and feeling of
his gracious presence, was the truth and unfainedness of my Love to him, 1
These. 1. 3. Heb. 6. 10. [I sought him, but I found him not,] Though by this
means also, I sought him earnestly, making the best use of the conference and
prayers of such as I could meet withal, yet neither could I this way recover my
comfort.

Ver. 3. The Watchmen that go about the City found me,] q. d. At length, while
I was thus seeking for my beloved, the Pastors and Governors of the Church,
whom the Lord has appointed to be as Watchmen to this City, Isa. 62. 6. Ez.
3. 17. and who go about, and diligently look into the Estate of all Gods people
committed to their charge, Act. 20. 20, 31. [found me] came to enquire into
mine Estate, [to whom I said, saw ye him whom my Soul loves,] q. d. my heart
was so full, that I stayed not till they questioned or demanded any thing of
me, but I required of them, and sought help of them to recover my comfort, in
my Lord and Savior: and could not conceal from them, the unfeigned and fervent
love my my Soul bore unto him.

Ver. 4. It was but a little, that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
Soul loves,] q. d. Though while I was with the Watchmen, and faithful
Ministers of the Lord, and enjoyed Gods Ordinances in their Ministry, I seemed
in my own feeling, to receive no benefit by it, yet within a while after I did:
I lost not my labor in seeking and using all Gods means, for I recovered the
comfort which I had lost, I found and felt the gracious presence of my Lord and
Savior, whom my Soul dearly and unfeignedly loves, [I held him, and would not
let him go,] q. d. The great vexation of Spirit, that I found all the while
that I thought him to be absent from me, made me more highly to prize him, and
to lay the faster hold on him, by renewing my faith, to make him the more sure
unto my self, and to resolve with my self, that I would never, through my
carnal security, or any other sin lose him again, nor deprive my self of the
comfort I found in him, [until I brought him into my Mothers house, and into
the Chamber of her that conceived me,] until, (in the public assembly, where I
was regenerate by the immortal seed,) I had testified my Love to him, and my
thankfulness for this great mercy I had received in the recovering of my
comfort.

Ver. 5. I charge ye O ye Daughters of Jerusalem,] See Cap. 2. 7, 9. q. d.
Now I have found him again and recovered his sweet peace and comfort that I
have in him, take heed you do by no means interrupt it, for it is long of our
selves, if at any time we be deprived of it.

Ver. 6. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, like Pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Mirrhe and Frankinsense, with all powders of the Merchant?] q. d.
Who is this? and how unknown for her worth and excellency to the World, 1 John
3. 1. that forsaking in her affliction, and leaving this world, which is as
barren of any virtue or piety, as any Wilderness, (Isa. 40.) aspireth and
mounteth up in her desires toward Heaven; which desires of hers, are as sweet,
and acceptable unto me, as the sweetest incense and perfumes that are in the
World? 2 Cor. 5. 1, 4.

Ver. 7. Behold his Bed, which is Solomon's,] q. d. Is it marvail my dear Lord,
though my desires and affections, be thus carried up toward Heaven, there is
thy Bed, the place where I shall ever enjoy thy company, and solace my self in
thy love? 2 Cor. 5, 6, 8. Phil. 1 23. These. 4. 17. Who as thou art indeed the
true Solomon, so thy Bed does far exceed in glory and delight, the bed of
Solomon, though it were very glorious, [threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel,] q. d. Though Solomon's bed was so guarded by threescore
of the choicest for valor of all Israel, yet is thy bed (O my Lord and
Savior) far more glorious, for it is attended with 20000 of Angels, whereof
every one excels in strength the mightiest host of men, Psalm. 68. 17. Dan.
7. 11. Psa. 103. 20. Isa. 37. 36.

Ver. 8. They all hold swords, being expert in War, every man has his sword
upon his thigh, because of fear in the night,] q. d. And as the valiant men
that guard Solomon's bed, were ever ready with their Weapons to defend him, from
any treason that might any way be attempted against him in the night, so are
those glorious and mighty Angels that attend the bed and throne of my Lord and
King, ever ready pressed to do his will, and use all their strength and wisdom
in his service.

Ver. 9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot (or Bride-bed) of the wood of
Lebanon,] q. d. Solomon's stately bride-bed, was made of the goodly Cedars that
grew in Lebanon, which was a very durable wood; but this bed that I speak of,
this bed of my Lord and King, is far more durable, and shall never decay, Heb.
11. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

Ver. 10. He made the pillars thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of Gold,
the covering of it of Purple, the midst thereof being paved with Love, for (or
of) the Daughters of Jerusalem,] Solomon's bride-bed was indeed very rich,
having pillars of Silver, the bottom of Gold, the covering of Purple, all
embroidered, as it were in the midst paved with needle work, which the
daughters of Jerusalem, out of their love and duty wrought for him: but those
heavenly mantions wherein I shall, as in his bride-bed, continually rest with
my Lord and Savior, does beyond all comparison, excel it in riches and glory,
Rev. 21, 11, 18, 24.

Ver. 11. Go forth O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the
Crown, wherewith his Mother crowned him in the days of his espousals, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart,] q. d. O ye members of the visible Church
that live in Zion, go forth of your houses, and behold King Solomon riding in
his Princely Chariot through Jerusalem, in great state and glory, having on the
Crown which his Mother bestowed upon him, in the day of his contract, which was
the day of his greatest joy; and consider that all the glory of Solomon, was
but a Type and representation of the glory and Royal Majesty of my Lord and
Savior, Hebrews 2. 7. Rev. 19. 13.

Chap. IV.
Ver. 1. BEhold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair,] q. d. Surely O my
Spouse, whom I dearly love, thou art in my eye, and estimation, admirably fair
and beautiful, both in respect of that perfect holiness and righteousness of
mine, which is imputed unto thee, and put upon thee; as also of the excellent
graces of my sanctifying spirit, that are inherent in thee, [thou have Doves
eyes,] thy Teachers and Ministers, whom I have set to be as thine eyes, to
guide and direct thee, are not only for their sharpness of sight, their
understanding and knowledge, like unto the eyes of the Foul, but also for their
chastity and care to maintain the purity of my Religion and Worship, not
casting their eyes upon any Idol, or false Worship, [Within thy locks] This
sharpness of spiritual sight and understanding, this sincerity and purity of
thy Teachers, is well discerned by me, though it be as it were somewhat
covered, and obscured by the weakness and contemptible estate of the multitude
of Believers, (as it were with thine hair hanging over thine eyes,) do follow
them, and depend upon them, Io. 7. 48, 49. [Thy hair is as a flock of Goats,
that appear from mount Gilead,] That multitude of Believers that are in thee,
howsoever they be contemptible, and obscure thy beauty in the eyes of worldly
men; yet to me they are both for their number, and their spiritual comeliness,
and the goodly graces of my spirit, which I discern in them, like to a flock of
Goats, that feeding upon Mount Gilead, are both fat and flourishing.

Ver. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which come up
from the washing, whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren amongst
them] The Teachers (who in respect of their chief work, to prepare and chew (as
it were) the food of life for thy little ones, and of that bony strength and
courage, to endure and overcome the mighty oppressions they continually meet
withal, are fitly compared unto teeth,) are like unto a flock of Sheep,
depending wholly, and following the direction of me the great Sheapherd, and
joining together for the mutual strength, and comfort, in a holy concord and
association. Yea, they are like to such a flock of sheep as are even shorn, and
come up from the washing, showing no inequality or difference in degree one
above another; and being all sanctified and purged from their uncleanness, and
are fruitful also in their minds, not one of them barren and unprofitable.

Ver. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy speech is comely,] q. d.
As the chief beauty and comeliness of the lips consists in the smalness and
thinness, and in the readiness of them; so do thy lips. i. e. thy doctrine,
excells in both these respects: for as it swells not with the ostentation of
earthly and carnal wisdom, Io. 3. 31. 1 Cor. 2. 4. so is it for the principal
object and matter of it, nothing else but a preaching of my Cross, and as it
were dyed red with my blood, 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, and 2. 2. Yea, thy whole speech
and manner of uttering this Doctrine, is comely and gracious, suitable to the
Heavenly doctrine it self, which thou do deliver, 1 Cor. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
[thy temples are like a piece of a Pomegranet within thy locks,] q. d. the
natural color of those parts wherein beauty is chiefly discerned, is such, as
thou need not the help of wanton adorning, nor any worldly glory to set thy
self forth witthall.

Ver. 4. Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury,] Thy holy
discipline and government, which as the neck bears up and supporteth the
doctrine, and Ministers, is like unto that tower of David, which was made for
an Armoury, mentioned, Neh. 3. 19, 25, 26. [whereon there hang a thousand
Bucklers, all Shields of mighty men,] which has ready in it great store of
spiritual armor, and means to protect and keep safe thee, and thy holy
doctrines and worship from Adversaries of all sorts: yea, such armor and means
of defense, as have been well tried and approved in many victories, achieved
by the Lords Worthies.

Ver. 5. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are Twins, which feed
among the Lillies,] Thy Teachers upon whom my People being like newborn Babes,
do hang and depend for the sincere milk of the Word, are themselves full of
good nourishment, and fit to give such nourishment unto my People.

Ver. 6. Until the day break, and the shaddows fly away, I will get me to the
Mountains of Myrrh, and to the Hill of Frankinsense] See Chap. 2. 17. I will in
respect of my Bodily presence withdraw my self from thee, and keep my corporal
residence in the Heavens, even in the holy Mountain of the Lord, where is all
fullness of joy and pleasure.

Ver. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee,] q, d. Yet, O my
love, I would not have thee think, this my withdrawing my self from thee,
rises from any dislike I have of thee, for any of thy corruptions, or
infirmities; for thou art in mine eye, and account, without any spot or
deformity at all, and perfectly beautiful and amiable in every member; partly
because my blood has thoroughly washed thee from all the spots of thy sins, and
my perfect righteousness and holiness is imputed to thee; and partly because
the time will come, that thou shall be perfectly sanctified; which because I
clearly foresee it, as well as already done, makes thee amiable unto me.

Ver. 8 Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon, look from
the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions dens, from
the Mountains of the Leopards.] Lebanon and Amana were Mountains in the
Northern borders of Judea; Shenir and Hermon was on the same Hill, situate in
the East, Deuteronomy. 3. 9. These Hills were inhabited by Brutish men, Heathens, and
Idolaters; so that, the meaning is, as if Christ should say thus to the Church,
come and be with me, in my heavenly mansions O my Spouse, with whom then I will
consummate my marriage; (for so the word Chalath here used does signify, viz.
one not espoused only, but married) and be thou gathered unto me from all the
parts of the Earth, even from the most savage and barbarous places, where Lions
and Leopards, even men of cruel dispositions do inhabit, Ezekiel. 11. 6.

Ver. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished
my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck,] q. d. O my
beloved, who art both Sister and Spouse unto me, and knit unto me by my taking
thy Nature upon me, and uniting thee to my self by Faith, by all the nearest
Bonds that can be imagined, thou have marvellously delighted me, even with that
sincerity, and that sharpness of understanding, even to discern of things that
differ, which I observe in any one of thy Teachers, and with any one of those
excellent graces of my Spirit wherewith thou art adorned.

Ver. 10. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse; how much better is thy
Love than Wine, and the smell of thine Ointments than all Spices,] The Love
that I discern in thee toward me my beloved, makes thee more amiable in my
eye, then can be expressed; and does more cheer and refresh me, then any wine
can do the heart of man: and the pleasant and comfortable savor which the
graces wherewith God has endued thee, do send forth, is far better than can
be resembled by the most fragrant Spices that be in the world.

Ver. 11. Thy Lips O my Spouse, drop as the Honey comb, Honey and Milk are
under thy tongue,] q. d. Thy speech O my beloved, in thy Teachers and
Ministers, is most sweet and pleasant; yea, thy doctrine which is under thy
tongue, ready to come forth, is both for the wholesome nourishment it yields
to the little Ones, like Milk; and from the virtue that is in it, to preserve
thee from corruption like Honey; [And the smell of thy Garments, is like the
smell of Lebanon,] and thy very garments, that which is outwardly to be seen of
men, in thy whole conversation, is for the sweetness, and the comfort it
yeildeth unto others, like to the smell of those fragrant Trees of spices that
grow in Lebanon.

Ver. 12. A Garden enclosed is my Spouse, my Sister, a Spring shut up, a
Fountain sealed,] My Church which is most dear unto me, as being united unto
me, by all the nearest Bonds that may be, is both a Garden full of the Trees of
Righteousness, Isa. 61. 3. bearing all the most wholesome and pleasant fruits
of holiness and righteousness; and a Spring and Fountain wherein the water of
life flows and runs continually. Yea, she is as a Garden enclosed, and
Fountain shut up and sealed, being fenced and protected by my power, who am as
a wall of fire about her, to keep her from the rage of cruel Enemies, (Job 1.
10. Zac. 2. 5.) which like the wild Boars and Beasts of the field might waste
and devour her, and keeping out also by her censures and discipling, the filthy
and profane, from defiling those holy things, which I have trusted her
withal; the knowledge and comfort whereof is not come unto all, but hid and
shut up from most men, and opened only unto such as my Father is pleased to
reveal them unto.

Ver. 13. Thy plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranets, with pleasant fruits,
Champhire and Spikenard. Ver. 14. Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon,
with all Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief Spices,]
q. d. the plants that grow in this garden, the Persons that are members of my
Church, specially such as are public Persons in it, are (for this comely order
that they keep among themselves, and for the pleasant Trees, and manifold
virtues that are to be found in the fruits they yield,) like unto an Orchard of
Pomgranates; yea, all the fruit that grows in this Garden, the graces of my
spirit, which abound in all my people which I have planted in mine house, do
delight me more then all the sweet spices in the World can do the senses of any
mortal men.

Ver. 15. A Fountain of Gardens, a Well of living Waters, and streams of
Lebanon.] q. d. All this excellency O my Lord and Savior, which thou art
pleased to ascribe unto and commend in me, alas, is none of mine, but such as I
have wholly received from thee alone. All these my Trees and Plants, which bear
such pleasant fruits, as they are altogether of thy planting, so with thy
watering them continually with thy grace and blessings, they become so fruitful
as thy are; for thou art unto all my Gardens, i. e. my particular Assemblies,
and Congregations, through the Abundance of thy grace and gifts of thy spirit,
not only as a Fountain, which sometimes by the extremity of the heat in Summer,
is wont to be dried up; but as a well which being deep, is better fenced from
the Sun, yea, as a well of such waters as is fed with a spring continually
issuing; yea, thou art like unto those streams which run from the spring in the
great Hill Lebanon.

Ver. 16. Arise thou North Wind, and come thou South Wind, blow upon my Garden,
that the Spices thereof may flow out, let my Beloved come into his Garden, and
eat his pleasant fruit] O let the spirit of God which is in operation like unto
the North and Southwind, binding and opening, drying and moystening, so work
with his Ordinances in my Soul, that I may abundantly bring forth such fruits,
as he may delight in; and let my dear Lord and Savior come and be in the
midst of the Assemblies of his Saints, which are his own Gardens and Vineyards
planted, watered and dressed by his own hand, and accept of the Services of
fruits and obedience, which his Saints do there offer unto him; which as they
are wholly his own, he is pleased to express great delight in.

Chap. V.
Ver. 1. I Am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse; I have gathered my
Myrrh, with my Spices: I have eaten my Honeycomb with my Honey; I have drunk
my Wine with my Milk; eat O Friends, Drink, yea, drink abundantly, O Beloved]
q. d. Doubt not thou of my presence with thee O my Beloved; I am ever with my
people assembled in my name, and have already taken notice of, and delighted my
self greatly in the graces and fruits of my spirit, that I have discerned in
them; and not only in those that come from such of thy members as are eminent
and excellent in gifts (like to Myrrh, and Spices, and Wine,) but even in them
that proceed from the meanest and weakest of all my people (like to Honey,
Honey-combs, and Milk;) and as I my self am thus delighted and refreshed with
the fruits of my spirit in my people, so ye my Friends, my Ministers, that woo
for me, and faithfully labor to draw my peoples affections to me (as Io. 3.)
and ye my holy Angels, whose Ministry likewise I use in furthering this work,
let this be your delight and joy also to see my people bring forth such fruit.

Ver. 2. I slept, but my heart waked; it is the voice of my beloved that
knocks, saying, open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Un-defiled; my
Head is filled with the dew, and my Locks with the drops of the night] q. d. I
grow carnally secure, yet was I not in a dead sleep; for, my heart even then
was awake, the mortal seed remained in me; neither did I yield to my security
with the full sway of my Soul, for in this my spiritual sencelesness and
carelessness I did discern the voice of my dear Lord and Savior; who when I was
thus forgetful of him, forgot not me, but sought unto me, and called upon me,
yea, with great importunity (by his word and spirit) knocked at the door of
mine heart, as if in a most loving and affectionate manner he should have said
thus unto my Soul: O thou that in respect of the unity of nature that is in us,
and for that we have the same Father (Io. 20. 17. Heb. 2. 16, 17.) art my
Sister, whom in respect of the sweet familiarity that is betwixt us, I account
as my special Friend, and am ready to reveal all the secrets of my Fathers will
unto; thou which for thy simplicity and innocence, and for that care thou have
to keep thy self undefiled from all spiritual Fornications, I do so much
delight in; open thou unto me, give me free access into thy heart, receiving my
comforts and promises with more affection, love, and delight; for I have
endured many sorrows and afflictions for thy sake, and that I might enjoy thee.

Ver. 3. I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my Feet,
how shall I defile them?] q. d. I was not in so dead asleep, but this calling
and knocking of my Lord and Savior did awake me, and I heard him well enough,
and might have risen to open unto him; for I was able (which greatly increased
my sin) to make to answer unto him, when in the Ministry of his word he sought
to raise me out of my security; I did well enough discern it was he that spoke
to me, and what it was that he required of me, but I had reasonings within my
self against it: and what did I answer to him? what did I object against him?
Surely that it would be a matter of too great painfulness and trouble, and
cause me to forgo a great deal of worldly ease and delight, for me, thus to
open unto him, and to give him all my heart, to yield to him such absolute
obedience in all things, and to serve him with all the affection of my heart;
for this sleep that I was fallen into, was not upon the ground, or in my chair,
but in my bed; I had washed my feet, and put off my clothes, and laid down
quietly to take my rest; I had entertained a resolution within my self to enjoy
the entertainments and ease of this world.

Ver. 4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him] My dear Lord and Savior did not only call upon me, and
knock to awaken me, and get me to open to him, but sought to open my door
himself, putting in his hand by a hole that was in it, to that end, i. e.
stirring me up also by the good motions of his spirit, to yield more cheerful
and resolute obedience unto him; which when I did perceive, and consider with
my self, my heart did then begin to smite me, and I was much troubled in my
self for my sluggishness and security, and for answering him as I had done.

Ver. 5. I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and
my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock] q. d. I did
not only see my own folly, and grieved for it, but I did also rowse up my self
to go and open to my Beloved; I resolved with my self to entertain him better,
and receive him into my heart; which so soon as I had done, I found mavelous
sweetness and comfort in that which he had left behind him, in the graces of
his holy spirit, which his calling on me in so comfortable a manner, by the
Ministers of his Gospel, had stirred up and revived in me.

Ver. 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself and was
gone; my Soul failed when he spoke; I sought him, but I could not find him; I
called, but he gave me no answer] q. d. I did at length unfainedly affect my
dear Lord and Savior, and was willing to open my heart unto him, and give him
the full possession of it; but he had now withdrawn from me the comfortable
feeling of his gracious presence, and then was I brought to the brinck of
despair, by remembering how graciously and lovingly he had spoke unto me; and
how ungratiously I had rejected him; and being in this case, I did both by
meditation and fervent prayer, labor to recover my former feeling of his sweet
and comfortable presence, but could not prevail.

Ver. 7. The Watchmen that went about the City, found me; they smote me, they
wounded me; the keeper of the wall took away my vail from me] q. d. Whilst, I
thus not only by my private prayers and meditations, sought to recover my
feeling of the comfortable presence of my Lord and Savior, but by going
abroad, and making use of the helps from others the Ministers and Governors of
the Church, whose office is to watch the city of God, and to keep the walls of
it, and who did accordingly go about the City to over-see and take heed to all
the flock, Act. 2. 28. found me out, and in their Ministry met with my foul
sin, whereby I had so rejected my Savior; and by the power of the word, and
the rebukes thereof, did even smite me, and wound my heart, humbling me much
more deeply for my sin; yea, they took away my veil from me, laid me open,
shamed me, and exposed me to all reproach, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Psalm. 145. 5.

Ver. 8. I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye
tell him that I am sick of Love] q. d. Finding no more comfort in the public
Minister of the Word, I sought help by the Prayer and Council of such of the
faithful as I could meet with, and earnestly charged them, that if themselves
did meet with my Beloved, and find any comfort in him, they would be earnest
with him in their prayers for me, and make known unto him my case, that the
love I bear unto him, makes me languish with grief, and anguish of heart for
his absence from me.

Ver. 9. What is thy Beloved more than other beloved, O thou fairest among
Women? What is thy Beloved more than other Beloved, that thou do so charge
us?] O thou, in whom we see and acknowledge more grace, and goodness, than is to
be found in any other, and whom in that respect we honor; tell us what is the
cause of this affection thou bear unto Christ, which seems strange unto
us; what excellency is there in him above all other things, that men use to set
their hearts and affections upon? Yea, we pray thee tell us what thou have seen
in him; that thou do thus importune us.

Ver. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand] q. d.
My dear Lord and Savior is every way fit and able to justify such as come
unto him; for he is both white, holy, harmless, and undefiled, and separate
from sinners; and ruddy through the merit and blood of the everlasting
Covenant, which speaks better things than that of Abel; yea, he is greater,
and far more excellent, not only than any mortal Creature, but then the very
Angels themselves, Psalm. 46. 2. 7. Heb. 1. 4.

Ver. 11. His Head is as the most fine Gold; his Locks are bushy, and black as
a Raven] q. d. In respect of his Kingdom and Sovereignty, he is the God of
Gold; not only most excellent and precious, (the being King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, Rev. 19. 16.) but most pure also and permanent; his Throne is for
ever and ever; a Scepter of Righteousness, is the Scepter of his Kingdom, Heb.
1. 8. His hairy-locks, the multitude of the faithful that hang and depend upon
him, as upon the head; as they are bushy in respect of their number, and the
foulding and twineing one within another, through their mutual agreement and
love; so are they black, and set forth, as a shadow in a picture, the excellent
beauty that is in his face.

Ver. 12. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, by the Rivers of water, washed
with milk, and fitly set] q. d. His eyes are as clear and quick - sighted, Rev.
4. 14. 2. 18. chaste, and also shining; white, without any spot or blemish; pure
and clean, beholding no corruption, which he either revengeth not, or heals
not in his own blood, Heb. 1. 13. in a comely manner filling the hollow places
prepared for them with absolute perfection, beholding the state and necessities
of his Servants.

Ver. 13. His Cheeks are as a bed of Spices, with sweet Flowers; his Lips like
Lillies, droping sweet smelling mirrh] q. d. His open face and clear
manifestation of himself, is full of spiritual sweetness and comfort; his
speech and doctrine also is most gracious, and such as rejoices the heart,
Luke 4. 22. Psa. 19. 8, 10.

Ver. 14. His hands are as gold rings set with the Berril, his belly is as
bright Ivory, over-laid with Saphirs] q. d. The works of his hand, all his
administrations, are most glorious and seemly; his bowels or secret parts, the
inward councils of his heart, when once manifested, and revealed, appear all
precious, and full of miraculous glory.

Ver. 15. His legs are as Pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine Gold,
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars,] q. d. his divine power
and providence, whereby he sustaineth all his works, is everlasting, most pure
and glorious; His whole countenance, whereby he shows and makes himself known
to his people, viz. his public Worship and Ordinances, Genesis 4. 14. is full
both of sweetness and comfort, and of spiritual stateliness and Majesty.

Ver. 16. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem,] The words of his
mouth are most sweet and comfortable, yea, there is nothing in him, whether you
consider his Nature, or his Offices, his Active or Passive obedience, but it is
most lovely and amiable; and therefore O my friends, since my dear Lord and
Savior, is such an one as I have described unto you, marvail not though I do
thus earnestly seek him.

Chap. VI.
Ver. 1. WHether is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among Women? whether is
thy Beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?] Tell us O thou,
whom for the graces of God, shining in thee, we do honor above all others, and
who, (though thou soughtedst to us to help thee to him, as ver. 8.) art only
able to tell us where he is to be found. Tell us we pray thee, whether thy dear
Lord, and Savior, is gone, and where he uses to be when he absenteth himself
from thee, that we also (who by this description thou have made of him, are
drawn to a love and admiration of his excellencies,) may seek him with thee,
without whose help and company we have no hope to find him.

Ver. 2. My beloved is gone into his Garden, to the beds of Spices, to feed in
the Garden, and to gather Lillies.] If you would indeed seek my dear Lord and
Savior, I will tell you where you may find him: He is gone to the Assemblies
of the Saints, that join together in the use of his Ordinances; that is the
place of his chief residence and abode, where He delights to be, that is his
Garden, which he planteth and waters; those are his beds of Spices, the place
where the sweet graces of his Spirit grow; there he refreshes himself, with
the spiritual service that is done to him by his Saints, and gathers the
goodly and pleasant fruits of their holiness, and righteousness, to make use of
them for his advantage and glory.

Ver. 3. I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine, he feeds among the
Lillies] q. d. Now by this Meditation of the excellency of my Lord and Savior,
and speech I have had thereof for the instruction of others, and drawing them
to love him, I feel my faith revived in me, and am fully persuaded, that I am
his dearly beloved, and he with all his merits and graces are wholly mine, See
Chap. 2. and ver. 16.

Ver. 4. Thou art beautiful O my Love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible
as an Army with banners] q. d. Though I have for thy sluggishness, and
neglecting me too much, through thy carnal security, withdrawn my self from
thee for a time, yet do I still esteem highly of thee; for thou, in thine
Assemblies and Societies, art in mine account, as beautiful and pleasant for
the delight I take in thee, as Tirzah, (which for that cause, sundry of the
Princes of Israel made choice of, for their seat and place of abode, 1 Kings
14. 17. and 15. 33. and 16. 8, 23.) as comely for the decent order of them,
(Col. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 14. 40.) as Jerusalem, a City fitly compact together, Psa.
122. 3. which for the good order and government thereof, and for the house of
God in it, was called the perfection of beauty, and joy of the whole earth,
Lam. 2. 15. yea, terrible, in respect both of my word that is taught, and my
spiritual censure, that are exercised in them, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 1. 8,
12, 13. Zac. 12. 2, 9. as an Army with banners.

Ver. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, thy hair is
as a flock of Goats, that appear from Gilead] q. d. When thou do set thine
eyes directly and steadfastly upon me, I take so great delight and pleasure
therein, that I am even as it were overcome, and raised with joy. See Chap. 4.
1.

Ver. 6. See Chap. 4. 2.

Ver. 7. See Chap. 4. 3.

Ver. 8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number] q. d. Although numbers of other Companies and Societies in the
world, that seem in their outward glory and pomp, that are like to the Queens
and Concubines of some great King, and the train of innumerable Virgins
attending upon them.

Ver. 9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her Mother,
she is the choice one of her that bare her, the Daughters saw her, and blessed
her, yea, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her] q. d. Yet are
none of them all in true glory and dignity to be compared to my Church, who is
most sincere, and void of guile, most pure, and incorrupt in her Religion, and
that worship she does unto me, her Mother that bare her, i. e. that Jerusalem
that is from above, my holy Catholic Church, where she was begotten by the
word of truth, acknowledges her only for her natural Child, and esteems her
above all others that bear the Name of her Children; neither is she thus highly
esteemed of by me, and the whole company of holy and elect people only, but all
that do make but an outward profession of the faith, when they see her, and
consider her beauty, and glory, are ready to speak all good of her; yea, even
they that most abound in the glory, and pleasures of this world, cannot but
praise and admire her, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

Ver. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Noon, clear
as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners] q. d. They shall in
admiration of thee say, who, and how excellent is this blessed society of the
people of God; the beauty and glory whereof does thus increase continually,
being at the first, in the light and beauty of knowledge and grace, but like
unto the Morning, or dawning of the day, after like the Noon, and never
ceaseing to grow and increase till it be like the Sun it self, in his
brightness: Terrible also (as v. 4)

Ver. 11. I went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the Valley,
and to see whether the Vines flourished, and the Pomegranets budded] When I for
thy sluggishness, and too much neglect of me, did seem to withdraw my self from
thee, I did not altogether forsake thee, but went to visit thy public
Assemblies, which are as a welldressed and pruned Orchard, to see and delight
me with the beholding the beginnings of grace, and firstfruits of my spirit in
my people; who though they grow in the Valley, and are lowly in their own eyes,
yet are they in mine account as the Vine and Pomegranet - Tree, whose fruit is
most pleasant and comfortable.

Ver. 12. Or ever I was aware, my Soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab]
q. d. When I had but a little while estranged my self from thee, mine
affections were so strongly bent unto thee, that I could not be long absent
from thee; but on a sudden, even ere I was aware, I was carried with a
vehement desire (as upon such Chariots as Noble men use to ride in) to return
unto thee again, and restore thee to the comfortable feeling of my gracious
presence with thee.

Ver. 13. Return, return, O Shulamile; return, return, that we may look upon
thee; what will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies]
Therefore since my desire and affection is such toward thee, return thou also,
I earnestly and importunately require thee, O Shulamite, the true Daughter of
Jerusalem, which was anciently called Shalem, Genesis 14. 18. Psalm. 76. 2.) to thy
former feeling and delight in me, that I and my holy. Angels may behold it, and
rejoice in it, Luke 15. 10. And ye, O ye holy Angels, when ye behold my Church,
what shall ye see in her? Surely such a goodly and comfortable sight as Jacob
at Mahanim, Genesis 32. 1, 2. even the company of my people, whom I have often
compared to an Army with Banners, and your selves the Host of God, appointed to
be her guard for her safety and protection.

Chap. VII.
Ver. 1. HOw beautiful are thy Feet with Shoes, O Princes Daughter; the joints
of thy Thighs are like Jewels, the work of the hand of a cunning Workman] Oh
how beautiful and seemly in mine eyes art thou, in thy returning unto me: O
thou, who in respect of thy new birth, art truly honorable; thy affections
(which as thy feet do bring thee unto me) being shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace, ready and prepared through the knowledge of the Gospel of
peace, to go through thick and thin after me; make thee very amiable unto me,
and thy holy desires (which like the joints of thy Thighs, make thee nimble,
and with cheerfulness and speed to come unto me) are more precious in my
account, than the richest Jewels, being wrought in thee, not by any skill or
power of thine own, but by the hand, the spirit of my Heavenly Father.

Ver. 2. Thy Navel is like a round Goblet, that wants not liquor; thy Belly
is like a heap of Wheat, set about with Lillies] q. d. Thou art most fruitful,
for thy Navel is not dry, but full of natural and kindly moisture; thy Belly in
respect of the fruitfulness of it, may be compared to a field of Wheat, that
does not only bear store of Corn in the midst of it, but is fruitful, even in
the utmost sides and corners of it, and is not fenced and encompassed about
with a a Thorny hedge, but with Lillies, which as they are most pleasant to
behold, so use they not to grow and prosper, but in fruitful soyles, and are
themselves very fruitful also.

Ver. 3. Thy two Breasts, are like two young Roes that are Twins] Thy Teachers
upon whom my people hang like newborn Babes for the sincere Milk of the Word,
being full of cheerfulness and swiftness, do with a ready mind deliver to my
people the food of their Souls, and do with their mutual consent and agreement
greatly grace the Ministry also.

Ver. 4 Thy Neck is like a Tower of Ivory, thine Eyes like the Fish-pools of
Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim; thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, which
looks toward Damascus] q. d Thy holy Discipline and Government, which like
the neck, supports the Doctrine and Ministry, is for the strength and beauty of
it, like a Tower of Ivory. Thy Teachers and Ministers whom I have set to be the
eyes for thy guidance and direction, are for the clearness of their sight, and
the flocking of my people unto their Ministry, like the Fish-pools in Heshbon,
that were by the gate, at which, the greatest number of the people were wont to
go in and out. Thy Nose, the Organ of smelling, is perfectly featured like the
curious Tower of Lebanon, that looks toward Damascus, i. e. the judgment and
faculty in discerning of Doctrines, and the spirits of thy Teachers is exact.

Ver. 5. Thy Head upon thee is like Carmel; and the Hair of thine head, like
Purple; the King is held in the Galleries] q. d. Thine Head is for comeliness
and freshness of color and vigor, like Carmel, that fruitful Mountain, 1 Samuel
25. 2. 2 King. 19. 23. The multitude of Teachers (who for their number, are as
the hair of their head) are all as Kings and Princes (whose manner was to be
attired in Purple, Dan. 5. 7, 16. 29. Mar. 15. 17.) Rev. 1. 6. Zac. 12. 8. The
King, i. e. my Self and Heavenly Father, are in our desires and affection
(through the delight and pleasure we take in thee) even tied and bound to be
ever with thee, in thy galleries or walking-place; the place of thy public
meeting, or holy Assemblies.

Ver. 6. Oh how fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights] But why
should I insist on thy comeliness and beauty, on thy several parts and members;
thou art throughout, and all over, (through the imputation of my perfect
holiness and righteousness unto thee) so fair and beautiful in mine eyes; and I
do take that exceeding delight and pleasure in thee, (O thou that art not only
beloved of me, but even my Love; I love nothing else but thee, nor can ever be
weary of loving thee) as I am even in a vehement admiration thereof, and can
find no terms or comparisons sufficient to express it.

Ver. 7. This thy Stature is like to a Palm Tree, and thy Breasts to clusters
of Grapes] q. d. Thou art in thy whole body like to the Palm Tree, which
besides the pleasant fruit it bears, cannot be kept from growing, or
flourishing, by any weight or burden that is laid upon it; no affliction or
persecution can hinder thy growth, but it will rather cause thee to flourish
the more, Psalm. 92. 12, 14. Thy Ministers and Teachers, are for their comfort,
that their Doctrine works in the hearts of my people, and for the plenty and
abundance of fruit which they do yield, fitly compared unto clusters of Grapes.

Ver. 8. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree; I will take hold of the boughs
thereof; now also thy Breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the smell
of thy nose like Apples] q. d. I resolved with my self, when I saw how thou
do flourish, and how fruitful thou art, to dress and prune thee, that thou
may be more fruitful, and to gather and refresh my self with the pleasant
fruits of holiness, and righteousness which thou bring forth. yea, I will
also, in joining my self unto thee, bless thee; causing thy Teachers to abound
yet more and more in the fruitfulness and comfort of their Doctrine, and making
such a sent and savor to come from thee, as shall (like the pleasant Apples)
refresh the spirits of my people that are ready to faint.

Ver. 9. And the roof of thy mouth, like the best-Wine, for my Beloved, that
goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak] q. d.
And the uttering and delivering of thy Doctrine, by the Preaching of my
Ministers, shall be for the comfort and benefit of my beloved ones, like unto
the best and strongest wine, not only for the sweetness and delight they shall
take in it; but for its force and opperation also, for it shall waken and
revive such as are even in a dead sleep of sin, and cause them to show and
declare it by speaking the language of Canaan to the praise and glory of God,
Isa. 35. 6.

Ver. 10. I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me] q. d. Is it so, that
notwithstanding all my weakness and corruptions, that thou esteemest of me?
Well then, I do fully believe in my heart, and profess with my mouth, that I am
my Beloveds dear Spouse; his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone;
yea, that I am not my own, but wholly at his will and command to serve and obey
him; and his desire, and his care, and affection is wholly set upon me, and
bent for my good.

Ver. 11. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us lodge in the
Villages] q. d. Let us O my dear Lord and Savior go together, with patience
and diligence, using our joynt-endeavours to do our spiritual Husbandry upon
such of thine Elect as are abroad in the world, and do not yet inhabit the City
of our good, nor are Members of his visible Church.

Ver. 12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards; let us see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the Pomegranets bud forth; there
will I give thee my Love] q. d. Let us with speed and diligence comfort and
visit all those Nations and people, whom God in his Council and decree, has
determined to call and make his Church, in whom (though they yet bear no fruit
unto him) he does already by his grace, work some aptness and readiness to
receive and embrace the means of their Salvation, and to bring forth the
pleasant fruits of righteousness to God; let us I say, use the means with all
diligence that they may be called and converted, and with patience expect fruit
from them. [There will I give thee my loves] q. d. there and among the people
(whether this be meant of the calling of the Gentiles in the Apostles days, or
of the conversion of the Jews) thou shall more fully enjoy me, and beget
Children of me unto God, then ever yet thou did.

Ver. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved] Let
us the rather do this, because the time is even come, that those, thine Elect,
which are yet without thy visible Church, should be called and made fruitful
unto God; those among them that will not only bear fruit themselves, but also
provoke others to do the like, do (even as it were already) begin to show
themselves; yea, the fruits of righteousness and holiness of all sorts, which
we take pleasure in, are even at our gates ready for us to receive and refresh
our selves withal, which the Nations are apt to yield upon the Husbandry we
shall do upon them, and means we shall use for their Conversion; yea, the
fruits of the Gospel, which these Nations shall yield, are even the chiefest
dainties which I have laid up and reserved for thee, O my dear Lord and Savior.

Chap. VIII.
Ver. 1. O That thou were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother,
when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet, I would not be
despised] q. d. O that the day were come, wherein thou by taking our nature
upon thee, shall become my Brother, Heb. 2. 11, 14. and make thy self under the
same Law, that we are subject to, submitting thy self to all the Ordinances,
whereby my Mother (the holy Catholic Church,) does give suck and nourishment
unto her children; then would I more openly and familiarly converse with thee,
and testify both my homage and love unto thee; and yet (and yet so clearly,
that thy glory shall be manifested to the world, as) all men shall count thee
worthy of that duty I shall do unto thee, and not despise me for it.

Ver. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee to my mothers house, who would
instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my
Pomegranate.] q. d. Then would I, (when thou have first revealed thy self unto
me, and vouchsafed me the honor, that by my means, thou should first be made
known to the Gentiles, bring thee forth by publishing thy Gospel unto all
Nations,) into the Assemblies and solemn Meetings of the universal Church
(whose daughter I am,) where I shall be more fully instructed in thy will, then
hitherto I have been; then would I entertain thee with a royal feast, of the
manifold and diverse graces of thy people, wherein I know thou would take more
delight, then any man takes in the wine, that is most delicately spiced, or in
the most comfortable juice of the Pomgranate.

Ver. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me] q. d. Then will my dear Lord and Savior wholly rest and repose him
in my bosom; then shall I enjoy his comfortable and loving embracings, and have
more full and sweet communion with him then formerly I have had.

Ver. 4. I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love until he please,] q. d. I do in most earnest manner require you
all, ye that profess your selves Members of the visible Church, that you do no
way by the least aversion, disquiet or interrupt this my sweet peace and
comfort, I have so long as he shall please in his mercy to continue it unto me.

Ver. 5. (Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved?) I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy Mother brought thee
forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.] q. d. Then and in those
days it shall be said of me, who, or how excellent a person is this, that
forsaking in her affections, and leaving the World, (which is as barren and
uncomfortable to live in, as any wilderness, Isa. 40. 3.) and renouncing the
pleasures, and delights of it, rests wholly on her beloved Lord and Savior;
I have not now of late begun to love thee O my dear Lord and Savior, but I
raised thee up, and laying hold on thee by faith, stirred up thy love toward
me, even under that Apple Tree, where, after I had by the subtilty of the
Serpent, destroyed my self, the Lord restored me to life by that gracious
promise, Genesis 3. 15. In that place, and that time, were thou first by faith
formed in the womb of the Catholic Church, Gal. 4. 19. and brought to light.

Ver. 6. Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine arm, for love
is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof, are
coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame] q. d. be thou never unmindful
of me, but let me be as the impression of a Seal, both in thine heart, and in
thine eye continually; for love requires love, and my love to thee, is so
Ardent and strong, that I can no more resist it, then a man is able to resist,
and withstand Death it self, against which it a were a solly for any to strive,
and contend; and my jealousy, lest any should bereave me of thy love, or any
thing alienate thy affection from me, consumes me like the grave; in which
respect also it is like to the hottest fire, the most fumous and raging flame
that devours all.

Ver. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a
man would give all the Substance of his house for love, it would be utterly
contemned] q. d. yea, my love to thee is is not only so ardent and strong, but
durable and unchangeable, no floods of persecution and affliction shall ever be
able to quench it; nor if all the delights and pleasures of the World should be
offered me to draw away my love from thee, I would utterly despise them.

Ver. 8. We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for
our Sister, when she shall be spoken for] q. d. We have the Church of the
Gentiles, which in the eternal Council of God, is our Sister, and is yet in her
nonage, not ripe for marriage, being unable through the want of thy serving
Ordinances, to bring forth or nourish any Children unto thee, when the time
shall come, that she shall grow riper in years, and her friends shall set her
forth, and speak for her, (as the manner is to do for Maids to be bestowed in
Marriage,) i. e. when the time shall come that God in his decrees has set for
her calling and conversion, and when all the faithful shall labor by their
prayers to further it, what shall we do for her, what will thou out of the
richness of thy wisdom and grace, and what shall I when thou will be pleased to
use me, as thine instrument in this work, do to increase and adorn her?

Ver. 9. If she be a Wall, we will build upon her, a Palace of Silver: and if
she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.] q. d. If the Church
shall enjoy the benefit and defense of a good Government, we, i. e. I by thy
Ministry will make it a glorious Church, like to a stately and sumptuous
Palace, meet for the King of Glory to dwell in; if she shall for a time want
the benefit, and have only the help of the sound doctrine of Salvation, through
faith in me, (who am the door, whereby mine Elect enter into the Kingdom of
grace and glory, Io. 10. 7, 9.) then will we so strongly enclose and fence this
doctrine, by my providence and powerful assistance of my Spirit, as it shall
never decay, nor the gates of Hell prevail against it.

Ver. 10. I am a wall, and my breasts like Towers, then was I in his eyes as
one that found favor.] q. d. O my dear Lord and Savior, let this thy promise
be fulfilled to the new estate of thy Church, for (foreseeing by Faith, and
being fully assured of that glorious and blessed estate I shall be in at that
time, when the Gentiles shall be called, as if it were already come to pass.) I
do in thankfulness and joy of heart, profess and glory, that I am, for the
strength and defense I have, through the government thou have established in
me, as a strong Wall; and my Ministry, by which, as by breasts I nourish my
Children, is through the abundance of the sincere Milk of the Word, wherewith
it is furnished like unto great Towers; in respect whereof, I shall be most
acceptable unto thee, and thine affection and favor shall be increased toward
me.

Ver. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard] (in a most fruitful place, even) at
Baal-hamon] a place, that as far exceeds others in fruitfulness, as the Lord
and Master does excel in dignity; the multitude of his Servants and Followers
that are under him; he could not dwell in this Vineyard, nor keep it, and dress
it himself, but was fain to let it out to others that might keep and dress it;
yet received he much benefit by this his Vineyard, for every of his Tenants and
Farmers that did Husband it, brought unto him for his Rent, 1000 pieces of
Silver; which amounts unto 125. l.

Ver. 12. My Beloved which is mine, is before me] q. d. But my Church, which is
my Vineyard, is always in my sight; I dwell in it my self, watch it, and dress
it my self, and put it not forth to others, though I use the help and ministry
of my Servants, both in planting and watering of it, in watching, keeping, and
dressing of it; yet am I with them always my self, as the Chief and
Master-Work-man; and do increase, strengthen, and bless their labors, work
with, and by them; if I be from them, they can do nothing. And therefore,
whereas thou O Solomon, received'st but five parts of the increase of thy
Vineyard, how fruitful soever it be, and are fain to allow a sixth part thereof
to them that dress and keep it; the whole profit and fruit that my Vineyard,
(my Church) does yield, redoundeth wholly to my Self; and my Servants that
labor in it, work not for themselves, but Me alone.

Ver. 13. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to to thy
Voice, cause me to hear it] q. d. O my dear Church and Spouse, who have thy
chief abode, and art most seen in the Assemblies, where my people meet together
to worship me, which both for the pleasantness and fruitfulness, are like to
the choicest and sweetest Gardens; all the faithful which have a most near
communion with me, and among themselves, will hearken unto thy voice and
ministry; let me by their prayers and praises, and holy confessions they make
of my truth, wherein thou have instructed them, hear and discern that they have
indeed hearkened unto thee; for therein shall I take great comfort and delight.

Ver. 14. Make have my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart
upon the Mountains of Spices] q. d. O my dear Lord and Savior, do thou soon
finish these days of sin and misery, and be thou like the Roe or young Heart in
thy speed in comeing to judgment, and gathering together all thine Elect, to
take them with thee into thy Kingdom, which as it is fitly compared unto a
Mountain, because it is in the highest Heavens, so may it be called a Mountain
of Spices, because there shall be fullness of joy and pleasures for ever more.

CANTIC. I.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1.
THe Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
Ver. 2.
O let him join his lips to mine,
And solace mine with his:
Thy matchless love excels wine,
(No Vintage joy like this.)
Ver. 3.
The savor thy good Ointments shed;
The Odours of thy name:
The Virgins hearts have ravished,
And their desires inflame.
Ver. 4.
Draw me, we will run after thee:
(There Is none but thou can do it):
Me has the King (where I would be)
Into his Chambers brought.
Thus made glad, we will rejoice therein,
Thy loves (so far above,)
We will remember more than wine:
Thee do the upright love.
Ver. 5.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
I Am black, but comely so:
Thus both as Ismaels Tents I seem,
And Solomon's Curtains too.
Ver. 6.
Look not upon me, cease to gaze,
Now we so black you see;
Because the Sun, with scorching rays,
Has so discolored me.
My Mothers Children me betrayed,
And in their anger, they
Me keeper of the Vineyards made;
But mine neglected lay.
Ver. 7.
My Dearest, unto me make known,
Where thou do feed thy Flock.
Where thou do make them rest at noon'
By what cool stream or rock,)
Lest I should be as one of them,
That turn aside to those,
Their Flocks, which thy Companions seem,
But are disguised Foes.
Ver. 8.
O thou, whose beauty does excel
All others of thy Sex;
If this, because thou can not tell,
Thy troubled mind perplex;
Go forth, and in those footsteps tread,
Those tracts, the Flock frequents;
And thou thy Kids securely feed,
Besides the Shepherds Tents.
Ver. 9.
My Love, I have compared thee
Unto those stately Steeds,
Which in King Pharoahs Charots be,
(So much thy praise exceeds.)
Ver. 10.
Thy Cheeks are comely, and thy Neck,
(To all, that do behold)
Those, with these rows of Jewels decked,
This, with that chain of Gold.
Ver. 11.
(That thou may yet more splendid
And more illustrious be,) show,
Borders of gold will we bestow,
With silver studs on thee.
Ver. 12.
My Spikenard, while the King does sit,
And entertain his guests,
At his full Table, then of it,
How is the smell dispersed?
Ver. 13.
A bundle of refreshing Myrrh
To me, is my Beloved;
Hee'st lie betwixt my breasts, and there
Rest all night un-removed.
Ver. 14.
As Camphire-clusters, when they blow,
Is my Beloved to me;
As those, which in those Vineyards grow,
Which in Engedi be.
Ver. 15.
Behold you are very fair my Love,
Behold you are very fair;
Thou by thine eyes, might be a Dove,
(So mild, and chaste they are.)
Ver 16.
All beauties, my Beloved, show
In thee, and there are seen:
Behold you are fair, and pleasant too;
Also our bed is green.
Ver. 17.
The beams, which over our house are laid,
And every Mansion there,
Are all of goodly Cedar made;
Our Rafters are of Firr.
Chap. II.
Ver. 1.
A Rose, when it does freshly blow,
The Sharon-Rose am I;
The Lilly of the Valley too,
(And all their praise outvie.)
Ver. 2.
And as the Lillies to the briers,
When these encompass this;
So my fair Love, when she appears
Amongst the Daughters, is.
Ver. 3.
As the fair fruitful Apple Tree,
Amongst the Forest ones;
Soe's my Beloved, such is he,
Compared with the Sons.
Under his shadow I sat down,
Where my delight surpast,
And his rare fruit (before unknown)
Was sweet unto my taste.
Ver. 4.
He brought me to his Banquet-house,
(For entertainments made,)
And love, was over me, his Spouse,
The Banner he displaid.
Ver. 5.
Stay me with Flagons, stay me soon,
With Apples; O remove
These fainting fits, or ere I swoon,
For I am sick of Love.
Ver. 6.
Under my head, when I take rest,
He does his left hand place;
And with his right hand over my breast,
He does me fast embrace.
Ver. 7.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
I, by the Rose, and Hind,
Adjure you, and by all of them,
The fields have of their kind,
Now my Beloved takes his ease,
That you due silence keep,
Nor stir him up, until he please,
Nor once disturb his sleep.
Ver. 8.
It Is my Beloved's voice I hear,
Behold he is coming still:
Leaping upon the Mountains there,
Skipping from hill to hill.
Ver. 9.
Like a swift Roe is my Beloved,
Like a young Heart he is;
Lo he behind our wall removed,
Looks through the Lattices.
Ver. 10.
To me then my Beloved spoke,
Rise up and do not stay;
It Is time to rise, my Love; awake,
My fair one; come away.
Ver. 11.
For lo, the Winter now is past,
(Which was so sharp and sore,)
The threatening rains (which fell so fast)
Are gone, and clean blown over.
Ver. 12.
The flourie spring adorns the Earth,
Birds sing in shadie groves,
The Turtles ('it is a time of mirth)
Now murmur to their loves.
Ver. 13.
Fig Trees put forth green Figgs, likewise
Vines tender grapes, and they
Smell; O how sweet, my Love, Arise,
My fair one, come away.
Ver. 14.
My Dove, who in the Rock do bide,
Within the clifts immured,
Who do within the stairs reside,
There secretly obscured:
Thy countenance to me disclose,
Thy voice to me advance;
For sweet is thy melodious voice,
Comely thy countenance.
Ver. 15.
For us the ravening Foxes take,
Spare neither old nor young,
Which of our Vines such havoc make,
For they have Grapes begun.
Ver. 16.
He, who is my Beloved indeed,
Is mine and I am his,
The place, where he delights to feed,
Amongst the Lillies is,
Ver. 17.
Till day, my Dear, it is light impart,
And duskie shaddow's flee,
Turn thou, and like a Roe, or Heart,
On Bether Mountains be.
Chap. III.
Ver. 1.
BY night, upon my Bed, I sought
Him, whom my Soul does love.
I sought him, but I found him not,
My pains did fruitless prove.
Ver. 2.
Perplexed I resolved to rise,
And search the City round,
Both narrow streets, and broader ways,
At least till I had found.
Thus searching, I pursued more hot,
Him, whom my soul does love;
I sought him, but I found him not,
My pains did fruitless prove.
Ver. 3.
Me wandering thus, the Watch did find,
As they the round had been;
To whom I said, with troubled mind,
Have ye my Soul's Love seen?
Ver. 4.
No sooner I from them was gone,
Nor many steps had past,
But him, my Soul's beloved one,
I found and held him fast:
Nor let him go, till I had brought
Him to my Mothers house,
The chamber, where the (most devout)
Conceived me, his Spouse.
Ver. 5.
You daughters of Jerusalem,
I by the Roe and Hind,
Adjure you, and by all of them
The Fields have of their kind,
Now my Beloved takes his ease,
That ye due silence keep;
Nor stir him up, until he please,
Nor once disturb his sleep.
Ver. 6.
Who Is this presented to our eyes,
Who from the Desert comes,
Who does like smoke in pillars rise,
Perfumed with fragrant Gums?
The gums of Myrrh and Frankincense,
With (what Sabea else,
Affords, for) all the powders thence,
Wherein the Merchant deals.
Ver. 7.
Behold his Bed, even Solomon's,
A guard about it stands,
Of threescore valiant Champions,
Drawn out of Isreal's bands.
Ver. 8.
So dreadful to their Enemies,
All Warriors skilled in fight,
Their bright swords mounted on their thighs,
Because of fear by night.
Ver. 9.
(For his delight) King Solomon
A sumptuous Charot made;
Of Cedars fetched from Lebanon,
Where he his stores had laid.
Ver. 10.
The Pillars, which the frame sustain,
Where all with Silver wrought,
And what he for the Throne ordained,
With Gold from India brought.
With Tyrian Purple, he did face
That part, which was above,
And for Ierusalems daughters grace,
The midst he paved with love.
Ver. 11.
Go forth ye Sion daughters, go,
Behold King Solomon,
(O what a bright and glorious show)
Now he his Crown has on:
The crown which on his sacred head
His royal Mother placed,
When he his Nuptial finished,
And was with joy's embraced.
Chap. IV.
Ver. 1.
BEhold, you are very fair my love,
Behold you are wondrous fair,
Thou have the eyes as of a Dove
Couch't underneath thy hair.
Whose dangling curles resemblance bear
Unto the numerous flocks,
Of climbing Goats, as they appear,
From Gileads towering rocks.
Ver. 2.
Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep
New washed, and even shorn;
All which have twins they bare and keep,
None barren or forlorn.
Ver. 3.
Thy lips are like a scarlet thread,
Whence graceful accents flow,
Thy temples in thy locks not hid,
Like some Pomegranate show.
Ver. 4.
Thy neck like David's tower does stand,
Built for a Magazin,
Wherein a thousand bucklers hang,
All shields of mighty men.
Ver. 5.
Thy two breasts are like two young Roes,
Twins of one fruitful Dam;
The Lillies, O how sweet to those,
They feed amongst the same.
Ver. 6.
Until the morning light appear,
And shadow flee from hence,
I Will get me to the Mounts of myrrh,
And hill of Frankincense.
Ver. 7.
Thour't fair my Love, thou art all fair,
As fair, as fair can be;
No stain thy fairness does impare,
There is no spot in thee.
Ver. 8.
Come O my Spouse, O come away
With me from Lebanon,
Look from the top of Amana,
Of Shenir, and Hermon;
From every dark devouring Cave;
The dreadful Lions-dens,
And mountains where the Leopards rave;
O come with me from thence.
Ver. 9.
My Sister, thou my Spouse, that eye
This chain about thy neck;
My ravished heart in Fetters tie,
And all my powers subject.
Ver. 10.
My Sister, O thy lov's so fair,
My Spouse, it wine excels;
Nor any Spice of all that are,
Sweet, as thine Ointments, smells.
Ver. 11.
Like hony-combs thy lips, my Spouse,
Drop honey all along:
A stream of milk, and honey flows
From underneath thy tongue.
The Robe and Vesture thou have on,
The Garments thou do wear,
Smell like the smell of Lebanon,
And all that is pleasant there.
Ver. 12.
My Sister, she who is my Spouse,
What enclosed gardens be,
Or springs shut up, (which no man knows)
Or Fountains sealed, is she.
Ver. 13.
An Orchard stored with pleasant fruits,
(Such fruits thy plants do bear:)
Pomegranat-trees there spread their roots
Camphire, and Spikenard's there:
Ver. 14.
Sweet Spikenard, Saffron newly blown,
Disperse their savor thence,
With Calamus and Cinnamon,
And trees of Frankincense;
Myrrh, Alloes, and all that is rare,
With every precious spice;
Whose Odours do perfume the air,
And Lovers hearts entice.
Ver. 15.
From thee those living springs proceed,
Those streams in plenty run,
Which do our plants with moisture feed,
As from Mount Lebanon.
Ver. 16.
Awake O North, O South arise,
Upon my garden blow;
That from each rich and precious spice
A fragrant smell may flow.
Ver. 17.
Beloved (grant my humble suit)
Come with a Lovers have,
Into thy gardens, eat the fruit,
That most delights thy taste.
Chap. V.
Ver. 1.
INto my garden I am come,
My Sister-Spouse most dear,
Of every spice have gathered some,
And with my spice, my Myrrh.
In hony-combs all pure, and fresh,
My honey I have eat:
I Have drunk my wine new from the press,
With milk warm from the Teat:
Come Friends (for you is all this store)
Eat till ye have enough;
Drink O Beloved, nor give over,
Till you are enflamed with love.
Ver. 2.
Although I sleep, and lie secure,
My restless heart does make;
It Is my Beloved's voice I Am sure,
His knock, and he that spoke:
My Sister open unto me,
My Love, O thou, more mild,
Then gaulless Doves, I long to be
With thee my undefiled:
The dews, which on my head have light,
My drenched hair do fill;
The dropping moisture of the night,
Down from my locks distill.
Ver. 3.
Shall I, now I am all undrest,
Go cloth my self again!
My feet washed fair, in hope of rest,
Shall I so soon distain?
Ver. 4.
But, when I my Beloveds hand
Upon the latch discernd;
Greiv'd, that I should so long withstand;
O then my bowels yearnd!
Ver. 5.
And rising, if he still was there,
To open to his knock,
My hands dropped myrrh, sweet smelling myrrh,
As I but touched the lock.
Ver. 6.
To my Beloved, thus kept out,
Then opened I the door,
But my Beloved (grieved no doubt)
Was gone away before.
My soul, because he did complain,
Failed me, my heard did break;
I sought, and called, but all in vain
to find, or make him speak.
Ver. 7.
The Watch, both they that walked the round,
And they that kept the wall,
Found, smote, and gave me many a wound,
And took away my veil.
Ver. 8.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge you, ere you move,
Tell my Beloved, ye finding him,
That I am sick of love.
Ver. 9.
O thou, of all our Sex most fair,
What Is thy Beloved trow?
Or what is he more than others are?
That thou do charge us so?
Ver. 10.
Why, my Beloved (to be brief,)
Pure white, and ruddie is,
Amongst ten thousand he is chief,
And beauties master-peice.
Ver. 11.
His head is of refined gold,
His locks all bushie grow,
With curles, which in each other fold,
Black as the pruned Crow.
Ver. 12.
His eyes, as if he were a Dove,
By some clear rivolet,
Washed in milk, and as they move,
Alike exactly set.
Ver. 13.
His cheeks as beds of Spice and flowers
Which pleasant smells confer,
His lips like Lillies (filling ours)
With drops of fragrant Myrrh.
Ver. 14.
His Hands as rings of gold with Jemms
Of blazing Berril made,
His Belly pollisht Ivorie seems,
With Saphires overlaid.
Ver. 15.
His Legs like marble pillars stand
Upon gold sockets placed,
His Countenance like Lebanon,
With lofty Cedars graced.
Ver. 16.
His Mouth most sweet, and all of him
Most lovely; this, O this,
O Daughters of Jerusalem,
My Souls beloved is.
Chap. VI.
Ver. 1.
FAir Virgin, paralleled by none;
If thou can tell us, do,
Whither thy Soul's beloved's gone,
That we may seek him too.
Ver. 2.
Down to his Garden, my beloved,
And beds of spices there,
Is gone to feed on fruits improved,
And gather Lillies fair.
Ver. 3.
I Am my Beloved's, He is mine,
In love which words exceeds,
Our hearts do mutually combine,
He amongst the Lillies feeds.
Ver. 4.
Fair Tirza, comely Solyma,
Thy beauty, love, excels;
No Army in Battalia,
Thy Terrors parallels.
Ver. 5.
O turn away thine eyes from me,
Each glance in fetters locks;
Thy hair, a flock of Goats might be,
When seen on Gilead's rocks.
Ver. 6.
Thy teeth like Sheep, as they anew
Come from the washing, all
Of which, not one a barren Ewe,
But equal Twins let fall.
Ver. 7.
Thy temples (to the rest, so rare,
Completely adequate)
Do underneath thy well-spread hair,
Look like the Pomegranate.
Ver. 8.
They boast of many Queens, great store
Of Concubines, a train
Of Virgins infinitely more
Than numbers can contain.
Ver. 9.
My Dove, my undefii'd is one,
Her Mothers only dear;
The all, and very choice alone,
Of her, who did her bear:
The Daughters this unparalled
Saw, and her praise confessed,
The Queens and Concubines beheld,
And did pronounce her blessed.
Ver. 10.
Who Is this? who like the new - begun,
And pleasant morning show's,
Fair as the Moon, bright as the Sun,
(When most illustrious:)
Who though so pleasant, fair, and bright,
Yet terrible; the dread
Of Armies does not more affright,
When they their Ensigns spread.
Ver. 11.
I to my pleasant Gardens went,
Where spicy Nutmegs blow,
To see the fruit, and increment,
Which in the Valley grow;
To see the Vines, if they, (their jems
Disclosed) young clusters bear,
To see the Granats on their stems
In their first bud - appear.
Ver. 12.
I, e're I was aware, or knew,
With strong desires inclined,
As in Amin'dabs Charots flew,
(Whose wheels outstrip the wind.)
Ver. 13.
Return, O Shulamite, return,
Return to Us, that we,
(Who for thy absence greatly mourn,)
Thee once again may see.
What is there in the Shulamite
May such desires create?
Two Armies prevalent in fight,
A strife inveterate.
Chap. VII.
Ver. 1.
HOw beautiful (for thee most meet,)
Thee so illustrious,
O Princess daughter, are thy feet,
Thy Feet adorned with shoes!
How are the junctures of thy Thighs,
Like jewels, which impart
To curious, and admiring eyes,
The skilful Workmans Art!
Ver. 2.
Thy Navel's like a Goblet set,
With moisture standing out;
Thy Belly like an heap of wheat,
With Lillies round about.
Ver. 3.
Thy Breasts are like two new-wean'd Roes,
Twins of one fruitful Dam:
Ver. 4.
Thy Neck like a fair Turret shows,
Which they of Ivory frame:
Thine Eyes, the fish-pools in Heshbon,
By th'gate of Beth-rabbim,
Thy Nose, the Tower of Lebanon
Facing Damascus, seem.
Ver. 5.
Thy Head like fruitful Carmel is,
Whose hair's like purple stained;
Within his royal galleries,
How is the King detained!
Ver. 6.
How fair and pleasant for delight
I thee, O love, esteem,
Ver. 7.
Thou mighst a Palm be by thine height,
Thy Breasts fair clusters seem.
Ver. 8.
I said unto the Palm aloft,
To it is sweet fruit, I Will go,
And take hold of the boughs thereof,
Which the victorious show.
Also, thy Breasts shall kindly swell,
Like clusters of the Vine;
Thy Nose shall, as ripe Apples smell,
(No breath's so sweet as thine.)
Ver. 9.
Thy Pallat too the best wine shows,
For my Beloveds sake,
Which goes down sweetly as it goes,
Making th'asleep to wake.
Ver. 10.
I Am my Beloveds, none but he
To me can title claim,
And in him, zealous love to me,
Does strong desires inflame.
Ver. 11.
Come my Beloved, let us go,
And walk the Fields throughout,
And for our lodging, take into
Some Village there about.
Ver. 12.
Then to the Vineyards, let us be gone,
And ere it is day be there,
To see the Vines, if they come on,
And their young grapes appear:
To see how the Pomgranets prove,
Whether they bud, or no;
There will I give, out of my love,
And all on thee bestow.
Ver. 13.
My Dear, the Mandrakes give a smell,
And at our gates there be,
Fruits new and old, what ere excel,
Which I Have laid up for thee.
Chap. VIII.
Ver. 1.
Were thou my Brother, were thou this
And sucked my Mothers breast,
Thee, when I found without, i would kiss,
And unreproved rest.
Ver. 2.
Then bring thee to my mothers house,
Who would me discipline,
There thou, with my Pomegranate juice
Should drink of spiced wine.
Ver. 3.
As a soft pillow to my head,
He should his left hand place,
And with his right hand gently spread,
He should me fast embrace.
Ver. 4.
You daughters of Jerusalem,
Now my Belov'd's at rest,
Stir not, besure, nor waken him
Till he himself thinks best.
Ver. 5.
Who Is this whose feet the hills ascend*
Who from the Wilderness,
Com's leaning on her darling friend?
(A pleasing sight is this:)
From under the fair Apple tree
I raised thee up, even there
Thy Mother, who conceived thee,
Did thee conceive and bear.
Ver. 6.
O let me as a seal be set,
And on thine heart impressed;
And as a seal, and annulet,
Upon thine arm be placed.
For love's as strong as death, the grave
Then jel'sie not more cruel,
Whose flames are fierce, and always have
A fresh supply of fuel.
Ver. 7.
Not many waters, nor great floods
Can quench, or drown the same;
Nor will a man for all one's goods
His part in love disclaim.
Ver. 8.
We have a little Sister, one
Whose breasts do not appear;
What Is for our Sister to be done,
In the day they spoke for her?
Ver. 9.
Is she a Wall, on her will we
A Silver palace build:
Or if a door, we will cause she be
About with Cedar ceild.
Ver. 10.
I am a firm foundation wall,
My breasts like Towers seem,
Then in his eyes I (more then all,)
Found favor and esteem.
Ver. 11.
A Vineyard did King Solomon
In Ba-al-ha-mon plant;
And let it out, when he had done,
At such a yearly rent:
They, who the keeping of it had,
Each person for his share,
A thousand silver shekels paid,
For fruits and profit there.
Ver. 12.
That Vineyard, that which I possess,
And which is mine by right,
With diligence I daily dress,
And keep still in my sight:
O Solomon! we thus compute,
A thousand is thy due,
And unto them that keep the fruit,
An hundred does accrue.
Ver. 13.
Thou that do in the Gardens live,
Unto thy voice, their ear
Do the companions freely give,
Yet cause thou me to hear:
Ver. 14.
Haste my Beloved unto me,
A Roe or Youthful Heart,
Upon the spicie Mountains be,
And set delays apart.
The Song of Moses.
Exodus 15.
Verse 1.
I Will sing unto the Lord,
Of his great Victory;
His honor I Will record,
Who tryumphs gloriously;
For thrown has he,
Both horse, and man Egyptian
Into the Sea.
Ver. 2.
The Lord's my strength and praise,
He Is my salvation,
My God, for him I Will raise
An habitation:
My Fathers God
I Will him exalt, toth' starrie vault,
And all abroad.
Ver. 3.
The Lord's a man of war,
Jehovah is his name,
What men for prowess are,
He is much more the same.
Ver. 4.
The Lord did cast,
Into the Sea, Phar'ohs array,
Chariots and Host.
His chosen Captains too
Were in the Red Sea drowned
Those waters did overthrow,
His Leaders most renowned.
Ver. 5.
The depths swelled over
Those lofty ones, they sunk as stones
Below the shore.
Ver. 6.
Thine own right hand, O Lord,
Has got a glorious name,
Thy power's upon record,
To thy eternal fame,
Even thy right hand
In pieces dashed, O Lord, and quasht
The Egyptian band.
Ver. 7.
Thou in the greatest might,
Of thy transcendencies,
Have overthrown them quite,
That did against thee rise,
Thy wrath severe
Thou did display, as stubble they
Consumed were.
Ver. 8.
Thy nostrils, with their blast
The fluctuous waves did sneap,
The floods as't were aghast
Stood upright as an heap,
The depths even they
Congealed did part within the heart,
Of all the Sea.
Ver. 9.
The Adversary cried,
I Will run, pursue, over take,
I Will spoil, and then divide,
My lust I Will satiiate
(They fly in vain,)
I Will draw my sword, my hand incurred
Shall be their bane.
Ver. 10.
Thou madst thy wind to blow,
The Sea did cover them;
They sank as Lead, full low,
Within the mighty stream.
Ver. 11.
What God can be,
Of all that are, that may compare,
O Lord with thee!
Who ere like thee appeared
Glorious in holiness,
In praises to be feared,
In wondrous works no less!
Ver. 12.
Thou Lord did stretch,
Thy right hand forth, the greedy earth
Did them dispatch.
Ver. 13.
Thou in thy mercy led
Thine own redeemed out,
They were distinguished
From all the adverse rout;
Thy strength did guide
Them to the place of holiness,
Where thou do bide.
Ver. 14.
Unto the Peoples ear
The fame hereof shall spread,
Who shall no sooner hear,
But be as soon afraid:
Sorrow shall cease
Upon the men of Palestine,
(Till then at ease.)
Ver. 15.
The Dukes of Edom then
Shall be amazed all,
And Moabs mighty men
Shall each a trembling fall;
The dwellers they
Of Canaan, do what they can
Shall melt away.
Ver. 16.
Surprised with fear and dread,
The greatness of thine arm.
Shall strike their hearts stone-dead,
And all their coasts alarm,
Till they pass over,
Whom thou have held, and purchased
From bondage sore.
Ver. 17.
Thou'st bring, and make them rest,
Lord, in the Mount and place,
Which thou inheritest,
The dwelling of thy grace,
The Sanctuary,
Which thou have made, and stablished
O Lord most high.
Ver. 18.
The Lord alone as King,
Shall reign for evermore.
Ver. 19.
For Pharoh's Horse went in
As Israel did before,
Into the Sea,
Whose Chariots then, with his Horsemen
Marched on their way,
The Lord did bring again
The overflowing waves,
Upon the Egyptian train,
The depths became their graves:
But Israel past
Through the Ocean, upon dry Land,
From first to last.
The Song of Moses.
Deuteronomy. 32.
Verse 1.
GIve, O ye Heavens, ear to me,
And I shall silence break;
And thou, O Earth, attend and hear
The words my mouth shall speak.
Ver. 2.
My doctrine as the rain shall drop,
My speech as dew shall pass,
As small rain on the tender herb,
And showers upon the grass.
Ver. 3.
Because I Will publish, and set forth
The Lords most holy Name,
Ascribe ye greatness to our God,
His glorious praise proclaim.
Ver. 4.
He is the Rock, perfect his work,
His ways all judgment be,
A God of truth, in Him no guile,
Most just, and right is He.
Ver. 5.
They are corrupters of themselves,
Nor as his Childrens spot,
Is theirs, they are preverse and crook't,
And all they have begot.
Ver. 6.
O foolish People, and unwise,
Is this the course you take?
And do ye thus requite the Lord,
For all his kindness sake?
Has He not as a Father been,
Who thee redeemed and bought?
Has He not made and stablisht thee,
And thy deliverance wrought?
Ver. 7.
Remember now the days of old,
Consider thou the years,
Of many generations past:
Compare thy times with theirs;
Ask thou the Father, and he will show,
What in his days befell;
Thine Elders also of their time,
And they to thee will tell.
Ver. 8.
When to the Nations; the Most High,
Their heritage did divide,
When he did separate Adams sons,
And show them where to bide:
He set the People buts and bounds,
And them disposed of then,
According to the numbers made,
Of Isreal's Children.
Ver. 9.
For He does for his Portion take
His People and their race,
The lot of his inheritance,
He does in Jacob place.
Ver. 10.
He found him in a desert Land,
And howling Wilderness:
Lead, taught, and kept him as his eye,
And what there tendrest is.
Ver. 11.
Like as an Eagle stirs her nest,
And flutters over her young,
Spreads out her wings, and them thereon
Takes and preserves from wrong.
Ver. 12.
So him the Lord sustained and led,
The Lord himself alone,
And there was no strange God with him,
None such to Israel known.
Ver. 13.
On the high places of the Earth,
He caused him to ride,
That he might of the fields increase,
Eat and be satisfied:
Of Honey from the rock it self,
He made him suck his fill,
And Oil, which from the flinty Rock
In plenty did distill.
Ver. 14.
Butter of Kine, and milk of Sheep,
Were then whereon he fed,
Besides the fat of Lambs, and Rams,
The best that Bashan bred,
With Goats, and with the finest fat,
And Kidneys of the Wheat;
And thou did drink the Grapes fresh blood,
Pure clean without deceit.
Ver. 15.
But Iesurun waxed fat and kicked,
How very fat you are grown!
You Are grown thick, fat and covered ore
With fat, puffed up and blown:
Then his great Maker he forsook,
And greatly disesteem'd,
The Rock, which his Salvation wrought,
The God that him redeemed.
Ver. 16.
With strange Gods they provoked him,
And execrable Rites,
Than which his jealousy, and wrath,
There Is nothing more excites.
Ver. 17.
They to plain Devils, not to God,
Profanely sacrificed;
To Gods they never knew before,
Which they themselves devised:
To new God's, that came newly up,
That were no God's before,
Such as your Fathers feared not,
Nor offered to adore.
Ver. 18.
But of the Rock, that thee begat,
Thou art unmindful grown;
Forgetting God who formed thee,
As if he would never been known.
Ver. 19.
This seen, the Lord abhorred them,
His jealousy did smoke,
Because his Sons and Daughters too,
Did him no less provoke.
Ver. 20.
I Will hide my face, said he, from them,
And I their end will see;
For they are a very forward race,
Children that faithless be.
Ver. 21.
Since they, with that which is not God
Moved me to jealousy,
And unto anger me provoked,
With every vanity:
Them with a people next to none,
To jealousy I Will move,
And will some foolish Nation raise
Who shall their patience prove.
Ver. 22.
For in mine anger, flames of fire,
Which are unquenchable,
Are kindled, and shall fiercely burn
Unto the lowest Hell:
Which shall consume and wast the earth,
With her increased store;
And fire the foundations down,
On which the Mountains shore.
Ver. 23.
On them will I great mischiefs heap,
And all mine Arrows spend.
Ver. 24.
Devouring Famine, which shall burn,
And burning heat I Will send,
On them shall sore destruction come;
The teeth of savage beasts
Shall waste them, Serpents of the dust,
Whose poison soon infests.
Ver. 25.
The Sword without, Terrors within,
Shall stroy, none shall be spared;
Young men, nor Virgins, Sucking Babes,
Nor him that is gray-hair'd.
Ver. 26.
I said, I Would scatter them abroad,
And into corners chase,
And cause, that their remembrance here
With men should have no place.
Ver. 27.
Were it not that I feared the wrath
Of the insulting Foe;
Lest their proud Adversaries then,
Themselves should strongly show.
And lest triumphing, they should say,
Our hand is raised high;
It Is not the Lord has done all this.
But our own gallantry.
Ver. 28.
For they are a Nation most unwise,
Of Council wholly void,
Nor do they understand at all
How they themselves should guide.
Ver. 29.
O that at length they would be wise,
That they this understood;
And that they would their latter end
Consider for their good.
Ver. 30.
How should one man a thousand chase,
And two ten thousand foil,
Except the Lord their rock had sold,
And shut them up for spoil.
Ver. 31.
For their Rock is not as our Rock,
Our Enemies can tell;
If they themselves were left to judge,
Or make the parallel.
Ver. 32.
For their Vine is of Sodoms Vine,
And of Gomorrah's Field:
Their Grapes are very Grapes of gall,
And bitter clusters yield.
Ver. 33.
As strong and deadly is their Wine,
As Dragons Poison is;
Nor can the Venom of the Asp
More cruel be than this.
Ver. 34.
Is not this thing amongst the rest
Laid up in store with me,
And up amongst my treasures sealed,
Till there occasion be.
Ver. 35.
Vengeance, and Recompense belong
To me, and none beside;
In due and most convenient time
Their wandering feet shall slide.
For lo the day draws on a pace,
Which their destruction brings;
The troubles that shall come on them
Approach with open wings.
Ver. 36.
For God shall judge his peoples cause,
(A righteous God is he)
And shall repent himself for them,
That his own Servants be.
Especially when he perceives
That all their power is gone;
And that there is none shut up, or lest,
But they themselves alone.
Ver. 37.
And he shall say, where are their Gods,
What is become of those?
Their Rock, in whom they did their trust
And confidence repose?
Ver. 38.
Which of your Sacrifices eat,
The fat and pleasant things,
And drank the wine they did present
In their drink offerings?
Let them arise with all their help,
And help you all they can;
And in your great extremities,
Be your protection.
Ver. 39.
See now that I, even I am he,
With me there is no God;
I kill, and I do make alive
In all the earth abroad:
I wound, and I make whole again,
And none can me withstand;
Nor is there any that can save,
Or take out of my hand.
Ver. 40.
For to the Heavens (where I dwell),
I lift mine hand on high,
And do most solemnly profess,
I live eternally.
Ver. 41.
If I my bright and glittering sword,
Shall once begin to whet;
On judgment, if my hand take hold,
And there-upon be set:
I Will render Vengeance on them all,
That are mine Enemies,
And them reward to their desert,
That hate, and me despise.
Ver. 42.
I Will make mine Arrows drunk with blood,
My Sword shall flesh devour,
Because of blood, and Captives made,
From the first day and hour.
Ver. 43.
Ye wiser Nations, then rejoice,
And with his people sing;
For he will revenge his peoples blood,
And wrongful suffering.
His adversaries he will requite,
And vengeance on them send;
But to his land, and people there,
His mercy will extend.
The Song of Deborah.
Judges 5.
Ver. 2.
PRaise ye the Lord (let it be said)
Who vengeance to our foes repaid,
When you his people not afraid
Of life, so brave a tender made.
Ver. 3.
Ye Princes, ye your ear afford,
And ye who bear the Regal sword;
Whilst I in sacred hymns record
The praise of Isreal's God, the Lord,
Ver. 4.
When he from Scir his Army led,
Through Edoms fields his Ensigns spread
The Earth shook, the Heavens dropped for dread,
The Clouds did tears in plenty shed.
Ver. 5.
The Mountains which before did swell,
Before thy face a melting fell,
Nor Sina could his force repel,
Who is the God of Israel.
Ver. 6.
In Shamgars time, and Iael's days,
(Shamgar I mean of Anaths race)
None durst frequent the common ways,
Fear did the Traveller amaze.
The highways then unsafe, men crept
Through Woods, or into by-ways stepped,
Or went by night when others slept,
(Their Foes them in such thraldom
kept.)
Ver. 7.
The Land uncultivated lay,
In Israel men became a prey,
Till I arose, I Deborah,
Till I their Matron bore the sway.
Ver. 8.
When to themselves new Gods they chose,
Then were their walls beseig'd with foes
Though Israel forty thousand rose,
Was shield or spear among all those?
Ver. 9.
Ye Rulers, O, how well I take,
(When your poor Country lay at stake)
Your zeal and valor for their sake
Of Gods renown, due mention make.
Ver. 10.
Spoke ye, that on white Asses ride,
Now judging those that you defied;
And they that have the highways tried,
Now walking safe on every side.
Ver. 11.
Ye to your Fountains now restored,
Where you the Archers noise deplored;
There with united joys record
The righteous judgments of the Lord.
His righteous Acts do you profess,
Toward you his Israel, that possess
Your Cities, and your Villages,
Go down unto your gates in peace.
Ver. 12.
'Wake Deborah, wake, relate what is done,
Sing thou of our Salvation:
'Rise Barack, thou Abinoam's Son,
Isr'els renowned Champion.
Ver. 13.
Lead Captive thy Captivity;
Him that remained he set on high,
To rule over the Nobility;
The Lord gave me the Victory.
Ver. 14.
From Ephraim thou a party gained,
Who their old principles retained;
Nor they from Benjamin refrained,
Who marched under thy command.
From Machir came down leading-men,
Such as had old Commanders been;
Zebulons ready-writers then,
Took up the Sword, and left the Pen.
No fears did Issachar dismay,
His princes were with Deborah,
Marching where Barack led the way,
Whose service in the Valley lay.
Ver. 16.
But Ruben did our thoughts amuse,
Because divided, and did choose
To hear the bleating of his Ewes,
And did the holy Wars refuse.
Ver. 17.
Gilead of thundering Drums afraid,
Or sloathful, beyond Jordan stayed:
Dan more intent upon his trade,
Gat to his ships, denied his aid:
So Asher in his clifts resides,
And fortifies against the tides;
His eyes from public danger hide,
Against his own alone provides.
Ver. 18.
Yet Zebulun and Naphtali,
Were men of spirits far more high,
(Not daunted with the Enemy,)
Nor shunned the great jeopardy.
Ver. 19.
The Kings, even Canaan Kings came out
Their Armies up to Tanaach brought,
And by Megidda's waters fought,
Though for no gain but Isreal's rout.
Ver. 20.
(...) the Celestial Warriors,
Fought against Sisera, the Stars
(Though in their courses free from jarrs)
Moved in Battalia, in those wars.
Ver. 21.
Kishon that River so renowned,
Swept them away not to be found:
Thou O my Soul, with conquest crowned
Have trod down Strength unto the ground.
Ver. 22.
Their Horses, such then prancing were
Either for fury, or for fear,
Their mightiest then their hoofs did tear,
Quite broken in their fierce carreer.
Ver. 23.
Curse Meroz, curse, an Angel cried,
That cursed crew that help denied,
Refusing with the Lord to side,
Against the mighty sons of pride.
Ver. 24.
But Iael (from those curses free)
Heber the Kenites wife; O she,
Then Women of what ere degree,
Shall in the Tents more blessed be.
Ver. 25.
He ask't but water from the Spring,
She gave him milk (a better thing;)
And Butter as unto a King,
She in a Lordly dish did bring.
Ver. 26.
But she with courage fortifyed
Her hands to other work applied,
Her self a sharp nail did provide,
The right the Workmans hammer guide:
So, through the Temples, Sisera
She having peirced, as he lay,
Smote off his head without dismay;
(Thus God to Israel gave the day.)
Ver. 27.
Down at her feet upon the floor
He bowed, till he could bow no lower;
Fell where he bowed, bathed in his gore;
Bowed down, fell dead, and rose no more.
Ver. 28.
His Mother at the window stayed,
And thrusting out her shoulders, said,
His Charet-wheels why thus delayed,
That heretofore such haste have made!
Ver. 29.
But her wise Ladies standing by,
Yea, she her self did make reply,
Ver. 30.
Is It not because the Hebrews fly,
And he pursues victoriously?
Is not their stay their greatest gain,
That they returning on the slain,
A greater booty may obtain,
And every man a Girl or twain?
Whilst to great Sisera there is brought
By his brave Captains with a shout,
The choice of all the prey, no doubt;
A prey with diverse colors wrought:
Some piece of needle work, suppose,
Whose curious work on both sides shows
Meet only for the necks of those,
That trample on their spoiled foes.
Ver. 31.
O Lord, so let thine Enemies,
All that against thy people rise,
And mischief in their hearts devise,
Perish in every enterprise:
But they that love thee, O that they
Like to the Sun in luster, may,
When in his strength he takes his way,
Appear more glorious, day by day.
FINIS.

