The Careful RESIDENT


The Careless NON-RESIDENT


The Protestant Mirror, in proper Postures and Principles: OR, The Careful
Resident, and the Careless Non-Resident.
The Trial of DOCTRINES, Its Necessity, and the Sure way: For the Service of
the Church, and Strengthening of Believers.
By Samuel Hieron, Minister of the Gospel.
THe course of seeking Holy Knowledge, at the mouths of those, whose Lips by
their calling ought to preserve it, is termed by Solomon, a buying of the
Truth. As therefore in buying, it is every man's Wisdom to consider the Wares
which are tendered to him, how they are conditioned, and (as Chrysostom says
pithily to this purpose) To go from Shop to Shop, and from Chapman to Chapman,
to look where he may have the best, before he make a through bargain: so it
ought to be the care of a prudent Christian, to consider of particulars, which
are taught, before he give them entertainment. Take heed how you hear, said our
Savior; does not this take heed in hearing intend a trial of things heard?

Some purpose to deceive, whom the Apostle terms Liars in wait to deceive,
and whom he compares (according to the nature of the Greek Word used) to
Cheaters and false Gamesters, who have devices by cogging Dice, to deceive the
unskilful. These speak perverse things, and privily bring in damnable Heresies.
It has been an ancient practice of the Devil, to be a lying spirit in the
mouths of some Prophets; There have been ever some misleading leaders, causers
of the people to err by their lies; and Saint Peter has assured us, that in
this particular, the latter times will-hold proportion with the former: Still
there will be some Seeds-men of Tares amongst them that sow the purer Wheat,
some temperers of Leaven, with the sweet Lump of Gods sacred Truth.

A Man might so lap up the poisonous drugs of Popery, and so gild them over
with the seeming Allowance of Scripture, and of hore-headed Antiquity, that
even the greatest part would soon swallow them down without suspicion.

We disclaim all Lordship over your faith, We are set on Work, for the service
of your Faith, not for commanding it. We leave it to Papists to Tyrannize over
Men's Thoughts in matters of Religion, and to require the people to lap up their
faith in the general believing of the Church. We desire you to Try, we beseech
you to enquire, we would fain bring you to stand in the ways and ask, we know
you can never till then have stablished hearts.

The main Touch by whch all Doctrine must be tried, and by which it must either
stand or fall, is the will of God revealed in the scriptures. Bring them to the
Law, and to the Testimony, (said the Oracle of God of old) and consider whether
they speak according to that word. By this our Savior himself was content to
be Tried: by this the preaching of Paul and Silas at Thessalonica was tried:
Religious Doctrines are Gods matters, and shall we have a better then God to be
tried by, in the things of God? and how shall we know what is Gods mind in a
matter of Doctrine, but by the Scriptures? Excellent spoke he, who called the
Scripture the Heart and Soul of God; and he who affirmed that God has left for
us in the Scriptures, a Fortress against Errors. Let Papists (if they will
needs) persist in their blasphemous disclaiming the trial of the Scripture,
accounting Traditions to be the Touchstone of Doctrine, and foundation of Faith.

We will ever account them the Divine beam; and the most exact balance, and
approve that course of that great Constantine, exhorting the Fathers assembled
in the Nicene Council, to take the resolution of things in question, out of the
divinely inspired Writings.

And let Men learn here by the way, how necessary it is for them, if they would
be rightly grounded in religion, to be well acquainted in the Scriptures. Our
Saviors rule can never fail, You are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures. God
forbid, we should under any pretext dishearten you in your care to turn over
Gods Book. Let profaneness, and Popery cast reproaches, upon diligence and
ordinariness; herein we the Ministers of Christ, shall rather call upon you as
Chrysostom of old did upon his hearers, Hear, O ve men of the World, get you
Bibles. It is (says another of the Ancients) of all torments, the greatest to
the Devils, if they see a Man given to Reading of the Scriptures.

We wondered of late times, to see so many not simple people only, but Learned
Clerks and Rabbis, to turn Papists, we needed not, if we had considered, that
their hearts were gone to Rome before, and now their heads followed after. Were
they well examined, many of them, it would be found, they first put away a good
conscience, before they made shipwreck of the Faith; their hearts betrayed
their heads. Many of them were (its known they were) Covetous, Ambitious,
Voluptuous; and Popery has baits of all sorts to catch them: that great Harlot
and Mother of Fornications, has a Golden Cup, full of Preferments, Profits,
Pleasures, and this made men's heads Drunk and Giddy, to embrace the grossest
Errors and Obsurdities for Truths.

Christ cannot be taken nor overtaken, Hunt and Catch, and lay Snares who will;
Saul, Judas, or all the Violent Crafty Hypocrites in the World. A Bow of Steel
is broken by his Hand: Hell is naked before him; not only open, but naked as a
thing without all strength or force to hurt.

When the Kingdom is destroyed by hearkening to flatterers and self-seekers,
what will ye do? If you shall to please fawning Men, or froward men, displease
God, and betray all into the hands of his wrath, what will these unworthy
persons advantage you? when the guilt of the blood of thousands, lies upon your
consciences, will you send them for those Clergymen, or Statesmen, which
mislead you? why, you may, and miserable comforters will they be.

The Ram was caught behind him, Genesis 22. 13. The pleasure of the Lord does
prosper at his pleasure, and as his pleasure; sometimes before us, that is, in
ways which we can reach, and serve Gods providence in; sometimes again, behind
us, that is, in such ways as we cannot reach, to lend him the least Concurrence
in, to teach that our expectation should be purely placed upon his word, and
that we should say to our Souls in all straits, The pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. Abraham had no hands behind him, neither do men ordinarily
go that way to catch things, yet there was the Ramm caught.

If ever England shine, or any Instrument in England, 'twill be as in his hand,
by whom alone all shall prosper. Expectation pure, the Spirit is solid, very
high, and yet very low, never at a loss.

Nothing makes the way of a Man's Spirit so wide and sweet within him, as
fidelity to God and to his Conscience; it is so in bigger bodies, nothing makes
the way of a Kingdom more quiet and prosperous within it self, then faithful
dealing with God, and the advantages it has by his hand.

Is God amongst us? Israel wants water, Amalek waits to give battle, and this
great straight made that great State fall a chiding of God and one another. Is
God amongst us? The place was called for this, Massah, Meribah (i.d.) striving
and chiding. The bigger Bodies are, with the greater difficulties they move;
now when great difficulties, make great impatience, toward God and toward one
another, this and not our straights indangers all.

I know nothing wherein a wise Christian has more cause to fear himself, that
his love nor his zeal is not so servent as it has been.

The Ship-wrack'd CLERK Whose Heart was gone to Rome before his Head: Drawn to
the Life by his own PENSIL.
That the Presbiterians were such Persons, as the very Devil Blushed at them;
and that the Villain Hamden grudged, and made it more Scruple of Conscience, to
give Twenty Shillings to the KING, for supplying his Necessities by Ship Money
and Loan, which was His Right by Law, than to raise Rebellion against Him: And
that the Presbiterians are worse (and far more Intolerable) than either
Priests or Jesuits.

That a Presbiterian Brother, qua talis, was as great a Traitor by the Statute,
as any Priest or Jesuit whatsoever.

Mr. Thompson in his Preaching inveyed bitterly against Subscribing Petitions
for Sitting of this Parliament, saying, That it was like the Seed of Rebellion
and like to Forty One; and that the Devil set them on work, and the Devil would
pay them their Wages; saying, That before he would set his Hand to such
Petitions, he would cut it off, yea, and cut them off.

Mr. Thompson comes to this Informant, Mr. Row, and claps his Hands on his
Shoulders, saying, Hah Boy, had Queen Elizabeth been living, you needed not to
have been Sword Bearer of Bristol. The said Row asked him why? He replied, She
loved such a lusty Rogue (so well) as he was, and he would have been very fit
for her drudgery at White Hall.

Mr. Thompson said Jan. 30. 1679. in the same Sermon, There was a great noise
of a Popish Plot, but, says he, Here is nothing in it but a Presbyterian Plot;
for here they are going about to Petition for the Sitting of the Parliament,
but the end of it will be to bring the Kings Head to the Block, as they have
done his Father.

Mr. Thompson speaking concerning the Meeters in private, said, He would hale
them out and fill the Goals with them, and hoped to see their Houses afire
about their ears in a short time; and this, he the said Thompson, doubled again
and again.

Thompson said, If he were as well sattisfied of other things, as he was of
Justification, Auricular Confession, Penance, Extreme Unction, and Crisme in
Baptism, he would not have been so long separated from the Catholic Church.
And further affirmed, That the Church of Rome was the True Catholic Church.

Further, he has heard him say, The King was a Person of mean and soft Temper
and could be led easily to any thing, but yet a Solomon in vices; but that the
Duke of York was a Prince of a brave Spirit, would be faithful to his Friends,
and c.

And that in Discourse, he commended the Romish Clergy for their single Life,
and is himself so; and did at the same time Vilify and Rail at the English
Clergy for Marrying; saying, It was better for a Clergyman to be Guelt, then
to Marry; and that the Calvinists in France were Lecherous Fellows, and c.

He further said in the Pulpit at St. Thomas's, That after Excommunication by
the Bishop, without Absolution from the Spiritual Court, such a one was surely
Damned; and he would pawn his Soul for the Truth of it.

O! when such Clergy at the Dreadful Day,
Shall make their Audit; when the Judge shall say,
Give your Accounts; what, have my Lambs been Fed?
Say, do they all stand Sound? is there none Dead
By your Defaults? come Shepherds, bring them forth,
That I may Crown your Labors in their Worth.
O what an Answer will be given by some,
We have been Silent, Profit struck us Dumb;
To say the Truth, Great Judge, they were not Fed,
Lord, here they be, but Lord, they are all Dead.
Ah Cruel Shepherds! could your Conscience serve,
To Fleece your Flock, and then to let them Starve!
Finis.
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cross, Seignior; in Harp-Court, near Fleet-Bridge,
1681.


