A BRIEF RELATION OF The Irreligion of the NORTHERN QUAKERS.

Wherein their horrid Principles and Practices, Doctrines and manners, as far
as their Mystery of Iniquity has yet discovered it self, are plainly exposed
to the view of every Intelligent Reader.

Together with a (Brief Reply) to some part of a very scurilous and lying
Pamphlet called SAUL'S errand to Damascus.

2. Pet. 2. 1. 2.

But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
Truth shall be evil spoken of.

2. Tim. 3. 9.

But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest to
all men.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. R. at the sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

To my Christian Readers.
I Here present you with a brief Relation of the execrable Irreligion of a sort
of people lately started in some parts of the North, commonly called Quakers.
When you have read it, you will be ready to dream (if you be acquainted with
the History of the last Century) that you behold the turbulent Exorcists of
Germany, redivive in England, and acting their old Tragic parts over again,
though on another Stage: and you will plainly see what ill use these men make
of that Liberty, permitted to dissenters in Religion (pleaded only for, and I
believe intended to be conceded only to tender Consciences:) and that is not
Liberty, but Libertinisme, that some men seek after: viz. That they may be as
wicked as they will without control. In the mean while the uncurb'd
Licentiousnes of many evil men, and blasphemous heretical Seducers through the
Nation, makes many honest christians now look upon the present times as ill
boding times, who a few years ago were raised in their expectations, to see
better days then any age ever produced, since the time that our Savior Christ
and his Apostles were living on earth. But to add no more to this purpose, I
will only put you in mind, what use every Christian that reads or hears this or
such like relations of the crying Evils of these present times, ought to make
of them. The more therefore the blasphemy against the God of Heaven abounds
among the Apostates of this Generation, the more we should (and if we fear God
indeed, we shall) labor to glorify him, the more we should be grieved for the
dishonor done to his sovereign Majesty, and the more earnestly should we pray,
that this bloody sin may not be imputed to the Nation. The more lightly they
esteem of the written Word of God, and the more contemptuously they undervalue
and deride the sacred Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the more should we love and
reverence and prize them, and the closer should we cleave unto them. The more
Heresies spread themselves and eat like Cankers, and the sweeter they are to
the Pallats of deluded multitudes that are gredy after them, the more should we
labor to decline the contagion, to ballast our vessels, and settle our selves
in the Truth, so, that if an Apostle from the dead, or an Angel from Heaven, or
all the Seducers on Earth should preach unto us another Gospel, they may not be
able to remove us from that which we have already received, and which is
preached to us in the Word of God. The greater the number is of those that fall
away, the more should we that think we stand take heed least we fall. The morre
violently the teachers of falls doctrines, and their supporters do oppose the
Truth, and labor to exalt and propagate their Opinions, the more earnestly
should we contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints against all the
Adversaries of it: and to add no more the more tumultuous, factious, impious
and barbarous the spirits and practices of these men are that have entertained
the Errors of the times, the more they curse and rail and threaten, and intend
mischief, the more holily, and humbly, and peaceably ought we to demean our
selves, and the more watchful ought we to be over our Conversations: that we
may be as unlike to them, as the children of the day are to those that are of
the night. The Lord grant we may make this good use of the impieties of those
that fall away.

If any of those honorable Gentlemen that are in Authority, or that it shall
please the Lord in his providence to call to the Government of this Nation,
shall vouchsafe to read over the lines of this Book; I humbly beseech them to
look upon them not as lying lines, but such as do plainly and faithfully relate
the Truth: and if they shall doubt of the verity of this Narrative. I humbly
request of they think it expedient, that by them Authority they would cause
the truth to be brought to light. The God of Heaven make us all willing, and
able to move in our proper Orbs for the interest of his Son Jesus Christ,
and his glorious Gospel.

To the Seduced Followers of George Fox, James Nayler, etc. living in
Westmerland, and some adjacent parts.
FRIENDS, for so I call you since our blessed Savior has commanded us to love
you, though you be our Enemies, to bless you, though you curse us, to do good
to you, though you hate us, and to pray for you, though you despightfully use
us, and persecute us as for as lies in your power. Believe me, I pray you; I
have written nothing in this ensuing Relation to discover your nakedness. The
Lord knows, and the whole Country where you live knows, that you have done this
for your selves too much already. Nor have I said any thing out of any inward
hatred I bear to any of you. Your Persons I love, but your wicked Principles,
your Erroneous Opinions, your Irregular, Exorbitant, unchristian Practices,
those I hate; And the Lord make me to hate all Impiety in my self, more then
in any other in the world besides. Nor have I inserted any thing to irritate
you, to exasperate your Spirits. Alas the Spirits of some of you, seem to be
already as rough as the waters of the Sea in a grown Tempest, and stand in need
of healing rather then further Exulceration. But to be plain with you, the main
end I propounded to my self in this Narative, was the Glory of God, and the
good of some poor Souls in the discovery of the wickedness of your way (if it
please the Lord to prosper it to that end) that those that hate your way may go
on to hate it still, and that your selves that have been seduced to walk in it,
through the craftiness of those that have lain in wait to deceive you, and
have in part affected it, may come to see the Impiety of that new Superstition,
rather then Religion which you have lately taken up, and that seeing it,
through the good hand of God upon you, you may be reclaimed from this way of
Perdition. Look upon your way, I pray you, which you (poor Souls) think is true
Religion, in the Glass of this Relation. Behold here the Errors and
Enormities of the chief of your Sect. Are they not their Blasphemies, their
Tenets, their Practices that are here mentioned? Do you not know, and many
others of your Sect to be guilty of some, of most of them? and are they not
Abominations also? are they not works of the flesh, and deeds of darkness? If
the Candle of the Lord be not wholly put out in you, and that light within you,
you so much talk of, be not altogether darkness; I appeal to that light. And
for my plain dealing in the ensuing Narration, I hope you of all men will not be
displeased. The Leaders and ^autors of your Sect have taken a sinful liberty
to themselves in their printed books, as in Saul's Errant to Damascus, Rich.
Farnworths Call out of all false Worships, and in another book entitled the
threefold state of Antichrist, and in another Pamphlet, called false Prophets,
and false Teachers, described by the Prisoners at York, etc. In these printed
Libels, and in your Manuscripts that fly as thick as Moths up and down the
Country; the ablest of your party, the Authors of them, have said, and railed,
and censured, and slandered, and at a venture predicted his pleasure. Let me
now repeat a little of what they have said, and tell some part of the World
some of the wickedness that is contained in them. I have not mentioned the
personal failings of any of your Society, except such practices as are
notoriously known, and have been defended, and wherein your Religion is partly
placed Nor have I aggravated any thing, or made a Mountain of your Mole-hil;
those that are well acquainted with you know, that what is here said is rather
a Molehill to your Mountain. For the Errors of your Sect mentioned in this
book; it is not my intent in this discourse to debate them with you, or to
undertake a confutation of them. To those that are not Children in knowledge,
the very nomination of them is a sufficient confutation: such clear opposition
is there between them and the word of Truth. And for your selves, I suppose
private and moderate reasonings (if you would admit of them) would be more
praevalent to reclaim you, then Writings: Yet if you would deal so ingenuously
with us, as to let us know under your hands, wherein you go alone, and dissent
from the Generation of the Children of the most High, and desire our answer to
it* a little time I hope would produce it from some abler Pen then mine, to
what should clearly appear to be Erroneous.

Lend me your Patience a little longer, while I speak yet something more freely
to you of your way, your selves that walk in it, and your Speakers that have
seduced you to it. Your way may challenge the Christian world, to show one more
wicked. I must confess to you, I do not detest Popery it self more heartily
then I do your Irreligion. Papists are open Idolaters, and the Propagators of
your Superstitions are more horrid Blasphemers: most of your Errors may throw
down the Gauntlet to the worst of theirs, besides many that you hold in common
with them. They worship God according to the fancy of the Pope and his
Conclave; You, according to the fancy of Fox, and those others that have
deluded you, or according to your own imaginations; or rather, you worship not
the Lord at all, having cast off all his Ordinances without exception; your
Soul loatheth that light Bread. Besides your Spirits are more impetuous, and
your practices and Tenets as, nay more destructive to humane Society, and
civil Peace and Government, then those of the Jesuits Proselytes: or are you
one jot less (if not more) Antichristians then they: Your way also leads to
Ranting; and if the Lord in mercy do not reclaim you, it is easy to predict,
that before a few months or years be gone over, you will be ascended to that
height and precipice of Impiety.

And for your selves, while in this way, if you be compared with the profane
people of the world, you are the worse. They, when they revile, and curse, and
drink, and swear, and live in uncleanness, will be easily convinced of, and
confess the evil of their way: But you, when you turn your backs upon Gods
word and Ordinances, and scoff at them, and speak evil of the way of Truth,
and cease not with Elymas to pervert the right ways of the Lord, and revile
the Ministers of Christ, and mock at his Messengers; you make it your Religion,
and applaud and justify your selves in it, as though you did God good Service
in so doing. Yet this Iniquity of yours is, I am assured of it, a greater and
purer piece of Profanity, then if you should, in the sight of the Sun, lie down
and wallow in the Mire of any of the common Vices and Pollutions of the world.
If there was that order and discipline established among us which Christ has
appointed in his Church, such as you should be cut off from the Lords people
by Excommunication, be solemnly delivered up to Satan, and declared to be as
Heathens and Publicans, Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic (says the
Apostle) after the first and second Admonition reject. But however men on earth
deal with you, if you live and dye without repentance in the sins above
mentioned, it is no presumption to say, the sentence of Excommunication will be
passed upon you in Heaven, and that the doors of the Kingdom of God will be
shut against you for ever. You hear the word of Truth telling you, 1 Cor. 6.
9. 10. That no unrighteous Persons, And particularly, that Revilers shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, and Gal. 5. 20. 21. That Idolatry, Witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, Heresies are manifest
works of the flesh, and that those that do such things, shall not be the
Inhabitants of that upper Region: and Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15. That the
unbeliving, and all liars shall have their part in the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. And you know how Christ will
deal with those at the last day, that obey not his Gospel. Many of these
sins specified in the Texts above cited, are the natural Fruits, or rather
essential parts of your new Irreligion; and I am sure also, they have been
hitherto in very many of your way, as the i^^^rable Adjuncts of it. The Lord
the Father of mercies open your (...) see the evil of this your way, and
reclaim you from it; for it (...) path of life, but one of the rodes to Hell,
and a way that goes down to the Chambers of death.

And for your Speakers, if ever there did arise false Prophets and Seducers,
since Christ's time, and since the Apostles fell asleep, as they have told us in
their Sacred Writings, that there should, especially in the last Ages of the
World; I do as verily believe, and know them to be such, as if they were marked
in the Forehead; so exactly do they answer the Characters and Predictions of
holy Scripture concerning this sort of men. And your selves may easily discern
them to be such by their Fruits; viz. by their Blasphemies, by their damnable
Heresies, by their lying Doctrines, by their professed disobedience to Jesus
Christ, in casting off all his Ordinances, and teaching others to do so also,
by their resisting the Truth, as Jannes, and Jambres did Moses, by their
Diabolical Trances and Raptures, by their Superstitious, unholy Fastings, by
their railing Language, by their speaking great swelling words of vanity, their
boasting of Perfection, and Voices, and Revelations, and immediate Inspirations
from the Spirit, by their will Worship, by their unchristian, immodest,
unhumane Incivilities, and Impudencies, by their bearing witness to
themselves, as that woman Jezebell did, Revel. 2. 20. who called her self a
Prophetess; by their creeping into houses, and their success in their
Seductions, in subverting whole houses, and overthrowing the faith of so many,
and drawing them to follow their pernicious ways.

It has been ordinary with the Devil in all Ages of the Chuch, especially
when he fancies or fears a time of Reformation approaching, because he cannot
abide the light of the Truth, to excite men that make some profession of
religion as his Agents, and to lend them his assistance, in stirring up
Tumults, to hinder the success and propagation thereof, and to bring it into
contempt and hatred in the world; And therefore it is not now to be look upon
as strange, that the Devil has raised up his Instruments under a
vainglorious Profession of a new and more spiritual Religion, to oppugn the
true Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and all obedience both to it and
him.

Bear with me yet a little, and I will tell you plainly what is our duty in
respect of these Deluders. It is the duty of all Christ's faithful Ministers,
who are set for the defense of the Gospel, to contend earnestly for the faith
against them, I mean not by carnal, but by those Spiritual Weapons of our
Warfare, which are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. It
is their duty to endeavor to stop the mouths of these Gainsayers from the
word of Truth, and to warn and exhort all men to avoid them as ravenous Wolves,
as the very Pests of the places where they are, or come. And for all that
desire to appear before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ with comfort, and
your selves, it is your duty to beware of them, to turn away from them, to
withdraw from their Society, and have no common familiarity with them. Hear
to this purpose the Command of the Lord in his holy word, Math. 7. 15. Beware
of false Prophets, Matthew. 24. 24, 25, 26. There shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that (if it
were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Behold I have told you
before, wherefore if they should say unto you, behold he is in the Desert, go
not forth, behold he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not. Romans 16. verse
17. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. 2 These. 3. 6.
Now we command you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received of us. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 6. From such turn away, of
this sort are they that creep into houses and lead Captive silly women, etc. 2
Ioh. verse. 10, 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed. For he that bids
him God-speed, is partaker of his evil Deeds. Except you obey these Commands
of the Lord Jesus, you will not, you cannot be his Disciples. O repent
therefore of your former disobedience to him, and your revoltings and wanderings
from him, who is the Bishop and Shepherd of Souls. Return to embrace that
Truth, from which you have turned away your Ears; and to attend upon the Lord
in those his holy Ordinances, upon which you have turned your backs, and from
those crooked by-waies, into which you have been seduced through the subtlety
of Satan's Messengers. And do this speedily, while you have time before you, and
before it be too late. It will be ere long too late to repent, and impossible
for you to return. You know how ready the Lord is to extend his mercy to the
Penitent. If this and such like fair warnings will not prevail with you, but
you will still obstinately proceed in your Enmity to the ways of God and his
Gospel, I will, and I hope all that fear the Lord will together with me set
themselves more earnestly then we have yet done, to solicit the Lord to
appear and plead from Heaven against your Heresy, and to extirpate it from
off the Earth.

Though I have not satisfied my self in this my plain address to you, nor
spoke, methinks, what I would; yet that I may not be tedious, I will add no
more but this Prayer for you. That the Lord, the Sun of Righteousness would
please to rise unto you, and chase away that night, and darkness that lies
upon your Understandings, and grant unto you Repentance, to there
acknowledgment of the Truth, and powerfully recover you out of the Snares of
the Devil; that so being turned from the power of Satan to God, you may
receive an Inheritance among those that are Sanctified through faith in him.
This is the desire of his Soul to God for you, who is

Your loving Friend F. H.

A BREIFE Relation of the Irreligion of the Northern QUAKERS:
Wherein their horrid Principles and Practices, Doctrines and Manners, as far
as their Mystery of Iniquity has yet discovered it self, are plainly exposed
to the view of every Intelligent Reader.

THE last Summer there came, or rather crept unawares into the County of
Westmerland, and some parts of Yorkshire and Lancashire adjacent to it, George
Fox, James Nailer, one Spoden, and one Thornton, all of them Satan's seeds-men,
and such as have prosperously sowed the Tares of that Enemy in the
forementioned fields, as shall be, with Gods assistance, in this ensuing
Relation manifestly declared.

These men, together with some others (who being affectors of novelties in
Religion more then Verity, were quickly made their Proselytes) have powerfully
seduced multitudes of people in these parts from the Truth, and true worship of
God, to embrace their Doctrines of Devils, and follow their pernicious ways.

This sort of people are vulgarly, and not unaptly, distinguished from others
by the name of Quakers, the reason of which Appellation I shall show you
hereafter.

Now to the end it may be as apparent as the day, that the Guides of this Sect,
notwithstanding their fair pretensions of an immediate call, and extraordinary
Mission, and the great Opinion their followers have conceived of them, are not
the servants of the Lord Jesus, but in very deed the Emissaries and Ministers
of Satan, and that their way is not the good old way, the way of God, but as
contrary to it as darkness to the light. I shall take some pains to acquaint
my Reader,

1. With the cursed Blasphemies which George Fox, the Grand Master of this
Faction, and some others have uttered.

2. With some of those Doctrines of Devils, damnable Heresies, and dangerous
Errors, which their speakers have disseminated, and wherewith they have
infected their unhappy Disciples.

3. With the bitter and rotten fruits of their Doctrine; such of their strange,
impious, seditious, suspicious, insolent, and Barbarous practices as have come
to my knowledge; some of which do in the judgment of the most sober and
intelligent Christians, strongly savor of sorcery, and the immediate
cooperation of the Devil.

Of the horrid Blasphemies of the Quakers against God and his Christ.
George Fox, the Father of the Quakers of these parts, has avowed himself
over and over, to be equal with God; being asked by Doctor Marshall, in the
presence of Master Sawro, Colonel Tell, and Colonel West, Justices of the
Peace in the County of Lancashire, at a private Sessions in the Town of
Lancaster, whether or no he was equal with God, as he had before that time
been heard to affirm: his answer was this, I am equal with God.

This Blasphemy has been attested upon Oath by the foresaid Doctor Marshall,
and Master Altam, Schoolmaster of Lancaster, before the Justices at the last
Sessions, held at Appleby, January the 8. 1652. and before Judge Puleston at
the last Assizes held at Lancaster, March the 18. 1652.

This Fox, in a Book entitled Saul's Errand to Damascus, endeavors to purge
himself of this and other such cursed speeches laid to his charge, but he does
it so woodenly and ambiguously, that if there wanted sufficient witnesses, his
own bungling answers would to a rational man, declare him guilty.

And well may he affirm himself to be equal with God, when he in the
foresaid Book, Page eight, Line nine and ten, lays down this blasphemous
Proposition indefinitely. He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead, is equal with God.

The said Fox has also avowed himself to be the Christ, yea, to be the way,
the Truth, and the life. George Bickett, Isaac Bourne witnesses.

At the last Assizes abovementioned at Lancaster, Mr. Sawro, a Justice of the
Peace in that County, and an honest Gentleman, told Judge Puleston in the open
Court, that he could produce many would witness, that Fox had affirmed
himself to be the Christ. The same also he said in the hearing of an honest
Minister in Westmerland, who will be ready to attest it when called to it.

This Fox has also professed himself to be the Judge of the World. George
Bickett, Adam Sands, Nathaniel Atkinson witnesses. Yea, the Eternal Judge of
the World: George Bickett witnesses.

James Nailer, another of Satan's Nuntioes, and principal spokesman in these
parts, affirms that he was as holy, just, and good, as God himself. This was,
I hear, attested at Kendall by two witnesses. There is a man of good Repute,
an Inhabitant of Underbarrow, in the Barony of Kendall, who says, many heard
this Blasphemy besides himself; but he thinks, being all followers of this
Nailer, and Fox, they will be unwilling to testify it.

James Milner, one of Foxes Disciples, in the County of Lancashire, professed
himself to be God, and Christ. Thomas Shaw, Gerard Shaw, George Inman
witnesses. This man's Advocate, I mean that Pamphleteer, that took the pains to
put forth, and procure the printing of that Book, called Saul's Errant to
Damascus, or he that undertook to answer in his behalf, to Salve this his
execrable Blasphemy, and some wretched Prophesies which are already turned into
lies, has minted this miserable Excuse. As for James Milner (says he) though
his mind did run out from his condition, and from minding that Light of God
which is in him, whereby the world takes occasion to speak against the Truth,
and many Friends stumble at it, yet there is a pure Seed in him.

It seems if a man be of their way, though a Blasphemer and false Prophet, by
their own confession, yet with them he is excusable.

One Williamsons Wife, a Disciple of Milners, when she came to see him at
Appleby, said in the hearing of diverse there (whose names might be here
inserted, if it was needful) that she was the Eternal Son of God; And when
the men that heard her, told her that she was a woman, and therefore could not
be the Son of God; She said, no, you are women, but I am a man. These last
words I insert, that the Reader may see how strongly the Spirits of some of
these people are transported, and how ready they are to affirm any thing how
ever impious, or absurd.

Of the Erroneous Opinions of the QUAKERS.
HItherto of their Blasphemies. Now for the Doctrines which the Leaders of this
Sect have avouched and taught; and the Principles they have instilled into
their credulous Adhaerents: They are some of them Errors of the first
Magnitude, Fundamental Errors. Others of them, though of a lesser size in
their own nature, yet the understanding Reader will censure them to be such as
tend to the disturbance of the Civil Peace, as well as that of the Church.
Others of them again are such light stuff, as shows them to be mere triflers
in Religion.

I shall hear mention such of their Errors only, as I can bring sufficient
proof for; either from those that have been Ear-witnesses, and are well
acquainted with their way, or from their own printed Books, which are owned and
admired by their Disciples.

1. They hold that the holy Scripture, the Writings of the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles are not the word of God, and that there is no written
word of God: But they say, using a foolish distinction of their own coining,
that they are a declaration of the word only in those that gave the faith.

2. They hold their own speakings are a declaration of the word [Christ] in
them, thereby making them, though they be for the most part full of impiety,
and nonsense, to be of equal Authority with the holy Scriptures.

3. They hold that no Exposition ought to be given of the holy Scripture, and
that all expounding of Scripture is an adding to it; and that God will add to
such a one all the plagues written in that Book. Opening, and applying the
Scripture, is one thing they mainly declaim against, where ever they come.

4. They teach poor people, that whosoever takes a text of Scripture and makes
a Sermon of, or from it, is a Conjurer, and that his preaching is Conjuration.

Fox in his printed answer to this (Saul's Errant) Page 7. says thus; All that
study to raise a living thing out of a dead, to raise the Spirit out of the
letter, are Conjurers, and draw Points, and Reasons, and so speak a divination
of their own brain; they are Conjurers and Diviners, and their teaching is from
Conjuration, which is not spoken from the mouth of the Lord, and the Lord is
against all such, and who are of God are against all such: for their Doctrine
does not profit the people at all, for it stands not in the Counsel of God,
but it is a Doctrine of the Devil, and draws people from God.

5. They affirm that the Letter of the Scripture is carnal.

6. That he that puts the Letter for light, is blind.

7. That the word is not the Rule, whereby to try their Spirits; they will not
allow of comparing of that Watcher (they say) they have within, with the
written word in Scripture.

8. They call the written word of God, the Worlds word, the Worlds light,
Touchstone, Rule, and say, our outward Scriptures and glorious Gospel is dust.
Some of them have affirmed, it was no great matter if all the Bibles in England
were burnt.

9. It is a Doctrine general with them, that the Soul is a part of God, or of
the Divine Essence; and was actually existent long before it was conveyed into
the Body. This wicked Opinion of the Priscilianists, and other old Erronists
now revived by this Sect, some of the most eminent of them have endeavored to
maintain against Mr. Cole, a godly and learned Minister living in Kendall.

10. The denial of any distinction of Persons in the Godhead is common with
them. Fox, Saul's Errant, Page 12. affirms, that it is but a busy mind to
enquire whether there be one Individual God, distinguished into Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.

11. They hold that Christ has no body but his Church.

12. That Jesus Christ is come into their flesh, that he is in them as man,
that the man Christ dwells in them.

13. That Christ his coming in the flesh is but a figure, and all he did is
nothing else but an Example (the exploded Doctrine of the Socinians (denying
the efficacy and virtue of his Blood and Sacrifice, by which in his own body he
purged away sin) which Principle stands clear in the Lancashire charge against
them, and nothing evaded by what is laid down under the name of an Answer,
called, Saul's Errant, Page 8.

14. They hold that Christ is a light within every man, and that every man must
mind that light and teacher within, and follow no Teacher without. Nailer, when
Mr. Cole had some discourse with him at Kendall, affirmed to him that Christ
was in all men, even in Reprobates, and that in them he is held under
Corruption.

15. They hold that all men in the world, have in them a light sufficient to
Salvation; Turks, Indians, yea, such as never had, or ever shall have any
outward means to reveal Christ to them.

16. Some of them have argued that the man Christ is not ascended into Heaven.

17. They hold that we are justified by Christ alone, without Imputation.

18. They hold Prayer for remission of sins a needless thing.

19. They hold that that Righteousness which Jesus Christ fulfilled in his own
Person with us, and before we were born, is not the matter of our Justification.

20. Some of them, and those no mean ones among them, neither hold the Popish.
Doctrine of Justification by works, or inhaerent Righteousness, which Christ
in him inables them to perform.

21. They hold that in Conversion there is no new nature, no habit of grace, or
Seed of God infused, but that Christ that was in man before, is then raised up
in them out of Prison.

22. They hold that there is fullness of Glory in this life, that they enjoy
God here, and Christ here, the Resurrection, Judgment, Angels, Glory, and all
they look for they enjoy in this life, and mock at those that speak of another
World, or life to come, or a better Kingdom.

23. They deny many of them the Resurrection of the body.

24. They hold that there is no Local Heaven, or Hell.

25. They hold many of them, that they have attained to a state of Perfection,
and that they neither do, nor can sin.

26. They hold that the calling of the Ministry of England, without any
exception, is Antichristian.

27. They affirm that there is no such thing contained in the holy Scripture,
as a Mediate call to the Ministry by man.

28. They hold the Office of teaching to be utterly useless in the Church of
God, and tell the most ignorant people where they come, that they have no need
that any man should teach them, and therefore dissuade them from hearing any of
our Ministers what ever, telling them they shall be damned if they do so; and
that all that go to the best houses to hear them, shall be turned like Chaff
and Stubble, and charge people not to believe a word that any of them speak.
And for themselves when they speak, they say, they do not teach or preach, but
only declare the Revelations of God in them.

29. They hold that Fox and all the rest of their Speakers are immediately
called. Saul's Errent, Page 4. Fox says, they were moved to come into those
parts by the Lord, and the Lord let them see he had a people here before they
came. Nailer also at the last Sessions at Appleby, Ian. 1652. affirmed in the
face of the Court, that when he was at Plow in Barley Seed time, meditating on
the things of God, he suddenly heard a voice commanding him to go out from his
Country, and from his Fathers house, and had a promise given in with it. And
being demanded whether he heard the Voice, he said he heard it himself, but
those that were with him heard it not. Being asked again whether it was an
Audible Voice; he answered, no friend, it was not a carnal Voice, audible to
the outward Ear. A little after, going on in his relation, he said, that going
agateward (they are his own words) with a friend from his own house, the Voice
come to him again, commanding him to go into the West, not telling him whether
he should go, or what he was to do there; but when he had been there a little
while, it was given him what he was to declare.

If my Reader please to be detained with another short Story to this purpose,
he shall have it.

Fox, with one or two other men, his Companions, as I heard it, came to an
Honorable Gentleman's house in Cumberland. One of the house came to them to the
door to know their business: They asked if the Gentleman of the house was
within, calling him by his name (for they give no title of respect to any man
whatsoever) they were answered affirmatively. Being called in, the Gentleman
took them aside, to know what they would with him; they told him they were sent
to him from God: He enquired of them how they certainly knew it; they answered
a Voice came to them, commanding them to come to him: He asked them again where
this Voice came to them: they replied, T: F: his Garden in Lancashire; he
demanded again, what that Voice commanded them to say to him? they answered, it
was not yet given in to them: The Gentleman then told them, if they knew not
what they had to say to him, he knew not what he had further to say to them.
That night being toward Evening, they were entertained in that Gentleman's
house, and being desired by the Servants to Supper, they refused to eat, but
called for a little water only. The next Morning also they refused to eat any
thing, but offered to one of the Servants money for their Lodging; he told them
they did not well to come thither to abuse his Master, he kept no Inn. In the
return toward their old Randezvous, a few miles from this Gentleman's house,
they called at a little Alehouse that stands alone, where desiring the Hostess
to provide for their Breakfast, they eat, and drank heartily. The poor woman a
little after told one of the aforesaid Gentleman's Servants that had occasion
that way, that two or three notable Trencher-men had been at her house, who
enquiring what manner of men they were, knew them to be the same men that had
been at his Masters.

30. They deny all Ordinances, and their practice is suitable to this their
wicked Tenet. An honest Minister in Westmerland discoursing with Fox, asked him
whether he did believe Prayer, Preaching, the Sacraments, Meditation,
Holy-conference to be Ordinances of God. No, says he, away with them, I deny
them all.

31. They call the Worship of God used in our public Assemblies, a beastly
worm-eaten form, a Heathenish way, and Worship, fleshly, carnal, etc.

32. They hold that the sprinkling of Infants is Antichristian, and their
Baptism the mark of the Beast, spoken of in the Revelation, which those that
worship the Beast recieve in their foreheads.

33. They affirm that there is not one word in Scripture that speaks of a
Sacrament, and that they are unlawful; that a little bread, and a little wine
in a Sacrament is the Worlds Communion, and that in the true Church of God
there is no talk of such carnal things.

A Minister in Westmerland having some conference with Fox, and knowing him to
be against the Baptism of Infants, asked him, if he did not own the Baptism
of water to be an Ordinance, No, says he, I deny it, there is no such
Ordinance.

34. They hold it unlawful to sing the Psalms of David, and call them the
Worlds Psalms, carnal Psalms, and say we sing David's quakings, and
tremblings, and that we put David's Conditions into Rhyme, and Meter, and sing
them to the dishonor of God,

35. They deny the Lords day to be the Christian Sabbath, and say, the Sabbath
is a Mystery which we understand not.

36. They hold it unlawful to worship God in our Churches (commonly and
metonymically so called) and term them Idols Temples, beasts houses, where God
is not worshipped, but the worship of the Beast is upheld, and that the Beasts
of the field meet there, Night-birds, Screech Owls.

37. For the Office of the Magistracy, though they do not yet openly declaim
against it, fearing they should be quickly called to account for such an
attempt; yet their Opinions which some of their lavish Tongues have manifested
touching it, as also this rude irreverent, saucy deportment toward
Magistrates, wherein they show not so much as any common respect to them; their
bold, and impious Predictions of the ruin of all in Authority whatsoever, and
railings against them, do easily evidence them to be none of the best friends
to it. The ensuing words are the words of a godly learned Minister to a friend
of his. However (says he) the advice of some of late has made them wiser:
There was no Doctrine more ordinary at their first entering into these parts (at
which time they spoke their hearts more freely, and plainly then they have done
since; sense of danger, and some little opposition, having made them more
politic) then that we owe no Obedience to any Magistrate, and that we ought
not to own them with any honor or subjection. Mr. Cole several times
endeavored the Conviction of some of them, from that abundant Testimony the
Gospel gives to that distinction of Magistrates and Subjects, Superiors, and
Inferiors but in vain. And in his discourse with Nailer at Kendall, when
Nailer told him, he accused him in this point falsely, Providence so ordered
it, that one of his followers was there present, who having before maintained
the said Doctrine to him, confessed then, he had recieved it from James Nailer.

One Leonard Till, of their way in Lancashire, affirmed, that one man ought not
to have power over another.

Another principal man of the Sect in our County, affirmed to a Justice of
Peace, there would be Quakers in Westmerland, when there should be never a
Justice of Peace in it; for which words he was Indicted at the Sessions Ian.
last.

How those of this Sect at York, now Prisoners there, railed against the
Judges, ealling them Scarlet colored Beasts, etc. while sitting on the Bench,
is not unknown.

Such Justices of the Peace that appear against their way, they call Justices
so called.

38. They hold that all things ought to be common, and teach the Doctrine of
Levelling privately to their Disciples. Those that know the Leaders of this
Sect best, judge them to be down right Levellers, and that fear of suppression
keeps them for the present from teaching that Doctrine openly. Several of them
have affirmed that there ought to be no distinction of Estates, but an
universal parity, and one above the rest denied the property of Estates; a
third affirmed that whersoever Christ came, he came to destroyal property.

39. They hold to quote Fathers and Authors in preaching is Antichristian.

40. They are of Opinion that it is unlawful to call any man Master, or Sir.

41. They hold it unwarrantable to salute any man by the way.

42. They account it unlawful to use the Civility of our Language, in speaking
to a single Person in the Plural number.

I do not lay all the Tenets above recited to the charge of every one of them,
nor do I believe that all of them hold them all, some of them are defended by
some certain men of them only. Others of them are maintained by them all in
general.

Of the wicked Practices of the QUAKERS, and first of their Meetings, and
Speakings.
HItherto of their Errors that are come to our knowledge; I shall now go on to
present my Reader with a brief view of their black wicked Practices, the
natural Fruits of such corrupt Principles, as are above mentioned. In doing of
which I shall principally take notice of their Meetings, Speakings, Quakings,
Fastings, Revellings, Censoriousnesse, ^^ings, Inconstancy in their own
Opinions, enmity to Learning, Idleness, Incivilities, bloody, barbarous, and
turbulent Practices, for their ways have not been altogether in the Clouds;
nor their deeds of darkness always done in corners.

For the truth of this relation (let me say thus much beforehand for the
praevious satisfaction of my Reader) the particulars of it are most of them so
notoriously known to the whole Country, where these degenerated people live,
that no sober man can deny them. Many of them are, and will be owned by
themselves; for they make some of these horrid Practices hereafter mentioned a
part of their Religion, and glory in them. And there is I think few particulars
contained in it, which we shall want witnesses to attest (if need be) upon Oath.

And first for their Meetings, and the manner of them. They come together on
the Lords Days, or on other days of the week indifferently, at such times and
places, as their Speakers or some other of them think fit. Their number is
sometimes thirty, sometimes forty, or sixty, sometimes a hundred, or two
hundred in a swarm. The places of their Meetings are for the most part, such
private houses as are most solitary; and remote from Neighbors, situated in
Dales and by-places: Sometimes the open fields, sometimes the top of an Hill,
or rocky hollow places, on the sides of Mountains, are the places of their
Randezvous. In these their Assemblies for the most part they use no Prayer: Not
in one Meeting of ten, and when they do, their Praying Devotion is so quickly
cooled, that when they have begun, a man can scarce tell to twenty before they
have done. They have no singing of Psalms, Hymns, or spiritual Songs, that
is an Abomination. No reading or Exposition of holy Scripture, this is also an
Abhorrency. No teaching, or preaching, that is in their Opinion the only thing
that is needless. No Administration of Sacraments; with them there is no talk
(they say) of such carnal things, not so much as any Conference by way of
question is allowed of: That which asks, they say, does not know, and they
call propounding of any Question to them, a tempting of them. They have only
their own mode of speaking (that is all the Worship that I can hear of) which
they do not call, but deny to be preaching; nor indeed does it deserve that
more honorable Name. If any of their chief Speakers be among them, the rest
give place to them; if absent, any of them speak, that will pretend a
Revelation; sometimes Girls are vocal in their Convents, while leading men
are silent: Sometimes after they are Congregated, there is (altum silentium)
not a whisper among them for an hour or two, or three together. This time they
are waiting which of them the Spirit shall come down upon, in Inspirations and
give utterance unto. Sometimes they only read the Epistles of Fox and Nayler,
which according to their Principles are (to them) of as great Authority as the
Epistles of Peter and Paul.

They exceedingly affect Night meetings, which are usually of both Sexes very
lately, and not infrequently continued all Night long. Their Holyes, they
think, are best dispensed while others are asleep; these unseasonable dark
Assemblies of theirs, much like the Nightmeetings of the Anabaptists in
Munster, which afterward proved fatal to that City, in a time of peace and
liberty, considering the Constitutions of the Spirits of this people, have been
in some places a just cause of affrightment to the Neighboring Inhabitants
that are not of their way, who have professed they could scarcely sleep in
their Beds without fear.

These Night-meetings were therefore forbidden by the Justices at the Sessions
at Appleby, January last, where one of them pleaded stiffly for this liberty of
the Subjects, as he called it.

For the manner of their Speakings, their Speaker for the most part uses the
posture of standing, or sitting with his hat on; his countenance severe, his
face downward, his eyes fixed mostly toward the Earth, his hands and fingers
expanded, continually striking gently on his breast; his beginning is without a
Text, abrupt and sudden to his hearers, his Voice for the most part low, his
Sentenses incohaerent, hanging together like Ropes of Sand, very frequently
full of Impiety, and horrid Errors, and sometimes full of sudden pauses; his
whole Speech a mixed bundle of words and heap of Nonsense, his Continuance in
speaking is sometimes exceeding short, sometimes very tedious, according to the
paucity or plenty of his Revelations: His admiring Auditors that are of his
way, stand the while like men astonished, listening to every word, as though
every word was oraculous; and so they believe them to be the very words and
dictates of Christ speaking in him.

Sometimes some of them, men, or women, will more like Phrantick people, then
modest Teachers of the Gospel; or like the Prophets of Munster, or John of
Leydens Apostles, run through, or stand in the streets, or Marketplace, or get
upon a stone, and cry Repent, Repent, woe, woe, the Judge of the World is come,
Christ is in you all, believe not your Priests of Baal, they are Liars, they
delude you. Kendall, and many other Towns in these Norihern parts, are
witnesses of these mad Speakings, and Practices.

The matter of the most serious and ablest of their Speakers, is quicquid in
Buccam venerit, and for the most part of this Nature. They exhort people to
mind the light within, to hearken to the Voice and follow the guide within
them, to dwell within, and not to look forth; for that which looks forth
tends to darkness: They tell them that the Lord is now coming to teach his
people himself alone, that they have an Unction, and need not that any man
should teach them; that all their Teachers without, the Priests of the world
do, decieve them, away with them; that they speak the Divination of their own
brain, and every one seeks for gain from his Quarter, that they take Tithes
which are odious in the sight of the Lord.

That they teach for Lucre and for the Fleece, and live in Pride,
Covetousness, Envy, and in great houses, that they sit in the Seat of the
Scribes and Pharisees, go in long Robes, are called of men, Masters; that they
scatter people, and delude them with Notions of fleshly Wisdom, and ways of
Worship according to their own wills, and not according to the Mind of the
Lord. They call them out of all false ways, and worships, and forms, and
false Ordinances (so they call all the Ordinances of God used in our public
Assemblies.) Such stuff as this all their speakings are for most part stuffed
with. Something also they speak of Repentance, of living under the Cross;
against Pride in Apparel, and Covetousness. But the main Subject and Design
of their Speakings, is to invey against Ministers, and Ordinances, to bring
ignorant Country people to hate or forsake them, to mind only their light
within for teaching, which they tell them is sufficient to Salvation.

Reader; I do verily believe that if the Deceiver of the Nations should come
visibly abroad clothed in flesh, as a Speaker, he would reach the very same
Doctrine that these men do, or some other very like unto it: Such as wherein he
would not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord. 1. To render them
odious, and make them seem to be perverse ways to the Ignorant Multitude, and
such as wherein he would chiefly labor to persuade them to turn their backs
upon the preaching of the Gospel, and all Gods Ordinances, and to mind only
the light and guide within them: which is plainer English, to worship God,
according to their own Fancies, to pursue the bent and inclination of their own
Nature, and to do only that which is right and good in their own eyes.

If the Devil himself (whose Mercuries these Speakers, of whom I am now
speaking, are) could with his Seductions prevail upon unstable Souls; but thus
far what would he desire more?

I have related in part what is, and will now tell you according to the best
intelligence I could gain, what is not the subject of their speakings: I once
heard Naylor speak a while my self; I have enquired of diverse that have been
the Auditors of others of them, I have read very many of their Epistles and
Papers that are common in the Country, which I think I can produce. I could
never see, or hear, or learn, that they speak almost any thing of the
miserable estate of all men by Nature, of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, of his two
Natures, of the reality of his Deity, and Humanity, of his Office of
Mediatorship, especially of his Sacerdotall Office, of his Meritorious death
and Resurrection, of the Satisfaction he has given to God for us, of his
Intercession for us, of Remission of Sins, and Justification to life to be
obtained through faith in his blood. These glad Tidings, these Evangelical
Doctrines are too low for their highflown Spirits. Instead of making our Lord
Jesus Christ (blessed for ever be his holy Name) the Object of their teaching;
they make Ministers, and Tythers, and the pure light that is in every man that
comes into the World, the Object of their teaching. And the two first of them,
chiefly of their railing. If they chance to speak any thing of those
Gospell-Doctrines above rehearsed, it is so obscurely, mystically, and in such
odd terms, that they do rather darken then clear up those truths to their
hearers, and so erroneously, that they had a hundred times better let speaking
alone; For these wretched Speakers must one day know, that it is no little sin
to adulterate the Glorious everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ.

And for propagation of such their erroneous Opinions as are heretofore
recited: Their Speakers and others of their way that have nothing else to do
but follow them, wander from one Parish and part of the Country to another;
sometimes ten, or twenty, sometimes a whole Troop of them together; and by
their Agents and Letters which they send before hand to those that are friends
to their Sect, or that they hear are Opinionative, and addicted to Novelties
in Religion, gather people together. And sometimes they are invited by such as
hanker after their way. Where their places of meeting are, many resort, some
out of curiosity to see their persons that are so famous, or infamous rather in
these parts for their Seductions; some itching to hear how and what manner of
Doctrine they speak. In these Conventions they tell people they are sent to
them from God, to declare what he has revealed in them, and begin such
Preachments as are above Deciphered: Where this Swarm hives, they are generally
more chargeable in two or three Nights then the payment of their Tithes, which
they so eagerly declaim against, would be in two or three years.

Of their Quaking Fits, and the manner of them
NOW for their Quakings, one of the most immediate notable Fruits, and
Accidents of their speakings, though their speakings be a very Chaos of words
and errors, yet very often while they are speaking, so strange is the effect
of them in their unblest Followers, that many of them, sometimes men, but more
frequently Women and Children fall into quaking fits. The manner of which is
this; Those in their Assemblies that are taken with these fits, fall suddenly
down, as it were in a Swoon, as though they were surprised with an Epilepsis,
or Apoplexy, and lie grovelling on the Earth, and struggling as it were for life,
and sometimes more quietly as though they were departing; while the Agony of
the fit is upon them their lips quiver, their flesh and joints tremble, their
bellies swell as though blown up with wind, they foam at the mouth, and
sometimes purge as if they had taken Physic: In this fit they continue
sometimes an hour or two, sometimes longer before they come to themselves
again, and when it leaves them they roar out horribly with a voice greater
then the voice of a man; The noise, those say, that have heard it is a very
horrid fearful noise, and greater sometimes then any Bull can make.

The Speaker, when any of them falls in this Fit, will say to the rest (that
are sometimes astonished at this Sight, especially if they be Incipients, let
them alone, trouble them not, the Spirit is now struggling with flesh, if the
Spirit overcome they will quickly come out of it again, though it be sorrow now
it will be joy in the Morning, etc. And when they have said a few words to this
effect, they go on with their speaking.

Sometimes' they carry those wretched Patients to Beds, when they are near
them, and let them lie on them till their Fit be over. These Quakings they
maintain, Saul's Errant Page 5 and in their Books and Papers call them the
mavelous works of the Lord; Battles of shaking and trembling before the
presence of the Lord, and call them that speak against them Ishmaelites, that
scoff at the Works of the Lord, and endeavor to prove them to be from God,
horribly abusing the holy Scriptures to this purpose. The chief places they
quote for this purpose, are, Ezra 9. 4. and 10. 13. Isaiah 66. 2 Ier. 5. 22.
and 23. 9. Hos. 13 1. Hab. 3. 16. Act. 9, 6. 2. Cor. 17. 15. Ephesians. 6. 5 Phil. 2.
12. Heb. 12. 21. etc.

They say also, those that speak against this Quaking, show themselves to be
Blasphemers, and that it is presumption and blasphemy against the holy Ghost to
speak against it. From their frequent falling into these Fits and defending of
them, this people have deserved the name of Quakers. A Title of distinction,
not Dignity, now usually given to them.

Some are of Opinion that these quaking Fits are mere feignnigs, but others
look upon them as real passions.

I hope my Reader will not be displeased, if I freely deliver my own Opinion.
In plain English, then I do heartily believe these Quakings to be Diabolical
Raptures immediately proceeding from the power of Satan; if not from his
Corporal Possession, or Obsession of the Parties so passive.

For 1. diverse Godly learned Christians, Ministers, Physicians, and such as are
able to judge, do so conceive of them.

2. It is an utter impossibility for any man, especially women, that never knew
what belonged to Stage-playing, and young Children to feign such swounings,
tremblings, palsie-motions, swelling, foaming, purging, such great and horrid
screechings, and roarings; yea common Modesty would restrain any man, or woman
that are themselves, from such uncleanly Excretions as do often accompany these
sordid Trances. Surely it must needs be some black Art that works so
turbulently on men's Spirits or bodies, and conjures them into such Surprises.

3. The holy Scripture predicts, 2 These. 2. 9. that the coming of Antichrist,
the man of sin, etc. shall be after the working of Satan, with all Power, and
Signs, and lying Wonders, and withal deceivablenes of Unrighteousness in them
that perish; and that God shall send his Followers strong Delusions to believe
lies, etc. Ergo the coming of Antichrist and Heretical Speakers may be such
also.

4. Their Quakings are very like the Fits of that Child mentioned, Mark. 9. 17,
18. 20. 26.

Master (says the Father of the Child to Christ) I have brought unto thee my
Son which has a dumb Spirit, and wheresoever he takes him he teareth him, and
he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away, and strait-way the
Spirit tare him, and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming, and the Spirit
cried and rent him sore and came out of him, and he was as one dead. This is as
punctual a Description of a Quakers Fit, as if it had been intended for a
portrature of it; and for that particular in it which concerns pining away,
all the Country in these parts knows how pitifully many of the Quakers look
by reason of those Fits, and immoderate fastings, and some distemper it may be
of brain besides, and what pale ill countenances they have now in comparison of
what they had before they joined themselves to this Sect: This is not generally
true of them, but so true of some of them, that they may be discovered by their
very faces.

5. The Devil delights to possess and abuse the bodies of men and women that
are in his power, when, and as far as God permits; but this people who have
forsaken the truth and true Worship of God, his Ordinances, Commandments, and
are selfe-excommunicate, may more then probably be looked upon as delivered up
to Satan by God himself, as may appear by this whole Relation.

Ergo the Devil Will delight to possess and abuse their bodies.

6. It is no new thing for false Prophets to fall into Satanicall Trances; such
were Mathewes, Becold, and others the Prophets of Munster, which lay sometimes
two or three days in their Ecstacies (though some think they were Forgeries)
and therefore we need not wonder at these Raptures, as if some strange thing had
happened amongst us that was never heard of before; especially seeing this
people both Leaders and Learners (if it be proper to call them so that will
away with no teaching) are as like that Phrantick Rabble that once Reigned in
Munster, as any one thing can be like another.

7. Women or Children, or those that have fasted long, such as are most subject
to Fascination, do most frequently fall into these Surprizals.

8. These Ecstasies are seals of Doctrines of Devils, therefore from the
Devil. Mr. Perkins in his discourse of Witchcraft, Chap. 3. Sect. 4. makes
this difference betwixt Divine and Diabolical Trances; Divine Ecstasies tend
always (says he) to the confirming of the truth of the Gospel and the
furtherance of true Religion and Piety, such was Peter's, Act. 10. 11. which
served to assure him of his calling to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and
to inform his Judgment in this Truth, that there was no acceptance of Persons
with God, and that to them of the new Testament, all things were clean and
nothing polluted. But the scope of them that are from Satan is principally the
suppressing and hinderance of Religion, the drawing of the weak into Errors,
the ratifying and confirming of those that are fallen thereinto, and the
general upholding of practices of ungodliness.

9. Mr. Perkins ibid. makes this another difference between Divine and
Satanicall Trances. In Divine Trances (says he) the Servants of God have all
their Senses, yea, and all the powers of Soul and Body remaining sound and
perfect, only for a time the Actions and Operations are suspended and cease to
do their duty. But in Ecstasies that be from Satan, his Instruments are all
cast into Frenzies and Madness, so as Reason in them is darkened, and
Understanding obscured, Memory weakened, the Brain distempered; so kind is
Satan to his Friends that he will leave his tokens behind him where ever he
comes in this sort. That some of these people have fallen out right and
furiously mad, and dyed in that madness: That others of them have been and are
strangely distracted, and that the Countenance' of many of them bewraies the
troubles and distemper of their heads, is too well known in these parts to be
denied. This Brain-sicknesse though I know it is principally to be imputed to
the just Judgment of God upon them who have turned away their Ears from the
Truth, and greedily drunk down many intoxicating Opinions; yet I think it very
probable, that in some of them it is the Fruit of these Ecstatick Fits, whereby
Satan has disturbed and debilitated their Intellectuals.

10. George Fox the Ringleader of this Sect, has been and is vehemently
suspected to be a Sorcerer.

The presumptions of his wickedness in this kind are not weak. Some persons of
good quality that came out of Notinghamshire to Kendall, told them of Note in
that Town what Pranks this Fox had played, and what disturbance he had caused
in that County before he came into these more Northern parts, and with all he
credibly reported to them a very strange story, of the Devils discovering this
Fox to be one of his Vassalls and Agents, while he was there in a certainr
house, together with many of his Disciples speaking to them. This Accident he
said, caused many of his followers to desert both him and his wicked way, and
principally procured this Foxes Apprehension and imprisonment in Nottingham
Castle, till he run away, and his Keeper with him.

It has been his custom in these parts, to fix his Eyes earnestly on such
strangers as came into his company a good while together as though he would look
them through. If any one please to look on him sted fastly again, it is his
manner impudently to out-stare them. His followers say he can out-look any man,
and that he does it to know what is in them, but if there be such a thing as
Fascination by an evil Eye. I should rather suspect him guilty of that, then
of any abillity to discern the complexions of men's souls in their Faces.

When such as have conceived any likeing of their way come to their meetings,
or any young men or women or others are by their proselyted friends who desire
to make them as bad as themselves, brought to hear him speak or discourse with
him, it is another of his Customs to talk and hold them a while by the hand,
and it is confidently reported that many he has thus handled, though some of
them before their comeing to him did exceedingly disaffect both him and his
Impieties even to hatred, and though they stayed but a while with him and heard
nothing from him that might either morally persuade or rationally convince them
of the evil of their former way, or if any greater Excellency in his new way,
yet so strangely have they been wrought upon, and altered that they been all on
the sudden earnest, feirce, impetuous in both for it, and him, and do now
much more violently affect his wicked Religion then ever before they did
distaste it. Such heady* fiery, diverters of many Men and Women to their way
makes sober Christians, think that though there be nothing that is divine,
either in it or the Propagators of it, yet there is much Diabolical attraction
and Art in both.

Many have professed, that having left their society after dislike of their
ways, they have been for a while so distempered both in mind and body that
their bodies have been all wett with sweat in their Bedds, and they could not
get a winck of sleep.

These and such like accidents especially that faculty which most of their
Speakers have to cause their hearers fall into such Diabolical Ecstasies above
described, has induced many understanding Christians to believe that these
blasphemous heretical Impostors are accompanied with the power and workings of
Satan.

Of their FASTINGS.
THey use also Fastings, which are some sometimes prescribed by their Speakers
to their Novices, and continued by those that observe them for many days
together, but their Fasts are as the Apostle calls the humility of
VVill-worshippers; A voluntary humility, not savouring of Religion, not joined
with Prayer, but undertaken as a foolish imitation of the miraculous forty
days Fasts of Moses, Elias, Christ, and the long three weeks abstinence of
Daniel, and three days Fast of the Apostle Paul, and as is conceived for the
procuring of Revelations and inspirations, as they think of the Spirit. And
they that use such ceremonies to purchase them, may have them (I believe) from
one Spirit or other. Many of them have fasted themselves so weak, they could
scarce go, and till their faces have gathered blackness: One of them of late I
could name, has fasted himself so weak, that he could scarcely speak, or go,
otherwise, then by the help of some to lead and support him: a servant made
that lived in the house with him, reports that she is certain, that for
foureteen days together, he neither eat nor drunk, a crum or drop of any
thing: some that have lately seen him are of opinion, he is starved almost past
recovery, but whether death will be the issue of his Fasting or no, must be
left to the providence of God, and to a little time to determine. But where are
such ungodly Murtherous Fasts as these prescribed in the Word? David George of
Delfe, a Blasphemous Impostor, whom George Fox resembles as much as one Egg
another, had frequently his three days Fasts. The Heathen Priests in China use
abstinence sometimes for thirty days together, to procure ability to
Prophecy. The savage Indians in New England that are trained up for Powwowes
(so they call their Wizards) use to fast many days before the Devil appears
to them, and they make their compact with him. And some Maids there are that
know what Saint Agnes Fast means; and Papists (we know) have their Fasts as
well as Quakers. All Fasts are not holy Fasts, some are Superstitious, and some
are Diabolical. No more of them.

Of their Railings.
THey are also as horrible Railers as ever any Age brought forth, a Generation
whose mouths are full of bitterness, whose throats are open Sepulchers, etc.
The Billinsgate Oister-women are not comparable to them. It is ordinary with
them in the Letters they write to other men to call them Fools, Sots,
Hypocrites, vain men, Beasts, Blasphemers, Murderers of the just. It is a
customary thing with this Gang of people in their discourse with others, to
tell them they are Dogs, Heathen, etc. One of Kendall going to the Burial of a
Minister his acquaintance, met a woman of this Sect by the way, and asked her
if she had seen the Corpse go by; I saw, says she, a company of Heathen go to
bury a dead Dog. Such language is common in the mouths of their principal
Speakers, and none more notorious this way, then Fox, their prime Oracle.

If any man in their Meetings speak any thing in opposition to what they
deliver, or asks any Question wherein he desires to be satisfied, not
agreeable to their humors; or manifests the least disrelish of what they say,
it is enough to provoke such Terms. To give one Example, Nayler at a private
Meeting in Sedbergh, asked an honest Christian, Samuel Handley, whether he was
without sin, or no? Handley replied, he was a Sinner; hereupon Nayler called
him a Thief, a Murderer, a Cain, and justified himself to be without sin.

They rail against the very Aedisicies wherein we meet together to worship
God; against the Ordinances there practiced, against the Doctrine there taught:
but never reason like men, or Christians out of the Scriptures, against the
Corruptions they conceive to be in them; Yea, they spare not the Pulpit, that
is, they say, the Seat of the Pharisee, the chief place in the Synagogue, the
high place that is to be demolished and broken down: Yea, sometimes they spare
not the Dignity of Magistracy, but speak evil of them as far as they dare.
But their hate and spite is specially against the persons of Ministers and
calling of the Ministry, which they impiously revile with open mouth, even all
the Ministry of England without exception; calling them the Priests of the
World, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Liars, and a
Viperous and a Serpentine Generation, Blasphemers, Scarlet colored Beasts,
Babylons Merchants selling beastily Ware, whited Walls, ravening Wolves, greedy
Dogs, Baals Priests, Tithemongers, Deceivers, Hirelings, etc. Such Titles as
these they give them, not only in their printed Books and Papers, but
oftentimes when they meet them in the Streets, and in the very public
Assemblies while they are preaching the word, that whole Congregations may be
witnesses of their Impiety.

They affirm that all the Ministers in England that preach in Steeple Houses
are Liars of Jesus Christ; that they uphold the Kingdom of Antichrist, that
they do all for filthy Lucre, that they run greedily after the way of Cain to
envy and murder, and follow after the ways of Baalam: That they seek to the
Powers of the World to guard them in their Pulpits. (It seems if they durst
they would pull them out, so I hear they had very lately dealt with some) that
pride, idleness, and fullness of bread, the sins of Sodom are the fruits of
their preaching.

They acuse them of being brought up at Oxford, and Cambridge; they say, they
know nothing but natural Books, and natural things, the Scripture Letter,
Hebrew and Greek which is all natural: That the ungodly, unholy proud Priests,
add Professors must be scorned who know not the Power of the word. Reader, I
coin or add no expression of mine own, I repeat only their own words, which
such Books and Papers of theirs as I can produce are full of.

They apply all that is spoken to Idolatrous, ignorant, idle, profane
persecuting Priests, and false Prophets, either in the old or new Testament, to
the Ministers of England; but we know that though one syllable, or tittle of
such abused Texts of Scripture does not pertain to any godly faithful Minister
of the Gospel; yet that very many of them do as properly belong to themselves,
as the Skin that is upon their flesh.

They exhort people not to hear them, to cease from them, and not to hold them
up, and tell them they will never be profited by them: And indeed as soon as
any man turns their Proselite, he becomes as pure a Recusant as any Papist in
England.

And not content to rail against them in Prose, they compose Songs, or Ballads
rather, which their Disciples magnify and look upon as Spiritual Songs, that
they may revile them in Meeter also.

One of their Speakers said not long since, that the Priests had deluded the
people this sixteen hundred years, borrowing this piece of Divinity, or
Devility rather from the Almanack-maker.

Their Writings are full of Threatenings, Prophesies against Ministers, for
which also they are beholding to the Astrologers. They say the Lord is coming
to beat up their Quarters, the Son of Thunder is coming abroad to sound
Trumpets, to call to Battle against the great day of the Lord, and there
Kingdom must be taken from them, and that their downfall is near at hand: Some
of them have said, they hope within a years time to see never a Minister left
in England.

They exhort one another in the words of Coliier (out of whose Pit they have
drawn much of their black Religion) to overturn, overturn, overturn. Thus one
Instrument of the Devil helps another.

Reader, I do very believe that if these wicked men had power in their hands,
there would be no Toleration of any true Minister of Jesus Christ in England;
and that one of the first things they would endeavor, would be if not to raise
a tempest of Persecution by raining blood, yet at least to raise and extripate
the Sacred Callings; I say Sacred calling of the Ministry, being the
Institution of Jesus Christ in his Church.

One principal reason why they do thus show their teeth against Ministers I
imagine to be this, they look upon some of them as those that do mainly stand
in their way; as those that are able to detect their Errors to manifest their
folly, and unsheath the Sword of the Spirit, the word of Truth against them.
They cannot for them so freely proceed in the propagation of their Delusions as
they would. Hence they are their greatest eye-sores. Also if I may without
offense speak what I think and partly know, they presume to take this liberty
to themselves, because they are apt to conceive that Ministers are now almost
friendlesse, that Authority will not appear for them, and that they are the
Object of the wrath of diverse Soldiers in the Army, whom they foolishly suppose
to incline to their (as to them) unknown Sect. But I hope, yea, I am confident
that when the Hypocrisy of these men shall be unmasked, and their madness and
iniquity, which has already begun in some places to lift up her head, shall be
better known and appear, they shall then proceed no further: And that those
Worthies that by divine Providence do, or shall sit at the Stern to guide the
Ship of the Commonwealth; and the godly Officers of the Army will not only
disowne and detest, but also manifest themselves to be Enemies to all their
Impieties, and Enormous Practices of this turbulent Faction.

But in the mean time while they are so injurious to the Sovereign Majesty of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, by their Hellish
Blasphemies and eager opposition of the Truth, well may they contemn and rage
against such Earthen Vessels as are his Ministers here on Earth.

Of their Censoriousnesse, Lying, instability in their own Errors, and enmity
to Learning.
NEver did Heretics speak greater swelling words of vanity, and more exalt
themselves and throw down others, then those who are of that Synagogue do. They
commend themselves up to Heaven, they give themselves the title of Saints, they
boast themselves to be equal to the Apostles, to speak from the immediate
Revelation of the Spirit; impudently and impiously affirming more of themselves
then the true Apostles of Jesus ever did, or durst do, touching their freedom
from sin and perfection in holiness, etc. and threaten that they shall be the
Judges of the World; but they will readily censure all others to Hell, tell
them they are damned, that they worship the Beast, that they are possessed with
the Devil, yea, with many Devils; that the Devil speaks in them, and that
they see him in their eyes and faces, etc.

This language of Devils indeed, is as ordinary with them to dissenters from
their way that oppose them as to talk with them.

Many of them will be as ready to say and unsay any thing, as if lying was a
Virtue. They make no conscience of raising false Reports against those
especially that do any way oppose them; Witness that lying Pamphlet, Saul's
Errant to Damascus, wherein there are a hundred untruths, as may be proved by a
hundred Witnesses.

It is the Testimony of a faithful Minister of Christ concerning them. Not in
half an hours discourse, says he, with most of those I have discoursed with,
but you shall find plain and downright lies. Some of them (says he) have
commed to my house, and said, they had a Message from God to me: upon my speedy
demanding it, they have point blank almost in the same breathing time denied it.

When some that have been in some measure able from the word of Truth to
manifest their Errors, have discoursed with those Wells without water, though
themselves have stood like men inwardly convicted and ashamed, utterly unable
to gainsay, or darken those clear Evidences of Scripture brought against
them, and sometimes totally silenced, and as mute as Fishes; Yet when these
Champions of Errors have gone away, they have boasted of their Conquests, and
how gloriously they had foiled and stopped the mouths of their Adversaries.

Thus wholly by Lies, Lying Doctrines, lying Revelations, lying Wonders, lying
Reports, they do endeavor to build up the Kingdom of the Father of Lies among
us.

Their inconstancy to their own Errors is also very remarkable: They have left
the Truth and the good ways of the Lord, which are always like themselves,
and as unalterable as the courses of the Stars of Heaven: And now they
fluctuate like the Waves of the Sea, they have unbottomed themselves, and now
they know not where to fix; they are removed from that Religion that is true to
another Gospel, and now they have both the Credenda and Facienenda, the
Doctrinall and Practical parts of their Irreligion they have taken up, to seek
and settle. It is not to be expected that they will be a year, or two hence
what they are now; new Visions, new Revelations they daily look for. Unstable
Souls, whither will your Fancies go? whither will he drive you that sets you
on work?

One in Kerbylonsdale Parish that had been of their Society a while, fell sick
of an Ague, and was by it detained at home a Month; after recovery going to
their Assemblies again, he professed that he found them so altered from their
Principles in that Months time, that he could only know them by their faces to
be the same men, not by the constitution of their minds.

Diverse others that were a while agon of their way, perceiving the instability
of their Opinions, and Impiety of their walkings, are now fallen off from them,
and frequent the public Assemblies as before.

The Profession of some of the tallest of this Sect that afford shadow to the
rest, has had almost as many faces as the Moon, before they turned Promoters
of Quakers: The world has seen them zealous for Episcopal Policy and
Ceremonies, hot for Presbytery, all for Independency, and after all for
Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme; and now beyond all, only for Foxes new Irreligion
which is above all Forms and Ordinances. Most of them that steer their course
according to the direction of these wandering Stars, were heretofore noted men
for their Singularity, and unsoundnesse of their Tenets, such as ever affected
to put on the newest Fashion of Religion.

A Tailor at Grayrigge, that while there was no Minister there used to speak
publicly every Lords day; delivered them openly many dangerous and Heretical
Doctrines, and what ever his Doctrine was, true, or false, he was wont daily,
as his Hearers said, to pawn his Soul on the truth of his Assertions, and bid
if they were not such, to take him for ever for a false Prophet. Yet this man
after Fox and Nayler came into these parts, having been their Auditor a little
while, was perverted by them and became a Quaker, left his former Principles
and came to Grayrigge where he had taught long before, and told the people he
had formerly deluded them, and taught lies and false Doctrine among them, but
he had now found the right way indeed, with other words to that effect.

The Builders of this Babell of the Quakers, which they as impiously, as
vain-gloriously call the Temple of the Lord, will have no Tools taken out of
the Shops of humane Learning to work withal; and indeed I think they have not,
except what the Learning of Winstanley and Collier have afforded them.

If any of their way of of the Countenancers of them be learned indeed, as some
of them are held to be, I look upon their owning and admiring at it, and those
empty Clouds their Speakers, as a very sad Judgment of God upon them, sending
them strong delusions to believe a lie.

They hate a Library Cane pejus and Angue, all Expositors of holy Scripture
they call Heatheninsh Commentators; the Relics of those pious Learned men,
that were great Lights in the Churches of Christ in their Ages; such Books I
mean as Students in Theology use as good helps to attain to that excellent
Knowledge of the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, they term heathenish Books,
and the Compilers of them heathenish Authors.

Languages, and Arts, and such like Ornamentall Qualifications are ulcerous
Deformities in these men's eyes: A methodicall discourse is an Odium, all
distinctions, they say, are the Seed of the Serpent, they savor too much of
solid Knowledge.

They deny it to be needful to bring up Children in any Learning, and some of
them have taken their Children from School.

Their Books and Papers which they disperse abroad the Country, with these or
such like absurd frothy Sefle-contradicting Quaeries.

Whether the Lord made use of any as Ministers of his mind unto the people,
that were bred idle at Sdhooles and Universities all the days of their lives,
without a calling as the Priests of England; but rather the contrary, as Moses
a Shepherd, Amos a Heardsman, Christ himself a Carpenter, Paul a Tent-maker,
Peter a Fisherman.

Whether ever Universities, or Schools of Learning were in holy Scripture
called the Well-heads of Divinity.

Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did make use of those great Bugbeares, so
common in use with the Priests of England to prevent the Saints from preaching
the Gospel, and the world from hearing them. As first, the Approbation and
Ordination of the men of the Earth. Secondly humane Learning and the Language
of the Beast, without which men are in their account altogether unmeet to
meddle in the things of God.

Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did confirm the Truths they delivered, by
the power of the Magistracy, Authors, and Fathers.

Whether the Spirits teaching be not sufficient in the things of God.

Whether it be not the work of Christ, and that which is to be expected in the
latter days, to overturn, overturn, overturn all these ways so contrary to
his own mind.

What do they mean in the last Quaere? what Spirit is this they speak from? but
let these Quaeries go as they are, for me.

Of their Idleness, Savage Incivilities, and their Irreligious bloody,
barbarous, and turbulent practices.
TO what has been hitherto related of their Impieties and disorderly walkings,
it may be added that they are many of them notorious for Idleness in their
Callings, working not at all sometimes for whole weeks and months together.

Some of them leave their Wives, Children, Families, Vocations and turn all
Journy-men Speakers. Others regardlesse of all at home, wander after them,
compassing the Country from place to place, and live upon those of their
Fraternity where they light, to their Excessive charge.

They are degenerated also to such Incivilities as are in few places of the
World to be found among the Heathens, having departed from the Doctrine of
Christ and practice of Civility both together. Reader, I have been an
Eyewitness of more courteous behavior in the Indians of the West, and
Natives of the East Indies, and Moors of Africa, then these men will afford to
their nearest Relations, or those they ought most to honor.

A Son, if turned a Quaker, will not use the usual Civility of the world that
is christian in putting off his hat to his Father or Mother, will give them no
civil Salutations: to bid him Goodmorrow that begat him, or her Good night, or
farewell, that brought him forth, is with them accounted a wickedness.

None of the Quakers will give the common respects to Magistrates, or to any
Friends or old Acquaintance.

If they meet them by the way, or any stranger, they will go or ride by them as
though they were dumb, or as though they were Beasts rather then men, not
affording a Salutation, or Resaluting though themselves be Saluted.

They do not give any Title or color of respect to those that are their
Superiors, in Office, Honor, Estate -- such as Master, or Sir, etc. but call
them by their naked name, Thomas, or William, or Gervase, or Dorothy, and
ignorantly mistake it to be disagreeable to the word of Truth.

They go to their Meals for the most part like the Heathen, without any Prayer
or thanksgiving.

When meat or drink is set on the Table, the Master of the house if he be any
thing skilful in their way, invites none of his guests to it, but they fall to,
one after another as their appetite serves them: when they go to bed, when they
rise in the morning, when they depart from a house they use no civil salutes;
so that their departures and going aside to ease themselves are almost
undistinguishable.

It is the opinion of many honest men that have observed the ways of this
society, that there are none professing Christianity more irreligious then they
are, Ranters excepted. Those that formerly used prayer in their Families, have
now laid it aside as useless; They observe no day by virtue of Gods command.
And for the Lords day, those that are far from their Speakers, spend it in
lying long in bed, sitting at home, and mere idleness; If any go to the
public Assemblies, as some few of them do sometimes, it is but one part of
the day, and they count that enough and too much rather: and when they come to
their fellows, the use they make of what they heard is only to carp and laugh
at it. Such days of humiliation and thanksgiving as have been appointed by
authority of Parliament they as I can learn, never observed, and called those
Ministers that did observe them the States Priests. Some have been down right
cursed by Fox, the Ring leaders of this crew.

One in the Barony of Kendal, that is now fallen off from their society, gave
this as one reason of his deserting them he had oftentims urged James Nayler to
pray with him, and could not long hale him to it by his entreaty, so averse was
he to this Ordinance; at last prevailing with him, he used only in his prayer
3 or 4 sentences, whereof this was one.

O Lord (says he) raise up thy Son from under corruption in us: which sentence
he distasting, together with some other reasons, moved him to leave them.

It was a strange bold piece of Impiety in George Fox in commanding a Criple at
a place near Kendal to throw away his crutches, as though he had been invested
with a power to work Miracles, but the Criple remained a Criple still, and
George Fox impudently discovered his own folly.

Many of them that had good clothes, as soon as they joined themselves to this
Sect, burnt their bravery, and some of them, as one says, as a part of their
first zeal burnt their Bibles.

To go naked, is with some of them accounted a decency becoming their imagined
state of innocence better then apparel; the ablest of their way plead for this
obscenitie.

One of this sort in Kirbbymooreside a Market town in Yorkshire, ran stark
naked to the Cross in the view of many, and stood in that posture (as I heard)
speaking to the people.

Two others of their society, a Man, and a Woman, that called themselves Adam
and Eve, went for some while as some uncivilized Heathen do, discovering their
nakedness to the eye of every beholder, and when they were publicly examined
at the Assizes for their brutish practice, the man wickedly affirmed that the
power of God was upon him, he was commanded to do it.

At Weighton also a little town in Yorkshire, a woman of this Goatish herd
came naked from her own bed to another woman's Husband, a companion of hers it
seems of the same sect, and bid him open his bed to her, for the Father had
sent her to him: The man had at that time another man lying in bed with him,
who rose to give place to this woman, and left this honest couple to lie
together according to the woman's Revelation: this says the Author of a Book
entitled The Querers and Quakers case at the second hearing is no lie, but
fallen under the Magistrates Cognizance a known thing.

One of their Gang in Westmerland, on Friday the Eighth of April last, ran
like, a mad man naked, all but his shirt, through Kendall crying, Repent,
Repent, woe, woe, come out of Sodom, Remember Lots wife, with other such stuff.
His principal Auditors were a company of Boys that followed him through the
Town. I almost wonder, what the Devil should mean, in sending abroad such naked
Bedlam speakers; one would think the walls of this Jericho should rather be
razed then raised by such pitiful Engineers.

But to linger no where in particulars. This one thing to me does plainly
evidence the way of these Apostates to be of the Devil. No sooner is any one
become a Proselite to their Sect: but he is possessed with a spirit of malice,
and wrath, and turns enemy to all men that are not of their way. Especially to
those that appear against it; To such they use menacing speeches as of a day
that is coming wherein they shall be avenged, and talk frothily sometimes of
levying forces, chuseing Colonels and Captains, etc.

And though they speak much against going to law before Infidels, (so they
insinuate all our Ministers of Justice to be) yet upon the least affront given
to themselves they will procure the Indictment of those they have any color of
charge against Instancies enough might be given.

There is a credible report (and when there is need all Parties may be named)
of some that attempted to Sacrifice their Children, but were through Providence
prevented.

Mr. Burton a well qualified Gentleman, and a Justice of the Peace in the
County of Westmerland, who made Naylers Mittimus, a little after riding from
Appleby toward his own house, which is about a mile distant from the said
Town, about the midway in a place where the narrow Lane he was to pass
through, disparts it self into two, was waylaid with four Musketteers, two
of whom lined the Hedge on one side of the way, and two of them where the Lane
divides it self on the other side; when the foresaid Gentleman with his man
only in Company was come over against them, one of those Assassines discharged
his Musket at him, the Bullet flying as he conceived betwixt himself and his
man who rode a little before him; he had not rid five Paces further but a
second discharges upon him, whose Bullet also he heard sing by him, but
received no hurt: being startled at this unexpected Accident, and fearing there
might be yet more of them, he quickened his Horse with his Spur and declined to
the other side of the Lane.

At the turn of the way were two more Muskets discharged upon him, where in all
probability he could not have escaped the intended mischief, had not the Lord
mercifully frustrated the bloody Intentions of those his unknown Enemies: These
men fled immediately, the darkness of a long Winter night which they had
before them, it being then about the end of December, helping to conceal their
persons.

That these men that attempted this Murder were of this Sect is not certainly
known, but it is strongly presumed and concluded that they were none other, by
all the Country for these reasons.

1. He was generally reproached and threatened by the Quakers for sending Nayler
to Prison, some of whom were not long before heard to say, they would pick his
Skin full of holes.

2. That very day before, there were many of that malicious Sect in Appleby,
that came to visit Nayler, who might take notice of his being there, and be
invited to take that opportunity of executing their bloody purposes.

3. This Gentleman is of such known honesty and Ingenuity, that he is generally
beloved in the Country, and has not, I dare say an Enemy in the world one
quarter so cruel as to thirst after his blood, except among that Rabble.

That multitudes of Scurrilous Libels, against Ministers and private persons
have been fastened to their doors, thrown into their houses, pinned on Pulpit
Cushions on the Lords days, and on the Church doors, without any name affixed
by those Pretenders to Christianity, is a thing well known.

For satisfaction of the Reader, I shall give him a true Copy of one that was
affixed one Lords day, about the beginning of January last, unto the
Church-door at Lancaster, which Dr. Marshall openly read to the people there
assembled, that they might perceive the strange temper of the Spirits of those
men by such their unsavory Eructations.

A Copy of a Scurrilous Paper affixed to the Church Door at Lancaster.
THis is the Idols Temple where the worship of the Beast is upheld, down with
it, down with it, Revel. 15. 7. 8. Revel. 1. 2. 5. God that made the World and
all things therein, dwells not in this Idols Temple that is made with hands,
Act. 7. 47, 48, 49. Act. 17. 21. Neither is he worshipped in this Idols Temple
with men's hands, Act. 17. 24. God is a Spirit; and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father is seeking such to worship
him, Ioh. 14. 23, 24. All the World wonders after the Beast and worshippeth the
Beast, but those who have found their names written in the Book of life, and
they that worship the Beast, and receive his Mark in their Forehead, as
sprinckling Infants and worshipping the works of their own hands, following the
imaginations of their hearts, they must drink of the wine of the wrath of the
Almighty powered out without mixture. Revel. 14. 9, 10, 11, 12. This Idols
Temple that is made with hands is a place for Night-birds and Screech-Owles to
meet, each one to the dishonor of the true God that dwells in Temples made
without hands, at new Jerusalem where the Temple of God is with men. Revel. 21.
3. Drunkards and Swearers, Revellers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and proud and
wanton ones, and Hypocrites, and Dissemblers, Enviors, Haters, back-biters,,
Persecutors, Lustful ones, and contentious Persons, and Earth-wormes, meets
here; the fearifull and unbelieving, peevish and perverse, and contentious
ones, meets here in their Idols Temple to satisfy their Lusts: and says the
Lord, this people draw near me with their mouths, and honor me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me. But know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but must be cut down and cast into
the fire, and have their Portion in the Lake that burns? be not deceived, God
is not mocked. This is a Deceiver that stands up here to deceive the people
every seventh day, proud and covetous, and speaks a Divination of his own
brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, and so makes the people light and
vain, but the Lord is against him, hold him not up. All the Children of the
Lord are, and shall be taught of the Lord, Jer. 31. 34 Isa. 54. 13. 1 John 2.
27.

Of a long time it was a constant practice of some of the most impudent of them
to enter in a scornful manner with their hats on into the public Assemblies
in some places, and to rail openly and exclaim aloud against the Ministers
with most reproachful terms in time of the dispensation of Gods Ordinances,
calling them byars, Seducers, Baals Priests, Deluders of the people, and
bidding them come down from the high places. There is fullness of Witnesses for
this in Kendall and Lancashire and other places. And this not only before, but
since the Justices at Appleby ordered the binding of such Disturbers to the
Peace; but alas, what can bind them to Peaceablenesse whose Spirit is
tumultuous? or what can Law do, when Conscience is seared, and takes
tumultuousnesse for a Duty?

Mr. Coal who was employed to preach abroad in this County, where the most
eminent necessity of this County lay, viz. Where the Country was destitute of a
Preacher, has had much experience of them, and has professed that long it was
before he could have any peace or safety, but the Lord stood by him. Two, or
three of the ablest of them have dogged him from place to place, and come
several times to his house with horrible railings And lately, not many weeks
since, two or three at once in the open Street fell upon him with such horrid
expressions, as might show to all the world the boiling of a most Hellish
Rancour, and with such fury, that he was beholden to Friends to rescue him from
them.

The next Lords Day three of these wanderers came into the Congregation at
Kendall, and called to him to come down, belching forth such terms of Baals
Priests, etc. and Hellish reproaches, as filled both the Congregation and
streets after with Tumult.

The violence offered by some of this people in an open Auditory to one Master
Crosby had proved little less then the loss of his life, as himself has
affirmed openly, if the Lord had not been on his side.

What was complotted against another Minister, as he gathers from a Letter
sent him by one of that confederacy, but a friend at that time, as God so
ordered it. I cannot relate, but the said Minister could not as he said
conjecture less then some gross abuse intended against him as he was
discoursing with Fox, had not one present prevented it? Others have been
desired by some friends to keep out of their way, for they heard a mischief was
intended them. What Eye in these parts where this people live is not a witness
of the tumults and uprores they make in Markets? What ear has not heard heard
of their open revilings, which they principally fasten on them in whom most of
God and sound Religion appears? A man that professes godliness, especially a
Minister, that endeavors to be faithful to Jesus Christ in the discharge of
the duties incumbent on him cannot pass by them without their scorns. Against
such they grin, and point at them with their fingers.

These and such like practices of this licentious people have filled the hearts
of Gods People in these parts with exceeding fears to be driven after all their
hopes to serve God in Corners, and that they may die, tho in the faith of the
promise of Jerusalems peace, yet without receiving it: whilst the enemies of
God roar in the midst of the Congregations.

So fast did their insolences grow, and their Numbers increase for a while,
that had they not been a little curbed by the imprisonment of Nayler, and
sending forth a warrant for the Apprehension of Fox for his blasphemies, it is
verily believed by many sober understanding men among us, there would have been
in a short time no peace or almost safety for any real Christian in Westmerland
and some adjacent parts. This was, as some of the Justices expressed themselves
at the Sessions January last, one main reason of Naylers confinement, namely,
that they were necessitated to it for the preservation of the public peace,
and prevention of civil dissentions, and such evils as might have ensued upon
further connivance at these turbulene Impostors.

I shall conclude with the Judgments of two known learned and judicious men,
one of which is yet living, and able to plead for the Truth and himself.

Master OWEN, in his Discourse of Toleration has this Passage. Page 32.
THere are (says he) a sort of persons termed in Scripture disorderly,
vagabond, wandering, irregular persons. 1. These. 5. 14. Acts 17. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
2. 1. Tim. 1. 9. Fixed to no Calling, abiding in no place, taking no care of
their Families, that under a pretense of teaching the Truth, without Mission,
without Call, without Warrant, uncommanded, undesired, do go up and down from
place to place, creeping into houses, etc. Now that such ways as these, and
Persons in these ways may judicially be inquired into, I no way doubt. The
Story is famous of Sesostris King of Egypt, who made a Law that all the
Subjects of his Kingdom should once a year give an account of their way and
manner of living, and if any was found to spend his time idly, he was certainly
punished. And the Laws of most Nations have provided that their people shall
not be wanderers, and whosoever has not a place of abode, and employment, is
by them a punishable vagabond. And in this by experience of the ways, walking,
and converse of such persons, I am exceedingly confirmed I did as yet never
observe any other issue upon such undertakers, but scandal to Religion, and
trouble to men in their Civil relations, when men by the practice of any vice
or sin, draw others to a pretended Religion, or by pretense of Religion draw
men to any vice or sin, let them be twice punished, for their real vices,
and pretended Religion.

Thus far Master Owen.

Master COTTON of New England, touching the controversy of Liberty of
Conscience in matters of Religion, Page 7. lays down this Position for Truth.
IF a man hold forth (says he) or profess any Error or false way with a
boisterous and arrogant Spirit, to the disturbance of civil Peace, he may
justly he punished according to the quality and measure of his disturbance
caused by him; and page 8. He says, the Scripture forbids not to drive
ravenous Wolves from the sheepfold, and to restrain them from devouring the
sheep of Christ: and Page 9. He says, we acknowledge that none is to be
punished for his Conscience though misinformed, unless his Error be
fundamental, and seditiously and turbulently promoted; and further, we
acknowledge none ought to be constrained to believe or profess the true
Religion, till he be convinced in judgment of the Truth of it; but yet
restrained he may be from blaspheming the truth, and from seducing any into
pernicious Errors.

The End.
A BRIEF REPLY To some part Of a very scurrilous and lying Pamphlet, CALLED,
Saul's errand TO DAMASCUS, SHOWING The vanity of the praises there attributed
to the Sect of the Quakers, and Falsitie of their Relations which are naught
else but the breathings of a spirit of Malice.

Psalm. 35. 20.

They speak not Peace, but devise deceitful matters against them that are
quiet in the Land.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. R. at the sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

To the Reader.
THere is an unlicensed Pamphlet, called Saul's errand to Damascus, lately
procured to be Printed, wherein diverse Ministers of Westmerland, and
Lancashire are falsely aspersed, and maliciously belied and traduced. Had it not
been for the clearing of their Innocence, and the discovery of the falsities
contained in that Book too apt in this credulous age to be believed; (as
whatsoever is spoken against a Minister) there had not been one word written in
answer to it. And for the rest of that Book that concerns us not, I should be
loath to betray my indiscretion so far as to attempt a full answer to such a
heap of words, or to trouble any judicious Reader with such fruitless contests.
Good Readers, you have that Book by you, or can think it worth your buying or
perusal, let me entreat you to read it with some observation of the Contents.
And if you be men, whose inner man has been indeed illuminated by the good
spirit of the Lord, and the knowledge of the Truth, or whose reason has been
at all refined or polisht by learning or good education: you will easily
perceive by what they have to say for themselves, that they are men, whose
knowledge is science falsely so called, that these men are blind Leaders; that
while they pretend to be full of the Spirit, full of Light and Revelations,
they are led a captive prey to the spirit of lies, that spirit that works in
the children of disobedience, that they walk in thick darkness, that they go
they know not whither, and speak they know not what. Something they would say
to clear themselves of those blasphemies and cursed speeches they have been
overheard to utter, and have bin deposed upon oath against them, both in
Westmerland and Lancashire, if they could tell how. Flatly deny them they
cannot, they do not, and you will even wonder to see how they bungle out an
answer. You will admire at their impertinencies, inconsistencies, irrational,
insensate, misty expressions, as ambiguous sometimes as the devils oracles: and
stand amazed to see their impudence, and how magistically they can revile and
censure to the pit of hell, and how boldly they dare avouch an error, and offer
a rape upon the holy Text, wrest and misapply it, and father their heretical,
absurd tenets and assertions on it, and that in Print even to the face of the
world. While they would defend themselves before you, they bewray themselves,
and if you be intelligent Readers, will stink in your nostrils. Nor will you
need that any man should take the pains of any reply the book is big with folly
and madness. It is self-accused and carries its confutation with it. Here is
therefore notice taken chiefly of the calumnies charged upon some Ministers in
Westmerland, as to matter of fact, (lest they should triumph in our silence,
and the world look upon their relations as Truth) to which you may expect an
answer so true, that if need be, it may be attested on Oath, by a multitude of
witnesses.

A brief Reply to a very scurrilous and lying Pamphlet, called Saul's Errand to
Damascus: showing the Vanity of the praises there given to the Sect of the
Quakers, and the falsitie of their Relations, which are, etc.
THe first Epistle in Souls errand to Damascus inscribed (I suppose) chiefly to
that sort of the People, whose irreligion and horrid impieties have been in the
forner part of this Book sufficiently manifested; intrudes to raise up your
honor, and procure a precious esteem for them among those that are Saints
indeed: and therefore tells them [That the Lord Jesus Christ, and Christ with
all his Train, and bids them glory in their habit, and persuades them they wear
the signal Favors of the King of Kings; by which the Author says, he knows
to whom they belong, because they love the Brethren.]

Reply.
REader we could wish that not one of that apostatized Generation, but were
such indeed; that they all had that Genuine and real glory upon their souls,
which this Enemy would varnish them over with, to deceive those that know them
not. But alas, how shall the most extended Charity that knows them, be
persuaded, to entertain such a high opinion of them? If to hate the Truth as it
is in Jesus, to adulterate, oppose it, to worship the mental Idols of their
own imaginations, If to cast off and deny all Christ's Ordinances, if zealously
to malign, revile, reproach, taunt, speak all manner of evil falsely against
all the Ministers of his Gospel without exception, and against the most honest
godly spiritual Christians that live near them; If this be to love Christ, then
may this people be thought to love the Lord Jesus indeed: But if to live and
delight in those Impieties be not love, but real hatred to Jesus Christ, then
may this people (if any in the Christian World) be justly reputed his professed
Enemies.

We must confess their love to those of their own society seems to be much,
and sometimes discovers it self too unhandsomely, and uncivilly, to give a
vantage for a Spiritual and Saintlike love.

But be their affection eminent among themselves, it is too palpably turned
into the gall of bitterness against all, not of their principles; so that the
Author of the Epistles to justify his sayings, must be forced to condemn all
the Professors of Christ, except his own Epileptick society, as none of the
Saints, Brethren or Train of Jesus Christ.

If any of those who dwell in the Bosom of the Son of God, and by the flamings
of their own souls in love to Christ and to his Saints, do know the proper
colors and operations of a divine affection, can say there is any spark of
what the Epistle pretends to, of love to Christ and his Train in this
Generation; I must confess our sight much less able to see it, then our soul
is ready to desire the Lord by his converting power would plant it in them.

In the second and third Epistles. He again represents them as peaceable, holy,
humble, self denying men, precious Christians, such as have for some time past
forborne to concorporate in parochial Assemblies, wherein they profess
themselves to have gained little of the knowledge of Christ: such as demean
themselves without giving any offense to those that for God, etc. and after
calls their meetings Christian and peaceable Exercises.

Reply:
THe Author of those Epistles (it seems) thinks to gain advantage upon the
Readers affections for this people, by telling him what a well qualified people
they are, how pious, how peaceable, humble, selfdenying. How easy is it to
call evil good and good evil?

We could wish from our souls they were all what is spoke of them, and it is
our prayer to the Lord for them, that they may yet become such, be clothed
with those Christian Graces, and filled with these gifts of the Spirit, which
are Ornaments of great price before God. But true it is, the contrary is too
manifest. Their Blasphemies and hellish Errors, their superstitions,
irreligion, selfconceitednesse, their uncharitableness, censoriousnesse,
constant Sabbath-breaking, living, according to the Impulse of their own wills,
their professed Enmity to Christ's Gospel, the preaching of the Word, and
violent endeavors to overturn all Ordinances and ways of Worship, and
invecctives against them, their incomparable reproachings of the servants of
the living God, and turbulent behavior more fully spoken to in the former
Narrative, do too openly declare them to the World to be quite opposite to what
this man would represent them to be, viz. to be Enemies to peace and piety, and
full of the worst kind of pride and arrogance, of that which is Spiritual.

If Lancashire produce a fairer crop, and the pasture of theirs be different
from ours, if they be there better fed and taught then with us; we are glad
they are not so ill in any place as ours. But we fear those of this society
with them do fall under the same unanswerablenesse, to the praise of these
Epistles, as these in Westmoreland do. We speak of whom we know, and do
conclude that they are so unlike to prous and peaceable men, that as it would
be a mercy to some Congregations, if they might wait upon the God of their
fathers in peace; so we have reason to solicit the Lord in our prayers, that
he would still continue to spread the skirt of the Magistrates protection and
power over the Churches: without which we must I a n to prepare for those times
wherein the people shall perish for lack of vision, and the Prophet shall say
with Elijah; It is enough Lord, let me d e.

For their forbearance to concorporate with parochial Congregations; It is no
commendation to them, that they refuse to be hearers in such Assemblies where
the Word of God is purely preached. It is no sin to hear the Word in a mixed
Congregation. Christ himself preached most frequently to unconverted
Multitudes, nor had his Disciples learned from him to forbear to concorporate
with them, as far as came to the hearing of the Word among them. He sent forth
his Apostles with Commission to preach the Gospel to all Nations, to every
Creature, and therefore it was the duty of every Creature, the worst of
sinners as well as the best of Christians, where ever they came to hear them.
It would rather have been matter of sin and shame, then praise for any
Companion of the Apostle Paul, when he preached on Mars hill in Athens, to have
denied to hear him preach there, because his Auditors were Epicureans and
Stoics, and all save Paul's Associats, Idolaters.

But this is made use of only for advantage, by reason of that Odium that he
knows lies upon parochial Constitutions. The whole Nation almost knows that
most of the Congregations in Lancashire are reduced to a narrower compass then
that of parochial. And we are assured, that James Nayler, one of their Leaders,
deserted a gathered Congregation in Yorkshire, whereof he was, and had
continued a good while a Member.

And however they deny any benefit received by the public Ministry, yet we
believe what ever relics of sound knowledge are in any of them, they owe them
to it; and for what imaginary knowledge, or unsound Principles they have
learned otherwise from their new Teachers, cursed had our condition been if we
had given these stones in stead of bread; such poisonous deadly Scorpions, in
stead of fishes.

We must confess the major part were never savingly wrought upon by the Gospel
whereof we have the Ministration. It was our great Masters case. His combats in
the time of his Ministry on earth were but few. Acts 1. 15. The Apostles case
sometimes, when they preached the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus Christ to
crowds of people, some one or two only believed their report, and rejoiced in
it. And though it be our case, yet it is our complaint to the Lord continually.

And (as some godly persons have out of their own experience, as far as they
could discern, professed) the greatest part, the generality of these of this
way in Westmerland, are of that Number, viz. Such as have had no saving work of
God upon their Spirits by the Ministry of his Word: but such as have been
ignorant of, or erred from the Truth, and whose Religion consisted in the
praise of Opinion, and floatings of their own fancies, and who have been
carried with great zeal and heat of spirit, through all forms of Religion, (as
some call them.) In so much that scarce a knowing Christian among us, but could
have easily pointed at those, whom theseFoxes were like to deceive before they
came, and whose spirits would be ready to strike in with any principle might
subvert the Truth of the Gospel. In the mean time the seals of the Ministry of
those that have been faithful to Christ in their stewardship, such Christians
as have looked in themselves stand still, and are rooted faster then to be
removed to another Gospel by the blasts of such delusions as have their descent
written in their foreheads.

In the Title Page, he compares the peaceable Petitioning of some Ministers in
Lancashire to the Council of State, to Saul's errand of Damascus, and a little
after says their Petition breaths out threatenings and slaughters against a
peaceable and godly people, by him nicknamed Quakers.

In the second and third Epistles also, the Author has diverse insinuations of
charges against some Gentlemen and Ministers in Lancashire, as that they make
none but the Lords Disciples the object of their indignation. That they never
did proclaim war against drunkards, swearers, common blasphemers, enemies to
the Lord and his people. That their high-flown contending spirits are gone
beyond slender wrestlings, and they scorn to encounter with any below the
degree of a Saint. Other wickednesses he point blanck lays to your charge, as
that those sons of Levi, as he says they call themselves, pretend a jus
Divinum to persecution. That they troubled the Council of State with abominable
misrepresentations of honest, pious peaceable men. That the Quakers have been
more faithful to the interest of the godly people in this Nation, then any of
the contrivers of the Petition, That they exalt themselves above all that are
called Gods People in these parts.

Reply.
I Wonder much at the Spirits of these men, and what eyes they see withal.
They would make the world believe, they can espy the Spirit of Saul, while he
was unconverted, in the breasts of others, comminations and persecution, blood
and slaughter, where they can see nothing but Christian Modesty, and the words
of Truth and Sobriety. Surely blood and slaughter are the Objects of their
Meditation by day, and their dreams in the night are dreams of cruelty.
Otherwise the humble, innocent, sober Petitions of Christians jealous for the
Glory of God, and the welfare of his Church, and studious to prevent the enemy
from making such havoc of Souls, as he has done of late in some parts, would
not so presently put them in mind of them.

And where he says in this your Petition, they troubled the Council of State
with abominable misrepresentations* etc. It is it self an abominable untruth;
and I do verily believe that Epistoler Conscience tells him so. There was indeed
such a Petition prepared and intended to be presented to the Council of State,
but as I am certainly informed it never was presented to them. Nor did that
Petition contain the least tittle of any misrepresentation, but a brief and
true relation of some of your Abominations, which are too famously and
evidently known to the whole Country to be denied. O the impudency of that
lying spirit that has entered into this generation of men.

To all the other false and railing accusations of this man brought against (I
do verily believe for some of them) the faithful Ministers and servants of
Jesus Christ, I shall only answer as Michael to the Devil, The Lord rebuke
thee.

I could have rather desired that some of these Ministers in Lancashire would
have answered this Calumniator, and made him ashamed of his falsities.

Some of them are known to us, and we are confident are as clear from all those
charges as the new born child, and such as according to that precept, Isay 51.
7. Fear not the reproach of man, nor are afraid of their revilings.

If the Author of theseEpistles prefixed to Saul's errand, etc. lives in
Lancashire, as it is supposed he does; he cannot but know that there is more
real worth, Truth of Godliness, Christian simplicity and white Innocence in
some of them then in 160. such Foxes as now spoil the vineyards

He might have considered whose work it is to accuse the Brethren, and who has
from thence deserved the name of (...).

Me thinks he manifests himself to be of that Generation, Prove. 30 14. Whose
teeth are swords, and whose jaw teeth are knives to devour the poor from off
the earth, and the needy from among men. While his words are smoother then
butter, and softer then oil to those of his way, war is in his heart against
others, and his words are drawn swords, and the breathings of a spirit possessed
with malice. The Apostle describing the men that shall make the last times
perilous, says among other Characters of them, they shall be false accusers,
fierce dispisers of those that are good. I do not wish my greatest enemy so
much hurt as that he should be one of them.

But those in Authority know they might not give ear to the Calumnies of every
Anonymus, Psalm. 101. 5 7. Who so privily slandereth his neighbor (says David)
him will I cut off. He that works deceit, shall not dwell in my House. He
that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight: And that it was Saul's sin and
shame to hearken to the calumnies of Doeg, against those that ministered at the
Altar to the Lord.

And we all know it is no new thing for the Ministers of Christ to be the
object of the worlds indignation, and accused of all manner of evil. Our
Savior Christ himself, his Apostles, and the best of the Christians in the
Primitive times, did not escape the scourge of the Tongue, the worst of
slanders. Well therefore may the false aspersions of this man be born as an
easy burden.

But thou O Lord, deliver my soul from lying lips, and from a deceitful
Tongue. Psalm. 120. 2.

Let thy mercies also come unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation according to thy
Word. So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me, for my trust
is in thy Word. Psalm. 119. 41. 42.

The next part of this Pamphlet which I shall give some answer to, consists of
a false and scandalous Relation, wherein Nayler, or some friend of his for him
foolishly complains of Persecution, and maliciously abuses and belies diverse
Ministers in Westmerland as his persecutors, who I am confident never used any
unchristian language to him, and were never guilty of the least incivilitie in
Action toward him, notwithstanding his outcry of persecution by them. Now
because I intend to say something by way of reply to this Relation, as also to
their falls Narrative of the proceedings of the Justices at Appleby, against
James Nayler, Jan. 8. 1652. I think it will not be amiss, first to expose the
Quakers own Relations verbatim, to the view of my Reader, as they are contained
in Saul's errand to Damascus.

Diverse particulars of the Persecutions of James Nayler, by the Priests of
Westmerland.
JAmes being at a meeting at Edward Briggs house on the first day, where many
people met, he was desired by diverse friends to meet the day following at Widow
Cocks house, about a mile from Kendal; whereof the Priests having notice,
raised the Town of Kendal against him; but being long in gathering together,
the meeting was done; but Spies being out upon the Steeple top, and other
places, notice was given what way James passed from thence: and coming down
toward Kindal, two Priests being accompanied with a Justice of Peace, and some
other Magistrates of the Town, with an exceeding great multitude of people
following them, met him saying, Nayler, I have a Message from the Lord Jesus
Christ to thee, but that there is not a convenient place. To which James
answered, The Lord Jesus Christ is no respecter of places. The message that he
had to declare was this: I conjure thee that thou tell me by what power thou
inflictest such punishment upon the bodies of creatures. James answered, Do
thou remember who it was that did adjure Christ to tell if he were the Son of
God, and asked by what authority he did those things? for James saw him to be
one of that Generation. But the Priest still conjuring him to tell by what
power he did it; James answered, Do thou acknowledge it to be done by a
power? Yea (says he) I have the Spirit of God, and thereby I know it is done
by a power. James said, If thou have the Spirit of God, as thou say thou
have, then thou can tell by what power it is done. The Priest said, When God
comes, he comes to torment the souls and not the bodies. James said, He comes
to redeem the souls.

But after much jangling, the Priest began to accuse him before the Justice and
Magistrates of many things; As, that he taught people to burn their Bibles,
Children to disobey their Parents, Wives their Husbands, People to disobey the
Magistrates, and such like accusations: To which James answered, Thou art a
false accuser: prove one of these things if thou can, here, before the
Magistrates. But not being able to prove any one, he began to accuse James for
holding out a light that does convince of sin, which, says the Priest, all
have not. To which James said, Put out one in all this great multitude, that
dare say he has it not. Says the Priest, These are all Christians; but if a
Turk or Indian were here, he would deny it. James said, Thou go far for a
proof: but if a Turk were here, he would witness against thee.

The people beginning to fight, the Priest turned away, saying. Here will be a
disturbance. Said James, These are thy Christians, and this is the fruiuts of
thy Ministry. But the Justice with some others, did endeavor to keep the rude
people off him, so that they could not come to their purpose there: But he
being to pass over the bridge, and through the town, they that were of the
Priests party ran before, swearing they would throw him off the bridge into the
water; but coming thither, and seeing their purpose, he was encouraged in his
God, who gave him assurance of protection, and did wonderfully keep him, and
those that were with him: for when he came unto the bridge, the word of the
Lord came unto him, and he was made to cry out against their rage, and the
power of the Lord was with him, so that he received no harm, though he was made
to speak all along* and in the Marketplace, and till he came out of the town.
But the raging Priests continued shouting, crying and throwing stones at him, a
quarter of a mile out of the town: But such was the power of the Lord, that
neither he, nor any with him received any harm. The work was wonderful, and we
were brought much to admire it and praise the Lord, who is blessed for ever and
ever.

Another time James being desired of many Christian Friends to be at a meeting
at Ortor, there to wait upon the Lord for what he would make known to his
people, did accordingly; and many friends and brethren accompanied him; but the
Priests having intelligence some days before, five of them were gathered
together, and many people from all quarters. A friend in the town desired James
to come to his house; and being come into his house, a message was sent from
the Priests, desiring him to come into the field, under pretense of a more
convenient place for the great multitude. To which James answered, It is my
desire that all may be edified: and coming into the field, the Priests came
with a great multitude, and asked him by what authority he came thither, and
had gathered so many people together to break the peace; and tempting him,
said, Will thou be bound that none here shall break the Peace? To which James
answered, We come not hither to create offenses, but if any break the Law, let
him suffer by the Law: for he perceived they intended violence, as it appeared
afterward.

But seeing they could not prevail in that, another of them desired him to go
into the Church, as he called it, tempting him, saying, The people may all sit
and hear better: But James perceiving their deceit said, All places were alike
to him, he would abide in the field. Whereupon they pulled out an Ordinance of
Parliament, forbidding any to speak, but such as were authorized to speak
either in Church or Chapel, or any public place; and bad him speak at his
peril, as he would answer the contempt of it. To which he answered, saying.
This is not a public place. No? said one of the Priests, Is not this a public
place, the Townfield? and charged the Constable of the town to do his office;
and examined his authority: James answered, Those that are sent to declare the
things of God, have not their authority from men. But they bad him prove that.
He said, Paul received not his Commission from man, nor by man. To which one of
them answered, That was his Gospel; but they would prove that Paul had a call
from man to preach; and for that end he named that place in Acts 13. 2. where
the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul: and the Apostles laid their
hands upon them; which said one of them, was the laying on of hands of the
Presbytery; But when he had found that place, James asked him if that was Paul's
cal^ to the Ministry (three times) but he answered nothing. Then said James,
If that was his call, he had preached long without a call before that; and
instanced to prove it Gal. 1.

Whereupon that business ended; But another Priest stood up and said, Thou
ought to give an account of thy Faith to every one that asks; whereupon,
he asked diverse questions; whereunto James answered, insomuch that some who
stood by cried out, Answer not all, but ask him some. A while after, James
asked him how he would prove himself a Minister of the Gospel, and live upon
Tithes? To which he would not answer. Then said James, Neither will I answer
thee, if thou ask me twenty more.

The next question he asked, was, Whether Christ was ascended, or no: but James
said, I will not answer thee. Whereupon he cried out to the people, and said,
He denies the humanity of Christ, and made a great outcry among the people of
it: but he people cried out saying. Let us hear him; you have often told us
many things against him: let him speak, and then if he speak not the Truth,
you may then reprove him. James hearing the desire of the people began to
speak, and the people gave audience and were very silent. But beginning to hold
out Christ alone to be the Teacher of his people in spirit and Truth, one of
the Priests cried out, I cannot endure to hear this Seducer any longer. Upon
which, James said, Prove me a Seducer before all this people, or else thou art
a false Accuser. But he had not one word to say against any thing that he had
spoken; But said, If thou will not answer me that question I asked thee, I will
call thee a Seducer as long as I live.

Whereupon, seeing there could be no peace there, nor liberty to speak, they
desired James to go into the house; and they kept close about him, to keep him
from the violence of some that came along with the Priest: but they raged so,
that he and some other friend received stripes, and with much ado got into the
house: But the r^ging S^a mires waited about the door to do mischief, and kept
shouting about the house (...) the while he was speaking: but the house being
filled with People they could not come to their purpose; and he Lord so ordered
it in the Evening, we came away without any more harm: but not long after,
there came some of the Priests party about the house, and asked if Nayler was
gone: and when they heard he was gone, they said, He may thank God of that.
Thus by the wisdom of God he escaped their violence at that time

But the Priests missing of their purpose there the next first day after, they
prepared their Sermons suitable to what they intended, possessing the people
that he was a Blasphemer, and denied he Resurrection and the Humanity of Christ
and all Authority; and that the Parliament had opened a gap for Blasphemy, and
as it was said by some of their hearers, they did God good service that would
knock him down Thus having stirred up the ruder sort, the next day they
prevailed with (...) called a Justice of Peace: the Priests son got him to come
twelve miles from his own house, he was one that had been in actual arms
against the Parliament, for the bringing in of the Scots: and having armed a a
great multitude against the next morning, they came very early to the house
where he was, where many Christian friends should have met that day, and asked
for Nayler, threatening to knock out his brains against the stones in the wall,
and that they would pull down the house, if he would not come out, though the
dorewas never shut against them. But some of them come into the house, and
commanded him to come forth, under pretense to dispute with the Priest. But
James seeing what they intended, answered, You did not use me socivilly the
last time I was amongst you, but if any have a mind they may come in, the
doors are open. Which answer they told the Priests whereupon they rushed
violently in, and took him by the throat, haled him out of the door into a
field, where was a man whom they called a Justice and with a Pitchfork struck
off his hat, and commanded him to answer to such Questions as the Priests would
ask him. Whereupon, the Priest began to ask many Questions: as concerning the
Resurrection, the Humanity of Christ, the Scriptures, and diverse other
Questions, as the Sacrament and such like: to which he answered, and proved
Scripture. But at last, being asked if Christ was in him, he said, he witnessed
him in measure. The Priest asked, if Christ was in him as man. James said,
Christ is not divided. But he urged him to tell whether Christ as man was in
him or no. He answered, Christ is not divided; for if he be, he is no more
Christ: but I witness that Christ in me who is God and man in measure. But the
Priest said, Christ is in heaven with a carnal body. To which said James,
Christ fills Heaven and Earth, and is not carnal but spiritual: for if Christ
be in Heaven with a carnal body, and the Saints with a spiritual body, that is
not proportionable: neither was that a carnal body which came in among the
Disciples, the doors being shut: for Christ is a Mystery, and thou know him
not.

Then after much jangling and tempting, the Priest not having got the advantage
he waited for, he cried out unto the people not to receive him into their
houses: and alleged that in the second Epistle of (...), verse 10. Now how
suitable that place was for his purpose, all people may see who have eyes, for
there they are forbidden to receive any into their houses but such who abide in
the Doctrine of Christ and confess themselves that they had both the Father and
the Son, and preach that Doctrine: but the Priests say that is blasphemy.

Then the Priest turned away from him: upon which, the armed multitude began to
be violent against diverse friends that were there. James hearing friends cry
out, said to the Justice, You will surely set us peaceably into the house
again: But seeing him to go away, and leave them in the hands of the rude
multitude, he gave himself up saying, The Will of the LORD be done.

Upon which the Justice turned again, saying, We will see him in the house
again: and going toward the house, many friends kept close about James,
exposing their own bodies to the danger of their weapons, to save him
harmless: and so with much ado we got into the house, not receiving much harm.
Which being done, and as James was praising the Lord for his wondrous
deliverance from their malicious intents, some heard them say, If we let him go
thus, all people will run after him. Whereupon they agreed that he should be
brought before the Justice again; and came with violence and haled him out
again. Then the Justice and the Priest getting a horsback, they caused him to
run after them to an Alehouse on the other side the water, where they went in,
not suffering one friend to go in with James. And when he came before the
Justice, he told him, if he would not put off his hat, he would send him to
prison, and also because he Thoued him for the Justice said, My Commission
runs, Ye. To which James answered, I do it not in contempt, for I own
Authority, and honor it according to the Scriptures: But I find none such
honor commanded in Scripture, but forbidden. Then they concluded to commit him
for that, and also as a wandering person, and said none knew there from whence
he came, for those who knew him were kept out. Then said he to Arthur Scaife,
Thou know me; I was in the Army with thee eight or nine years. It is no
matter, said the Justice, thou art no Soldier now.

Then they writ a Mittimus to send him to prison, and carried him to
Kirkby-Steven that night and shut him up in a Chamber and set a guard upon him;
but diverse of our friends following into the Town, where a great multitude was
gathered together for meeting, then did the people come from the Steeple-house
where another had been preaching: for diverse of the Priests were gathered
together that day; some preaching, some plotting, and some persecuting: (...)*
fast was a preparation for Naboths death. But friends not being suffered to go
into the house where James was, they abode in the streets: and some of them
being moved to speak to the people, the Priests perceiving the people to give
audience to what was spoken, made complaint. Whereupon some were sent forth and
with violence fetched in one Francis H^^gill, a friend, who was speaking to the
people, and brought him into the Highpriests hall, where were five Priests
assembled, with many other of their party, but not one friend. And bringing
him before the Justice, he was commanded to put off his hat. He answered, I
know no such law. The Priest said, He will tread both Ministry and Magistracy
under his feet. He said, Thou art a false Accuser: prove wherein. But one that
stood by, took off his hat, and cast it into the fire. Then said the Justice,
What is this thou speak against the Ministers? He answered, What have thou
to accuse me of? Whereupon one affirmed that he said, All the Ministers that
taught for hire, and in Steeple Houses, were enemies and liars against Jesus
Christ, and no Ministers of Jesus Christ. Upon that the Justice said, Thou
speak against the Law; for the Law gives them their maintenance. He said, I
meddle not of the Law but of their practice. Then said Francis to the Priest,
Did thou ever know a Minister of Jesus Christ that was a persecutor, or did
labor to imprison any? And after some more discourse, he said to the Priest, I
have seen a great deal of tyranny and persecution in this days actions. Then
said the Justice to the people. Take notice, he says the Law I act by is
Tyranny and persecution. To which the people assented. Then said Francis, Thou
may give out to the people what thou will; but I speak not of the Law but of
your Actions. Upon that he was sent to prison, a guard of 8 men was set over
them, who spent the night in drinking, swearing, and filthy and unclean
talking; and the more they were desired by the people to take heed of sin, the
more filthy they did appear: but these are the fittest instruments for acting
the Priests intentions, being Members of the Churches.

The next day they were guarded to Appleby: but some friends following could
not be suffered to pass on the streets that way, so great was their envy
against all that set their face that way. And the prisoners being brought
thither much means was used that none should come at them but such as were sent
to tempt them. There they were kept until the Sessions; in which time they sent
up and down the Country to seek for any that would witness any thing against
them, and improved their utmost interest for their advantage. A Jury was
chosen; diverse of them were resolved on the business, so that it was told the
Prisoners what would become of them before the day of examination came; and it
was accordingly: For the day came, and judgment passed; but the Prisoners
never saw their Accusers, nor know who they are; but against that day, the
Priests had prepared 3 large Petitions stuffed with most filthy untruths and
slanders, raised out of the bottomless pit; but not one of them proved though
one of the Justices said to them, It is fit they should be proved: neither was
there any thing in them which they could charge upon the prisoners, save only
the Power of the Lord had manifested at their meetings in shaking proud flesh,
and pouring out his Spirit among many, especially, as they said upon little
children: which the Priests concluded was Sorcery and Witchery, and of the
Devil: hereby declaring themselves to be of that generation, who called the
good man of the house Beelzebub; and if they should not do the same to them of
his household, the words of Christ could not be fulfilled.

Likewise they had gathered up all reports, true or falls, of things done by
many that the Prisoners had not seen the faces of, nor ever knew; thinking
thereby to make them odious to the people. They also brought two Priests out of
Lancashire, to swear things that another man had spoken in the presence of
four Justices of the Peace, and for which the man had been tried and cleared:
And these they brought, thinking to ad afflictions to the Prisoners bonds. But
he is kept in great peace and joy, having not any comfort from man, but from
God, who has appeared to him in this condition, and has given him assurance
of his love, in whom he rests. To whom be praise, honor and glory, for ever.

Amen.
The Examination of James Nayler, upon an Indictment of Blasphemy, at the
Sessions at Appleby, in January, 1652.
JUstice Pearson. Put off your hats.


James. I do it not in contempt of Authority: for I honor the power as it is
of God; without respecting men's persons, it being forbidden in Scripture. He
that respects persons, commits sin, and is convinced of the Laws a Transgressor.


Just. Pear. That is meant of respecting persons in judgment.


Iam. If I see one in goodly apparel and a gold ring, and see one in poor and
vile raiment, and say to him in fine apparel, Sit thou in a higher place than
the poor, I am partial, and judge of evil thoughts.


Col. Brigs. If thou were in the Parliament House; would thou keep it on?


Iam. If God should keep me in the same mind I am in now, I should.


Col. Brigs. I knew thou would contemn Authority.


Iam. I speak in the presence of God, I do not contemn Authority, but I am
subject to the power as it is of God, for conscience sake.


Just. Pears. Now Authority commands thee to put off thy Hat; what say thou
to it?


Iam. Where God commands one thing, and man another, I am to obey God rather
then man.


Col. Benson. See whether the Law commands it, or your own wills?


The Indictment was read, wherein James was Indicted for saying that Christ was
in him, and that there was but one Word of God.

Col. Brigs. Where wast thou born?


Iam. At Ardislaw two miles from Wakefeild.


Col. Brigs. How long livedst thou there?


Iam. Until I was married: then I went into Wakefeild Parish.


Col. Brigs. What profession wast thou of?


Iam. A Husbandman.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou a Soldier?


Iam. Yea, I was a Soldier betwixt 8 and 9 years.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not at Burford among the Levellers?


Iam. I was never there.


Col. Brigs. I charge thee by the Lord, that thou tell me whether thou wast or
no?


Jam. I was then in the North, and was never taxed for any Mutiny, or any other
thing, while I served the Parliament.


Col. Brigs. What was the cause of thy coming into these parts?


Jam. If I may have liberty, I shall declare it. I was at the Plow, meditating
on the things of God, and suddenly I heard a voice, saying unto me, Get thee
out from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers house: and I had a promise given in
with it. Whereupon I did exceedingly rejoice, that I had heard the voice of
that God which I had professed from a Child, but had never known him.


Col. Brigs. Did thou hear that voice?


Jam. Yea, I did hear it; and when I came at home, I gave up my Estate, cast
out my money; but not being obedient in going forth, the wrath of God was upon
me, so that I was made a wonder to all; and none thought I would have lived:
but (after I was made willing) I began to make some preparation; as apparel,
and other necessaries, not knowing whither I should go. But shortly afterward
going agate-ward with a friend from my own house, having on an old Suit,
without any money, having neither taken leave of wife or children, nor thinking
then of any journey, I was commanded to go into the West, not knowing whither I
should go; nor what I was to do there: but when I had been there a little
while, I had given me what I was to declare; and ever since I have remained,
not knowing to day what I was to do to morrow.


Col. Brigs. What was the promise thou had given?


Jam. That God would be with me: which promise I find made good every day.


Col. Brigs. I never heard such a call as this is, in our time.


Jam. I believe thee.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee?


Jam. I witness him in me: and if I should deny him before men, he would deny
me before my Father which is in Heaven.


Just. Pears. Spiritual, you mean?


Jam. Yea, Spiritual.


Just. Pears. By Faith, or how?


Jam. By Faith.


Just. Pears. What difference then between the Ministers and you?


Jam. The Ministers affirm Christ to be in Heaven with a Carnal body, But I
with a Spiritual body.


Just. Pears. Which of the Ministers say Christ is in Heaven with a Carnal
body?


Jam. The Minister so called of Kirkby-Steven.


P. Higginson stood up, and affirmd it again openly before all the Court.

Jam. If Christ be in Heaven with a Carnal body, and the Saints with a
Spiritual body, It is not proportionable; neither was that a Carnal body which
appeared among the Disciples, the doors being shut, and appeared in diverse
shapes.

Quest. Was Christ man or no?


Jam. Yea, he was, and took upon him the seed of Abraham, and was real flesh
and bone, but is a Mystery not known to the Carnal man; for he is begotten of
the Immortal ^eed, and those that know him, know him to be Spiritual; for it
was the Word that became flesh, and dwelt amongst us; and if he had not been
Spiritual, he had not wrought my Redemption.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee as man?


Jam. Christ fills all places, and is not divided: separate God and man, and
he is no more Christ.


Just. Pears. If we stand to dispute these things, we should have the
Ministers.


James Perceiving Priest Higginson offended, because he had told of h^s saying
that Christ was in heaven with a Carnal b^dy. James said, Friend, I had not
accused thee, had I not been asked what was the difference between the
Ministers and me; for I am not come to accuse any; for I am against accusations.

Col. Brigs. Wast thou not at a Kirk about Sawrby?


Jam. I was a member of an Independent Church at Weed-Church.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not excommunicated for thy blasphemous Opinions?


Jam. I know not what they have done since I came forth; but before I was not,
to my knowledge.


Col. Brigs. called of Master Goal, saying, Did you ever hear such a call as
this? Did you hear it?


Coal. Yea, I heard part of it.


Col. Brigs. Did thou not write a paper wherein was mentioned, that if thou
think to be saved by that Christ which died at Jerusalem, thou art deceived?


Jam. If I cannot witness Christ nearer then Jerusalem, I shall have no benefit
by him; but I own no other Christ but that who witnessed a good Confession
before Pontius Pilate; which Christ I witness suffering in me now.


Col. Brigs. Will thou deny thy hand?


Jam. I will not deny my hand, if I may see it; and I desire that I may have so
much favor, that that paper may be kept as an evidence either with or against
me.


A large Petition being read, wherein was something against Quaking and
Trembling.

Just. Pears. How comes it to pass that people Quake and Tremble?


Jam. The Scriptures witness the same condition in the Saints formerly; as
David, Daniel, Habakkuk. and diverse others.


Just. Pears. Did they fall down?


Jam. Yea, some of them did so.


Coal. David said all his bones were broken, but they were whole.


Iam. So are these now.


Coal. Moses trembled: for he saw the face of God, and all Israel.


Iam. Did all Israel see the face of God? that crosses the Scriptures.


Coal. They saw his Glory. I shall see the Lord with these eyes; putting his
fingers to his eyes.


Iam. They must first be made spiritual: he cannot be seen with carnal eyes,
for he is a Spirit; and no flesh can see God, and live.


Coal. That light by which I am justified is a created light.


Iam. That light by which I am justified, is not a created light.


Coal. That is true.


Just. Pears. To the Word: What say thou to the Scriptures? are they the
Word of God?


Iam. They are a true Declaration of the Word that was in them who spoke them
forth.


Higginson. Is there not a written Word?


Iam. Where read thou in thy Scriptures of a written Word? The Word is
Spiritual, not seen with Carnal eyes: but as for the Scriptures, they are true,
and I witness them true, in measure fulfilled in me, as far as I am grown up.


Just. Pears. Why do thou disturb the Ministers in their public worships?


Iam. I have not disturbed them in their public worships.


Just. Pears. Why do thou speak against Tithes, which are allowed by the
States?


Iam. I meddle not with the States; I speak against them that are hirelings, as
they are hirelings: those that were sent of Christ, never took Tithes, nor ever
sued for any wages.


Just. Pears. Dosh thou think we are so beggarly as the Heathens, that we
cannot afford our Ministers maintenance? We give them it freely.


Jam. They are the Ministers of Christ, who abide in the Doctrine of Christ.


Just. Pears. But who shall judge? how shall we know them?


Jam. By their fruits, you shall know them; they that abide not in the Doctrine
of Christ, make it appear they are not the Ministers of Christ.


Just. Pears. That is true.


A reply to the Title of that lying Relation, called [Diverse particulars of
the Persecutions of James Nailer] by the Priests of Westmerland.
THus is the second part of this Pamphlet ushered in with such an Inscription,
as (if James Nayler had been a real Martyr of Jesus Christ, and not an open
Enemy to him and his Gospel) might well have served for the Title page of his
Martyrdom.

You see Reader their language, and how bloodily they charge us in the very
entry of their Relation. The term Priest which they give us here and all over
by way of contempt, may discover to the world what is the rancour of their
souls against us. However it be grown the common reproach against us in the
mouths of those that know not God, yet we hope the Lord will teach them better
language in his season. I am credibly informed that a little while ago, one of
them railing with that and other language, against a Minister, went from him
home and died presently. What ever scorn they intend to heap upon us by that
word, we do not own it, nor ever did as a Title proper to the Office of the
Ministers of the New Testament, or to their persons, further then as they are
Christ's Disciples, who has made all whom he has loved and washed from their
sins with his blood, Kings and Priests to God his Father, Rev. 1. 5. 6. And
in this sense, if themselves do but once become Priests, they will become
companions of Devils for ever.

And for Persecution, the Lord forbid that we should be persecutors, as they
render us to the world to be, while our selves are designed as the Objects of
it by some, if their power answered their wills: and do already suffer the
persecution of the Tongue in as high a degree as ever did Ministers of Christ
in any Age. The Lord forbid that we should lift up our hand or open our mouth
against the least of Saints. We know what reward our Savior has promised to
him that shall give to drink unto one of his little ones a cup of cold water in
the name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10. ult. and on the other hand what severity of
judgment he has threatened to those that do offend them, Matthew. 18. 6. We do
not therefore pretend a jus Divinum to persecution, as one (I heartily believe)
most falsely and maliciously accuses the Ministers of Lancashire to do: but do
from our souls rather wish to be sufferers of it our selves, then defiled with
the least tincture of the guilt of that red sin of persecuting others.

If to be steadfast in the profession of the Truth, to warn and charge those
that are committed to our charge, who we hope shall be our crown and joy in the
day of the Lord, to take heed of seducers: if to labor to keep them from being
robbed of the salvation of their souls, if to satisfy the desire of some of our
people whom we heard continually wishing that we would have some conference
with these men, if to contend for the Faith against those men that are the open
enemies of it, and to petition for their liberties when they are consined; If
this be persecution, then we must confess our selves persecutors, and deserving
blame for it: but if these actings do not savor of a spirit of persecution, we
can then challenge the whole World to prove us guilty.

And for Naylers sufferings, which the unfaithful Relator calls persecutions,
he knows, or might as well as we, that, that little restraint only which he
suffered as an evil doer, was by the Order of the Justices; and we know that we
did not so much as desire his sufferings in the least, and that we sought and
desired nothing, but the preservation of Religion and Peace among us, and that
those Authors and Fomentours of the disturbances of this poor County, might
return to their habitations and callings, and there according to the Apostles
rule study to be quiet, and do their own business. And must we upon this
account stand charged with Persecution? But the Lord the righteous Judge,
though we should alrogether hold our peace, will one day plead for us against
those that have hated us without a cause, and are our enemies, because they see
us friends to Truth and Peace. The Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

A Reply to that part of the Relation which concerns Master Coals discourse
with Nailer near Kendall.
THe relator in Saul's Errand to Damascus, says, That James Nayler, meeting at
a house near Kendall, the Priests in the Town having notice, raised the Town of
Kendall against him, but being long in gathering, the meeting was done. But
spies being set on the steeple and other places, notice was given, which way
James past from thence: and coming down toward Kendall, two Priests with a
Justice, etc: and an exceeding great multitude of people following them, met
him, etc.

It Is true Mr. Coal met Nailer at the time mentioned near Kendall, and there
was no other Minister with him then: Master Turner the Schoolmaster came to
them about a quarter of an hour after. But that they raised the Town is a
notorious falsehood. That they set spies on the Steeple, is false again. That
they set spies in other places, is another nntruth. That any gave notice which
way Nayler went, is another. That they met him with a great multitude is a sixth
lie in the Narrative already. How easily is that cause discovered, that has a
lie in its right hand, and falsehood for its Foundation.

Mr. Coal was earnestly pressed by some that feared the Lord in Kendall, and
whose spirits were troubled to see the disorders of these men to take the
opportunity to go up to widow Cocks to speak with Nayler being a Ringleader of
that way, which at last he was, though unwillingly, persuaded unto. All that
accompanied him, was but Mr. A. and 6 more, nor was any more near, till meeting
with diverse of that party coming toward them, they were informed the meeting
was done. Yet lighting so patly on Nailer himself (for he was with the
multitude that came from the meeting) he thought it necessary (though not very
convenient there) to have a little discourse with him. Upon occasion of which
stay so near the Town, the people, as is usual in cases of Novelty, in an
hours time or less were flockt about him in great multitudes: but a great part
of them was Naylers company, that came before him and with him, and followed
him from their meeting.

We should admire to find such gross lies against men, did we not see their
lies against the Lord more shameless and more impudent. And we wish Nayler, or
whosoever else relates such things, to tremble before the presence of the Lord,
that will shut out every liar from his Kingdom, and to false things will give
sharp arrows of the Mighty, with coals of Juniper. But no marvel such lies may
steal forth in press, where they may hope to meet with so much credulity from
some as may make them current, when Thomas Willen, that lives in Town, one of
that fect, had the impudence to tell Mr. Archer, that the bell was rung to give
notice of Naylers coming. If necessity require, these slanders may be proved to
be such by hundreds of Evidences.

The Particulars of that conference M. Cole had with him were these: Mr. Coal
told him, the Lord had put it upon his spirit, and he had a message from the
Lord to deliver to him. His best answer was this. Have thou received a Message
from the Lord to speak to me, and I not know it? Mr. Coal was somewhat
astonished with such a blasphemous Expression, and told him how like he spoke
to Zedekiah, the son of Chenannah. 2 Cron. 15 that said to Micaiah, Which way
went the Spirit of the Lord from me, to speak to thee? but this he wholly
passes over. Mr. Coal then demanded of him, by what power he did exercise
such Tyranny over the bodies of such poor creatures, viz. in their quaking
fits. To which he answered much to the same purpose his Relation has it. Mr.
Coal still pressed him with it. Nayler said, Do thou acknowledge it to be
done by a Power? To which Mr. Coal answered not one word, which he forgeth as
answered to that; But said, Yes, I do well know whose coming is after the power
of Satan, with all signYes and lying wonders, etc. This was all the account he
could get of Nayler, concerning these horrible pangs the bodies of men, women
and children are taken with at the time of their speaking. Mr. Coal told him,
It was not by the Power of Christ, or his saving work in conviction of sin and
horror because of it* lying in and upon the Soul and Conscience, and not the
body. This the Relator falsely perverts, and (...) the Priest said: When Christ
comes, he comes to torment souls, and not bodies, which with his Answer to it
are both (...) Mr. Coal proceeded, because he could give no account of it
himself, to give (...) an account thereof, and to prove it to him; Not to be
from (...) work of God, but from the spirit of darkness and delusion: which he
mentions not at all.

Amongst other things proposed to convince him, of this, this was one, That the
constant Operation of this Quaking in all, was immediately to fill their souls
with a crowd of all damnable and destructive doctrines, and an absolute turning
away from Christ in all his Ways, and Truths, and Ordinances. Amongst others
he instanced in what he specifies in his Relation, to which Nayler answered, as
is there expressed; and asked him further, if ever he heard him aver any of
those things. M Coal told him he never saw his face before, and so could not
hear them from himself, but he knew them to be the Principles of his follower.
He said, what was that to him. And whereas the Relator says, Mr. Coal was not
able to prove any one particular, is known to the contrary. For so the Lord
ordered it, that to put to silence the foolishness of evil men, among Naylers
followers present, was one Strickland, with whom, and one Thomson, Mr. Coal
had had private discourse before, who plainly denied to him the use of
Teaching, of Bibles, the duty of children to their Parents, and of any man to a
Magistrate, and that in the presence of many more besides himself. When Nayler
called for proof, Mr. Coal took Strickland by the hand, and presented him to
Nayler as one of his followers, and one that held those principles, and had
told him he received those Doctrines from Nayler. Nayler again said, what was
that to him; but could not be got either to a confession, or denial of those
wicked Principles.

Mr. Coal proceeded further to charge him with what he knew to be a Principle
with them all, and which Nayler had so publicly professed that he thought he
durst not deny it, and that was this. Nayler had affirmed, That every man in
the World had a Light within him sufficient to guide him to Salvation. This Mr.
Coal disputed with him till he rnn him to this absurdity, That if an Indian
were there, that had never heard or read of Christ, that he knew Jesus Christ
as well as any of us. At which the people making some noise, and Mr. Coal
being partly satisfied, as having witnessed to the Doctrine of Truth in these
Particulars against those men; And the crowd increasing, their conference
ended. Now the Relator to add yet sin to sin, says he charged him for holding
out a Light to convince of sin which all have not. Ala^^ poor hearts, if they
could persuade the world that a man of such known Learning and Abilities as Mr.
Coal is, had no knowledge; and though it be true that the Gentiles have their
(...). Romans 2. 25. What will this advantage their cause? Think they he was
ignorant, That all Nations and Kindreds have some sparkeling of Light and
Knowledge, some twilight streamings of Understanding, the Candle of the Lord
within them? But what is this to a Light sufficient to save them? Can the
Owning of those implanted natural Principles bring us to know Jesus Christ and
his Gospel, which is a Doctrine of pure Revelation, and which the world could
never have known by all its wisdom, had not God by his Son, and by his
Servants the Prophets and Apostles revealed it from Heaven unto us?

And whereas they would persuade the world, that what rude behavior was after,
was by the Priests party, scornfully so called: Had the Relator any spark of
ingenuity left in him, he knows Mr. Coals unwillingness to discourse in that
place, as fearing some tumult: and that those that came with Mr. Coal to speak
with Nayler, did guard him with safety through the Town*

And where they say the raging Priests continued shouting, crying, and throwing
stones at him a quarter of a mile out of the Town, their souls may blush for
shame to Print such a palpable execrable falsehood. Those whom they so nickname,
have, I am confident, more compassion in them for such beguiled souls, then
Passion, and were so far from being engaged in such a barbarous and unchristian
act, that their souls would loath the very thoughts of it. Mr. Coal saw not
Nayler at that time after he was departed from the place where he discoursed
with him, but stayed there with four Christian friends till the people were
gone, and Nayler conveyed safely through the Town by a Magistrate. But let them
not be deceived, God is not mocked; for they that thus sow to the flesh, shall
of it not fail to reap corruption.

At the close of the Book, I find the word Priests in this place among the
Errata's, and that you should read not the raging Priests, but the raging
People. A willing Erratum doubtless, and an excellent back door here is to
avoid a lie. But how shall these Errata's which one of 100. reads not, and few
in comparison know the use of, take off this base aspersion?

It is well that either I. Nayler his particulars, or George Fox his press of
Persecutions are either capable of mistakes, or have the modesty to confess an
Error. We shall not challenge what the reparation of their honesty does at
their hands, viz. To alter their Relations, and speak Truth, and right the
names of those they have wronged, in their Saul's Errand to Damascus, but shall
bind all their aspersions of us as a crown upon our heads, having learned in
some measure to go through both good and bad report, and desiring to be
crucified to vain estimations of men.

A Reply to that part of Nailers Relation, which concerns Master Fothergils,
and my own discourse with him at Orton.
HE says, many Christian friends did desire his coming to Orton. Who those
were, or whether desirous of his coming or no, I did not inquire, since we know
too well that such guests as he, may be had upon very easy terms. He is indeed
for any way but home, or where he hopes to find entertainment, and then the
feat is to pretend that either by voice or revelation, or at least by the
entreaty of their Brethren they were called thither. And it is probable upon
this last score, Nayler came to Orton. Fox was heard to say a few days before,
he thought God would give him a Call to speak at Orton shortly. But thither
came Nayler in steed of Fox, and with him a great company of all sorts and both
sexes; where true it is, that some Ministers were, but that any multitude or
number of people was drawn together by their procurement, is utterly false. As
for his temptations by the Ministers, and their Intentions of violence against
him, and the appearance thereof afterward, his paper when he writ it would
have answered him with a blush, if it had been capable of shame.

The Relation which Nayler, or some for him makes of the conference betwixt our
selves and him that day, is very confused, imperfect and false. Briefly and
truly thus it was; Mr. Fothergill, Minister of Orton, wished the Constable to
do his Office so far, as to ask Nailer by what Authority, and to what end he
had drawn together that multitude. Nayler replied, the end of his coming
thither, was to declare what God had revealed in him.

If so, said Mr. Fothergill, that thou come to instruct the people, it is a
good work, if so be thou have a lawful calling so to do. Then showing him an
Ordinance of Parliament, forbidding any to preach publicly, but such as were
lawfully called thereunto, he asked what calling he had to do so. Nayler
answered, he had a calling. If so, said M. Fothergil, it is either
Extraordinary, or Ordinary, one, or both, or neither, which I rather believe.
To which Naylers reply was, that distinctions were from the seed of the
Serpent. Yea, said M. Fothergil, what say thou then to that distinction, 1.
John 5. 16. There is a sin unto death, and a sin not unto death. I spoke of
thy distinction, said Nayler, though indeed he spoke of distinctions generally.
But leaving this discourse, Nayler affirming that there was no other kind of
call to the Ministry? but such as the Apostles had M. Fothergill proceeded to
give some instances of extraordinary calls in the Prophets and Apostles: and of
ordinary calls, as in the successive Ministers of the New Testament by
Imposition of hands. And lastly, of both in the example of Paul, of whose
immediate and extraordinary call we read, Acts, 9 And of his mediate and
ordinary call, by Imposition of hands. Acts 13. 2. Against this Nayler spoke
many words to little purpose, out of Gal. 1. And when he says, he could have
no answer though he asked 3. times whether the imposition of hands, Act 13. 2.
were Paul's calling to the Ministry, it is untrue. For he was answered then,
that it was his ordinary or mediate call to the Ministry among the Gentiles,
and a confirmation of that extraordinary call, which he had before. Not said Mr.
Fothergil, as though that extraordinary call had not bin of its self
sufficient, but that the Churches consent and approbation being hereby
signified, he might be the more welcome to, and the better received of the
Gentiles, to whom he was sent. Nor do we judge amiss, if we think that the
Lord hereby would also signify, what manner of calling to the Ministry he
intended to continue in the Church to after ages.

That other Minister, that the Relator contemptuously calls Priest, was my self.
I told him then, that seeing he denied the Office, and teaching of all the
Ministers in England without exception, and did pretend, that himself, together
with his fellow speakers, were the only true Ministers and Messengers of
Christ, that we desired to know his Faith, and to hear from him if we might,
the sum of that Doctrine of the Gospel which he came to preach. I told him
further, that our selves and the Country in general did look upon him, and his
fellow speakers as seducers, such as preached another Gospel, and another Jesus
then we had preached: and that therefore for the clearing of himself, and the
satisfaction of the Countery and our selves there present, it was but meet that
he should give us them, desiring it some account of his says. And to do that I
told him, I hoped he would not be unwilling, seeing the Apostle Peter exhorts
all Christians to be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them, to
every one that asks.

To this he replied nothing, but stood as one that had naught to say. I then
asked the people there present, if they did not generally desire to hear
something from him, touching his Faith in some of the main principles of
Religion. To which many of them said it was their desire.

Whereupon I entreated Nayler to answer plainly to a few questions which I
desired to propound to him.

The first Question I propounded was whether he believed the Holy Scripture to
be the very Word of God.

To this he answered, there was no word but Christ, which he would have proved
out of John 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, etc.

I told him we did not deny Jesus Christ to be the Word, but did believe him to
be the Essential Word of his Father. I further told him (according to that
distinction of the Word into Verbum Deus, and Verbum Dei) That the Word was
twofold, The Word, that is God, which is Jesus Christ, and the Word of God,
which is the Holy Scripture. Then altering the former question a little, I
asked him whether he did believe the Holy Scripture to be the written Word of
God.

To which, after many words to no purpose, being pressed to answer positively,
he said. It is not the Word of God, there is no written Word.

The next question, I asked him was, Whether he that speaks or teaches that
which is directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, is to be
looked upon as one speaking from the immediate inspiration of the Spirit, though
he pretend to do so.

To this be replied. The Word and the Spirit are one.

What said I, do you understand by the Word, when you say the Word and the
Spirit are one. He said, by the Word, he meant Christ. I told him we did
believe Christ and the Holy Spirit to be one God, and that if that was the
matter of his answer, That Christ and the Holy Spirit are one, it was
impertinent to my question.

I then put the case touching my self thus. If I (said I) should pretend to
preach from the immediate assistance of the Spirit, and preach that which is
repugnant to the Holy Scripture, whether would your self believe that the
Spirit of God spoke by me or no?

To this he answered as before, I say (says he) The Spirit and the Word are
one.

I told him, he did not answer like a rational man, and pressing him to answer
plainly, and not so cloudily and darkly as he did endeavor to do: that those
were Auditors could not understand what he meant, diverse of his followers that
were there present, said altogether almost the devil spoke in me, the Serpent
spoke in me.

I told them that was a pure Language that became a Quaker better then a
Christian.

His Disciples there present desired he should propound some question to my
self. I told them upon that condition he would answer me plainly to some
questions I further desired to put to him, I would answer him to any Question
of his as plainly as I could.

He then asked me how I could prove my self to be a Minister of Jesus Christ.

I told him that-I had been called and ordained to the work of the Ministry,
by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, and that Nayler says, to this
Question, he could get no answer.
the Lord had been pleased mercifully to furnish me with some (though very
mean) abilities for the discharge of that work, and that it had been my
endeavor to preach the Gospel sincerely, and that I desired, and as far as
the Lord assisted, labored to walk as became that Doctrine.

He told me I did not live as became a Minister of Christ.

I asked him wherein he could accuse me.

He said I preached for hire, and suffered my self to be called Master,
contrary to the command of Christ.

To the first I replied, that for the terms hire, or wages, they were used in
Scripture, that our Savior speaking of those that labor in the Gospel, says,
The workman is worthy of his hire: And that the Apostle scrupled not to say he
received wages. Accordingly I told him I took hire, or received wages for
Preaching of the Gospel, But did not preach for it, did not make that the end
of my Ministry.

And for being called Master, I told him that I was not ambitious of that
Title. That my name was T. H. and that it would please me very well to be
called by that name. I said further, when our Savior says, Matthew. 23. and 10.
Be not ye called Masters; he does not simply forbid them to be so called no
more, then in the foregoing verse he forbids children to call an earthly Parent
Father: but that he there forbids such proud and ambitious affectation of
Titles of respect as was in the Scribes and Pharisees.

Away, Away, says Nayler with your Expositions of Scripture. The Scripture is
not to be expounded, and God will add to such as Expound them, all the plagues
written in that Book.

I replied, that the Apostles knew the meaning of this Precept of Jesus Christ,
and were obedient unto it, and yet suffered a Title superior to that of Master
to be given, to them, John 12. 21. and Acts 16. 30. and that they reproved not
them that so called them, which they would have done, if it had been unlawful
for them to have been called Master, and that John 20. 15. Mary Magdalen called
our Savior Sir, supposing him to have been the Gardener. [The Greek word
translated Sir, is (...) and does properly signify Lord, and is as Linguists
know, a Title of greater respect then (...). the term used, Matthew 23. 10.

The next question I asked him was not as he says, Whether Christ was ascended
into Heaven as Man, (that was in another place about 5 days after) which yet
some of their speakers have denied and argued against:) but whether he did
believe Jesus Christ to be true God and true Man also in one Person. And first
said I, whether do thou believe Jesus Christ to be true God?

The question I asked, because I had heard that some of them had affirmed that
Christ was no more then another man.

In steed of replying to this question, he stood like a man astonished, and said
nothing at all.

I desired him to answer, telling him he need not be afraid or ashamed to
confess Christ before men: and that if he should desire my self to tell him my
Faith concerning Jesus Christ my Savior, I would do it with all
cheerfulness, yea though in the presence of his professed enemies.

He there faintly bad me Answer the Question he had propounded to me. I told
him I had done so, but that we might not lose time, I desired him not to
trifle, but to answer in five words, and plainly. His spirit here it seems
began to move him, and while we thought he had been about to shape some Answer
to the foresaid Question, he slipped into one of their speakings, exhorting the
people to look only to the light, and to Christ within them, and not to look
forth, telling them they had no need of any teacher without, with other such
stuff. When he had proceeded a little while, I interrupted him, and told him
that we came not thither to hear a Seducer, and such a one we took him to be,
and that we are commanded in the Holy Scripture to beware of false Prophets,
and to avoid them that are known to be such. Then urging him again for the
clearing of him self, to let us hear what was his faith concerning Christ, and
first for that particular above mentioned, concerning Christ his deity, he
utterly refused.

When we saw we could not get a word more from him, we quietly departed and
left him in the field, with as many as pleased to stay with him.

The Quakers relation says the people cried out saying, let us hear him, etc.
a notorious untruth, that any did speak such a word there mentioned, save some
of their own faction that did desire he might go on in his Speech.

Their relator says also, there could be no peace, that some kept close about
Nailer, to keep him from the violence of some that came along with the Priests,
but they raged so, that he and some other friends received stripes.

Reader, believe them not, their words are as light as wind and vanity. All
that had the color of any affront offered to Nailer was only this, and that, a
good while after we were once away. A young man in Orton Parish as Nailer was
going down the hill set his staff or foot before him. I do not now remember
well whether, and caused him to stumble, but he fell not; for which Act this
poor man was Indicted at the Sessions, and fined 20. s. so ready were the
Justices to appear against any that offered the least shadow of violence to
them.

A little after the Author of that lying relation says. That the raging
Sodomites waited about the Door to do mischief and kept shouting a bout the
house, etc.

Inquiring of this particular since, some of the Townsmen told me, that it is
true; there were some little Boys and Girls that made some noise about the
house while Nayler was speaking. These were his raging Sodomites: Upon these
they also bend the bow of their tongue, and spend these words of Gall.

A Reply to that Part of the Quakers Relation, that concerns what was done at
Mallerstang and Kirkby-Stephen.
THeir Relator says the Priests missed of their purpose at Orton.] He
intimates we had purposes of violence against Nayler, when we met him at Orton
a little before: But the searcher of hearts knows that we never intended no
more violence to him, then to our selves, and they know also as well as we,
that we offered none.

The end why any of us desired to speak with him was this. Having heard much of
his seductions of great numbers of people on the other side of the Country to
their wicked way, and knowing he had no other errand among us, but to infect
the people of our several Congregations with their internal doctrines and to
persuade them to desert the preaching of the Word, and all their Ordinances of
Christ, and to render not only ourselves, but the very calling of the
Ministry hateful to them; We therefore thought it fit to go to him, and have
some discourse with him about some fundamental points of Religion, that if we
found him to be erroneous in these Principles, we might exhort the people of
our respective Congregations to beware of such false Prophets, though they came
to them in sheeps clothing. And therein we did nothing but what we took our
selves obliged to do in duty to God whom we serve in the Gospel of his Son, and
the souls of the people related to us. Should we being shepherds and overseers
of the flock, stand still, look on, and be silent, or fly when the Wolf comes
and labors to devour? Should we not rather warn all men under our charge if it
were possible day and night with tears to beware of such impostors as are risen
up among us, teaching such Errors as have overthrown the seeming faith of
many, and speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them?

Their relation says further, the next Lords Day after, we prepared our
Sermons suitable to what we intended.

We intended with the assistance of God to do our endeavor, (and shall while
we have a mouth to speak) to help those to whom we preach the Gospel, as far as
in us lay, free from the contagion of the Quakers Errors: and to this our
intention, some of us did then suit our Sermons. And blessed be God that has
given to any of us some, though weak ability to suit our Sermons to the
present occasions. Solomon tells us, how pleasant and profitable a word spoken
in season is, Prove. 25. 11.

Their Relation says further, that we said the Parliament had opened a gap for
blasphemy.]

I do not believe these words were ever spoken by any of us. There is one Mr.
Dodson, a Minister of Rassendale, I am persuaded an honest Godly man, that is
accused to have uttered these words on the 24. of October, by two of Naylers
Proselytes: but the most judicious knowing hearers of that Congregation then
present, deny to their best remembrance that ever any such words were there
spoken And whereas this Relator affirms them to be spoken the 5 of December, he
might have remembered that true saying, A lier had need of a good memory.

The following part of the Relation is a mere heap of lies, as that any of us
said, they did God good service that would knock him down, is a wicked
malicious lie. That we stird up the ruder sort of people, is another. That any
of us solicited Mr. Burton to come to Mallerstang is another untruth. That the
Priests son got him to come, is another falsity. It is well known to those to
whom he is known, that he neither has, nor ever had son or daughter.

That Mr. Burton had been in actual arms against the Parliament, is another
revengeful ly; and an imputation of unfaithfulness to those Gentlemen that
were of the Committee for sequestration.

That the multitude was armed, is another horrid falsity, or that any was
armed, save that 2 Gentlemen there had their swords with them, which is not
unusual with them when they go abroad, and 1 Country man. And if he brought his
sword thither upon that occasion, as not using to wear one, it was rather for
fear of the Quakers, then to offend them.

That any threatened to knock out his brains against the wall, to pull down the
house, that the Priests rushed in violently and took him by the throat and
haled him out of door; That there M. Burton struck off his hat with a
pitch-fork, or any body else, or that any violence was done to him any where,
are such notorious falsehoods, as I think the Father of lies himself would be
ashamed to forge, seeing there are so many sorts of people that can bear
witness against them. There was no Minister there but my self, and if Nayler,
or any of his lying followers can say that I was guilty of the least incivility
toward him, either in word or action, let them not spare to charge me with it
before any authority. I shall dare the whole Generation of them to do it: What
was done there was not done in a corner, but before many witnesses, by whom the
Truth may easily be made to appear.

Reader, I will not detain thee with reckoning up all the falsities contained
in this Relation, only in general, I beseech every man fearing God that shall
read these lines, to believe, that there was no one of those abuses offered to
Nayler, that are there spoken of in our sight or hearing that were there
present. If when we were absent any one used any railing language to Nayler or
his followers, according to their own constant custom toward others, I do not
here go about to justify them in that sinful practice.

For the Particulars of our conference there, if the recital of them might
benefit the Reader, I would set them down exactly according to Truth. While we
were discoursing, Nayler was answered one question for another, and I think to
his own conviction, seeing his Relation neither mentions those questions he
propounded, nor my Answers to them, I am sure his mouth was stopped then, he had
nothing to gainsay.

For that particular which he charges me with, that I said, Christ was in
heaven with a carnal body, I shall reply to it by and by in my relation of the
Examination of Nayler, at the Sessions at Appleby.

And where he says, his Commitment was for Thou-ing Master Burton, and
refusing to put off his hat to him, it is most untrue: though his pride and
contempt of Authority did thereby sufficiently appear.

M. Burton, as all other inhabitants of these parts, had heard much of the
blasphemies of these wicked speakers, Fox and Nayler, etc. Of the seeds of
heresies they had sown, the damnable doctrines they had broached, the
distractions and disturbances they had caused in Towns and families in other
parts of the Country, and of the great number of people they had perverted, and
looked upon it (as I have heard him say) as necessary to give some check to the
proceedings of these men, for the preservation of the public peace. This he
thought to have done only by binding Nailer over to the Sessions, where he
hoped some order might be made for the bridling of the growing insolences and
impieties of this turbulent sect. But Nayler, refusing to yield obedience to
the Law in giving security for his apperance at the next quarter Sessions,
which were then nigh, occasioned Mr. Burton to write a Mittimus, and send him
to Appleby to continue in the Goals custody, till the Sessions should be.

For Hogils business, there were three or four of their speakers or praters
rather, in the Market place, all of them speaking together, more like mad men
then Ministers of Christ, or sober teachers of the Gospel, and virulently
railing against those that were so indeed; and this Hogill amongst them: who
affirmed for his part, that all the Ministers in England that preach in steeple
houses were liars against Jesus Christ. M. Burton being then in the Town, sent
for him to reprove him for this language. When he came in, he behaved himself
very contemptuously, and his words were very stubborn and peremptory. Some
present told him M. Burton was a Magistrate, and it was meet he should show him
at least some civil respect, as that of putting off the hat. Hogill denied to
do it. M. Burton told him in a friendly manner, how far they were degenerated
from all Civility and common manners, and that for himself, he did not desire
the respect of putting off the hat from him, or any man, (though he knew that
such behavior was due toward a Magistrate, as might show some reverence and
respect to him, but did much wonder, they were so superstitiously scrupulous of
it, as if it were some great sin. Hogil repiyed, God had not commanded him to
put off his hat, and that he did not owe him that respect, nor would he give it
to him. Whereupon one that stood by took it off and laid it upon the end of the
Table by him. Hogil took his hat and put it on again. Another standing by him
took it off again, and laid it in the fire within his reach. He refusing to
save his hat himself, one that stood by presently took it off the fire, before
it had received any hurt, and gave it to him, and he wore it according to his
own mind. Among other peremptory expressions he used to Master Burton, this was
one. The Law (says he) thou actest by is tyranny and oppression. For this and
other wicked speeches, M. Burton desired him to find bail among his friends
(many of whom were then in the town) for his appearing at the Sessions then not
far off, which when he utterly refused to do, he made him a companion to Nayler.

Where the Relator says, There were 3 large Petitions prepared, stuffed with
most filthy untruths and slanders, raised out of the bottomless pit; The Reader
may know, that there were indeed 2 Petitions then presented to the Justicess
one of which came from the town of Kendal, the other from some other parts of
the Country. Nor will the subscribers be ashamed to own them, being able to
make every particular good with advantage.

But I doubt I have already exacted upon the Patience of my Reader, and am even
weary of raking in this Relation, wherein untruths ly as thick as worms in old
dunghils. But I am not curious to observe all the material Errataes in it.

The Reader may be assured of this, that if they had had any thing whereof they
could have justly accused us, we should have heard of it in another manner,
then out of Saul's Errant to Damascus long before this time, and louder
complaints would have been made then those of this Relator. But if they have
neglected hitherto to accuse any of us in particular of such wrongs as they
complain to have bin done in general, why do they not apply themselves to those
in authority, and charge him or them by name that did infer the injury, and
prove it by witnesses, that they may bring such to condign punishment? Or if
the Justices have done them injustice, why do they not Petition to their
Superiors for remedy?

If any man shall yet mistake the commitment of Nayler for persecution, it were
good, (if he have bin a stranger to his sufferings) he were acquainted with the
greatest heat of it. It was no more but his confinement to the Goalers house,
where he had as good accommodation, as I think his own house would have
afforded him, or he did desire, and better surely then he did deserve: and from
whence he is now gone well amended both in body, and raiment, and in purse
also. For his incomes from the contributions of his Proselytes, as is reported
by some that have reason to know were not inconsiderable; nor would he have had
much cause to complain, but that he wanted liberty to range the Country, if it
had lasted as long as he had lived.

An answer to the false and unfaithful Relation, of the examination of James
Nayler, at the Sessions at Appleby, January, 1652.
Reprinted verbatim, in this Book as it is micrepresented in Saul's errand to
Damascus.
REader, I suppose thee in this Book at least to have porused that untrue and
halting narration of Naylers examination procured by him or some of his friends
to be printed and spread abroad for no other end, is to us it appears, but to
belly slander, wrong, dishonor and bring an Odium upon both the Magistracy and
Ministry in this County of Westmerland, that have any way appeared against the
wickedness of that man and his Faction, and to render them concemptible in the
eyes of the people of this Nation; and those that fear God in it, that are
strangers to that business, if it were possible. Thus they give their mouths to
evil, and their tongues frame deceit, against them that never merited it at
their hands or pens, and desired naught to them but good. But the Lord will one
day examine and reprove them, and set this sin among the rest in order before
them, except they yet become convicts, which from our souls we wish on their
behalfs.

To wipe off that dirt wherewith they have aspersed the Gentlemen that then sat
on the Bench; I must first inform my Reader, that whereas he says, he was
indicted for Blasphemy, for saying. Christ was in him and that there was but
one word of God, it is a notorious untreth known to all the Country then
present; I cannot but wonder at their impudence in Printing so well known a
lie. It easily discovers to him that will see, of what spirit they are: They
would make the world believe (...) Gentlemen, were Ignorants indeed, that had
no better skill then to take those words for Blasphemous: It Is true; these words
were contained in his Indictment, which he spoke in the hearing of an hundred
people that he affirmed Christ was in him as man, and that the holy Scripture
was (...) the Word of God; which last words though they may be truly said to be
Blasphemous, taking Blasphemy in a larger sense, as it is used, Act, 6. 1. Tim.
1. 6. Tit. 2. 5. Yet that he was indicted for Blasphemy at all, is utterly
false; what was the cause of his confinement, I have in another place informed
my Reader.

But further, to discover the falsehood and wilful omissions and imperfections
of their Narration I shall give my Reader a true account of the examination of,
and discourse had with James Nayler at the Sessions, in all the material
passages of it, which was as follows.

After the Justices had spoken something to Nayler, concerning his refusal to
put off his hat in the presence of Authority, which he then and there denied to
do, and had put some question to him concerning the place of his birth and
habitation, his Profession being a Soldier, Col. Brigs demanded of him the
cause of his coming into these parts.

To which Nayler, If I may have liberty (says he) I will declare it. [I was in
the fields at the Plow in Barley seed time, Meditating on the things of God, and
suddenly I heard a voice, saying unto me, Get thee out from thy kindred, and
from thy fathers house, and I had a promise given in with it, whereupon I did
exceedingly rejoice that I had heard the voice of that God which I had
professed from a child, but whom before that day I had never known: So I went
home, and stayed there a good while, and not being obedient to the Heavenly
Call, I was in a sad condition as my friends know, and those that knew me,
wondered at me, and thought I was distracted, and that I would never have
spoken nor eaten more.

Hereabouts as he was going on, Coll. Brigs interrupted him with this question.

Friend, said he, Did thou bear that voice thou say spoke unto thee?

Nayler answered, Yea, I did hear it.

(...). Briggs questioned him again thus, Were there not some others besides
thy self at plow with thee?

Yea faith Nayler, there were two more besides my self.

And did not they, said the Coll. hear that voice as well as thy self.

No friend, says Nayler; it was not a Carnal voice, audible to the outward
care.

O then said Coll. Briggs, I know what voice it was.

Nayler then proceeded thus, after I was made willing to go, I gave away my
estate, and cast out my money, and I began to make some preparation, as apparel
and other necessaties, but a while after going agateward with a friend from my
own house, having an old suit without any money, having neither taken leave of
wife or children, nor thinking of any journey, The voice came to me again,
commanding me to go into the West, not knowing whither I should go, nor what I
was to do there; but when I had been there a little while, it was given me what
I was to declare, and ever since I have remained not knowing to day what I am
to do to morrow. When he had finished this Relation touching his call, Coll.
Briggs put this question to him;

Friend, you said, you gave away your estate, and cast out money before you came
forth, to whom did you give your estate and money?

Nayler said, I gave it to my wife.

Coll. Briggs replied, do thou call that a giving away of thy estate, and
casting out thy money? I should not much care if all my estate were so given
away; But what was the promise which thou said was given in to thee?

Nayler said, That God would be with me, which I find made good every day.

Said Coll. Briggs, I never heard of such a call as thine, in our time:

To which Nayler replied, he believed to

M. Pearson then asked, whether Christ was in him as man, as he had before
affirmed?

Nayler replied, Christ God and Man is not divided; separate God and Man, and
He is no more Christ; Christ God and Man is every where.

I asked thee, said Mr. Pearson, Whether thou believe Christ as He is Man to
be in thee?

I witness Him in me, said Nayler, and if I should deny him before men, He
would deny me before my Father which is in Heaven.

How do you mean, said Mr. Pearson, that Christ is in you; Do you not mean
that He is in you Spiritually?

Yea, Answered Nayler, Spiritually.

By Faith, says he, you mean, or how else?

By Faith says Nayler.

Why, what difference is there then in this point (said Mr. Pearson,) between
the Ministers and you?

Nayler replied, the Ministers affirmed Christ to be in Heaven with a Carnal
Body, but He is with a Spiritual Body.

Which of the Ministers say so, says Mr. Pearson?

The Minister of Kirkby-Stephen being present, rose up and said thus; I confess
I said Christ was in Heaven with a Carnal Body, I was willing to own a Truth
though in course Language, I look upon it as an unmeet Expression, and should
not have used it, had I not bin drawn to it upon this occasion: Discoursing
with Nayler at Mallerstang about the Reality of Christ's humane Nature, I asked
him Whether he did believe that Jesus Christ now Glorified in Heaven, was a
true real Man as well as true God. When according to his manner he labored to
speak as ambiguously as he could, and would plainly affirm or deny nothing.
Urging him with the same question again, with some little alteration, I asked
him, Whether he did believe that Jesus Christ was now in Heaven in a body of
flesh? to which when I pressed him to answer plainly: Thomas Array, one of
Naylers companions, said to me thus: Do thou imagine that the body of Christ
in Heaven is a Carnal body? To which I answered presently thinking they had
understood English language: Thomas, take the word Carnal, not as it is used in
the Scripture in opposition to that which is, Holy, or Spiritual, but according
to its natural and proper signification, as it signifies fleshly, and so I do
believe the Body of Christ in Heaven to be a Carnal body; (that is) as I said,
a body of flesh.

Naylers relation says, he perceived him to be offended, because he had told
of his saying, And said; Friend I had not accused thee, had I not bin asked,
what was the difference between the Ministers and me, for I am not come to
accuse any. It is true, some such words he immediately spoke, But that the
Minister of Kirkby-Stephen was offended at him is an untruth, He knew no cause
he had to be offended at him, but saw cause rather to pity his ignorance.

M. Pearson was here saying something manifesting some desire that some of the
Ministers there present should discourse with Nayler about some of his
erroneous opinions; but in regard it was then night, and they had much business
to do before they rose, it was thought unseasonable.

Coll. Briggs then asked him, if he had not bin a Member of a Church about
Saurby.

Nayler answered, he was a Member of an Independent Church at Wood-Church.

Coll. Briggs told him, that he had heard he was excommunicated out of (...)
Church for some blasphemous opinions, and akt him if it was not so.

(...) he knew not what they had done since he came forth, (...) was not to his
knowledge. One that had it from Mr. (...), who is Pastor of that Congregation
at Wood-Church, told a friend of mine lately, that it is very true, that Nayler
was there Excommunicated for his blasphemous Tenets.

Coll. Briggs then asked him further, if he did not write a letter to one in
Lancashire, wherein he told him, that if he hoped to be saved by that Christ
that died at Jerusalem, he would be deceived: Such a letter Nayler did write
(...) one Henry Holme, containing these wicked words in it: And when he was
taxed for them though he could not deny it, yet he would not at first confess
them, till Coll. Briggs asked him if he would deny his own hand; To which he
repliedno, if he might see it. Coll. Briggs told him he thought he could
procure the letter: Nayler desired it might be kept as a witness against him.
Coll. Briggs asked him, what was his reason to use such a cursed txpression?

Nayler to season it, had this grain of salt in readiness, (an ill shift is
better then none.) If, says he, I cannot witness Christ nearer then Iesalem, I
shall have no benefit by him, but I own no other Christ but that who witnessed
a good confession before Pontius Pilate, which Christ I witness suffering in
me now.

There were 2 Petitions presented to the Justices, subscribed by the hands of
many Gentlemen, Ministers and others of known integrity and honesty,
occasioned by the troublesome insolent behavior of this people; Especially
their gross disturbance of whole Congregations in time of public worship: and
because it may be some satisfaction to the Reader, I shall here adjoyn the true
Copy of some of them which I have by me.

To the Worshipful, the Justices of Peace for this County of Westmerland.
The Humble Petition of several Gentlemen, Ministers of the Gospel, and others,
friends and servants to Jesus Christ his Gospel Truths, and Ordinances, and the
general weal of this Commonwealth and Nation,
SHOWS,

THat in the late Wars, We, or most of us did expose Lives, Liberties* Estates
and Relations, with all other Personal advantages in the just defense of
Religion and Liberty, in concurrence with and maintenance of the just defense
of Religion and Liberty: After the prosperous Effects whereof we expected the
settlement of the grand ends of our engagement, and so much the more, as being
the promise of the Parliament the vows of their affection, the price of our
Prayer, purses, hazards losses, banishments and the blood of many thousands our
fellow servants in the work of God freely sacrificed in the Quarrel of this
Nation.

What has bin done in the settlement of our Rights, Peace and wholesome Laws,
we bless God for, and the Parliament as his Instruments: nor can we but
acknowledge what has bin done by them in the Cause of God, as their Acts
against Adultery, Fornication, Swearing, Drunkenness, Sabboth-breaking,
Promoters of heretical Doctrines, against Ranters or Blasphemers, (may the Lord
increase the number of these things:) Yet so it is, that in this County,
several persons, Proselites of one George Fox and James Nayler, do in the times
of our Assemblies ordinarily in a way of contempt and scorn come in amongst us
with their hats on at time of Prayer or Singing, use in our Congregations some
of them violent actions, in the time of Sermon or Prayer or singing, cry out
aloud with horrible clamours, slanders, abuses, reproaches against our
Ministers, to the stirring up of woeful tumults, evident disturbance of the
work and the turning of the peaceable Assemblies of the Church of Christ into
the grossest confusion.

That their deportment is such, and with so continual violence against the most
godly of our Ministers, in all places, in their travels, in the streets,
abusing them with railing language, scornful behavior, walking usually in
Markets, with such great numbers together, and scarce passing by any not of
their judgment without abusive words, that it cannot but show us as no small
Symptoms of bad designs, so no small reason to provide for our security.

That it is their great Design to stir up the spirits of people against the
Ministry of England in general without distinction, setting such, and sending
abroad daily, libels and slanders against the Office, as needless, and them,
as, or under the names of Antichrists, Antichrists Merchants, Tithemongers,
robbers, deceivers, Ministers of the world, Priests, murderers, Conjurers,
Devils, and attempting to make Proclamations in the open Markets to the said
effect.

That their main drift is to engage the people against the Ministry by reason
of Tithes, crying out with open clamors against Tithes as unlawful,
Antichristian, to the necessary overturning of the Laws to that purpose,
bringing an Odium upon the Government, and tending to stir up Sedition in the
people, to withdraw their due obedience from the Laws and Government of
England.

That besides what others perhaps may know of the Blasphemies of them, we do
plainly see and know, that their practices do exceedingly savor of Sorcerie,
the quakings, swellings, roarings, foamings; (Such as never we heard of, but
such as were possessed of the Devil) of persons at their meetings, and
especially of little children, giving a sad suspicion of it, and the more by
reason of the known suspicions upon George Fox, to deal with the Devil, before
ever be came to us in these parts.

That we know the Principles of some of their followers are against Propriety,
against subjection to Magistrates, against distinction amongst men, and the
practices of the most such, that there is a ceasing of relations, children
prosessedly refusing subjection to their Parents, and servants to their
Masters.

That we are sensible what confusions, divisions, tumults, and parties made by
these disturbances, and cannot but with sadness of spirit remember, that such
small beginnings have in other Nations grown to eat out their peace, and
stagger the foundation of their states; as also we lay it before you what
advantage it gives to the common Enemy, how it weakens the Parliaments interest
in the peoples hearts; to see such people unrestrained, creates discontents,
and lays a clear foundation for civil wars; or at least advantage to the
Hollander, or French now in Arms against us, to carry on their wicked
intentions with greater facility.

As you are therefore Christians, and English Magistrates, we as freeborn Men
of England, and discerning something more as instruments under God, with
others, of our present Peace, do beg and challenge from you:

1. Your timely looking unto the Peace of England, that is seeming too
evidently to be endeavored to be rent asunder.

2. The protection of our selves, and our Ministers from violence, disturbance
in our worship of God, and suppression of offenders.

3. Execution of the Statute against Sabboth-breakers, and such as under
pretense of Religion are in no Religious Assembly that day.

4. Charge to all differing Judgments to meet together such Lords Days
peaceably, and not to spread themselves to several places for disturbance,
suppression of persons being without any calling.

5. And your witnessing against all Blaspemies of the Name of God; especially,
such as are contained in the Act of Parliament. And if the Application of an
effectual remedy lie not within your Power, that you will please to join with
us in this desire, and transmit the case to the knowledge of the Right
Honorable the Council of State, as a case so nearly concerning the Peace of
England.

And we shall ever pray.

When this last Petition was read, Mr. Coal was called for and examined what
disturbances he had received, or could witness. He told the Justices, he came
thither to beg the States Protection, and not to endeavor the prejudice of any
man's person, and that the Petitioners did challenge protection as their Native
right and purchased due, and as what he knew, was the mind of the Parliament:
and that he desired no more for himself in this respect, then he did for those
of differing judgments, only craved that we in our several Congregations,
might worship God without disturbance and affronts.

It is known to the whole Bench and present Multitude, that he persuaded with
the Justices, that he might not instance in any of these particular public
disturbances, by naming the persons, till they had promised to pardon what was
past; which was done. Upon which Master Coal instanced in several men and
women, whose uncivil, unchristian, boisterous carriages in public Assemblies,
and turbulent spirits fully speak, what freedom might be expected to be given
to our Congregations, if they might sway the Nation according to their wills:
And that the spirit of Persecution rests indeed in their breasts, what ever
strange nesse they pretend to it, and notwithstanding their untrue complaints of
suffering of it.

Orders being given by these Gentlemen that then sat in the Bench for the
peaceable preaching of the Gospel, Master Pearson asked Nayler this question:
How comes it to pass (says he) that people at your meetings, do sometimes
fall unto such horrid quakings and tremblings?

The Scriptures, said Nayler, witness the same condition in the Saints
formerly, as in David, Daniel, Habakkuk and others.

Master Coal replied, that David also sometimes says, His bones were out of
joint and broken, yet notwithhanding, his bones were sound.

Nayler then instanced again, In the trembling of Moses, and Habakkuk and Paul.

Master Coal told him it was true; yet he might understand that in Scripture,
these words of quaking and trembling were not always taken in a litterall
sense, but did signify that trembling of Spirit and horror of Conference
(...) God did bring upon the soul in the sense of sin and his displeasure,
the breaking of the bones of our comfort, and shaking of the souls strongest
confidences. Sometimes again, (he said) they were to be taken literally, as in
Moses, Paul, etc. But then they were upon occasion or a more extraordinary
Manifestation of the Majesty and Glory of God, appearing to them: which was an
Act of Extraordinary Providence, and not the Lords ordinary work

Nayler replied, that they, (viz. that fell into the quaking fits among them)
also saw the Glory of God; but says he, did they, Moses and Paul, etc. see it
with their bodily eyes.

Yea, said Master Coal, Moses did see the Glory of God, upon Mount Sinai with
his bodily eyes, and not only he, but also the whole Host of Israel, and
desired they might not see that sight any more.

Nayler said, How then is it said, Who can see the Face of God, and live?

Master Coal answered, True, it is so said; but that Face of God which Moses
saw, is not spoken of, as that full vision of God, which we cannot have till we
be changed, but of a more extraordinary appearance of God in his outward
discovery of his Glory. And therefore when afterward Moses desired to see Gods
Face, he showed him but his back parts.

Do thou then believe (said Nayler) to see God with thy carnal eyes?

Master Coal answered, in the words of Job, Yea, with these eyes shall I see
Him Only said he, friend understand, That though these same eyes shall see
Him, yet they must be, though not in substance, yet in quality changed, He
shall change this vile body, (says Paul) and make it like unto his own
Glorious body.

Says Nayler, Had I said so, I had been charged with Blasphemy, though it be
Truth. Master Coal answered, he would then have had a great deal of injury
done him: but (said he) though we shall be made like unto him, I do not
understand it thus, that we shall be made equal to him, there is a vast
difference betwixt likeness and equality.

Nayler, after this speaking of the life of Christ, said, he lived by the life
of Christ, and Christan him.

Master Coal told him it was true, that a Christian lives by the life of
Christ, but that life (says he) which I live, is a created life, and it is I am
quickened, and I that am made alive.

(...), says Nayler by an uncreated life.

True, said Master Coal A Christian does so, but he must make a difference
between living the Essential life of Christ, and living by it: The uncreated
life of Christ (said he) is the cause of my life, but not the matter of it. For
they were the influences of that life upon me, that did beget a life in me, but
that life that is in me is a created life; for which he quoted, Ephesians 2.
You has he quickened: and 1. Cor. 15. The last Adam is made a quickening Spirit,
or a life creating Spirit, as he told him the word signifies. Also 2. Cor. 5 If
any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: And you are his workmanship created
in Jesus Christ unto good works.

To these he replied nothing, but said, I do witness Christ is in me, and is
persecuted in me this day.

Master Coal told him, he persecuted him not: but came to crave Protection.

The foregoing discourse produced some words, about Justication; touching which
Nayler said, he was justified by Christ in him.

To which Master Coal replied thus. Christ in me is my sanctification, but
Christ fulfilling the Law for me, is my Justification. Justification is an Act
of God for Christ's sake, acquitting me and absolving me from the guilt of
sin; not done in me, but without me, in the Court in Heaven. Only the
Manifestation of it is in my Conscience.

Nayler said nothing to this, but that which is without, is without.

Being asked whether the Scriptures were the Word of God, he answered, he knew
no Word of God but one.

Being asked again, whether he believed the written Word to be the Word of God,
he said, I know no such thing.

Master Coal told him, That it was true, that Jesus Christ is the Eternal
Word: but in the ordinary sense, a word is as much as the Declaration of a man's
mind. He asked him therefore, whether he believed the Scriptures did declare to
us the Mind of God, and so whether that which they deliver to us, is the very
mind of God?

He answered, I do believe it.

This is the substance of all those Passages.

ANd now good Reader, compare this faithful Relation, which may be attested by
many judicious and observant witnesses, with their foolish and scandalous
stories and you may find them full of such gross abuses, and pernicious
suggestions and falsehoods, as are apt to proceed from a spirit that
premeditatech mischief, and abhors not evil.

I think none of us that are traduced in Saul's Errand to Damascus, should have
made any thing public in this kind in respect to our selves. We know it is as
easy is common for Christ's Disciples indeed to bear the lying accusations and
reproaches of his Enemies. But knowing again how Error may strengthen it
self, and get a party by lying reports, and the Cause of God contract an Odium
by misrepresentations, and Religion sometimes suffer through silence,
especially when Satan labors to speak so like the Language of a complaining
Saint, and Truth it self is under prejudice and disadvantage, we were moved in
Spirit, to speak what we have heard and know, and to testify what we can
witness, though the world should not receive it.

That Mystery of Iniquity which does so Energetically work against the Gospel
in this Nation, and that design of Satan which now appears with open face in
Multitudes of his Agents, to overturne the Ministry of the New Testament, and
root out the Soul and Life of Christianity from among us, the despised
Servants of the Lord in these parts are hopefully encouraged, that the Lord
will ere long crush to pieces, and make it as the untimely Fruit of Summer,
and as the grass upon the House top, of which the Mower fills not his hand,
nor he that binds Sheaves, his bosom.

Yea, we see already some probable Symptoms of Death upon these New born
Principles, and the marks of Vengeance from Heaven upon them. The hollownesse,
and unholynesse of their fanaticke Notions, which as blazing Stars do dazzle
the weaker, or delight the more wanton eyes of many. The fruit of our Prayers
in the returning of some who were esteemed Godly; The Divisions of the rest;
Their visible palpable Atheism, And the Lords Eminent leaving of them both,
living and dying in either the most despairing, or most brutish Condition ever
heard of; which though sad as to their persons, yet we cannot but look upon
them, as Signal Testimonies of GOD, against their Heresies and Impieties.

O that Men would receive the Truth of God in the Love thereof, that those
Glorious Beams of the Eternal Word might ravish the affections of all that
know them: Least otherwise (as is the sad condition of this poor Country) the
Lord do in his just Judgment, send them some strong Delusions to believe a
Lie; and plunge their Souls from their Imaginary highest Elevation of
Spiritual Knowledge, into the lowest depth of Atheistical Heathenish or
Popish darkness. In this Prayer I hope, good Reader, we shall have the
Communion of your Spirit, and the joint compassion of your Souls for a
misguided Generation. The Lord enable us, to contribute what strength we have
for the Gospels Interest.

FINIS.

