THE Wary Widow: OR, Sir Noisy Parrat. A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

By their MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Henry Higden Esquire.

Lectori Credere mallem
Quam Spectatoris fastidia far Superbi.
LONDON, Printed for Abell Roper, at the Mitre near Temple Bar; and Tho. Rainy,
Bookseller in Doncaster. M.DC.XCIII.

Dramatis Personae.
SIr Wordly Fox. An Oliverian Colonel, a cunning griping Sharper: a Widdower,
but privately keeps a Mistress. Franck Fox. His Son, a noble generous Person,
who unknowingly has for some time converst with his Fathers Mistress under a
false Name. Sir Noisy Parrat. A prating whimsical Fool a great admirer of the
Town. Two Sparks of the Town, returned from Land. Jack Scaredevil a Bravo. Sea.
Tom Fulham a Gamester.
Plot. A Servant to Sir Worldly, but privately a Friend to Franck; with whom he
holds intelligence and is bound with him for his Debts. Freindly. An honest
honorable Gentleman, a Friend and Relation to Franck, and in love with
Clarinda.
WOMEN.
Lady Wary. A Young rich discrete Widow, and Sister to Freindly, bred up with
Clarinda. Clarinda. Daughter to Sir Worldly Fox. Leonora. A Mistress kept by
Sir Worldly, having for some time had an Intrigue with Franck under a false
Name. Her Aunt. Who brought up Leonora, and for Avarice exposed her to Sir
Worldly; yet forced by Leonora to conceal her Intrigue with Franck. Lady
Wary's Maid. Clarinda's Maid, and Nurse. A Woman Servant to Sir Wordly.
A Leiutenant, Seamen, their Wives, Fiddlers etc.

To the right Honorable the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of
their Majesty's Household, and Knight of the most Honorable Order of the Garter.
My LORD,
WHen I had the Honor to present this COMEDY to your Lordships perusal I
designed it as an acknowledgment, or rather as my first Fruits in the Dramatic
way for the many Favors your Lordship had conferred upon me. But now it is
forced to beg your Protection from the malice and severe usage it received from
some of my Ill natured Friends, who with a Justice peculiar to themselves,
passed sentence upon it unseen or heard and at the representation made it their
business to persecute it with a barbarous variety of Noise and Tumult, that
many of the well meaning Spectatours (for I am sure it had very few Hearers)
must conclude it a very Criminal performance. As I should never have been
vain enough to have valued my self upon the opinion of such weak Judges, so I
am not much mortified at my falling under their Indignation. But though I can
easily forgive such an ungenerous way of proceedure in relation to my self, who
never expected to subsist by the Stage; Yet it is a precedent of dangerous
consequence, and may happen to fall very severely upon those Gentlemen whose
ill fortune or Genius shall lead them to attempt this sort of writing. An
unrighteous Faction may be formed against the Jastest, and most regular
Composition; and no man is safe if these Gentlemen (whom we must allow good
Critics in dressing) shall assume to vent their ill grounded Fury, and spet
their venom upon every Author that endeavors to divert them. At the same
time it is my comfort that better Plays have met with the like fate from
unthinking imcompetent Judges: And without vanity several of a meaner Caracter
have found a reception they never merited.

It Is this Reflection has somewhat releiv'd me under the late miscarryage of my
Play and is a sensible satisfaction to me that your Lordship (who is
acknowledged by all Parties for the most correct and Judicious writer, the
truest Judge, and the most disinterested Partron; to be the delight, the
ornament, and support of our Age) has been pleased to peruse and approve it.
Your single Suffrage weighs more with me, and the thinking part of mankind,
then the repeated acclamations of a numerous assembly.

My LORD, Should I vainly presume to discribe every inherent and particular
Grace, that shines in the constellation of your Lordships Virtue: or enumerate
those rare qualifications that have rendered your Lordship so universally
Esteemed, beloved and admired, both at home and abroad; I should loose my self
in the Rapture and Contemplation. But your Lordship has already received
incense from happyer hands but from none that has a profounder honor for your
Lordship, then

My LORD, Your Lordships most humble most Obedient and most Faithful Servant.
Henry Higden.

THE PREFACE.
THis Play had the misfortune to come very unluckily on the Stage, where it
found very few Friends: Their prejudice had decreed it should suffer under
their Indignation, and before it was off the Stocks, had predestined it to
Damnation. Their kindness being greater for the preceding Play, resolved they
would see no sin in their Favorite Jacob, but expose their unfortunate Esau to
Reprobation, without the least hopes of a Blessing. The Theater was by Faction
transformed into a Bear-Garden, hissing, mimicking, ridiculing, and
Cat-calling; the Actours could not support themselves against so strong a
Current. And if any came with a design to be diverted, they were distracted
with the variety of Noyses, and continual uproars; they could neither hear, nor
Judge of the matter: Had any of the Ancient Romans revived to have been witness
to this Interlude, this medly of Noises; they would certainly conclude the Moon
was laboring under some dismal Eclypse, and the Pagans of the Pit were
endeavoring to recover her out of her Trance with this horrid din. The
distracted Players were stunned with their clamours, and though they had often
stood the shock of Thunder and Lightning on the Stage, yet now they found
themselves confounded in this real Tempest: They fancyed the Scene had been
Translated into Sicily and the Earth had gaped to swallow these Grumbletonians,
like the murmuring Israelites of old. Some dark Sons of uncertain Fathers,
infinitely diverted themselves with their melodious Cat-calls, these Sons of
Zerviah vanquished the Stage, backed with the untuneable brayings of Balaams
Ass that joined in this dismal consort: In this distraction we may safely
conclude the Audience were wholly strangers to the Plot and conduct of the
Play. And therefore it will be reasonable they should now read for their money
what in the Action they could neither Hear nor Understand.

I am not Ignorant a just Cause may suffer under the prejudice of an Ignoramus
Jury, or an unjust Judge may stop his Ears against the voice of the Charmer,
and harden his heart to the severest Judgment; or that an incensed Mob may be
wrought up to break through all Laws, and commit the highest outrages, and
Barbarities. But after the fury of their military Execution is over they may
relent of their rigor, and have some reserve of compassion for the unfortunate
Martyr, that suffered their indignities with all constancy and Patience. Had
our unlucky Author been worthy to have known they were absolutely bent to damn
his Play, unsight unseen, his caution would have withdrawn him from the Thunder
of their displeasure. But now we are convinced by the surprising success of the
Baudy Batchelour, that the nicest Ladies may be brought (by good mannagment) to
stand the fire of a smutty Jest, and never flintch for the matter. They are the
sensible Judges that family duties can not proceed without the creature
comfort: Nor Nature be well instructed without the help of a feskue. These
Camelion Ladies cannot like the Spanish Jennets conceive by the air, or grow
big with such a Timpany.

Tanquam conjugibus suis Mariti,
Non possunt sine Mentula placere.
What Sot can think to please a Beauty,
That wants wherewith to do his duty.
But I must beg the Ladies pardon that I introduce a Foreign Tongue, that can
make use of their Mothers to a better advantage, but in a Preface it is
necessary to sprinkle a little Latin, to show our Breeding. The Authors are
now convinced the Batchelour has touched upon the true string, to please and
tickle: They are now grown more generous then to deny their sentiments and
Inclinations, and scorn any such bashful pretense, but openly avow and
countenance that Poet, that seasons his Scenes with salt and good humor, to
please the hant-gousts of their fancies: and make their Ears glow with
licentious Farce, which they are resolved to stand by and justify: What though
the Plots are old, and stale, they are so prettily jumbled and blended together
they can never fail of being well received. Tho some nicer Ladies are of an
opinion, that an impure Idea, that is obscene in the first conception (though
never so cleanly wrapped up) can no way be made passable: But these are squeamish
pallats that strain at a gnat in public, and after make no bones of a Camel on
occasion. What does it import if Parson Spintext have a wicked design on the
Alderman's wife? What harm was it if his agreeable Impudence revenged the City
cheats upon the Aldermans head, and exalted his horns above the rest of his
Brethren? There cannot be a taking Play without some Limberham or fumbling
Alderman, or keeper to expose* let the fair Gilt engage her Gallant like a
Spider in her own cobweb, before her poor Nickapoops face, unbar the sluices,
that her kindness may run down in a mighty stream; let the lightning of
Courtship melt his Daughters maidenhead in the scaboard, or chopping of that
Hidra's Head of barren Virginity, let twins sprout up in their stead and let
the Family of love be propigated quite through the City.

But hold, it is not reasonable for me to ramble into these pleasant forbiden
paths, but say something besuteing this poor Brat I must now turn a drift into
the World in melancholy weeds.

Vade sed incultus qualem decet exulis esse,
Infelix habitum temporis hujus habe.
Go on adorned thou cursed abandoned Play,
Let luckier Authors, court a happyer day.
I may well say Vnadorn'd, for there was nothing done for the advantage or
decoration of this Play: not a farthing expended. When I had given them leave
to Act it, I was told it was theirs, and they would Cook it according to their
own humor. Some of the Politic would be of the Coffeehouse had given it an
ill Name and Caracter and were glad to see it succeed accordingly. The Songs
designed were never set by omission or combination: The Master of the Revells
had expunged what he pleased, least forsooth it should prove Bawdy or give
offense, thereby making the sense imperfect, which the Actours would not let me
mend or supply; though now I submit it, to your Judgment as I first designed
it. The Actours cut out what they pleased to shorten their parts according to
their own humors, and I must stand by and see it mutilated and dismembered
before my Face: When it appeared on the Stage, it was but an imperfect
Rehearsal, for some could never repeat their parts, and therefore impossible
they could Act them: Some were perfect and could have done it right, if others
had been able to have played their parts up to them. I shall conclude with the
words of Martial.

Quem recitas meus est Fidentine libellus
Sed male cum recitas incipit esse tuus.
What you rehearse I writ to please the Town,
But while yon Act it Ill; it is all your own.
To the Author of Sir Noisy Parrat: Or, the Wary Widow.
WHy did thou write in such a tastless Age,
When Boys and Coxcombs influence the Stage?
With Kindred Farce they are linkd in a strict 'tye,
And against Wit unite their noisy Cry.
Thy Reputation the vile Herd alarmed,
And Whores and Sots against thy Play soon armed.
Some knew their Guilt, and therefore feared thy Wit.
And one Fool touched engages the whole Pit.
Confederate Fops in loud Conjunction sit
With Bully, Pimp, grave Bawd, and angry Miss
And all as for one common Interest Hiss.
Strong painted Satyr could expect no less.
You must write duller, if you would have success:
Lay Physic by, and humor the disease,
For dry insipid Farce will only please.
Caryl Worsly Esquire.

Henrico Higden Suo.
QVod inquieta voce, risu, Sibilis
Salesque comptos, and innoxios jocos
Superba Bruti turba sic exceperit:
Quod purpuratus Infans, and vecors Eques,
Summoque Meretrix in subsellio sedens,
Totusque Delicatulorum Circulus
In te, tuumque conjuraverint Opus:
Nolito questus irritos effundere,
Damnare Musas, increpare Apollinem,
Tanquam Poetae inserviant parum suo.
Quin Drama tandem luce donans publica
Invisis orbem? Quin timoris tuscius
Vanas Maligniorum despicis minas?
Abunde damnum sic resarcies prius,
Famaeque consu^es. Lector dabit libens,
Quod improbus Spectator abnegaverat.
Tho. Brown.

To his Friend Mr. Higden. Upon the uncertainty of success in the DRAMA.
LEt Men of Sense give ore the uncertain game
Where Wits with Fools at hazard play for fame,
Upon the Square you may throw out a Nick,
Therefore wise Gamesters have recourse to trick;
And by Caball Squires, Ladies, Beaus, and Bullies,
Are jointly managed and drawn in for Cullies.
The worst of Cullies, others loose their pence,
But these are chows'd even of their Common Sense.
What Scribbling Slave for such an Age would drudge?
Who would write well when most so lewdly judge?
The Sovereign Mob decides the cause of wit;
For mob includes the universal Pit.
Yet he who writes with Spirit must contemn
Those Magistrates who by chance votes condemn:
As in some Foreign, little, wretched State,
The Burghers Tyrants are, and Laws create;
At precise times leave Cheating in their Shops,
And on the Bench turn legislative Fops;
So Sots at home bubled by Friends and Spouses,
Abroad are Sovereign Judges of both houses:
And an assembly which consists of Fools,
Without control in Wits Dominions rules.
But as when Beasts by Brutal lust are Joined,
They but arrive to propagate their kind,
So let ten Thousand fools to voting fall,
Folly will still be the result of all.
J. D.

To Mr. Higden.
NO longer your expected Play conceal,
But to a more impartial Court appeal.
The righteous Few, true to the Cause of Wit,
Will soon reverse the Sentence of the Pit.
Why should their Censure men of Sense alarm?
Those Sons of Muggleton can do no harm.
Even let the Foplings save their nauseous breath,
For they have neither power of life, nor Death;
The wit, which often their feeble malice dooms,
Outlives its Judges, nay outlasts their tombs.
Once it was my chance to visit a sick Friend,
Whom dire foreboding Omens did attend,
His Doctor tells him, Sir your hour is nigh,
Send for the Parson and prepare to dye,
In vain the help of Physic you implore,
Art has been tried, but art can do no more.
At this the angry Patient raised his head,
And Doctor do you then conclude me dead?
Peace you grave Sot: elsewhere your Cant bestow,
I Will bury half the College ere I go,
And spite of that learned Phyz, and reverend beard,
Will live to see your Rascalship interred.
Thus he ran on, and as his Stars decreed,
Wae soon from his unkind distemper freed,
Left his vain gaping kindred in the lurch,
And saw the Velvet Fop born decently to Church.
Tho. Browen

On Mr. Higdens Comedy
BY senseless, Faction, and a noisy Pit,
Our honest Poet's damned for want of wit,
Not in himself he has enough I swear
But suffers for it in his Auditor.
Else why should he, were that defect his Crime,
Fare worse then all his Brethren of the time?
From Spawn of Wills those wits of future Tense,
He now appeals to men of riper sense:
And hopes to find some shelter from the wrath
Of furious Critics of implicit Faith.
Whose judgments always ebh, but zeal flows high,
Who for there truth upon the Church rely.
Wills is the Mother Church. From thence their Creed
And as that censures, Poets must Succeed,
Here the great Patriarch of Parnassus sits,
And grants his Bulls to the Subordinate Wits.
From this hot Bed, with Foplings we are oppressed
That crowd the Boxes and the Pit infest.
Who their great Masters falling spitle they lick,
And at the neighboring Playhouse judge on tick,
Thus have I seen from some decaying Oak,
A numerous Toad-stool brood, his moisture suck
And as the Reverend Log his verdure sheds,
The fungous offspring flourishes and spreads.
It Is true a Legion of young Critics may,
If so resolved, with Cat-calls damn a play:
Who doubts their power? though had he used his throat
Each Ass among them owned a louder note.
Well! let these sucking wits their whistles have,
Set off with Silver Bells, and Coral brave.
Let careful Mother rub each tender gumm,
And make way for Satiric teeth to come.
Full grown they may with their own weapons fight,
They can already hiss, in time they will learn to bite.
F. P.

To his Friend Mr. Higden.
Friend Harry, some Squeamish pretenders to thinking.
Say thy Play is encumbered with eating and drinking*
That too often in all Conscience thy Table's brought out,
And unmercifull healths fly like Hail-shot about.
Such a merry Objection who ere could expect
That does on the Town or its pleasures reflect?
Is a Treat and a Bottle grown quite out of fashion,
Or have the spruce Beaus found a new recreation?
At a Tavern I Am certain they seldom find fault,
When Flask after Flask in due order is brought:
Why then should the Fops be so monstrous incivil,
As to damn at a Play what they like at the Devil?
When to Moloc of old by way of Oblation,
Cross Dad of his Child did make a donation;
With Drums and with Trumpets the Priest made a Noise,
To stifle his groans, and extinguish his cries,
So our modern ill-natured young Jews of the Pit
When to damn a poor Author's attempt they think fit,
With a Consort of Cat-calls the House they alarm,
Least the wit of the Play, should their fury disarm.
How'er they may pass with the rest of the Nation,
Though their malice I blame, I commend their discretion.
For it is but convenient, you will readily own,
That the Beast should perform, what the man would disown.
Tho. Palmer.

The Prologue.
Written by Sir Charles Sydley.
ENvy and Faction rule this grumbling Age,
The State they cannot, but they shake the Stage,
This barren trade some would engross, still hopeing
From our poor Port, to banish Interloping:
And like the plodding Lawyers, take great care
To elbow blooming merit, from the Bar:
In every Age there were a sort of Men
As you do now, damned all was written then.
Thousands before 'em less provoked their Pride
Then one poor rival straining by their side,
Such vermin Critticks we expect to find,
For Nature knows not how to loose a kind
The stinking Poll Cat, nor the Mole that is Blind.
But against old as well as new to rage,
Is the peculiar Phrensy of this Age.
Shackspear must down, and you must praise no more
Soft Desdemona, nor the Jealous Moor:
Shackspear whose fruitful Genius, happy Wit
Was framed and finished at a lucky hit
The Pride of Nature, and the shame of Schools,
Born to Create, and not to Learn from Rules;
Must please no more, his Bastards now deride
Their Fathers Nakedness they ought to hide,
But when on Spurs their Pegasus they force,
Their Jaded Muse is distanc'd in the Course:
All that is now has been before it is true,
But yet the Art, the Fashion may be new:
Though old Materials the large palace raise,
The skillfull Architect deserves his praise.
If nothing please, you are not nice, but sick,
It Is want of stomach, ever to dislike.
On our past Poets, petty Juries sit,
The Living sink beneath your present spite,
As if this were the doomsday of all wit.
But Beaus and Ladies for your selves be wise
You Will break our Lottery if none draw a Prize
For this one night, do as kind Lovers u^^
Tie up strict Judgment and let fancy loose.
THE Wary Widow: OR, Sir Noisy Parrat.
ACT. I.
Scene Covent Garden. Enter Scaredevil in a Fantastic habit as just returned
from the French- Camp. Ecarede. HOW empty this Town is grown, since this
unlucky War. I have traversed the Streets, and have not met with one of my
Acquaintance: The Play Houses are silent; the Bowling-Greens abandond; not a
Vizor stirring in the Mall: I have beat it one the Hoof quite through the City;
Ransacked our old quarters, and Rendevouz; and cannot start one Honest Fellow
to communicate my thoughts with: Nor so much as a Whore roving about to pick up
Coach hire: Well, if this wicked lewd Town continues under so strict a
Discipline and Reformation, it will be high time to bid adeiu to this scene of
Sin and Seacoal: And trudge down to my last Reserve of Country Friends, the
Topers: There Is a sure Card for good plain wholesome Eating and Drinking: A
change of Raiment for these Martial habiliments, and a Patent, to Sponge the
Manufacture of the Nation, Potent Beer: Well -- I see I must turn over a new
Leaf; And now I think out, I have as much Learning as is Necessary for a
Country Parson, and shall have Wit enough, to accept of A handsome Chambermaid
with a fair Living to boot, when my Patron has given her Earnest for a Son and
Heir -- and said Grace to the Banquet -- Enter Tom Fulham in a Ta-pawling
habit. But see kind Fortune has revived me with the sight of an old Companion.
Tom Fulham welcome I say into our ancient Territories and Dominions of
Covent Garden --


Full. My dear Friend, Jack Scaredevel! Welcome into my Arms! But the
Circumstance of your Campaign-garb; together with the Circumflex of your
Whiskers, had almost removed you, out of the Landmark of my Remembrance.


Scar. And the roughness of your Tarpawling Habit, had almost josled you out of
my thoughts: I was wondering what was become of that proper Bean, that could not
stir without a Coach or a Chair at Midnight: Lest the Dampness of an injurious
Mist might put his Wigg out of the Curle: Or the roughness of the Wind
discompose it: But I am glad to see thee clear come off, Lad.


Full. Yes faith -- I am clear come of and as Lank as a shotten herring! I have
mewed all my Feathers, and nothing left to bless my self, or pawn for a
Reckoning: But prithee, Dear Jack! what Booty amongst the Bourghers? what
plunder amongst the Boors? what rich Trophies has thou brought home to Dazzle us?


Scar. Just as much as you see: The Boors fled into Villages and secured
themselves with a safeguard: And the Bourghers were still to nimble for us --
They never sufferd it to come to a Seige but Capitulated before hand; or
surrendered on the first Summons -- and very Civilly turned Tennents to the
French, who as civilly received em, paying their old Rents and Customs: and a
new fine into the Bargain. And having Marched us off our Legs, turned us like
Hackneys to Graze in Winter Quarters till the next Spring -- But how have thou
acquired this Honorable Mayme, and made a shift to halt home a Criple -- that
the last winter could outrun a Legion of Bailiffs? and out strip a Constable
at the head of the Fleetest pack of his Hounds the Watchmen?


Full. Fortune of the War, an unlucky Splinter in the late Engagement, but it is
in a fair way of Recovery -- I wish I could as soon recover my broken
Condition: of which this Empty Town gives me but a Mellancholy-Prospect.


Scar. Come Bully Tarr. Never let us despair of good Fortune. We that (to the
envy of the Sharpers) have like Oil floated on the Tide of Business, will not
fear to be stranded in this low Ebb of affairs: It Was well thy right hand
Escaped that unlucky Splinter: which might have disabled the best Artist in
Christendom: Ah that surprising Top: that nimble side, that dextrous
management, that gallop and change, that Legerdemain! that clever Conveyance of
the Doctor, can never want while there are Cards, Dice or Quicksilver stirring
in this Nation.


Full. It Was well my careful Friends gave me some breeding.


Scar. Rather give the just praise to thy own Industry: Thy Father was Broke
ere thou wast fit to go to the Hospital -- whence thou came a Raw-Boy -- and
had the good Luck to strike in an under Agent to a knowing Gang, and
improving the Talent of thy towardly Genius, quickly picked up a Competent stock
of Knowledge: and insight into Men and Manners. Which, with thy Natural
assurance bore thee out in all Company.


Full. But your high Extract Don Bravo remains as obscure as the Head of the
River Nile, or the Barren Mountains, where you were first reared, and your
true name as unknown: I have heard thee answer to above a Grand Jury of
Christian Names: And as for Monseur Scaredevil -- I suppose it is your Name of
War: gained to your immortal Fame by some honorable Achievement. And why may
not you be a Herald to your self as well as a Godfather: and derive your
pedigeree from what Hero God or Devil you think fit? But a late curious
Antiquary has Searched deep into your Original. And the first station he traced
you in, was an under Usher to a Country Fencing-School. And being quit of that
Honorable employment, you promoted your self a Spunger at a Billiard Table,
and for making a Lucky thrust in a quarrel, were adopted a Brother of the
Blade, where sometime you flourished on the Sallary of a Hackny Second to all
Comers, without Consideration of Honor, Quarrel, principle of Friendship, or
Justice, and full as Mercenary as the Swisse, would throw down your Arms,
unless the ready Gelt were produced on the Spot, then invading all Companies
with wondrous Confidence, you failed not upon hard drinking to make some
advantage of the Reeling Company.


Scar. Well -- thy rallying has shown thee a man of Parts: And for thy malice I
will recommend thee for one of the Club when they sit in Conjunction to hatch
the next Lampoon: Prithee why should thou and I turn Satyrists on one another
misfortune? and like hot-braind Disputants betray the blindness of each others
Cause, to the malicious Censure of the by standers? who like sly Atheists will
take the Advantage to ridicule us both: let us like the Distressed States
combine against all rich and wealthy Strangers and set up for a Pyraticall
State?


Full. Your advice is good -- but such designs must be shadowed under a fair
pretense, and false Colors must be used to decoy the prize within our power --
no Fish will bite at a bare Hook. And every Novice will take us by our Trim
for Picaroones. And will rather choose to run to rights on a strange shore, than
come within command of our shot -- I have been Cruising here these two Days and
cannot discover one Sail may administer Comfort.


Enter Sir Noisy Parrat with his Servants. Scar. But here is a Lucky Rogue,
spreads his Canvas, may make us all savers, and repair our Shipwrackt Fortunes
-- while the painted Jay is mustring his glittering Equipage, and priding
himself in his borrowed plumes. I will prepare you with a hint of his
Character. This Knight is one of the Cocking Top-Fools in the Town, born to an
Estate able to bear out his most Extravagent Folly. He brags much of his
Valor, and knowledge in gaming and other the modish arts of the Town: but is
at the bottom a rank Bubble, and a fitting Tool to be wrought upon by wiser
men: But the Fox must sometimes flatter this Daw, that he may drop his Chese
for a Song. But you will ken him upon the first view: Sir Noisy Parrot, we are
your most humble Servants, and rejoice at our most Lucky-Fortune (being just
arrived) to encounter the very life and spirit of Wit and good humor: Were the
whole Race of Modish well-bred Sparks quite Extinct your single Example were
enough to restore and qualify the Age.


Full. You are the approved Rule and Standard of all Gallantry: a pattern
sitting for the world to imitate and Copy, having the absolute Ascendant over
all the Ladys which you govern without Control.


Sr. Nois. No faith Gentlemen, my wit and good humor is grown very Dull of
late: I am so damnably overrun with Honorable Love, my thoughts are wholly
taken up with raptures and contemplations: making my Court and Addresses to the
bright Object of my Devotions, which has put me to a continual pumping my
Brains till they are as dry as Saw-Dust.


Full. Certainly that Lady must have more than a humane wit, that can hold
repartee with so prodigious a Master of it, or can defend her self against the
attaques of so invincible a Conqueror.


Sr. Nois. I have not given Nature a fillip, or cloa'd my Body with a Brimmer
this week! And my parts and faculties grow rusty for want of Scowering and
Furbishing: But I have made a discovery of most delicious Burgundy! Just stolen
in from France, and to avoid all scandal we will be very drunk in private, and
hear the History of our Campaign-Friends on the other side of the water. Pox
on it if I had not bin engaged in this Foolish passion. This Love intrigue: I
should have made a figure among 'em. But now I am like to Flux; Marry and
Settle, and am Condemned to raise up Issue to my Forefathers! And sleep
forgotten with my Country Ancestors.


Scar. Your Friends are concerned your Amors and engagements have disappointed
them of the honor of your Company? And you lost the fair Oppertunity of
Signalizing your self in Arms and raising up Trophies to your Immortal name!
But the little Archer will be obeyed: and lead grim Mars where he pleases in
Triumph. But for the History of our Heroes engaged in the War, it shall be
deferred till we have the honor to kiss your hands over a Bottle.


Sr. Nois. And drink a health to all the Sparks and Sharpers abroad: not
forgetting their poor disconsolate Misses, that sit languishing and forlorn at
home: Poor Souls! They have run through a long Lent of Penance and
Mortification: I would willingly have the Fiddles, a Treat, and the Diversion
of Ballum Ranckum with Loose. But such a frollick, if smoked might cause a
rupture in our Matrimonial Treaty, which is now far advanced. But for the
present we must banish Venus out of our Calender, Jolly Bacchus shall rejoice
our hearts, and be our Dominical Letter, making our Eyes sparkle like flaming
Carbuncles; but at present I am in have to pay a visit to my Mistress: but must
call in the way for a Copy of Verses made in praise of her excellence, though I
may Justly boast I have as good a fancy as any of the Ryming Tribe. But my
thoughts are too busy to trouble my head about such Trumpery.


Scar. Then we must conclude you are smitten to some purpose? when you Dabble
so deep in Poetry!


Sr. Nois. I am grown lazy and cannot perform all offices at once and therefore
have provided my self with a Journeyman Poet -- a certain Reteiner to the
Muses, and let him Rook now and then a Guinny to twelve to encourage his fancy:
And I believe he has as pretty a way of Cooking up a piece of Invention, as
most of their Thread bare Mystery! Well Gentlemen; call me exactly at Four at
the Rose Tavern.


Ambo. We will not fail -- Exit Sir Noisy, Parrot.


Scare. This Fool is much admired among the Ladies for a Wit, and a Gallant.
And among the Fops for a man of parts: He brags much of his cunning and
Knowledge of the Town, and talks of false Dice when he has 'em in his hand.
When to those that have the Courage to attack him, he it as secure and humble a
bubble as ever was bit, at Cole under the Candlestick! He has not good nature
enough to do a Friendly office: But must be Driven like a Deer into the Toil.
To them Enter Frank Fox. But here comes Frank Fox, a Man of a generous Nature,
that will help a Friend at a pinch; And has courage to call any man to account,
that fails to make him a suitable Return. --


Fra. Welcome my brace of Warriors! you from the Camp, You from on Board, as
your several habits seem to confirm me! And how go matters among the Hero's of
the Age?


Scar. We sought not our private Advantage abroad: our end was the honor and
service of our Country! in a lofty strain.


Fra. This public concern ought to be encouraged and rewarded: But some
malicious spirits will suggest, 'twas hopes of pay and plunder engaged you in
the War: Else who can think that men of Wit and Sense: wholly disinterested in
any Forreign-French quarrel, should voluntary engage their mercenary Hands in
all sorts of Cruelty and Barbarity: without pretense of Justice. To every Brave
and Gallant man all Just and fair respect is due; but this Town of late has
been so pestered with a sort of young raw confident pretending Fops, who
returning from abroad, by their Grimace, nauseate all men of Discerning sense.
I saw the other day a young Spark returned in Triumph from the Campaign,
Strutting and Swaggering with a most dreadful Meine, Cocking and looking as
haughty as if he had retaken the Imperial Standard, or accomplished some
wonderful achievement: hoping with his arrogant Looks to Hector the world into
a Belief that he had changed his Nature, as well as his Garb: His discourse
was embroidered with Flowers he had culled out of the Gazet, mixed with some
French Terms of art, which Jargon of Discourse, he mingled and put most
awkardly together. But though this Ass was so well disguised in the Lions skin,
the dull Annimal was quickly discovered by his Brayeing and exalted Ears, and
Exposed to the scorn and Contempt of the Company.

They smelt the Fop out in the shining Vest.
Apes will be Apes though in rich Scarlet dressed.

Scar. Such pretenders talk much of Robin Hood that never had the honor to
shoot in his Bow, and give occasion to those that live at ease at home to rally
poor Soldiers, that for their sakes expose themselves to hazard and fatigues
abroad.


Fra. 'Twere unkind in you to suspect, I would join with the ill natured World
in such a baseness; Though I cannot sufficiently contemn such pretending
Blockheads: I know how to value men of Merit: That may be reduced by the
uncertain Chance of War, which often happens to the most free and Generous
Spirits: I know you to be men of mettle, and Blades that deserve to be adorned
in richer Scaberds: Here Gentlemen, command my present Stock; -- gives em' his
purse. Share it, and get your selves rig'd in a Christian habit, you look at
present like some strange Americans in a Map, or some Heathen Prince to be
showed in Bartholmew Fair for money: Meet me at the Rose at two. And then I
shall Communicate a matter to you, In which I shall desire your assistance? in
the mean time I must walk a turn or two here in Expectation of my Father. Your
Servant -- [He walks.]


Scar. Well go thy ways for an honest Worthy obliging fellow! And though his
noble Nature is crampt with a griping Fathers bare allowance, yet he knows how
to serve a Friend at a pinch.


Full. He Is a sharp Lad and knows the World: and how to place a benefit to
advantage.


Scar. While some ungainly Fellows manage their kindess so Awkardly they
affront those, they pretend to serve, and made them blush that they are
beholding to such Brutes.


Full. This generous assistance has rescued us from the Gulf of Despair, and we
will serve to the hazard of our lives: of which his last words seem to hint, he
should make a sudden proof. How many rich sordid Heirs wallowing in endless
wealth that can present profusely to a flattering Bawd -- or a Jilting painted
Mercenary Whore; but would be damned ere they would oblige an honest brave
wanting Friend; Let Us Devide his Benevolence.


Scar. Forty Guinneas to a Doit.
I have an old Suit in Limbo will Equip me to a hair.

Full. But my Wardrop is past all redemption, I must to the Brokers and rig my
self against the Time, we will meet at the Rose. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Wordly, Fox and Plot. Sir Worcester. Is Mr Scattergoods further Mortagage
prepared?


Plot. It is, Sir Worldly --


Sir Worcester. And have you drawn a Warrant to Confess Judgment in Ejectment? That I
may have the Stirrup ready to mount into the Saddle of possession, I believe I
have advanced to the full of the Estate: -- The Auctions in the East India
Company run very high at present, and I am resolved to dispose of my stock
there, and place it upon Terra firma: on a fat Mortgage? or a Purchase -- Let
my Daughter know I would have her receive Sir Noisy's Address for Marriage, he
has a great Estate in Land and Money? and refers the Settlement to me. Who will
take care to hamper him, and secure her Fortune; on this Marriage: That it
shall not fall into Huckstirs hands, and be Extravagantly spent and Squandered,
She ought to look on this Match as a great Blessing, and not grow perverss and
Humorsome like her Brother. I am to meet Sir Noisy at my Councils Chamber, when
it is dark -- go home.


Exit Plot. Re-enter Frank Fox. Fr Fox. I was at your House to Pay my Duty and
am glad to wait you here.


Sir Worcester. Excuse me Sir. I am not Supple enough to return your Complement, and
for your Duty Sir, it is but a word of Course, pray Sir, know the use of you
Hat: there needs no Ceremony between us, a man of ripe Age, and one might have
made me a Grandfather, if he would have used the means, but a willful humor
blasted my hopes.


Fr Fox. I hope Sir you will be entreated to pass by this single act which
looks like Disobedience. You have taught me Sir, that Love and Friendship ought
to be chosen; and not Compelled, and to Marry without Love, is to bind a living
Body with a Dead: When ever I design that knot, I will be solely Governed by
your Judgment.


Sir Worcester. I must refer you Sir, in what concerns your self to stand and fall by
your own Management, I will not be so Idly Curious to concern my Thoughts for
him I cannot Govern: And for your Debts. They were not Contracted, by any fault
or Encouragement of mine: Heaven has blessed you Sir with helps, my youth could
never pretend to: and yet I weathered Fortunes utmost malice. I went a raw
Schoolboy to Oxford. And but a freshman when the War begun: I Left the
Studious for an Active life: and finding none preferred at Court, but for some
by Interest, or Downright money, I was condemned to take the Luckier side. From
thence rose Gradually to be a Colonel. Finding an Heiress fitting for my
purpose, I married her, without considering either Wit or Beauty. An Estate was
the only thing had the Witchcraft to inchant and fix my happiness. Then secured
by the act of Indemnity, I bid adeiw to all Military Employments: my Wife,
dying Early I have above Ten Years remained a Widdower, unwilling to overcharge
my Family with a second Brood: But having in you met a Disappointment in my
Designs, I resolve henceforward to please my self, and choose a partner in my
Bed and Fortune.


Fr. Fox. Let your indulgence wink at what is past: my Care shall still comply
with your Commands.


Sir Worcester. Then you shall find me an indulgent Father? Ex. Sir Worldly.


Fr. Fox. The Conduct of this old man vexes me! Solus.
His starched behavior over-Ceremonious:
As if his Malice studied for revenge:
I would not drive him to a Desperate humor:
To fix his Thoughts upon a second Match;
Or Marry my Cast Mistress:
Who in her Pride may Lord it over me!
And seek my torment for Apostasy:
None know how sweet Revenge is to that Sex?
Which I Will prevent, and marry her to Parrot:
Hedge in a Sum shall clear me of my Debts?
Which his Indulgence made me first contract
And now abandons me unto the World.
It Is this compells me to an Act immorrall
Which I my self condemn, but cannot avoid:
He who constrains me thus to stretch my Wit.
And forces the occasion pardons it.
Enter Plot. Why are your Looks so Mellancholly Plot?

Plot. I am considering (a point you take but little care off.) how to stop
mouths of your barking Creditours; which if I find not some to silence, I shall
be swallowed alive in prison: and you may live to make Dice of my Bones: I am
so disturbed and alarmed with their Threats and dunning Epistles, that I can
take no repose? If your Father did but know my hand was with you, and my
friendship to you had involved me in this affair I should be discarded from his
Service.


Fr. Fox. Well Plot: what Expedient have you thought upon to stop this
dangerous Leak; which threatens to sink our Crassy Vessel, and prove a common
ruin to us both.


Plot. I declare I am at a loss -- what says your Father? will he not advance?


Fr. Fox. He is so offended with my refusing that Squintifego-Crump for a
Bride, that he has discarded me with my bare allowance to buckle with the World.


Plot. He had set his heart upon that Match: 'Twas his darling Device: which he
had sat long a hatching: but your obstinate refusal blasted his hopes. and made
him desperate-mad: Disappointing him of the rich Harvest he had so long Dreamt
of: Hang it, why should a Tyrannical Father think to compel his only Son to
marry an Heiress worth Sixty Thousand pounds, contrary to his Inclination,
though he bribed him with a Settlement of 1500 l. per annum. And secured the
rest after his Death. Had you had the Grace to have Complied, these petty Debts
would not have stung us like Hornets, as now they do: Then you had amazed and
dazzled the world with your shining Epuipage. And appeared the Glory and envy of
the Town: The enchanting Ladies would have adored and cried you up for the most
happy Conqueror and you might put their hearts under what Contribution you had
pleased, you cannot guess Sir at the Magic power of Riches, which can in a
moment transform a Seseless Brute into an accomplished Gentleman.


Fr. Fox. What need I despair, or poorly Compound for a Despised Livelihood,
when my Fortune stands fair before me, and assures me all things will succeed
most happily: None can Disappoint me of my Fathers Estate: And I had rather be
a Gally-Slave, than chained to the Embraces of her I hate.


Plot. Though Love is adored as a powerful God among the Superstitious Troop of
idle votaries: yet to Wisemen, he is but an Empty nothing, and used as a Cloak
to cover politic designs: Love and Religion Serviceable Tools:
To the Wise Artist: Dangerous to Fools.



Fr. Fox. Hold a little Sir: let me stop you in the Career, of your Harangue:
and entreat the assistance of your Tallent to matters in hand.


Plot. I stand Corrected Sir: and must own that a Florid Philosophical
Discourse will be as unseasonable and ridiculous in our present Condition as
Sir Hudibrass grave set of Moralls in the Stocks: it is better Imitating the
Wiser Conduct of Court Preachers, that never disgust their Audience with a
dangerous Truth: and by that means run the hazard of bilking themselves of a
long hunted preferment. But is there no means left to mollify your obdurate
clutch-sist Father? Did you urge your Necessities home?


Fr. Fox. With all the winning Rhetoric and art of persuasion I could, but his
heart was not to be softened with all my Arguments; and like a Diamond bore it
without any Impression: He told me, since I had refused the Settlement he had
proposed: and disappointed him of the satisfaction of seeing me married: it was
the Effect of my roving Fancy: He had known many like Gypsies, better pleased
to follow their own humor and Inventions then confine themselves to any
settled Course of Life: and was pleased to find he was related to a Son that
had Wit enough to Swim in the world without being beholding to the Bladders of
his Friends assistance.


Plot. Then it is but reasonable since he condemns you to live by your wits he
should feel the first Stroke of your Fancy.


Fr. Fox. And I have a Project just now teeming in my brains shall make us
savers to the Tune of a Thousand -- But of that hereafter. How does my Sister
receive Parrats addresses?


Plot. Who? my good Friend and Patron Sir Noisy? He has chosen me of his
Cabinet Council in this affair, and prime Confident: He is smitten up to the
Hilts with your Sister!


Fr. Fox. How does she receive him?


Plot. Very coldly.


Fr. Fox. I like it the better, and am resolved you shall do a double Favor,
in ridding her of a troublesome Gallant; and assisting in a Marriage, Designed
between the aforesaid Knight your Friend, and a Damsel of my intimate
acquaintance. You may easily bring it about because he trusts you!


Plot. Of your acquaintance! nay then he will have a fine time on it -- Sir I must
heartily beg your pardon in this Case: I would be ready to do you any Service
my self. But my Conscience will not let me dispense with a Breach of Trust:
What? betray a Friend: you must hold me Excused!


Fr. Fox. Betray a Friend, betray a Coxcomb! There is no more obligation for a
Man of Wit and Sense to keep the peace or Friendship with a Fool, then for a
Turk to observe Articles with a Christian, or a Papist with a Heretic. There Is
a mutual parity required in the bonds of Love and Friendship, and where one
side is turned Bankrupt, the other on Course remains no longer bound: And for
Conscience it is but a blind Stalking-Horse! to cover designs: A sham pretense,
not to be spoke of among men of wit. But to remove all Scruples, Accomplish
this, and for it, and your Services past and to come: I will confirm you an
Annuity of one hundred pounds per annum. under hand and Seal, payable on my
Marriage or my Fathers Death.


Plot. Sir I am much edifi'd by your Learned Distinction, and must confess you
have such a strange Winning bewitching power over my frail foolish Nature, a
very Tempting Motion, which I cannot refuse being accompanied with Gain.


Fr. Fox. I fear it will be heard to trap the old Fox.


Plot. I rather distrust the young Fop, who is naturally apt to Blink and
Boggle: But the old one is by long Success: grown confident and will swallow
the Bait.

All Novices are Shy: But a new Trick
Does the Old Gamester most securely Nick -- Ex. Plot.

Fr. Fox. This fellow has a subtle Brain, and a Genius sit for Business: he had
his first seasoning, under a petty-fogging Solliciter. And there grew well
acquainted with the Nicking part of Business, but straining a Knavish point too
high, was forced to fly beyond Sea for the safety of his Ears: till the
persecution was past, and there accomplished himself in all Foreign as well as
Domestic Politics: At his return Fortune threw him on my Father's Service,
where by his Dexterity of management, He has wound himself into his affairs,
and is become Prime Minister in the Conduct of his most important matters. I
have by degrees drawn him over, and fixed him of my party, and by that means am
Master of all my Fathers Secrets, which come within the Sphere of his
knowledge. And knowing only Interest could secure him, I have promised him
Mountains, when Fate calls the old man aside, and in the mean time drew him in
to be bound for my Debts, which will oblige him to any hazardous undertaking,
will work him out of his engagements, I must make use of him to advance an
other hundred pound. Credit is like a Pump grows dry for want of working, one
hat full of water puts it in Tune, then you may serve your self and friend, and
fill your Cisterns against a further occasion.

Enter a Vizour Mask and presents him with a Letter -- He reads -- August, the
10 th. 1672.
Earnest Business gives you this trouble and I request you will meet me at
Rosamonds Pond at Eleven this morning. I shall be habited. etc.

Madam you have served me with a Process of Love in nature of a Bille deux, to
which I answer I am at present no Idle Fellow; but oblige to take up one
Hundred Pounds, if I can persuade an honest obliging Person to lay it down: Now
if you, or any kind Friend of yours, will advance me such a Sum? I will give
you personal Security; or be Bound Body for Body.



Mas. Mine is an Affair of Consequence and might concern you to make a more
serious Answer?


Fr. Fox. I have been so bit under Vizours that I am under a Promise to be no
more deluded, Except you convince me, you're a new Face?


Mas. Then I remove all obstructions to the Treaty: I own my Credentialls bare
Faced.


Fr. Fox. And it is a very pretty one. Let you and I retire to my Lodging? hard
by: and adjust matters in private?


Mas. Hold Sir, I am but an Ambassadress; and claim Protection by the Law of
Nations: And if you press me further, I will call in the Mobile to my
Assistance.


Fr. Fox. Well thy Beauty has engaged me to meet; but if you Gilt me, I will be
revenged on those two twinking Stars if er'e I meet 'em. Ex. Fox.


Mas. I must wait my Ladies coming, it is much about the time of her coming from
Church, she has been at prayers she may be Lucky in this Adventure? Oh! here
she comes.


Enter Lady Wary. La. Wa. Well, did you deliver my Letter?


Maid. I did, and he has assured me he will meet at the hour.


La. Wa. My Brother has proposed him for a Husband:
Rendering his Character and Fortune Fair:
But Friendship like to Love proves often Blind.
Misleading the frail Judgment into Error:
It most concerns me nearly to Descry
The Rocks and hidden Quicksands of his humor.
And the rough Passions which infest his mind:
I cannot be too Curious in my Search:
On which my Future happiness depends:
He once may Lord it ore my Mind and Fortune!
If I in this disguise meet him by Chance
He will appear to me in his true Colors.
A sudden Speech discovers more the heart
Then Courtship made by studied rules of Art.
The weakest Lover will provide Disguise,
To hide his failings from his Mistress Eyes:
Through this Disguise I as a spy may see,
The unwary posture of the Enemy;
Like a Dark Lanthorn Vizors are designed,
To light before, while all is concealed behind.

End of the First Act.
ACT. II.
Enter Clarinda and Nurse. Clar. MY Dearest Nurse, by whose Counsel I have
hitherto conducted my self let your advice rescue me from this Insolent
pretender Sir Noysy Parrat whom I most perfectly hate.


Nur. And you desire my opinion? Therefore I will first shut the Door; for it
is very improbable where there is more then two Women concerned, Counsel
should be long concealed.


Clar. I have an Aversion for this troublesome Fellow, that talks sleeping and
wakeing without staying for, or expecting an Answer: His discourse is set to
the tune of his own Praise or Commendation, Extolling and valuing himself (as
he imagins) on his nightly Debauches, Quarrels, Rancounters, Duells disorders
and the Love of many great Ladys who languish and dye for his sake: Though none
regard, or give belief; to his Fabulous and Romantic Adventures.


Nur. It will be dangerous in you to oppose the Current of your Fathers humor
and cross his design: and you will find him Resolute Batt when he sets upon it.
Therefore it will be best to comply with his humor and dissemble obedience:
least you may run the Riske your brother has done for his Obstinacy: Bid Sir
Noisy welcome with all the Gayety imaginable; that he may fancy by the freedom
and indifferency of your humor you were bred up amongst those talking treating
Gossiping Intreaguing Ladys: That will toss a Bottle and take up a Story in
their ears upon occasion. Hint it to him, since your Father will have it so,
you are very indifferent in the point of Marriage: will comply with his fancy,
but choose with your own: That you look on Marriage as a humane Politic
Invention, a sort of a Smith-field-Bargain where inclinations are bought and
Sold: or swopt away for present Interest. Carry it on with Gayety and Gallantry
of Humor: Talk much of Plays, Music, Meetings, Balls the Mall, and freedom of
Conversation: And I Will secure you he shall be the first shall recant, and pay a
round forfeiture to be well off the Bargain. If he declines his Courtship your
Father will have no reason to Complain, for though Men are never so depraved
and Debauched in their own Principles, they wish their Wives should be Examples
the other way.


Clar. Well Nurse I am satisfied you have proposed the true way to bring me
off, and I will try to Act it to the life; when he comes next the whole Scene
shall be changed and I will over do it with Extravagant whimsy and Frolic, and
so nauseate his appetite that he shall never after think of Matrimony.


Nur. Well, we will go in and prepare our selves for Action, Study our Qs and
rehearse our parts and I will be near and prompt, if I find your Natural
Modesty at a loss, I be ready to assist, and I Will warrant you we will send him
away like a Dog with a rattle at his Tail. Exeunt.


SCENE. The Park. Enter Lady and her Maid. La. Do you think the Spark will
meet?


Ma. He looks more like a Cavaleir then to break his Word.


La. Prithee give me an exact Account of what past at the delivery of my Letter?


Ma. At first he laughed and told me he was a Man of business, and had abundance
of Irons in the fire, and could not be spared to wait on these Vain, Idle
assignations. That he was just going to take up a hundred Pounds if he knew any
person would be so civil to lay it down. I told him if he knew the fair Lady
sent the Letter he would court the occasion. He replied he had been so often
banter'd with Letters and Mask's that he was resolved never to stir one foot on
such sleeveles errands except my Face would persuade him. For he hated an old
acquaintance worse then durty Linen, a dunn, or a Bill of Exchange without
money to answer it. I discovered my Face and found grace to engage him to meet
at the time and Place. Well madam, are you not under some concern to meet this
dangerous man of War, that has been flushed with so many Victories? He has made
many a poor heart sigh, or the world fowly belyes him. Love is often Imperious
and domineering and will not be checked and governed by Reason.


La. Doubt not, I shall defend my own with Gallantry and Resolution. But I Will
advance him the Money on certain Conditions which if he breaks I Will hate and
despise him.


Ma. Courage madam, the Enemy approaches.


Enter Frank. Fr. By all the fair Tokens of my Letter of advice: Madam, you are
Consigned hither. And I am to be the happy Factor of so complete a Cargo?


La. You talk like a Merchant, come hither on some design of purchase or
Exchange. But I must declare my self an utter stranger to the affairs of your
Negotiation. I hope I may Sail here, under the protection of the Kings
Chamber, in these narrow Seas: without any imbargo, constraint or further
Examination from any Pikaroon that Cruises here for Purchase.


Fr. You may perceive by this Letter, [shews his Letter.] that I am come here
upon an Honorable Assignation, and If you agree with the Market in the
Margent, I must discourse with you further on that Subject.


[She reads and returns it.] La. Sir you see I do not agree in habit with your
Description, and rather believe you are some pyrate, or Corfaire that haunt
this Coast to snap a Prize, under false Colors and pretense?


Fr. My Colors truly declare what Prince I serve: But I have greater Reason to
suspect your Truth, that conceal your Commission with your Face? But my open
pretenses give me a fairer Character.


La. The Ladies that haunt the Boxes, and travers the Mall, enquiring after
every proper Gentleman's Circumstances, make a Figure there, know Mr. Fox's fair
Expectations: But no Woman of Fortune will venture for Better for worse,
without ample Settlements and a separate Maintenance, if Husbands should prove
base, unkind, or unjust; in these Cases it is good to have Two strings to ones
Bow.


Fr. I know some have had Twenty, and worn 'em to the Stumps.


La. Those are a fort of Roving Spirits: But a sober Musician will try what
Melody can be made on a Trump Marine with one single String, rather then
entertain a Scandalous Consort.


Fr. But Madam, since you are so well acquainted with mine: Let me be beholding
to you for your own Character?


La. That will avail you nothing: our Circumstances differing in every Point,
and I like other Artists can paint my Description as fair as I please. You
having had no sight of ^^e Original to contradict it: But to comply with your
desire: I am a Widow, my days of mourning with my Garments are almost at an
End: My husband died rich and Loved me passionately; and it was my Care to
preserve it, till misfortune parted us: he left me in full possession of all
which many think Considerable enough.


Fr. Your person is more valuable then the Indies: And I am most infinitely
charmed with your wit and humor. Let me beg you will remove that dark Cloud
which obscures the Noblest Object.


La. Want of knowledge is the True mother of Devotion: And a convenient distance
often makes us adore those Mysteries, which on a more familiar acquaintance, we
should slight and despise: If you think it worth your enquiry, I will preserve
it for a further interveiw: Let my first injunction request you will press it
no further which will oblige me to more freedom hereafter: But if your
Curiosity makes you pry further into my reserve, instead of your promised Juno,
you will meet an empty Cloud, or at least will prove so to you --


Fr. Madam your Commands oblige me more then an Oath or an Act of Parliament. I
beg your pardon, for my inquisitive humor, and will press no further: I am
wrapped up into the Heavens of Imagination! Your Wit and Conversation has raised
me into an Extazy: Your shape mein and charming accents of your Voice, has
ravished me from my self. Ulysses when he past through the Consort of the Sirens
was not more Transported.


La. 'Twas well his forecast had piniond him to the Mast, to secure him from
those fluttring Designs, would have ensnared his Life.

But I must not permit you to proceed in this rapture: It Is possible time may
discover such a Face, that may damp your Devotion and put it out of humor.


Fr. There never was so fair a Temple built but was inhabited by something
divinely Excellent.


La. Wa. When Fancy has raised you to the tipptoes of your Imagination: you
must at last consider your Mistress attributes are but mortal: Sudden passions
like furious Earthquakes, cause a Commotion and Expire; whereas more Calm and
regular sits are more permanent and lasting. The information I have given you
in my own affairs incourages me to enquire after the History of your Amors: A
person of your youth and Temper, cannot but have intrigues on foot: Deal
sincerely with me, for if Time ar Accident shall discover your falsehood, I
shall suspect you vehemently in the rest.


Fr. Fox, I condemn the rigor of my Misfortunes without my fault: Chance at a
Masquerade, brought me acquainted with a young handsome Woman: Beautiful to a
miracle; she lived in a solitary house in the outskirts of the Town: with an
Aunt, as her Governess. I made my frequent visits, but with a Caution under a
false name: And at last made a Discovery she was kept by an old Gentleman: My
Curiosity did not press to know further. We continued in this happy
Circumstance, for some time: When a cross accident blasted all my hopes and has
made an Eternal Separation: But I am still ready to Sacrifice my life for her
Interest and Service: But must for ever abandon her love: I can charge no fault
on her or my self; but the odd Capriciousness of my Fate distracts me: And this
Madam, is the sole Intrigue and Correspondence I have entertained or engaged in
for some time.


La. Wa. You have surpised me with a strange Riddle, I want an Oedipus to
expound it, but I must Credit it, because it is vouched by you, and the
Concern, with which you tell it, gives it the more lively faith.


Fr. Fox. It is a Secret too true, And I wish it may be still a Riddle, which
nothing but the Rack or Torture should have extorted from me, but your
Ladyships Command.


La Wa. I leave you Master of your Thoughts!


Fr. Fox Madam your enchanting Conversation has engaged me beyond my time: But
must beg you will appoint when I may make my self once more happy in your
Conversation: It will be Cruel to condemn my heart, and not allow me time to
put in further Claim.


La. Wa. What business hurries you away so fast?


Fr. Fox. It Is of import, and calls me into the City.


La. Wa. I Will hold my life to raiss a Sum of money to Carry on some fresh design.


Fr. Fox. You guess like a Conjurer, which must be provided or else my projects
will miscarry.


La. Wa. Well, rather then all shall be lost in fumo! I will venture a hundred
Guinneas on your project: if that will do you any service; It Is my Stock at
Basset: And for once, the Table shall want a Gamester: my Servant has it in a
Purse, you may take it by Consent, upon this Condition that you repay it,
before you make Courtship or profession to another Mistress: But if you are
strongly Tempted, you may have a Dispensation from me! when I see you next.


Fr Fox. Madam, I blush to accept this favor, which looks like robbery in me,
if I wore the Mask! takes the purse.


La. I Will ask no Note under your hand I have a good witness by.


Fr. My Heart assures me I can never fail.


La. At four I Will meet you here: Leave me to my Freedom without a Spy.


Fr. I kiss your hands.
Never was Man so generously obliged -- Exit.

Maid. I doubt not, but you have won on his noble Nature.


La. It Is better to sound his principles. with the loan of a trisling Sum, then
put my whole Fortune in his hand; and be cheated of it at a lump, by such a
faithless Banker, I am at a loss to expound this riddle of the Masquerade, but
I will use my utmost art to Dive into his Breast, I cannot be satisfied till I
master it: And if he Loves -- He cannot hide it long -- she muses.


Enter Leonora disguised in the habit of a Gentleman, running and out of
Breath, looks about him, falls in a Swoond crying -- He Is gone, he is gone!
Maid. Lord Madam, I am surpised.


La. Charity obliges us to help him in this Distress: Rub his Temples. Oh he
revives and opens his eyes.


Leo. Oh when will my Misfortunes have an End!
I thank your Charity that brought me back!
Or else my Miserable life had here concluded.

La. You Are welcome Sir once more to breath the air,
Lend him your hand and raise him from the Ground.

Leo. Madam -- I thank your Charity and beg your pardon*
If I enquire what Gentleman was that,
That held discourse with you before my Coming?

La. A perfect Stranger I met here by Chance.


Leo. Oh Madam -- pardon a Distracted Woman;
Plun'gd by misfortune in Eternal ruin,
Who in few hours envied no mortal State.

La. A Woman! Madam you Surprise me much!
And though your borrowed shape misled my Guess
I cannot repent of serving so much Beauty.
I see your weak Limbs ill support your Body
Accept my Servants Arm?
She will conduct you to my Coach that waits,
And I Will attend you to your Lodging.

Leo. Madam ten thousand thanks for your assistance.


Ex Leonora leaning on her Woman. La. What if this Stranger prove the
Masquerade,
I am on fire, till I pump out the Secret -- Exit.

SCENE. the Hall. Enter Clarinda and her Maid Betty. Bett. Madam Sir Noisy's
come,
To Serenade you with the Fiddles.

Clar. Is the Wine and Colored water prepared?


Bett. So like you cannot distinguish it by your Eye.


Clar. It Is well -- admit him. Enter Sir Noisy Parrat. Sir Noisy Parrat, you are
welcome, since my Father has given you admittance; you are Patron here.


Sir Nois. I am glad to wait on you in so good a humor: it used to be more
Lowering and Tempestious -- And therefore I brought the Fiddles to appease the
Storm.


Clar. That is allayed by your Company; a Woman's Countenance, does not always
show her real meaning: But since you have brought the Music, we will have a
minuit. strike up.


Sir Nois. I am Surpised to find you in so good a humor


Music plays -- She Dances and Sings with all Gaiety, Turns him about. He
shows himself very Clumsey and awkard in the Dance. Clar. I see Sir Noisy I can
tire you out -- Sit down and Breath a while and we will to it again. I perceive this
exercise has made you Dry -- Betty bring Wine, and a Collation -- Come Sir
Noisy? since the Fates will have it so, here is to our better acquaintance --
fill him his Glass -- to the whole Legion of your Mistresses -- alon's Monseiur
Chacon l'ver. The glasses meet and clash. I think I do pretty well for a young
beginner at this Exercise: A little Practice will make me perfect. Sir Noisy I
am resolved I Will Imitate your Example every way, and first we will discard all
jealousy: for that will disturb our happiness. When we are Married the Law
installs me your Sultana; your Mistress of State, And I in days of Triumph am
to wear your Golden Trappings, as your Charging Palfry: Neither shall I be out
of humor if you divert your self, with an easy pad, on ordinary occasions: by
the by; provided you return home to your quarters safe and Sound, and in the
mean time the Necessity of the Family may be supplied: Marriage is like to
prove a tedious Journey, and will hold out one of our Lives: And therefore it
will be good to support Nature with all Comfortable refreshments, of which I
take the Bottle to be a main one, which constan^ly feeds the Lamp of Love. And
none but the foolish Virgins will want that precious Liquor for a recruite.


Sir Nois. And madam, I Will be bold to drink the aforesaid Health, to our
further Acquaintance.


Clar. The deeper the Sweeter. You see I make you welcome, after the German
Fashion: Who contract all amity and friendship over a Bottle: and faith, plain
dealing is a Jewel now a days; and it is good to let every one know betimes
what they must trust to: But since you have pressed the Music let 'em divert us
with a Song.


Sir Nois. Madam! I design to treat you with an air of my own Composing and
setting. [which he produces and reads it with great admiration.]


Clar. Indeed Sir Noisy this must be very Charming?


The Music Sings the same Song. Clar. Sir Noisy, I perceive you're in a
perfect Rapture, these Hyperbolical Expressions treat your Mistress like an
Idol, be pleased to command the Music to sing the new Dialogue of Women's
freedom that is much more agreeable to my humor.


Sir Nois. Madam I will. [goes to speak to the Music.]


Clar. How have I performed?


Betty. To the life: the poor Idiot stands amazed at your freedom: Carry it on
with fresh humor, and I Will warrant you, you nauseate him: For ever prosecuting
his Love further. That torrent of discourse that used to roll so volubly from
his Tongue, without sense or Consideration, has now left him; he is grown
Speechless, quite run down and insipid.


Re-enter Sir Noisy. The Song. Clar. I this is to the purpose. We Will never live
sneakingly at home with my Father, to be curbed with his Musty Morrals: but
take the full swing and scope of our humor. First, we will furnish a large
splendid House, where we may have Elbow room, with servants and Equipage
suitable; and by the way you must forswear living in that nasty dull place, the
Country. Where with much ado, we may once in a Moon Scrape Company together to
make a Game at Whisk, or Lantraloo; or a Country Dance. We will live constantly
in Town, and when our dear diversion the Play Houses are shut up, and all grows
dull here, we will down to Tun-bridge, where while you fret your self at the
Groom-Porters, I will divert my self at the Royall-Oak, spend all the Morning
Raffling at the Wells, and the Evening in Conversation and Dancing: and thus
the time shall slide insensibly, with all mirth and Jollity: and I will lead a
life more like your Friend, or Mistress then your Wife: But I must Article you
must always keep a Coach for me to make my separate Visits: You shall not
enquire into my affairs: Neither will I trouble my head with yours: We Will keep
a free open table to entertain our Friends. And for other matters I shall leave
it to my Fathers Care to secure me a separate Maintenance, and make provision
against all mischances.


Sir Nois. Well Madam, we shall be an envied pattern to the World: Let me beg
the Favor to Seal the Bargain upon your lips.


Clar. Well Sir, for once I am contented, you take it as a liker, before
Marriage; But I must be more shy of my Favors: till you are fast in a trap:
When the parson has said Grace, you are welcome to use your pleasure; in the
mean time I must be more upon the Reserve: least if you should entice me to be
to free, before hand, you might fly of from your Bargain; Some have bin served
so to my Knowledge.


Sir Nois. Madam, there is no danger I can Repent.


Clar. Well, say and hold; I always resolved I would marry a brave fellow: that
should stand by me, and justify my honor and reputation, right or wrong: I
Scorn a little sneaking fellow, th^s is easily run down; encouraging others to
pretend to more familiarity then is true, and that will provoke a Saint.


Sir Nois. It will indeed: Well madam, I will leave no stone unturned to bring
this matter to a sudden Conclusion.


Clar. And I will lend my helping hand. Sir Noisy, we will not part with dry
Lips: one Glass more to the happy Consummation of our wishes.


Sir Nois. With all my heart: Your Servant.


Clar. Hold hold Sir Noisy: who could have thought you would have bin such a
Clown? to steal away without taking leave. they kiss. I vow Sir Noisy, you make
me blush to mind you of your Duty.


Sir Nois. I Am glad I got off Sober, but this strange freedom amazes me. aside.


Exit Sir Noisy. Bet. Well madam, you have acted your part with all Gallantry:
I Will secure you this dunghill cock will never have spirit to wheel or strike
one stroke more in the Battle: you see he is perfectly cowed and dares not show
his face! you have baffled his pretensions, and cut him down in his own way!


Clar. I believe he is grown Crop-sick of the bargain. If we see him no more to
day, you shall Visit him to morrow! And entertain him with a hideous Character
of my Wantonness.


Bet. I doubt not but He Is already well enough satisfied.


Clar. Well I must blush and ask pardon; that have strained a point of Modesty
to be rid of so vain a pretender.

Of proffered Dainties we suspect the Savor.
Where most were courted, seldom prize the Favor. Exeunt.

SCENE, Leonora's House. Enter Lady, and Leonora in her man's clothes. Leo. Your
kindness, Madam, infinitely binds me
What I shall ever be, must own your Bounty,
Who brought me from the Dungeon of Despair.

La. This storm blown over all will then prove fair,
The Stars never meant that face for black Despair.

Leo. What can I hope in this distracted state
That am a perfect stranger to the World
And want a faithful Friend to give me Council.

La. Madam! you freely may Command my Service,
And Women prove as trusty to each other
As great Heroes: And conceal their Secrets.
But while you labor thus to stifle thoughts
They often suffocate, or fester inwards,
And breed a hidden Gangreen in the Mind;
Open your Grief and give your Passions vent,
The very telling it will Ease your Heart:
And I Will apply my utmost Skill to serve you.

Leo. Then I will freely make you my Confessor,
Be not severe or kill me with a frown:

La. Your Face assures me yours are Venial failings!


Leo. I wish my faults to you transparent were,
Which I condemn, but never can declare:
When to arraign my self, it is my Choice
Shame hides my Face and robs me of my Voice.
Enter Aunt and whispers Leonora. Madam some business interrupts us now:
I beg you call on me: I am still at home!
Conceal your self a Moment in this Lobby
And those back stairs conduct you to your Coach.

La. But I Will make bold to Listen. retires.
Enter Fr. Fox. Leonora runs and embraces him and faints in his Arms. It is as
I expected. I Will watch the Issue.

Fra. My absence made me seem a Criminal,
I from your sight concealed my Guilty Face
And hid me from the person I adore.

Leo. Since I once more enclose you within these Arms
Nor Time nor Fate shall e're divorce me from you!
Happy that hour when at a Masquerade,
Thy Wit and Beauty charmed my panting Breast,
And first inspired thy Love into my heart!
Which Was till then a stranger:
My Heart then melted and dissolved within me!
A race of Golden Days did then appear
Love was our Theme all day, and every Day a Year.

Fra. Our Love in blooming Youth is in the prime
And like pure Gold works perfect from the mine:
Till thoughts and Care the Mettle does debase
And mix it with a dull and Gross allay.

Leo. Love at this Envied pitch should ever stay.


Fra. Our fruitless wishes cannot arrest the Sun
That great Machine of Heaven must still proceed
And having touched the highest Southern point, from thence declines:

Leo. Then since we find our selves Each hour decay,
Our Bodies like a Clock at first made perfect;
Until the Spring, and well disposed wheels
Wear out, and faulter in Career of motion,
Loosing its pulse, no more points to the Hour.
Since hours fly, each Minute lets improve
And think all time is lost, that is not spent in Love!

Fr. Yet that self moving Clock may be disordered:
By some mischance disabled to perform
Or strike, until restored and put in tune.

Leo. Then we must wait with patience until Art
Or Time restore it to perform its office:
For Love can pardon and supply defects!
But, dearest Life, be free and tell the Cause
What made you steal away from me abruptly?

Fr. When in our infant Love you smiled upon me:
Though your Aunt stormed and I received repulses
Yet I cut through the Billows by your light.
At last convinced it was in vain to strive
Against the stream of our united Love:
She thought it safest to conceal our Converse
From the old Dragon, watched the Golden Fruit,
I interlop'd and drove a private trade,
And never minded who touch on the Coast
Till by his Picture you betrayed the Secret.
I at that sight grew pale, my color faded
And shot a discomposure through my frame,
Starting as I had met my Fathers Ghost!
Which you perceived, I told you it was a Qualm
That suddenly benumbed my fainting Spirits.
And while your Friendship went to fetch a Cordial
I stole away.

Leo. And was that kindly done?


Fr. I strait retired home reflecting there
That he who often had proved our sport, and maygame;
Was my own Father -- 'twas then I found
Nature unknown to us had placed a Bar
So strongly fixed no Art nor time could shake it.

Leo. Then I alone can cut that Gordian knot:
Which I want strength to break or skill to loose.
And Death alone shall end this tedious Life.

She draws her Sword and offers to fall upon it, but is prevented by Frank.
Fra. Hold! hold!
Let not a rash and inconsiderate Act
Deprive you of the power to Repent
Of Errors past, and wash them white with tears,
And Heaven will say Amen, to our Endeavors:
But if grown deaf unto those checks of Conscience
We still persist, it swells to rank Rebellion:
We defy, Heaven and set a mark for Vengeance,
Whose thunder never fails to hit the white.

Leo. Could I be once assured this change of Fortune
Proceeded not from your inconstant humor?
I could support this hated separation,
And live recluse never to see mankind.

Fr. That were to hard a task for Youth to relish
Which is not prone by Nature, to such strictness:
I doubt not if your Beauty will be ruled,
To raise your Fortune to a pitch of Envy.

Leo. Thou art alone the Scope of all my Thoughts,
The joy, the light, the comfort of my Eyes:
And since my heart is robbed of that content,
What further can I hope, wish or desire;
When all my happyness in thee lies Buried?

Fr. Never despair! the Sun shines every where;
Fortune may doubly recompense the loss:
Your late adorer now becomes your Friend,
That still will lose his Interest for your Service
And time may in a moment Change your Passions
Transferring fancy on some other object
Where it may thrive and prosper:
Cast all care on me, compose your Thoughts
And I Will inform you more when next we meet

Leo. My Friend? So from this hour I still may call you
Rest ever happy, blessed, and fortunate: Exit Fra. she stands and looks after
him then throws herself on the Couch. the Scene Closes.
Though I despair for ever of repose.

Enter Lady and her Maid. as in the Street. La. Well you must get my new
Garniture ready, for I must shift as quick as a Player between the Acts, let me
have all new and change and vary my shape, that my Gallant may forget his
invisible Mistress and have his eyes dazzled with my Costly ornaments and
Jewels. My Brother assures me he will dine here to day. Well Girl I have made
such a discovery that amazes me. Though I am satisfied in the Main.


Maid. How do you find the Spark?


La. Just and honorable. But I will now put on all my Charms that I may the
better Judge of his Constancy to his Mistress in the Mask.


May. If he should quit all his interest in her, and fall in love with you on
the first sight.


La. That would argue to great a levity and blemish him in my Esteem: leaving
me to distrust that such an Inconstant Rambler like Mercury can never be fixed.
But I will try him at both weapons, which has the greatest Influence my Face
and Gravity at home, or my airy Conversation abroad in the Mask.


May. 'Twill puzle a Casuist to distinguish between your Natural and Politic
Capacities.

By several ways the train of Love he fires,
He Courts your Wit, your beauty he admires:
Then let us guess which Charms most by the Event;
Beauty in view, or wit on the cold Scent. Exeunt.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT. III.
The SCENE Opens and discovers Leonora on the Couch. To her Enter Aunt. Au. I
Hope your Friend has left you in a sober Temper. He tells me, though his
Conscience will not give him leave to serve your delights, yet he shall make it
his sole Study to advance your Interest and well doing in the World. He always
use to behave himself so rudely and scurvily to me, that I hated him mortally;
but now he has changed his note and speaks kindly and feelingly to me: that my
heart melts within me, and I love the very ground he goes on. And though I
understand there is a cessation of Arms between you, yet he shall command me
any earthly thing. He tells me he will marry you to a young rich Knight and
Barronet, and that you shall be Ladyfied and keep your Coach and Six, and live
in the Country in a Stately House as big as a Palace.


Leo. Thou art always busying thy head about Vanity.


Au. So is every thing that does not jump with your humor: What shall I say if
my old Master comes, for he will haunt and be prying about?


Leo. Tell him I am in Bed: there he will find me. I need not Counterfeit.


Au. Lord! what a hurrican and Commotion this young fellow has made, and has so
turmoil'd our affairs: before he came preaching here, all things went on
swimmingly: now they are quite of the hooks: I wish Fortune had never conducted
his feet within these doors: ever since our matters have gone Retrograde, as
Mr. Gadbury says: I always advised you against this poor indigent young Fellow:
I opposed him what I could, till I saw it was to late: But I was forced to use
my utmost art of dissimulation, to Cloak your Infidelity: and made the old man
believe that he had the sole possession: did so sweeten and Cajole his fancy:
if he had smok'd the least he would have discarded us both, and turned us out
of House and home: and then what reparation could your fine young, slim,
smooth-faced Friend, have made? Yet still you remain in an obstinate perverse
humor: I am ashamed to see what cold advances you make to the old Gentleman's
Complements and Caresses: well, if you will not Buckle, and apply your self to
be more Complaisant, you will ruin all my Care, and we must bid good Night
Landlord: and loose the best Friend that ever you had since your Mother bound
your head.


Leo. Forbear to torture me, thou cursed Engine of the Devil and all mischief:
'twas thy Flattery that first seduced and Debauched me then a Child, and
betrayed me into his Arms: where I destroyed my honor and Conscience for your
private advantage: and foolishly bartered away my Virgin Treasure, for Glass,
Bells, and Bawbles.


Aunt. I don't know what you mean by Glass, Bells, and Bawbles. But I am sure we
made his Pocket bleed good full substantial Guinneas. And he would have come
deeper if you had had sense enough to have managed his humor and not been too
forward and coming. Madam it is the wisest way to strike your fortune while the
Iron's hot, and not let his affection cool for want of your Complacence. I am
sure I made a good bargain for you, if you had had Grace or known how to have
managed and improved it.


Leo. Thy arts and insinuations have misled me, and made me the most despicable
and infamous of all Creatures, for which I curse thee and hate my self, and
hope Death will are long put an end to my misery. Exit Leonora.


Aunt. Well this is nothing but a Flatus of the Hipocondraick, a Hurrican of
Passion that will quickly blow over: her necessity will make her Strike sail to
her old Lover while I make advances to ensnare the young one, he is a fine
delicate well shaped person, and I effect him strangely. Ah! those charming deu
eux they are most lusciously ingageing. And why may not I like a lucky Bowler
Strike out my young Mistress and lodge in her place; or at least in the way of
preferment. She has so glutted and palled his appetite with her repeated
fulsome kindness, while wisdom should keep them hungry to prize loves Banquet,
all honey moons soon cloy with the repeated treat, Chapon boulie, (as the
French Proverb says) is not always welcome. I have seen a horse up to the eyes
in fresh pasture, break through a dangerous hedge for worse. I love such a
rambler that in his return like a springtide covets all: a fresh Countenance
gives fresh Courage to the Encounter. Exit.


SCENE, the Park. Enter Frank Fox. Fr. This young widow Friendly's Sister, is
a most Beautiful delicious Creature, in the Blossom of her youth and much
improved since I saw her, of a most noble, proper, charming Shape and Mein: And
like a Mellon just ready, of an inviting Eye, an engaging Face; Composed with
all Modesty: That while it stays you to Gaze an admire; it proudly bids you
keep your awefull Distance? If her reservedness would admit of a lighter
Mixture of Humor like that Free, Airy, Sharp Poynant Conversation of my Masked
Mistress: She would be unparalleled. But what if this Park Lady should prove no
Sham of the Bristoll Rock, but a real Diamond of a Considerable Charact. Then
She will outweigh all Competition: These two Load-Stones do so strongly
Attract my Heart. That (like Mahomets Iron-Coffin) I am poys'd and supported in
the Air between Both: I wish Fate would quickly decide my Fortune. For now I am
too rich in Imagination.

Enter Lady Wary. Oh madam you are come luckily to decide the Controversy!


La. I find you alone! how can you differ with your self? But however you
appeal to a very weak Judge.


Fr. I know your Honor; and cannot doubt, you will be Biased by Interest:
Madam you have shown your self a Prophetess: For it is fallen out just as you
foretold. I dined this day with a Rich, young Widow, just come to Town.
Handsome to a Miracle, with all the freshness of the Country Air in her Face:
and as Beautiful as a Rose newly blown: If your Idea had not worked strongly in
my mind, and retained me in due Obedience, I had professed my self her Lover
and Adorer.


La. I am like to have a hopeful Servant of you, that are always provided with
a Dispensing power in your Sleeve, against all former engagements, and
obligations: If your inconstancy should have left my poor Heart in the Lurch
after you had fooled it, into a paradise of Fancies. I should have been in a
fine Condition.


Fr. If her Beauty Conquers, and leads me Captive, How can I resist or help it.
You ought in time to Discover your Charming Face, and reclaim my wavering
Heart: For Adoration which only dwells in an Airy vest of Contemplation, will
quickly vanish; without it be fixed upon some outward visible Object: Fancy is
but a Camelion-Diet, and cannot support it self, without some fit matter to
prey upon. How can I confirm my allegiance to you, that it is possible owes it
already to another.


La. For that you have my word already. And I have more reason to suspect your
promise. Come tell me truly: Did you not Court this fair young Widow?


Fr. No faith: not at all. But I was civil as became my Respects to her
Quality!


La. Did you not say some fine charming thing, which won upon her? tell the
Truth upon Honor and I Will forgive you.


Fr. I rather believe she thought me an insensible Blockhead, that had so
little to say on so fair a subject and occasion; and so kind and gracious
Invitation! Well Madam, if you know any Impediment, why I cannot be Successful
in my Addresses to you? It would be Infinitely kind to discharge me, ere I
Engage my heart too far; which will oblige me in honor never to retreat on
foot, but push on Victory, by most furious attacks, Mines, and Countermines!
And studdy Stratagems of war to bring you to a speedy Surrender!


La. You think I am a very faint-hearted Warrior to talk of Capitulation.
Before you have drawn down your great Guns, or Mounted your standing Battery.


Fr. I am at present a Soldier of Fortune, quite out of employment, I was born
to be continually in action, but if I should admit a habit of Laziness, it
might corrupt my youth and turn to a Disease.


La. There Is no Danger; you that have bin accustomed to these French
Engagements. But Caution should view the ground and provide against a
treacherous Ambush, which has disabled many from future Service, and take care
to make you pass a Quarentine of health: before admitted to so dangerous
Conversation: And if once I discover your fickle Temper, that cannot defer your
prying Curiosity a moment, I shall be glad I have so soon found out your
humor, and will not envy my Country Rival, such a Conquest, detesting that
ungrateful man, that could so easily forget his promise, and engagements:
Without pride, or Vanity, I can boast my self, her Equal in Fortune, my
Reputation without a Blemish -- And for my Face, I must leave it to Judgment.
Though if my Glass and Friends have not Flattered me, it may pass muster. I do
not desire to be hunted by pretenders: I hate the persecution of such Fops: yet
doubt not, but my Eyes have Luster and Vigor enough to warm one single heart,
and make my self happy in his only Friendship: For your further pretentions, I
resign 'em wholly to your own Dispose.


Fr. Madam, I entirely submit till your pleasure shall remove that Cloud that
Eclipses your brighter Beams. Nor will I sawcily enquire a Reason.


She gives him her hand. La. Well Sir your pardon's Sealed and meet me here to
morrow. kisses her hand.
Then I Will unveile this Curtain to your sight,
And Clear all doubts before to Morrow Hight. Exeunt.

SCENE, Covent Garden. Enter Plot Scardevil and Fulham, the two last disguised.
Plot. All things are now agreed and Settled you have your full Instructions


Scar. I Will warrant ye we wont fail a tittle in the Execution.


Full. This Plot is so well laid it cannot miss.


Scar. We want our chief Ingineer, young Fox.


Plot. He Will meet us on the Spot, Sir Worldly stays within expecting the Coach
from Sir Noisy. All things are fixed -- Gentlemen, I doubt not you come here to
serve your Friend with Secresy and Caution. There needs no Scruple, since all
care is taken none but our selves are privy. You Scaredevil shall take the
reigns of Government, and in a feigned shape and voice deliver your Message to
Sir Worldly --


Scar. I Will do it, I have long since been versed in the Coachmans art for the
sake of a fair Mistress I enjoyed under that disguise.


Plot. I Will see him in the Coach, then haste in my disguise to play the Ruffin.


Scar. Every man to his Post -- away -- Smaks his whip. Exeunt.


SCENE, the Chamber. Enter Aunt. Aunt. I expect my Nieces Gallant here every
moment, and I will try my utmost art to captivate, his fancy in the mean while.
I Will practice ore my Ayrs, and postures.

She pulls out her Glass, makes faces and practices in it. That Smile was very
taking and becoming --

That Glance was sharp and killing -- Just like an arrow from a Parthian Bow --

That Rolling eye Surveys all at one Motion, and Cries have at you all --

That enticing damnable Leer, is most engaging, and serves to fly a Lover to a
Mark --

That grave affected look with the feigned accent of the Voice, is ravishing --

Those Languishing Eyes inchant a heart --

But when you would Inspire and shoot the Spirit of Love, then Ogle him thus --
Steadfastly -- look babys in his eyes, fetch a deep sigh, and gripe his hand;
Then leave and gaze upon him, and say some fine soft thing, or use some toyish
wagish Action -- thus --

That Palpitation of the breast is moving --

When a witty Smutty jest is broke that admits a double construction, Cover
your Face with your Fan, stifle a laugh as forced by the Conceit --

So much for this time. --

puts up her Glass. But this Dress does not set off --

The nasty vapors of this Dunghill Town, darkens my Complexion into a languid
paleness, and then it is just to waken the Roses -- But nasty whitewash stinks
like the Devil Foh -- If I miss him now, I Will to his levy to morrow, and try if
I can rouse him to honorable Satisfaction.

Exit.
Enter Fra. Plot, Scar. and Fulham. in a lone house. Scar. We have secured the
old Lion fast in the Toil, and threatened him sufficient with the Bowstring,
and will leave the rest to your own management. If there be occasion you will
find us at the Rose. We make no Articles with you who have already redeemed us:
but leave it frankly to your own discretion.


Fr. For this Jobb, I Will secure you each a hundred. And if the Match with the
Knight take, one hundred more.


Full. We hope for a good Market with him before we have done.


Fr. We are your fellow laborers, and one hand must wash an other We expect
but 500 l. ready, which we know where to take in a Casting net. For Bonds and
Bills they are a Chip in Porridge.


Scar. Well, Speed the Plow Gentlemen. Exeunt Scar. and Full.


Fr. Now we have secured him to our sole management in this Lone new-Built
unfurnished house, far enough from all neighbors: Put the matter home to him
in your feigned hollow Counterfeit voice, make him Dispatch the order for the
thousand Guinneas: I know his strong Box will bleed that Sum. Which will do my
Business, without smoke or further trouble, and redeem all.


Plot. I would have you appear in their two several shapes: It will Terrify the
more, as if they were present: I have already Given him the proposal: Are you
secure of our two Friends the Co-operators?


Fr. I have known 'em sufficiently: Neither of 'em, but would suffer the Rack,
ere they would reveal a Syllable, if they should Think of muttering a word,
they would betray themselves to no purpose: And be whooted like Owls into the
wild Desert. I have known some of them trusted with money, would have given the
slip; but I never knew any of 'em betray the life of a Friend, That were to
dishonor themselves and starve. These are a sort of Bravo's, that never leave
their Engagement unperform'd; And fear neither man nor Devil: But religiously
keep their words to a Tittle: And support themselves on that sort of
Reputation: And never Boggle through fear, but are stanch to in the main.


Plot We Will in and see how the physic works with the old man. Exeunt.


The SCENE, draws and discovers Sir Worldly bound in a Chair. in the house. Sir
Worl. What cursed luck have I had, to be Trappan'd and picked up for Hawks
meat, and forced to this unreasonable Composition of a thousand Guinneas for my
Discharge, or loose my Life, and leave my whole estate a windfall to my
Ungracious Son? Well, I am the willinger to comply, because it satisfies me, He
had no hand in it: He might Draw the knot and secure it all to himself at once
-- There is no trifling with Destiny. I must send to Plot to pay the money out
of my Scrutore -- But this must be accomplished ere I can have my Liberty -- I
am fast in the Trap, and a man will hazard all to save his Life. Knocks on the
Table. Re-enter Fr. and Plot disguised Well Gentlemen I have considered on your
unreasonable proposal! And if I could find a way to raise the money: what
Caution can you give me for my freedom?


Plot. We are Men of Honor, and live by keeping our words: you having done
your part, shall immediately be set at Liberty: Dispatch -- your life depends
upon your Resolution. Do not Trifle when all is at Stake, we'd rather have your
money then your blood. But one of 'em, we have Sworn to take within this hour.


Sir Worcester. I Will write, where it shall be complied with, and send my Key and a
Token: Give me Pen and Ink.


Plot. Here Sir, Write Effectually, for your own sake: that we may have no
further trouble.


Sir Worcester. I will.


Plot then we will conduct you hood-winked from this place, and leave you free in
the open field.


The SCENE shuts and changes to the Rose Tavern. Enter Sir Noisy, Scaredevil,
Fulham. Sir Nois. Welcome my Brace of Worthies Castor and Pollux: where both
shine bright and fair, no storm can hurt: Welcome my Bullies of the Land and
Sea: now you have changed your Hues and Shapes, you smell no more of Gunpowder,
He of Tar; Here Is to the brave Youths are gone to serve the French abroad: They
have Culled and stripped the Root and Branch of Covent Garden: for their
Service; and made a Nosegay of those Rank weeds: I wish some of our old
Scowerers here: The Watch and Beadles finding our forces weak, begin to insult:
And drive us to our Trenches!


Scar. You shall Command us Sir to Scower these rusty Halberts from the Parade:
And fix our Standard up in Triumph!


Sir Nois. My noble Friends! and hardy men of mettle, I shall be proud to join
in the Detachment: Here Is to the Mistresses of our young Warriors: whether they
tread the Stage, or mewed up Close, secured with Lock and key, till the return
of their loved Paramours, That they may meet 'em with Limbs safe and Sound, by
no French hurt Disabled from performance.


Scar. To you the Ladies Sir are much beholding: who comfort them in absence of
their Friends: Their not so dull, but they return your kindness.


Sir Nois. My Thoughts are only fixed on noble Game. And scorn the abject offer
of the Stage: or Herd of Trading Mercenary Misses; I have enjoyed where Peers
have missed their Aim.

Oh! There Is a Difference* twixt brisk noble Blood
And the Dull offspring of the Dunghill Brood.

Full. But we who claim our Birth from humble Shrubs may Sport under the shadow
of the Cedar, and sometimes hope to get a happy wind-fall.


Scar. Here is a high health to every worthy Lady disdaining to debar her noble
Person: to the Embrace of any but her equal: In Merit, Birth, and rich
accomplishments.


Sir Nois. Agreed, and to those noble Courteous Ladies love a good turn when
it is Discreetly offered: who wipe their mouth and say no harm is done; How I
despise the base and Common Game: Wild-foul and Venison in the Blood takes me.


Scar. I am for a frollick too and would venture hard for a dainty Bit: But if
a man is once taken within the forbidden purleius of the Law: He often pays
more then his Skin is worth for his Ransom; I am not for breaking into great
men's enclosures: Coursing these Fera Nature. These open Diversions of the
Field, is lawful; without running the hazard of breaking ones neck into one of
these dangerous pit-falls, which I avoid and detest: Deer that run Wild in the
Forest show more-sport, and are better Breathed, then what is Cooped up within
a Narrow Pale, or pinfold. It Is not the meat. but it is the stomach got by
Exercise makes the pleasure of Eating: A clean Country Lass worked up into good
humuur shows more Diversion, then the proud Stall-fed Lady of the Court: Who
will make you wait her leisure! while she is pleasing her self with some smooth
Page or some such insignificant Utensill.


Sir. Nois. Every man to his Delight, and Pleasure; one man's fancy must not be
a Rule or Guide to sway others Judgment: And Gentlemen Here Is to your Cheap
Diversion with your next well breathed Country Milk-Maid.


laughs and drinks. Scar. With all my heart: Why Sir, do you think the
Blessings of nature are the less to be valued for being cheap, and common? The
Sun, who is the light and life of the World; And the common Air wherein we
breath, cost us nothing, yet chiefly to be valued above All other Enjoyments:
without which we cannot subsist one moment! It Is our Folly often pays
extravagant dear, for these unnescessary Delights.


Full. Let Us wave this Argument, and not wear it thread bare and while we have
ease and leisure value our own happynes, indulging our selves under our Vines
and figtrees at the Fountain head the Rose, Crowned with a Nosegay of rare
Wines, Choice Music and the bright Sparkling Eyes of the kind Damosells,
rather then be sows'd and Pickled in a Storm for Months together, without hopes
of seeing Land: Eating Sea-beefe and biscuit, with many a cold gulp of stinking
Water, mixed with Beveredge for Consolation.


Scar. Or to be house'd, and case'd up in Canvas in the Camp, sweating in the
Summer like a hot-house: Or after a hard tedious March for want of the Baggage
stretch on the cold ground without a Canopy, and wake in the Morning with our
limbs frozen like a dish-clout. A Country Tapster with his Lasses about him,
leads a life like the Grand Seignior in his Seraglio.


Sir Nois. It makes me sigh at my misfortune, that I whom the World must own
for so eminent a Virtuoso, so well read in Men and Manners, so great a
Philosopher, Mathematition, Astrologer, Lawyer, States men, Painter, Architect
and so able a Casuist: I might have out rivaled the greatest Generals, both by
Sea and Land: had not the Inchantin of the Ladys stopped me in the Careire of my
Honorable designs.


Full. Their softness often disarmes the bravest Spirits, and makes them like
Hercules exchange their awful Club for a distaff.


Sir Nois. Ay, this spurs on my Revenge upon both Sexes, for Heaven be thanked
I am not much guilty of good nature that is the blind side of a man. And where
I find a Lady holds a fair unspotted Reputation, I insinuate my self into her
Conversation, and by my confident behavior persuade the world I have a great
Interest in her: and never leave, till I have fixed a Scandal upon her which I
Industriously promote and spread: and this pleases me far better then Beastiall
Enjoyment.


Scar. But this humor may bring Quarrels upon you.


Sir Nois. No not at all: for I can work it in such a sly manner the Fools
never perceive it, or if they do I can forswear at a pinch, or place it upon
some woman that shall be nameless, or upon some great Person shall be past
their finding out: with whom I can play the Pimp or the Parasite, and having
wrought him into a belief of my honesty and sincerity, I easily win on the
unguarded hearts of his nearest Relations, whither Wife, Sister, or Mistress;
(which way my Tallent closely lies) To which purpose I have already qualified
my self with all the Romances extant, whither Greek, Lattine, Italian, French
or Spanish: And write a Billet deux to a Miracle: I can unriddle the most
Occult Cipher: and where a Knotty Case is started, I have a Spirit of wrangling
will never be convinced, and weary them by my Subtle distinctions till I make
them knock under the Table. And if it had not been for my cursed lame Leg at
the University, I had writ a Crittick on all the Classick Authors.


Sca. The World is to sensible of your Prodigious Parts.


Sir Nois. I it is that gives an Alarm to the World and makes them afraid to
trust me, for if I were once brought in to Play they would be glad to Court me.
But now I resolve seriously to apply my self to Business, and have laid the
Scene to be chosen in a Country Town, where I have already drunk up the
Cuckolds, and entertained their Wives at a Ball; who were ravished with my
Dancing, and praised my handsome Foot and Leg I Gad.


Sca. Sir Noisy here is to that; and all the Appurtenances: and that it may
always bear away the Bell. drinks.


Full. He Is drunk already -- ^int the discourse of Box and Dice. aside.


Sca. Sir Noisy you are a great Virtuoso and understand the frail Dye and
Tackle: We are just come over raw, and it would be a great favor if you would
communicate your Knowledge?


Sir Nois. I Will do it with all my heart -- And while the Boy fetches the Dice,
I Will tell you how I bit an old Cavaleir that had been a deep Bubler in his
time; I carried him to my house, and denied him to his Wife, was upon the Hunt
for fear of me: I out watch him and played him Blind, and then managed him at
my one discretion -- Oh here comes the Drawer, sit down and I Will show you
clever management which is not yet divulged -- Pray Gentlemen keep it private
for your own sakes, the Drawer gives him the Box they sit down he throws. how
do you like this? this will pass.


Sca. Most securely -- we will practice it at more leisure, this will win a
mint of Money.


Full. Here we have the Tower of London to a Turnep. Here Is your health.


Sca. He begins to Totter, souse him deep with the other Bumper.


[ gives Sir Noisy the glass, who lets it fall and sinks down in the Chair.]
Full. This last pull has overset the Bell -- he is now grown past the Knowledge
of Box and Dice.


Sca. No matter let us rattle the Box and Dice a while to put off, and Quarrel
as at deep play -- Come Sir Noisy set deep -- keep the door shut and it will
prove the same thing.


Full. But he is fast a sleep how shall we win the Money.


Sca. That we have done already by dint of Drinking, let me alone to face him
down we did it fairly -- I Am sure he never dares to contradict it -- Now
Fulham speak in thy heart if this is not as fair away as thy false Dice -- come
let us be impudent and share it before his Face, it is something above fourscore
Guinneas, there is forty for you -- the rest I Will be Accomptable for -- knocks.
Enter Drawer. what is to pay? --


Draw. I Will fetch a Bill --


Full. You ought to pay Sir, you have stripped Sir Noisy and my self.


Re-enter Drawer. Scar. This was a Lucky hand -- whats's a Clock Drawer?


Draw. It Is now just Three?


Scar. There Is your Bill, and a Guinnea for your waiting: Dispose Sir Noisy on
a Bed within, while we chastise our Bodies on the Chairs till morning. The
Scene shuts.


SCENE, Sir Worldly's House. Enter Sir Worldly and Plot. Sir Worcester. Did you pay
the one thousand Guinneas I ordered you by Note?


Plot. I did Sir, and here is your Keys.


Sir Worcester. It Is well.


Plot. A Woman waits to speak with you without.


Sir Worcester. Send her in -- To what end should I discompose my self, and pull off
the Remainder of my hair for madness: As if my Baldness could recompense my
Loss? No, I Will digest it calmly: And set it down as a punishment for my Sins
and Folly, and bar the Door against a further mischief.


Enter his Woman. Wom. Sir I come to wait upon you, according to my Duty, and
acquaint you I have found some great Disorders at your house. I have observed a
young Gentleman frequent it, and privately admitted, and dressed Suppers, of
which I fancied he eat part. Yesterday my young Lady came home in man's Clothes
with another Lady; And other persons, now frequent the house. Her Aunt tricks
her self up like a Lady, Painted, Perfumed and Patched.


Sir Worcester. For me to ask a reason, would but betray my weakness unto their Shams
and Follies: I Will pry into the matter, and resolve my self. If She proves
false: I Will hate my self, and quite forsake all Women's Conversation. aside. To
morrow about Eight I will disguise my self in the habit of a Seaman: And steal
out of my back Door: And visit you as your Brother, just come from Sea, by that
means, I undiscerned; shall discover all: Here, take this Guinnea for your
Diligence, and wait me at home -- Exeunt.


Plot. I wonder to see him bear the Loss of his money so patiently! But he is a
Philosopher! I have overheard all their Discourse, and this new Design; which I
must prevent, or Sir Noisy's Marriage with the Neice will miscarry [Studies] I
have it -- Fullham and some of the Tars shall press him as a Seaman on Board.
And there secure him till the Business is over; It shall be so, I Will presently
about it.

Since the old Fox resolves to undermine
My Counterplot Shall Baffle his Design. Ex.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
SCENE, The Rose-Tavern; discovers Scaredevil, and Fulham asleep on the
Chaires. Scar. wakes and rises. Scar. THis hard lodging makes a man woundy
amorous, I wish fortune would obliege me a kind Mistress next my heart, I would
so welcome her; but time will provide all things for the accommodation of the
Industrous -- [Knocks] Come Fullham shake your ears, and rise you Sluggard; you
see the morning Smiles and promises a lucky day.


Full. Prithee do not wake me from my pleasant dream.


Scar. Arise you slugard, for we have money now, to turn idle dreams into real
Enjoyments. Enter Drawer. Is Sir Noisy awake.


Draw. This alarm has roused him. I Will up and see what he wants.


Scar Do, and get us a cold Tankard of Rambowse, and we will have a further
Consideration of your diligence.


Draw. Sir, I fly to serve you. Exit Draw.


Scar. What think you if we dash the Tankard with a lusty dram of Cool Nantz?
'twill raise his mettle, keep up his Spirits, and make the Match we design, go
down the Glibber.


Full. Well thought on. I Will send a Porter for a Pint, and prime it in an
instant.


Enter Sir Noisy. Scar. Sir Noisy, how did your Champaigne work with you last
night?


Sir Nois. It proved stronger then I imagined and makes me spit Cobwebs this
Morning.


Full. What was in your mind to propose play, I lost my stock out of pure
complaisance. This Blundering Scaredevil has run a stock by that means; pox out
I have deerly welcomed him on Shore.


Scar. Yes faith; Chance has been kinder to me then was her Custom, and I hope
this glimps of fortune, would prove a lucky omen to my future undertakings. I
never saw Sir Noisy so eagar of Play. At first he run deep into my stock. But I
rallied and routed him horse and foot, and brought off his Watch for a Trophy
at ten Guinneas.


Enter Drawer with the Tankard. Sir Nois. Sirrah! Did I play last night?


Draw. Yes Sir I heard the Box and Dice at work a long time.


Sir Nois. Well it is no great Matter, 'twas only the money I picked up at the
ordinary, and for my watch I Will pay you the ten Guinneas upon demand.


Scar. Your word's sufficient -- is the Tankard ready.


Full. It Is Cocked and Prim'd.


Scar. Sir Noisy here is your health -- about with it Fullham.


Full. I, here is some virtue in this, it is good to restore and comfort the noble
parts.


Sir. Nois. Give me the Tankard, I Will take a lusty draught who would not be
drunk over night for the satisfaction of a cool Mornings draught? Oh how it
hizes as it goes down, but I Will have the other bout.


Full. I Will warrant you this will put you in good humor. Oh for a kind wench to
rub us down after this hard exercise.


Sir Nois. No, my thoughts are Elevated above so vile a Contemplation, they are
but trash and rubbish: I have found out a Constellation of most transcendent
Beauties, it is but looking out sharp and you may Compass a Duchess, as soon as
an orange-wench: But you must take greater Caution least it be smoked: Quality
invites with a greater life and Gustoe. I have lately enjoyed a Beauty of Women
of the highest Rank and degree.


Full. Now it begins to work. aside.


Scar. You carry the Matter very sliely and like White Powder hit the mark
without Noise. You are no open Courtier, no haunter of the Playhouse, or
Drawing Room; what Art have you to bring these Ladies to the Lu^e, of sure you
must walk in an invisible Cloak.


Sir Nois. When I meet the ravishing Beauties in the Mall, Basset-Table, or
elsewhere: I make no application in Public, because of the niceness of their
Reputation, but I fly them to a mark with my eye, and by the help of a female
friend clap Salt on their Tail, and the business is done. For they are easily
persuaded to meet so able a performer, one that can give so ample satisfaction.
My name's up I gad, and now I may ly abed and have Chamber practice more then I
can turn my hand to.


Full. Doubtless all the world is sensible of your great abilities.


Scar. We will petition, to be taken in as assistants and Coadjuters in the
School of Venus.


Sir Nois. Quality is too Nice to admit of Rivalls, it is a Jewel of value,
and must not be Sullied with profane hands. There is a pleasure, and a Gustoe
in it, delights nice and generous Pallats; and what would a man baulk for his
Pleasures and delight. I have known a Bully supported by a chance hit, disdain
all Butchers meat: longing for the most delicious Bits, and the choicest Wines,
indulging himself in all voluptiousness: present largely to a Mistress: As if
his small, and only stock, would hatch and breed in his Breeches, like
Fortunatus his purse. I have seen another beg or borrow half a Crown to treat
himself with a bon-Christian-Pare, though he had not wherewith left to satisfy
his hunger at the three-penny Ordinary. Another that his left whole stock a
Crown as earnest, for a Dog-fish, went home and pawned the rest of his Equipage
to furnish out the Treat. Costa que Costa I am resolved to indulge my self.
Plot peeps in. What makes you here Plot.


Plot. I am come to find out my young Master Fox, I have a writing for him to
Seal, and the Parties stay in the next Room. I thought he had been here.


Scar. Plot here is Sir Noisy's good health.


Plot. Sir your good health. -- Ah Sir I wish you were provided of so good a
fortune as Young Mr. Fox is like to have. He is forthwith to marry a rich
Merchants Daughter worth Threescore thousand pounds; I saw the young Girl, she
is now about Seventeen: But bred up with so much foolish Modesty and Innocence,
she curtsy'd to the footman carried the writings. Her Aunt told her he was a
Servant, she blushed and replied, she took him for some noble Person by his
Laced Coat, I was ashamed to see so much Beauty so strangely bred.


Sir Nois. What writings are they.


Plot. Here young Fox Covenants, that in Consideration of her Aunts care and
pains, in her no breeding her Neice; to give her one hundred pounds for her
life, for which she sells and delivers her said Neice. So Subtle Sir Worldly
marrys his Son without a Penny expense, and it is possible the old Fox will
cheat him of his ready money into the Bargain. But I must in and wait for his
coming. Exit Plot.


Scar. Sir Noisy. It would be a pleasant Jest, If you should give over the
pursuit of Sir Worldly's Daughter, and snap up this rich Prize; carry her down
into the Country and breed her up to your own likeing.


Sir Nois. I should say more, if I were secure of her fortune.


Scar. Plot's your Creature, he can tell you all: But if he joins with you, he
must run the risk of being turned out of Sir Worldlys Service, if you make him
your Steward, he will have no cause to repent: It Is all one to the Aunt who has
her, so she may be secure of the hundred pounds a year; it is but altering the
name: Plot will bring it about.


Sir. Nois. But that may breed ill blood between Frank and me.


Scar. If you clap it up of a sudden, none will concern himself for a Woman
that you have already enjoyed; besides you may say it was Plots device and you
know nothing of his concern in the matter.


Sir Nois. Well I Will in and consult with Plot, if I find it feasible I Will
Squeese wax in Fox's place, and go through stitch. Exit.


Scar. This Fool will be bubbl'd in spite of our teeth and therefore it is
reasonable we should share in the purchase.


Full. Our last Job past cleverly upon him, and I fancy he thinks he really lost
his money.


Scar. I know I could easily persuade him. Exeunt.


Lady meeting Clarinda in her Apartment. La. Welcome my dearest, and my bosom
friend,
Our breeding, and our Constant Education,
Has formed our love and humor to the same;
Like two kind Twins each others Counterpart.

Clar. Few know the Joy and comfort of a friend,
Dividing Grief, that it is scarce perceived;
And makes the floods of Joy come double on us,
Washing away all Sorrow.
We were adopted Sisters from our Childhood,
Till riper years united us to friendship.

La. A secret Sympathy appeared in both,
As if one Soul informed our several Bodies,
We writ, we speak, we thought like one another.
Endeavoring to improve each others fancys.

Clar. Your riper Genius, had the mastring Power,
On whom mine waited as a weak desciple,
And like an echo made a faint return:
Like our two Lutes tuned to an equal pitch
When yours was struck, mine made a trembling motion;
And gave a dumb consent.
When cruel Fate did for some time divorce us
We kept the Vestall fire of love alive
Like a Recluse I sat and mused alone
And on your bright Idea did Contemplate.
Our hearts the Epitomy of natures Book
In which we read all with a running look.
To Cultivate man's wit they plant and Toil,
Which of their accord shoot in your happyer Soil.

La. Madam your kindness puts to great a value,
Upon that Spirit, I but Copy from you,
Your witty Letters of the Town affairs
Mixed with Remark of other serious note
Has raised your worth, and Canonized your fame
Above the admired Sibells of this age.
Among that Troop, my Brother does admire,
Your Wit, your Beauty, and your manly Sense:
Vowing had he lived in the Infant world,
When Dowry and Portion never had a name
But men by Constant Service proved their Love:
His Faith and Duty had over come all Rivalls
And though as yet, he is made no formal tender
His heart being full of love ore flows the bounds.

Clar. My life and friendship are bound up with yours
Like the firm Union of the Steel and Loadstone.
Which move, incline, meet, and embrace each other;
While none discern whence comes the attractive Power.

La. I blush to praise my Brother to my Friend
Whose long acquaintance needs no information:

Clar. Your Brother's Virtue claims respect from all,
Whose Native Gallantry in every action.
Distinguishes his Judgment,
But if my mind stood more indifferent to him
Your sole Command should allways Sway the Balance.

La. I thank you for this Grace: Our faithful friendship,
Is like a league made by our selves defensive
Excluding man, would proudly make us Slaves:
And of a gracious Lord, would prove a Tyrant.
Like Salvage Turks, exclude us heavenly bliss,
To make our Bodies servil to their Pleasures:
But we must stand on our prerogative,
And make them find we still command the reigns,
And steer them as we please.
Should the Brute Annimall once know his strength
In vain we would restrain his headstrong will:
While haughty men, tamely Submit, and wait;
Upon our Pomp, and Ceremonious State;
Present, Lie, Flatter, Weep to make us Sport:
While we at last consent to what we else must Court.

Enter Frank, and Plot. Fra. Plot. I thank you for your Care and vigilence,
otherwise my Dad might have disturbed and Turmoyl'd the whole affair, he must
remain in Limbo till the Marriage with Sir Noisy is fixed, and then redeem him.


Plot. Sir Noisy has concluded and sealed to the Aunt, and is mustering up his
Coach and Equipage to pay his first Visit: if he like her person, he will
instantly marry her.


Fra. 'Twill not be reasonable for me to appear till the Ceremony is past, then
twill be time enough to give them Joy. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Noisy, Fulham, and Aunt, in Leonora 's Apartment. Au. Well Sir Noisy
you have such an engaging, winning way, with you; a Woman can deny you nothing:
But Really Sir Noisy you push this matter on too furiously. You must give the
oor Innocent Girl, some time to prepare her self for so weighty a concern: I
have hitherto kept her so Ignorant she will not guess what you mean by your
adresses.


Sir Nois. I Will crack the Ice of her Virginty, and then carry her down into the
Country instruct there by degrees at more leisure.


Au. Man was designed as the sole Lord and Ruler of all below: And to mould
Woman like wax into what form and shape he pleases when once she has tasted of
the tree in the middle of of the Garden of delight, her Eyes will be enlightened
to know what is what, then she will soon despise the toys and Bawbles she once
admire'd.


Sir Nois. Let me alone to infuse Understanding into her, I am young and
Vigorous.


Au. but that makes me afraid to commit her into your hands, she is green and
tender and must not be handled to roughly: But since you resolve to bring her
Maidenhead to the block: make her drink a hearty Glass of Wine, and tell her
it is part of the Ceremony, it will raise her mettle encourage her Spirits, and
make her suffer with less apprehension.


Sir Nois. I Will warrant you madam I will pursue your instructions.


Au. I doubt not but it will be infinitely for your satisfaction. Exit Au.


Sir Nois. I long to see this pretty Charming Creature.


Full. Plot says she is very handsome and doubtless will engage your fancy: for her
being Country bred (as it goes in the World) it is a great happyness. Your
Polite conversation will instruct her in her duty perfectly according to your
own mind and humor.


Enter Aunt, and Neice in her hand dressed like a Girl. Au. Come in Child, hold
up your head thus fashioned -- so -- when was your Dancing Master here?


Leo. Yesterday forsooth.


Au. Very well Child -- make this Gen^leman a low Curtsy -- Child this
Gentleman is a worthy Knight, that your Uncle has sent hither for your Husband.
You must bid him welcome. Sir Noisy salutes her.


Leo. Oh Lord foorsooth Aunt his Face feels as rough as a Nutmeg grater.


Au. But he can wipe it away with a washball, and make it as smooth as a
Bowling Green.


Sir Nois. Mistress I am come to Court you for my Wife.


Leo. You are welcome as my Aunt prayed me to tell you.


Au. Well Child this Noble Knight is come to make you his Lady.


Leo. Oh Lord! Aunt forsooth what is that.


Au. He will lead you to a man in black, there you must say some words join
hands, and be married; and then you must lie in a Bed together.


Leo. Oh Lord! forsooth I shall be ashamed to lie with any Body but you:


Au. But now I must lie with this Gentleman. pointing to Fulham. And you must
leave me, and lie with this noble Knight: and he will Court you, and say
obliging things, and look Babyes in your Eyes, and present you with fine rich
costly Jewels all Sparkling like the Stars in a a frosty Night, and you must
ride up and down with him in a Coach and Six Horses, with Pages with Hats and
Feathers and laced Coats, and go as fine as hands and Pins can make you, and
live in Ihe Country in a great house as big as half this Town.


Leo. Oh dear that will be very fine, but will he be as good as his word?


Sir Nois. That I will, if you will kiss and Love me.


Leo. I Will do my best Sir.


Sir Nois. And I hope to please you better before you and I part.


kisses her. Leo. I vow Aunt he takes away my breath.


Au. But now you are his, he may take a greater Liberty; and you are bound to
do as he would have you.


Leo. Nay I vow he makes me ashamed.


Sir Nois. My Dear! you must go with me to be Married.


Leo. My Dear! that is a fine Honey Sugar Candy word, you may carry me where you
please.


Sir Nois. Well I would not have believed a pretty Woman could have been
brought up in such Ignorance: Yet I perceive in her some Glimmering of
Knowledge: I doubt not but I shall quickly improve her Fancy. kisses her
roughly.


Exeunt, The SCENE Changes to a Ship. Enter Master, Mate, their Wives and other
Seamen. Mas. Come my Lads, let us Crown the Table in the Dutch Fashion, that
we like Ducks in warm weather may kiss and tipple our fills. In this vast Punch
Bole is contained Celestial Liquor: It Is all Prise Brandy and as true as ever
came from Nantz. Guard the Bowl Boy, least a high Sea should overset it.


Mate. There is no danger of smooth Water in the Thames. But I perceive Master
you are already half Seas over.


Mas. But Drunk or sober Mate, I know my business. Place your selves Doxyes.
You love to sit admiring the reflection of your Beauty in the Punch Bowl.
Here Is your health. drinks.


Wife. We return you the thanks of the Table: and we doubt not to match a
Rowland to your Oliver.


Mas. Coxon, what Pressed men have you brought, let them appear and muster before
the Women, that they may Pick and Choose.


Wife. Thou art a lying Knave, thou had rather the bread should moldy on my
hands, then I should spare a bit for Charitable uses.


Mas. Thine was a cut loaf, and therefore I did not expect the kissing crust:
but I think I had best to lock it up and put you to short Allowance.


Wife. Where every man carrys a picklock about him how can you secure it,
except I stand Centry.


Mas. I wish I were the richest Cuckold that ever trod the Exchange.


Wife. I doubt not that would advance your Fortune, as high as Cuckolds point.


Mas. I hate these sculking Rogues that hide themselves from the Kings Service.


Mate. It Is a base quallity, but they have generally a tenderness for life and
would avoid broken Bones; since they can get better pay in a Merchant man or a
Collier.


Mas. For my part I always cry neck or nothing, the King loves no Cripples.


Coxon, brings in the Pressed men, and with them Sir Worldly disguised. Cox. This
Rogue to save his Bacon lodged in a Conduit upon straw.


Mas. If such a cold Lodging agrees with his Constitution he shall have no
Punch to warm it, but you may give him a kick to stir his Blood.


Cox. This great He-Whore, I found in Essex at harvest in Petticoats; his
fellow laborers the wenches, were loath to part with their freehold, having
found the sweetness of his Temper. One Jayd hung about him like the Jackanapes
on the horse, at the Bear-garden; But would not for the delights of her body
venture her Carcass on board. This Rogue, I found with a wench just going to be
married. She down of her knees that the Ceremony might proceed, that the parish
might have tittle to keep the next Bastard. I had patience till the Job was
over, drove him on board, and Consummated my self. This fellow a Brickmaker,
was set to me by his Wife in a passion: But when she found he was going, she
would have pawned her Child's whistle to have redeemed her plaything: But he
gave her a kick and bid her look after her kidds, for now the King had made him
free and bid adeiu to his Slavery, resolving he would no longer make brick
without Straw.


Mas. Here Sirrah here is a cup of Punch for your noble resolution. What
fellow's that in the Whiskers -- pointing to Sir Worldly.


Cox. He was taken by our Leiutenant and delivered with Special orders not to
be parted with till he came.


Mas. Then I suppose he knows him for (...) of moment. Make room come sit down
Whiskers.


Sir Worcester. I thank you Sir, better here then among the lousy Seamen.


Mas. You are welcome on board, here is my Leiutenants health in pure Nantz
Brandy as ever was tipped Supernaculum. What does he Scruple it, you must know a
Bumper of Punch is your Garnish on board, and must be paid here as well as in
the Counter, I suppose Brother you can take Charge to the Norward.


Sir Worcester. I beg your pardon, I am a stranger to these matters.


Mas. That wont serve your turn. here is our Captains health.


Sir Worcester. I have a weak head and you must hold me excused


Mas. By that fine expression, I know this fellow is a Land-lubber and I will
take pleasure to use him as such a dog deserves. What Scruple our Captains
health? [Whistles] Toss me up a dozen of hands and lay this Recusant over the
breech of a Gun, and give him a lusty Coptee, and while his breech is warm,
plant him in the Bilbows, there let him be forth coming at the return of my
Leiutenant.


Sir Worcester. Better sit quietly in the Stocks, then be drunk in such Swinish
Company. Exit Sir Worldly and the Crew of Seamen.


Mas. Come let the health pass.


Mate Will a Goose Swim Oh Master what Storms you and I have been in, that was
a blusterer cast us away on the Coast of Holland.


Mas. Pox ont that was but a flea-bite to what I have seen, I have been Tossed on
the Cape of good hope, where at every send of a Sea, I could have touched the
Moon with my finger, and at the next have pulled the devil up by the pate: The
hugest Mountains have looked like Warts, and the Peak of Tenariff like a
Sugar-loafe. In the Dreadnongh, a Thunderbolt split our Main mast, and a flash
of lightning fired me a Pipe of Tobacco, a Sulpherous clowd of fire roul'd
round the deck, and I swept it off with the Swab. The poor Master looked as
pale as a clowt, half dead and frozen with fear. I took the whipstaff out of
his hand and steered her to a Cows thumb. I have been in a storm when to
lighten the Ship we have threw Gold and Silver overboard by Wholesale, as much
as would have ransomed the King God bless him, yet the hard hearted Sea roared
the louder for more: I was more troubled with a fellow came from Rome, that
would have preserved some Agnus dei's, Relics and other precious trinkets,
which he reserved for a London Market, I ordered them to be thrown overboard
together, which presently decided the difference and made it plainly appear his
movables were of less value then his life: I told him when he was on shore he
might find Ingenious Artists would easily repare the damage if he had the grace
to vouch they came from Rome. And so Gentlemen have among you blind harpers.
drinks.


Mate. Our Master would monopolize the trade of lying, but I will put in for my
snack. [aside.] I once Sailed with a grave Spaniard who in a great Storm
invoked the Virgin at Loretta, by the sweetest kindest obliging Saints names
that I expected to have seen her appear, and strokeing his beard with great
gravity, complemented the Sea at such a rate as made the by standers laugh. Oh
thou most mild and Gentle Sea! Oh thou most Noble Rich and Generous Sea! Oh
thou most comely fair swelling Sea! Let us prevale with thee, to aswage thy
mighty billows and become more calm and temperate: Casting away his obliging
expressions on the deaf Boisterous Waves. He vowed to the fair Lady if she
would set him safe on Land, he would light up a torch to her glory bigger then
the Monument in London. I touch him with my elboe to mind him, he was not to
extravagant in his promises. But he whispred me she was a good Lady and if he
once got on dry Ground, she would accept of a farthing Candle in full
satisfaction. The Company was divided into several Caballs, and every one was
devoute in his own way. Some sung Psalms and Hymns: some accosted their
several Saints some were muttering of Spells which they thought more
available, but few or none addressed themselves to him that they were sure had
power to help them.


Mas. Mate you are in a Comicall humor -- Suck your face you Baggage or else
you shall never be welcome to a dram of the Bottle.


Wife. Wherever you hide it, I will never sleep till I have my fill of it.


Mas. Why you Jade do you think I Will make his Majesty's Ketch a Bawdy House.


Wife. What need you scruple that, when it has been done before hand by your
betters.


Mas. How do you know that, you Cocatrice? Scatter no words I say.


Wife. By hearsay my dear.


Mas. Oh it is well your come off, or else honor would have divorced me till
the return of the next Voyage. But if at my coming home after a two years
voyage I find you ready to fall on Sunder, the Parish shall keep its own
Children, but at present I pass by the last Brat.

Here are a sort of Fiddlers aboard, bring them out, and let them rub out their
Guts for my diversion, and let the Rascals sing us a Song, that the Punch may
trole down to some tune. The force of this great Bomb has blown off some of our
Bull dogs, but we will fall on with a new detachment, and sound the bottom ere we
part. They sing a Sea Song. This was made by one that understood plain Sailing,
and Ship shape. My deer let some of the inferior women come in and divert us
with a Dance: But let me not see a face that is not drunk as any in the great
Cabin.


Wife Never trouble your self, I Will warrant you they have not been Idle


Mas. Go muster the Buttocks, I make you the Mistress of my Ceremonys, while I
sit here in State, here Cockatrice your health -- I am resolved to get you with
Child this night, and then none can injure my love in my absence.


Wife. And when I have my owners goods on board, I can pick up what Passengers
I please.


Mas. Go to, you are a pert baggage, get them together while I sit here to be
diverted and smoke a pipe.


Enter the Seamen and their Wives dance awkardly as being drunk, and fancying
the hee'les on one side as in a gale of Wind: At the end of the Dance, Enter
the Leiutenant, and Plot. The Bote-swaine whistles and with his Cat of nine
tails drives them all of the Stage. The Lieutenant brings back the Masters
Wife. Lieu. I have some Friends to come on Board and design to treat them
chere-intier, and now you are to drunk for Business.


Wife. I Will warrant you Sir, I can mind the main chance I will instantly on
shore, and and summon in all the young Jolly handsome Seamens Wives that do all
for Love.


Lieu. Let them be Young and sound, and no man on our part shall engage, till
he has passed your examination and has allowed him practick. If you put one
rotten Egg upon us, we will see you keele-hald for our diversion.


Wife. If I deceive you I Am ready to undergo that discipline. Exit.


Lieu. Sir I have ordered your Prest-man to be delivered you. to Plot.


Plot. I thank you Sir, and am your humble Servant. Exeunt.


Enter Aunt. Au. Well they are Married and the Lusty Knight will to bed in a
moment: This sort of diversion puts odd fancy's in my head: And since young Fox
is so full Gorged, he will not stoop to the Lure, I will drive the Nail where
it will go. This Fulham is a lusty handsome propper Fellow. He is rough and
bousterous, and will quickly humble a Woman, without harkening to
Capitulations: Besides he has a great hand with Sir Noisy: and if he and I
should set our Horses together, we could manage him as we please.


Enter Fulham. Full. I just parted with Sir Noisy, and drank a Stirrup cup to
his good Journey, by this time he is mounted.


Au. I Will warrant you are Sorry you are out of Employment?


Full. That might quickly be if you pleased. It Is merry in the Hall, when Beards
wag all; You look too Charming for an Aunt I should have taken you for a Maid.


Au. Sure you think Ten years between my Neice, and me; has wrought strange
alterations.


Full. Your Beauty like the purest Gold often tried
Does from Loves Furnace rise more puryfy'd:
While Youth is mixed with follys gross allay
Without some granes will never pass in pay.
Like fresh green wood averse unto Loves fire,
By slow degrees is warmed into desire;
Whereas as the Jolly well experienced Dame,
Pays Love for Love and Triumphs in the Flame.
Youth like the Dog Star burns beneath the Line,
While riper Years make a more temperate Clime.
And like new Wine inrages boiling Blood,
But when grown fine by Age, grows safe and good.

Au. Your Reason is very Powerful and I am charmed with your Conversation: Your
so like my first dear Love, that I am ravished with your Company.


Full. my heart is inflamed with your Beauty: this fair opportunity makes a
Theif, and I am to blame if I do not plunder a kiss. kisses her.


Au. You cannot Robb another of what she is willing to bestow: I look on you as
Sir Noisy's Friend, and therefore may safely commit my Honor into your hands;
and I know you Scorn to take this opportunity to be rude.


Full. Not except you force me to it.


Au. Force me then I defy you.


Full. So I thought. aside.


Au. But I would have you to know, I have hitherto lived in the World without
Scandal: and will spit in any man's Face will offer an unhandsome thing to me.


Full. Then you are welcome to spit in mine, for I must make bold.


Au. Nay do not be uncivil I charge you in the Kings Name, If you should force
me I can hang you.


Full. That would be but an unkind return to one that vows your service, but if
it must be come doleful Death. kisses her.


Au. I see by your Eyes you have some wicked design upon my Honor, but I will
not stir one Foot into the next room.


[Kisses her and lays hand of the Chain about her Neck.] Full. Nay hold, now I
have you fast by the Chain you shall go, and if you force me to break it, I Will
carry it to the Tavern and melt it down for Consolation.


Au. Why you treacherous Villain! you will not make use of this advantage to
robb me of my Honor? Well I vow I Will be revenged.


Full. If I do not please you, hang me and spare not.


Au. Well let the Stars bear witness I am Innocent of this Folly, forced like
an Ox to the Slaughter, and hamper*d like a Bird in a snare. And now I defy
your baseness -- do your worst.


Full. So I will in an honorable way.


Au. Nay I vow I Will cry out. Sir Noisy, Sir Noisy, Sir Noisy. I am quite spent
with Straining my Voice, Oh! thou base Fellow! I Will bawl so loud the Neighbors
shall here me, except you stop my mouth with your handkerchief.


Full. I gad and that was well thought off. puts his handkercheif in her mouth*
Now I think I have secured all and can command you as a Spider does a fly
engaged in her Cobwebb. Come along Lady. [she holds the handkerchief in her
mouth and cries hum -- hum -- while he drags her off the Stage by the Chain.]


Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT. V.
SCENE, the Park. Enter Lady, and Clarinda. La. I Am well pleased with your
contrivance to free your self from that Impudent pretender Sir Noisy Parrat,
who having got your Fathers Approbation thought to invade and carry you by
right of Conquest. Parents should strive to win our minds, by fair, and gentle
Methods: and not force their Childrens Inclinations like ridged Tyrants.


Cla. But Madam I must beg if he should return to plague me, you will lend your
assistance to laugh him out of Countenance?


La. That I will, and engage if ever he be so audacious to return, we will
drive him out of the Field. But my Friend, it will be reasonable since I so
freely engage in your Quarrel, you should be my confident and assist me. I
have already had two interveiws with your Brother Fox in mask unknown, and by
Chance: entertained him with all Raillery and freedom. The same day he dined
with my Brother and me, I changed the Copy of my countenance and received him
with all gravety, he not guessing I was the Jolly Lady in the Mask: He told me
at my next meeting in the Mask, my face had strangely shaken his Constancy, and
pressed me to discover mine by way of Antidote: But I insisted I expected a
firmer proof of his Constancy and obedience, ere I obliged him so far: and if
he slighted my Conversation he was at liberty to pursue his Conquest upon my
Country Rival: He submitted and vowed fidelity, and I received him into
Favor: If I find him a man of strict honor and Justice, It will sooner take
with me then the sparkling fancys of an airy Wit. And if he has engaged his
Inclinations to the Lady in the Mask when he discovers me to be the same, it
will prove a double Conquest: I will not doubt you can be unfaithful to me for
the sake of a Brother when one of the same Relation has already vowed himself
your Servant. And if I had discovered any unworthy Quality in him I would
acquaint you with it, to avoid his pretensions.


Cla. My heart is now calm and even like a standing water, and I could wish it
would so remain, without the Flux, and Reflux of a passionate tide agitated and
driven at the mercy of the winds; sometimes rising with the floods of Joy,
above the banks of moderation: and afterward discending into the Gulf of
Sorrow and despair. Fortune chains us Women like Prentices, to the will and
humor of our Husbands, who must rise or fall by their care and Management;
while the distracting cares of Families and Children devides our hearts, and
spirits us away into remote and distant Countries and by degrees Supplant that
kindness which at present governs our hearts.


La. The Love I owe my Husband, is a separate duty, and does not interfer with
our Freindship: which like a chain firmly unites our hearts, whereon the least
stroke given, is by both sensibly felt: Then let us twine our weak defenceles
Vines about the arms of two strong Neighboring Oaks, who still shall join in
Freindship to support our Interest, and honnour: against the Canker of all
envious Tongues, where they may flourish to our wishes and still preserve our
Freindship.


Cla. On what a ticklish ground our happyness depends, so many cares distract
our choice, that Laboring fancy sits down unresolved.


La. Then let our Prudence steer the wisest course, and leave the rest to
chance. But hold I perceive my Gallant at a distance bringing your Brother as a
Spy, let us shift our walks they cannot Know our habits and I Will instruct you
further. Exeunt.


Enter Frank, and Freindly. Fra. I beg your pardon I have trayn'd you hither,
where I expect to meet a Lady whose Wit has much engaged me. She brings a
Friend or Servant with her, but keeps her face and Character still in the dark,
and I would beg when you see me accost her, you draw the other Mask aside, and
pump out what you can to clear my doubts of her Condition. I at this interveiw
will fix the Matter or break of further Correspondence, and bring you as a
witness. Had not I been engaged in this blind Business, I had paid homage to
your Sisters Eyes, whose Beauty and reserv'dness charmed me strangly for whom I
own a most profound respect, and cannot make a tender of my Service, while this
Intrigue depends.


Frein. Sir you have reason in your fair proposal. I know my Sisters caution,
has still preserved her Reputation Spotles: my Freindship would not engage her
in a doubtful matter: when you have cleared that point, and shall be
constantly resolved to quit all dangerous rambling: You shall command my best
assistance.


Fra. Your Freindship Sir obliges me -- One of these Ladys by her Stature and
mein should be her I told you of, but altered in her habit. Enter Lady,
Clarinda. Madam your Servant?


La. Oh Servant, I had much ado to be punctual to my word this Lady knows: You
have obliged me with a double favor and brought your Second: this Lady else
had wanted Conversation. Your pardon Sir, while we discourse apart. Clarinda
Curtsys to Freindly they walk off.


Manent Lady and Franck. Fra. The Star Light of your Sparkling Diamonds Madam,
Suite your be nighted Vizour.
Remove that shadow from your shining Orb
And chase the Egyptian darkness from my heart.

La. I once designed this for my Wedding Garb
Resolving then to have cleared every doubt
Making my fortune worthy your acceptance.
But since your Jealousy did not confide
But brought a Friend for a discovery,
I will suspend though not Casheir your hopes:
I know your late Intrigue.
Which now is blasted with an envious Star
And your Adresses to the Country Lady,
But you suspend to make a declaration
Till you can make an estimate of me.
But while divided Interest hunts two Hares,
An accident often chops to miss them both.
And if you will prove a noble generous Lover,
give me your hand, and take me at a Word.

Fra. Though I Am Enchanted with your Wit and Humor,
I dare not make so rash a hood winked Bargain.

La. My hasty proffer puts you to a loss:
But Company draws near to interrupt us,
Let Us change our Walk?

Enter Clarinda and Freindly. Cla. Sir you have infinitely diverted me with your
discourse, and therefore I must beg the favor of your Advice upon some
Circumstances which tend to my disquiet.


Frein. You may command my service.


Cla. I am now upon the stroke of Eighteen, and quite tired out with going to
morning prayers, where I am continually pestred with a troublesome sort of
insects they call Fops, and Beau's; that infest the neighboring Pews, buzzing
about ones Ears, who though they despair of the Body, will studdy to deflower
Reputation. And therefore I judge it convenient (by way of prevention) to marry
out of the way, and having put my Husband into full Possession, let him from
thenceforward take care of it for his own sake. For if these busy Fools should
lay a train to blow up ones good name, it will be difficult to retrive it, or a
Husband, to Justify honor and reputation: and at last be forced to take up
with a sneaking Jealous, one of whom I shall have reason to be ashamed: or
forced to turn Nun and lead Apes in Hell.


Frein. I perceive by your discourse you are in no great likelihood to fit your
self with a Husband ready made, and twill be too late to bespeake one, you must
take your Chance.


Cla. You speak like an Oracle: what think you of a sweet natured easy
Complaisant Person?


Frein. Such a fool were a blessing, many a Lady would have jumpt at
heretofore, and have bidden battle to any would have snapt him out of their
hands. But it was in times of Yore, when abler men were at hand to supply his
place. By this means she secures to her self the sole rule and government, and
is installed Plene-Potentiary, But so absolute a domination, scarcely
counterveils the nauseous trouble and conversation of such an intolerable
Coxcomb; who often misled by evil Counsel, proves an unmanagable beast, and
like the Elephant when he is gauld turns on his own part, trampling down all
that oppose him.


Clar. But a wise woman will govern in public no more then is reasonable, and
leave his misdemeanors to a Curtin-lecture in the morning fresh and fasting --
But what think you of a brisk airy Spark?


Frein. As a mere dancing singing noisy empty nothing, one that Cuffs the
Cushion so often abroad, he is seldom in humor to hold forth at home, But
leaves the neglected Sine Cure to shift for it self; If you rouse the stupid
churl with any concern for himself, or his estate, he shuns you like an
offended Ghostly Father, or a School Boy broke loose from his book; He
squanders his favors all over the Town, and is never better pleased, then when
his Gilting Mistress sevearly rallys his Orthodox Spouse, owning him for a fine
sweet natured accomplished Gentleman, Oh then she melts his Heart and his Purse
to the last Penny.


Clar. What say you then to a fine dressed well shaped Beau?


Frein. He was a Fop of the last Edition, and finding his Monky antic tricks
and Gimmcracks would no longer pass in his Autumnall Years, reforms his manners
and customs, and sets up for a sober formal ill natured person, frequents the
Coffee-house and turns a snarling Critic, and like old women in rancour and
spite: turn malicious witches. And considering he has misspent the best of his
time frequents the Church, Play house, music meetings and Dancing-Schools to
make himself a saver upon some young Giddy-braind Fortune, retires with his
wife into the Country, least she should pay his old Scores.


Cla. What say you to a Learned Sot, or a downright Lawyer or a Vertuoso?


Frein. 'Twould grieve a Lady to be troubled with such a hum drum Studious
dunce allways poreing over his Books and forgetting his duty to his own flesh
and Blood: But the drudg is ready, when she is minded to resort to him for
Counsel, manages her case gratis: If she were not unreasonable she would not
complain of her standing Counsel though she scarce vouchsafes him thanks for
his pains, but robs our poor Peter of his fees for the sake of her beloved
Paul. He is no Fool at the bottom though she often makes him one: He permits
her to Rule his Family, and dispose of his movables at pleasure. If he lives
not to long, his Industry makes her no looser by the Bargain.


Cla. You give me no Encouragement to venture with any of the aforesaid
Persons, let me be beholden to you for your more serious directions, how to
pass away this foolish transitory Life, and keep so great a happyness as Love
and Freindship alive; though raked up in the Embers.


Frein. Madam you say right, for though love makes a Bon-fire to welcome you
home, it will hardly keep the Embers alive to warm us when you go to Bed. The
joys and transports of love like Lightning dazells us, and then follows the
thundering Noise of Pekes, Jelousies, Hopes, Fears, turmoiles, vexations,
troubles and disappointments like the successive hot and cold Fit, of a Feavour
and Ague, of which women made of a refined mold and of a more noble Original
and Extraction, are more sensible of the jarring discords. But how to preserve
so great a happyness will lie under the direction of a deeper Philosopher then
I can pretend to be. Yet I must comply with your Ladyships desires and venture
on some chance directions a Sketch of a fancy -- Let Beauty, Fortune, a good
Wit and disposition concur in your Choice, which Blessings singly are but
melancholy Company when you are joined for your Lives: Let him be a man of
Virtue and Honor of a Steady humor and disposition, not given to be peevish
or froward, or unreasonable opinionated hugging himself in the chair of the
Scorner. If little quarrels do arise give way to each other, and never
prosecute them with eagernes and contention, but let the next glass of Wine,
like a Cup of Lethe drown the remembrance. So may your young Love like new Wine
not glut and cloy with the sweetness of the first Enjoyment, but drink the more
refined pure and sprightly dureing your Lives, being a continual Feast and
Sauce for every days Enjoyment.


Enter Lady followed by Franck running as affrighted, runs behind Freindly to
save her self from Franck. La. Oh save me Sir, from this unworthy man!
Whom I came here to meet upon his Letter
Which basely he disowns, denis his Vows
And threatnes Vengeance if I give not up
My Solemn Contract under hand and Seal.
But I resolve to engage all my Friends
To Vindicate my Spotles Reputation:
Having renounced his honor and his Faith,
And changed his fancy for some other Beauty.

Fr. Thou base unworthy and most perjured Woman!
Take there your hundred Guinneas your first Bribe,
I Scorn the thought of such dishonest practice,
And thee the Inventer of so gross a Lie.

La. So here the Letter written with his hand gives Freindly the letter*
Kindly Inviting me to meet him here.

Fr. Base Forgery and Witchcraft.
My Passion swells me past all bounds of Reason! Ladys hold of her.
I Will drown the Hag in the neighbring Canale.

Frein. Hold Sir I must oppose your Violence!
Un hand her Sir! She runs behind Freindly while he looks on the letter.
This Letter seems all written with your hand,
Vouched with a Contract under hand and Seal:
This Ladys Meine appears of Quality
Equal to whatsoever she pretends.
And if your Courtship has prevailed upon her
Redeem your soily and now do her right.

Fr. It Is not the Rack or Torture should compel me,
It makes me mad to think,
That you should easily believe so gross a slander.

Friend. I ever will renounce the name of Friend
Where I perceive such base and double dealing,
This one discovery has made me happy,
Else thou would still have sheltered under Friendship
And lurked to hide thy base intent. Thou Crocadile
That lie in ambush for my Sisters Fame
Then feign a tear ore them thy falsehood ruined.
Madam you shall command my Sword to right you,
And wipe this Stench and Nuisance from the Earth
Since happily I saw the Bassalisk,
I now defy his future machinations:
Draw and defend your life.

Fr. hold Sir! forbear,
Else you may act a Mischief you will repent
Through heat and passion, which I well can clear.

Friend. Men of your sort are used to skin the Soar
And leave the rotten Coar within to fester,
But I will spill that poison on the earth
Unless you poorly beg your life and pardon.

Fr. That Sir perhaps may prove too hard a Chapter,
My Sword unsheathed never petitioned yet.

Clar. I Will guard that life you force me to defend --

La. Hold Brother -- as they are ready to fight the Sisters unmask and lay hold
of their Brothers -- they part

Clar. Hold --

Fr. Hy! what is here to do? a trial of skill
And the fair Ladies drawn in as Sticklers to the Quarrel.
This threatening Storm Raised by the Magic of the Ladys Eyes!
Is by their Smiles composed: When in my own defense
I raised my Sword it never could design
To pierce that Breast: I rather would have died.
Welcome dear Friend into thy Brothers Arms.

Friend. Welcome my Friend and Brother:
And pardon Sir this Foolish may-gaym quarrel?

La. It Is I alone must blush and beg your pardon:
My false pretentions Raised this sudden quarrel,
By this seign'd claym I tried your Gallant temper
And found you both most perfect every way.
I own your worth has justly won upon me,
And I had held you longer in suspense
Had not this sudden Gust blown of my Mask.

Fra. Then I must bless that storm your wit has raised,
Which hurryed me into so safe a Harbor.
Madam I beg you will confirm my hopes,
Since wit and Beauty join to fan desire
Who can oppose such a resistless fire?

La. This does confirm you Master of my Fortune: gives him her hand, he kisses
it.
In times of Innocence,
E're Subtle heads devised long Settlements
And perplexed clauses made things intricate,
One single Turfe conveyed a vast Estate.

Fra. [He salutes her and says,] This Turf's my tenure,
And I Will never quit it until death depart.

La. I cannot Brother make you a return, to Freindly.
For Interesting your self in my concern;
Which binds me ever to become your Servant.
This Lady's Eyes have power to reflect
The true Idea of your Generous mind.

Frein. My secret Vows have made me long your Servant, to Clarinda.
And been a true devote unto your Shrine:
My Sister knows my Heart was still your Slave.

La. I know his constant and sincere Affection,
Then let me beg you will accept this hand,
That will present a Heart has long adored you.

Fra. Sister if I have power to sway your mind, to Clarinda.
I beg our Families may be united.

Clar. Should I refuse, to the Lady.
My self I banish from what most I Love;
While your Example blindly I obey,
I without thinking give my self away.

Frein. To a disparing heart this balm is sure,
Your gracious hand could only work the Cure. kisses Clarinda' s hand.

Fra. At last this lucky quarrel cleared the doubt,
Or else these Forts had many Months held out:
So boyst'rous waves in high wrought Seas are known
To meet, and kiss, and presently grow one. Exeunt.

SCENE, the Hall. Enter Sir Worldly, Aunt. He dressing himself. Sir Worcester. You Have
told me all the story of your Neice,
Which calls a guilty Blush into my Cheeks,
But henceforth be to me an utter stranger:
The Goods are yours and all the Furniture,
Go and be Huckster to an other bargain. Exit Aunt.
I who have long by Wisdoms Compass steered
Through the Rough Seas and threatening Rocks of danger
Into the Ports of Profit, and of Honor;
Find now some Remora arests my Vessel,
Detaining her against the Wind and Current:
Either the prosperous Gale of Fortune leaves me,
Or I want wit to trim and shift my Sails.
I late was forced to pay a heavy Ransom
For this unlucky head to the Banditty,
And glad I escaped so too.
And when my cares, had treasured up my heart
In Leonora's Love was disapointed;
And when I thought to search all in disguise,
By an unlucky chance or close design
Was Spirited on Shipboard.
At my return I found my Mistress married
By the Contrivance of my Son -- should I resent it
As I have Reason, I must then Revenge it:
And my Revenge is blunted by my Nature,
Or my divided house must drop to pieces.
I must forgive his faults or raise a Scandal
On my past Actions.
Pardon his Clemency who punished my Purse,
And had it in his power to use me worse.

To him Enter Lady, Franck, Freindly and Clarinda. Fra. I kneel to ask your
pardon: I would not presume
Had not this Lady joined in the request
In hopes that you will grant your free Consent,
To make us happy. The Lady going to kneel he stops her.

Sir Worl. Madam I must prevent you,
Unless you will make me kneel for Company:
I give my full consent to your desires,
And pardon all offenses of this Boy.
Rise Sir, and I pray heaven to make you happy.

Lady. I used to plead some interest in your favor
And pray,
That as our Family has still been joined
In Freindship -- now you will Unite their Love,
In this my Sister and my Brother Freindly.

Sir Worl. Madam you Ravish me with this good News,
And now my Girl has chosen with my Eyes.
I wish all four may ever prove most happy. he kisses them all.
My heart is swelled and pent in narrow bounds,
As mighty tides meeting Lands Floods of Joy,
Over flow the Banks and with excess destroy.
I must retire a while. Exit Sir Worldly.

Fra. I know my Fathers infinitely pleased
But time must work it to his satisfaction,
And calm the troubles raised within his breast.
I saw the Aunt,
That told him of Sir Noisy's Marriage,
With his young Wife.

La. I know that whole Intrigue, by a strange chance, and that she is bound to
you for her Advancement: I Will never think you worse for your good Nature, and
putting of old household stuff to best advantage.


Fra. For faults are past I humbly beg your pardon.


Enter Plot. Plot. Sir Noisy and his Lady, and other Friends are without to
wait on Sir Worldly.


Fra. It is his vanity to show his pretty Wife I Will out and introduce 'em. Exit.


To them Enter Sir Noisy, his Lady, Aunt, Scaredevil, Fulham, Plot and other
Servants. Sir Nois. I brought my Wife to wait on Sir Worldly, a young Innocent
Foolish harmless Girl whom I intend to breed up in my house in the Country,
and instruct her to carry her self in Company: She has no skill in the Minuet,
and Sings but one tune that I have taught her: Poor Soul she cannot manage a
Bottle decently with a Friend, nor has not confidence to -- make the Glasses
clash in Chorus. aside. That Is a bitter Bob for some body. I have no relish
for these Learned Ladys that know the nicety of Rules, which make Women
positive and preremptory, and as resty to all mannagement as a headstrong
horse: who having once got the Bit between his Teeth runs away with a man to
the Devil. I Am for breaking a young filly till I can steer her with a twine
thread.


Fra. But your Lady looks as if she had good natural parts, I dare swear her
ready Genius will improve upon your Instruction, and quickly play her lesson
upon sight. I wish you all happyness, though I cannot so well digest your
Cross-biting me of my Mistress.


Sir Nois. Dear Frank, I always desire to hold a fair Corespondence with thee,
and am an humble Servant to these Fair Ladys.


Fra. to Lady aside. I was forced to humble the Fool or he would have Top'd us
all and grown rampant.


La. Sir Noisy, I will wish your Lady Joy -- Madam your humble Servant?


Leo. I thank you forsooth. they go to the other side of the Stage.


La. Pretty Innocence. Leo. turns her back to the Stage.


Leo. Madam I dare not pay you what respect is due in outward show:
But my heart is your Slave.
And having Shipwrack'd by my Folly
I am by chance redeemed from utter ruin:
Oh I could weep with tears of joy and grief,
For my good Fortune oweing to his Friendship,
And loosing him whom I hold once so dear.

La. But now your Friend is turned into my husband.


Leo. I wish you Joy, and that they never may prosper
Would wish to disoblige so good a Lady.

La. I am acquainted with your story, which still lies here concealed: I wish
your conduct may redeem your faults, and well atone what is past, and for my
sake accept this Ring a pledge of Freindship.


Leo. Madam you honor me.


Enter Sir Worldly. Sir Worl. This day has crowned my Joys, and here I bid
adeiu to Love and Vanity. Sir Noisy you are welcome so is your Lady, you are
the greatest Strangers -- Son Freindly, I Settle Ten Thousand pounds upon your
Marriage, and will not stint my hand as you are kind unto Clarinda. To you my
Son I give your mothers whole Estate for present mantenance, and the remainder
at my Death. And now my thoughts are fixed upon my Children, who are my joy and
hopes: I cannot now separate your Interests. Whosoever makes me first a
Grandfather I give a Thousand pound.


Plot. Sir Noisy has brought some men of Art to entertain you with a Dance, if
you please to sit.


A Dance. Sir Worldly comes forward on the Stage. Sir Worl. My Folly has
convinced me of this Rule,
Young men Instruct, while oid Fops go to School.
I own with Shame what I have often been told,
That of all fools there is none can match the Old.

FINIS.
This Song is Repeated by Sir Noisy Parrat with great Admiration, and after
Sung. In the Second Act. page 17.
I.
THou Life of all the Sun whose Grace
Enlightens this fair Hemesphere,
Where Noblest Beautys fainter rays
Like Stars by daylight disappear.
II.
Thou Miracle with Heavenly Fire
Do kindle Love in every heart,
In whom the Graces do conspire
Joined with the Muses utmost art.
III.
My Wit is dazzled with thy Eyes,
My heart is ravished with thy Voice;
Lend me Loves wings that I may rise
Not by my merit, but thy choice.
Second Song in the same Page.
I.
Man. I took the faithless Callow from the Nest
And Nursed thee in my Breast,
Taught thee the grounds and notes to Chirp and Sing,
But when thou felt'st the Spring
Thou did despise my Care unkindly Roame
Abroad regardless of my Love, neglecting home.
II.
Woman. For all thy care and kindness past it is true
Grave Sir, my thanks are due;
But thou design'st to slave me as a Wife,
And Cage me for my Life:
Beauty for ^loysters Nature did not mean,
While every b^sh presents a brisk young Valentine.
III.
Man. Thy Vows assured me and our hands did join,
Thou ever would be mine,
That no seducing Bird of Song or Prey,
Should Spirit thee away,
I claym thee as my right, thou ^earl of price;
Purchased with all my Stock my lovely Paradise.
IV.
Woman. 'Twas man grown false, or weak that first did plot
To knit this Gordian Knot,
By Tyrant Customs strive to fetter Love,
Whose Nature is to rove:
When fancys glutted, Birds fresh mates may choose,
Yet none are shamed, divorced, or wealthy Joyntures loose.
V.
Urge Constancy no more, those feeble ties
Avail not to the Wise,
Who would a Costly Vessel rig or trim
Never to let her Swim.
My Inclination bids me wildly range,
And love in every Port, to barter and exchange.
A Sea SONG. Made by an Unknown Person.
ONe hand up a loft
Swab the Coach for and aft
For the Punch Council strait will be fitting,
For fear the Ship roll
Sling up a full Bowl
For their Honors let all things be sitting,
In an Ocean of Punch to Night we will all Sail
In a Bowl, whereof Sea room we never can fail.
Chorus. With full double Cups, we will liquour our Chops
And then trim the Sayls with a hoe up hoe,
But we will drink e're we go, we will drink e're we go.
The Winds veereing aft
Then loose every Sail
She Will bear all her Top-sayles a trip,
Heave the Log from the Poop
It blows a fresh gale,
And a just Account on the board keep,
She runs you Eight knots, that is Eight cups to my thinking,
That Is a cup for each knot should be filled for our drinking.
Here Mess Mate. Thanks Skipper.
it is a Health to the King.
While the Starrboard watch drinks, let the Larrboard watch Sing.
Here Is to thee Peter. Thanks honest Jo.
About let it go.
In our Bowl still a calm is how e're the Winds Blow.
The Quarteere must cun
While the fore mast man steers,
Each health to the Port where it is bound,
Who belayes 'till it is a Brimmer
Is drub'd at the Geeres
And the Health of each we must sound.
To our Noble Commander his honor and health,
Let him drown and be damned refuses the health.
What news on the Deck hoe
It blows a mere Storm
She lies a try under the Missen,
Why what if she do
Will it be any harm
If one Bumper more does us all reason.
The Bowl must be freed boys, in spite of the weather,
Yea, yea, -- huzah, let us all haule together.
Chorus. With full etc.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Lassells.
WHat diffring designs we Women lay
She to avoid, and I to snap the Prey:
Virtue, and Fortune, makes her Luster great:
Raising that Value, I but counterfeit:
We hold our Sexes Charter by deceit,
The Pious seeming Saint proves often a Cheat:
Why should you grutch, if an old battred Lover
Pass for a Maid, in a fresh gilded cover?
For what e're trips she makes, she never miscarrys,
But proves a perfect Virgin when she marrys,
Our Fop by seeming Innocence is caught,
Few Eagle eyes, discern so nice a fault,
And while his roughness Ravishes a kiss,
We seem transported at the unknown Bliss.
Methinks I hear Pride and ill nature Cry
Why is sin blessed, and scandal raised so high
Out brass'ning Beauty Birth and Quality:
How many wandering Rovers, chance does fix,
From humble Pattens raised to Coach and Six.
Faith it is not worth your thoughts, for as some say
The world is but a Stage, our life a Play:
Why should We be astonished at the matter
If Strowling Miss mounts on our Proud Theater.
Now we should Court your favor to our Play,
And Pardon for our Authors first Essay,
Hopeing this Rugged Bench wont prove severe
To his first fault, let him for once go Clear:
In doubtful durance Pensive he remains,
Till your good pleasure shall strike of his Chains:
And Sir's if this a maiden session proves,
Let us alone to fit you all with Gloves.
The End.

